Seasonable Thoughts ON THE State of Religion In NEW ENGLAND, A TREATISE in
five Parts.

I. Faithfully pointing out the Things of a BAD and DANGEROUS TENDENCY, in the
late, and present, religious Appearance, in the LAND.

II. Representing the OBLIGATIONS which lie upon the PASTORS of THESE CHURCHES
in particular, and upon ALL in general, to use their Endeavors to suppress
prevailing Disorders; with the GREAT DANGER of a Neglect in so important a
Matter.

III. Opening, in many Instances, wherein the DISCOURAGERS of Irregularities
have been INJURIOUSLY TREATED.

IV. Showing what ought to be CORRECTED, or AVOIDED, in testifying against the
evil Things of the present Day.

V. Directing our Thot's, more positively, to what may be judged the BEST
EXPEDIENTS, to promote pure and undefiled Religion in these Times.

With a PREFACE Giving an Account of the ANTINOMIANS, FAMILISTS and LIBERTINES,
who infected these Churches, above an hundred Years ago: Very needful for these
Days; the LIKE SPIRIT, and ERRORS, prevailing now as did then.

The whole being intended, and calculated, to serve the Interest of CHRIST'S
Kingdom.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY. D. D.

Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for SAMUEL ELIOT in Cornhill. 1743.

THE PREFACE.
IF the following Treatise is, in any tolerable Measure, adapted to serve the
Ends of Religion, by guarding People against the Errors in Doctrine, and
Disorders in Practice, which have, of late, obtained in many Parts of the Land,
there can be no need of an Apology for its Publication: If it is not, the usual
Excuses upon such an Occasion are well known; and I may claim the Benefit of
them, in common with others.

Instead therefore of saying any Thing upon this Head, I shall look back to the
first Times of this Country, when there was the Prevalence of an erroneous,
enthusiastic Spirit, beyond what has been known from that Day 'till the late
Appearance, in some Places, in NEW ENGLAND: And I the rather choose to insert
here some brief Account of the religious State of Affairs in those Days,
because of its surprising Agreement, in many Instances, with what has happened
in these Times; which, if duly attended to, will not only prepare the Reader
for what he may meet with in the following Sheets, but powerfully tend to
undeceive him, if he has entertained a good Opinion of such Things as have,
once already, raised Disturbances in the Country, to the Grief of our first
Fathers, who may justly be ranked among the most pious and valuable Men, who
have yet lived in it.

Not many Years after the Settlement of our Progenitors in this Land, some,
who, through an Excess of Heat in their Imaginations, had been betrayed into
various unsound and dangerous Opinions, came over to them from ENGLAND. They
had not been here long, before they freely vented their Notions among the
People, Multitudes of whom, both Men and Women, Church Members and others, were
soon led aside, to the Hindrance of the Gospel, and throwing these Churches
into great Confusion.

My purpose is to show distinctly, though briefly,

What these Opinions were,

Here they spread so fast, and prevailed so suddenly.

How they did rage and reign, when they had once gotten Head.

How they fell and were ruined, when they were at highest. This is the Method
of Mr. T. WELDE (one of the first Preachers in our ROXBERRY) in his Preface to
the Story of the ANTINOMIANS etc. in NEW ENGLAND; whose Language also I have
thought fit chiefly to use. The Words distinguished by inverted (...) are
always his; unless where I give Notice to the contrary.


As for the Opinions: -- They were such as these, viz.

1. He that has the Seal of the SPIRIT may certainly judge of any Person,
whether he be elected or no.

2. Such as see any Grace of GOD in themselves, before they have the Assurance
of GOD'S Love sealed to them, are not to be received Members of Churches.

3. The due Search and Knowledge of the Holy Scripture, is not a safe and sure
Way of finding CHRIST.

4. There is a Testimony of the SPIRIT, and Voice to the Soul, merely
immediate, without any Respect to, or Concurrence with the Word.

5. The Seal of the SPIRIT is limited only to the immediate Witness of the
SPIRIT; and does never witness to any Work of Grace, or to any Conclusion by a
Syllogism.

6. No Minister can teach one that is anointed by the SPIRIT of CHRIST, more
than he knows already unless it be in some Circumstances.

7. No Minister can be an Instrument to convey more of CHRIST unto another,
than he by his own Experience has come up to.

8. A Man is not effectually converted, 'till he has full Assurance.

9. A Man cannot evidence his justification by his Sanctification, but he must
needs build upon his Sanctification, and trust to it.

10. The immediate Revelation of my good Estate, without any Respect to the
Scriptures, is as clear to me as the Voice of GOD from Heaven to PAUL.

11. It is a Fundamental and Soul-damning Error, to make Sanctification an
Evidence of Justification.

12. The SPIRIT gives such full and clear Evidence of my good Estate, that I
have no Need to be tried by the Fruits of Sanctification: This were to light a
Candle to the Sun.

13. Sanctification is so far from evidencing a good Estate, that it darkens it
rather; and a Man may more clearly see CHRIST when he sees no Sanctification,
than when he does: The darker my Sanctification is, the brighter is my
Justification.

14. If a Member of a Church be unsatisfied with any Thing in the Church, if he
express his Offense, whether he has used all Means to convince the Church or
no, he may depart.

15. If a Man think he may edify better in another Congregation, than in his
own, that is Ground enough to depart ordinarily from Word, Seals, Fastings,
Feastings, and all Administrations in his own Church, notwithstanding the
Offense of the Church often manifested to him for so doing.

16. Where Faith is held forth by the Ministry, as the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace on Man's Part, as also evidencing Justification by
Sanctification, and the Activity of Faith, in that Church there is not
sufficient Bread. These Opinions, however absurd, were yet, many of them,
strongly pleaded for, as of vast Importance: Hence, among the Reasons given for
the meeting of the Synod, in 1637, to consider of these Matters, this is one,
because the Opinionists pretended such a NEW-LIGHT as condemned all the
Churches, as in a Way of Damnation; and the Difference to be in Fundamental
Points, even as wide as between Heaven and Hell: And hence it was conceived,
that all the Churches should consider of this Matter, that, if it were a Truth,
it should be universally embraced; but if it were an Error or Heresy it might
be universally suppressed, so far as such a Meeting could reach. Manuscript
Copy of the Proceedings of the Synod, in 1637, Page 3.


These are a few of the Errors, with which many began to be infected; I say a
few, because their whole Number amounted to upwards of fourscore. I should
willingly have presented the Reader, with a List of them all; but, not having
Room, Choose to confine myself to those only which might be thought to bear a
Resemblance to the unsafe Tenets of the present Day. The rest may be seen in
the Book, entitled, The Story of the Rise, etc, of Antinomianism, etc, in
NEW ENGLAND. And let me add, the Account there given of these Errors may be
depended on; for having had Opportunity to compare it with an ancient
Manuscript Copy of the Proceedings of the Synod, in 1637, I find it to be a
very exact Catalogue of the Opinions condemned by that Assembly of Churches.
All the Churches unanimously consented to the Condemnation of them, except
diverse of BOSTON, one or two at CHARLESTOWN, one at SALEM, one at PLYMOUTH,
one at DUXBURY, two at WATERTOWN: And although Mr. COTTON set not down his Hand
as the rest of the Elders did; yet he thus expressed himself, in Disrelish of
them, that some were blasphemous and heretical, many erroneous, and all
incongruous. Manuscript Copy. P. 46.


It may, at first, View seem strange, how these Errors (many of them being so
gross) should spread so fast, and prevail so generally; but the Wonder will
cease, if we "consider the Slights they used in fomenting their Opinions: Some
of which I shall set down; as,

1. They labored much to acquaint themselves with as many as possibly they
could, that so they might have the better Opportunity to communicate their
NEW-LIGHT to them.

2. Being once acquainted with them, they would strangely labor to insinuate
themselves into their Affections, by loving Salutes, humble Carriage, kind
Inv^ements, friendly Visits; and so they would win upon Men, and steal into
their Bosoms, before they were aware: Yea, as soon as any NewComers (especially
Men of Note, Worth and Activity, fit Instruments to advance their Design) were
landed, they would be sure to welcome them, show them all Courtisy, and offer
them Room in their own Houses, or of some of their Sect; and having gotten them
into their Web, they could easily poison them by Degrees: It was rare for any
Man thus hooked in to escape their Leaven.

3. (Because such Men as would seduce others had need be some Way eminent) they
would appear very humble, holy and spiritual Christians, and full of CHRIST;
they would deny themselves far, speak excellently, pray with Soul ravishing
Expressions and Affections, that a Stranger that loved Goodness could not but
love and admire them, and so be the more easily drawn after them; looking upon
them as Men and Women as likely to know the Secrets of CHRIST, and
Bosom-Counsels of his SPIRIT, as any other. And this Opinion of them was the
more lifted up, through the Simplicity and Weakness of their Followers, who
would, in Admiration of them, tell others, that, since the Apostle's Time, they
were persuaded, none ever received so much Light from GOD, as such and such had
done, naming their Leaders.

4. As they would lift up themselves, so also their Opinions, by guilding them
ever with specious Terms of free Grace, glorious Light, Gospel Truths, as
holding forth naked CHRIST: And this took much with simple honest Hearts that
loved CHRIST; especially, with new Converts, who were lately under Sin and
Wrath, and had newly tasted the Sweetness of free Grace. Being now in their
first Love to CHRIST, they were exceeding glad to embrace any Thing that might
further advance CHRIST, and free Grace; and so drank them in readily.

5. If they met with Christians that were full of Doubts and Fears about their
Conditions, (as many tender and godly Hearts there were) they would tell them,
they had never taken a right Course for Comfort, but had gone on (as they were
led) in a legal Way of evidencing their good Estate by Sanctification, and
gazing after Qualifications in themselves; and would show them, from their own
Experience, that themselves, for a long Time, were befooled even as they are
now, in poring upon Graces in themselves, and while they did so, they never
prospered, but were driven to pull all that Building down, and lay better and
surer Foundations in free Grace; and then would tell them of this Gospel-Way we
speak of, how they might come to such a settled Peace, that they might never
doubt more, though they should see no Grace at all in themselves: And so (as it
is said of the Harlot's dealing with the young Man, Prove. 7. 21.) with much
fair Speech they caused them to yield, with the flattering of their Lips they
forced them.

6. They commonly labored to work first upon Women, being (as they conceived)
the weaker to resist; the more flexible, tender, and ready to yield: And if
they could once wind in them, they hoped by them, as by an EVE, to catch their
Husbands also; which indeed often proved too true among us then.

7. As soon as they had thus wrought in themselves, and a good Conceit of their
Opinions, by all these Ways of Subtilty, into the Hearts of People; nextly,
they strongly endeavored, with all the Craft they could, to undermine the good
Opinion of their Ministers, and their Doctrine, and to work them clean out of
their Affections; telling them, they were sorry that their Teachers had so
misled them, and trained them up under a Covenant of Works, Mr. JOHNSON,
writing of these Times, observes, that the good old Way would not serve the
Turn with certain Sectaries, who, like cunning Sophisters, seeing the Bent of
the People's Heart (after so many Mercies received) was to magnify the rich
Grace of GOD in CHRIST, began to tell the People (yet very privately) that the
most, if not all the Ministers among them, preached a Covenant of Works, either
course or fine; and with a what do you say to this? Vid. his Wonder-working
Providence of SION'S SAVIOR, P. 93. In the next Page he goes on to speak of
them, as persuading the People, their Ministers were legal Preachers, teaching
them little better than Popery, and unfit for Gospel Churches. -- Here Is
nothing, says one of them, but preaching out of the Law and the Prophets.
Truly, says another of them, I have not heard a pure Gospel-Sermon from any of
them.
and that themselves having never been taught of GOD, it is no Wonder they did
no better teach them the Truth, and how they may sit 'till Doomsday under
their legal Sermons, and never see Light; and withal, sometimes, casting
Aspersions on their Persons, and Practice, as well as Doctrine, to bring them
quite out of Esteem of them. And this they did so effectually that many
declined hearing them, though they were Members of their Churches; and others
that did hear, were so filled with Prejudice that they profited not, but
studied how to object against them, and censure their Doctrine, which (whilst
they stood right) was wont to make their Hearts to melt and tremble. Yea, some
that had been begotten to CHRIST by some of their faithful Labors in ENGLAND,
for whom they could have laid down their Lives, and not being able to bear
their Absence followed them to NEW ENGLAND, to enjoy their Labors; yet these,
falling acquainted with those Seducers, were suddenly so altered in their
Affections toward those their spiritual Fathers, that they would neither hear
them, nor willingly come in their Company; professing they had never received
any Good from them.

8. They would not, 'till they knew Men well, open the whole Mystery of their
new Religion to them; but this was ever their Method, to drop a little at once
into their Followers as they were capable, and never would administer their
Physic, 'till they had given good Preparatives to make it work, and then
stronger and stronger Potions, as they found the Patient able to bear.

9. They would in Company, now and then, let fall some of their most plausible
Errors, as a Bait laid down to catch withal: Now if any began to nibble at the
Bait, they would angle still, and never give over 'till they had caught them;
but if any should espy the naked Hook, and so se their Danger, and protest
against the Opinions, then you should have them fairly retreat, and say, nay,
mistake me not, for I do mean even as you do; you and I are both of one Mind in
Substance, and differ only in Words. -- By this Machivilian Policy, these
Deluders were reputed sound in their Judgments, and so were able to do the more
Hurt, and were longer undetected.

10 -- 11. But the last and worst of all, and which most suddenly diffused the
Venom of these Opinions into the very Veins, and Vitals of the People in the
Country, was Mrs. -- double weekly Lecture. -- This Mrs. --, to give some
Account of her, from the Author of the Rise and Reign of Antinomianism in
NEW ENGLAND, Page 33, 34. was a Woman of a nimble Wit and active Spirit, and a
very voluble Tongue, more bold than a Man, though in Understanding and
Judgment, inferior to many Women. She had discovered some of her Opinions in
the Ship as she came over, which occasioned some Delay of her Admission, when
she first desired Fellowship with the Church of BOSTON; but by coloring her
Opinions, she got admitted into the Church, and some went to Work; and being a
Woman very helpful in the Times of Childbirth, and other Occasions of bodily
Infirmities, and well-furnish'd with Means for those Purposes, she easily
insinuated her self into the Affections of many; and the rather, because she
was very inquisitive about their spiritual Estates, and in discovering to them
the Danger they were in by trusting to common Gifts and Graces, without any
such Witness of the SPIRIT as the Scripture holds out for a full Evidence; --
all which was well, and suited with the public Ministry: But when she had thus
prepared the Way by such wholesome Truths, then she began to set forth her own
Stuff, and taught, that no Sanctification was any Evidence of a good Estate,
except their Justification were first cleared up to them by the immediate
Witness of the SPIRIT; and that to see any Work of Grace (either Faith or
Repentance, etc.) before this immediate Witness was a Covenant of Works:
Whereupon many good Souls, that had been of long-approv'd Holiness, were
brought to renounce all the Work of Grace in them, and to wait for this
immediate Revelation. Then sprung up also the Opinion of the indwelling of the
Person of the HOLY GHOST, and of Union with CHRIST, and Justification before
Faith, and a denying of any Gifts or Graces, or inherent Qualifications; and
that CHRIST was all, and did all, and that the Soul remained always as a dead
Organ, and other gross Errors. -- It was indeed a Wonder, upon what a sudden
the whole Church of BOSTON (some few excepted) were become her new Converts and
infected with her Opinions: And many also out of the Church, and of other
Churches, yea, many profane Persons became of her Opinion; for it was a very
easy and acceptable Way to Heaven, to see nothing, to have nothing, but to wait
for CHRIST to do all. After she had thus prevailed, and drawn some of eminent
Place and Parts to her Party, she kept open House for all Comers, and set up
two Lecture-Days in the Week, when there usually met at her House threescore or
fourscore Persons. The Pretense was to repeat Sermons; but when that was done,
she would comment upon the Doctrines, and interpret all Passages at her
Pleasure, and expound dark Places of Scripture, so as whatsoever the Letter
held forth (for this was one of her Tenets, that the whole Scripture in the
Letter of it held forth nothing but a Covenant of Works) she would be sure to
make it serve her Turn, for the confirming her main Principles, whereof this
was another, that the darker our Sanctification is, the clearer is our
Justification. And indeed most of her Tenets tended to Slothfulness, and quench
all Endeavors in the Creature. And now there was no Speech so much in Use as
of vilifying Sanctification, and all for advancing CHRIST and free Grace. --
All indeed that opposed this Woman (being near all the Elders, and most of the
faithful Christians in the Country) she spoke of as under a Covenant of Works,
that she might with the more Credit disclose and advance her Masterpiece of
immediate Revelations, under the fair Pretense of the Covenant of free Grace:
Wherein she had not failed of her Aim, to the utter Subversion both of the
Churches, and the civil State, if the most wise and merciful Providence of the
LORD had not prevented it, by keeping so many of the Magistrates and Elders
free from the Infection.

These were the cunning Sleights used for the spreading of Error, not only in
the Church of BOSTON, where most of these Seducers lived, but also in almost
all Parts of the Country. Besides which, the Sectaries (to use the Words of Mr.
JOHNSON Vid, His Wonder-working Providence of SION'S SAVIOR, in NEW ENGLAND,
P. 95, 96.
) had other pretty Knacks to delude with all; such as the telling of rare
Revelations of Things to come from the SPIRIT, and the weakening the Word of
the LORD in the Mouth of his Ministers, by putting ignorant and unlettered Men
and Women in a Posture of preaching to a Multitude, that they might be praised
for their able Tongue. Come along with me, says one of them, I Will bring you to
a Woman that preaches better Gospel than any of your blackCoats that have been
at the University; a Woman of another Kind of Spirit, who has had many
Revelations of Things to come: And for my Part, faith he, I had rather hear
such a one that speaks from the mere Motion the SPIRIT, without any Study at
all, than any of your learned Scholars, although they may be fuller of
Scripture; ^ay, and admit they may speak by the Help of the SPIRIT, yet the
other goes beyond them. -- By which, and diverse other such like Matters, which
might be here inserted, you may see how these Sectaries, love the Pre-eminence,
and for this End seek to deprive the Ministers of CHRIST, inveigling as many as
they can in the Head, that they take too much upon them, scoffing at their
Scholar-like Way of Preaching, wherein the gross Dissimulation of these
erroneous Persons has appeared exceedingly.

The Opinions being thus spread in the Country, and grown to their full
Ripeness and Latitude, through the Nimbleness and Activity of their Fomenters,
began now to lift up their Heads full high, to stare us in the Face, and
confront all that opposed them. And what added Vigor and Boldness to them was,
that, by this Time, they had some of all Sorts and Quality, in all Places, to
defend and patronise them; some of the Magistrates, some Gentlemen, some
Scholars, and Men of Learning, some Burgesses of the General Court, some of our
Captains and Soldiers, some chief Men in Towns, and some Men eminent for
Religion, Parts and Wit. So that, wheresoever the Case of the Opinions came in
Agitation, there wanted not Patrons to stand up to plead for them; and if any
of the Opinionists were complained of in the Courts for their Misdemeanors, or
brought before the Church for Conviction or Censure, still some or other of
that Party would not only suspend giving their Vote against them, but would
labor to justify them, side with them, and protest against any Sentence that
should pass upon them; and so be ready not only to harden the Delinquent
against all Means of Conviction, but to raise a Mutiny if the Major-Part should
carry it against them: So, in Town-Meetings, Military-Trainings, and all other
Societies, yea, almost in every Family, it was hard, if some or other were not
ready to rise up in Defense of them, even as of the Apple of their own Eye.
Observable are the Words of Mr. JOHNSON, concerning the religious State of
Things at this Time. Says he, There was among all Sorts of Persons a great Talk
of NEW-LIGHT; but verily it proved old Darkness, such as sometime overshadowed
the City of MUNSTER. -- The better Part of the People stood still many of them,
gazing one upon another, like Sheep let loose to feed on fresh Pasture, being
stopped and startled in their Course by a Kennall of devouring Wolves. The
weaker Sort wavered much, and such as were more grown Christians hardly durst
discover the Truth they held, one to another, The Fogs of Error increasing, the
bright Beams of the glorious Gospel of our LORD CHRIST, in the Mouth of his
Ministers, could not be discerned, through this thick Mist, by many; and that
sweet refreshing Warmth, that was formerly felt from the SPIRIT'S Influence,
was now turned (in these Errorists) to a hot Inflammation of their own
conceited Revelations, ulcerating and bringing little else than Phrensy or
Madness to the Patient. The Congregation of the People of GOD began to be
forsaken; and the weaker Sex prevailed so far, that they set up a Priest of
their own Profession and Sex, who was much thronged after, abominably wresting
the Scriptures to their own Destruction.


Now, O their Boldness, Pride, Alienations from their old and dearest Friends,
the Disturbances, Divisions, Contentions, they raised among us, both in Church
and State, and in Families, setting Divisions betwixt Husband and Wife!

Oh the sore Censures against all Sorts that opposed them, and the Contempt
they cast upon our godly Magistrates, Churches, Ministers, and all that were
set over them, when they stood in their Way!

Now the faithful Ministers of CHRIST must have Dung cast on their Faces, and
be no better than LEGAL PREACHERS, BAAL'S PRIESTS, POPISH FACTORS, SCRIBES,
PHARISEES, and OPPOSERS OF CHRIST HIMSELF.

Now they must be pointed at, as it were, with the Finger, and reproached by
Name. Such a Church Officer is an ignorant Man, and knows not CHRIST; such an
one is under a Covenant of Works; such a Pastor is a proud Man, and would make
a good Persecutor; such a Teacher is grossly popish: So that, through these
Reproaches, Occasion was given to Men to abhor the Offerings of the LORD.

Now one of them, in a solemn Convention of Ministers, dared to say to their
Faces, that they did not preach the Covenant of free Grace, and that they
themselves had not the Seal of the SPIRIT, etc.

Now, after our Sermons were ended, at our public Lectures, you might have seen
half a Dozen Pistols discharged at the Face of the Preacher, so many Objections
(I mean) made by the Opinionists, in the open Assembly, against our Doctrine
delivered, if it suited not their new Fancies, to the mavelous weakening of
holy Truths delivered, in the Hearts of all the weaker Sort; and this done, not
once and away, but from Day to Day after our Sermons; yea, they would come,
when they heard a Minister was upon such a Point as was like to strike their
Opinions, with a Purpose to oppose him to his Face.

Now you might have seen many of the Opinionists rising up, and contemptuously
turning their Backs upon the faithful Pastor of that Church, and GOING FORTH
FROM THE ASSEMBLY, when he began to pray or preach.

Now, you might have heard one of them preaching a most dangerous Sermon, in a
great Assembly, when he divided the whole Country into two Ranks, some (that
were of his Opinion) under a Covenant of Grace, and those were Friends to
CHRIST; others, under a Covenant of Works, whom they might know by this, if
they evidence their good Estate by their Sanctification: Those (said he) were
ENEMIES TO CHRIST, HEROD'S, PILATES, SCRIBES and PHARISEES; yea, ANTICHRISTS:
And advised all under a Covenant of Grace to look upon them as such, and did
with great Zeal stimulate them to deal with them as they would with such; and
withal alleging the Story of MOSES that killed the EGYPTIAN, barely left it
so. I mention not this, or any Thing in the least Degree, to reflect upon this
Man, or any other; for GOD has long since opened his Eyes (I hope): But to
show what Racket these Opinions did then make, and will whenever they get Head.

Now, you might have seen open Contempt cast upon the Face of the whole General
Court in subtle Words to this very Effect; that the Magistrates were AHABS,
AMAZIAHS, SCRIBES and PHARISEES, ENEMIES TO CHRIST, led by Satan that old Enemy
of free Grace; and that it were better that a Millstone were hung about their
Necks, and they were drowned in the Sea, than they should censure one of their
Judgment, which they were now about to do.

Another of them you might have seen so audaciously insolent, and high-slown in
Spirit and Speech, that she bad the Court of Magistrates (when they were about
to censure her for her pernicious Carriages) take Heed, what they did to her;
for she knew by infallible Revelation, that, for this Act which they were about
to pass against her, GOD would ruin them, their whole Posterity, and the
Commonwealth. This refers to a Gentlewoman, who, when before the Court to
answer for her Mal-Conduct, among other Things, said to them, I will give you
one Place more, which the LORD bro't to me by immediate Revelation, and that
does concern you all. It is in Dan. 6. When the Presidents and Princes could
find nothing against him, because he was faithful they sought Matter against
him concerning the Law of his GOD, to cast him into the Lions Den: So it was
revealed to me, that they should plot against me; but the LORD bid me not to
fear, for he that delivered DANIEL and the three Children, his Hand is not
shortened. And see this Scripture this Day fulfilled in mine Eyes: therefore
take heed what ye go about to do unto me, for ye have no Power over my Body,
neither can ye do me any Harm: for I am in the Hands of the ETERNAL JEHOVAH MY
SAVIOR. No further do I esteem of any mortal Man than Creatures in his Hand: I
fear none but the GREAT JEHOVAH, who has foretold me of these Things, and I do
verily believe that he will deliver me out of your Hands: Therefore take heed
how you proceed against me, for I know that for this you go about to do to me,
GOD will ruin you, and your Posterity, and this whole State. When she had thus
vented her Mind, the Court demanded of her, how she expected to be delivered,
whether by Miracle as DANIEL was? To which she answered, Yes; by Miracle as
DANIEL was. Being further demanded, how she knew that it was GOD that did
reveal these Things to her, and not Satan? She answered, How did ABRAHAM know
that it was the Voice of GOD, when he commanded him to sacrifice his Son? The
Court soon made it appear, that her Revelations were Delusions. Vid. The Story
of ANTINOMIANISM in NEW ENGLAND, P. 40.


By a little Taste of a few Passages, instead of Multitudes, here presented,
you may see, what a Height they were grown to, in a short Time; and what a
Spirit of Pride, Insolency, Contempt of Authority, Division, Sedition, they
were acted by. It was a Wonder of Mercy, that they had not set our
Commonwealth and Churches on Fire, and consumed us all therein.

They being mounted to this Height, and carried with such a strong Hand (as
you have heard), and seeing a Spirit of Error, Subtilty, Malice, and Contempt
of all Men that were not of their Minds, breathing in them, our Hearts sadded,
and our Spirits tired, we sighed and groaned to Heaven, we humbled our Souls by
Prayer and Fasting that the LORD would find out, and bless some Means and Ways
for the Cure of this Sore, and deliver his Truth and our selves from this heavy
Bondage: Which, when his own Time was come, he hearkened unto, and in infinite
Mercy looked upon our Sorrows, and did, in a wonderful Manner, beyond all
Expectation, free us by these Means following.

1. He stirred up all the Minister's Spirits, in the Country, to preach against
those Errors, and Practices, that so much pestered the Country, to inform, to
confute, to rebuke, etc. thereby to cure those that were diseased already, and
to give Antidotes to the rest, to preserve them from Infection: And though this
Ordinance went not without its appointed Effect, in the latter Respect; yet, we
found it not so effectual for the driving away of this Infection as we desired,
for they (most of them) hardened their Faces, and bent their Wits to oppose,
and confirm themselves in their Way.

2. We spent much Time and Strength in Conference with them, sometimes in
private before the Elders only, sometimes in our public Congregations for all
Comers; many, very many Hours, and half Days together we spent therein, to see
if any Means might prevail. We gave them free Leave, with all Lenity and
Patience, to lay down what they could say for their Opinions, and answered them
from Point to Point, and then brought clear Arguments from evident Scriptures
against them, and put them to answer Things, even until they were oftentimes
brought to be either silent, or driven to deny common Principles, or shuffle
off plain Scripture; and yet, (such was their Pride and Hardness of Heart,
that) they would not yield to the Truth, but did tell us they would take Time
to consider of our Arguments: And, in the mean Time, meeting with their
Abetters, strengthened themselves again in their old Way, that when we dealt
with them next Time, we found them further off than before, so that our Hopes
began to languish of reducing them by private Means.

3. Then we had an Assembly of all the Ministers and learned Men in the whole
Country, which held for three Weeks together at CAMBRIDGE, Mr. HOOKER and Mr.
BUCKLEY, being chosen Moderators, or Prolocutors, the Magistrates sitting
present all that Time, as Hearers, and Speakers also when they saw fit. A
Liberty also was given to any of the Country to come in and hear, (it being
appointed, in great Part, for the Satisfaction of the People) and a Place was
appointed for all the Opinionists to come in, and take Liberty of Speech (only
due Order observed) as much as any of ourselves had, and as freely. The first
Week we spent in confuting the loose Opinions that we gathered up in the
Country. -- The other Fortnight we spent in a plain syllogistical Dispute (ad
Vulgus as much as might be), gathered up nine of the chiefest Points (on which
the rest depended) and disputed of them all in Order, pro and con. -- GOD was
much present with his Servants, Truth began to get Ground, and the adverse
Party to be at a Stand; but after Discourse among themselves, still they
hardened one another: Yet, the Work of the Assembly (through GOD'S Blessing)
gained much on the Hearers that were indifferent, to strengthen them; and on
many wavering, to settle them. The Error of the Opinions, and Wilfulness of
their Maintainers laid stark naked. The next Thing mentioned as a Means then
used for the Suppression of Disorders, was the Interposition of the civil
Magistrate; but this I have entirely passed over, because a just Idea of it
cannot be conveyed to the World, without a greater Number of Pages than I can
spare for the whole Preface.


The last Stroke that slew the Opinions, was the falling away of their Leaders.
(1.) Into more hideous, and Soul-destroying Delusions, which ruin, indeed, all
Religion; as, that the Souls of Men are mortal like the Beasts; that there is
no such Thing as inherent Righteousness; that these Bodies of ours shall not
rise again; that their own Revelations of particular Events were as infallible
as the Scripture, etc. (2.) They grew also (many of them) very loose, and
degenerate in their Practices (for these Opinions will certainly produce a
filthy Life by Degrees); as no Prayer in their Families, no Sabbath,
insufferable Pride, frequent and hideous Lying; diverse of them being proved
guilty, some of five, others of ten gross Lies: Another falling into a Lie, GOD
smote him in the very Act, that he sunk down into a deep Swound, and being by
hot Waters recovered, and coming to himself, said Oh GOD, thou might have
struck me dead, as ANANIAS and SAPPHIRA, for I have maintained a Lie. Mrs. --
and others cast out of the Church for Lying; and some guilty of FOULER SINS
than all these, which I here name not.

These Things exceedingly amazed their Followers, (especially such as were led
after them in the Simplicity, of their Hearts, as many were) and now they began
to see that they were deluded by them. -- Now no Man could lay more upon them
than they would upon themselves, in their Acknowledgements. Many, after this,
came to us, who before fled from us, with such Desires as those, Acts 2. Men
and Brethren, What shall we do? And did willingly take Shame to themselves, in
the open Assemblies, by confessing (some of them with many Tears) how they had
given Offense to the LORD, and his People, by departing from the Truth, and
being led by a Spirit of Error, their Alienation from their Brethren in their
Affections, and their crooked and perverse walking in Contempt of Authority,
slighting the Churches, and despising the Counsel of their godly Teachers.

Now they would freely discover the Sleights the Adversaries had used to
undermine them by, and steal away their Eyes from the Truth, and their
Brethren, which before (whilst their Eyes were sealed) they could not see. And
the Fruit of this was great Praise to the LORD, who had thus wonderfully bro't
the Matter about; Gladness in all our Hearts and Faces, and Expressions of our
renewed Affection by receiving them again into our Bosom: And from that Time
until now they have walked (according to their renewed Covenants) humbly and
lovingly among us, holding forth Truth and Peace with Power.

But from the rest, who (notwithstanding all these Means of Conviction) yet
stood obdurate, yea, more hardened (as we had Reason to fear) than before, we
convented those of them that were Members before the Churches, and yet labored
once and again to convince them, not only of their Errors, but also of sundry
exorbitant Practices which they had fallen into, as manifest Pride, Contempt of
Authority, neglecting to hear the Church, and lying etc: But after no Means
prevailed, we were driven with sad Hearts to give them up to Satan; yet not
simply for their Opinions (for which I find we have been slanderously
traduced), but the chiefest Cause of their Censure, was their Miscarriages
persisted in with great Obstinacy.

Thus the LORD heard our Groans to Heaven, and freed us from this great and
sore Affliction, which first was small, like ELIAS'S Cloud, but after spread
the Heavens; and has given the Churches rest from this Disturbance ever since,
that we know none that lifts up his Head to disturb our sweet Peace, in any of
the Churches of CHRIST among us: Blessed be his Name.

This, in brief I say in brief, because some Things I have only hinted at,
while I have entirely suppressed others, which might have been gratifying to
the Curious. The Disputes (preserved at large in Writing) between the Synod and
Messieurs COTTON and WHEELWRIGHT, upon some of the grand Points in Agitation at
that Day, would, perhaps, set some of our present Controversies in a just
Light. But the inserting these would have taken up too much Room. I should be
glad if a complete History of these Times might be wrote. I know there are
authentic Materials sufficient for such a Purpose; and it might be of
Advantage to the present, as well as Times to come.
is a just Account of the religious Commotion in the Country, soon after its
first Settlement by our Fathers; which I could not omit presenting the Reader
with, hoping it might be of Service at such a Day as this. -- Few, I believe,
will venture to disown a Likeness between the Disturbances then and now: They
are indeed suprisingly similar; insomuch, that, if I had not spoken in
Language, Part of which was in Print, fifty; and Part, eighty Years ago, some,
I doubt not, would have imagined, I had purposely gone into the Use of certain
Words and Phrases, to make former Times look like the present; and not only so,
but that I had artfully given Things a Turn, so as to lead People, while they
were reading of ancient Days, to think of those that are but just past. -- The
Boldness and Insolency of some of the Zealots of this Day; their Alienations
from their old Friends; the Disturbances, Contentions, Separations, and
Schisms, they have raised in the Country, in Families, in Churches, in Towns;
the Reproaches they have cast upon all who don't think as they do, particularly
upon the Body of the standing Ministers: These, with other Things I need not
mention, are as significantly spoken of, in the Words pointing out the sad
State of Religion in old-time, as any could now adapt Language, were they
inclined to describe what has happened, of late, in various Parts of our Land.
And if People a few Years since, had generally known what had befallen the
Country, in its Beginnings, it would have been, I cannot but think, a great
Preservative against the Errors and Disorders they have unhappily run into: Nor
is it too late now to furnish them with some general History of this. -- It may
still be of Advantage, not only to guard those who are not as yet infected, but
to check the Growth of our Difficulties; especially, if due Attendance is given
to the Means and Methods used by our Fathers, when the Churches, in their Day,
were in Danger. -- Their being spoken of under all the Names of Ignominy and
Contempt did not affrighten them from Duty; no, but they appeared,
notwithstanding, bold in the Cause of Truth and good Order, against all
Opposition: And having herein set us a noble Example, we shall do well to
follow their Steps.

It may not be amiss to observe here, as the Church of which I am a Pastor, was
the only one in BOSTON, in the Times I have been speaking of, so this was the
Church to which most of the grand Opinionists belonged: And from hence it was,
that Disturbance went forth into the Country. -- Many of its Members depended
upon the immediate Witness of the SPIRIT for an Assurance of their good Estate,
so as to renounce Sanctification as any Evidence in the Case; which indeed was
the Root of most of the Errors and Confusions in that Day. -- Their beloved
Teacher, Mr. COTTON, though a Gentleman of considerable Parts, and Learning,
and exemplary Piety, was yet not altogether free from Blame. The famous Mr.
NORTON intimates as much, while yet he speaks honorably of him. His Words are
these. Vid. His Life or Mr. COTTON. P. 36, 37.
Though his Forbearance was both observable, and very imitable, in the Things
which concerned himself; yet he could not forbear them whom he knew to be Evil.
An Experience whereof we saw concerning some Heterodox Spirits, who, by their
specious Discourses of free Grace, and subdolous concealing of their
Principles, so far deceived him into a better Opinion of them than there was
Cause, as that, notwithstanding they fastened their Errors upon him in general,
and abused his Doctrine, to the countenancing of their denying of inherent
Grace in particular; yet, he was slow to believe these Things of them, and
slower to bear Witness against them: But so soon as the Truth herein appeared
to him, hear his own Words taken out of his Letter to Mr. DAVENPORT; the Truth
is, says he, the Body of the Island [BOSTON] is bent to Backsliding into Error
and Delusion: The LORD pity and pardon them, and ME also, who have been so slow
to see their Windings, and subtle Contrivances, and Insinuations, in all their
Transactions. -- Yea, such was his Ingenuity and Piety, as that his Soul was
not satisfied without often breaking forth into affectionate bewailing of his
Infirmity herein, in the public Assembly, sometimes in Prayer, sometimes in
Sermon; and that with Tears.

Thanks be to GOD, who notwithstanding all our Errors in Doctrine, and
Disorders in Practice, has continued us a Church to this Day. -- May the
glorious King in Sion cleanse and sanctify us! protect and bless us! And, at
last, present us to GOD, even the FATHER, a glorious Church, without Spot, or
Wrinkle, or any such Thing! Amen. -- Let us always, my Brethren, hold fast the
Truth, with Peace and Holiness: And, if there are those among us, who are
Enemies to that which formerly stained our Glory, it may not be thought
strange: Nor would it be to the Reproach of this ancient Church, if it should
please GOD to succeed the following Attempt of one of its Pastors, to put a
Stop to like Errors and Disorders with those, which once proceeded from it to
the public Hurt.

To conclude now with a few Words concerning the ensuing Treatise. -- Had I
wrote it to please my self, it would have been without those numerous
Quotations, which, I am sensible, have not only taken up a great Deal of Room,
but made the Book less agreeable to many Readers. My Design herein was, to make
it evident, that the Divines, in most Esteem, in these Churches, for their
Piety and Soundness in the Faith, have spoken in much the same Language, upon
the Things now in Agitation, with those who have been called Opposers of the
Work of GOD, and charged with leading Souls to Hell: And I was in Hopes, what
they said might be regarded, if Contempt was poured upon what I offered in my
own Words. And if this End may be answered, I shall be content, though I have
appeared in a Form not so well suited to my own Inclinations.

It has been my Endeavor to write, so as to give no just Occasion of Offense
to any Gentleman, with whom I have thought it needful to concern my self. If
any Expressions have slipped from me which savor of Bitterness, I willingly
retract them, and ask Pardon of those, whoever they be, who may be ill-treated
by them. Some of the Language, in here and there a Paper I have made use of, I
own, is harsh; and should have been altered, had it been in my Power to have
done it. Whatever, in this Kind, may be delivered in too hard Words, I hope
will be overlooked so far as I am accountable for it.

As for Facts, I have related none but such as I really believe my self, and,
as I think, upon sufficient Evidence, Few, perhaps, have taken more Pains to
inform themselves than I have done. I have been a Circle of more than three
hundred Miles, and had, by this Means, an Opportunity of going through a great
Number of Towns in this, and the neighboring Government of CONNECTICUT, and of
having personal Conversation with most of the Ministers, and many other
Gentlemen, in the Country, and of settling a Correspondence with several of
them, with a particular View to know, as nearly as might be the Truth of
Things, upon better Evidence than that of mere Hearsay. After all, I may have
been guilty of Mistakes; though I am not conscious of it: And I shall be obliged
to any of my Fathers or Brethren in the Ministry, or others, if they will set
me right wherein they may think I have erred, whether in Point of Fact, or
Reasoning upon it. My Sentiments upon the Times, I have freely offered, from
the Beginning, in several Sermons, which have been made public; and if,
instead of secretly whispering to my Disadvantage, any, by the Way of the
Press, or private Conference, had endeavored to show me wherein I have
delivered any Thing dishonorary to the Cause of Religion, I should have
esteemed it a Kindness. -- I hope I have all along aimed at the promoting of
Truth and Holiness: This is the View I profess to write with at present; and if
I have advanced that which has a contrary Tendency, I should be glad to be
convinced of it, that I might make an open Retraction.

I expect to be further loaded with ill Names: And so far as this may tend to
render me less useful to those I would be glad to serve, I shall be sorry: But
otherwise, it is with me a small Matter to be judged of Man's Judgment: Nor
shall I regard the little Squibs that may be thrown at me by those, who think
the Cause of Truth will be better served by railing, than arguing. I shall not
mispend my Time to take Notice of what may be said by such; but if any will be
at the Pains to give what I have offered the public a fair and Christian
Examination, I shall think myself obliged to make them some suitable
Acknowledgment.

CHARLES CHAUNCY.

A LIST Of the SUBSCRIBERS.
His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief over
His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts. Bay in New England. (for six)

The Honorable JONATHAN LAW Esquire Governor of the Colony of Connecticut.

The Honorable RICHARD WARD Esquire Governor of the Colony of Rhode Island and
Providence Plantations.

The Honorable SPENCER PHIPPS Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Massachusetts.
(for two)

The Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER Esquire late Lieutenant Governor of the
Massachusetts. (for three)

A
T HE Honorable John Alford of Charlestown Esquire (for three) Mr. James Abbot of
Rumford Jedidiah Adams M. A. Mr. Daniel Adams of Suffield Joseph Adams of
Springfield M. A. Mr. Pygan Adams of New London Mr. Thomas Adams of East-Haddam
Capt. Daniel Allen of New Haven Mr. Edward Allen of Milford The Rev. Mr.
William Allen of Greenland (for two) Mr. William Allen of Newbury Samuel Andrew
M. A. Mr. Thomas Arthur B. A. The Rev. Mr. Jonathan Ashley of Deerfield
B
The Hon. Thomas Berry of Ipswich Esquire The Hon. William Brown of Salem Esquire (for
three) The Hon. John Buckley of Colchester Esquire (for two) The Hon. Peter Bourse
of Newport Esquire Mr. John Bachelder of Kensington Mr. Nathan Bachelder of
Kingston Mr. Joseph Bachelder of Hampton Mr. Josiah Bachelder of Hampton The
Rev. Mr. Jacob Bacon of Ashuelot Mr. Samuel Bailey of Newbury Mr. Joseph Baker
Mr. Robert Baker of Sudbury The Rev. Mr. William Balch of Bradford Mr. David
Baldwin of Sudbury The Rev. Mr. John Ballantine of Westfield Mr. Benjamin
Ballard Mr. Josiah Ballard Mr. John Barker of Acton Mr. Joseph Barns of Acton
The Rev. Mr. Edward Barnard of Haverhill The Rev. Mr. John Barnard of
Marblehead The Rev. Mr. John Barnard of Andover (for three) The Rev. Mr. Thomas
Barnard of Newbury Mr. John Barrel Merchant The Rev. Mr. Samuel Barrett of
Hopkington Capt. Richard Bartlet of Newbury Samuel Barton of Salem Esquire The Rev.
Mr. Benjamin Bass of Hanover Mr. Thomas Baxter The Rev. Mr. Abner Bayley of
Methuen Mr. Enoch Bayley of Newbury M. A. John Henry Bastide Esquire Mr. Joshua
Bayley of Newbury Mr. James Beautineau Merchant (for six) Mr. John Becham Mrs.
Mary Bennet Mr. Divan Berry of Walling ford Mr. Thomas Berry of Wallingford
Nathanael Bethune M. A. Merchant (for three) Mr. Simon Bachelder of Kensington
Mr. Joseph Bartlet Mr. James Bickne^ of Hartford Mr. Moses Blake of Kensington
Mr. Hezekiah Blake of Kingston Mr. John Blowers Mr. Offen Boardman of Newbury
William Bowdoin M. A. Merchant (for three) The Rev. Mr. Shearjashub Bourne of
Situate Mr. Ebenezer Bowditch of Salem Merchant The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Bowers
of Middleton The Rev. Mr. Nicholas Bows of Bedford The Rev. Mr. Jonathan
Bowman of Dorchester (for 2) Mr. Nicholas Boylston Merchant Mr. Theopf^ilus
Bradbury of Newbury William Bradbury of Salisbury Esquire Mr. Gamaliel Bradford of
Duxbury The Rev. Mr. Simon Bradstreet of Marblehead Mr. Noadiah Brainard of
East-Haddam William Brattle of Cambridge Esquire The Rev. Mr. Robert Breck of
Springfield Mr. John Brewster of Duxbury Mr. William Brock Merchant The Rev.
Mr. James Bridgham of Brimfield The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Bridge of Chelmsford Mr.
Samuel Bridgham (for two) Mr. Samuel Briscoe of Milford Mr. Abijah Brown
Benjamin Brown of Salem Esquire Mr. Ephraim Brown of Concord Mr. James Brown of
Newbury Mr. Jonathan Brown of Kensington Mr. Josiah Brown of Sudbury Robert
Brown of Plymouth Esquire (for six) Mr. Ebenezer Bryan of Milford Joseph Bryan of
Milford M. A. Joseph Buckingham M. A. Capt. Edward Buckley of Weathersfield The
Rev. Mr. Nathan Bucknam of Medway Mr. Abraham Burbank of Suffield Mr. John
Burbank of Suffield Mr. James Burbeen of Wilmington Mr. Joseph Burbeen The Rev.
Mr. Isaac Burr of Worcester The Rev. Mr. John Burt of Bristol (for nine) Mr.
Thomas Buttler (for two) Mr. John Buttolph (for two) Mr. Josias Byles
C
The Hon. John Chandler of Woodstock Esquire The Hon. John Cushing of Situate Esquire
The Hon. John Chandler of Worcester Esquire The Hon. John Chipman of Newport Esquire
The Rev. Mr. Thomas Clap Rector of Yale-College in New Haven John Cabot M. A.
Mr. Charles Caldwell of Guilford Merchant Mr. Joseph Calfe The Rev. Mr. John
Callender of Newport Mr. Joseph Callender Mr. Samuel Carey jun. Mr. Josiah
Carter Mr. Thomas Carlton The Rev. Mr. Joseph Champney of Beverley Mr. Samuel
Chandler jun. of Concord Mr. John Channing of Newport Josiah Chase of Newbury
M. A. The Rev. Mr. Stephen Chase of Lyn Mr. Josiah Chauncy of Hadley David
Cheesborough of Newport M. A. Merchant Capt. Bartholomew Cheever Mr. Nathanael
Cheney of Newbury The Rev. Mr. Thomas Cheney of Brookfield Mr. Jonathan Church
of Springfield Mr. Elijah Clap The Rev. Mr. Supply Clap of Woburn Thomas Clap
of Situate Esquire Capt. Jonathan Clark Merchant Mr. Josiah Clark The Rev. Mr.
Peter Clark of Salem-Village William Clark M. A. Physician Mr. Enoch Cleeveland
of Acton Mr. Samuel Clifford of Kensington Mr. Nathan Clough of Kensington Mr.
Ebenezer Coburn Mr. Seth Coburn William Coddington jun. of Newport Esquire The Rev.
Mr. Peter Coffin of Kingston Mr. Tristram Coffin of Newbury John Colman Esquire
Capt. Nathanael Colman of Hatfield Mr. David Colson Mr. John Colson The Rev.
Mr. Benjamin Colton of Hartford Mr. Jonathan Colton of Wallingford The Rev. Mr.
Jeremiah Condy Josiah Convers M. A. Physician Mr. John Cook of Hartford
Middlecott Cook M. A. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Cook of Cambridge The Rev. Mr.
William Cook of Sudbury Mr. Richard Cotta (for two) Mrs. Johannah Cottle of
Newbury The Rev. Mr. John Cotton of Newton Josiah Cotton of Plymouth Esquire Roland
Cotton M. A. Mr. John Cragin of Acton Major Joseph Crosbey of Braintr^^ Richard
Crouch of Hadley Esquire Mr. Robert Cuming of Concord Mr. Witter Cumings of Newbury
(for two) Mr. Ephraim Curtis of Sudbury The Rev. Mr. Jeremiah Curtis of
Panthorn The Rev. Mr. Philip Curtis of Stoughton George Curwin of Salem M. A.
Samuel Curwin of Salem M. A. The Rev. Mr. Caleb Cushing of Salisbury The Rev.
Mr. James Cushing of Haverhill The Rev. Mr. Job Cushing of Shrewsbury The Rev.
Mr. John Cushing of Boxford Mr. Joseph Cushing of Situate Mr. Jonathan Cushing
Matthew Cushing M. A. Mr. David Cuttler Robert Cuttler B. A.
D
The Hon. Paul Dudley of Roxbury Esquire The Hon. William Dudley of Roxbury Esquire The
Hon. Samuel Danforth of Cambridge Esquire Capt. Michael Dalton of Newbury Mr.
Ebenezer Darby of Concord Thomas Darling M. A. Mr. John Darrell Mr. William
Davenport of Newbury The Rev. Mr. Joseph Davis of Holden Mr. James Davidson of
Milford Aaron Day M. A. Seth Dean M. A. Mr. Nathanael Delano of Duxbury The
Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Devotion of Windham The Rev. Mr. James Diman of Salem Mr.
William Diodate of New Haven Merchant Mr. Joseph Dow William Downs M. A. Mr.
Samuel Dowse of Charlestown The Rev. Mr. Samuel Dunbar of Stoughton Mr. Shem
Drown Mr. Joseph Dyar of Worcester
E
The Hon. William Ellery of Newport Esquire (for two) Mr. Benjamin Eastabrook of
Sudbury Mr. Joseph Edwards Bookseller (for twelve) The Rev. Mr. Nathanale Eells
of Situate The Rev. Mr. Jacob Eliot of Lebanon Mr. Edward Ellis Physician Mr.
Moses Emery of Newbury Mr. Stephen Emery of Newbury Mr. Benjamin Emmons (for
two) Mr. David Ensign of Hartford John Erving Esquire (for six) Mr. Francis Evelith
F
Henry Frankland Esquire Collector of his Majesty's Customs for the Port of Boston
(for six) Mr. Barnabas Farnam of Rumford Daniel Farnam of Newbury M. A. (for
two) Nathanael Farrand jun. of Milford M. A. Mr. John Farewell Mr. Jonathan
Fiffield of Hampton Benjamin Fitch M. A. (for two) Benjamin Flagg Esquire Sheriff
of the County of Worcester The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Flagg of Cheshire Mr. Joseph
Fletcher of Acton Mr. Thomas Fleet Printer (for six) Capt. James Flucker of
Charlestown (for two) Henry Flynt Esquire Fellow of Harvard-College The Rev. Mr.
Jeremiah Fogg of Kensington Mr. Edward Foster of Suffield The Rev. Mr. John
Foul of Hingham Mr. Isaac Fowls Mr. John Fox Mrs. Sarah Frankland (for six)
Capt. Thomas Frankland Commander of his Majesty's Ship Rose (for two) Mr. John
Franklyn The Rev. Mr. Thomas Frink of Rutland Stephen Frost M. A. (for two) Mr.
John Fuller of East-Haddam
G
The Hon. John Greenleafe of Newbury Esquire (for six) Mr. Moses Gage of Bradford
Benjamin Gale of Killing sworth M. A. Physician (2) Capt. Caleb Gardner of
Newport David Gardener of New London M. A. (for two) The Rev. Mr. John Gardner
of Stow Nathanael Gardner M. A. Samuel Gardner of Salem M. A. Mr. Samuel
Gardner Merchant Mr. Jeremiah Gates of East-Haddam Mr. Joseph Gates of
East-Haddam Mr. Phinehas Gates of Stow The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Gay of Hingham The
Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Gay of Suffield Mr. Lusher Gay of Dedham Mr. Bartholomew
Gedney Hugh Geltson of Long Island Esquire Benjamin Gerrish of Salem M. A. Merchant
Mr. Benjamin Gerrish Col. Joseph Gerrish of Newbury Mr. Moses Gerrish of
Newbury Samuel Gerrish M. A. Merchant Mr. Thomas Gib of Milford Nicholas Gilman
of Kingston Esquire Mr. John Gilman of Kingston (for two) Henry Gibbs of Salem M.
A. Merchant Samuel Gibson M. A. Mr. Timothy Gibson of Stow Mr. John Godfrey of
Taunton Mr. Ezekiel Goldthwait (for two) Capt. James Gooch of Hopkinton Mr.
John Gooch Merchant (for six) The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Gookin of Hampton The Rev.
Mr. Thomas Goss of Bolton (for six) The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Gould of Long Island
Mr. Harrison Gray Merchant (for three) Mrs. Abigail Green Mr. Benjamin Green
Merchant (for two) Capt. Jeremiah Green (for four) Mr. Jonas Green Joseph Green
M. A. Mr. Timothy Green of New London Printer (for 6) Mr. Joseph Greenleafe of
Newbury Mr. Richard Greenleafe of Newbury Merch. (for 12) Mr. Stephen
Greenleafe M. A. Merchant (for two) Mr. Tristram Greenleafe of Newbury Mr,
Samuel Greenough of Newbury The Rev. Mr. John Greenwood of Rehoboth Samuel
Greenwood M. A. Jeremiah Gridley Esquire
H
The Rev. Mr. Edward Holyoke, President of Harvard College, in Cambridge. (for
four) Moses Hale of Newbury M. A. Mr. Nathan Hale of Newbury Thomas Hale of
Newbury Esquire Mr. Joseph Hall of Rumford The Rev. Mr. Samuel Hall of Wallingford
(for three) Capt. Stephen Hall The Rev. Mr. Theophilus Hall of Wallingford(for
2) The Rev. Mr. Willard Hall of Westford Mr. William Hall Mr. Benjamin
Hallowell Belcher Hancock M. A. Fellow of Harvard College The Rev. Mr. John
Hancock of Braintree (for two) Mr. Thomas Hancock Merchant (for six) Mr.
Elnathan Hanmer of Newport The Rev. Mr. Timothy Harrington of Ashuelot (for 2)
Mr. William Hardy jun. of Bradford Mr. John Harpin of Milford Physician Mr.
Benjamin Harris of Newbury Merchant The Rev. Mr. William Heart of Saybrook (for
two) Jonathan Hastings M. A. of Cambridge Mr. Waitstill Hastings of Hatfield
Physician Mr. Hezekiah Hapgood of Stow Mr. Josiah Haywood of Concord Mr.
Richard Hazen of Haverhill The Rev. Mr. Stephen Heaton of Goshen (for two) The
Rev. Mr. Nathanael Henchman of Lyn (for four) Mr. Elisha Hide of Norwich Mr.
Joseph Higgins of Lyme (for two) Mr. Stephen Higginson of Salem Merchant The
Rev. Mr. Abraham Hill of Rhode-Town Mr. Joseph Hills of Newbury Physician Mr.
Samuel Hill Mr. Smith Hills of Newbury Jonathan Hoar, M. A. Mr. Stephen Hobs of
Kensington Samuel Holbrooke M. A. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Hinsdale of Fort-Dummer
Mr. Joseph Holt of Wallingford Joseph Holt of Andover M. A. Capt. John Homans
The Rev. Mr. James Honeyman of Newport The Rev. Mr. William Hooper (for two)
Mr. John Hopkinson of Bradford The Rev. Mr. Samuel Hopkins of Springfield Mr.
Ephraim Hosmer of Concord Mr. Jonathan Hosmer of Acton The Rev. Mr. Stephen
Hosmer of Haddam Mr. James Hovey of Plymouth Mr. Luke Hovey The Rev. Mr.
Nathanael Hunn of Reading in Connect. Mr. Jabez Hunt Mr. Jacob Hurd Mr. Samuel
Hunting of Long Island Mr. Ebenezer Hews of Newbury Thomas Hutchinson Esquire (for
two)
J
Edward Jackson M. A. (for six) Mr. Joseph Jackson Mr. Thomas Jackson Mr.
Joseph Jacob of Situate George Jaffrey jun. of Portsmouth M. A. Mr. Leonard
Jarvis Merchant Mr. James Jeffrey of Salem Merchant Mr. David Jenkins Mr.
William Jennison of Watertown Mr. Edward Jennings Mr. John Indicott jun. The
Rev. Mr. Samuel Johnson of Stratford The Rev. Mr. William Johnson of Newbury
Mr. Samuel Johnson Mr. Timothy Johnson (for two) Thomas Jones B. A.
K
Mr. John Kelley of Newbury Mr. Daniel Kembal The Rev. Mr. Samuel Kendal of
New-Salem Thomas Kilby Esquire (for twelve) Mr. Joseph King of Suffield Mr. Josiah
King of Suffield Mr. Benjamin Kneeland jun.
L
The Hon. Benjamin Lynde of Salem Esquire The Hon. Isaac Lothrop of Plymouth Esquire
The Hon. Benjamin Lynde jun. of Salem Esquire Joshua Lamb of Roxbury Esquire Mr.
William Lampson of Kingston Mr. Benjamin Landon Merchant Capt. John Larrabee
Lieut. of Castle Wm (for 2) Mr. Thomas Law of Acton Capt. James Leavett Mr.
Jonathan Leavett Joseph Lee M. A. Merchant (for two) Mr. Knight Leverett (for
two) The Rev. Mr. Daniel Lewis of Pembrook Daniel Lewis jun. of Pembrook M. A.
Mr. Elisha Lewis of Farmington Ezekiel Lewis jun. M. A. Merchant The Rev. Mr.
Isaiah Lewis of Eastham Mr. John Light Benjamin Lincoln of Hingham Esquire Mr.
David Little jun. of Marshfield Mr. Enoch Little of Newbury The Rev. Mr.
Ephraim Little of Colchester (for two) Otis Little of Marshfield Esquire Mr. Andrew
Lord of Saybrook John Loring M. A. Physician (for two) Jonathan Loring of
Marlborough M. A. The Rev. Mr. Israel Loring of Sudbury Mr. Henry Lovejoy of
Rumford John Lovel M. A. Master of the South Grammar School Mr. Ebenezer Lowell
(for two) The Rev. Mr. John Lowell of Newbury Mr. Joshua Lunt Mr. Stephen
Lyferd of Exeter Mr. Caleb Lyman (for two) William Lynde of Salem M. A.
Merchant Mr. Josiah Lyndon of Newport (for two)
M
The Rev. Mr. Thaddeus Maccarty of Kingston Mr. Hugh Mc'Daniel (for two) Mr.
Pelatiah Man of Wrentham Richard Mansfield B. A. Mr. Richard Mansfield of
Sudbury Mr. Jonathan Marble of Stow Mr. Jacob March of Newbury Physician Capt.
Daniel Marquand The Rev. Mr. Cyrus Marsh Mr. Daniel Marsh of Hadley Mr.
Ebenezer Marsh of Hadley The Rev. Mr. Elisha Marsh of Narragansett Mr. Job
Marsh of Hadley John Marsh of Hartford Esquire The Rev. Mr. Jonathan Marsh jun. of
New-Hartford Joseph Marsh M. A. Thomas Marsh M. A. Fellow of Harvard-College
Mr. Benjamin Marshall of Providence Mr. Joseph Marshall of Milford (for three)
Thaddeus Mason M. A. Moses Mather M. A. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Mather Mr. Timothy
Mather of Lyme Joseph Mayhew M. A. Fellow of Harvard-College John Mellen B. A.
Mr. John Melven of Concord Mr. Benjamin Merrell of Killingsworth Mr. Nathanael
Merrell of Nottingham Mr. John Merriam of Wallingford Capt. Nathanael Merriam
of Wallingford The Rev. Mr. Noah Merriam of Springfield Mr. John Miles of
Concord Mr. Samuel Miles of Concord The Rev. Mr. Richardson Miner of Unity Col.
James Minot of Concord Stephen Minot jun. M. A. Merchant Mr. John Moffat of
Portsmouth Merchant Mr. John Moffat (for two) Mr. Thomas Moffat Merchant Mr.
William Molineaux Merchant Mr. Caleb Moody of Newbury Mr. Benjamin Moody of
Newbury Mr. Joshua Moody of Newbury (for two) Mr. Uriah Moor of Sudbury Mr.
William Moor of Sudbury Mrs. Mary Mumford of Newport Mrs. Abraham Moulton Mr.
Josiah Moulton John Murdock of Plymouth Esquire (for six)
N
Mr. Samuel Nelson of Plymouth John Newman M. A. The Rev. Mr. John Newmarch of
Kittery Mr. John Newmarch jun. of Portsmouth Christopher Newton of Milford
Samuel Nightingale of Pomfret M. A. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Niles of Braintree The
Rev. Mr. Abraham Not of Saybrook The Rev. Mr. Joseph Noyes of New Haven Mr.
Jacob Noyes John Nutting M. A.
O
Mr. Dudley Odlin of Exeter, Physician Eiisha Odlin of Exeter M. A. 2 Mr. John
Odlin of Exeter 2 Woodb. Odlin of Exeter M. A. Andrew Oliver Esquire (for six)
Capt. Nathanael Oliver of Chelsea M. A. Nathanael Oliver jun. M. A. Peter
Oliver M. A. Merchant Samuel Olmstead of EastHaddam Esquire Mr. Timothy Orne of
Salem Merchant Mr. Jeremiah Osborne Mr. Dav. Osgood of Lancaster Mr. Hooker
Osgood of Lanca. John Osgood of Andover Esquire Mr. Thomas Oxnard Merchant (for
three)
P.
The Hon. William Pepperrell of Kittery Esquire (for two) Mr. John Page of
Salisbury Mr. Samuel Page of Kensington Mr. Sam. Palmer of Bradford Mr. T^o.
Palmer Merchant Stephen Parker M. A. The Rev. Mr. Thomas Parker of Dracut The
Rev. Mr. Joseph Parsons of Bradford The Rev. Mr. Samuel Parsons of Rye (for
two) The Rev. Mr. William Parsons of Southhampton (for two) Richard Patteshall
M. A. Mr. Jonathan Payson The Rev. Mr. Oliver Peabody of Natick (for two Mr.
William Pierce of Stow Mr. John Pierce of Dorchester (for two) Mr. Josi. Pierce
of Hadley M. A. Mr. J. Pierson of Newbury (2) Benjamin Pemberton Esquire N. Perkins
M. A. Physician Nicholas Perryman of Exeter Esquire John Philips M. A. Chaplain of
Castle William Mr. Nicholas Philips jun. of Weymouth. Capt. Benj Pickman of
Salem Capt. Elias Pike of Salisbury Tim. Pike of Newbury (for 2) Mr. Josiah
Piper of Acton James Pitts M. A. Merchant Mr. N. Piper of Concord Ichabod
Plaisted of Salem Esquire Col. Benj. Pollard (for two) The Rev. Mr. John Prentice
of Lancaster The Rev. Mr. Joshua Prentice of Holliston The Rev. Mr. Benjamin
Prescot of Salem Mr. Cha. Prescot of Concord John Prescot of Concord Esquire Mr.
Jonathan Prescott of Kensington Mr. S. Prescott of Hampton Mr. John Prince of
Kingston Mr. Nathan Procter of Stow
Q
The Hon. John Quincy of Braintree Esquire (for two) Norton Quincy M. A. Merchant
(for two) The Rev. Mr. William Rand of Sunderland (for four) Mr. John Rawlings
Grindall Rawson M. A. Mr. William Reed Attorney at Law Mr. Abraham Reller Mr.
Joseph Remington of Suffield The Rev. Mr. Caleb Rice of Sturbridge. Mr. Dav.
Rice of Shrewsbury Mr. Jon. Rice of Sudbury Aaron Richards B. A. Jos. Richards
of Dedham Esquire Mr. D. Robins of Lancaster David Robinson M. A. Mr. Ephesians. Robinson
of Kingston (for two) Mr. James Robinson of Newport Physician Mr. Jeremiah
Robinson Mr. John Robinson (for two) Mr. Benjamin Rogers The Rev. Mr. Daniel
Rogers of Littleton The Rev. Mr. John Rogers Benj. Rolf of Rumford Esquire Henry
Rolf of Newbury (for two) Mr. Robert Rogers of Almsbury Physician Mr. Thomas
Rogers jun. of Newbury Mr. Benj. Row of Kensington Physician Mr. Ebenezer Row
of Kensington Mr. Eben. Rowell of EastHaddam Thomas Rowell Esquire Jacob Royal Esquire
The Rev. Mr. Thomas Ruggles of Guilford (for two) The Rev. Mr. Samuel Ruggles
of Billerica Mr. Simon Rumpill Capt. Daniel Russel of Newport (for two)
Chambers Russel of Concord Esquire Mr. James Russel of Charlestown Merchant (for
two) Mr. John Russel Mr. Nathanael Russel
S
The Hon. Richard Saltonstall Esquire (for three) The Hon. Stephen Sewll Esquire (for
two) Mr. Malachi Salter jun. Mr. Sampson Salter Mr. Ca. Sanborn of Hampton Mr.
Joseph Savel Mr. T. Savoury of Bradford Mr. Josiah Sauburn of Exeter Edw. Scott
of Newport Esquire Mr. Joshua Sayer. Mr. Sam. Seabury of Duxbury The Rev. Mr. James
Searing of Newport The Rev. Mr. Jos. Secombe of Kingston (for two) The Rev. Mr.
Christopher Sergeant of Methuen The Rev. Mr. John Sergeant of Stockbridge Mr.
Moses Sergeant Mr. Samuel Sarvice Nicholas Sever of Kingston Esquire (for two)
Mitchel Sewall of Salem Esquire Mr. John Shaw Capt. Edward Sheafe of Charlestown
(for four) Mr. Daniel Shephard of Acton Mr. J. Shephard of Soughegon Mr. Samuel
Sherburn of Portsmouth (for two) James Skinner Esquire The Rev. Mr. Thomas Skinner
of Colchester The Rev. Mr. Aaron Smith of Marlborough Jabez Smith of Hampton
Esquire Mr. James Smith of Newbury J. Smith of Milford M. A. (3) Mr. Joshua Smith
of Shrewsbury (for three) The Rev. Mr. William Smith of Weymouth William Smith
B. A. Mr. Job Snell The Rev. Mr. John Southmaid of Water bury (for 2) Mr. S.
Southworth of Lyme The Rev. Mr. John Sparhawke of Salem Mr. Nathanael Sparhawke
of Kittery Merchant The Rev. Mr. Sampson Spaulding of Tooksbury John Sprague of
Newbury M. A. Physician Mr. John Staniford The Rev. Mr. David Stearns of
Lunenburgh Mr. Steph. Steel of Hartford Mr. Gershom Stetson of Situate
Benjamin Stevens M. A. The Rev. Mr. Phineas Stevens of Contacook Mr. Samuel
Stevens Mr. Simon Stone The Rev. Mr. Isaac Styles of East-Haven (for three) Mr.
Jeremiah Stickney of Rumford Mr. Ebenezer Storer (for 4) The Rev. Mr. Josiah
Swan of Dunsiable Robert Swanton, Commander of his Majesty's Ship Astrea (for
six) Mr. Steph. Swett of Newbury The Rev. Mr. John Swift of Framingham Jos.
Sylvester of Newport M. A.
T
The Hon. Jonathan Trumble of Lebanon Esquire Samuel Talcott, Sheriff of Hartford
Esquire (for twelve) Mr. John Tanner of Newport The Rev. Mr. John Tailor of Milton
(for two) Mr. William Tailor (for 3) Mr. T. Tannatt of Newbury Mr. P. Tenney of
Bradford John Thaxter B. A. Deacon Cornelius Thayer (2) Mr. Cornelius Thayer
jun. Mr. Nathanael Thayer Mr. Onisiphorus Tilestone Capt. Jethro Tilton of
Hampton-Falls Capt. Joseph Tilton of Ditto Mr. Josiah Titcombe The Rev. Mr.
Jonathan Todd of Guilford (for two) Mr. Mitchael Todd of NewHaven Merchant (for
4) The Rev. Mr. Christopher Toppan of Newbury The Rev. Mr. Joseph Torrey of
South-Kingston (for 4) Mr. William Torrey (...) Mr. J. Townsend of Newport Mr.
Thomas Townsend Mr. P. Tracey of Newbury Mr. R. Treat of Middleton Edmund
Trowbridge Esquire The Rev. Mr. Joshua Tufts of Litchfield The Rev. Mr. David
Turner of Rehoboth (for three) John Turner of Salem Esquire Mr. Samuel Tyley (for
three) Samuel Tyley jun. M. A. (6) Capt. Edward Tyng (for 2)
V U
Mr. Edward Vail William Vassal M. A. The Rev. Mr. Edward Upham of Springfield
W
The Hon. Joseph Wilder of Lancaster Esquire The Hon James Wadsworth of Durham Esquire
The Hon. George Wyllys Esquire Secretary of the Colony of Connecticut The Hon
Richard Wibird of Portsmouth Esquire Mr. J. Wadley of Kingston The Rev. Mr. Daniel
Wadsworth of Hartford Deacon Thomas Wait (for 2) Mr. Samuel Walker of
Wilmington The Rev. Mr. Tim. Walker of Rumford Mr. Thomas Walker of Newbury
Merchant (for 3) The Rev. Mr. Nehemiah Walter of Roxbury The Rev. Mr. Nathanael
Walter of Roxbury James Warren, Esquire Sheriff of the County of Plymouth (2) Capt.
Robert Watt Capt. Samuel Waterhouse Mr. Daniel Warner of Springfield (for two)
Mr. J. Wear of Kensington Mesech Wear of Hampton-Falls M. A. (for two)
Nathanael Wear of Hampton Esquire (for two) Mr. Jonathan Webb Mr. Jonathan Webb
(for two) The Rev. Mr. Elisha Webster of Canaan The Rev. Mr. Samuel Webster of
Salisbury Noah Wells B. A. Mr. Samuel Wentworth M. A. Merchant (for two) Mrs.
Deliverance Wheeler of Stow Mr. Jeremiah Wheeler of Concord Mr. Hez. Wheeler of
Acton Jeremiah Wheelwright M. A. Mr. Job. Wheelwright Merchant (for two) Mr.
John Wheelwright jun. Merchant Mr. Nathanael Wheelwright Merchant Mr. Theodore
Wheelwright The Rev. Mr. Joseph Whipple of Hampton-Falls (for four) Mr. Abijah
White of Marshfield Mr. Cornelius White The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer White of Norton
John White M. A. Mr. John White jun. Mr. Sam. White of Taunton Mr. Thomas White
Mr. William White (for 2) Mr. E. Whiting of Wrentham Mr. John Whiting M. A. Mr.
Job Whiting of Hartford Mr. Stephen Whiting Mr. T. Whiting of Concord Mr. A.
Whittelsey of Saybrook Mr. Elisha Whittelsey of Wallingford Merchant (4) The
Rev. Mr. Samuel Whittelsey of Wallingford (for 6) The Rev. Mr. Samuel
Whittelsey jun. of Milford (for 2) The Rev. Mr. Samuel Whitman of Farmington
(for 2) Mr. Samuel Whitman jun. of Farmington Mr. Elnathan Whitman of Hartford
Mr. Jonathan Whitney of Wrentham Mr. Rich. Whitney of Stow S. Wickham of
Newport Esquire Mr. Ben. Willbore of Taunton Mr. Dav. Wilder of Lancaster Mr. Caleb
Wilder of Lancaster The Rev. Mr. Chest. Williams of Hadley Samuel Willard Esquire
(for 2) The Rev. Mr. Eben. Williams of Pomfret J. Williams of Taunton Esquire Capt.
Williams of Deerfield Mr. Robert Williams Mr. T. Williams of Deerfield The Rev.
Mr. War. Williams of Waltham Mr. T. Wilson of Kingston The Rev. Mr. Pain winget
of Almsbury (for two) Edward Winslow Esquire Sheriff of the County of Suffolk (3)
Edward Winslow of Plymouth M. A. (for two) Joshua Winslow Esquire Isaac Winslow M.
A. Merch. Mr. Kenelm Winslow (for 4) Mr. S. Winslow M. A. Merch. John Winthrop
M. A. Hol. Pro Ma. Harvard College Mr. -- Wit of Brookfield John Wolcott of
Salem Esquire Mrs. Abigail Woodbridge of Hartford (for three) Mr. Bennet Wood of
Littleton Mr. John Wood of Concord The Rev. Mr. B. Woodbridge of Amity Benjamin
Woodbridge M. A. Dudley Woodbridge M. A. of Groton (for six) Mr. Thomas
Woodbridge Mr. J. Woodman of Newbury Mr. J. Woodman of Newbury Mr. D. Woodward
of Sudbury Mr. J. Woodward of Sudbury Mr. John Worth of Hampton The Rev. Mr.
William Worthington (for two) Mr. Abijah Wyman
Y
Mr. M. Yeomans of Colchester
A considerable Number of Subscribers to this Book sending too late, their
Names could not be inserted.

CORRECTIONS.
Page 85.1.15. after of 1. Mr. P. 89.1. 7. of the Notes r. propinquo. P. 90. 1.
5. of the Notes for me r. mi P. 239. 1. 15 after been r. so. P. 279. 1. 23.
after which r. he. P. 3841. 22. for exceptionable r. unexceptionable.

INTRODUCTION.
ONE of the first Fathers of this Country, the memorable SHEPARD (whose
Writings have been, of late so highly commended) thought it needful to caution
People, See his Parable of the Ten Virgins, second Part, Page 61.
not to trust Men too far, nor boast of any Man too much; especially, in Regard
of his glorious Profession and Affections at first. GOD (says he) sends diverse
of his faithful Servants to a Place; and many, at first hearing, are wrought
upon, battered down, convinced, mourning after Peace, going to Ministers,
Delight in Ordinances: Now many bless GOD for their Conversion; and many a
Christian is put out of Doubt of it, Parents of their Children, and Children of
their Parents; one Brother of another, and one Christian Neighbor of another.
-- O take Heed of boasting too much! It may be they may, and will fall down
(before they have lived many Years) when at their Height. What Man was ever
more sought unto, than JOHN? All JUDEA came unto him; yet, at last they forsake
him, rejoiced but a Season in his Light: They went also from him to CHRIST,
(John 7. 26. 32.) yet, JOHN complains, none received his Testimony. CHRIST
himself preached in CAPERNAUM, and never such exalting a Man: They boasted in
him: Yet only a few Babes which the LORD wrought upon. The GALATIANS would
loose their Eyes for PAUL; yet, afterward they slight him, and join with false
Teachers against him. O therefore pray for them, and weep for them, but do not
trust them too far! Neither trust yourselves too much. Then are ye my
Disciples, (Joh. 8. 31.) if ye continue. DEMAS forsakes PAUL: All in Asia
forsake me.

Had this observable Caution been the Product of a Spirit of Prophesy, I can
searce see, how it could, in a more pointed Manner, have admonished us in these
Days. There never was a Time, in this Land, wherein there was such flocking
after some particular Ministers, and glorying in them, as though they were GODS
rather than Men; never a Time, wherein Men's Professions and Affections rose
higher; never a Time, wherein Conversions, numerous Conversions were so much
boasted of: Would to GOD, there was no Reason to suspect the Truth of any one
of them! But it ought always to be remembered, there may be a very specious
Show, where there is not the Substance of Religion: Nor are Persons without
Danger of resting in the former, to the Neglect of the latter: And, it may be
feared, whether this Danger han't been greatly increased, while so many have
been encouraged to look upon themselves as in a State of Grace, without that
Proof of the Reality of their Conversion, which might reasonably be expected.
There has certainly been too much Haste, as well as Positiveness, in declaring
these and those, in this and the other Place, to have passed from Death to
Life: A Judgment has been too commonly formed of Men's spiritual Condition,
more from their Affections, than the permanent Temper of their Minds discovered
in the habitual Conduct of their Lives; not duly considering, how precarious
that Religion must be, which has its Rise from the Passions, and not any through
Change in the Understanding and Will.

Much, I am sensible, has been said, in these Days, of a Work of GOD going on
in the Land: And I trust, this has all along been the Case with this People,
from the Days of our Fathers: And I doubt not, it is so now; nay, I charitably
hope, there have been more numerous Instances of saving Conversion, in the
Years past, than usual: But must it not be said, at the same Time, that there
have been more Disorders and greater Extravagances, than common: And what is of
still more dangerous Tendency, han't the great Talk of a Revival of Religion
arisen more from the general Appearance of some Extraordinaries, (which there
may be where there is not the Power of Godliness) than form such Things as are
sure Evidences of a real Work of GOD in Men's Hearts? I am clearly satisfied,
this is the Truth of the Case, however unwilling some may be to own it.

Nor have People been so plainly and faithfully taught, as it were to be wished,
what a Work of GOD is, or how to distinguish between those Things which are
undoubted Marks of such a Work, and those which are not. They have often been
told of the glorious Work of GOD; his Work, so as was never before seen in our
own, or Father' s Days.

But have they not been too much left to think, as if the Thing hereby intended
was, the late religious Appearance, taken in the Gross? This, I believe, is the
Idea Multitudes have of what is called, the Work of GOD going on in the Land;
which, if it be, they certainly include that in their Notion of GOD's Work,
which is highly dishonorary to him: Nor is it any Wonder, if, from this
mistaken Though It of what is truly the Work of GOD, they should speak of those as
its OPPOSERS, who are its greatest FRIENDS; and have proved themselves to be
so, by their Endeavors to discountenance such Things as are dangerous to Men's
Souls, and may prove a Hindrance to the Progress of real Religion. People must
have in their Minds some distinct Conception of the Nature of a Work of GOD, or
they will act in the Dark, while they embrace these as the Friends of it, and
stand aloof from those as its Enemies: They will, in this Case, neither know
what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

What I propose therefore, by way of Introduction, is, to exhibit, in as brief
a Manner as I can, a distinct and clear Idea of a Work of GOD, with the
Appearance it will make; especially, when it is remarkable.

Now, in a Sense, every Thing that comes to pass, may be called the Work of
GOD; for as our SAVIOR said to his Disciples, Matthew. 10. 29, 30.
A Sparrow shall not fall to the Ground without your Father: The very Hairs of
your Head are all numbered. All great Events in Providence, whether in a Way of
Judgment or Mercy, are more especially the Work of GOD; according to that, Isa.
45. 7.
I form the Light, and create Darkness: I make Peace and create Evil: I the
LORD do all these Things. Creation and Redemption are still more eminently the
Works of GOD, and always so spoken of in the Oracles of Truth. But the Work of
GOD here intended, is the same with that, concerning which our SAVIOR says,
John 6. 29.
This is the Work of GOD, that ye believe on him whom GOD has sent: It Is the
same with that, of which the Apostle speaks, when he affirms, Phil. 1. 3.
that he who has begun a good Work in you, will perform it until the Day of
JESUS CHRIST; and which he calls, 1 These. 1. 11.
The Work of Faith with Power: It Is in one Word, That Work of divine Grace,
which is sometimes, called the New Creation; sometimes the New Birth; sometimes
the Spirit's Renovation; sometimes Conversion, or as it is otherwise expressed,
a being turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Sin and Satan unto
GOD.

Let me observe the following Things concerning this Work of GOD.

First of all, There is ordinarily some Preparation in the Mind of Sinners,
previous to it. This is called by Divines Conviction; by which is understood
that Operation of the HOLY SPIRIT, whereby, in a Way agreeable to the Nature of
Man, he opens to the Sinner a View of himself, in his Sinfulness and Guilt:
upon which, he is driven out of his former Ease, and filled with Anxiety and
Distress. This inward Disturbance may, as to its Degree, be various in
different Persons; but there is the Reality of it in all: In all, I mean, who
have come to Years, before they have had awakened in them serious Thoughts of
their Souls, and another World: In respect of this Kind of Persons, and those
among them in special who have not been under Restraints from Sin, but have
accustomed themselves to do Evil, it is rare, if ever, that the Work of GOD is
wrought in them, but their Consciences are first alarmed, and their Hearts
filled with bitter Remorse for their past Follies.

But then, it may be worth a particular Remark, this Preparation of Mind, is
not the Work of GOD in the special and distinguishing Sense; in such a Sense,
as that the Subjects of it may be thought to be in a State of Salvation.
Hypocrites in Zion may say, Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire? And
they may be Hypocrites still: Nor is the greatest Disquietude of Soul; a
Disquietude expressing itself in Roarings, or Tremblings, or the strangest
bodily Effects, a sufficient Evidence of a saving Work of Grace; yea, it may be
nothing more than the Effect of Nature; or, if it should, in the Beginning,
arise from a divine Influence, it is yet a Mark of a converted State that may
not be depended on. Persons, notwithstanding all this, may be under
Condemnation, and finally doomed to a Departure from CHRIST with the Workers of
Iniquity.

It may be nextly said, This Work of GOD is a Secret Thing; a Work within Men;
a Work effected in the inward Frame of their Mind. It principally lies in a new
Heart, another Soul; in other Views and Intentions, other Thoughts and
Sentiments, other Principles and Springs of Action: All which Things are
hidden, out of the Sight of the World.

From whence it follows, by the Way, that the Work of God, as an internal
Thing, can be judged of by others, only from the outward Discoveries of it. One
Man cannot look into the Heart of another: This is the Prerogative of him who
has said, Rev. 2. 23.
I am he that searches the Heart, and tries the Reins of the Children of Men.
If therefore we would judge of the interior State of others, we must do it from
some external Manifestations of it.

Men may open to us the Temper of their Minds, in a Relation of their
Experiences: But even here, we are liable to be deceived. They may be mistaken
about their own State; and what is worse, may represent Things different from
what they really are: so that at the best we only judge in this Case upon
Supposition. And as there is so much Hypocrisy in the World, it would be but
Prudence to hear Men's Declarations, respecting themselves with a heedful
Caution. It may perhaps be a Truth here, as well as in other Cases, Actions
speak much louder than Words.

And this therefore is another Way, in which Men may disclose what is within
them; and it is the great Gospel Rule by which we are to govern our practical
Sentiments one of another. Says our SAVIOR, Matthew. 7. 16, 17, 18.
By their Fruits ye shall know them? Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns? Or Figs of
Thistles? Even, so every good Tree brings forth good Fruit: but a corrupt
Tree brings forth evil Fruit. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit;
neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit. Agreeable whereto are those
Words, Matthew. 12. 33, 35.
Either make the Tree good, and his Fruit good; or else make the Tree corrupt,
and the Fruit corrupt: For the Tree is known by his Fruit. -- A good Man, out
of the good Treasure of his Heart, brings forth good Things; and an evil Man,
out c the evil Treasure, brings forth evil Things. It Is true, this is not an
infallible Rule; nor did our SAVIOR ever intend to give us one: This would
anticipate the last Judgment, or render it needless; for Men's States would be
known beforehand.

It may be further noted, this Work of GOD is the same at all Times, and in all
Places.

I mean not that the Instruments, Means, or Manner, of it is Production, are
always alike. There has commonly been a great Diversity here, as seemed best to
the Wisdom of GOD.

Sometimes, he has taken the Work very much into his own Hands, and sometimes
he has made use of Instruments: And when this has been the Case, the
Instruments he has chosen, have sometimes been more adapted to such a Design,
and sometimes less so. i. e. to the Eye of Man's Wisdom; for in themselves,
they have always been the best, and were we able to see clearly into the
Reasons of Providence, we should perceive them to be so: To be sure, they are
never such as are in their own Nature unfit to be made use of.

There has likewise ordinarily been a Variety as to the Means. Sometimes it has
pleased GOD to make Use of one Means, and sometimes of another; sometimes the
Means have been wonderful and extraordinary, as in the Days of MOSES and of
CHRIST; and sometimes they have been of a more common Nature: And sometimes He
may have accomplished the Work without any Means at all.

And alike various has been the Manner, in which GOD has wrought upon the Minds
of Sinners. Sometimes it has been in a Way of great Terror, and sometimes in
the Methods of Mildness and Gentleness. Sometimes he has dealt so with them,
that they could not but have a clear and distinct Perception of his Operations
in them; and sometimes he has formed them into a new Workmanship, in a more
insensible, and variously interrupted Way.

Neither do I mean, that this Work of GOD is the same in its Strength and
Beauty in all; or that it is always wrought in the like Number of Instances,
either in one Place, or another. There has always been an admirable Diversity
in this Respect! Some have been made to partake of the divine Nature in one
Degree, others in another; sometimes a greater Number have appeared living
Images of their Father in Heaven, sometimes a less.

But as to the Work, for Substance, it is the same in all Places, and among all
People under Heaven. There may be a Variety as to the Circumstances, Degrees,
and Appendages of it; but for the Thing it self, as to it is Essence, it is the
very same all over the World; has been so from the Days of CHRIST; yea, from
the Days of ADAM, and will be so to the End of the World. Very observable to
our Purpose here, are the Words of the famous Dr. OWEN. Says he, Discourse of
the Holy Spirit, P. 177, 178.
Regeneration by the HOLY SPIRIT is the same Work for the Kind of it, and
wrought by the same Power of the SPIRIT, in all that are regenerate, or ever
were, or shall be so, from the Beginning of the World to the End thereof. Great
Variety there is in the Application of the outward Means; -- nor can the Ways
and Manner hereof be reduced unto any certain Order. For the SPIRIT works
how, and when he pleases, following the sole Rule of his own Will and Wisdom.
Mostly, GOD makes Use of the preaching of the Word; thence called an engrafted
Word which is able to save our Souls: Sometimes it is wrought without it, as in
all those who are regenerate before they come to the Use of Reason, or in their
Infancy: Sometimes Men are called, and so regenerate in an extraordinary
Manner, as was PAUL; but mostly they are so, in and by the Use of ordinary
Means, instituted and sanctified of GOD to that Purpose. And great Variety
there is in the Perception and Understanding of the Work it self, in them in
whom it is wrought. For in it self it is secret and hidden, and no otherwise
discoverable than in it is Causes and Effects, John 3. 8. -- And there is a
great Variety in carrying on this Work toward Perfection, in the Growth of the
new Creature, or the Increase of Grace implanted in our Natures by it: For
some, through the Supplies of the SPIRIT, make a great and speedy Progress
toward Perfection; others thrive slowly, and bring forth little Fruit, the
Cause and Occasions whereof are not here to be enumerated. But notwithstanding
all Differences in previous Dispositions, in the Application of outward Means,
in the Manner of it ordinary or extraordinary, in the Consequents of much or
less Fruit, the Work it self, in its own Nature, is of the same Kind, one and
the same.

It may be again remarkt, The Appearance of this Work of GOD, as well as the
Work it self, is always the same. What I intend is, that the Appearance is ever
of a like Kind and Nature. As the Instruments, Means, Circumstances and
Appendages of the Work may be different, so will be the Appearance as to these
Things: And as the Work it self may be more of less perfect, in this or the
other Place, at this or the other Time, so will be the Appearance more or less
glorious. It will bear an exact Proportion to the greater or less Degree of the
Work it self: So it always has been, so it is now, and so it ever will be to
the End of Time, in all Parts of the Earth: Which leads me, to what I have
principally in View here,

In the last Place, to describe the Appearance of this Work of GOD. And in
doing of this, I shall confine my self to the Scripture, as the surest Guide,
as well as only Rule. And the Texts, descriptive of this Work of GOD, and the
Appearance it will make, are so numerous, and expressive, that there can be no
reasonable Ground for Debate upon the Matter.

There are several Prophesies in the Old Testament, which look beyond the then
present Day to the Times of the MESSIAH, and plainly point out the Appearance
this Work of GOD will make in the World. Such an one is that, Zech. 12. 10.
where it is promised in these Words, I will pour upon the House of DAVID, and
upon the Inhabitants of JERUSALEM, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication; and
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for his only Son; and shall be in Bitterness for him, as one
that is in Bitterness for his Firstborn. I here take that for granted, which
is supposed by the Generality of Expositors to be the Truth, that these Words
look forward to be the Truth, that these Words look forward to the Days of
CHRIST, and foretell the outpouring of the SPIRIT, in a mavelous Work of
Grace. Whether they refer more immediately to the Jews, and were fulfilled in
the first Times of the Gospel; particularly, when three Thousand, who had been
consenting to the Crucifixion of CHRIST, were, upon PETER'S Sermon, pricked in
the Heart: or concern Sinners in general under the Gospel Dispensation, I
dispute not. In which ever Sense the Words are understood, the Effect or
Appearance of this Work of Grace (which is all I now aim at) is the same; viz.
a great and bitter Mourning for Sin, such a Mourning as Parents are subject to
upon the Death of an only Son, or firstborn. But then, you observe the Rise of
this Sorrow and Lamentation. It flows from a Look to that SAVIOR, whom by Sin
we have pierced; and not from a Dread of Wrath and Hell. There is, it is true, a
Sorrow for Sin which may be excited from a Fear of Punishment; and this is
commonly the first Kind of Sorrow, and it has its Use in Religion: But its no
Sign of a truly penitent Heart, whatever Stress Sinners may be disposed to lay
upon it: Nor is it the Mourning for Sin here prophesied of. This is a Sorrow
taking Rise from Faith in CHRIST, and a View of Sin as occasioning those
Sufferings, HE underwent to make Atonement for it. And it is no Wonder if the
Sorrow, which has such a Rise, is great like to that for a Firstborn. For
there is nothing; no, not the Torments of Hell itself, that will so effectually
move and melt the Heart, as a believing Sight of CHRIST, in his bitter
Sufferings, and dying Agonies, for our Sins. This, if any Thing, will open the
Springs of Grief, and overwhelm our Souls with Sorrow at the Remembrance of our
Transgressions.

And this, let me add, is the only Sorrow for Sin, that is a Fruit of Grace,
and evidential of a saving Work of the SPIRIT upon the Sinner's Heart. An Eye
to CHRIST is the only Gospel-Ground of a Gospel-Repentance. The Curse of the
Law, and the Wrath of God, may alarm Conscience, and distract the Sinner almost
with Anguish and Terror; but all will be to no Purpo^^^ (...) CHRIST comes into
Consideration, and a ^^^eving Look to him gives Spring to the Sorrow This is
the Life of true Repentance: Without a View to CHRIST, it is but as a dead
Carcass.

The out-pouring of the SPIRIT is again spoken of Ezekiel. 36. 29.
, where GOD promises to give to his People a new Heart, and to put his SPIRIT
within them. And what is the Effect, the visible Appearance? It follows in the
next Words, v. 21.
Ye shall walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. This
is more fully expressed in the next Chapter, v. 23, 24. Neither shall they defile
themselves any more with their Idols, nor with their detestable Things, nor
with any of their Transgressions: -- They shall also walk in my Judgments, and
observe my Statutes, and do them.

Another Prophecy, wherein the out-pouring of the SPIRIT, in a Work of Grace,
is spoken of, with a more particular Account of the Appearance it will make, we
have in Isa. 32. 15, 16, 17. Until the SPIRIT be poured out upon us from on
high, and the Wilderness be a fruitful Field, and the fruitful Field be counted
for a Forest. Then Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness
remain in the fruitful Field. And the Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and
the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for ever. We have here an
Account, not only of a Work of Grace, but its Appearance, the Effect that will
be produced by it. The Wilderness shall become a fruitful Field. i. e. I have
paraphrased this Text, in the Words of one of the Fathers of this Country, the
Rev. Mr. ADAMS of DEDHAM; which I the more readily chose to do, because I find,
in the Preface to his Sermon, an excellent Character given of him, for his
Piety as well as Learning, by those two Lights in our Churches, the famous Mr.
TORRY and Mr. FLYNT.
These who have been as a Wilderness, barren and unfruitful, bringing forth no
Fruit to GOD, but wild Fruits of Sin, shall be changed, tilled, converted, and
made fruitful, to bring forth Fruits of Holiness to GOD, And the fruitful Field
shall be counted for a Forest. i. e. They have a Principle of Fruitfulness in
them, and did bring forth Fruit before, yet now, upon the pouring out of the
SPIRIT upon them, shall receive such Abundance of Grace, and be so eminent in
the acting of it, that what they did before shall be accounted, as the Fruit of
a barren Forest, in Comparison of what they do now. Or the Meaning may be,
Those that were before fruitful Fields shall, upon the pouring out of the
SPIRIT, fructify so incredibly, that they shall seem rather to be a Wood, a
Forest, a Thicket, than a Field of Tillage (by an Appropiation of such
Expressions as are sometimes used concerning the incredible Fertility of some
Fields in Grain and Fruits, unto the exceeding Fruitfulness of Persons in
Grace, and spiritual and holy Actions): And so the Sense is the same as before.
Vid. English (...) Calvin in Pol. Synop. (...)
Then Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness. i. e. Those who were as a
Wilderness before, untilled, untaught, unregenerate, and unsubdued to the Will
of GOD, being now converted, shall give Heed to Judgment, Equity,
Righteousness, Honesty and Piety; abandoning all Ways of Profaneness,
Debauchery, Dishonesty, Injustice, Intemperance, and Impiety, which once they
lived in. And Righteousness remain in the fruitful Field. i. e. Christians,
Professors, who have given up their Names to CHRIST, shall be studiously
careful, to hold fast Righteousness, Sincerity and Uprightness in all their
Carriages toward GOD and Man; being plain-hearted, rightdown fair and square
in all their Dealings, behaving themselves in all Things holily, justly and
unblameably; being harmless, and without Rebuke: Putting away all Semblance of
Dishonesty, unjust Dealing, Unfaithfulness, Untruth, Encroaching, Covetousness,
DoubleDealing, Unsteadiness, Shuffling, Winding, Turning, and whatsoever else
is unworthy the Vocation wherewith they are called. And these sure are happy
and blessed Times, when there are such Fruits of Sanctification, so generally
and universally appearing (...) Righteousness shall be (...) Righteousness,
Quietness, (...) There shall be Peace with GOD, and the Testimony of that Peace
in their Consciences; whence an holy Serenity and Calmness of Soul, the Peace
of GOD which passes all Understanding, keeping their Hearts and Minds through
JESUS CHRIST; a religious Composure of Mind, resting quietly upon GOD alone,
and depending on him with confident Assurance of Mercy, Protection (and all
Good) from him. Eng. Annot. in loc.


The Appearance of this Work of GOD, is again particularly described in that
Prophecy, referring to the Times of CHRIST, Isa: 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Wolf also
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid: and the
Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall
lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down
together: and the Lion shall eat Straw like the Ox. And the sucking Child shall
play on the Hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his Hand on the
Cockatrice-den. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy Mountain: for
the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the
Sea. The Meaning of which Words, according to the Sense of almost all
Expositors, stripped of Metaphor, and put into plain English, is obviously
this, That in the Times of the Gospel, when Men are effectually wrought upon by
divine Grace, the Roughness of their Temper shall be smoothed, their Passions
restrained and brought into Order, so that they shall live together in Love and
Peace, doing to each other all the Offices, not only of Humanity, but of
Christian Kindness and Charity. Such Persons as were once ravenous in their
Disposition, should undergo a Transformation, as if a Wolf should change his
Nature, and of Savage become gentle so as to feed with Lambs,; or as if the
Leopard should quit his Fierceness, and lie down with the Kids: And such as
were once angry and techy, should pass through an Alteration, as if the Asp
should lose its Venom, and suffer a Child to play about its Hole. There should,
in a Word, be no more biting, opposing and devouring one another. But this
Change in Men would make them mild and gentle; disposing them to behave toward
each other with all Tenderness, loving one another as themselves.

But the best Idea of the Appearance of this Work of GOD is to be fetched from
the New Testament, where the Texts descriptive of it, are still more clear and
express.

Only, before I proceed, I shall make one Remark: It is this; That there is a
twofold Work of the SPIRIT of GOD spoken of in Scripture: The one respects his
extraordinary and miraculous Gifts and Powers; the other, his common and
ordinary Influence, that by which a Work of Grace is begun and carried on in
the Souls of Men, to their being prepared in this World, for Glory and Honor
in the better World that is to come. Some Texts, when they speak of the Work of
the SPIRIT, may include both his ordinary and extraordinary Work; and some may
more especially mean the former, and others the latter. But however this be, a
Distinction ought always to be made between these Works of the SPIRIT.

And let it be carefully remembered, when the Work of the SPIRIT, in the
extraordinary Sense, is the Thing intended, the Effect hereof, or its
Appearance, in Prophesyings, Visions, Revelations, Signs, Wonders, or any other
strange and miraculous Events, is not the Appearance to be looked for, from the
ordinary Influence of the SPIRIT, i. e. his saving Work upon the Souls of Men:
Nor can it be collected from all the miraculous Gifts and Powers that any were
the Subjects of, when the SPIRIT was poured forth in the Days of the Apostles,
that they were among the Sanctified in CHRIST JESUS. Some, who were then the
Subjects of a Work of Grace, were, no Doubt, endowed with the extraordinary
Gifts of the HOLY GHOST; but their extraordinary Endowments were no Proof of
their having wrought in them an effectual Work of Grace. Says the celebrated
Dr. OWEN, Discourse of the SPIRIT. Page 178.
Those who were miraculously converted, as PAUL; or, who upon their Conversion
had miraculous Gifts bestowed upon them, as had Multitudes of the primitive
Christians, were no otherwise regenerate, nor by any other internal Efficiency
of the Holy SPIRIT, then every one is at this Day, who is really made Partaker
of this Grace and Privilege: Neither were those miraculous Operations of the
Holy SPIRIT, which were visible unto others, any Part of the Work of
Regeneration; nor did they belong necessarily to it: For many were the Subjects
of them, and received miraculous Gifts by them, who were never regenerate; and
many were regenerate, who were never Partakers of them!

It Is probable, we should generally be disposed, at once, to look upon a Man as
the Subject of a Work of GOD's Grace, if he was endowed with extraordinary
Gifts; if, to all Appearance, he had the Spirit of Prophecy, the Gift of
Tongues, the Gift of Healing, and had Faith so that he could do Miracles: But a
Thousand of these Gifts, considered simply in themselves, are no Argument of a
regenerate State. The least Spark of true CHRISTIAN CHARITY is a better
Evidence of a Work of GOD in the Soul, than the greatest Ability to show Signs,
and work Wonders. The learned Dr. HICKS has expressed himself upon the saving
and miraculous Gifts of the SPIRIT, in a Manner well worth transcribing See his
Enthusiasm exorcised from the 54th to the 59th Page.
. As for these (the miraculous Gifts) they neither supposed any saying Change
in the gifted Person, nor necessarily brought any along with them, nor drew any
after them. But as St. CHRYSOSTOM compares them to Riches, so like Riches they
tempted Men to Pride, Vanity and Contempt of their Governors, as also to envy
and hate one another: -- Nay, so inconsiderable are these Gifts for themselves,
and so unprofitable to any Christian, as to his main Concern, that like the Sun
and Rain they were given to good and bad. -- The Tongues of Men or Angels, to
speak in the Apostle's Words, could have said nothing more plain or emphatical
[than what he has said in the 1 Cor. 13. beg.] to show how much more excellent
the saving Graces of the SPIRIT are, than the infused miraculous Gifts, which
can neither render us like GOD, nor qualify us for the Enjoyment of him; and
which Things have no intrinsical worth to the Persons who formerly had them,
nor made them more useful for the Church, than acquired Gifts, which are the
ordinary Means of Faith and Repentance, make us. Suppose thou know the
Gospel, like the Apostles, by Inspiration; What then? Another Minister, who
knows it by Reading and Study, is as capable, by the Blessing of GOD, to serve
the Church as thou: And besides, if thou art like a vain Corinthian, ambitious
of Inspiration, know that it will add nothing to the Reputation of thy Parts;
for an inspired Man is but the Vessel to the Treasure, the very Instrument and
Machine of the HOLY GHOST, who can ordain Strength out of the Mouth of Babes
and Sucklings, and make a Child, or an Idiot, if he please, preach as well as
thee. Or, suppose thou had the Spirit of Prediction; what then? The Knowledge
of Things past being as excellent in its self, and generally more useful to the
World, than the Knowledge of Things to come, the Historian would then have as
much to boast of as thou? -- But if thou could do Miracles; what if thou
could? Heretics and Magicians have done them, and JUDAS did them; and many
shall say to me in that Day, LORD, LORD, have we not prophesied in thy Name,
and in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works?
Then will I say unto them, I know you not: Depart from me ye Workers of
Iniquity. But thou art a Minister, and would fain preach by Inspiration; why
so? Not out of Corinthian Vanity and Ostentation; for then thou art a
vainglorious Man; but because thou have a Desire to convert Souls: But alas,
thou art not sure of that, for the Words of the inspired PAUL were a
Stumbling Block to the Jews, and a Scandal to the Greeks, even the Savor of
Death to many who heard him. And the Souls of Thousands who heard inspired
Sermons, from CHRIST and his Apostles, and saw them also work Miracles, lie
roaring now in the Flames of Hell. But to pray by the SPIRIT is a most
desirable Gift: But thou can cry Abba Father, without Inspiration; and thou
may make Prayers and Supplications, and Intercessions, and giving of Thanks
for all Men without Inspiration: Which if thou had, would not make thy
Prayers more excellent in themselves, or more acceptable in the Sight of GOD:
For whosoever has a devout Soul, and approaches GOD with that Reverence which
is due to his infinite Majesty, and heartily asks what he would obtain, in the
Name of CHRIST his dear Son, shall prevail as much as if it were inspired. --
From all which it appears how much more excellent and desirable the saving
Graces of the SPIRIT are, than all these pompous miraculous Gifts: In which
there is really no intrinsical excellence. -- All which I would have those
especially to consider whose enthusiastical Tempers, or Education, incline them
first to admire, and then to conceit these miraculous Gifts, till by insensible
Degrees they impose upon their own Imaginations, and commence within themselves
illuminated Men.

But having made this Remark, or Digression, if any should choose to call it so,
I now come to mention the New Testament Texts, which describe to us the
Appearance of this Work of GOD.

And the Destruction of the Prevalence of Sin, and Vice, they always represent
as one of the certain Characteristicks of this Work. The Passages to this
Purpose are many, and the Language of them various and significative: Romans 6.
2.
How shall we that are Dead to Sin, live any longer therein? And a little
onwards, Romans 6. 7.
Knowing this that our old Man is crucified with him, (CHRIST) that the Body of
Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin: For he that is
Dead to Sin, is freed from Sin. And the Apostle speaking of those who are in
CHRIST JESUS, and to whom there is no Condemnation, gives that as their
Character, Chap. 8. 1.
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: The just Import of which
Character may be learned from that Description of this same Apostle, Gal. 5.
19, 20, 21.
Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like: Of which I tell you before, as I have
also told you in Time past, that they which do such Things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of GOD. Or, from that Command of his, Col. 3. 5, 6.
Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Coveteousness which
is Idolatry; for which Things sake comes the Wrath of GOD on the Children of
Disobedience. The Apostle JOHN is is still more peremptory in his Language, as
to this Destruction of the Power of Sin, where there is a Work of Grace, 1 John
1. 6.
If we say that we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and
do not the Truth. And again, in the next Chapter but one, Ver. 6.
Whosoever abides in him sins not; Whosoever sins, has not seen him,
neither known him. And yet again, in a Verse or two onwards, Whosoever is born
of GOD does not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him; and be cannot sin,
because he is born of GOD: Which same Though is still repeated, Chap. 5. 18.
We know that whosoever is born of GOD, sins not; but he that is begotten of
GOD keeps himself; and the wicked One touches him not. The Meaning of all
which Texts is, not that those who have been effectually wrought upon by divine
Grace, may, in no Sense, be said to commit Sin: Such an Interpretation of the
Words cannot be reconciled with those Declarations, in this very Epistle,
wherein it is affirmed, Chap. 1. 8.
That if we say, we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in
us. And again, ^. 10.
If we say we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not in us.
But the plain Import of them is, That the Frame of Mind, in those who have the
Work of GOD wrought in them, is such as renders Sin so odious to them, that
they cannot entertain the Thought of committing it, or of a Temptation to do so,
but with Detestation; nor can they live in the habitual Practice of it: And if
they fall into Sin, especially a heinous one, it is but rarely, and then through
Surprise, or the Violence of Temptation: And when they come to consider, they
condemn themselves, repent of what they have done, and are upon their Guard
particularly against this Kind of Sin for the Time to come.

If any would know what the Sins, in special are, that Men will not live in the
Practice of, when they have had a Work of GOD begun in them; even this we may
fairly collect from some Texts of Scripture. It Is observable, the Apostle
exhorts the Christians at COLOSS Col. 3. 8, 9, 10.
, to put away all These, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, filthy Communication
out of their Mouths; and enjoins it on them, not to lie one to another: And
that is the Ground of his thus cautioning them, Seeing that they have put off
the OLD MAN with his Deeds, and have put on the NEW MAN, which is renewed in
Knowledge after the Image of him that created him. Parallel whereto is that of
this same, Apostle, in his Epistle to the EPHESIANS; where, having called upon
them to be RENEWED in the Spirit of their Mind, and to put on the NEW MAN,
which after GOD is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, he goes on with
his Exhortation, Ephesians. iv. 23. and onwards.
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every Man Truth with his Neighbor. -- Be
angry, and sin not: Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath. Neither give Place
to the Devil. Let him that stole, steal no more. -- Let no corrupt
Communication proceed out of your Mouth. And grieve not the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD.
-- Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking, be
put away from you, with all Malice.

They likewise represent the Practice of Righteousness and Holiness, as another
sure Characteristick of this Work of GOD. Know ye not (says the Apostle Romans 6.
16, 18.
) that to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants lie are to
whom ye obey; whether of Sin unto Death, or or of Obedience unto Righteousness.
Being made free from Sin, ye became the Servants of Righteousness. And again,
Ver. 7.
But now, being made free from Sin, and become Servants to GOD, ye have your
Fruit unto Holiness. Very express to the like Purpose are the Words of the
Apostle JOHN 1 John 2.4, 5, 6.
, He that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and
the Truth is not in him. But whose keeps his Word, in him verily is the Word
of GOD perfected: Hereby know we that we are in him: He that says, he abides
in him, ought himself also to walk, even as he walked. And in the last Verse of
this same Chapter, If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that
does Righteousness is born of him. So in the next Chapter Ver. 7.
, Little children, let no Man deceive you; he that does Righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous. And in the 10th v. In this the Children of
GOD are manifest, and the Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not
Righteousness is not of GOD.

And the Scripture is very clear as to the Particulars of this Righteousness or
Holiness, as they will appear in those, in whom there is a Work of Grace. The
Apostle has enumerated the Fruits of the SPIRIT. i. e. the visible, as well as
internal Effects of his special Work on the Hearts of Men. The Fruit of the
SPIRIT (says he Ephesians. 5. 9.
) is in all Goodness, and Righteousness and Truth. The Enumeration is more full
in his Epistle to the GALATIANS Chap. 5. 22, 23.
; The Fruit of the SPIRIT is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: against such there is no Law.

Wherever there is the saving Work of the SPIRIT, it will appear in Love; Love
to GOD, and Love to our Neighbor, on which two Commandments (as our SAVIOR
expresses it Matthew. 22. 40.
) do hang all the Law and the Prophets.

There will be Love to GOD; the Reality of it in the Heart, and the genuine
Appearance of it in the Life. If may discover itself in the Passions; and this
in a lower or higher Degree, according to the Temper, Education and other
Circumstances of the Persons who are the Subjects of it: And where the
passionate Appearance may be greatest, many may be ready to think, there is the
truest and highest Love: But this is a Mistake. The passionate Discovery of
Love is not the best Evidence, either of its Being or Strength: The surest and
most substantial Proof is, Obedience to the Commandments of GOD; and the
stronger the Love, the more uniform, steady and pleasant will be this
Obedience. The Scripture is remarkably express in this Matter. Says our
SAVIOR, Joh. 14. 15.
, If ye love me, keep my Commandments. And in the 21 v. He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me. So, in the 23 v. If any
Man love me, he will keep my Words. The same Thing is again repeated 1 Job. 5.
3.
, This is the Love of GOD, that we keep his Commandments. It is added, and his
Commandments are not grievous.

There will also be Love to our Neighbor; a Love unconfined as to its Object.
We shall love not only those who love us, and are of our Opinion and Party:
This is nothing more than the Love of Publicans and Sinners Matt. 5. 46.
But we shall love those who hate us, and are out greatest Enemies; yea, we
shall love all Men, but those especially, who are of the Household of Faith. And
our Love will be a Love like to that we have for our ourselves; like it for
unfeigned Sincerity, and all the genuine Expressions of true Benevolence. It
will be a Love, not in Word, neither in Tongue only, but in Deed and Truth. It
will appear in all the Offices of Kindness, both to Men's Souls and Bodies;
opening our Hearts and Hands to minister to their Help, as we are able.
Wherever this Love reigns, as it ought to do, it will banish ill Nature, evil
Surmisings, unchristan Jealousies: It will restrain the Mind from evil
Thinking, and much more the Tongue from evil Speaking. There will be no secret
Whispering and Backbiting, much less open dealing in Slander and Reproach: So
far will Christians be from injuriously treating one another, that they will
rather cover one another's Failings; forbearing and forgiving one another, as
GOD for CHRIST'S Sake forgiveth us.

The next Fruit of the SPIRIT is Joy; by which we are to understand, not merely
an animal Passion, a free Flow of Spirits: This there may be where there is no
true Joy. And that Joy ought always to be suspected, which rises high in is
sensible Appearance,. while the Temper of the Mind is not, at the same Time,
proportionably exalted in its real Spirituality. Wherever there is this Joy,
there will be a Complacence of Soul in GOD, a holy Satisfaction and
Cheerfulness of Mind: And as it will be mixed with a becoming Fear and Caution,
so will it express it self in as low an Abasement of our selves, as high
Adorations of the free and rich Grace of GOD. -- But of this I shall have
Occasion to discourse largely afterward.

Another of these Fruits is Peace; by which (I suppose) is here meant, not so
much a holy Serenity of Mind (that being before spoken of) as that State of
outward Quietness, and good Order, which may justly be expected, where Men's
Passions are under a divine Government, and they themselves have been formed to
a Temper, disposing them to live peaceably with all Men, if it be possible, and
as much as in them lies. The Apostle has told us, Ephesians. 5. 20.
that Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, are Works of the Flesh.
He also mentions it as the Character of the Wisdom that is from above Ephesians. 5.
20.
, that it is peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated; full of Mercy and good
Fruits; While he declares Jam. 3. 17. Ver. 14, 15, 16.
, that if we have bitter Envyings and Strife, this Wisdom descends not from
above; but is earthly, sensual, and devilish: For where Envying and Strife is,
there is Confusion and every evil Work. If Men are fierce and furious; if they
foment Divisions, and promote Contention and Schism, they are so far sensual,
not having the SPIRIT; for the Fruit of the SPIRIT is Peace, a dwelling
together in Love and Unity. It Is true, our SAVIOR has said Luke 12. 51, 52, 53.
, Suppose ye that I am come to give Peace on Earth? I tell you nay; but rather
Division. For from henceforth there shall be five in one House divided, three
against two, and two against three. The Father shall be divided against the
Son, and the Son against the Father; the Mother against the Daughter, and the
Daughter against the Mother, and so on. But this Text is intended to represent,
not the proper Design of CHRIST'S coming, nor yet the genuine Tendency of it;
but what would unhappily be the Effect, through the Prevalence of Men's Lusts,
in Opposition to the Precepts of the Gospel: Nor can it be supposed, this
should be the Effect, among those who are savingly wrought upon by the SPIRIT.
Whatever Occasion the coming of CHRIST may give to the working of Lust in
others, in respect of these, the Turbulency of their Spirits has been so
checked, their Passions brought under such Restraint, their old Man suffered
such a Mortification, that it cannot be supposed they should be given to Strife
and Contention, and go into the like mutinous and divisive Methods, with Men
that are carnal. If the Fruit of the SPIRIT is Peace, those, certainly, who
pretend to the SPIRIT, must be distinguished from others by their peaccable
Temper and Conduct: Nor may it be thought, that they should be the Disturbers
of Society, the Instruments to sow the Seeds of Discord and Confusion: They
will rather endeavor to keep the Unity of the SPIRIT in the Bond of Peace.

A fourth Fruit of the SPIRIT is Long suffering. This supposes Injuries and
Abuses, and is expressive of the Temper and Behavior of one that is spiritual.
He is slow of Resentment, loath to retaliate; not apt to take Offense, nor hasty
to render Evil for Evil; but prone rather to overcome Evil with Good: He is
patient under Ill-treatment, firm against the Impressions of Wrath; can suffer
a great deal, and endure Insults and base Carriage, without being filled with
Indignation, and hurried on to Acts of Revenge; in these Ways walking worthy of
the Vocation wherewith he is called, with all Lowliness, Long-suffering and
Forbearance.

Another Fruit is Gentleness. i. e. a Disposition to treat one another with
Candor and Mildness. Where this Fruit is, the Temper is softened, and rendered
sweet and pleasant: And this it will express in a courteous and obliging
Deportment. It will not stand upon nice Points; it will not be harsh and rugged; much
less will it be fierce and destructive, calling for Fire from Heaven to devour
all who don't think just as we do: It will rather put us upon the Methods of
Mildness, behaving toward one another with Kindness and Lenity.

Goodness is also ranked among these Fruits. This is descriptive, not so much
of a virtuous Character in general, as of that, the distinguishing Mark of
which is Kindness and Benignity: As when our SAVIOR speaks of the good Man for
whom one would even dare to die, he means to point out, not only a Man of
Religion, but one eminent for his Humanity and Beneficence! And this Kind of
Goodness there will always be, in a less or greater Degree, wherever there is a
special Work of the SPIRIT. It will make Men tenderhearted and compassionate;
kindly affectioned to each other, ready to all the Offices of Love and Charity,
apt to show Favor: And this they will do, in all the Ways they can devise;
yea, they will take more Pains, and go through greater Difficulties for the Good
of Mankind, than, according to the Rigor of strict Justice, might be expected
of them. The contrary to this is that Selfishness, which prompts Men to seek
their own, and not the Good of others; that Hardiness of Spirit that is not
touched with a feeling of other Men's Miseries; that niggardly, covetous
Disposition, which can see a Brother have need, and shut up its Bowels of
Compassion from him.

Faith is likewise numbered among the Fruits of the SPIRIT. By this some
suppose is meant that Faithfulness, which consists in an Aversion to Lying and
Falsehood and Deceit; and in a Disposition to act with Uprightness and
Sincerity: But others incline to think, the Faith here intended is that by
which we are justified. And to be sure, this Faith is a Fruit of the SPIRIT,
and such an essential one too, that no Man may be said to have been wrought
upon by the SPIRIT, in a saving Sense, that has it not. But then it must be
remembered, this Faith is not a mere speculative, nor yet unactive Thing: It
will have a powerful Influence both on Men's Hearts and Lives. It Is spoken of
as that which purifies the Heart Acts 15. 9.
; as that which works by Love Gal. 5. 6.
; as that which overcomes the World 1 John 5. 4.
; yea, as that which is a living, active, never-failing Principle of all holy
Obedience to the Laws of GOD: Insomuch, that if a Man says he has Faith, and it
shows not itself by his Works of Righteousness, it is a vain Pretense.
Observably express are the Words of the Apostle JAMES to this Purpose. Jam. 2.
14, to 18.
What does it profit, my Brethren, though a Man say, he has Faith; and have
not Works? Can Faith save him? If a Brother or Sister be naked, and destitute
of daily Food; and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and
filled: Notwithstanding ye give not those Things which are needful for the
Body; what does it profit? Even so Faith, if it has not Works, is dead being
alone. So in a Verse or two following, Ver. 20.
But will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith without Works is dead? And again,
Ver. 26.
For as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead
also.

Another of these Fruits is Meekness, i. e. a certain Sweetness of Temper,
making Men mild and placid and quiet; which they will discover more or less, in
their whole Deportment in the World, whether toward GOD or Man. In Respect of
GOD, they will be ready to believe what he says, to do what he commands, and to
suffer what he lays upon them with Patience and Cheerfulness. In Respect of
Men, they will behave toward them, if they are Superiors, with a modest
Deference and Respect; if they are Inferiors, with Kindness and Condescension;
and if they are Equals, with a friendly affable Freedom. The contrary to this
Fruit of the SPIRIT, is that Ungovernableness of Temper, which is apt to
express it self in Anger, Wrath, Clamor; in Impatience, Discontent, Murmuring,
and the like, according to the several Ways wherein Men's Passions may be
excited.

The last Fruit of the SPIRIT here mentioned is Temperance, i. e. a Christian
Moderation in the Enjoyment of the Things of Time and Sense: Or, it may rather
mean the same Thing with Chastity; which wherever it has a predominating
Influence, will restrain from all Filthiness, not only in Speech and Behavior
but in Heart also; according to that spiritual Interpretation, which our
SAVIOR has left us of the Seventh Commandment, in the 5th Chapter of MATTHEW'S
Gospel.

But besides these, there are other Things, wherein a Work of the SPIRIT will
appear. It will set Men a praying, and dispose them to maintain a constant
Course of this Duty. This we are taught from the Instance of PAUL, of whom, one
of the Things recorded, after his Conversion, is, Behold he prays. Acts 9. 11.

It will also beget in Persons a Love to the Worship and Ordinances of GOD in
his House, and unite, them in a continued Attendance thereon. So, the first
Christians continued steadfast in the Apostle's Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers: Acts 2. 24, 46, 47. And this they did with
one Accord; praising GOD, and having Favor with all the People.

This now, in general, is the Appearance a Work of GOD will make, wherever, and
in whomsoever; it takes Place. And if the Work be remarkable, so will be its
Appearance in these Things: And it is to delude Men to pretend the contrary. If
great Numbers, in a Town or Land, are effectually wro't upon by the SPIRIT, it
will appear in their Ceasing to do Evil, and Learning to do well. They will
certainly become better Men; and it will be visible they are so. They will
appear more like to their SAVIOR in the Temper of their Minds, and in the
Course of their Lives: To be sure, it will be thus, if the Work is remarkable
in the Degree in which it is wrought. They will, in this Case, be eminent for
their Faith, Love, Meekness, Humility, Patience, Justice, Brotherly-Kindness,
Forbearance, Forgiveness, and the like: And as for Bitterness, Wrath, Strife,
Emulation, Pride, Sedition, Schism, and the rest of the Works of the Flesh, it
cannot be supposed, that these should abound, and be more prevalent than before;
certainly, not among those, who are remarkably the Subjects of this Works. This
would be to invert the Order of Things, to make that to be the Appearance of a
Work of Grace, which is an Appearance arising from Men's Lusts; and perhaps,
the worst of them too.

Having thus, in as plain a Manner as I could, shown what a WORK OF GOD is,
together with the APPEARANCE it will make; especially, when REMARKABLE, it will
not be thought, my Design, in the following Treatise, is, to reflect Dishonor
upon any of those Things wherein I have made a real Work of GOD, or its
Appearance to consist. I trust, I am not mistaken in the Idea I have given,
either of such a Work, or its Appearance; and the rather, because what I have
said upon this Head, I have mostly expressed in the very Words of Scripture: And
so far as the Work, I have above described, appears in this or any other Place,
I am, if I know myself, in a Disposition to rejoice in it, and thank GOD for
it; And instead of saving any Thing to oppose it, would do all in my Power, to
encourage and promote it. But it is easy to observe, a Work of GOD may be
thought to consist in those Things, in which the Bible does not make it to
consist; and great Stress may be laid upon such Appearances as are no sure
Characteristicks of a saving Change in Men's Hearts: And it is too evident to
need Proof, that this has been too much the Truth of the Case in these Times.
Many have taken the Work of GOD to lie in those Things, which are so far from
being either Parts or Effects of such a Work, that it is rather a Reproach to
the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD, to suppose he should be the Author of them: And one of
the best Ways to serve the Cause of GOD and Religion, is, in my Opinion, to
point out, with Freedom and Plainness, those Appearances, which instead of
being the genuine Fruits of a Work of GOD, are real Hindrances to the
flourishing of pure and undefiled Religion: And this prepares the Way to enter
upon the Business I have taken in Hand.

PART I.
Particularly pointing out the Things of a bad and dangerous Tendency, in the
late religious Appearance in NEW ENGLAND.
THERE is not a Man, in the Country, in the sober Exercise of his
Understanding, but will acknowledge, that the late religious Stir has been
attended with many Irregularities and Disorders. These, some are pleased to
call, Imprudencies, human Frailties, accidental Effects only, such as might be
expected, considering the Remains of Corruption in good Men, even among those
in whom a remarkable Work of Grace is carrying on: Others are in the Opinion,
they make a main Part of the Appearance that has been so much talked of, and
have arisen unavoidably, in the natural Course of Things, from the Means and
Instruments of this Appearance; and that it could not reasonably be supposed,
it should have been otherwise.

I shall particularly show what these bad and dangerous Things are; making such
Remarks (as I go along) as may be thought needful to set Matters in a just and
true Light.

Among the bad Things attending this Work,

I shall first mention Itinerant Preaching. This had its Rise (at lest in these
Parts) from Mr. WHITEFIELD; though I could never see, I own, upon what Warrant,
either from Scripture or Reason, he went about Preaching from one Province and
Parish to another, where the Gospel was already preached, and by Persons as
well qualified for the Work, as he can pretend to be. I charitably hope, his
Design herein was good: But might it not be leavened with some undesirable
Mixture? Might he not, at first, take up this Practice from a mistaken Thought
of some extraordinary Mission from GOD? Or, from the undue Influence of two
high an Opinion of his own Gifts and Graces? And when he had got into this Way,
might he not be too much encouraged to go on in it, from the popular Applauses,
every where, so liberally heaped on him? If he had not been under too strong a
Biass from something or other of this Nature, why so fond of preaching always
himself, to the Exclusion, not of his Brethren only, but his Fathers, in Grace
and Gifts and Learning, as well as Age? And why so ostentatious and assuming as
to alarm so many Towns, by proclaiming his Intentions, in the public Prints,
to preach such a Day in such a Parish, the next Day in such a one, and so on,
as he past through the Country; and all this, without the Knowledge, either of
Pastors or People in most Places? What others may think of such a Conduct I
know not; but to me, it never appeared the most indubitable Expression of that
Modesty, Humility, and prefering others in Love, which the Scriptures highly
recommend as what will adorn the Minister's, as well as the Christian's
Character.

And what became of his little Flock all this while? This Gentleman (if I don't
mistake) expresses a very contemptuous Thought of NONRESIDENTS and PLURALISTS,
when he makes that Remark, in one of his Journals (...) NEW ENGLAND, Page 94,
95.
, The Towns through CONNECTICUT, and the Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY --
are well-peopled. -- Every five or ten Miles you have a Meeting House, and I
believe there is no such Thing as a PLURALIST or NON-RESIDENT-MINISTER in both
Provinces. And what is the mighty Difference (so far as a particular Flock is
concerned in its Pastor's Labors) between an ITINERANT PREACHER, absent from
his Charge seven Eights of his Time, and a NON-RESIDENT-MINISTER? Or, between a
PLURALIST, and one that acts as though all the Parishes in a Country were his
proper Cure? It Is true, your NON-RESIDENTS and PLURALISTS have their worldly
Encouragements; And some are in the Opinion, it han't been to Mr. WHITEFIELD's
Disadvantage, on temporal Accounts, that he has traveled about the World in
Quality of an Itinerant Preacher. He has certainly made LARGE COLLECTIONS: And
if, in the doing of this, he had a Fellow-Feeling with the Orphans, it is no
more than might be expected. No one, I believe, besides himself, can tell the
Amount of the Presents, he received in this Town, as well as in other Places,
for his own proper Use.

The next Gentleman that practiced upon this new Method was Mr. GILBERT
TENNENT, who came in the Middle of Winter, from NEW-BRUNSWICK (a Journey of
more than 300 Miles) to BOSTON, to water the Seed sown by Mr. WHITEFIELD; the
Ministers in the Town, though a considerable Body, being thought insufficient
for that Purpose. I shall not think it amiss to insert here Part of an
expostulatory Letter sent to him, after he had been preaching among us for some
Time. Pray, Sir, (says the Writer See the Boston Post-Boy, Numb. 353.
) let me put it to your Conscience; was not the Reason of your traveling so
many hundred Miles to preach the Gospel, in this Place, founded on the
Insufficiency of the Ministers here for their Office? Why travel so far, in
such a rigorous Season, to preach the Gospel, if the Gospel was really preached
by the Ministers here? Did you not fear Seward's Journal.
, that notwithstanding they pretend to water what Mr. WHITEFIELD, by the
SPIRIT, had planted, had set up a Lecture, and the like, they would build with
untempered Mortar, would build Wood, Hay, Stubble, etc.? Had you not some
suspicion, that, either they had not a true Knowledge of the Doctrines of
Grace, or if they had, that it was only a Head Knowledge, that they were not
converted, and of Consequence not likely to be made Instruments of much good?
If this be the natural Construction to be put upon your coming hither, can you
think, you are in the Way of your Duty? Can you think, the bringing the
standing Ministry of a Place into Contempt, the Way to promote the Interest of
Religion, and the Salvation of Souls? But perhaps, you did not think, nor would
have any Body else think, quite so hardly of the Ministers here? Perhaps, you
only thought, that if they did a little Good, you might do a great Deal more.
Is not this approaching too near to Vanity? Is it not thinking more highly of
your self than you ought? Is it not contrary to the Scripture Rule of
preferring others in Love? The Answer to this Letter I never looked upon as
satisfactory: And I have the more Reason to think, there was a Propriety in
these Questions, as I now know what Opinion Mr. WHITEFIELD entertained of the
Generality of the Ministers in Town. I shall only say, I have had personal
Conversation with one, who joined in the Prayers previous to this Journey to
BOSTON.

Mr. TENNENT tarried in Town a great Part of the Winter; in all which Time, he
never expressed a Desire (so far as I can learn) of being assisted by any of the
Ministers: But seemed as fond, as Mr. WHITEFIELD before him, of preaching every
Day himself; and did so, willingly taking from the other Ministers even their
own Turns in the stated Lectures: And if, by their Submission to him herein,
they fell in the Opinion of the People, who can wonder at it? It would indeed
have been a Wonder, if they had not. For either the Circumstances of the Town
were such as to require Preaching every Day in the Week, or they were not: If
they were not, why did they encourage such a Practice? If they were, I don't
see how they could answer it to GOD, their own Consciences, or their People, to
fit still, and let one Man have ^the sole Trouble of that which was the proper
Business of their Office. Such a Conduct as this naturally taught People to
(...) upon them as idle Shepherds: And if this was the Reflection, some cast
upon them, it was no other than might be expected.

Mr. TENNENT went from BOSTON to PISCATAQUA in the Path of Mr. WHITEFIELD; and,
in some Places, appeared very forward in tendering his Service to preach, though
he knew it was not (as to Time) agreeable to the Ministers. Upon his Return
home, he preached in most, if not all the Towns as he past along: And if, in
all the Parishes, he had the Consent of the Pastors, it was, I am ready to
think, by Constraint. They might give into it to prevent Difficulties among
their People; not that they approved this Manner of Conduct, the Construction
of which seemed to be, that upon him lay the Care of all the Churches.

From this Time, the Method of Itinerant Preaching became common. Many, in
various Parts of the Land, took upon them to visit the Churches; preaching from
Place to Place, wherever they went. Sometimes, contrary to the known Judgment
of the settled Ministers, and in Opposition to them; and sometimes, where their
Consent was only a Matter of Necessity to keep Peace among their People.
Sometimes, they have come into Parishes of their own Accord; and sometimes, by
Application made to them from a few disaffected persons. Sometimes, in order to
get the Liberty of the Meeting-Hourse, they have used mean and indirect Arts;
and sometimes, when they could not get into it, they have gone into private
Houses, or gathered Assemblies in the Fields. Nay, Lay-Exhorters, Men of no
Capacity, nor Learning; yea, some of them of a suspicious Character for their
Virtue. (not to say any Thing worse) have traveled about from Town to Town,
calling Assemblies, and sometimes exciting Prejudices in People against their
Ministers, for not letting them into their Pulpits, or not encouraging them in
their disorderly Practice. I cannot better describe the Manner of these
Itinerants, than in the Words of a Friend in his Letter to me. The Itinerant
Ministers that have been among us, have been (as I think) very irregular and
disorderly in their Proceedings. It has been their Manner to estrange
themselves, in a great Measure, from me, and to associate with a disaffected
Party. They appoint and warn Lectures without my Consent or Knowledge, and just
before the Time of Exercise they have commonly sent for my Approbation: And
upon my manifesting a Dislike of their Managements, they have preached
sometimes in private Houses; sometimes in a Barn; sometimes in the open Air

The Inconveniences, which have arisen from this Method of acting, more
especially in CONNECTICUT, have been so great, that the GOVERNMENT there have
taken the Matter into Consideration, and come into an Act, whereby they have
restrained, both ordained Ministers, and licensed Candidates, from preaching in
other Men's Parishes, without their and their Church's Consent; and wholly
prohibited the Exhortations of illiterate Laymen This Act we had printed in one
of our NewsPapers, at large.


It is not my Business to consider, how far an Irregularity, in this Kind, may
properly fall under the Cognizance of the civil Magistrate: What I have to do
with, is the Thing it self; which I cannot but reckon among the Disorders of the
present Day.

I see not but those, who make it their Practice to go about gathering
Assemblies, in other Men's Parishes, properly come under the Character of
Busybodies. These were common, in the first Days of the Gospel; and there
seems to have been two Sorts of them.

Some were idle, not doing their own Business; but wandering about from House to
House, talking, and speaking the Things they ought not. This is the very
Character of some idle Persons, who have lately risen up among us. And what is
the Though It of the great St. Paul concerning them? Why, he says, 2 Thessalonians. 3. from
the 10th to the 15th.
They are disorderly Walkers; and commands, that a Mark be set upon them, that
they be withdrawn from, and admonished.

But besides these, there seems to have been another Sort of Busybodies; such
as went out of their own Line, intermeddling in other Men's Matters. It Is
observable, the Original Word, answering to that Scripture Phrase, 1 Pet. 4. 15.
a Busie-Body in other Men's Matters, is, allotrio-Episcopos; one that plays
the Bishop in another's Diocese, takes upon him the Inspection of another's
Charge. The Person described is one, who officiously employs himself about the
Business that does not belong to him; acting in the proper Sphere of others, as
though it was his not their's. This is the Conduct the Apostle points out: And he
has an ill Opinion of it, or he would not have ranked it with some of the
greatest Crimes.

It appears indeed to be a Fault of the same Kind with that, which the Apostle
PAUL blames in the false Teachers, who had crept into the Church of CORINTH, to
their great Disservice. Remarkable are his Words upon this Head. I shall set
them down at large. We dare not, says he 2 Cor. 10. from the 12 to the 17 Verse.
, make ourselves of the Number, or compare ourselves with some that commend
themselves: But they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing
themselves among themselves are not wise. But we will not boast of Things
without our Measure. but according to the Measure of the Rule, which GOD has
distributed to us, a Measure to reach even unto you. For we stretch not
ourselves beyond our Measure, as though we reached not unto you; for we are come
as far as to you also, in Preaching the Gospel of CHRIST: Not boasting of
Things without our Measure, that is, of other Men's Labors; but having Hope,
when your Faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you, according to
our Rule abundantly, to preach the Gospel in the Regions beyond you, and not to
boast in another Man's Line of Things made ready to our Hand. Three Things are
suggested to us as faulty in these Teachers.

The first is, their commending themselves so much. We dare not, says the
Apostle, compare ourselves with some, who commend themselves. The Language is
satirical, setting forth, in the strongest Light, the undue Praises these
Teachers heaped upon themselves. They were vainly puffed up in their Minds,
glorying in themselves, as though they were extraordinary Persons, out-doing
even the Apostles. Such was their Pride and Self-Conceit, that they took all
Occasions to proclaim their own Goodness; which they, no Doubt, did, with such
Art and Cunning, as hereby to insinuate themselves into the good Opinion of the
People, to the prejudicing them against the very Apostles. They are therefore
called, in the next Chapter, V. 13.
deceitful Workers; and represented, V. 14, 15.
as transforming them selves into the Ministers of Righteousness, according to
the Example of Satan, who can transform himself into an Angel of Light. Mr.
BURKITT's Note here is very just, and may be worth transcribing. Vid. in Loc.
It is very possible, says he, for Men to be really Satan's Instruments,
animated and taught by him, to do his Work against the Interest of CHRIST and
his Truth; and yet, at the same Time, to pretend to excel and go beyond
CHRIST's faithful Ministers, in preaching Truth and Holiness: So that the
highest Pretenses to Truth, Orthodoxy, free Grace, Purity and Unity, are no
sufficient Evidences of a true Ministry. Satan and his Instruments, who love to
transform themselves sometimes into an Angel of Light, may pretend to all
these; and notwithstanding, be the sworn Enemies of CHRIST and his Kingdom.

Another Thing insinuated to be Blameworthy in these Teachers is, their
entering into other Men's Labors, and making their Boast of Things made ready
to their Hands. This Method of acting, the Apostle condemns by his own Example
to the contrary. It was not his Practice to bestow his Labors chiefly on the
Places where the Gospel had been settled, and was now preached by faithful Men
set apart for that Purpose: He chose rather to be the first Founder of
Christianity wherever he went. He did not neglect ungospelized Places, to go
to those where the Gospel was already preached; [This was the Practice of the
false Teachers he is arguing against] but on the contrary, he past by the
People, who enjoyed the Gospel, in the stated Preaching of it by settled
Pastors, that he might make known the LORD JESUS CHRIST, to those who had not
heard of his Name. very express are his own Words to this Effect, Romans 15. 20,
21.
Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where CHRIST was named, lest
I should build upon another Man's Foundation: But as it is written, to whom he
was not spoken of, they shall see; and they that have not heard, shall
understand. And if those, in this Day, who would be thought more zealous than
their Neighbors to promote the Interest of Religion, instead of going, from
Place to Place, where the Gospel is already preached, and by Persons much
better qualified for the Work than they are; I say, if instead of this, they
would carry the Gospel to the People sitting in Darkness, and that see no
Light, (Multitudes of whom there are upon our Borders) they might discover as
much truly Christian Zeal, and do as great Service to the Kingdom of CHRIST.

The last Thing the Apostle blames in these Teachers is, their not keeping to
Rule, their going beyond their Measure. If this had not been a Fault in them it
would not have been to the Commendation of the Apostle, that his conduct, in
this Matter, has been contrary to their's. And yet, this he glories in: He
seems to exult in it, that it could not be said of him, as of these false
Teachers, that he had transgressed his Line, exceeded his Measure. Says he,
comparing himself with them, we stretch not our selves beyond our Measure. And
again, Not boasting of Things without our Measure, that is, of other Men's
Labors. And yet again, Not to boast in another Man's Line of Things made ready
to our Hands.

This Language of the Apostle appears singularly beautiful, as well as
expressive, to those who have Acquaintance with the GRECIAN AGONES, to which it
evidently alludes. One of these was RACING; concerning which, two Things may be
taken Notice of: The Stage of Ground they were to run; and the white Lines,
which marked out the Paths for the Racers to run in. These were as many as the
Racers: Each Man had his Path chalked out to him, out of which if he stepped into
the Path of another, he went out of his Line, and lost the Prize. To this the
Apostle alludes in these Words. His Apostleship Vid. Doctor HAMMOND. Not. c. d.
in Loc.
, his preaching the Gospel, is his running in a Race; the Province assigned him
to gospelize, is the Measure distributed to him, his Stage or Compass of
Ground, which GOD, as it were, by the Line in a Race, had marked out for him to
exercise himself in: And to this he had kept. He had not, like these false
Teachers, gone beyond his Measure; he had not stepped out of his own into the
Line of another.

The obvious Import of all which is, that such are unlike to the holy Apostle
PAUL, and (...) condemned by his Example, who keep not within their own Bounds,
but go over into other Men's Labors: They herein intermeddle in what does not
belong to them, and are properly Busybodies; especially, when they concern
themselves in the Affairs of others uncalled, and so as to introduce Disorder
and Confusion into the Church of GOD.

And if, in the first Days of Christianity, when the State of Things was such
as to require the traveling of the Apostles and others, from Place to Place,
to preach the Gospel; I say, if, in these Times, even an Apostle thought it
disorderly to go out of his own Line, and enter upon other Men's Labors, it is
much more so in the present settled State of the Church. The Pastor has now his
special Charge. He is devoted to the Service of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, in a
particular Place, and over a particular People. His Work, as a Minister, does
not lie at large; but is restrained within certain Boundaries. I don't mean,
that he may not use his Office, in other Places, within the Rules of Order, upon
special Occasions, and where there may be a just Call: But his stated, constant
Business is with his own People. These have been committed to his Care; these,
he has solemnly engagd, before GOD, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and holy Angles,
to do all the Duties of a Pastor to. And can he be faithful to his Ordination
Vow, or the Command of GOD, which says, Feed the Flock over which the HOLY
GHOST has made thee an overseer Acts 20. 28.
, while he leaves his People one Week and Month after another, bestowing his
Labors upon those, he has no particular Relation to? Are not the Souls of his
own People as precious as the Souls of others. Han't he Work enough, among his
own People, that he need seek for it elsewhere? That Man knows little of the
Work of a Minister, that does not know how to employ all his Time, and
Strength, and Though It, for the Good of those of his own Charge. He may here spend
all his Zeal, and be as abundant in Labors, in Season and out of Season, as he
judges proper. And I should think, extraordinary Pains are as suitable among a
Minister's own People, as Strangers; and would be as evidential of his Love to
Souls, and Desire of their Salvation.

It was, in my Opinion, far from being exemplary in Mr. WHITEFIELD, his taking
so little Care of his own Flock. When he went from these Parts to GEORGIA,
notwithstanding his frequent Prayers for them, and Expressions of a more than
ordinary Love to them, and longing after their Salvation, he was not longer
than Part of two Days at SAVANNAH; nor did he preach there more than two
Sermons, if we may believe his own Account. See his Journal from his leaving
NEW ENGLAND, Oct. 1740. P. 34. 35.
It appears strange, he should allow his own Charge so small a Share of his
Labors, as he was so lavish of them elsewhere! And it is observable, as soon as
he had left GEORGIA, and arrived at CHARLESTOWN in CAROLINA, his Journal again
appears with pompous Accounts of his Preachings. He writes, Sunday, Jan. 4.
"Preached twice this Day, and expounded to large Auditories." And, Saturday,
Jan. 10. "Preached twice every Day this Week, and expounded frequently in the
Evening". See P. 38 of his Journal.
If this is watching for Souls, I mean, the Souls, of our particular Charge, as
those that must give an Account; it is not a Matter of so much Difficulty as I
always imagined.

And as to others, who are so forward in going into other Parishes, to preach
there perpetually, I cannot learn that they do more among their own People, than
those who make no such Excursions? Nay, they have, some of them, greatly
neglected their own, from a Zeal to take Care of other Minister's People: And
they have been complained of on this Head, and fallen under public Censure.

One of the Charges exhibited by Mr. D -- T's People against him, and laid
before a Council of Ministers, Oct. 7. 1742, was, His leaving his Congregation,
at several Times, for a great while together, at his Will and Pleasure, without
Leave or Consent of the Church, or Society: Upon which, the Council gave it as
their Judgment, We think that his Congregation have just Cause to complain of
his leaving them, at several Times, for so long a Space as he has done, without
their Consent: Whereby he has not only left them destitute of Gospel
Ordinances; but has been too unmindful of the Obligation he lies under, by his
pastoral Relation, to them who are his peculiar Charge.

Another of these Itinerants was complained of, by a considerable Number of his
People; and one of the Articles they objected to him, before an (...) Council,
convened, June 15. 1742, was, We are uneasy with his wandering from Town to
Town, to the great Disturbance of Towns and Churches, and neglecting his own
Church at Home. Upon which, the Council came into the following Result, It
appears to us, that the Rev. Mr. -- has been too ready to wander from Town to
Town, and invade the (...) prick and Office of his Brethren, and administer
Occasion to Disturbance in several Places (and we fear) to the Neglect of his
faithful Discharge of his Duty, among his own Flock, and to give too much
Encouragement to Lay-Persons exhorting publicly; All of which, are so contrary
to the Laws of CHRIST and his Gospel, as upon no Pretense to be countenanced. I
could mention some other Instances in this Kind: But these shall suffice for
the present.

And what is the Language of this going into other Men's Parishes? Is it not
obviously this? The settled Pastors are Men, not qualified for their Office, or
not faithful in the Execution of it; They are either unfit to take the Care of
Souls, or grossly negligent in doing their Duty to them: Or, the Language may
be, we are men of greater Gifts, superior Holiness, more Acceptableness to
GOD; or have been in an extraordinary Manner sent by him. Some of these
Itinerants, it is evident, have traveled about the Country preaching, under the
full Persuasion of an immediate Call from GOD: And as to most of them, it may
be feared, the gra^^ Excitement, at the Bottom, has been an (...) Opinion of
themselves, and an unchristian one of their (...). It has therefore been their
Practice, too commonly, not only to boast of their own superior (...),
wherever they have gone; but to (...) suspecions against the fixed Pastors, If
not to (...) against them, and pray for them as (...), (...), unconverted Men:
Nay, mere (...) for the Ministry; yea, illiterate Exhorters, (...), weak young
Men, or Lads, have too frequently taken up on them, openly to judge and (...)
their Ministers; as I shall have Occasion, afterward, to show at large.

Moreover, what is the Tendency of this Practice, but Confusion and Disorder?
If one Pastor may neglect his own People to take Care of others, who are
already taken Care of; and, it may be much better than he can take care of
them: I say, if one Pastor may do than, why not another, and another still, and
so on, 'till there is no such Thing as Church Order in the Land? One Minister
has the same Right to enter into other Men's Parishes as another; and may
vindicate his Conduct upon the same Principles: And if this should become the
general Practice, what might be expected, as the Effect, but an entire
Dissolution of our Church State? This Itinerant Preaching, it is my firm
Persuasion, naturally tends to it in the Course of Things; yea, and the
Principles, upon which it is supported, will disband all the Churches in the
World; and make the (...) between Pas^^^^ and People, a mere (...) a (...)
without Meaning.

It will not be thought a needless Digression to insert here, the Sentiments of
the First Fathers of this Country, upon this Point of Order in the Churches.
This justly lay with great Weight upon their Minds; For it is indeed the
Strength as well as Beauty of the Creation. Next to Faith, they esteemed Order,
a Matter of Necessity to the Well Being of these Churches. And to this it was
owing, that they held a Synod at Cambridge, Anno 1648, consisting of all the
Churches of the MASSACHUSETTS-PROVINCE, by their Elders and Messengers; when
they agreed upon that Rule of Church Order, commonly called, our Platform of
Church Discipline. Here it is declared as their united Judgment, Platform,
Chapter 3. Sect. 5.
That Elders are appointed to feed, not all Flocks, but the particular Flock
over which the HOLY GHOST has made them Overseers; and that Flock they must
attend, even the whole Flock: And one Congregation being as much as any
ordinary Elder can attend, therefore there is no greater Church than a
Congregation, which may ordinarily meet in one Place.

And again, Chapter 9.
Church Officers are Officers to one Church, even that particular over which
the HOLY GHOST has made them Oveseers; insomuch as Elders are commanded to
feed, not all Flocks, but that Flock which is committed to their Faith and
Trust, and depends on them: Nor can constant Residence at one Congregation be
necessary for a Minister, no, nor yet lawful, if he be not a Minister to one
Congregation only, but to the Church universal; because he may not attend one
Part only of the Church to which he is a Minister, but is called to attend unto
all the Flock.

And it is observable, though they allow of a Communion of Churches, yet it is
only in such Cases, and under such Limitations, as may consist, with the Rights
both of particular Churches and their Pastors; yea, and with the Duties too
they mutually owe to each other.

On the one Hand, they concede to Ministers officiating in other Churches
besides their own; but then, it is upon Supposition of a mutual Consent, not
only between the respective particular Churches, See the Proposit. about a
Consociation of Churches; Prop. 5. and 8.
but their Elders Platform, Chapt. 10. Secti. 8. 11.
also: Nor is even this allowed, but occasionally, and as the Circumstances of
other Churches may call for the Assistance of neighbor Ministers. If the
Minister of one Church be sick, the Minister of another (if desired) may
administer Baptism in his Room. Platform, Chap. 15. Sect. 4.
In like case Sect. ibid.
, such Churches as are furnished with more Ministers than one, do willingly
afford one of their own Ministers to supply the Place of an absent or sick
Minister of another Church, for a needful Season. It Is evident from these
Passages, and indeed from the whole Scope of the Platform, that our Fathers
never imagined it warrantable, either from Reason, or the Word of GOD, for
Ministers to act in any Church besides their own, unless with the Consent, not
of a Party only in the Church, but the Body of the Church; yea, and with the
Concurrence also of its Elder, if any it had. A Conduct contrary to this, they
would have testified against, with all Severity; as being opposite to Order, an
Inlet to Disturbances, and tending to Confusion.

On the other Hand, they allow that the Brethren of a particular Church may
occasionally, and as there may be real Need of it, communicate with other
Churches in any Acts of Church Fellowship; but then, they particularly give it
as their Judgment Platform, Chap. 18. Sect. 1.
, That Church Members may not remove or depart from the Church, and so one from
another, as they please, nor without just and weighty Cause; but ought to live
and dwell together, forasmuch as they are commanded not to forsake the
Assembling of themselves together. Such Departure tends to the Dissolution and
Ruin of the Body, as the pulling of Stones and Pieces of Timber from the
Building, and of Members from the natural Body, tends to the Destruction of the
Whole. And again, Sect. 5.
To separate from a Church, either out of Contempt of their holy Fellowship, --
or out of Schism, or Want of Love, and out of a Spirit of Contention, in
Respect of some Unkindness, or some evil only conceived, or indeed in the
Church, which might and should be tolerated and healed with a Spirit of
Meekness, and of which Evil the Church is not yet convinced, (though perhaps
himself be) nor admonished: For these, or the like Reasons to withdraw from
public Communion in Word, or Seals, or Censures, is unlawful and sinful.

Had these Paragraphs been wrote, on Purpose to describe the disorderly
Separations of the present Day, they could not have done it more exactly: And,
at the same Time, they clearly exhibit the Opinion of our Forefathers, as to
the probable Issue of these Things; that they tend to break the Church to
Pieces. And what indeed can be expected but Confusion, when Church Members will
forsake their own Pastors for every wandering Stranger; and, rather than not
hear them, will break away from their own Church, forget their Duty to him that
has been set over them in the LORD, and treat him with Anger and Wrath, if not
with Contempt and Insult.

But notwithstanding all that has been said against this Itinerant preaching,
it is a Practice mightily pleaded for; and many are the Things that are offered
in its Vindication.

It Is said, much Good has been done by it. And han't there been much Evil
likewise? Han't it been the Occasion, not accidentally, but in the natural
Course of Things, of uncomfortable Heats, Animosities and Contentions? Han't
Christians, hereby, been divided into Parties, One saying, I am of PAUL;
another, I am of APOLLOS; another, I am of CEPHAS, to the disturbing the Peace
of Churches? Han't People, by this Practice, been led to glory in Men? And
han't they had some Men's Persons so much in Admiration, as to throw unjust
Contempt upon others? But, if more Good had followed upon this Kind of
Preaching than really has, it would not hereby be justified; unless it can be
made to appear, that Evil may not, by the alwise and gracious GOD, be overruled
for Good. The Question ought not to be, whether Good has been done in this Way?
But whether the Way it self is countenanced in the Bible, or can be vindicated
upon the Principles of uncorrupted Reason? If not; it is, in it is Nature, bad,
and unalterably so, let its Effects be what they will.

It is further pleaded, they are good Men that go into this Practice: Their
Hearts are fired with a holy Zeal to serve the Interest of Souls; and it is to
forward their Salvation, that they thus travel about Preaching. And are not the
Ministers, into whose Labors they enter, good Men also? Have they not a Love
to the Souls of Men, and ardent Desires of their Salvation? Or, must they be
thought selfish and carnal, because they are steady, and keep within the Rules
of Order in their Endeavors to do good? I know, it is a specious Thing for
Ministers to go about from Place to Place, professing a compassionate Concern
for Sinners, a Readiness to do, or suffer any Thing, to promote their
Conversion; especially, if this is accompanied with a bitter Zeal against all
who cannot come into their Measures: And they may be flocked after, on this
Account, and held in great Reputation, as more holy than their Brethren, more
like to CHRIST, and his Apostles: But for my self, I have lived too long in the
World, and seen too much of the Wickedness of it, to be over-pleased with high
Professions; especially, when they are rewarded with as high popular Applauses.
Pride of Heart; an Itch to come out of Obscurity, and to be thought somebody; a
secret Pleasure arising from the Hosannas of the Multitude; an undue Self-Love,
in some Shape or other, may urge on (as it actually has done in Hundreds of
Instances) to as zealous Pains in preaching the Gospel, as any in these Times,
can pretend to; and from as great a seeming Regard to the Good of Men's Souls.

I mean not by what I here say, to reflect upon ALL those, who have gone up and
down the Country, making a more than ordinary Show of Zeal for the spiritual
Welfare of their Neighbors; as though they were SOLELY acted, in this Matter,
from mean, and base Motives. They may, SOME OF THEM, be as good as they profess
to be, for all that I know: But this Conduct of theirs, is not, in my Opinion,
the strongest Evidence of their being so: Nor can it be collected from their
Zeal to preach in other Men's Parishes, that they are better than their
Neighbors; or that the Practice they are in, is such as it ought to be. They
may be good Men, and yet do that which is Evil: They may have a Zeal for GOD;
and yet, act without sufficient Knowledge or Prudence. Merely their being good
Men, or zealous for the Good of Souls, will not warrant this Conduct of theirs: If
it cannot be justified from other Considerations, it must be condemned.

It Is again urged in Favor of these Itinerants, That when the Time of
Reformation was come on, one of the most effectual Things done toward the
Reformation in ENGLAND, about the Middle of the former Century, was to send
about the Kingdom certain Itinerant Preachers, with a License to preach the
Fundamentals of Religion, instead of the Stuff with which the Souls of the
People had formerly been famished. This, which is a Quotation from Dr. MATHER'S
Magnal. Chris. American, we had printed in the BOSTON Weekly News-Paper Numb.
2016.
, "to give Check (as is said in the Letter introducing it to the Public) to
the great Outcry, and the bitter and harsh Reflections made by many against
Itinerant Preachers," To which I would answer, by giving a brief Account of the
Times and Itinerants here referred to, together with the present Times and
Itinerants.

As to the Times and Itinerants here referred to, a just Account has been given
of them, in the Letter to the Author of the above Quotation, in the following
Words See the Boston weekly NewsPaper, Numb. 2018.
, At the Time when the Reformation came on, which began with the Reign of King
EDWARD the VI, and was carried on by gradual Steps, through the long Reign of
Q. ELIZABETH, the whole Land was overspread with Darkness and Superstition: The
common People, almost every where, were stupidly ignorant. This may be fairly
gathered from your Quotation, which supposes they knew little or nothing of the
great Doctrines and Truths of Christianity, the very Fundamentals of Religion:
And indeed, it was scarce possible to be otherwise, when they were deprived of
the Key of Knowledge; the Scriptures, which are able to make wise to Salvation,
being locked up from them in an unknown Tongue, in which the public Offices of
the Church were also performed. And whatever Articles of Belief the People
held, they received from their Priests, by an implicit Faith, which naturally
produces a blind Obedience. Nor was the State of Things much better with the
Clergy, who were, the greater Part of them, grossly ignorant, and blind Leaders
of the blind. The chief Learning they had, was from Acquaintance with School
Divinity, and the Writings of the ancient Fathers, which, however it might pass
for Science, in those Times, was falsely so called. In short, the Clergy were so
ignorant, that few of them were able to compose their Sermons; to supply which
Defect, certain Homilies were set forth by public Authority, and enjoined to
be read, instead of Sermons, to the People.

This was the true State of Things respecting Religion in England, when the
Morning of the Reformation began to dawn: Which leads me to say something of
the Character and Mission of the itinerant Preachers employed in that glorious
Work.

As to their Character, they were Men of eminent Learning, and substantial
Piety; they were ready Scribes, well instructed in the Things that pertain to
the Kingdom of GOD; and able to communicate their Knowledge to others: In
short, they were every Way qualified to teach the People the great Fundamentals
of Religion.

As to their Mission, it was from proper Authority. They did not follow the
blind Impulses of a wild Imagination, or run before they were sent; no, your
Quotation tells us, that they were licensed: They had a regular Call and
Commission to enter on so great a Work. The Account Bishop BURNET gives of the
Occasion and Rise of these Itinerants, in the beginning of the Reformation, is
very observable. The Friars, says he, used all the Force and Skill of their
Industry to raise the People into Heats, by passionate and affecting
Discourses; that both inflamed a blind Devotion, and DREW MONEY: -- But there
was not that Pains taken, to inform the People of the Hatefulness of Vice, and
the Excellency of Holiness, or the wonderful Love of CHRIST, by which Men might
be engaged to acknowledge and obey him. And the Design of their Sermons was
rather to raise a present Heat, which they knew afterward how to manage, than
to work a real Reformation on their Hearers. They had also intermixed, with all
divine Truths, so many Fables, that they were become very extravagant; and that
Alloy had so embased the whole, that there was great Need of a good Discerning,
to deliver People from those Prejudices, which these Mixtures brought upon the
whole Christian Doctrine. THEREFORE, the Reformers studied with all possible
Care, to instruct the People in the Fundamentals of Christianity, with which
they had been so little acquainted. -- And much Pains was taken to send eminent
Preachers over the Nation; not confining them to particular Charges, but
sending them with the King's License up and down to many Places. It follows,
BECAUSE in that ignorant Time, there could not be found a sufficient Number of
good Preachers; and in a Time of so MUCH JUGGLING, they would not trust the
Instruction of the People to every one: Therefore, none was to preach except he
had got a particular License for it, from the King, or his Diocesan. But to
qualify this, a Book of Homilies was printed, etc. The whole Account is worth
reading. Vid. BURNET'S History of the Reformation. Vol. 1. Page 302, 303.


In the same Letter, we have also a just Account of these Times and the present
Itinerants. The Words are, I shall now proceed to say something of the State of
Religion in NEW ENGLAND, about two Years ago, when the Itinerant Way of
Preaching began to be practiced among us. And if we look into our Church at
that Time, we shall find them professing the true protestant Religion, in the
Power and Purity of it, and walking in the Faith and Order of the Gospel. The
Generality of our People were well instructed in divine Things, and acquainted
with the Truths and Principles of the Christian Religion: Great Numbers of them
were Righteous, Walking in all the Ordinances and Commandments of the LORD
blameless. As to the Ministers in this Land, I believe, it may be truly said of
the greatest Part of them, that they were Men of sound Learning, and serious
Godliness; they were skilful in the Word of Righteousness, wise Master Builders
in the House of GOD. Accordingly, whatever you may think, their Sermons were
not empty Stuff, tending to starve Men's Souls; but plain, and practical; and
therefore profitable. They took Pains to feed their respective Flocks with
Knowledge and Understanding, and went before them in a blameless, holy
Conversation.

And as to the present Itinerants, it is remarked, as certain and obvious, that
the most, if not all of them, are swollen and ready to burst with spiritual
Pride. As to their Mission, they have none, except from their own fond
Imaginations. They indeed tell us of an immediate Call, and Assistances from
Heaven; but can we believe them, while the Divisions and Disorders they create,
wherever they come, abundantly confute their Pretenses. As to their Furniture
for Preaching, the most of them are Babes in Knowledge, mere Novices in
spiritual Things, Workmen that have great Reason to be ashamed, because they
cannot rightly divide the Word of Truth. In one Word, they are so far from
being able to instruct Mankind, in the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity,
that, as the venerable Dr. COLMAN, speaking concerning them, elegantly
expresses it, They can only give some uncertain Flashes out of Clouds and
Darkness.

From all which (as the same Writer adds) it plainly appears, that this
Quotation from Dr. MATHER cannot serve the Purpose; that nothing can be drawn
from it in Favor of our Itinerants, and their disorderly Practice: And
therefore it can be no CHECK to such, as, with great Reason, speak freely
against them. I believe Dr. MATHER could never have thought, that this Passage,
in his History, would ever be wrested to serve such a wretched Design: For
whoever reads the History, and other Works, of that venerable Person, will
find, that he forever insists on the vast Importance of a learned Ministry, and
always sets his Face against such ignorant, and mischeivous Itinerants, as are
now caressed and encouraged; speaking of those Vagrants, with a just Severity
of Language, and in Terms of the highest Indignation.

It Is still pleaded, from 1 Cor. 3. 21, 21, where it is said, All Things are
yours, whether PAUL, or APPOLLOS, or CEPHAS, that See Mr. EMERSON'S
Exhortation to his People. Page 5.
"Ministers, with their various Gifts and Labors, are for the Use and Benefit
of the Church and People of GOD." And who ever disputed this? The Question is
not, Whether GOD had instituted a Ministry; and this, for the Good of his
Church, i. e. The whole Collection of Believers. This is acknowledged on all
Hands: But the Question is, in what Sense, particular Churches that make up the
Catholic Church, have a Propriety in all Ministers; so as that it may be said,
they are yours. It Is only talking at Random, and to amuse People, to tell
them, PAUL and APOLLOS and CEPHAS are yours, i. e. All Ministers are yours,
without saying, at the same Time, according to some determinate Meaning, How
they are so.

The Apostle, in this same Text, says, ALL THINGS are yours. But does this
destroy private Property, and make all Things common? This, I know, has been
pleaded for from this, together with some other Texts; and a Liberty hereupon
taken to have Communion, not only with other Men's Goods, but Wives also. All
THINGS are yours It Is a Truth as to particular Christians, or Churches, in no
Sense but what will consist with every Right, which GOD has given to one Man,
in Distinction from another: Nor may they lay Claim to any Thing, but in that
Way, and according to those Rules, which are laid down in Scripture, or pointed
out by the Laws of Nature and Reason. Notwithstanding these Words of the
Apostle, all THINGS are yours; particular Men have their own Wives, and
particular Women their own Husbands; this Man has his own House or Field, and
so has that: Nor can they invade one another's Property without sinning against
GOD. Christians can be said to have a Right in all THINGS, only so far, and
under such Restrictions, as GOD has been pleased to give them a Title to them.

So when it is said, PAUL and APOLLOS and CEPHAS, i. e. all Ministers are
yours; the meaning cannot be, that every particular People have a Right to
every particular Minister, in any Sense but what shall consist with the Order,
GOD has settled in his Church. They can have a Propriety in them, only in
Subordination to prior Rights; and so as that there may be an Harmony among
them all. Though it be a Truth, when spoken of particular Churches, all
Ministers are yours; yet each particular Church has its own Pastor, and each
Pastor his own particular Church: And in Virtue of this Relation that subsists
between particular Churches and Pastors, each Church has its special Rights
with Respect to its particular Pastor, and each Pastor the like Rights with
Respect to his particular Church; Nor may these Rights, either of them, he
broke in upon, under the Pretense that all Churches have a Propriety in all
Ministers. Their Propriety is restrained within certain Limits, beyond which,
if they extend their Claim, it interferes with other Rights, which cannot,
without Sin, be invaded.

The Churches, upon this Principle, For all Things are yours, whether PAUL, or
APOLLOS, or CEPHAS, have been lately exhorted, Mr. EMERSON'S Exhortation. Page
6.
To hear and improve for their Benefit, not only the Minister that is ordained
over them, and fixed among them, but as they have Occasion and Opportunity
other Ministers also. And have been told, Page ibid.
If any should attempt to deprive them of this their Christian Privilege, they
are guilty of Robbery: They rob them of a very great Privilege, which the LORD
has purchased at the dearest Rate; and which he has, in Love to their Souls,
confered on them: Whereupon they have been warned Page ibid.
, "To stand fast in this Liberty of their's wherewith CHRIST has made them
free." If the Thing meant by this Exhortation, which was "apprehended most
needful and seasonable at this Day", Vid. Preface to the Exhortation.
be only this that particular Churches have a Propriety in other Ministers,
their Gifts and Labors, according to Gospel Order, and so as not to Infringe
on the Rights of their own Pastors, or other particular Churches, it is what
all, so far as I know, are agreed in; And 'twas perfectly needless to found an
Alarm, as though this Liberty of the Churches was in Danger. But if the Thing
aimed at is, To give Countenance to that rambling about from Parish to Parish,
which some Ministers have come into, to the Uneasiness of their own People, to
the raising Factions among other People, and to the Invasion of the just Rights
of the Pastors among whose People they have gone: I say, if this be the Thing
intended, the Scripture upon which this Exhortation is founded, has been grossly
abused: Nor indeed could an Exhortation, to this Purpose, have had its Rise
from it, but in a mistaken and perverted Sense.

I complain not of People's hearing Ministers that are not their own, as they
may occasionally happen among them; Nay, I object not against one Minister's
coming among the People of another, on Purpose that they might have the Benefit
of his Gifts and Labors; provided there be a mutual Agreement between all the
Parties concerned, and the Case such as may properly call for such an
Expedient: But for Ministers to make a Business of going out of their own, into
other Men's Parishes, unasked; or, at the Desire of only some disaffected
People; And this, in known Opposition to the settled Pastors: it is contrary to
all Reason, as well as Scripture, and subversive of all Order in the Churches;
Especially, when they carry the Matter so far as to creep into private Houses,
when they cannot any longer force themselves into the Pulpits, and insinuate
such Things against the fixed Ministers, as tend to leaven the Minds of their
People with Prejudices against them, and hinder their further Advantage from
their Labors. Some may think highly of this Manner of Conduct, and "bless GOD
for the many Sermons that have been preached by such Ministers" Page 7.
; but for my Part, I have not so learned CHRIST, nor the Order of his Gospel.
And I shall be much mistaken, if the bad Effects of this Method of Conduct,
don't make some Men see with other Eyes than they do at present.

It Is granted in this Exhortation Page 7.
That Ministers ought to be well persuaded concerning these Strangers that come
among us, that they are Men of Knowledge, Prudence and Piety; Men of good
Principles and Morals, and that they have a Call to visit us, before we invite
them to preach to our People. And will any have the Face to Pretend, that
sufficient Care has been taken upon this Head? Nay, where 'Ministers have not
been satisfied about, either the Knowledge, or Prudence, or call, some Persons
have had to come into their Parishes, have they not thrust themselves in
notwithstanding? And han't the Ministers, instead of being well thought of for
their Caution, been reproached as OPPOSERS of the Work of GOD? And what is it
but to upbraid Ministers, to tell them, they ought to be well satisfied about
these Strangers that come among them, when, if they an't satisfied, they shall
be called all the bad Names that can be thought of? Han't this commonly been
the Case? Can it be denied?

Those Ministers, I should think, who don't see through the Propriety, or
Reasonableness, or Advantage, of Ministers going about into other Men's
Parishes, have just the same Right not to invite them into their Pulpits, as
those have to take them in, who think well of this Practice: And why should
their Christian Liberty be invaded? Why should strange Ministers force
themselves upon them? Is it not an Usurpation on their Rights as Pastors to
particular Churches? Does it not lead to Alienations and Contentions? Does it
not naturally tend to hinder the Usefulness of such Ministers among their own
People?

It may be insinuated, as though their not approving these Itinerants was owing
to the Influence of "a Spirit that lusts to envy." And might it not as justly
be insinuated, as though this Itinerating Disposition might have its Rise from
a Spirit too much puffed up with Pride^ But however this be, I do not think,
those who are for Order in the Church of GOD, and keeping Things from running
into Confusion, have any great Reason to envy those, who, from among our
selves, have been most noted for their traveling up and down the Country to
preach. We generally know who they are, and what Character they bear in the
World; and if disposed to Envy, these are some of the last Men who would excite
it. And I am clearly of the Mind, that if the Spirit and Disposition of the
holy and humble Apostle PAUL more universally prevailed among Ministers, they
would not so often imagine themselves to be Men of so much more Importance than
they really are; nor would they, from this vain Conceit they have of
themselves, so often go out of their own, into the Line of others; boasting of
Things beyond their Measure, and made ready to their Hand.

I had thought here to have left this Head; but cannot do it without first
expressing my Surprise at the late Ordination of a Person to go about the
Country as an Itinerant Preacher. The Account we have in the Boston
Evening-Post Numb. 381.
, We have lately heard from YORK, that on, or about the 13 of July last, one
Mr. D -- L R -- s, a NewMethodist, so called, summoned together a solemn (and
we think) unlawful Assembly, consisting of the Elders, and pretended
Messengers, of some of the neighboring Churches, to ordain the said R -- s at
large, to be a vagrant Preacher to the People of GOD in this Land; -- in which
Transaction we hear, that the Rev'd Messieurs M -- Y, W -- E, J. R -- S and G
-- N resolutely proceeded, although some other of the neighboring Ministers
bore their Testimony against such an irregular Action.

That late venerable Man of GOD, whose Praise is in all our Churches, Dr.
INCREASE MATHRR, has given the World his Thoughts at large upon such a
Transaction as this; which I shall here present to the Reader.

In his Order of the Churches in NEW ENGLAND vindicated, he proposes this
Question Vid. Page 101. And onwards.
, May a Man be ordained a Pastor, except to a particular Church? In Answer
whereto, he asserts, that no Man ought to be ordained a Pastor except to a
particular Church. And for these Reasons.

1. We have no Instance in the Scripture of ordinary Officers ordained, except
unto a particular Flock. Act 14. 23. They ordained Elders by Election (so does
the Geneva Translation read the Words truly enough, as that learned Knight, Sir
Norton KNATCHBULL, has critically evinced In Animad. in Lib. N. T.
) in every Church. PAUL left it in Charge with TITUS, that he should ordain
Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. He was not to ordain them to be Individua
vaga; but a particular Place, a City wherein was some Church, was assigned to
them to labor in. He might not (as Mr. BAYNES Altar Damascen. Page 209.
, and from him DIDOCLAVIUS, speaks) ordain Elders as the Universities create
Doctors of Physic, without assigning them any Patients; or as they make Master
of Art, without providing for them any Scholars.

2. Pastor and Flock are Relates; and therefore one cannot be without the
other. -- To say that a wandering Levite, who has no Flock is a Pastor, is as
good Sense as to say, that he that has no Children is a Father, and that the
Man who has no Wife is a Husband: Nor may it be pretended, that the Catholic
Church is his Flock; for,

3. A Pastor is under an Obligation to feed every one that is of the Flock, he
is a Pastor unto. Acts 20. 28. Take Heed therefore to your selves, and to all
the Flock over which the HOLY GHOST has made you Overseers. Is any Man able to
feed all that Flock of the Church Catholic visible? A Minister must give an
Account concerning every Soul in that Flock, he is the Pastor of. Heb. 13. 17.
They that say, they are Pastors of the Catholic Church, may do well to think,
what Account they can give of the ten Thousands of Souls belonging to their
Flock, that were never instructed, nor fed by them.

4. Supposing a Man to have a particular Church to which he is related, if he
is a Pastor to other Churches besides that, then it is not in the Power of that
Church to deprive him of his pastoral Office. If they should reject him and
that deservedly from being their Pastor, he ^ay pretend, I am a Pastor of the
Catholic Church, and will be so, do you do your Worst. This favors of the
Papist's indelible Character, who pretend, if a Man has once been ordained, he
can never be a Laic again. Thus a Person who is justly not only deposed from
his Office, but excommunicated, may be a Pastor still. -- Our Discipline
declares, not only such as never were related to a particular Flock, but such
as have been, but now are not so related, to be no Church Officers. The Words,
in the Platform, Chap. 9. Sect. 7. are, He that is clearly loosed from his
Office Relation unto that Church whereof he was a Minister, cannot be looked at
as an Officer, nor perform any Act of Office, in any other Church, unless he be
again orderly called into Office.

5. When Ordinations at large did, with other Corruptions, creep into the
Church, a whole Synod found it necessary, not only to bear Witness against that
Practice, but to declare such Ordinations to be void and null, and the
Ordainers liable to censure. It is well observed by the ingenious Writer of the
History of the Council of TRENT, Hist. Trid. Conc. L. 6. Page 550.
that "in the golden Times of Christianity, no Persons were ordained but to a
particular Ministry; but that this pious Institution was soon corrupted,
Bishops ordaining Men that had no Election by any Church." This caused great
Confusion, as the Magdeburgensian Historians have noted. As a Remedy, the
Council of CALCEDON made a Decree against all such Ordinations. The sixth Canon
of that Synod declares, That if any Man should be ordained absolutely, that is,
to the Catholic, without Relation to a particular Church, the Imposition of
Hands, which he has received, shall be null; and that he shall serve in the
Church to the Dishonor of them that have ordained him. This Decree was
confirmed by other Synods afterward; so that it became a general Rule in the
Church, that no Man should be ordained without a Title. But the forementioned
Historian (with many others) takes Notice that this Rule was in Process of Time
perverted. For whereas, at first, to have a Title was to have a particular
Church, afterward to have a Title was to have Money. The Canons of the Church
of ENGLAND will not permit any one to be ordained without a Title.

6. The impleaded Ordinations are contrary to the Judgment of our eminent
Divines, and to the Practice of some of the best reformed Churches. JUNIUS
Animadvers. in BELLARM. Cap. 3. etc. 7.
declares his Approbation of the mentioned Canon of the CALCEDON Synod; and
that since an Elder is not ordained to the Ministry absolutely, but to the
Ministry of this, or that Church in particular, it is fit the Church should be
concerned in the Ordination; and, that in the apostolical Times, in the
Ordination of a Minister, there was first a Cheirotonia, or Election by the
People; and then a Cheirothesia, or Imposition of Hands; that these two were
always joined together as the antecedent and Consequent. Mr. CARTWRIGHT 2
Reply. Page 272.
says, that after Election follows Ordination, which is a solemn investing or
putting a Minister into the Possession of that Office whereunto he was before
chosen. To the like Purpose does WHITAKER speak. It is needless, and would be
endless, to heap up Testimonies concerning this, since it is a common received
Opinion among our Divines, that the Election of a Minister by the Church should
precede his Ordination.

I shall add to what the Doctor has said, That there has appeared, in all Ages,
more or less of a Disposition, in some Persons, to think themselves qualified,
and called, to act as tho 'they were Pastors, not to particular Churches only,
but all the Flocks in a Neighborhood, or Province.

The learned VOETIUS makes Mention of a Circumambulation of Ministers Vid.
Polit. Eccles. Part II. Lib, III. Tract. II. Cap. X.
, the running about, or rather the wandering and walking about of Men, who,
without any certain Call and Affixion to any particular Church, frequently
preach Sermons, expecting COLLECTIONS or PRESENTS from the People. Such as
these (says he) were formerly called walking Levites, in Allusion to the Story
in Judges 17. 7. 8. Such there are (he adds) among the PAPISTS, who appear at
the Heads of Streets, and in the most public Places of Resort, and offer
themselves to celebrate Mass.

The famous HOTTINGER, writing about the Times of the Reformation gives an
Account, Vid. The last Vol. of his Eccles. History.
of some famous Itinerants, who distinguished themselves by preaching abroad in
the open Air, and by many uncouth Ways of Management; such as wearing a CHAIN
ABOUT THEIR NECKS, and sometimes THROWING OPEN THEIR BREAST, and vehemently
beating on it, and crying out with a MIGHTY VOICE, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy! and
some Instances he here mentions of those, who pretended to VISIONS and
REVELATIONS: And these he speaks of as some of the worst Sort of People.

But however prevalent this Itinerating Disposition may have been, more
especially at certain Times, it was always ill thought of by the best Men, and
the best Churches: They have ever esteemed it an Argument of Pride and
Self-Conceit, and as tending to Strife and Schism, and every evil Work; and
accordingly laid the Restraints of Ecclesiastical Authority upon it, so far as
they could.

The united Brethren in LONDON declare, That ordinarily none shall be ordained
to the Work of the Ministry, but such as are called, and chosen thereunto by a
particular Church. Vid. Dr. I. MATHER'S Order of the Churches vindicated P. 107.


One of the Articles of the ecclesiastical Discipline of the French Protestants
is, Ministers shall not be ordained without assigning them a particular Flock.
Ibid. P. 106.


The seventh Article in the Order of the Dutch Churches is, that Vid. VOET.
Polit. Eccles. Part II. Lib. III. Tract. II. Cap. X.
no one shall be called to the Ministry of the Word, without Employment in some
certain Place; unless he be sent to preach to Churches under Persecution, or
otherwise to gather Churches.

In the Church of SCOTLAND, some of the Conclusions agreed upon, in several of
their Assemblies, after sundry Conferences and often-Disputation and Reasoning,
are these Vid. CALDERWOOD'S History of the Church of SCOTLAND, Page 105.
All Office-Bearers should have their own particular Flocks, among whom they
exercise their Charge.

They that are called to the Ministry, or that offer themselves thereto, ought
not to be elected without some certain Flock assigned to them.

True Bishops should addict themselves to a particular Flock; -- Neither should
they usurp Lordship over their Brethren, and over the Inheritance of CHRIST
Ibid. Page 112.


Pastors, in so far as they are Pastors, have not the Office of Visitation of
more Kirks joined to the Pastorship, without it be given to them.

It agrees not with the Word of GOD, that Bishops should be Pastors of
Pastors, Pastors of many Flocks, and yet without a certain Flock, and without
ordinary Teaching.

It agrees not with the Scripture, -- that they usurp the Office of Visitation
of other Kirks, nor any other Function beside other Ministers, but so far as
shall be committed to them by their Kirk.

And the like Ecclesiastical Rules were made in the more primitive Times of the
Church, to give Check to the Humor that then prevailed in many, of going
beyond their own Bounds.

The XIVth, XVth and XXXVth canons, called Apostolical; the XVth and XVIth
Canons of the Council of NICE; the IId and IIId of the first Council of
CONSTANTINOPLE; the Xth of the Council of CALCEDON, with others that might be
mentioned of these, and other Councils, strongly testify against this Practice
of Minister's invading the Parishes of one another. Vid. M. L. BAIL. Summam
conciliorum omnium. Vol. I.


It may, as the Practice with us is new, carry with it a good Face, and be
readily encouraged; especially, for the Sake of some Men, who may be though it more
holy than their Brethren; but it is the same Evil now, it always has been, and
will be productive of the like bad Effects; some of which we have already seen
and felt: And I pray GOD, they may not prepare the Way for still greater.

The next Thing I shall take Notice of, as what I cannot but think of dangerous
Tendency, is that Terror so many have been the Subjects of; Expressing it self
in strange Effects upon the Body, such as swooning away and falling to the
Ground, where Persons have lain, for a Time, speechless and motionless; bitter
Shriekings and Screamings; Convulsion-like Tremblings and Agitations,
Strugglings and Tumblings, which, in some Instances, have been attended with
Indecencies. I shall not mention: None of which Effects seem to have been
accidental, nor yet peculiar to some particular Places or Constitutions; but
have been common all over the Land. There are few Places, where there has been
any considerable religious Stir, but it has been accompanied, more or less,
with these Appearances. Numbers in a Congregation, 10, 20, 30, would be in this
Condition at a Time; Nay, Hundreds in some Places, to the opening such a
horrible Scene as can scarce be described in Words.

The Account, those, who have been under these Circumstances, give of
themselves is various. Some say, they were surprised and astonished, and
insensibly wrought upon, they cannot tell how: Others, that they had presented
to their View, at the Time, a Sight of their Sins, in all their Number and
Desert: Others, that they saw Hell, as it were, naked before them, and
Destruction without a Covering; and that it seemed to them as though they were
just falling into it: Others, that they imagined the Devils were about them,
and ready to lay hold on them, and draw them away to Hell. The more general
Account is, that they were filled with great Anxiety and Distress, having upon
their Minds an over-powering Sense of Sin, and Fear of divine Wrath.

But whatever was the Cause, these bodily Agitations were, at first, highly
thought of by many; yea, looked upon as evident Signs of the extraordinary
Presence of the HOLY GHOST. Hence, it was common in one Congregation, to tell
of these wonderful Things, as they had appeared in another, to pray for the
like Testimony of the divine Power, to give GOD Thanks when they had it, and
lament it when religious Exercises were attended, and no such Effects followed:
And too much Encouragement has been given People, to depend on these Things as
sufficient Tokens of that Sense of Sin, which is of the Operation of the SPIRIT
of GOD.

I have now Letters by me, from different Parts of the Country, all concurring
in this Account; and wrote by Persons of as good Character as most among us,
and upon their own Knowledge. One, after he had given a Narrative of the
Strange Appearance he had been present at, in all the Agitations and Outcries
above described, concludes in these Words, But what appeared to me most
dangerous and hurtful was, that Mr. -- (the Minister through whose Management
these Things were effected) laid very much Stress on these Extraordinaries, as
though they were sure Marks, or, at least, sufficient Evidences of a just
Conviction of Sin, on the one Hand: or, on the other, of that Joy there is in
Believing, and so of an Interest in the Favor of God. Another, after an
Account of the Groaning, crying out, falling down and screaming, he had been a
Witness to, in one of our Places of Worship, among other Things, observes, That
these Things were encouraged by Mr. -- (a traveling Preacher) and the Minister
of the Town, who esteemed them undoubted Evidences of the Operation of the
BLESSED SPIRIT; which appeared by all their Discourse. A third, having
exhibited a Relation of the like Effects, adds upon it, I perceived by the
Preacher's Discourse, that he supposed all these Things, the Effect of a strong
Sense of Truth impressed upon the Minds of the Auditors, by the HOLY GHOST.

And these Accounts perfectly harmonise with the Pleas, which have been made,
both from the Press and Pulpit, in Justification of this Appearance in
Religion. We have been told of the falling down of the JAILOUR, and of SAUL,
afterward PAUL; we have been minded of the Trembling of FELIX, and of the
Three Thousand in the Acts, who were pricked in the Heart by PETER'S Sermon:
And the State of unconverted Sinners has been represented to be such, that it
ought to be wondered at, these Effects are not universal, rather than that some
of them have been seen among us.

But these Pleas notwithstanding, I could never yet see Reason, I confess, to
entertain a good Opinion of these religious Fears, with their Effects visible
on Men's Bodies, considered by the Lump. I mean not by what I here say, to
express a Dislike of that Fear, excited from a just Sense of Sin; which, in
Respect of adult Persons, is ordinarily previous to their Conversion. The first
Operation of the blessed SPIRIT upon the Minds of such Sinners usually is, to
awaken their Fear from a Perception of Sin, and Consciousness of Guilt, as I
have largely expressed my self, upon this Matter elsewhere: But then, it ought to
be carefully remembered, the Passion of Fear may be excited, not only from a
just Representation of Truth to the Mind by the SPIRIT of GOD, but from the
natural Influence of awful Words and frightful Gestures. Even where the
Torments of another World are the Object of Fear, the Passion it self may be
moved, and to such a Degree too, as to appear in all the violent Effects of
Horror and Surprise; and yet, the Origin of it be no other, than a mechanical
Impression on animal Nature: And this, I am inclined to think, has been too
generally the Case, in Respect of those Fears, and the Effects of them, which
have been so much talked of among us. A good Number, I trust, have been wro't
upon by the proper Influence of Truth, duly impressed upon their Minds by the
Divine SPIRIT; but in Regard of a far greater Number, I have no other Thought
of their religious Fears, discovered in their Cries, and Shrieks, and falling
down, than a mere sensitive Commotion; such a Sort of Surprise and Astonishment
as is affected, not by a rational Conviction of Truth, but a sudden and strong
Impression on the animal Economy. My Reasons are these that follow,

It Is with me, an Objection of some Weight against the Divinity of these bodily
Effects, that they have been, in all Ages, so rare among sober and solid
Christians; while among others, of a contrary Character, they have, all along,
been common. So it was with the MONTANISTS of old; with the GERMAN-ENTHUSIASTS,
in the beginning of the Reformation; and with the FRENCH-PROPHETS, within the
Memory of many now living: And so it was with the QUAKERS. They had their Name
indeed from the trembling and shaking ordinarily fell into, as though they were
all over convulsed: Nor can there be given more remarkable Instances of
Groaning, and Foaming, and Roaring, than from these People; Whereas, if we turn
our View to the more sober Part of Christians, we shall be at a loss to find
Examples in this Kind.

A noted Writer on the Times Mr. EDWARDS, in his late Book, Some Tho'ts on the
Revival of Religion in New England.
seems to have been at a pretty Deal of Pains to collect Instances: But how few
has he been able to produce, though he had the whole Christian World before
him, for more than Seventeen Hundred Years? Nor are those he has brought to
View so much to the Case as might have been expected.

The first Instance is of a single Person, the exellent Mr. BOLTON, P. 25.
who being awakened by the Preaching of the famous Mr. PERKINS, was subject to
such Terrors as threw him on the Ground, and caused him to roar with Anguish;
and the Pangs of the New Birth in him were such, that he lay pale and without
Sense, like one dead; as we have an Account, in the Fulfilling of the
Scripture, the 5th Edition, Page 103. 104. These are the Words of this
Gentleman. How it came about, I know not; but he has very much mis-understood
his Author, in representing from him Mr. PERKINS as the Person, by whose
Preaching Mr. BOLTON was subjected to Terrors that threw him to the Ground; for
it is not so much as insinuated in the Fulfilling of the Scripture, either that
Mr. PERKINS was the Instrument of Mr. BOLTON'S Terrors, or that he was ever
thrown into them in the Time of Preaching; unless the Edition I use (the
Second) is different from that, this Gentleman has in his Hands, which I
question, because I have now before me the Life of Mr. BOLTON, from whence the
Author of the Fulfilling of the Scripture took his Account: In which, one Mr.
PEACOCK is spoken of as the Instrument of his Conversion; and it is ascribed to
his Acquaintance with this godly Man, and not to his Preaching, or the
Preaching of any other Person whatever, that he was awakened to a Sense of his
Sins.

Nor is it so clear to me, that Mr. BOLTON, literally speaking, was thrown to
the Ground, or reared out, or lay like one dead. The Fulfilling of the
Scripture has given the World, not the very Words, but what he took to be the
Sense, of the Writer of Mr. BOLTON'S Life; and this Gentleman has done the same
by the Fulfilling of the Scripture. The best Way therefore of judging, in this
Case, will be from the very Words of the original Writer himself; which are
these, The first News he heard of GOD, was not by any soft and still Voice, but
in terrible Tempests and Thunder; the LORD running upon him as a Giant, taking
him by the Neck, and shaking him to Pieces as he did JOB; beating him to the
very Ground, as he did PAUL, by laying before him the ugly Visage of his Sins,
which lay so heavy on him, as he roared for Grief of Heart, and so affrightened
him, as (I have heard him say) he arose out of his Bed in the Night, for very
Anguish of Spirit. And to augment his spiritual Misery, he was exercised with
foul Temptations, horribilia de DEO, terribilia de fide. And these are
represented to have been so vehement upon him, that, with LUTHER, The very
Venom of them drank up his Spirits, and his Body seemed dead, that neither
Speech, Sense, Blood, or Heat appeared in him. And this, it is said, Continued
for many Months.

It Is obvious at first Sight, that some of the Language here used is
figurative, and to be interpreted as such, and not literally; as where the LORD
is said to have run upon him as a Giant; where he is said to have been taken by
the Neck and shaken to Pieces: As also where his Body is represented as
seemingly dead, without Sense, Blood, or Heat. The Idea intended to be conveyed
is not, That the Pangs of the New Birth in him were such, as that he lay pale,
and without Sense, like one dead. i. e. According to the Letter of these Words,
and as is commonly the Case in these Times. The Meaning is evidently this, and
only this, that his Distress was so great, and of such Continuance, that it had
a visible Effect on his Body, to make him look pale, and like one in a languid
State. And if any should be disposed to think, the Spirit of this Author's
Words is rather to be regarded than the Letter, when he speaks of Mr. BOLTON,
as beat to the very Ground, and roaring for Grief of Heart, I don't know that
they would be to blame; especially, as such a Construction of his Words is the
only one, that would, perhaps, have been thought of, if it had not been for
what has happened among ourselves. He, no Doubt, designed to exhibit this
Gentleman as an Instance of one, who was in great spiritual Distress; but that
he meant any Thing further, is not, to me, so evident as to be beyond Dispute.

Nor is this Kind of spiritual Trouble uncommon, in Respect of Persons of a
like Character with Mr. BOLTON, before his Concern for his Sins. For it is
observable, and particularly remarked by the Fulfilling of the Scripture Page
231, 232.
, that he was eminently profane; a horrid Swearer; and much accustomed to mock
at Holiness, and those who most shined therein; particularly, that excellent
Man of GOD Mr. PERKINS. The Writer of his Life adds Page 12. 14.
, that he loved Stage Plays, Cards and Dice; was a Sabbath-Breaker, a
Boon-Companion, and one that for the Sake of Money had actually accepted of a
Motion to go over to the Church of ROME. And has it not been usual, in all
Ages, for such great Sinners, when brought to a Sense of their Sins, to be
greatly pained in their Minds? There is nothing singular in the Case of Mr.
BOLTON, unless, according to the Letter of the Words, he roared out, and was
thrown down to the Earth; which, as I said, cannot certainly be collected from
the Manner of speaking used by the Writer of his Life: Though if it could, it
ought to be remembered, his Concern lasted for many Months; and by this
continued Pressure on his Spirit, his Body was reduced to an ill State, and it
might be thus with his Mind also. And under these Circumstances, though his
Trouble was of a divine Origin, there might be a Mixture in it of human
Weakness. It might be owing to himself, and not to the SPIRIT of GOD, its
arising to an undesirable Excess: Which is quite different from what is
supposed to be the Case in these Times; viz. That it is by the immediate Power
of the HOLY GHOST, that such Fears are excited in the Minds of Persons, as that
they are, at once, struck to the Earth, or forced to scream out.

Mr. GEORGE TROSS ("who of a notoriously vicious, profligate Liver, became an
eminent Saint, and Minister of the Gospel") is the next Instance of a Person in
"Terrors, occasioned by Awakenings of Conscience;" and these are said Page ibid.
"to have been so over-pouring to his Body as to deprive him, for some Time, of
the Use of Reason." I have carefully read over the Life of TROSS, written by
himself; and he was not only " for a Time deprived of the Use of his Reason,"
but to a great Degree; and it was thrice repeated! Nor does it appear, that his
Distraction was occasioned by Terrors too great for his Brain; but seems rather
to have had Rise from an ill Habit of Body, and this, perhaps, bro't upon him
by his own Follies: I speak thus only in general; because I don't choose to
publish to the World what Mr. TROSS has done himself.
Nor do I remember, he was ever in any extraordinary Terrors, unless where it is
evident, from his own Account, that he was not himself. And very observable are
the Words, in which he relates his Deliverance out of his horrid State of Mind.
His Life, Page 63.
" But at Length, through the Goodness of GOD, and by his Blessing upon Physic,
a low Diet, and hard keeping, I began to be somewhat quiet and composed in my
Spirits; to be orderly and civil in my Carriage and Converse, and gradually to
regain the Use of my Reason, and to be a fit Companion for my Fellow Creatures.

I shall add here, though somewhat out of Place; this Mr. TROSS, in the Time of
his Deliquium, often heard Voices, and was much given to strange Impulses; upon
which he makes this Remark Ibid. Page 48.
I am persuaded, that many of the Quakers, formerly, were deluded by such
Voices and Impulses, from the impure Spirit, which they mistook for the HOLY
SPIRIT of GOD; many of them having been grossly ignorant, and so fitted to
entertain such Delusions of the Devil, as I then was.

And besides hearing Voices, it was no uncommon Thing with him to see Visions;
which, says he Page 62.
I mention, the rather, because I am verily persuaded, that the many Visions
and Voices among the Papists, which gave Occasion to the Belief and
Establishment of their Purgatory came from the same Author, or Cause; viz. a
disturbed Brain, influenced by a deceitful and lying Devil.

But these extraordinary, external Effects are said to have been found, not
only in here and there a single Person; but there have been Times, wherein they
have appeared in Congregations, in many at once. So it was, says this Gentleman
Page 26.
in the Year 1625, in the West of SCOTLAND, in a Time of great Outpouring of
the SPIRIT of GOD. It was then a frequent Thing for many to be so
extraordinarily seized with Terror in hearing of the Word, by the SPIRIT of
GOD, that they fell down, and were carried out of the Church, who afterward
proved most solid and lively Christians: As the Author of the Fulfilling of the
Scripture informs us, Pa. 185. I should have been glad, if this Author had been
a little more particular in his Information; because so far as I can find, (and
I have been at the Pains to consult all the Writers I could meet with, in some
of the best and largest Libraries in NEW ENGLAND, upon the religious Affairs of
SCOTLAND) He only has recorded this Story; and he has done it so generally,
that little can be argued from it. He has said, it is true, it was in hearing
the Word, they were seized with this extraordinary Terror: But how the Word was
preached, either as to Matter, or Manner, he does not declare; which is a
weighty Circumstance in Effects of this Nature, as we shall presently see, from
what I have to say upon the like Effects among our selves. He has likewise
said, "They afterward proved solid and lively. Christians:" But how were they
at the Time? This is a material Question. For if they were like others, among
whom these same Effects have appeared, at other Times, and in other Parts of
the World, they may justly be ranked with them; at lest, while under the
Influence of these Things. And there is the more Reason for such a Question as
I have put, because this Author has himself given an Intimation, as though
these Effects, at the Time when they happened, were, by some attributed to
another Cause than that which is divine. His Words are these Fulfilling of the
Scripture. Page 416.
, This, by the profane Rabble of that Time, was called, the STEWARTON
SICKNESS; for in that Parish first, and after, through much of the Country, it
was remarkable. If the same Temper prevailed then as does now, the best, Men in
the Kingdom might have been ranked among the profane Rabble. I don't affirm,
this was the Case: But I think, there ought to be good Evidence that it wan't;
and the rather, because it is a known Fact, that censoriously speaking of
others, to a very high Degree, has been an inseparable Concomitant of these
extraordinary Seizures, in all Ages, and in all Places.

This Gentleman goes on, The same Author informs of many in FRANCE, that were
so wonderfully affected with the Preaching of the Gospel, in the Time of those
famous Divines, FAREL and VIRET, that, for a Time they could not follow their
secular Business. I doubt not, there was the Prevalence of real Christianity in
these Times: But was there not a vast deal of Enthusiasm also? These were the
Times, in which Visions and Voices, extraordinary Missions and Revelations,
extatick Raptures and Swoonings, were at their Height; and gave the greatest
Shock to the Progress of the Reformation of any Thing that happened in that
Day. And though I deny not, that "many were wonderfully affected under the
Preaching of FAREL and VIRET," yet I must be excused, if I have not the best
Opinion of the whole of this Affection; Especially, as excited by FAREL: For he
was a Man zealous even to Fury; and his Preaching such, that it was rather
called Thundering than speaking. Fuit enim in hoc Viro, -- Sermo Vehementiae
plenus; ut tonare potius, quam dicere videretur. MELCH. ADAM. Vit. Literat. in
GERMAN. Sub Vit. PHARELLI. Page 115.
ERASMUS, a good Judge of Men, and his Contemporary, has not given the best
Character of him In his Letter to the Official of BESANCON, are these Words
concerning FAREL, Habetis ifthic in Propinquo novum Evangelistam, PHARELLUM,
quo nihil vidi unquam mendacius, virulentius, aut seditiosius. And again, in a
Letter to the Brethren of the LOWER GERMANY, Si nunc est conversus ad meliorem
Frugem, gratulor Homini: Qualis olim erat, Mihi valde displicuit, seditiosus,
acidae Linguae, vanissimus. Sic Rem gessit in Monte PELLICARDI, ut bis inde
profugerit. BASILIENSIS Senatus, quum cuperet, Civitatem esse tutam a
Seditione, jussit PHARELLUM ire exulatum. Vid. BAIL Crit. Hist. Sub Nom.
FAREL. This learned Writer remarks upon these Passages from ERASMUS, "that as
he was personally offended with FAREL, we are not obliged to believe, he has
drawn his Character to the Life." But yet adds, "we may rest persuaded, our
Farel was one of those, who have more need of the Rein than the Spur."
: Or, if any should think he might be prejudiced against him, OECOLAMPADIUS,
his fast Friend, plainly describes him as a Man violent in his Temper, disposed
to pronounce his Anathemaes upon others, and to treat Mankind with
Imperiousness He speaks of him in that Language, -- "Ut quanto propensior es ad
Violentiam, tanto magis ad Lenitatem exerceas; Leonamque Magnanitatem,
Columbina Modestia frangas. Duci, non t^^hi, volunt Homines. -- Lib. 4. Epist.
Page 916. And in another Letter, -- Evangelizatum, non maledictum, missus es.
Condono, imo laudo, Zelum: Modo ne desideretur Mansuetudo. Da Operam, m^
Frater, ut Spiritum meum exhilares, hoc Nuncio; quod in Tempore suo Vinum et
Oleum infundas: quod Evangelistam, non tyrannicum Legislatorem praestes." Lib.
4. Epist. Page 956.
And if under the Administration of a Man of this Turn of Mind, there were like
Effects with those among us, they might arise from the same Cause. His
Character indeed seems to have been very like to the Character of some
Gentlemen, through whose intemperate Zeal, we have been thrown into great
Disorders.

The next Account is from IRELAND, in 1628; But as the Fulfilling of the
Scripture has taken no Notice of any strange bodily Effects, unless those may
be so called, which relate to the People's making little Use of Meat, Drink, or
Sleep, and not feeling the Need thereof, through a Sense of GOD; These only are
mentioned, but in a more advantageous Manner, than by the original Writer. For
he speaks of some only whose Case this was, not many. And he tells us, in
general, how long it was they went without a full Supply of these Recruits, and
does not leave the Matter at large. It was, in that Day, according to him, a
sweet easy Thing for Christians to go 30, 40 Miles, to the solemn Communions,
and to continue there from the Time they came, till they returned, with but
little of these Supplies; and this, in Regard of SOME, without their feeling
the Need thereof, their Souls were so filled with a Sense of GOD; which is no
incredible Account, unless they tarried longer, or eat, or drank, or slept, in
a less Proportion, than need be supposed.

The Story of CATHERINE BRETTERGH, I pass over with this Remark only, that if
nothing had appeared in these Times, but what is here recorded of her, I
believe no serious Person would have cried out of Wildness and Distraction;
though perhaps, they might have thought, there had been, in such Instances, some
Mixture of that which is Humane.

These are the Instances brought from the Fulfilling of the Scripture: And I
should have had, I own, a much better Opinion of them, if the Author had not
betrayed, by many of the Stories contained in his Book, a Turn of Mind, too
easily disposing him to a Belief of such Extraordinaries, as few besides
himself would have related to the World: Nor can I account for it, that, among
all the wonderful Things he has recorded as Examples of a prophetical and
apostolic Spirit, not so much as one is mentioned; unless it was thought, the
mentioning of these might have lessened the Credit of the whole.

This Gentleman now presents us with a Letter from his honored Father, wherein
we are told, from a Letter he saw, which came from SCOTLAND, that at the
Preaching of a Sermon in EDINBURG, the People were so affected, that there was
a great and loud Cry through the Assembly. And if the Fact be allowed, is it
possible, from such a general Account, to form a Judgment, as to its true
Origin? That there have been Outcrys, in Congregations, in diverse Parts of the
World, and at diverse Times, every Body knows that is acquainted with the
History of the Church.

The Author of the wonderful Narrative has mentioned a considerable Number of
such; but an Account of those Out-crys are here expected, which may justly be
supposed to be of a Divine Rise. And can this be determined, unless we know
something in particular, of the Means, Manner, and after-Effects? It Is
impossible. And the same may be said of what is further related about the
famous Mr. ROGERS of DEDHAM in ENGLAND; though he was such a Speaker, that if,
under his Preaching, People had sometimes cried out, it ought not to be at once
concluded, that it was owing to the extraordinary Power of GOD. For this is an
Effect, Voice and Action may sometimes produce, as we shall see by and by.

The Account from Mr. FLAVEL, I leave as it stands, with only saying, that good
Men may differ in their Sentiments as to the Cause of such Effects; and if any
should think, they are not to be wholly ascribed to a divine Influence, I would
not be too peremptory in saying, their Judgment was not according to Truth.

The Persons "in NORTHAMPTON, and some of the neighboring Towns, who formerly
cried out, and fell down," I never heard of 'till now: Nor of those, "whose
Flesh waxed cold and benumbed, whose Hands were clinch'd, and their Bodies set
into Convulsions:" Neither do I think, that such Accounts tend much to the
Credit of Religion.

But these Instances notwithstanding, and the most that can be made of the
foregoing ones, it must be owned, that such bodily Effects as have prevailed in
the Land, have always been rare among sober Christians: Whereas, They are the
very Things, by which, those of another Complexion have ever been
distinguished. Whole Volumes have been wrote containing Accounts in this Kind:
And whatever strange Effects, upon Men's Bodies, have been common among us, the
same have been common also among this Sort of Persons, in all Parts, and Ages,
of the World: Nor is there any Fact more notorious in the History of the
Church. But this I mention only as a Circumstance worthy of Consideration with
some others, that are to follow. Wherefore to go on,

The Way in which these Fears have been excited, in many Places, is not, in my
Opinion, the best Evidence in Favor of them. People have been too much applied
to, as though the Preacher rather aimed at putting their Passions into a
Ferment, than filling them with such a reasonable Solicitude, as is the Effect
of a just Exhibition of the Truths of GOD to their Understandings. I have
myself been present, when an Air of Seriousness reigned visibly through a whole
Congregation: They were all Silence and Attention; having their Eye fastened on
the Minister, as though they would catch every Word that came from his Mouth:
And yet, because they did not cry out, or swoon away, they were unbraided with
their Hardness of Heart and ranked among those who were Sermon-proof,
Gospel-glutted; and every Topic made Use of, with all the Voice and Action the
Speaker was Master of, to bring forward a general Shriek in the Assembly: Nay,
in order to give the People a plain Intimation of what he wanted, this same
Preacher sometimes told them of the wonderful Effects wrought by the Sermon, he
was then preaching; how in such a Congregation, they were all melted and
dissolved, and in another so over-poured, that they could not help screaming
out, or falling down, as though they had been struck dead. Nay one of the
Preachers, in this new Way, was so open some Months ago, as in plain Words, to
call upon the People to cry out, and plead with them to do so: This he did
three several Times in one Sermon, and had upon it so many loud Cries. And it is
too well known to need much to be said upon it, that the Gentlemen, whose
preaching has been most remarkably accompanied with these Extraordinaries, not
only use, in their Addresses to the People, all the terrible Words they can get
together, but in such a Manner, as naturally tends to put weaker Minds out of
Possession of themselves. A Friend in the Country, in a Letter to me, upon
these Matters, expresses himself in these Words, Under the Preaching and
Exhortations of these Itinerants and Exhorters, (the Manner of which is
frequently very boisterous and shocking, and adapted to the best of their Skill
to alarm and surprise the Imagination and Passions) it is no unusual Thing for
Persons to be plunged into the utmost Anxiety and Distress, which is often
attended with a Trembling of the Body, fainting, falling down, etc. The
Preacher now frequently grows more tempestuous, and dreadful in his Manner of
Address, and seems to endeavor all he can to increase, and spread the rising
Consternation, and Terror of their Souls; which, by this Means, is sometimes
spread over a great Part of an Assembly, in a few Minutes from its first
Appearance. I have seen the struck (as they are called) and distressed brought
together, from the several Parts of the Assembly, into the square Body by
themselves, and two or three Persons at Work upon them at once, smiting,
stamping and crying out to them with a mighty Voice, in the most terrible
Manner and Language; the poor Creatures fainting, screaching and bitterly
crying out under them. You may easily think, what Terrors of Imagination,
Distraction of Passions, and Perplexity of Thoughts, they endured. I was last
Summer at an Evening Lecture, at a neighboring Parish, at which, one of the
most famous Preachers in the new Method carried on. He had entered but a little
Way in his Sermon, (which was delivered in a Manner sufficiently terrible) when
there began to be some Commotion among the young Women. This inspired him with
new Life. He lifted up his Voice like a Trumpet, plentifully poured down
Terrors upon them. About half a Score of young Women were presently thrown into
violent histeric Fits. I carefully observed them. When he grew calm and
moderate in his Manner, though the Things deliverd were equally Awakening, they
by Degrees grew calm and still; when he again assumed the terrible, and spoke
like Thunder, the like violent Strugglings immediately returned upon them, from
Time to Time. Sometimes he put a mighty Emphasis upon little unmeaning Words,
and delivered a Sentence of no Importance with a mighty Energy, yet the
sensible Effect was as great as when the most awful Truth was brought to View.
This Account may be relied on. For it is given by one capable of making
Observation, and who bears as unblemished a Character as most Ministers in the
Country.

Agreeable whereto is the Account we have printed in the BOSTON Post-Boy Numb
391.
; in which the Writer, speaking of the Itinerant Preachers, among other Things,
observes, Their main Design in preaching, seems not so much to inform Men's
Judgments, as to terrify and affright their Imagination; by awful Words and
frightful Representations, to set the Congregation into hideous Shrieks and
Outcries. And to this End, in every Place where they come, they represent that
GOD is doing extraordinary Things in other Places, and that they are some of
the last hardened Wretches that stand out; that this is the last Call that ever
they are likely to have; that they are now hanging over the Pit of Destruction,
and just ready, this Moment, to fall into it; that Hellfire now flashes in
their Faces; and that the Devil now stands ready to seize upon them, and carry
them to Hell: And they will oftentimes repeat the awful Words, Damned! Damned
Damned! three or four Times over.

It Is well known, no Preacher, in the new Way has been more noted for his
Instrumentality in producing these Schriekings and Faintings and Tremblings,
than the Rev. Mr. JAMES DAVENPORT of SOUTHHOLD; and yet, one of the Ministers
of this Town, (who has always been a great Friend to that which he esteemed,
the good Work of GOD going on in the Land) having been, one Night, a Witness to
his inexpressible Management among the People, and the terrible Effects
consequent thereupon in their Screaming and Cryingout, and the like, thought
himself obliged in Conscience to go to him the next Day, and declare against
such a Method of acting: And accordingly went, and told him to his Face (as he
himself informed me) that in the Appearance of the last Night, he was
persuaded, there was no Hand of the SPIRIT of GOD; and that it was no other
than might have been expected, if a Man raving mad from Bedlam, had gone among
the People, and behaved as he had done. And one of the Charges exhibited and
proved against this Mr. DAVENPORT, when brought before the General Assembly of
CONNECTICUT, was, That he endeavored by unwarrantable Means to terrify, and
affect his Hearers. And that,

(1.) By pretending some extraordinary Discovery and Assurance of the very near
Approach of the End of the World; and that though he did not assign the very
Day, yet that he then lately had it clearly opened to him, and strongly inprest
upon his Mind, that in a very short Time all these Things would be involved in
devouring Flames.

N. B. This same Impression, he told the People at BOSTON, he had lately had
upon his Mind, and was as sure the Day of Judgment was at the Door; as of the
Things he then saw with his Eyes; and made Use of this accordingly, as an
Argument to work upon their Passions.

(2) By an indecent and affected Imitation of the Agony and Passion of our
blessed SAVIOR; and also by Voice and Gesture, of the Surprise, Horror, and
Amazement, of Persons supposed to be sentenced to eternal Misery. And,

(3) By a too peremptory and uncondition'd denouncing Damnation against such of
his Auditory, as he looked upon as OPPOSERS; vehemently crying out, that he saw
Hell-Flames flashing in their Faces, and they were now! now! dropping down to
Hell! And also added, LORD thou know, that there are many in that Gallery,
and in these Seats, that are now dropping down to Hell! See the BOSTON
Weekly-News-Paper. Numb. 1997.


An Account of Mr. D -- T's Preaching, not altogether unlike this, a Gentleman,
in CONNECTICUT, wrote to one of the Ministers in this Town, upon his own
Knowledge, in these Words, -- At length, he turned his Discourse to others, and
with the utmost Strength of his Lungs addressed himself to the Congregation,
under these and suchlike Expressions; viz. You poor unconverted Creatures, in
the Seats, in the Pews, in the Galleries, I wonder you don't drop into Hell! It
would not surprise me, I should not wonder at it, if I should see you drop down
now, this Minute into Hell. You Pharisees, Hypocrites, now, now, now, you are
going right into the Bottom of Hell. I wonder you don't drop into Hell by
Scores, and Hundreds, etc. And in this terrible Manner, he ended the Sermon.
It Is then added, After a short Prayer, he called for all the Distressed Persons
(which were near twenty) into the foremost Seats. Then he came out of the
Pulpit, and stripped off his upper Garments, and got up into the Seats, and
leapt up and down sometime, and clapped his Hands, and cried out in those Words,
the War goes on, the Fight goes on, the Devil goes down, the Devil goes down;
and then betook himself to stamping and screaming most dreadfully.

And what is it more than might be expected, to see People so affrightned as to
fall into Shrieks and Fits, under such Methods as these? Especially, when they
have first been possessed of the Notion, that the Persons who make Use of them,
are Men of GOD in an extraordinary Sense; as being sent immediately, as it
were, to deliver his Messages to them. The Mind is now prepared to receive
almost any Impression from this Kind of Persons; and it is no Wonder, if, by
their terrifying Voice and Action, People are thrown into Agitations and
Convulsions.

I doubt not, but the divine SPIRIT often accompanies the preached Word, so as
that, by his Influence, Sinners are awakened to a Sense of Sin, and filled with
deep Distress of Soul: But the blessed SPIRIT must not, at Random, be made the
Author of all those Surprises, operating in strange Effects upon the Body,
which may be seen among People. They may be produced other Ways; yea, I trust,
that has been already said, which makes it evident, they have actually been
produced, even by the wild and extravagant Conduct of some overheated
Preachers.

It will, doubtless, be here said, these Outcries have sometimes arisen, when
no other than the great Truths of the Gospel have been urged upon the
Consciences of Sinners; and this, in a becoming Manner, and by Preachers who
have not been noted, either for the Loudness of their Voice, or the
Boisterousness of their Action.

In Reply whereto, I deny not but this may have been the Case: But, at the same
Time, think it worthy of Notice, that these bodily Effects were, at FIRST,
produced, so far as I can learn, ONLY by such Preachers as were remarkable for
their terrible speaking, both as to Matter, and Manner: Nor do I remember an
Instance, in the Country, of Outcries, by any other Sort of Preachers, 'till
the Noise of such extraordinary Effects, as Arguments of an immediate divine
Power, in one Place and another, had alarmed the People, and made many of them
think, it was necessary they also should be in like Circumstances.

Besides, when these Outcries have been effected by your more moderate
Preachers, (which, by the Way, comparatively speaking, has been a rare Thing)
have they not begun with one or two only, and from them been propagated to
others? Nay, have not these, from whom they took Rise, usually, been such as
were before accustomed to the Way of screaming out? And were they not, at
first, brought to it, under a more terrible Kind of Preaching? I believe, upon
Examination, this will be found to be nearly the Truth of the Case.

I shall only add further, that however distinguished the Minister who has
preached has been, for his exemplary Piety, and shining Gifts; however
agreeable to the Mind of CHRIST he has delivered the Truths of the Gospel; and
however warmly he may have addressed himself to the People's Passions, if he
wan't before known to have been a Favourer of these Outcries, he has not
produced them: Nor do I believe, an Instance can be given in the Country, of
their being brought forward by any Minister, of whom the People had a
Suspicion, that he did not like them: Which to me, is not the best Argument of
their being so wholly owing to the divine Power, as some may be too ready to
imagine. But to proceed,

Another Thing that very much lessens my Opinion of these religious Fears, with
the strange Effects of them is, that they are produced by the Exhorters; and
this, in all Parts of the Land; and it may be, in more numerous Instances, than
by the Ministers themselves. And if these bodily Agitations arise from the
Influence of the SPIRIT, when produced by the Ministers, they are so when
produced by the Exhorters. The Appearance is the same in both Cases; the like
inward Distress is effected, and discovers it self in like Cryings and
Swoonings: Nor is there any Reason to think well, in the general, of the one,
and not of the other. And yet, some of the best Friends of this Work, both
among the Clergy and Laity, think ill of these Things, as brought forward by
the Exhorters: Nay, one of the greatest Friends to the good Work, among the
Ministers in Town, freely declared concerning one of these Exhorters, who came
into this Place, and began the Outcries we were before Strangers to, that he
feared the Hand of Satan was in his coming here to throw Disgrace on the Work
of GOD; suggesting, that the Wonders wrought by the Magicians in Egypt were, to
all Appearance, like the Miracles wrought by MOSES. I see no Reason for such a
Remark. The visible Effects of this young Man's exhorting here, and in the
neighboring Town of Dorchester, were just the same that are wrought by the
most famous Preachers in the new Way: And where there is no discernable
Difference, there is no Ground, in Reason or Scripture, to speak well of the
one, and ill of the other. Such are certainly inconsistent with themselves, who
attribute these Extraordinaries, as bro't forward by the Exhorters, to a Spirit
of Delusion, or Enthusiasm, or any other inferior Cause^; while they cannot bear
to hear a Word said against them, when they are the Produce of those who are
called Ministers. For my self, I put them both on the same Foot, as supposing
they both arise from the same Cause: Only, the Appearance of these Things, in
the same Kind and Degree, when the Exhorters are the Carriers on, administers
just Ground of Fear, whether they are, in general, so much owing to the
extraordinary Influence of the divine SPIRIT, as some may be too ready to
imagine. If they are not owing to the wonderful Operation of the HOLY GHOST,
when the Exhorters are the Occasion of them, they may easily be accounted for,
when produced by others: And it cannot well be supposed, there should be the
extraordinary Concurrence of the blessed SPIRIT with these Exhorters. For who
are they but such, concerning whom the inspired Apostle has said, Not a Novice
lest he be lifted up with Pride, and fall into the Condemnation of the Devil?
Who are they but such, of whom the same Apostle says, they walk disorderly,
working not at all, but are BusieBodies? With Respect to whom, he gives
Commandment by the LORD JESUS CHRIST, that with Quietness they work and eat
their own Bread. Who are they but such, as set themselves up in Opposition to
their Pastors, though sound in the Faith and of a good Conversation, contrary
to the Order of the Gospel, and to the Disturbance of the Churches? And can it
be thought, that GOD would countenance the Conduct of this Kind of Persons, by
extraordinary Testimonies of his Presence from Heaven; and this, while they are
in a Method of acting that directly contradicts his own Appointments? Besides,
may it not be said of these Exhorters, in the general, that they are very Babes
in Understanding, needing themselves to be taught which be the first Principles
of the Oracles of GOD? That they are over-forward and conceited; taking that
upon them, they have neither a Call to, nor Qualifications for? Yea, is it not
too true of some of them, that they have acted under the Influence of an
overheated Imagination; or what is worse, from low and base Views? This is now
so evident, that there is no Room for Debate upon the Matter. And of all Men,
these, I should think, are the most unlikely to be distinguished with the
extraordinary Presence of the HOLY GHOST.

There is yet another Thing that makes it look as though these Terrors might
arise from a lower Cause, than that which is Divine; and that is, their
happening in the Night. I don't mean, that there han't been Outcries in the
Day Time; but the Night is more commonly the Season, when these Things are to
be seen, and in their greatest Perfection. They are more frequent, and more
general, and raised to a higher Degree, at the Night Meetings, when there are
but two or three Candles in the Place of Worship, or they are wholly in the
dark. I have often, in Conversation, heard this Remark made by those, who have
been in the Way of these Things; and the same Observations I find in the
Letters that have been sent me. Says one, speaking of these Extraordinaries,
"They are more in the Night than in the Day:" Another, "They operate most
strongly in their Night Meetings;" Another still, "They never happened [this
must be understood of the particular Place, he is giving an Account of] to any
considerable Degree, 'till the Darkness of the Night came on." And why should
these strange Effects be more frequent, and general, in the Gloominess of the
Night, if they were produced by the Agency of the Divine SPIRIT? Does he need
the Advantage of the dark to fill Men's Hearts with Terror? This is certainly a
shrewd Sign, that there is more of the Humane in these Things, than some are
willing to own. We know every Thing appears more dismal in the Night: Persons
are more apt to be struck with Surprise and Consternation: And as this is a
good Reason, it may be the true one, why a doleful Voice, and frightful
Managements may take Effect more in the Night than at other Times.

The Subjects also of these Terrors may lead us to make the like Judgment about
them; and these are Children, Women, and youngerly Persons. Not that others
han't been wrought upon. Instances there have been of Men; and these, both
middle-aged, and advanced in Years, who have both cried out, and fallen down:
But it is among Children, young People and Women, whose Passions are soft and
tender, and more easily thrown into a Commotion, that these Things chiefly
prevail. I know, it is thus in those Places, where I have had Opportunity to
make Inquiry. And from the Accounts transmitted to me from Friends, in other
Places, it appears to have been so among them also. The Account I have from one
Part of the Country is, "The Operation is principally among Women and Girls;"
From another, "The Persons wrought upon were generally Women and Children;"
From another, "These Effects have been most frequent in Women and young
Persons." And are not these the very Persons, whose Passions according to
Nature, it might be expected, would be alarmed? If young People are, in a moral
Sense, more likely to be wrought upon by Divine Grace, than old, I see not that
this is the Case with Respect to Women in Distinction from Men. Men may as
easily be overcome by the Power of the HOLY GHOST, as Women; and are as likely,
in a moral View of the Matter, to be so: And what should then be the Reason
that they should be, as it were, overlooked, and Women generally the Persons
thrown into these Agitations and Terrors? It certainly looks, as though the
Weakness of their Nerves, and from hence their greater Liableness to be
surprised, and overcome with Fear, was the true Account to be given of this
Matter.

Moreover, the Way in which these Terrors spread themselves is a Circumstance,
that does not much favor their divine Origin. They seem to be suddenly
propagated, from one to another other, as in a great Fright or Consternation.
They often begin with a single Person, a Child, or Woman, or Lad, whose Shrieks
set others a Shrieking; and so the Shrieks catch from one to another, 'till the
whole Congregation is alarmed, and such an awful Scene, many Times, opened, as
no Imagination can paint to the Life. To this Purpose is that in the BOSTON-
Post-Boy Numb. 391.
, when after an Account of the terrible Language made Use of by the Itinerants,
it is added, This frequently frights the little Children, and sets them a
Screaming; and that frights their tender Mothers, and sets them to Screaming,
and by Degrees spreads over a great Part of the Congregation: And 40, 50, or an
100, of them screaming all together, makes such an awful and hideous Noise as
will make a Man's Hair stand an End. Some will faint away, fall down upon the
Floor, wallow and foam. Some Women will rend off their Caps, Handkerchiefs, and
other Clothes, tear their Hair down about their Ears, and seem perfectly bereft
of their Reason. I should not have inserted this Account, it looks so
extravagant, but that I have now by me two Letters, from Gentlemen of known
Worth and Integrity, in the Ministry, who particularly refer to it, and say,
it is a just one.


Appearances in this Kind, I have often had an Account of from those who have
been present at them; and as begun by one or two Persons at first: And where
this has been the Case, there is no great Difficulty in finding out the Cause:
It Is far more reasonable to look for it in Nature, than in Grace.

It may not be amiss to observe still further, that these Terrors, with their
Effects, are uniform all over the Country; operating upon all in whom they take
Place, much in the same Way and Manner, be their moral Character what it will.
Whether the Subjects of them be great or small Sinners, whether the Sins they
have committed be more or less, whether they have continued in Sin a longer or
shorter Time, there is no Difference as to their Fears, and the Operation of
them; but they are all indiscriminately thrown into the like horrible
Circumstances; which it is not reasonable to think would be the Case, if they
were put into this Condition by a divine Influence: Whereas, its the very Thing
that might be expected, where Nature is suddenly surprised, and overcome, as
in a Fright.

In fine, it is a Circumstance no Ways favoring the divine Rise of these
Outcries, that many People now commonly make them, not as urged hereto from an
over-pouring Sense of their own Sins, but the Sins of others. Having been
converted themselves, their Distress, under the Preaching of the Word, is now
raised to such a Height for the unconverted Sinners in the Congregation, that
they cannot help screaming out; and so many of them, sometimes at once, as that
the Worship is interrupted, or greatly disturbed. A Concern for others, whom we
have Reason to fear, are in a State of Sin, is, no Doubt, reasonable; and there
will be more or less of it, in the Heart of every sincere Christian. But are
Shriekings a suitable Expression of this Concern; especially, in the House of
GOD? And can it be supposed, the GOD of Order, would, by the Exertment of his
Power, raise this Concern to such a Height, as that his own Worship should be
broke up upon the Account of it? It Is impossible. I never heard one sober,
solid Person speak a Word, in Favor of these Outcries; and am heartily sorry,
any Thing has been printed, encouraging so gross an Extravagance. I hope none,
from the mere Sound of some Texts, will justify this same Distress for others,
as it begins now to discover it self, among some Persons, in another Form, in
Travail-Pains and Throws. Of this, I have now an Account by me, in a Letter
from a Friend, upon the Evidence of his own Eyes and Ears; which yet, I should
not have mentioned, but that I have since personally conversed with a Minister
in the Country, who informed me of one, who had been in Travail two or three
Times successively for him. i. e. Under all the Signs of Distress, that appear
in Women upon such Occasions.

These are the Reasons, why I cannot entertain so high an Opinion as some others
do, of the Terrors appearing in strange bodily Effects, which have been so
common of late in this Land.

It will, possibly, be said, I have, in saying these Things, reflected Disgrace
upon the Work of Conviction. If I had had such a Thought of the Matter, I
should have suppressed what is here offered. Those, in my Opinion, do the
greatest Dishonor to the blessed SPIRIT, and his Influence upon the Hearts of
Sinners, in the Business of Conviction, who make no Distinction between those
Fears that are the Effect of Truth duly impressed upon the Mind, and those that
arise from an affrightned Imagination. And to speak freely, I am clearly in the
Sentiment, that the great Stress that has been laid upon such Terrors, as have
evidently been produced by the mechanical Influence of awful Words and
frightful Gestures, has been a great Disservice to the Interest of Religion:
Nay, I am not without Fear, least the tremendous Threatening of GOD have, by
some, been profanely made Use of, while, under the Pretense of Awakening Men's
Consciences, they have thundered out Death and Damnation, in a Manner more fit
for the Stage than the sacred Desk, and so as to astonish the Imagination
rather than possess the Mind of a reasonable Conviction of these awful Truths
of GOD. I am not against the Preaching of Terror; but whenever this is done, it
ought to be in a Way that may enlighten the Mind, as well as alarm the
Passions: And I am greatly mistaken, if this has been the Practice, among some
Sort of Preachers, so much as it ought to be And to this it may be owing, that
Religion, of late, has been more a Commotion in the Passions, than a Change in
the Temper of the Mind: Not but that, I think, a lasting Change has been
wrought in a Number; though I could wish I had Reason to say, it was so great a
Number as some pretend: Nay, I am not without Hopes, that some even of those
who have been frightened into Shrieks and Fits, are become new-Men; but then, I
have no other Thought, in the general, of the Surprise they were thrown into,
than of the Surprise by a terrible Clap of Thunder, or the Shock of an
Earthquake: They might hereby be awakened to Consideration, and put upon
waiting upon GOD in his own Way, 'till a Work of Grace has been effected in
them.

I shall conclude this Head with two general Cautions.

The first is, to beware of being prejudiced against the real Work of
Conviction, from the strange Appearance, in a Way of Terror, there has been
lately seen among us. Many, I have Reason to fear, have herefrom been led, both
to think and speak, very unsuitably of this Work of the HOLY SPIRIT: But they
are herein greatly to Blame. There certainly is such a Thing as a Sense of Sin,
expressing itself in bitter Remorse of Conscience. It Is indeed impossible, that
Sinners should have upon their Minds a just Apprehension of themselves, and
their real Character, as Children of Wrath, and not be filled with uneasy
Sensations: Nay, it may be feared of all, who have lived to adult Years,
thoughtless of their Souls, that they know not the Grace of GOD in Truth, if
they have had no Experience of the Troubles of an awakened Conscience: Nor is
it any Objection against either the Reality or Necessity of this Conviction,
that there may be a Resemblance of it in the Workings of that Fear which is not
excited by the Influence of the HOLY GHOST: And instead of being prejudiced
herefrom against the SPIRIT's Operation, in convincing Sinners, we should take
Occasion to be wisely cautious in distinguishing between those Fears, with
their Effects, that are from the SPIRIT, and those that may have Rise from
other Causes.

Very serviceable for our Direction in this Matter, are the Words of that
experienced Christian, as well as noted Divine, Mr. CHARNOCK. Says he, His
Works, Vol. II. Page 584.
pointing out the Difference between those Convictions that are from Nature and
the SPIRIT, the former are sudden Frights and Startings, which soon settle
again; as in a sudden Fright and Start, Nature is speedily reduced to its
former Temper, and the Blood that was put on a sudden into another Motion, is
quickly brought to its former Consistence. They are usually like a Land-Flood,
which causes an Inundation, but sinks not into the Roots of the Soul. -- It is
a Work, not so much upon the Judgment as upon the Affections: Therefore it is
like a Fire falling upon Flax and other combustable Matter, which flames and
expires; and you see its Death almost as soon as it begins to be: Whereas those
Convictions that arise from the SPIRIT, settle upon the Judgment, and like a
Fire in a Log of Wood, are kept alive in the Soul, eat into the Soul, dive into
the Bottom, produce serious and lasting Affections. Conscience is staggering
and unfixt; therefore whatsoever arises from it, partaketh of the uncertain
Nature of the Cause. We shall be moveable in our Affections; unless first
steadfast in our Judgment. And again, showing the Difference between those
Convictions, in which Satan may have a Hand, and those that are from the
SPIRIT, he says, II. Vol. P. 594.
Satan works violently and suddenly, and most by the Passions and Humors of
the Body, rather than by Reason; but the SPIRIT works upon the Mind, therefore
he is an enlightening SPIRIT. Satan works upon the Reason by the Passion; the
SPIRIT upon the Passion by Reason; He first enlightens the Mind, and brings
Light into the Heart, and the rational Faculties, the proper Subjects of Light;
and by this Means winds up the Passions to what Pitch and Tune he thinks fit.
Satan first works upon the Humors of the Body, as melancholy, and the like.
Satan works violently, as upon Passion, as he buffetted PAUL; boxes a Man to
and fro, so that he has no Time to do any Thing but consider his Misery;
whereas the SPIRIT proposes the Object, helps the Soul to consider, and by
Degrees leads to a further Knowledge of the Light of the Gospel, from a
glimmering to a shining Light, 'till the Knowledge of the Lord break in, in its
full Glory. And his first Inference from what he had said about Conviction of
Sin is, Page ibid.
The Gospel does not destroy Reason and rational Proceeding. -- The working of
the SPIRIT is according to the Nature of Man, moves not in Contradiction to,
but in an Elevation of Reason. -- He does not, extinguish Reason, the Candle of
the LORD, but snuffs it, and adds more Light, reduces it to its proper Manner
of Operation, and sets it in its right State toward GOD; brings first Light
into the Understanding, and new Motions into the Will: He does not dethrone
Reason and Judgment, but applies it to its proper Work, repairs it, sets it in
its true Motion. -- The Arguments the SPIRIT uses, are suited to the Reason of
Men, otherwise Conscience could not be moved; for Conscience follows Judgment:
IT IS NOT AN ACT OF JUDGMENT, BUT IMAGINATION, THAT REASON DOES NOT PRECEDE. As
the Service GOD requires, is a rational Service; so the Method he uses in
Conversion is a rational Method.

The other Caution I would give is, to take heed of Mistakes about the
passionate Part of Conviction, i. e. The sensible Workings of the Affections.
There are two Mistakes, in this kind, People have been ready to fall into.

Some, and great Multitudes, it may be feared, have placed their Religion too
much in this extraordinary Terror; trusting to it, and making a Righteousness
of it: putting it in the Place of CHRIST, or of that real Change of Heart and
Life, without which they cannot be qualified for an Admission into the Kingdom
of GOD. Holy Mr. BAXTER'S Words are very pertinent to such Persons as these.
Says he, Think not that you can satisfy the Justice of the Law, or merit any
Thing of GOD, by the Worth of your Sorrows; though you should weep even Tears of
Blood. It is not true Humiliation, if it consists not in the Sense and
Acknowledgement of your Unworthiness, and Desert of Condemnation; and if it do
not lead you to look out for Pardon and Life from CHRIST, as being lost and
wholly insufficient for your selves. And therefore it would be a plain
Contradiction, if true Humiliation should be taken as Satisfaction, or Merit;
or trusted on, instead of CHRIST. To the like Purpose are those Words of the
pious Mr. BOLTON. Says he, In his Instructions for a right comforting afflicted
Consciences, P. 173.
Once for all, take this Caveat and Forewarning: If any should think of these
precedent Acts, these preparatory Workings of the Law and Gospel, which make
Way for the Infusion of Faith, as any meritorious Means to draw on CHRIST; it
were a most false, rotten, foolish, execrable, popish, absurd, Luciferian
Conceit; and might justly merit, never to obtain Mercy at GOD's bountiful
Hands; not part in the Merits of CHRIST.

Others, from what they have seen, or heard of the dreadful Terrors, some have
been in, discovering themselves in Shriekings and Swoonings, have been ready to
question their good Estate, merely because they have not experienced in this
Respect, as they have done. But this is a wrong Way of Judging in the Case.
Hear how the famous Dr. OWEN expresses himself upon this Matter. Under the Work
of Conviction there will be, says he, In his Discourse upon the HOLY SPIRIT, P.
305.
disquieting and perplexing Affections in the Minds of Men; nor can it be
otherwise, where it is fixed and prevalent. As, (1) Sorrow and Shame, for and of
what they have done. (2) Fear of eternal Wrath. This keeps the Soul in Bondage,
and is accompanied with Torment. (3) Perplexing unsatisfactory Enquiries after
Means, and Ways for Deliverance, out of this Distress, and from future Misery.
What shall we do to be saved, is the restless Inquiry of such Persons. He goes
on, P. 306.
The Substance of these Things is ordinarily found in those who are converted
unto GOD, when grown up unto the Use of Reason, and capable of Impressions from
external Administrations: Especially, are they evident in the Minds and
Consciences of such, as have been engaged in any open sinful Course, or
Practice. He then immediately adds, But yet, no certain Rule or Measure of them
can be prescribed as necessary in, or unto any, antecedaneously unto
Conversion. To evince the Truth whereof, two Things may be observed; (1.) That
Perturbations, Sorrows, Dejections, Dread, Fear, are no Duty unto any; only,
they are such Things as sometimes ensue, or are emitted into the Mind, upon
that which is a Duty indispensible; namely, Conviction of Sin. They belong not
to the Precept of the Law, but to its Curse. They are no Part of what is
required of us, but of what is inflicted on us. There is a Gospel-Sorrow, and
Humiliation after believing that is a Duty, that is both commanded, and has
Promises annexed to it: But this legal Sorrow is an Effect of the Curse of the
Law, not of its Command. (2.) GOD is pleased to exercise a Prerogative and
Sovereignty in this whole Matter, and deals with the Souls of Men in
unspeakable Variety. Some he leads by the Gates of Death and Hell unto Rest in
his Love. And the Paths of others he makes plain and easy to them. Some walk
and wander long in Darkness; in the Souls of others, CHRIST is formed in the
first gracious Visitation.

In a few Pages onwards 308.
, He speaks of it as an entangling Temptation Persons under Conviction should
beware of; Namely, that they have not attained such a Degree of Sorrow for Sin,
and Humiliation, as is necessary to them who are called to believe in JESUS
CHRIST. And says upon it, There was indeed more Reason of giving Caution
against Temptations of this Kind in former Days, when Preachers of the Gospel
dealt more severely, I wish I may not also say more sincerely, with the
Consciences of convinced Sinners, than it is the Manner of most now to do: But
yet, it is possible, that herein may lie a Mistake; seeing no such Degrees of
these Things, as some may be troubled about, are prescribed for any such End,
either in the Law or Gospel. And of the same Mind was the celebrated Mr.
SHEPARD, Mr. WILLARD, and others, I have elsewhere mentioned.

The Words of the pious Mr. BAXTER are so observable, I cannot help transcribing
them, for the Conclusion of this Head. A Mistake, says he, His Works. Vol. 2.
Page 562, 563.
to be carefully avoided is, The placing your Humiliation, either only, or
principally, in the passionate Part, or in the outward Expressions of the
Passions. I mean either in pinching Grief, and Sorrow of Heart, or else in
Tears. But you must remember, that the Life of it is in the Judgment and the
Will. It is not the Measure of passionate Sorrow and Anguish, that will best
show the Measure of your sincere Humiliation; much less is it your Tears, or
outward Expressions. But it is your low Esteem of your selves, and
Contentedness to be vile in the Eyes of others; and your Displicency with your
selves, and Willingness to mourn, and weep for 'Sin as much as GOD would have
you, and the rest of the Acts of the Judgment and Will.

Two great Dangers are here before you to be avoided. (1) Some there be that
have terrible Pangs of Sorrow, and are ready to tear their own Hair; yea, to
make away themselves, as JUDAS, in the Horror of their Consciences; and these
may seem to have true Humiliation, and yet have none. And some can weep
abundantly at a Sermon, or in a Prayer, or in mentioning their Sin to others,
and therefore think they are truly humbled; and yet, it may be nothing so. For
it, at the same Time, their Hearts are in Love with Sin, or have not an
habitual Hatred of it, and a predominant superlative Love to GOD, their
Humiliation is no saving Work. -- (2) Another Sort there are, much better and
happier than the former, that yet, to their great Trouble, are mistaken in this
Point; and that is, they that think they have no true Humiliation, because they
find not such Pangs of Sorrow, and Freedom of Tears as others have; whereas
their Hearts are contrite, even when they cannot weep a Tear. Tell me but this,
are you vile in your own Eyes because you are guilty of Sin, and that against
the LORD, whom you chiefly love? Do you loath your selves because of your
Abominations? And could you heartily wish you had been suffering when you were
sinning? And if it were to do again, would you choose to suffer rather than to
sin? Have you a Desire to grieve, when you cannot passionately grieve? Do you
think meanly of your own Sayings and Doings, and better of others, wherethere
is any Ground, than of your selves? Do you justify GOD's Afflictions, and Men's
Rebukes, and think yourselves unworthy of the Communion of the Saints, unworthy
to live upon the Face of the Earth? Yea, would you justify GOD, if he should
condemn you? This is the State of an humbled Soul. Find but this, and you need
not doubt of GOD's Acceptance, though you were unable to shed a Tear. There is
more Humiliation in a base Esteem of ourselves, than in a thousand Tears; and
more in a Will or Desire to weep for Sin, than in Tears that come through Force
of Terror, or Moisture of the Brain, or passionate Tenderness of Nature. If the
Will be right, you need not fear. It is he that most hates Sin, and is
hardliest drawn to it, that is truliest humbled for it. He proceeds, a little
onwards, to observe, That that Part of Humiliation, which consists in the
Acts of the Understanding, and Will, cannot be too much, as to the Intention of
the Act. To have too clear an Apprehension of the Evil of Sin, and his own
Vileness, this a Man need not fear. And in the Will it is more clear: No Man
can be too willing to be rid of Sin, in GOD's Time and Way; nor be too much
averse from it, as it is against the LORD. But then, the other Part of
Humiliation, which consists in the Depth of Sorrow, or in Tears, may possibly
be too much. And in several Particulars, he directs Persons how to discern when
it is so. As, First, When your Sorrow is greater than your Brains can bear,
without apparent Danger of Distraction, or a melancholy Disturbance and
Diminution of your Understanding, then it is certainly too much, and to be
restrained. For if you overthrow your Reason, you will be a Reproach to
Religion, and you will be fit for nothing that is truly Good, either to your own
Edification, or the Service of GOD. Again, When Sorrow is so great as to
discompose your Mind, or enfeeble your Body, so as to unfit you for the Service
of GOD, and make you more unable to do Good, or receive Good, you have Reason
then to moderate and restrain it. Likewise, When the Greatness of your Sorrow
does overmatch the necessary Measure of your Love, or Joy, or Thanks, and keep
out these, and take up more of your Spirit than its Part, having no Room for
greater Duties, then it is excessive and to be restrained. There are some that
will strive and struggle with their Hearts, to wring out a few Tears, and
increase their Sorrow, that yet make little Conscience of other Affections, and
will not strive half so much to increase their Faith, and Love, and Joy. So
when your Sorrow, by the Greatness of it, does draw you into Temptation, either
to despair, or think hardly of GOD, and his Service, or to undervalue his
Grace, and the Satisfaction of CHRIST, as if it were too scant and insufficient
for you, you have then Cause to moderate and restrain it.

The next Thing to be considered, as what I cannot but look upon to be of
dangerous Tendency is that sudden Light and Joy so many, of late, claim to be
the Subjects of. Not that I question, whether there is such a Thing as
religious Joy. The Bible often speaks of rejoicing in GOD, and in Hope of the
Glory to be hereafter revealed. The Kingdom of GOD is said to consist in Joy,
as well as Peace and Righteousness; And Joy is reckoned among the Fruits of the
SPIRIT: And this Joy is said to be unspeakable, and full of Glory; yea, his
called the Peace of GOD which passes all Understanding. But then, there is a
false, as well as true Joy; the Joy of the Hypocrite, as well as of the real
Christian; a Joy that has its Rise in animal Nature, as well as from the HOLY
GHOST. And though I would hope, a Number, of late, have been made Partakers of
true Joy, the Joy there is in Believing; yet, there may be Reason for bear,
lest the Joy that has been so much boasted of, should be no other, in the
general, than the Joy, those may experience, who are Christians more in
Appearance than Reality, in Word than Deed.

I shall here take Liberty to examine this Joy; and shall do it with all the
Impartiality I am able, as being a Matter in which it is exceeding dangerous for
Men to deceive themselves, or be deceived by others. And,

Three Things are observable with Reference to true Joy; the Foundation of it,
its Cause and Effects: And these are the Things by which I shall try the Joy of
the present Times.

The Foundation of true Joy is always laid in such a Faith, as embraces the
SAVIOR upon Gospel-Terms; a Faith that purifies the Heart, and is a living,
active, powerful Principle of all holy Obedience to the Commandments of GOD.
The new Creature, the Man that has upon him the Image of CHRIST JESUS, is the
Subject of this Joy. A Stranger to the Work of the SPIRIT, in Regeneration,
intermeddles not with it: And however he may pretend to it, or seem to be in
Transports of it, it is nothing more than Pretense, or the Effect of a deluded
Imagination. And this is a plain Case: For where there is not a Work of Grace
in the Heart, it is impossible a Man should think justly of himself, while he
thinks there is; and his Joy therefore from the Apprehension of his being a
Child of GOD, and in a State of Favor with him, must be a Delusion.

And now, can it be pretended of all that have, of late, been in great Light
and Joy, that they are among the Sanctified in CHRIST JESUS? Would to GOD it
were thus! Some have made it evident by their after-Lives, that their Joy was
only a sudden Flash, a Spark of their own kindling: Nay, some have been made
sensible, their Joy was nothing more than a mere sensitive Passion, and have
owned they were under a Delusion, while they imagined it was of a divine
Origin. And if the Foundation of Joy, in the Multitudes who have had the
feeling of it, was a renewed Heart, this they would have made evident by their
walking in Newness of Life: They would have appeared new Men, being better in
their whole external Conduct, both toward GOD and Man, in all the varying
Conditions and Relations of Life. And has this generally been the Case? I
believe few will have the Face to pretend it has; and we shall presently see
what Reason there is to fear it has not.

The Cause of true Joy is another Thing that must be considered; by which I
mean here, the immediate Occasion or Reason of the Excitement of this Passion.
And this is the Man's Perception of his being a true Believer, a real Saint;
and as such, interested in the Promises of the GospelCovenant. A Man must not
only be a sanctified Person, but discern that he is so, before he can
rationally have the Joy of Religion. The Spring of his Joy, is the View he has
of himself as a Person qualified, according to the Tenor of the NewTestament,
for the Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among the Saints in Light.
Hence that Direction of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 4.
But let every Man prove his own Work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself. Agreeable whereto we read, 2 Co^. 1. 12.
This is our Rejoicing, the Testimony of our Conscience, that is Simplicity and
godly Sincerity, not by fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of GOD, we have our
Conversation in the World. The immediate Reason of true Joy, according to the
Apostle PAUL, is the Witness of Conscience to the Work of Grace in our Hearts.
There is, no Doubt, the concurrent Witness of the Divine SPIRIT with the
Christian's Spirit, that he is a true Believer, a Child of GOD by Regeneration;
and from hence he triumphs in GOD as his Portion and Happiness.

Is this now the Way in which Persons, in these Times, come by their Joy? Is it
not rather, in some, a sudden, strange delightful Kind of State, arising they
cannot say whence, or wherefore? Says Mr. BAXTER, If I find a great deal of
Comfort in my Heart, and know not how it came thither, nor upon what rational
Ground it was raised, nor what Considerations do feed and continue it, I should
be ready to question, how I knew whether this be from GOD? And though, as the
Cup in BENJAMIN's Sack, it might come from Love, yet it would leave me but in
Fears and Amazements, because of Uncertainty. His Works, Vol. 3. Page 246.
I know it has been thus with some I have conversed with; and I have Reason to
think, it has been the Case with others also. And are there not Multitudes,
whose Joy has sprung from sudden Impressions, that their State was good,
without the Discernment of a special Work of GOD, wrought in their Hearts? Has
it not been secretly and strongly suggested to them, that they are GOD's
Children, that CHRIST died for them, and that they are interested in his
Merits? And han't they been sure of this, rather from a direct Light shining in
their Minds, than from the Evidence they have had, from the Word of GOD, that
they were possessed of such Marks of Regeneration as no Hypocrite ever came up
to? Nay, is it not an avowed Principle, that Assurance is to be had from the
immediate Witness of the SPIRIT, telling a Man that he is a true Believer, and
not from the Perception of a real Work of GOD, effected in him? Those that
don't know, that the Joy of these Times is too generally the Effect of this
sudden Light, and not of a strict and through Examination, and herefrom the
Witness of a Man's own Spirit, with the Testimony of the SPIRIT of GOD, to a
Work of Sanctification wrought in his Soul, are very much Strangers to the
religious State of Affairs in the Land.

This may seem a glorious Way to Assurance and Joy, but it is infinitely
dangerous for Men to trust to this Light, and depend upon the Joy arising from
it, without the concurring Testimony of their own Conscience, upon clear and
full Evidence. And in this Sentiment do the most experienced, and judicious
Divines perfectly agree. Says the pious Mr. BOLTON, See his general Directions
for a comfortable walking with GOD, Page 328.
That which the SPIRIT reveals to our Consciences, we ourselves may collect and
conclude out of GOD's Word, upon the Conscience of our Faith, Repentance, and
other saving Endowments and holy Graces, shining in our Souls, and uprightly
exercised in our whole Conversation. When we by these Means have assured our
Souls, that we are the Children of GOD, which is the Testimony of our own
renewed Spirit, the SPIRIT of GOD, as another Witness, secondeth and confirms
this Assurance by Divine Inspiration, and by sweet Motions and Feelings of
GOD's special Goodness, and glorious saving Presence; and so according to the
Apostle's Phrase, Romans 8. 16. Bears Witness with our Spirits. Wherefore, if
any Man presumes upon, or pretends any immediate Suggestions or Revelalation
for his spiritual Safety, and everlasting Well-being; and yet, wants utterly
the Testimony of his renewed Conscience to the same Purpose, the Testimony of
Universal Obedience, of not lying wilfully and delightfully in any one known
Sin, of crucifying the Affections with the Lusts; I can give him none but this
cold Comfort, he is cursedly coozened by the Devil's counterfeit Glory of an
Angel, casting into his absurd Imagination such groundless Conceits, which, in
Time of Trial, will vanish into nothing, and fly away as a Dream. To the like
Purpose are those Words of Mr. BAXTER, Some I have known, who have wanted
Assurance; and falling among the ANTINOMIANS, were told by them that they undid
themselves by looking after Signs and Marks of Grace, and so laying their
Comforts upon some Things in themselves; whereas they should look only to
CHRIST for Comfort, and not at any Thing in themselves at all. And for
Assurance, it is ONLY THE WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT, without any Marks that must
give it them; and to fetch Comfort from their own Graces and Obedience, was to
make it themselves, instead of CHRIST, or the HOLY GHOST, and was a legal Way.
No sooner was this Doctrine received, but the Receivers had Comfort at Will,
and all was sealed up to them presently by the WITNESS OF the SPIRIT, in their
own Conceit. Whence this came, judge you. Sure I am, that the sudden Looseness
of their Lives, answering their ignorant, loose, ungospel-like Doctrine, did
certify me that the SPIRIT OF COMFORT was not their COMFORTER; for he is also a
SPIRIT OF HOLINESS, and comfort Men by the Means of a holy Gospel, which
has Precepts, and Threatenings, as well as Promises. His Works, Vol. 2. Page
869.


The last Thing, is the Influence of true Joy; and it operates in various
Effects upon those who are the Subjects of it.

One of its Effects is, a Heart and Tongue to praise GOD. It expresses itself
in fervent Adorations of divine Mercy, in thankful Acknowledgements to the GOD
of all Grace. And this, it must be owned, is the Operation of the Joy of the
present Day: But then, is it not just Matter of Complaint, that its Praises of
GOD have been too ostentatious, too much favoring of a Desire to be seen of
Men? Has it been content with silent Admirations of the Loving Kindness of GOD
in JESUS CHRIST; venting it self in secret Breathings of Love, and Returns of
Gratitude to the Father of Mercies? No, but the Houses of Worship, the Places
of Concourse, are those in which it has generally broke forth, in
Acknowledgements to GOD: Nay, han't it been common in some Parts of the Land,
and among some Sorts of People, to express their religious Joy by singing
through the Streets, and in Ferry-Boats? And has not this Joy almost
universally shown it self in Raptures and Transports? Nay, in Swoonings, and
Outcries, and Screamings, so like to these same Effects under Terror, that it
han't been known, whether Persons were in Joy or Sorrow, but by asking them the
Reason of the Commotion their Passions have been in? Yea, has it not been a
usual Thing to show this Joy by clapping of Hands, by jumping up and down, by
Congratulations in the Way of Kissing, by breaking out into hearty loud
Laughter? It may seem like a Banter upon this Joy to speak these Things; but
they are the exact Truth of the Case, without a Figure: And known to be so; and
this, not in a single Instance or Place, but in Multitudes of both; yea, this
has been the Appearance, more or less, in all Parts of the Land, where People
have been in great Light and Joy.

This of Laughing, so far as I am acquainted with the History of the Church, is
a Method of expressing religious Joy peculiar to the present Times: Nor can I
think from whence it should take Rise, unless from Mr. WHITEFIELD and TENNENT.
The former of these Gentlemen was sometimes observed to speak of the Affairs of
Salvation, with a Smile in his Countenance; but it is generally known of the
latter, that he could searce hear of a Person's being under the slightest
Conviction, but he would laugh. And if told of any that were in great spiritual
Distress, he would fall into a broad Laugh. This always appeared shocking to
some who were Witness of it, as I have often heard them say: But as it was the
Gentleman's Practice, he might be imitated by others in this Imperfection, and
from them by others still, and so the Humor be propagated 'till it became
general. I cannot, for myself, give an Account of the Rise of this Practice from
any other Cause. But from whatever Cause it sprang, it is certainly one of the
most incongruous Ways of expressing religious Joy. It favors of too much
Levity, as it has to do with Matters of infinite and eternal Moment. It
discovers the Want of a due Reverence toward the divine Majesty; and seems
inconsistent with that holy Fear and Caution, which must be thought reasonable,
where the Salvation of the Soul is the Thing it is conversant about.

Nor is this all, but these Raptures and Ecstasies have, in too many Instances,
come to Visions, and Trances, and Revelations. There are few Places, where this
Joy, in all its Height, has prevailed, but it has ended, in a greater or less
Number of Persons, in these Things. I could fill many Pages with the Accounts I
have had of the Trances Persons have been in, from different Parts of the
Country; but shall confine my self to a double Instance, and give it in the
Words of a Friend, in his Letter to me. Says he, The most remarkable Thing
which has happened since Mr. D -- T's Departure (from NEW HAVEN) is Visions and
Trances, which have befell sundry Persons in this Place. I will endeavor to
give Account of two Women, who fell into a Trance together. It was sometime in
November last. The beginning of it was at a Conference Meeting, or private
Fast, kept by a Number of the New-Light Party (as it was said) to pray that the
general Council of Ministers, who were then sitting at GUILFORD, might be
restrained from doing any Thing that should be detrimental to the Work of GOD,
or (shall I be too uncharitable, if I say) in other Words, to their Cause. At
this Meeting, two young Women were exceedingly filled with Zeal, and their
Affections raised very high: They were, in some Degree, deprived of their
bodily Strength; but yet, were by Turns able to speak, which they did, in
Addresses and Exhortations to, and Prayers for, those present, who they
supposed were unconverted. Their Minds remained very full of Zeal and Affection
that Night, and the next Day. The next Evening, as they were together walking
the Street, they were both so overpowered by some Thing or other, that they
fell down unable to walk, and so continued, for some Time, lying in the Street
like Persons dead or asleep. At length, one recovered herself so far as to be
able to go to the next House, which was within a few Rods, and informed the
People of the Condition of her Mate, who thereupon went and brought her into
said House; and thus they continued in a Sort of Ecstasy, either lying as
though in a Sleep, or uttering extatic Expressions of Joy, of the Love of
CHRIST, and of Love to him; of Concern for the Souls of Sinners, and the like.
Many People resorted to see them, for whom, and especially for those they
supposed were out of CHRIST, they would frequently pray with great Earnestness,
and, to all Appearance, Engagedness of Mind; to whom they would also address
themselves in awful Warnings, moving Persuasions, and pathetic Exhortations, in
which they would use some Expressions, from whence it seemed that they supposed
themselves to have a special Commission, or endowed with some special
Authority; such as CHRIST has sent me, CHRIST has bid me say, and do, so and
so. And indeed many People, especially those of their Party, seemed verily to
believe that they were inspired, and did ever pretend to justify the Separation
from the Authority of their Word, as though divine. And they not only used many
unwarrantable Expressions, but made strange Declarations, as that they had been
to Heaven, had seen the Book of Life, the Names of many Persons of their
Acquaintance wrote in it; that they had seen the Seats of the Blessed, and
their own Seats empty, and the like. Many more Things they said and did of the
like kind, which the Time will not allow me particularly to relate. In the
Condition described, they remained about a Week, and then they came to
themselves, or to their former Condition by little and little.

The Light and Joy that has operated in the above Ecstasies, and Swoonings, and
Laughings, and at Length come to Visions and Trances, has been highly spoken of
by some; Nay, it has been thought profane so much as to question its divine
Origin: But the most experienced, and celebrated Divines have always had other
Sentiments of this Kind of Illumination, as well as the Exultings proceeding
from it. They have carefully cautioned against it, as what ought not to be
depended on; yea, they have esteemed it a Reproach to have it said, they had a
good Opinion of it. Hear the Words of the pious and learned Dr. OWEN. Says he,
His Discourse concerning the HOLY SPIRIT, Page 186.
The Work of the HOLY SPIRIT, in Regeneration, does not consist in
enthusiastical Raptures, Ecstasies, Voices, or any Thing of the like Kind. It
may be, some such Things have been, by some deluded Persons, apprehended or
pretended to. But the countenancing of any such Imaginations is falsely and
injuriously charged on them, who maintain the powerful and effectual Work of
the HOLY SPIRIT in our Regeneration. And in the next Page, The HOLY SPIRIT, in
this Work, does ordinarily put forth his Power in and by the Use of Means. He
works also on Men suitably unto their Natures, even as the Faculties of their
Souls, their Minds, Wills and Affections, are meet to be affected and wro't
upon. He does not come upon them with involuntary Raptures, using their
Faculties and Powers, as the evil Spirit wrests the Bodies of them whom he
possesses: His whole Work therefore is rationally to be accounted for, by and
unto them who believe the Scripture, and have received the SPIRIT of Truth,
whom the World cannot receive. It follows a few Lines onwards, This great Work
therefore, neither in Part, nor whole, consists in Raptures, Ecstasies, Visions,
enthusiastic Inspirations, but in the Effect of the Power of the SPIRIT of GOD
on the Souls of Men, by and according to his Word, both of the Law and the
Gospel: And those who charge these Things on them who have asserted, declared
and reached it according to the Scriptures, do it probably to countenance
themselves in their Hatred of them, and of the Work itself. He still adds,
Where by Reason of Distemper of Mind, Disorders of Fancy, or long Continuance
of distressing Fears and Sorrows, in and under such preparatory Works of the
SPIRIT, which sometimes cut Men to their Hearts in the Sense of their Sin, and
sinful lost Condition, any do fall into Apprehensions or Imaginations of any
Things extraordinary in the Ways beforementioned, if it be not quickly and
strictly brought to Rule, and discarded thereby, it may be of great Danger to
their Souls, and is never of any solid Use of Advantage. Such Apprehensions for
the most Part are either Conceptions of distempered Minds, and discomposed
Fancies, or Delusions of Satan transforming himself into an Angel of Light,
which the Doctrine of Regeneration ought not to be accountable for. Very
observable also are the Words of our famous SHEPARD to the like Purpose. Says
he, Parable of the ten Virgins, P. 198.
, There may be in a false Heart, a strange Knowledge of CHRIST without
Scriptures, which may ravish a Man's deluded Heart strangely, which is usually
the first Temptation of the Virgin Churches, that are of much Knowledge and
little Love, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3, 4. Wherein Satan does not seek to pull away Men
to forsake the Gospel, but from the Simplicity of the Gospel. -- And hence we
have heard, that some have heard Voices; some have seen the very Blood of
CHRIST dropping on them, and his Wounds in his Side; some have seen a great
Light shining in the Chamber; some wonderfully affected with their Dreams; some
in great Distress have had inward Witness, thy Sins are forgiven, and hence
such LIBERTY and JOY that they are ready to LEAP UP AND DOWN THE CHAMBER. O^
adulterous Generation! Woe to them that have no other manifested CHRIST, but
such an one! But to go on,

Another Effect of true Joy is Humility. It abases a Man in his own Eyes. He is
herefrom led into a low Apprehension of himself, and his own Worthiness. He
admires the divine Grace displayed toward such a Worm, such a Wretch! With
holy PAUL, he is ready to say, By the Grace of GOD, I am what I am: And instead
of entertaining a high Conceit of himself in Compare with others, he is rather
disposed to prefer them in Love; esteeming himself less than the least of all
Saints.

Is this now the Influence of the Joy of these Times? I hope it is so in
Respect of some; but of how many may the Reverse be justly said? And of those
too, who have been in high Raptures. Who more vain and proud than many of the
Converts of the present Day? Who more puffed up with a fond Conceit of their
own superior Seize? Why else so forward and forth-puting? Why so ready to
think themselves fit to be Teachers, and to thrust themselves into the Places
and Offices of others? And who more apt to despise others, while they trust in
themselves that they are righteous? How else should that be so often the
Language of their Practice, if not of their Lips, Stand off, I am holier than
thou? These Things are too well known to be called in Question: They are indeed
common all over the Land.

That wonderful Man, Mr. BAXTER mentions one Thing as an Argument of the want
of due Humiliation, which I cannot help giving a Place here. When you begin,
says he, His Works, Vol. 2. 565.
to be leavened with Pride, and think highly of your selves, and have good
Conceits of your own Parts and Performances, and would be noted and taken for
some Body among the Godly, and cannot bear to be overlooked, or past by; when
you think meanly of other Men's Parts and Duties in Comparison of yours, and
think yourselves as wise as your Teachers, and begin to hear them as Judges
with a majesterial Spirit, and think you could do as well as this your selves;
when you are finding Fault with that which should nourish you, and in every
Sermon are most nothing the Defects, and think that this you could have mended;
when you itch to be Teachers yourselves, and think yourselves fitter to preach
than to learn, to rule than be ruled, to answer than to ask for Resolution;
when you think so well of your selves, that the Church is not good, or pure
enough for your Company, though CHRIST disowneth it not, and they force you not
to sin; when you grow censorious, and aggravate the Faults of others, and
extenuate their Graces, and can see a Mote in another's Eye, but will discern
none of their Graces, if they be not as high as Mountains, and none can pass
for Godly with you but those of the most eminent Magnitude; when you are
itching after Novelties in Religion, and setting your Wisdom against the
present or ancient Church, and affecting Singularity because you will be of no
common Way; when you cannot hear this Minister, nor that Minister, though the
Ministers of CHRIST, and you are harping upon that, Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, as if CHRIST has called you to come out of his Church, when
he calls you to come out of the Company of Infidels: All this cries aloud for
further Humiliation; you have a Tympany that must be pricked, to let out the
Wind that puffs you up. If you be not for Perdition, and to be forsaken, and
given over to yourselves, you must be fetched over again, and humbled with a
Witness. When God has turned you inside outward, and showed you that you are
poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked, and that you are empty Nothings, who
thought so well of yourselves, he will then make you stoop to those that you
despised, and think your selves unworthy the Communion of those that before you
thought unworthy of yours. He will make you think you are unworthy to hear
those Ministers, that you turned your Back upon: and he will take down your
Teaching, talking vain, and make you glad again to be Learners: In a Word, he
will make you by Conversion, as little Children, or you shall never enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. This I look upon to be so exact a Description of these
Times; yea, and of those Persons, who have made Pretenses to the greatest Light
and Joy, and in the most extraordinary Ways, that I cannot but think the
Consciences of all must fall in with it. Upon which let me add the Words of the
same Author that immediately follow, as a Warning admirably suited to the
Circumstances of this Day, This spiritual Pride is a most lamentable Disease,
and the Issue usually exceeding sad. For with many, it is the Forerunner of
damnable Apostasy, and GOD gives them over to their own Conceits, and the
Wisdom which they so esteem, 'till it has led them to Perdition. And those
that are cured, are many of them cured by the saddest Way of any Men in the
World. For its usual with GOD to let them alone, 'till they have run themselves
into some abominable Error, or fallen into some shameful scandalous Sins, 'till
they are made a Hissing and Byword among Men, that Shame and Confusion may
bring them to their Wits, and they may learn to know what it was that they were
proud of, and see that they were but silly Worms.

Another Effect of true Joy is a becoming Modesty and Caution in the Affairs of
Salvation. If it makes Persons bold in their GOD, they are also jealous over
themselves with a godly Jealousy: Their Boldness is tempered with a holy Fear
that keeps them upon their Guard, and restrains them from being over-positive
and confident. They rejoice in Hope, but with Trembling also; as being aware of
the Treachery of their own Hearts, as well as the subtle Devices of Satan.

And is this generally the Character of those who have been in Joy, in these
Days? Aro they not rather too certain of their good Estate, too peremptory in
their Assurance? Have they not allowed themselves, some of them at lest, in
speaking too unguardedly upon this Head, being as confident of their Title to
Heaven, as though they were actually in Possession of it? I believe, it will not
be pretended, but that many have been wrought up, even to an Extravagance in
the Opinion they have had of their Interest in CHRIST, and the Purchases of his
Blood. And is this the Temper of those in whom the Peace of GOD reigns? It
looks more like the Spirit of those who have been remarkable for the Warmth of
their Imaginations.

In fine, It Is ever the Influence of true Joy to make Men better Christians,
more like to GOD and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, more eminent for their Faith and
Holiness; and in a Word, the real Substance and Power of Religion: Which does
not consist only or mainly (to use the Words of Mr. BOLTON His general
Direction for a comfortable Walking with GOD, P. 57, 58.
) in outward Shows, Profession, Talking; in holding strict Points, defending
precise Opinions, contesting against the Corruption of the Times; in the Work
wrought, external Forms of religious Exercises, set Tasks of Hearing, Reading,
Conference, and the like; in some solemn outward extraordinary Abstinences,
Forbearances, censuring others, etc. But in Righteousness and Peace, as well as
Joy in the HOLY GHOST; in Meekness, Tender-heartedness, Love; in Patience,
Humility, Contentedness; in Mortification of Sin, Moderation of Passion, holy
Guidance of the Tongue; in Works of Mercy, Justice, and Truth; in Fidelity,
Painfulness in ones Callings, conscionable conversing with Men; in Reverence to
Superiors, Love of our Enemies, an open-hearted, real, fruitful
Affectionateness, and Bounty to GOD's People; in Heavenly-Mindedness,
Self-Denial, the Life of Faith; in Disesteem of earthly Things, Contempt of the
World, resolute Hatred of Sin; in approving our Hearts in GOD's Presence, a
sweet Communion with him, comfortable Longing for the Coming of the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, etc.

And is this the Effects of the Joy that has been so common in these Days? I
cannot suppose, any will venture to say, it has generally been so. The contrary
hereto is evident to all who have Eyes to see; and if they don't see, it is
because they shut their Eyes against the Light. This, in Part, has been made to
appear already: And 'twill be more undeniable, the further we go on in this
Discourse.

I shall only add, upon the whole, two Passages, which are well calculated for
the Instruction and Warning of those, who pretend to high Joy in these Times.
The one is from the great Mr. HOW. Says he, His Book, the Blessedness of the
righteous. P. 444.
speaking of the Joy of the true Christian, It is a modest humble Exaltation, a
serious severe Joy; suitable to his solid, stable Hope. His Spirit is not
puffed up, and swollen with Air; it is not big by an Inflation, or a light and
windy Tumor; but it is really filled with effectual Pre-Apprehensions of a
weighty Glory. His Joy exceedingly exerts it self with a steady lively Vigor,
equally removed from vain Lightness and Stupidity, from Conceitedness, and
Insensibleness of his blessed State. He forgets not that he is less than the
least of GOD's Mercies, but disowns not his Title to the greatest of them. He
abases himself to the Dust, in the Sense of his own Vileness; but in the
Admiration of divine Grace, he rises as high as Heaven. In his Humiliation, he
affects to equal himself with Worms, in his Joy and Praise with Angels. He is
never unwilling to diminish himself, but afraid of detracting any Thing from
the Love of GOD, or the Issues of that Love.

The other is from the celebrated Mr. BAXTER. GOD, says he His Works, Vol. 3.
P. 246.
, must give us Joy itself, as well as afford us Matter for Joy: But yet withal
it must be remembered, that GOD does work upon us as Men, and in a rational Way
does raise our Comforts. He enableth and exciteth us to mind and study these
heavenly delightful Objects, and from thence to gather our own Comforts, as the
Be does gather her Honey from the Flowers. Therefore he that is most skilful
and painful in this gathering Art, is usually the fullest of this spiritual
Sweetness. Where is the Man that can tell me from Experience, that he has
solid and usual Joy in any other Way but this, and that GOD works it
immediately on his Affections without the Means of his Understanding and
Considering? It is by Believing, that we are filled with Joy and Peace, (Romans
15. 13.) and no longer than we continue our believing. It is in Hope that the
Saints rejoice; yea, in Hope of the Glory of GOD, (Romans 5. 2.) and no longer
than they continue hoping. And here, let me warn you of a dangerous Snare, an
Opinion which will rob you of all your Comfort. Some think, if they should thus
fetch in their Comfort by believing and hoping, and work it out of Scripture
Promises, and extract it by their own thinking and studying, that then it would
be a Comfort only of their own hammering out, (as they say) and not the genuine
Joy of the HOLY GHOST. A desperate Mistake, raised upon a Ground that would
overthrow almost all Duty, as well as this, which is their setting the Workings
of GOD's SPIRIT, and their own Spirits, in Opposition, when their Spirits must
stand in Subordination to GOD's. They are conjunct Causes, cooperating to the
Producing of one and the same Effect. GOD's SPIRIT works our Comforts by
setting our own Spirits a work upon the Promises, and raising our Thoughts to
the Place of our Comforts. -- GOD uses not to call in our Joys while we are
idle, or taken up with other Things. It is true, he sometimes does it suddenly,
but yet usually in the foresaid Order; leading it into our Hearts by our
Judgment and Thoughts. -- GOD seedeth not his Saints as the Birds do their
Young, bringing it to them, and putting it into their Mouths, while they be
still in the Nest, and only gape to receive it. But as he gives to Man the
Fruits of the Earth, the Increase of the Land in Corn and Wine, while we plow,
and sow, and weed, and water, and dung, and dress, and then with Patience
expect his Blessing: So does he give the Joys of the Soul. Yet I deny not, that
if any should so think to work out his own Comforts by Meditation, as to
attempt the Work in his own Strength, and not do all in Subordination to GOD,
nor perceive a Necessity of the SPIRIT's Assistance, the Work would prove to be
like the Workman, and the Comfort he would gather would be like both; even mere
Vanity: Even as the Husbandman's Labor, without the Sun, and Rain, and
Blessing of GOD.

The next Thing that is amiss, and very much so, in these Times, is that Spirit
of rash, censorious and uncharitable Judging, which has been so prevalent in
the Land. This appeared, first of all, in Mr. -- W D, who seldom preached, but
he has something or other, in his Sermon, against unconverted Ministers: And
what he delivered; especially, at some certain Times, had an evident Tendency
to fill the Minds of People with evil Surmisings against the Ministers, as though
they were, for the most Part, carnal, unregenerate Wretches. He often spoke of
them, in the Lump, as Pharisees, Enemies of CHRIST JESUS, and the worst Enemies
he had: And in Truth, the Spirit of his Preaching, upon this Head, was
unhappily calculated to leaven the Minds of People with Prejudices against the
standing Ministers; alienating their Hearts from them, and by this Means, in
the most effectual Manner, obstructing their Usefulness. And as though he had
not done enough, in Preaching, to beget in People an ill Opinion of the
Ministers, he expresses his Fear, in his Journal P. 95.
of NEW ENGLAND, left many, nay, the most that preach do not experimentally
know CHRIST. This Reflection he immediately levels against the Ministers, in
this Land: And its the more rash and uncharitable, as he past through the
Country in Post-Haste, having neither Opportunity nor Advantage, to know the
real Character of one tenth Part of the Ministers, he thus freely condemns. I
don't think this Gentleman had it in his Intention, by his thus preaching and
writing, to do an Injury to the Interest of Religion in these Churches; but if
this had really been his Design, what more effectual Method could he have
taken, than to represent the Body of the Clergy as out of CHRIST. i. e. carnal
and unconverted? And if so, as unfit, according to his other Doctrine, to be
the Instruments of converting spiritually dead Souls, as a naturally dead Man
is to beget living Children. What is the Tendency of such a Conduct at this,
but to set People against their Ministers as not fit to preach to them, and in
this Way, to sow among them the Seeds of Contention and Separation?

I freely confess, had the Ministers of NEW ENGLAND lost their Character as Men
of Religion, by a Deportment of themselves contradictory to the Gospel, I
should have found no Fault with any Representations of them as bad Men; nay,
dangerous Enemies to the Kingdom of CHRIST: For I am clearly of the Mind, that
a visibly wicked Minister is the greatest Scandal to Religion, and Plague to
the Church of GOD: Nor is it a Hurt, but a real Service to the Cause of CHRIST,
to expose the Characters of such, and lessen their Power to do Mischief. But
the Case is evidently different, where the Profession of Ministers, and their
Character, so far as appears, agree with one another: It Is now an Abuse of
them, and an Injury to the Church of GOD, to insinuate Suspicions against them;
much more, plainly to speak Evil of them. And may it not be said of the Body of
the Ministers, in NEW ENGLAND, that they are a Set of Men, as sound in the
Faith, and of as good a Life, as any Part of the Christian World are favored
with? Hear the Opinion of that eminent Man of GOD, Dr. COTTON MATHER upon this
Head. Says he, See his Book entitled, Quakerism displayed, P. 92. 93, 96.
in Answer to a Slander of GEORGE KEITH'S, upon the Ministers of NEW ENGLAND,
There is not that Spot of Ground upon the Face of GOD's Earth, which can
proportionably match NEW ENGLAND for Ministers, that not only have, and use all
true Piety, but are also most exemplary for it. No Man becomes a Minister in
our Churches, 'till he first be a Communicant; and no Man becomes a
Communicant, until he has been severely examined about his Regeneration, as
well as his Conversation. If any Minister do misbehave himself, he soon hears
of it, and becomes either a Penitent, or a deposed Man. Let this wicked SHIMEI
find so much as one ungodly Man, allowed as a Minister, in any one of our
Churches! -- Neighbors, you are blessed with Ministers that excel in Piety; and
you are very unjust, if you do not support and honor them. -- You have Reason
to be thankful for such holy, humble, able, painful and prayerful Ministers, as
GOD has generally blessed these Churches with: And I exhort you, as you would
approve your selves worthy to wear the Name that was begun at ANTIOCH, that you
do not forget that Command of our LORD, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the
Rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your Souls.

There are yet other Instances of uncharitable Judging in this Gentleman. The
same Spirit appears in his Journals, which are gone forth into all Parts of the
Land; but especially, in his Letters, representing Arch Bp. TILLOTSON, as
having no more true Christianity than MAHOMET. It would be going too much out
of my Way, or I could easily show, wherein he has greatly abused the A.Bp; more
especially, in some Things he has given the World from Dr. EDWARDS, without
carefully reading (as I charitably hope) the Passages quoted, as they lie in
the A. Bp's Writings. But supposing the A.Bp. did not in all Things think
exactly with Mr. WHITEFIELD, must he at once be as bad as a TURK? As ignorant
of the Fundamentals of Religion? As much without GOD and CHRIST, and beyond
Hope? Will Mr. WHITEFIELD so far assume to himself the Prerogative of the SON
of GOD, as to determine, that the Things contained in the A.Bp's Writings are
absolutely inconsistent with an upright Heart, a sincere Desire to know and do
the Will of GOD? And that it is impossible, the all-merciful GOD, should,
according to the Tenor of the Gospel, admit him to Favor? It appears to me
shocking Boldness, in any mere Man, thus to place himself, as it were, in the
Throne of CHRIST, and denounce the Anathemas of GOD against his
Fellow Christians: Nor can I conceive how this should be, where there is, in
Exercise, a just Sense of a Man's own utter Insufficiency to fit in Judgment
upon the State of others.

The only Thing I can say in Excuse for Mr. WHITEFIELD is, that he was young in
Years, and Christian Experience, as well as of raw Acquaintance with Divinity,
when he wrote these Letters: And as it has been common for Persons, in these
Circumstances, to speak and write with Rashness and Indiscretion, and so as to
do Mischief to the Interest they would serve; so when they have come to riper
Years and Judgment, and a better Knowledge of the Difficulties in many Points
of Divinity, they have often seen their Error, and repented of their Conduct:
And to this, I believe; this Gentleman will be brought, as he has been in some
other Instances, if he ever thinks upon the Matter as he ought.

Let me add here, as a further Representation of that monstrous Spirit of
censorious Judging that has been let loose upon the World, a few of the Words
of Mr. SEWARD; which I the rather choose to insert, because they are the Words
of one of the dearest and most intimate Friends Mr. WHITEFIELD had, and relate
to the Case of the A.Bp. Says he in his Journal See the Boston-Evening-Post,
Numb. 280. where these Passages are extracted from Mr. SEWARD's Journal.
, I wrote several Letters. -- I told him, some few of the Clergy admitted our
Brother into their Pulpits, but that most of them were violent Opposers,
especially since our Brother has so openly condemned A.Bp. TILLOTSON; that,
blessed be GOD, that DECEIVER was at last discovered, and our Age must have
been grossly wicked, or his Works could never have passed thus long for current
Gospel; but that I trusted in the LORD JESUS, he was about to deliver his
Church from such BLIND GUIDES.

A little onwards, concerning A.Bp. TILLOTSON I observed, that our Brother had
wrote a second Letter against him, which I believed would surprise most People
to see such base Coin should pass for Current for so many Years; but that,
blessed be GOD, the TRAITOR was discovered. JUDAS sold his LORD for thirty
Pieces of Silver, the A.Bp got a better Price, perhaps, THIRTY BAGS OF GOLD, or
more: That Is all the Difference; for the A.Bp was actually bred in the Schools
of the Prophets, was joined with many (as I believe) faithful Ministers in the
Morning Lecture at Cripplegate; -- But the Love of Money is the Root of all
Evil, and he CHOSE HIS GOOD THINGS HERE, a TEMPORAL rather than an ETERNAL
CROWN. And yet again, Enclosed I sent him our Brother's Letters against that
PLAUSIBLE DECEIVER A. Bp. TILLOTSON, whose Books have so long bewitched the
World. -- Blessed be GOD, the IMPOSTOR is discovered; nevertheless our Brother
expects for this to suffer many Things, and be set at Naught by the Rabbis of
our Church, and perhaps at last be killed by them.

I can scarce conceive wherein rash judging can be carried to a greater Height
than in these Passages. The Gentleman is not content with condemning the
Doctrines the A.Bp. preached, but must judge his State, condemn his Person;
which is the more surprising, because he was now dead, and actually gone to be
judged by him, who has said, Why do thou judge thy Brother? Or why do thou
set at Naught thy Brother? For we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of
CHRIST.

I believe it will not be denied, by the more sober Men among us, but that
those venerable Divines, the late Dr. INCREASE MATHER, and the present Dr.
BENJAMIN COLMAN, might know as much of the Nature of real Christianity, and be
as able to make a true Judgment of the Preachers of it, as either Mr.
WHITEFIELD, or SEWARD: I shall therefore subjoin here the Sentiments of these
Gentlemen concerning A.Bp TILLOTSON; which may serve, so far as human Judgment
is of Weight in the Case, to wipe off the Reproach that has been injuriously
cast upon him.

The first of these Gentlemen Expresses himself in these Words See his Preface
to his Son's Book, Johannes in Eremo.
, That EMINENT Person, Dr. TILLOTSON (the late A.Bp of CANTERBURY) did, not
above four Years ago, sometimes express to me his Resentments of the Injury,
which had been done to the first Planters of NEW ENGLAND, and his great Dislike
of A.Bp LAUD's Spirit toward them: And to MY KNOWLEDGE there are Bishops at
this Day (Anno 1695) of the same CHRISTIAN TEMPER and Moderation with THAT
GREAT AND GOOD MAN LATELY DEAD. -- Had the Sees in ENGLAND, fourscore Years
ago, been filled with SUCH A.Bps and Bishops as those which KING WILLIAM has
preferred to Episcopal Dignity, there had never been a NEW ENGLAND.

The other speaks in that Language, Vid. Preface to Mr. COOPER'S Ordination
Sermon.
We have seen the most venerable Men in the Church of ENGLAND for Learning,
Piety, Labors, Usefulness, Prudence, Meekness and Humility, insulted and
outrag'd while they lived, pelted to their Graves, and their Names persecuted
after their Decease, for their Spirit of Moderation, and faithful Services to
the Church. So were A.Bp. TILLOTSON and Bp. BURNET, Men of whom the Age was not
worthy; of CONSPICUOUS SANCTITY, abundant in Labors, Steady in their Conduct,
of UNSPOTTED INTEGRITY, of an APOSTOLICAL SPIRIT, and ready, I believe, to have
died either for their Country, or for CHRIST: Yet these GREAT AND GOOD MEN have
been loaded with Obloquy: but their Names must needs live in the History of the
Church, if TRUTH do not perish from the Earth. To go on,

Sometime after Mr. WHITEFIELD's Departure from us, we had the Discovery of the
like uncharitable Spirit in Mr. GILBERT TENNENT. His Preaching in this Town was
censorious beyond what can be easily imagined. Says the Author of the Letter,
in the BOSTON- Evening-Post, Numb. 365, I have several Times heard Mr. TENNENT
declare, that the greatest Part, by far, of the Ministers in this Land, were
carnal unconverted Men, and that they held damnable Arminian Principles; and
have heard him pray, that the LORD would either convert them, of turn them out
of his Vineyard. I have my self been several Times present, when he expressed
himself much to the same Purpose: Nay, I have often heard him publicly
declare, that those who were the Opposers of the Work he was carrying on, were
the Enemies of GOD, and would have opposed the Apostles; nay, CHRIST JESUS
himself, and stood it our against all the Miracles they wro't, had they lived
when they were on Earth: Yea, I have sometimes heard him openly say; and this,
without any cautionary Limitations, that they were Blasphemers of the HOLY
GHOST, and in Danger of committing, if they had not already committed, that
Sin, concerning which our SAVIOR has said, it shall never be forgiven to Men,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come. But the Spirit in which this
Gentleman preached, particularly when he got upon Ministers, cannot be better
conceived of than by reading his printed Sermon, entitled, The Danger of an
unconverted Ministry; than which I never saw a Piece more filled with
Censoriousness, or unhappily fitted to promote Discord and Schism. It Is, in the
general, a continued Strain of bitter Reflections on the Standing Ministry of
the Land. This is plainly insinuated in the Text placed on the Title Page; viz.
Jer. 5. 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible Thing is committed in the Land; the
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their Means, and my
People love to have it so: And what will they do in the End thereof? But the
Thing it self is directly expressed in the strongest Language, in the Improvement
of the Subject; the first Head whereof is, If it be so, that the Case of those,
who have no other, or no better than Pharisee-Teachers, is to be pitied, then
what a Scrole and Scene of Mourning and Lamentation, and Woe, is opened! because
of the Swarms of Locusts, The Crowds of Pharisees, that have, as coveteously,
as cruelly, crept into the Ministry, in this adulterous Generation! Who as
nearly resemble the Character given of the old Pharisees, in the doctrinal Part
of this Discourse, as one Crow's Egg does another. It is true, some of the
modern Pharisees have learned to prate a little more orthodoxly about the
New Birth, than their Predecessor Nicodemus, who are, in the mean Time, as
great Strangers to the feeling Experience of it as he. They are blind who see
not this to be the Case of the Body of the Clergy of this Generation. And O!
that our Heads were Waters, and our Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that we could Day
and Night lament, with the utmost Bitterness, the dolefnl Case of the poor
Church of GOD upon this Account. -- But this Gentleman, I would hope, is now
become more charitable. His Letters, in the public Prints, certainly avow such
Principles as are a virtual Retractation of a great Part of this Sermon; though
I could wish he had mentioned the Sermon by Name, and owned his over-Zeal when
he wrote it. This he has done to a private Friend in this Town; and if he had
done it to the World, I am sure, he would hereby have honored himself, and
might have given Check to those uncomfortable Hearts and Animosities, Which
this Sermon has had some Influence in fomenting, in one Place and another.

After Mr. TENNENT, there arose a considerable Number of other Itinerants, who
went forth in the Spirit of Bitterness, sowing the Seeds of Discord and
Uncharitableness all over the Land. The Writer of the Letter in the BOSTON-
Evening-Post, Numb. 365, observes of them, that the Engine which they artfully
manage is that of Detraction: Accordingly, in every Place where they come, in
the Course of their Perigrination, their grand Business is to persuade the
People, that their Ministers are unconverted, to alienate their Affections from
them, and thereby utterly to destroy their Usefulness among their Hearers. From
which Practice it is very just to infer, that there is a Design carrying on to
subvert and eject the standing settled Ministers. He goes on in the next
Paragraph, The Ministers of this Land, I have often said, and continue still of
the same Opinion, are a Set of Gentlemen, as sound in Principle, and exemplary
in their Conversation, as any of the like Number, in the Christian World: And I
confess, it has sometimes raised in me the highest Indignation, to hear them
reviled in so public and outrageous a Manner, even in the Presence of some of
the most grave and eminent Divines among us. He still adds, It has been no
small Surprise to me, when I have sometimes seen in these Assemblies, a Number
of grave and serious Men, Members of our Churches, who could hear these unjust
and hard Speeches belched out against their own proper Pastors, not only with
Patience, but with Pleasure. At the same Time, if you were to ask these Men,
they would tell you that they highly esteem and value their own Ministers: But
can this be possibly true? Will any one believe them, while they not only
caress, and adore the Itinerants, but continually pamper their Bodies, clothe
their Backs, and fill their Pockets.

I have my self been Part of a crowded Assembly, when one of these Itinerants
has mentioned the present Bp of LONDON by Name, and uttered it with a Voice
like Thunder, "That if the People of his Diocese should come up to all that he
prescribes in his pastoral Letters to them, and be the very Persons he would
have them, they would notwithstanding as certainly be damned as the Bible he
then had in his Hand was the Word of the eternal GOD." At the same Time, I
heard him pray for the Ministers of BOSTON, some of whom he as freely intimated
in his Prayer to be in an unconverted State, as if he had been their authorized
Judge. And in a Letter to me, giving an Account of the Conduct of this same
Gentleman, the worthy Writer mentions some Things, he was an Ear-Witness to,
which expressed the grossest Uncharitableness, not only toward the Colleges in
general, but the Governors of them in particular: And, at the same Time, he
heard him publicly say of A.Bp TILLOTSON, That when he wrote his printed
Sermons, GOD knew he had not a Spark of saving Grace: And if he was not
converted afterward, he was now weltering under the scalding Drops of GOD's
Wrath in Hell, there to remain a Monument of his Vengeance throughout Eternity.

But the most remarkable Instance, in this Kind, is the Rev. Mr. JAMES
DAVENPORT of SOUTHOLD. He traveled, says the Letter to the BOSTON- Post-Boy,
Number 391, from STONINGTON to NEW HAVEN, about 80 Miles, and condemned almost
all the Ministers; particularly, that shining Example of Piety, and Pillar of
our Churches, the aged and venerable Mr. ADAMS, and commanded his People to
withdraw from him: And accordingly a Number of the Communicants withdrew from
him, as being a carnal, old Pharisee. This was objected to him by the Ministers
in BOSTON, when he came to this Town, some Months ago, as sent by GOD, to
preach here. He owned the Fact; as also, that he had bad but a few Minutes
Conversation with Mr. ADAMS before he publicly expressed his Fears of his being
an unconverted Man; and that the Ground of his Judgment of him as unconverted
was, his not finding that he had bad Experience of a Hatred of GOD, and of
extraordinary Comforts and Joys. When that had been observed to him, by one of
the Ministers, which tended much to the Honor of Mr. ADAMS; another took
Occasion to ask him, whether he had felt no Uneasiness in his Mind, when he
reflected on the unhappy Effects of his condemning Mr. ADAMS, and advising the
People to separate from him, in the Contention and Division it had brought
forward in NEW LONDON: His Reply was, That he had often thought of the Matter
with Thankfulness of GOD, who had made him faithful, and gave Glory to GOD for
this his notorious Uncharitableness, in the Face of all the Ministers.

I have now by me Accounts of the strange Spirit of rash and uncharitable
Judging, this Gentleman has discovered in many Places where he has been. Some
of them I shall think fit to insert here.

The first is dated, SAY-BROOK, August 25. 1741. And is in the following Words,

On this Day, the Rev. Mr. JAMES DAVENPORT of SOUTHOLD, came to the Chamber of
WILLIAM HEART of SAYBROOK, Pastor of the first Church there, and asked him,
whether he was willing that he, the said DAVENPORT, should preach in his Pulpit
that Day: Upon which said HEART told him, that there were some Things in his
Conduct, which he desired to inquire and receive Satisfaction about, first of
all; to which said DAVENPORT consenting, it was inquired of him, among other
Things, whether he had not openly charged sundry of his Fathers and Brethern in
the Ministry, as being unconverted and blind Guides? To which he answered, that
he had; and did freely do it, when he judged so of any. It was then further
inquired of him, upon what Grounds he did so, and what Evidence he gave the
Public of the Truth of his Censures? To which he answered, that he did this
with a View to the Purification of the Church, to the Discovery of those that
are unconverted, that they may be avoided, etc. It was further inquired of him,
whether he did freely and openly declare to People, whose Ministers he did
judge to be unconverted, that they ought not to attend upon their Ministry, but
advised them to go to other Churches, where Ministers were converted, to attend
Worship; or if they could not, then to set up private separate Meetings, to
carry on the Worship of GOD among themselves? To which he answered, that he did
freely do so, and would have Men go ten or twenty Miles to hear a converted
Minister, or even set up private Meetings among themselves, rather than attend
Worship under their own Ministers, being unconverted; and that Parish-Bounds
are nothing; and that himself would go ten Miles on Foot to hear a private
Brother, rather than an unconverted Minister. Upon this, being told the Liberty
of the Pulpit could not be granted him, unless he would first retract these
Things, declare his Repentance of them, engaging to conduct regularly for the
Time to come; he replied, that he could not do this without pleasing Men rather
than GOD: And then, rising to depart, he addressed himself to his Attendants,
saying, Come, let us go forth without the Camp, after the LORD Jesus, bearing
his Reproach; and smiling said, O this is pleasant to suffer Reproach for the
BLESSED JESUS! SWEET JESUS! To the Truth of all which, we whose Names are
underwritten, do testify; having been Eye and EarWitnesses to the above
Conference.

SAMUEL LYNDE, WM. WORTHINGTON, ABRAHAM NOT, GEORGE BECKWITH, WILLIAM HEART, and
others.


Another Account from the same Place, bearing Date August 26. 1741. runs thus,

This Day, about half an Hour after eleven, the Reverend Messieurs WILLIAM
WORTHINGTON, ABRAHAM NOT, GEORGE BECKWITH, and WILLIAM HEART, went to the Rev.
Mr. DAVENPORT'S Lodgings in Town, with Design to discourse further with him,
upon those Things in his public Conduct, which had been objected to him the Day
before at Mr. HART'S Chamber: Upon their coming in, Mr. DAVENPORT, who was
above Stairs, sent Word he would come down, which he presently did; and after
sitting a few Moments prevented them by beginning a Discourse, which he
directed to them, but without mentioning either of their Names: In this
Discourse he spoke of them, and to them, as unconverted Ministers, and very
freely represented them as Wolves in Sheep's Clothing, blind Guides, Enemies
to GOD and his Cause in the World, and Persecutors of CHRIST in the Person of
himself his Servant; and compared them to GOLIATH, who profanely defied the
Armies of the living GOD; said, he wished their Conversion, should rejoice in
it, and wished to GOD he would strike them through immediately, and convert
them, and a great Deal more of the like Kind. During this Discourse, one of the
abovementioned Ministers attempted twice to speak, in order to turn the
Discourse to what they came for, but Mr. DAVENPORT would not be interrupted,
but went on without regarding them, and addressed himself to his Brethren
present; exhorting them to pray for the unconverted Ministers then present, and
suddenly took his Chair, and prayed over them a Prayer of some Length,
agreeable to his preceding censorious and vilifying Discourse, both as to
Matter, and Manner, and Spirit. Sometimes he prayed for them, and sometimes
against them. When this was over, Mr. HEART told him, that he and the other
Ministers were come down to wait upon him, with a View to discourse freely with
him upon those Things in his Conduct, which had been objected to him the
preceding Day; and desired to enter into Conference with him about them, that
he might justify them if he could; but he declined it, saying, there was no
Time for it before Meeting. He being then asked, whether he would give them
Opportunity for a free Conference, at some other Time, before his Departure
from the Town, he answered that he would consider of it, and that, if it
appeared most for the Glory of GOD he would; but if it should appear more for
GOD's Glory for him to spend the Time that might be employed in discoursing on
these Matters, in praying for him the said HEART, that he might be converted,
then he would spend it so. After some other Things had past not worth
mentioning, he left the Room, and returned to his Chamber without taking Leave.
To the Truth of the above Narrative, we, whose Names are subscribed, do
testify, having been Eye and Ear-Witnesses to what past at that Time.

WM. WORTHINGTON, WM. HEART SAMUEL CLARK.


The Account from another Part of the Country, as I have it in a Letter to me,
is thus, Of all (i. e. the Itinerants) that have been here, Mr. DAVENPORT has
been the most irregular and disorderly in his Conduct. When he came first to
Town, he called at my Lodgings, and let me know that some of the People had
desired him to preach that Evening, and asked my Consent to his Preaching in
the MeetingHouse: I replied, that before I resolved him, I must desire of him
Satisfaction in two Points; viz. by what divine Warrant he left his own People,
and traveled through the Country, acting the Super-Intendant over the
Churches? And how he justified his censoriously judging Men, and especially
Ministers, as he had done? To which Queries, he gave me no satisfactory
Answers; and thereupon was denied the Liberty of the House. He then proceeded
to inquire into my spiritual State; but an Account thereof was refused him,
until he showed his right to demand it: And thereupon he expressed his Fears
that I was a Stranger to CHRIST; and said, that my refusing to give him an
Account was a dark Sign thereof. After this, he soon departed the House: And
having mounted his Horse, with his Company at the Door, they set a Tune, and
rode singing through the Town, all the Way to his Lodgings, which was near a
Mile. He preached at the Place where he lodged that Evening, and the next
Forenoon; and the following Evening, in his public Exercises, he declared the
Minister of the Place unconverted, and prayed for him, sundry Times, that he
might be either converted or confounded. He warned the People to withdraw from
my Ministry; declaring, that to attend it would be as dangerous to their Souls,
as Bowls of Poison to their Bodies.

The like Spirit he discovered at NEW HAVEN. Says the Letter in the BOSTON-
Post-Poy, Numb. 391.
Mr. DAVENPORT, in almost every Prayer, vents himself against the Minister of
the Place, and often declares him to be an unconverted Man; says, that
Thousands are now cursing him in Hell for being the Instrument of their
Damnation. He charges all to pray for his Destruction and Confusion: He
frequently calls him, a Hypocrite, a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing, and a Devil
incarnate: And uses such vile and opprobrious Language, as that, had it been
done by any other Man, he would have been immediately sent to the Workhouse. I
think that few or none of his greatest Admirers undertake peremptorily to
justify these Things; but they have conceived such an extraordinary Opinion of
his Holiness and Success, as that they seem to suppose that he has some
extraordinary Assistance, or Commission to do that which may not be done by any
other Man.

Agreeable hereto is the Account in the same Paper. Numb. 392.

NEW HAVEN, Sept. 21. 1741.
Sundry of the Brethren of the Church in NEW HAVEN, being offended at Mr.
DAVENPORT'S publicly condemning their Pastor, the Rev. Mr. NOYES, as an
unconverted Man; calling him a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing, with many other the
like opprobrious Expressions, being met together at the House of the Rev. Mr.
NOYES, desired Mr. DAVENPORT to give the Reasons, why he has thus reproached
and scandalis'd their Pastor: Which he did as follows, viz,

1. That a Woman told him, that she came to Mr. NOYES'S under Conviction, and
said that she was the greatest Sinner in the World; and that Mr. NOYES
endeavored to abate her Convictions: To which Mr. NOYES replied,

That he did not remember the Instance; but supposed it might be thus, viz.
That he might tell her, that she was a very great Sinner, and that she ought to
be sensible of it, and more sensible of her own Sins than of any other Person's
in the World; but that he did not suppose she was really the greatest Sinner in
the World. Upon this, Mr. DAVENPORT declared, that Mr. NOYES'S saying so, was
an Evidence to him that he was an unconverted Man; and afterward, in explaining
himself upon the Word Evidence said, that it gave him Reason to believe it was
so.

2. Another Reason was, because Mr. NOYES assumed an Honor to himself, in the
Ministry, which did not belong to him, because a Woman told him that, some
Years ago, she came to Mr. NOYES, and brought a Relation wherein she mentioned
the Names of several Ministers, whom she supposed had been instrumenof her
Conversion, and Mr. NOYES asked her if he had not also done something toward
her Conversion, and asked her why his Name was not mentioned: Mr. DAVENPORT
also added, that several other Persons had told him, that Mr. NOYES disliked
their Relations because there were so many Names in them besides his. To which
Mr. NOYES replied,

That he did not remember any such Thing, and was confident that it was a
Misrepresentation.

3. Another Reason was, that Mr. NOYES was not a Friend to this Work going on
among them; and that he did not countenance Itinerant Preachers; and that
several Persons had told him that they came to Meeting with their Affections
raised, and that Mr. NOYES'S Preaching deadned and discouraged them, and tended
to stifle their Convictions. To which Mr. NOYES replied,

That his Preaching and Conduct in these Things were publicly known, and that
every one was capable of Judging without his saying any Thing upon them.

4. That Mr. NOYES, in private Conversation with Mr. DAVENPORT, had said to
this Effect, that he had been deeply sensible of the Vileness and Corruption of
his own Nature; and that every one that turned his Thoughts inward might easily
have such a Sense: and that Mr. NOYES, seemed to suppose that it was an easy
Thing; that Mr. DAVENPORT thence concluded, that he had never experienced it
himself. To which Mr. NOYES replied,

That he, at that Time, utterly refused to give Mr. DAVENPORT any Account of
his Experiences; but that they had some Discourse upon some doctrinal Points,
but he could not think that Mr. DAVENPORT could reasonably understand him, to
mean or intend, that every natural Man had a Sense of the Vileness and
Corruption of his Nature, or that it was an easy Thing to have it. Several
Things were said upon this Head which could not easily be minuted down; but on
the whole, there seemed to be a Misunderstanding between them.

Upon the whole Mr. DAVENPORT declared, that these Reasons were sufficient to
justify him in censuring and condemning Mr. NOYES as he had done: Then, he said
he would make a Sort of Acknowledgment; and, without any Notice given, while
diverse in the Room were talking loud, and others smoking, and some with their
Hats on, he began a Prayer; but there being so much Noise in the Room, he was
hardly heard at first: Many kept on talking, others cried out stop him; the
Revd. Mr. NOYES spoke once or twice, and said, Mr. DAVENPORT, I forbid your
praying in my House without my Leave; but he persisted, and went on in the
midst of the greatest Noise, Confusion and Consternation, and declared Mr.
NOYES an unconverted Man, and his People to be as Sheep without a Shepherd, and
prayed, that what he had now said might be a Means of his and their Conversion:
Or else, according to thy Will let them be confounded; and after that Manner
went on near a Quarter of an Hour. And when he had done, Mr. NOYES -- forbid
him ever going into his Pulpit any more; and some declared to Mr. DAVENPORT,
that his praying in that Manner was a taking the Name of GOD in vain: And so
the Assembly broke up in great Consternation.

This is the Truth according to the best of our Remembrance; and the Substance
of the Conference was minuted down at the Time of it, and publicly read to Mr.
DAVENPORT, and the rest immediately after.

Subscribers.
THOMAS CLAP. Rector of YALE-COLLEGE. JOHN PUNDERSON JOHN MUNSON THEOPH. MUNSON
ANDREW TUTTLE SAMUEL MIX


The same uncharitable censorious Spirit, this Gentleman brought with him to
BOSTON. I cannot give a better Idea of it then by inserting, at large, the
Account in the BOSTON- Evening-Post, Number 370. It runs thus. The late
Prosecution of Mr. JAMES DAVENPORT, being somewhat extraordinary (as was also
his Offense which procured the same) has doubtless occasioned various
Speculations, not only in this Town, but through the whole Country. And inasmuch
as many hard and unjust Censures have been plentifully bestowed on the Grand
Jury, and Witnesses concerned in that Prosecution, by weak, ignorant and
enthusiastical Persons; it may not be improper to publish the Presentment,
exhibited by the Grand Jury to the Court against Mr. DAVENPORT, with the
several Facts that were particularly sworn to, by the Witnesses before the
grand Jury; that so every rational, sober and unprejudiced Person may see
clearly, on what Grounds the Jurors (who were 23 in Number, and only 6 of
BOSTON) proceeded in this Affair: Wherein 21 of them were fully agreed; and of
the two that dissented, one was an ignorant Exhorter, and the other professed
himself of the People called Quakers, and therefore could not in Conscience
vote in such an Affair, but said the other Jurors were entirely right in what
they did.

It ought also to be observed, that it was solemnly given in Charge to the
Grand Jury, to enquire strictly into Disorders of an ecclesiastical Nature, and
that upon giving in this Presentment they received the Thanks of the Court for
that particular Service.

There is one Thing more to be taken Notice of in this Introduction, and that
is, a groundless and malicious Calumny, industriously spread abroad by Mr.
DAVENPORT'S Adherents, -- that the Grand Jurors of BOSTON were chose on Purpose
to bring on this Prosecution; than which nothing is, or can be more untrue; for
at the Time of the Choice, Mr. DAVENPORT was preaching at IPSWICH, and it was
given out by his Followers, that he would not return any more to BOSTON.

The PRESENTMENT
SUFFOLK ss. etc.
omitting the Form -- The Jurors of our Sovereign Lord the KING -- upon Oath
present -- That one JAMES DAVENPORT of SOUTHOLD, in the County of SUFFOLK on
LONGISLAND, in the Government of NEW YORK, Clerk, now Resident in BOSTON, under
the Pretense of praying, preaching and exhorting, at diverse Places in the
Towns of BOSTON and DORCHESTER, both in the County of SUFFOLK, first before
mentioned, and at diverse Times in the Months of July last, and August current,
particularly on, or about, the 20 Day of July last, and the 1st and 16th Days
of August current, did, at BOSTON aforesaid, in the Hearing of great Numbers of
the Subjects of our Lord the KING, maliciously publish, and with a loud Voice
utter and declare many slanderous and reviling Speeches, against the godly and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel in this Province, but more particularly
against the Ministers of the Gospel in the Town of BOSTON aforesaid, then and
there maliciously publishing and declaring of, and concerning them, the said
Ministers, these false and scandalous Words, and many others to the same Effect
and Purpose, viz. That the greatest Part of the said Ministers (meaning the
Ministers of the Gospel in this Province, and more particularly of the Town of
BOSTON aforesaid) were carnal and unconverted Men; that they (meaning the said
Ministers) knew nothing of JESUS CHRIST, and that they were leading their
People blindfold down to Hell, and that they were destroying and murdering of
Souls by Thousands; the said JAMES DEVENPORT, at the same Time, directing and
advising their (the said Ministers) Hearers to withdraw from them the said
Ministers, and not to hear them preach, nor frequent the Assemblies of public
Worship, where they, the said Ministers, taught and preached, for that the
following and hearing of them the said Ministers, was as destructive to the
Souls of those who heard them, as swallowing Rats-Bane or Poison was to their
Bodies; praying the LORD to pull them, the said Ministers, down, and put others
in their Places: By Means whereof, great Numbers of People have withdrawn
themselves from the public Worship of GOD, and the Assemblies as by Law
required, the public Peace of our Lord the KING has been much disturbed, the
LORD'S DAY greatly profaned, the lawful Authority had in great Contempt, all
which is contrary to the Laws, as also to the Peace, Crown, and Dignity of our
said Lord the KING.

Jos. GREEN. Foreman.

The said JAMES DAVENPORT, being arraigned upon the said Presentment, pleaded
not guilty, and for Trial put himself on the Country; a Jury being sworn to try
the Issue, Mr. BENJAMIN LANGDON, Foreman, and Fellows, on Oath, say, That the
said JAMES DAVENPORT uttered the Words laid in the Presentment, except those
Words "that they ( viz. the Ministers) knew nothing of JESUS CHRIST:" and that
at the Time when he uttered these Words he was non compos mentis, and therefore
that the said J. D -- T is not guilty.

Attest. SAMUEL TYLEY Clerk.

The Witnesses for the KING declared on Oath before the Grand Jury (August 18.)
as follows, viz.

Mr. H. G. says, This Day three Weeks he was on the Common, and heard a Woman
crying out very much, and seemed to be in Pain, and he went to help her; and
Mr. J. D -- T charged all Men not to touch her, as they would answer it at the
great Day of Judgment: And he then heard the said D -- T cry out against the
unconverted Ministers of the Town of BOSTON. And another Time he heard said D
-- T in Prayer say, The greatest Part of the Ministers of the Town of BOSTON
were unconverted; and he heard said D -- T on the 30th of July say, The
greatest Part of the Ministers of BOSTON were unconverted, and were leading
their People to Hell.

Mr. J. S. says, He heard Mr. D -- T pray for the unconverted Ministers of the
Town of BOSTON, and say, Good LORD, thou know the greatest Part of them are
unconverted.

Dr. E. E. says, he heard Mr. D -- T say, the greatest Part of the Ministers of
the Town of BOSTON were unconverted, and were leading their People blindfold
down to Hell It was in July: And he said, The greatest Part of the Ministers
through the Province were unconverted. He heard him more than once on the Common,
and he said, Good LORD, convert these unconverted Ministers, or remove them and
put others in their Office.

Mr. P. O. says, he heard Mr. J. D -- T say, (on Monday last) That most of the
Clergy of the Town of BOSTON were unconverted, and that if there were a Bowl of
Poison which would destroy their Bodies, he would advise any of his dearest
Friends to drink it, as soon as to go and hear them, or either of them. This
was at STRAUGHHAN'S House.

Mr. E. W. says, he heard Mr. J. D -- T say, on Monday last, at Mr.
STRAUGHHAN'S House, I am sure the greatest Part of the Ministers of the great
Town of BOSTON are unconverted; and said, Dear Souls, if there were a Bowl of
Poison on that Table, I would as soon advise you to drink it off, which would
destroy your Bodies, as to hear them which would destroy your Souls. And he
heard said D -- T say, The unconverted Ministers were leading People blindfold
to Hell by Thousands and Millions.

Mr. H. V. says, he heard Mr. D -- T say, (in July last, on COPP'S Hill) in his
Address to the Almighty, Good LORD, (or oh LORD) I will not mince the Matter
any longer with thee, for thou know that I know, that the most of the
Ministers of the Town of BOSTON and the COUNTRY are unconverted, and are
leading their People blindfold to Hell. AND at DORCHESTER, he heard said D -- T
advise the People there not to go to hear their Minister, for he was an
unconverted Man.

Mr. N. T. says, he heard Mr. D -- T, at Mr. WELCH'S, say, in his Prayer, LORD,
thou know the most of the Ministers of the Town of BOSTON are unconverted.
In a Sermon on the Common, he said, Good Lord, thou know, the most of them
are unconverted; pull them down, turn them out, and put others in their Places.

Mr. R. A. says, he heard Mr. J. D -- T (at Mr. WARDELL'S, August 1.) say in
his Prayer, LORD GOD, thou know, that the greatest Part of the Ministers of
this great Town are in an unconverted State, and leading poor Souls on to
Destruction; and therefore LORD, we pray thee to turn them out of the Ministry.
And you, dear Children of GOD, that are here present, I would advise you never
to go near them to hear them, for their Preaching to your Souls is as Poisonous
to them, as Rats-Bane is to your Bodies. This was LORD'S DAY Afternoon, about
an 100 present to hear him in the House and Shop, in ServiceTime.

Mr. R. H. says, he heard Mr. J. DAVENPORT say, at Mr. WARDELL'S House, in
BOSTON, on the Sabbath Day in the Forenoon, in July last, He blessed GOD, he
had so many come out from among the unconverted Ministers. Near an Hundred
present.

And one of the Grand Jury declared to his Fellows, that he heard Mr. JAMES
DAVENPORT say last Monday, That the Ministers of the Town of BOSTON knew
nothing of JESUS CHRIST; and that they were serving the Interest of Satan. But
this wan't sworn to in Court."

I may add, that since the Date of the above Presentment, and the Oaths
relative to it, Mr. DAVENPORT has often spoken of ALL the Ministers in Town, as
in a Combination against the LORD and his Anointed, meaning, I suppose,
himself; And as though this wan't enough, he has, in his public Prayers and
Preachments, mentioned the most, if not all of them by Name, as unconverted
Men, and solemnly warned People to separate from them, and not dare to attend
on their Ministry: And this he did, after having the Vanity to go to them all,
one by one, to enquire into their spiritual State: Though I am glad, I am able
to declare, that they all, except two or three, were so far from entering into
Conversation with him upon that Head, that they chastis'd his Insolence, and
severely testified against such an unheard of Conduct. It Is a Rule with this
Gentleman, if a Man will not give him an Account of his Christian Experiences, to
look upon that alone as a dark Sign, if not a sure Evidence, of his being in a
carnal State. No Wonder then the Ministers in Town were condemned by him.

But enough has been said, and some, perhaps, may think, a great Deal too much,
upon the Uncharitableness of some of the chief Instruments of the religious
Stir there has been in the Land.

I go on to observe, that this same Spirit has been generally propagated all
over the Country, among the common People; insomuch, that I shall not exceed
the literal Truth, when I say, that there never was a Time, since the
Settlement of NEW ENGLAND, wherein there was so much bitter and rash Judging;
Parents condemning their Children, and Children their Parents I shall, as an
Illustration of this Censoriousness, insert here some Part of a Letter, wrote
to me by a Friend, upon his own Knowledge. Says he, It Is remarkable, those, who
were said to be struck with Conviction, immediately seemed to be filled with a
censuring and judging Spirit against almost all others; Children against their
Parents, Servants against their Masters; declaring them to be in an unconverted
State. -- One Instance among many others, I shall mention. There was a young
Woman about 15 Years of Age, who felt under this Conviction, and for about four
Hours together she, in this Manner, exhorted. At first, she began with her
Father, and told him, she could see the Image of the Devil then in his Face,
and that he was going Post-ha^^e down to Hell; and that all the Prayers he had
ever made in his Family were nothing but Abomination in the Ears of the
Almighty, and that all the Counsels he had ever given her, had no better a
Tendency than to instruct her, how she should please the Devil; and that both
he, and his Wife, were no better than the Devil. Many such Instances there were
of Children condemning their Parents. And many old Persons also, though, as
well as the Parents above, Persons of unblemished Characters, a good
Profession, sober, and Lovers of Religion, were called, and by Children too,
old Hypocrites, Heirs of eternal Damnation, going the Road that would lead them
to Hell, etc. I have other Letters by me from whence I could transcribe like
Accounts, were it needful.
; Husbands their Wives, and Wives their Husbands; Masters their Servants, and
Servants their Masters; Ministers their People, and People their Ministers.
Censoriousness, to a high Degree, is indeed the constant Appendage of this
religious Commotion. Wherever it takes Place the Subjects of it, too
generally, are uncharitable to Neighbors, to Brethren of the same Community,
to Relatives, to Ministers in an especial Manner; yea, to all the World that
are not in their Way of thinking and speaking: And what may be worth a Note,
the Places where this Appearance has been most remarkable, have commonly been
most filled with Uncharitableness, in all the Expressions of it.

It would take up too much Room to relate the hard Speeches, the monstrous
Sayings which have been uttered among us; and this, not in a single Place only,
but in most Towns throughout the Provinces, where there has been any Thing
considerable of this Commotion: Nay, to such an abominable Height have some
suffered their Uncharitableness to rise, that they have declared, they would as
soon have Communion with the Devil, as with many, both Ministers and People,
against whom they have yet nothing to say, but that they don't judge as they do
about the present Times. Some of the most valuabe Ministers in the Country,
merely on this Account, have been called all the bad Names one can easily think
of: Nor have even those escaped, who, for 20, 30, 40 Years, have so caused
their Light to shine before others, as that they have seen their good Works,
and might have learned from their good Example to glorify our Father in Heaven.

And as the Effect of this Spirit, there is a very great Appearance of
Contention and Strife, which, if GOD don't mercifully interpose, will endanger
a Breach in all the Churches in the Land: Nay, separate Meetings are already
begun in one Place and another. Two have been set up in this Town of BOSTON;
another, at NEWBURY; another, at NEW LONDON; another, at NEW HAVEN; another at
MILFORD; and others still in some other Places: And there are a Number in
CHARLESTOWN, in DORCHESTER, in MILTON, and elsewhere, who han't Charity for
their own Pastors so much as to hear them preach; though they have obtained a
universal good Character, not only for their ministerial Gifts, but for being
Examples to their Flocks, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in
Faith, in Purity: Nay, I verily believe, there is not SO MUCH AS ONE MINISTER
IN THE WHOLE LAND, but the Minds of many are so prejudiced against them, on one
Account, or another, as that their Power to do good is hereby greatly lessened.

The Things I have here mentioned are no Secrets: They are notorious, and must
be evident to all who have Eyes to see, and Ears to hear: And so far will the
more zealous among our new Converts be from disowning them, that they will
rather glory in having it said, that they have come out from unconverted
Ministers and Churches; imagining, they have herein complied with the Command
of GOD, which says, Come out from among them, and be ye separate; and ye shall
be my People, and I will be your GOD.

Some may, if they please, call this Spirit of Censoriousness, operating in
Clamor, and Strife, and Schism, an accidental Effect only of the Revival of a
good Work; but from what has been said, descriptive of the Temper and Conduct
of the main Instruments in beginning, and carrying on this Work, it appears
with a Meridian Luster, that it is no other than their Spirit, wherein it was
bad, propagated to others. And such Effects may always be expected from such
Causes; They are no other than their natural and genuine Produce: And it is, to
me, one of the strangest Things, that any should be at a Loss to determine
otherwise.

But let these Effects be produced how they will, they are certainly very
pernicious ones; and must be accounted so by all, who make an Estimate of them
from the Scripture. Our SAVIOR is not more express in cautioning against any
Vice whatever, than this of uncharitable Judging. JUDGE NOT, is his peremptory
Prohibition; Mat. 7. 1.
and weighty is the Argument with which he backs it; viz. That if we judge, we
shall be judged. Men will judge us, who are seldom wanting in this Kind of
Retribution, but disposed rather to give full Measure, pressed down and running
over. But what is much worse, GOD will judge us. And don't we need his Pity and
Mercy? Shall Not we otherwise be cast in the Judgment? And can we expect any
other, while we are hard and severe in our Treatment of our Brother, and ready,
without due Allowances, to condemn him? And very solemn is that Challenge, the
Apostle makes to all who are given to rash Censure, Romans 14. 4.
Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant? Our Brother, we judge, is
GOD'S Servant; not our's. While therefore we call him to the Bar of our
Judgment, we invade GOD'S Prerogative, exercise an unjust Jurisdiction over his
Servant; a Power we have no Right, nor Business to use. Who art thou that
judge another Man's Servant? What Pretense have thou to do thus? Who made
thee a Judge? Who gave thee this Power over another Man's Servant? He stands
or falls to his own Master. He only can acquit or condemn him; the Right of
thus judging is his, and belongs not to another. Thou art therefore
inexcusable, O Man whoever thou art, that judge thy Neighbor; for herein
thou take that upon thee, which thou have no Claim to; herein thou set
thy self up, as it were, in the Room of the Almighty, and art guilty of the
Arrogance of acting as though thou wast in his Stead.

I know, in some Cases, it may admit of Dispute, what is uncharitable Judging:
And so it may, what is Intemperance, or Injustice, or Oppression, and the like.
But this does not argue, but that in other Instances, the Intemperance or
Injustice may be so evident, as to leave no Room for Debate upon the Matter.
And this is the Case with Respect to the Judging that now prevails. If there is
any such Vice, it now takes Place: Nor can it easily be imagined, wherein Men
could be more grossly guilty of it. This Prohibition of our SAVIOR was never, I
believe, more outragiously trampled upon, than it now commonly is by Multitudes
of those, who call themselves good Christians. In Respect of many, it is as
plain, they live in the Breach of this Law of GOD, as that any do in the Breach
of the Law of Temperance or Righteousness. And it ought to be considered with
all Seriousness, that uncharitable, censorious Judging is a Sin as well as
Intemperance or Injustice; and, perhaps, as bad a Sin, if not a worse: And it
ought not therefore to be excused. The same Lawgiver and Judge who has said,
thou shall not steal, or get drank, has also said, thou shall not judge; and
the Law is guarded with the like Sanction of Death and Hell. It Is therefore
dangerous to Men's Souls, to speak of this mischeivous Vice as a humane Frailty
only, a mere Imprudence, that will well enough consist with a Work of GOD in
their Hearts. It Is true, good Men may be betrayed into this Sin; and so they
may into Drunkenness, or Injustice; but if they allow themselves in it, if they
live in the habitual Practice of it, it will as certainly damn them as if they
lived in the Practice of any other Sin. And they ought to be told the plain
Truth. I am sure, the great St. PAUL plainly tells the Corinthians, when there
appeared the Want of Charity among them, that nothing else, while they were
destitute of this, would avail to their Salvation. He does not tax them with
Imprudence only, but solemnly assures them, in the Name of the great GOD of
Heaven, that all their other Seize were nothing, that no Work of GOD
could be wrought in their Hearts, if they were without Charity; that Charity,
of which he has given a large and beautiful Description, in the 13th Chapter of
his first Epistle to them. And I leave it with the Conscience of every Man
acquainted with the State of Things at this Day, whether this Charity, the
genuine Effects of which, the Apostle has here enumerated, is not as not
oriously wanting among us, as it can be supposed to have been among the
Corinthians.

And is there any one Thing, in all the Revelations of GOD, that is more
particularly and solemnly cautioned against, than this Uncharitableness,
discovering it self in Strife, Sedition and Schism? Are not these Effects of an
uncharitable Spirit reckoned up among the Fruits of the Flesh Gal. 5. 19, 20.
? And are not such as do these Things expressly, and as it were by Name,
excluded the Kingdom of GOD V. 21.
? Is it not peremptorily declared, that if we have bitter Envying and Strife,
this Wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual, devilish James.
3. 14, 15.
? How earnest, and frequently repeated are the Calls in Scripture, To put away
all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking Ephesians. 4. 31.
! How importunately are Christians besought to be kind one to another,
forgiving one another; to live in Love, with all Lowliness and Meekness, with
Long-suffering and Forbearance; endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace Ephesians. 4. 2. 3. 5. 32.
! And are not all the Arguments made Use of to enforce these Entreaties, that
can be fetched either from Earth, or Heaven, or Hell?

And what is worthy of particular Notice, this Law of Charity is the Law of
Christianity by Way of Eminence. This is MY COMMANDMENT (says our SAVIOR) John
15. 12.
that ye love one another, as I have loved you. And again Chapt. 13. 34.
A NEW COMMANDMENT give I unto you, that ye love one another: As I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. And it is by this, in a distinguishing
Manner, that Men are to be known to be Christians. Says our SAVIOR John 13. 35.
By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to
another. Nay, if Men do not love one another, neither do they love GOD. The
Apostle is express in this. 1 John 4. 20.
If a Man say, I love GOD, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: For he that
loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love GOD whom he has not
seen? Yea, 1 John 3. 10.
In this are the Children of GOD manifest, and the Children of the Devil:
Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of GOD; neither he that loves not his
Brother.

And shall it be thought, after all this, a Matter of slight Consideration,
whether Men, professing themselves Christians, dwell together in Love and
Peace? And if they are hard and cruel in their Censures and Reproaches of one
another, and fall into Strife, and carry it to such a Height that they cannot
have Communion with one another, shall this be made so little of, that they may
notwithstanding be remarkably good Christians?

There may, it is true, be an Appearance of Religion, even in the grossest
Uncharitableness; and Men may pretend a Zeal for GOD, while they are trampling
upon the Christian Law of Love: But their Zeal in this Case, is not a Fire
kindled at GOD's Altar; nor will it atone for their Guilt. If they are
censorious and uncharitable, and habitually so, be their Pretenses what they
will, and their Professions ever so pompous and glorious, they are nothing in
Point of that Christianity, which will serve them at the great and last Day.

I cannot better close this Head than in those observable Words of the Apostle
PAUL, Romans 16. 17, 18.
Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. For they that
are such, serve not our LORD JESUS CHRIST; but their own Belly: And by good
Words, and fair Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the Simple: Which are glossed
upon, by the Continuators of Mr. HENRY'S Expositions, in a Manner well worth
our Notice in these Times. Those, say they, who introduce and propagate
dividing and offending Notions, which are most erroneous, or justly suspected;
who, out of Pride, Ambition, Affectation of Novelty, or the like, causelessly
separate from their Brethren, and by perverse Disputes, Censures and evil
Surmisings, alienate the Affections of Christians from one another; -- these
cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to, or different from, the Doctrines
which they have learned. Now, Mark those that thus cause Divisions; observe
them, the Method they take, the End they drive at. There is Need of a piercing,
watchful Eye to discern the Danger we are in from such People: For commonly the
Pretenses are plausible, when the Projects are very pernicious. Do not look
only at the Divisions and Offenses; but run up these Screams to the Fountain,
and mark those that cause them; and especially that in them which does cause
these Divisions and Offenses; those Lusts on each Side, from whence come these
Wars and Fightings. And avoid them. Shun all unnecessary Communion, and
Communication with them, lest you be leavened and infected by them. Do not
strike in with any dividing Interests, nor embrace any of those Principles or
Practices, which are destructive to Christian Love and Charity, or to the Truth
which is according to Godliness. -- Such serve not our LORD JESUS CHRIST. They
do not aim at his Glory, promote his Interest, or do his Will, what ever they
pretend. But they serve their own Belly. i. e. Their carnal, sensual, secular
Interests. It Is some base Lust or other they are pleasing; Pride, Ambition,
Coveteousness, Lasciviousness: These are the Designs they are really carrying
on. And what is the Method they take to compass their Designs? By good Words
and fair Speeches, they deceive the Hearts of the Simple. Their Words and
Speeches have a Show of Holiness and Zeal for GOD. Thus by good Words and fair
Speeches the Serpent beguiled EVE. We have great Need therefore to keep our
Hearts with all Diligence; especially, when seducing Spirits are abroad.

Another Thing, I cannot but think of dangerous Tendency, is, that Regard to
Impulses and Impressions, which has prevailed among too many; their Aptness to
take the Motion of their own Minds for something divinely extraordinary, or to
put those Constructions upon common Occurrences, which there is no Ground for
but in their own Imaginations. Mr. WHITEFIELD had evidently a Turn of Mind too
much disposing him this Way. This appears in him all along from his being a
Lad, according to the Account he has given the World of himself. One of the
first Things he thought worthy of public Notice is, Account of his Life, Page
1.
That his Mother was used to say, even when he was an Infant, that she expected
more Comfort from him than any other of her Children. And adds upon it, This,
with the Circumstance of my being BORN IN AN INN, has often been of Service to
me, in exciting me to make Good my Mother's Expectations, and to follow the
Example of my dear SAVIOR, who was BORN in a Manger, belonging to an INN. He
observes, when at BRISTOL, though in an unconverted State at that Time, P. 7.
That GOD gave him great Foretasts of his Love, and filled him with such
unspeakable Raptures in St. JOHN'S Church, that he was carried out beyond
himself;; -- But in the midst of these Illuminations (he adds) something
SECRETLY WHISPERED, this would not last. In the next Page, he has this Remark,
One Morning, as I was reading a PLAY to my Sister, said I, I believe GOD
intends some Thing for me, which we knew not of. As I have been diligent in
Business, I believe, many would have me for an Apprentice; but every Way seems
to be barred up, so that GOD, I think, will provide for me some Way or other.
How I came to say these Words, I know not. -- GOD AFTERWARD SHOWED ME THEY
CAME FROM HIM. A more observable Note we have a little onwards, P. 11.
As I was going one Night on an Errand for my Mother, an UNACCOUNTABLE, BUT
VERY STRONG IMPRESSION WAS MADE UPON MY HEART, THAT I SHOULD PREACH AND PRINT
QUICKLY. -- When I came Home, I innocently told my Mother what had befallen me.
-- But she (like JOSEPH'S Parents, when he told them his Dream) turning short,
upon me, cried out, What does the Boy mean? Prithce, hold thy Tongue, or
something to that Purpose. SINCE GOD HAS SHOWN HER FROM WHOM THESE IMPRESSIONS
CAME. A still more surprising (and, as I think, very sinful) Account, we have
in the 29th Page, in these Words, One Day perceiving an uncommon Drought, and a
noisome Clamminess in my Mouth, and using Things to allay my Thirst, but in
vain; IT WAS SUGGESTED TO ME, that, when JESUS CHRIST CRIED OUT, I THIRST, his
Sufferings were near over. -- Upon this, I threw my self upon the Bed, CRYING
OUT, I THIRST, I THIRST. Soon after I perceived my Load to go off; a Spirit of
Mourning was taken from me, and I knew what it was truly to rejoice in the
LORD. At first, after this, I could not avoid singing Psalms wherever I was;
but my Joy gradually became more settled, and, blessed be GOD, has abode, and
increased in my Soul saving a few casual Intermissions, ever since. There are
numerous other Instances of this Turn of Mind, both in this History of his
Life, and all his Journals. I shall turn to only one or two more. The first is
that, where, having made Mention of BURKETT'S and HENRY'S Expositions, he goes
on, P. 34.
Many Months have I kneeled to study and pray over these Books, as though I had
been sitting at my Master's Feet. The HOLY SPIRIT, from Time to Time, has let
me into the Knowledge of divine Things; and I HAVE BEEN DIRECTED, by watching
and reading the Scriptures, in this Manner, EVEN IN THE MINUTEST CIRCUMSTANCES,
as plainly as the JEWS, who consulted the URIM and THUMMIM at the HIGH-PRIEST'S
BREAST. The other we have in the next Page, At my first coming to GLOUCESTER,
being used to visit the Prisoners at OXFORD, I prayed most earnestly, that GOD
would open a Door for me to visit the Prisoners here also. -- Quickly after, I
DREAMED, that one of the prisoners came to be instructed by me. -- The DREAM
WAS IMPRESSED MUCH UPON MY HEART. -- In the Morning, I went to the Door of the
County-Goal, I knocked, no Body came to open it; I THOUGHT THE HOUR WAS NOT YET
COME. I waited still upon GOD in Prayer; and in SOME MONTHS, came a Letter from
a Friend at OXFORD, desiring me to go to one PABWORTH, who had broken out of
OXFORD- Goal, and was retaken at GLOUCESTER. -- As soon as I had read this
Letter, it was SUGGESTED to me that my Prayer was now answered. Immediately, I
went to the Person, ASSUREDLY GATHERING THAT THE LORD CALLED ME THITHER.

I have not transcribed the above Passages from Mr. W -- D with a View to
reflect Disgrace upon him; but because I really believe, the Spirit discovered
in them (as well as in an hundred others of the like Import, in his Writings;
more especially, his Life and Journals) has been of great Disservice in
propagating the like fanciful Disposition to others. I have all along
encouraged a Hope of this Gentleman as a real Christian: And he has certainly
been zealous and active beyond most of his Brethren. But has he not, through the
Inexperience of Youth, and an Intemperature of Zeal, been betrayed into such
Things as cannot but be condemned? I always had, I consess, a bad Opinion of
his Conduct in many Articles; as judging it led, in the natural Tendency of
Things, to produce Mischief. And, in particular, I was always afraid, lest
People, from him, should learn to give Heed to Impulses and Impressions, and by
Degrees come to Revelations, and other Extraordinaries, in this Kind. His so
frequently writing after such a Manner, as to lead People to think, he imagined
he was under the immediate, extraordinary Guidance of the HOLY GHOST, in almost
all that he said or did, He speaks all along in his Journals, and Life, in the
Language of the inspired Writers; and as though he designed to lead his Readers
into an Opinion of him as under the extraordinary I^fluence of the HOLY GHO^T,
in his whole Conduct. This is so obvious, that it must have been taken Notice
of by all, who have read them, however cursorily.
never appeared to me in the same Light it did to some others: Nor do I think
his Preaching about inward Feelings was so guarded as it ought to have been. I
doubt not, the SPIRIT may be felt. i. e. Christians may have an inward real
Perception of those Things which are the Effects of the SPIRIT's Influence; but
this quite differs from an immediate Feeling of the SPIRIT himself, which, if I
mistake not, is the Thing always meant by this Gentleman: And while he insisted
upon this Kind of Feeling, he totally neglected giving People warning of the
Danger of a deluded, or overheated Imagination; which I could not but wonder
at, considering how many, in all Ages, have imposed upon themselves, thinking
they felt the Divine SPIRIT acting in them, when it was apparent to every one
else, that it neither was, nor could be any other than the Motions of their own
Fancies, or the Suggestions of Satan; and herefrom my Fears, from the first,
rose high, as to the unhappy Influence of this Conduct upon many Sorts of
Persons: Nor are the extraordinary Pretenses to the Spirit in Revelations,
Impressions, and the like, which have been common at this Day, any Thing beyond
what might have been expected.

But besides this Gentleman, others have paid an undue Regard to Impulses and
Impressions, and given given too much Heed to the Fancy of their being, in an
immediate and extraordinary Manner, guided and assisted by the HOLY SPIRIT. The
Rev. Messieurs BARBER This Mr. BARBER went with Mr. W -- D to GEORGIA; and is
now at the ORPHAN-HOUSE, and has (as I have lately heard) the chief Care of
instructing and bringing up the Children there.
and DAVENPORT claim Precedence of all others.

I have received a particular Account of these, Gentlemen, upon the Head we are
considering, from an able and faithful Friend, which I shall gratify the
Public with. It is as follows; -- with Regard to Messieurs BARBER and
DAVENPORT; -- When Mr. WHITEFIELD'S Fame, and the wondrous Successes of his
Preaching in ENGLAND, first reached us, they received him in their Minds as an
Angel of GOD and thought surely the Time was at the Door, when the Glory of the
LORD should fill the whole World, and the People be turned to him as one Man;
not doubting but that Mr. WHITEFIELD was a chosen eminent Instrument in this
Work. When he first came to NEW YORK, you know he was received and admired, and
what a mighty Influence he had upon the Passions of his Hearers. These
Gentlemen hearing of these Things, were abundantly confirmed in this Thought,
that vital Religion was beginning to have a glorious Revival, and astonishing
Spread through the whole Land; and that Mr. W -- D, whom they esteemed a
wonderfully holy Man, would be an eminent Promoter thereof. Hereupon they
applied themselves, in an extraordinary Manner, to seek of GOD the Out-pouring
of his Spirit upon the Land, to bring forward the expected happy Day; and
particularly, that he would please more fully to instruct them, what he was
about to do, and give them a great Share of his Spirit, and improve them as
eminent Instruments in promoting this glorious Work, in the Expectation and
Hope of which, their Minds were now swallowed up.

After some Time of waiting and seeking in this Manner, and frequently
communicating their Thoughts to each other, and mutually Strengthening and
confirming one the other in these Expectations, those Words, in Habak. 2. 3.
The Vision is yet for an appointed Time, but at the End it shall speak, and not
lie: Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry: These Words, I say, were IMPRESSED with uncommon Strength upon Mr.
BARBER'S Mind, and possessed his Imagination and Tho'ts for some Time. By this he
understood in general, that the SPIRIT confirmed his former Thoughts of GOD's
being about to effect a wonderful Revival of Religion, and directed him to wait
for further Discoveries of that Matter, which should, in due Time, be made him.
This rendered him much more engaged in seeking and expecting some extraordinary
Discoveries, than he was before; and very earnest to know the Vision: And this
being by him communicated to Mr. D -- T, had the same Influence on him.

A short Time after this, Mr. BARBER, having been up late one Saturday Night,
and sometime retired the next Morning, in deep Meditation on these Things, in
earnest Prayers for, and strong Desires and great Expectations of some further
Discoveries of this Matter, he at length quitted his Retirement to attend the
Morning Devotion of the Family; as Part of which, he read the 102 Psalm, in the
13th Verse of which are these Words, Thou shall arise, and have Mercy upon
Zion: For the Time to favor her; yea, the set Time is come: At the reading of
which, it was POWERFULLY IMPRESSED UPON HIS MIND, that that was the opening and
speaking forth of the Vision. And by these Words, he supposed he had received
certain Intelligence from him, who has reserved the Times and Seasons before
appointed, in his own Hands, that the Time, the set Time, for the glorious
Coming of the Kingdom of Grace was now fulfilled: The Sense of which, and other
concurring Thoughts so over-poured his animal Frame, that he sunk down in his
Chair, and remained for some Time but just alive. At length recovering, though
remaining exceeding fain^ and weak, he went out and attended the public
Service of the Sabbath.

After this, he spent about a Week, as I remember, in going from House to House
through all his Parish, declaring unto all, both great and small, what
Discoveries GOD had made to him of what he was about to do, and how he fainted
at the beholding of the Vision (which he compared, as to his people, so
afterward to others, in other Places, to EZEKIEL'S and DANIEL'S Fainting, and
being weakened and astonished at beholding some of the Manifestations of the
Glory and terrible Majesty of the LORD) and solemnly warning and exhorting them
to repent, for that the Kingdom of Heaven was at Hand: And this he did as one
extraordinarily instructed and commissioned for that Purpose. And from this
Time he openly declared that he had an extraordinary Call and Mission to go,
and publish abroad what GOD had revealed to him, concerning the wonderful
Revival of Religion, which was now to begin; and to warn and call People to
Repentance under the immediate Direction of the HOLY GHOST. Whether he founded
his Call upon the above mentioned Texts alone, or on some others with them I
know not.

After this, he left the OYSTER-PONDS, (the Place where he had been Preaching)
and went forth to publish and preach the same Things unto others; and came
first to SOUTHOLD, where he found Mr. D -- T fully in his Sentiments as to
these Things, absolutely believing that the LORD had spoken to him; which he
might be the rather disposed to do, as he had himself much about the same Time,
STRONG IMPRESIONS, and, as he believed, PARTICULAR INTIMATIONS FROM THE HOLY
GHOST, of the same Things, in those Words of the 115 Psalm, the 12th, 13th,
14th Verses, The LORD has been mindful of us, he will bless us; he will bless
the House of Israel; he will bless the House of Aaron; he will bless them that
fear the LORD, both small and great. He shall increase you more and more, you
and your Children.

Accordingly, Mr. DAVENPORT called an Assembly of the People, in which Mr.
BARBER declared the same Things, which he had done before at the OYSTER-PONDS;
and exhorted them in like Manner. From thence he went forward through all the
Parishes of that Town, saying, for Substance, every where the same Things.

N. B. When he went from the OYSTER-PONDS upon this Business, as he counted his
Mission somewhat like that of our LORD's Disciples, who were sent forth before
him into every City, whither he himself would come, so he supposed himself
obliged to follow the Directions given them on that Occasion; and accordingly,
took no Money with him, neither Change of Apparel, nor Shoes, but was shod with
Boots: And as he past along through the Several Parishes of SOUTHOLD, he
publicly declared that he had laid aside all Study and Forethought of what he
should deliver in his public Speeches to the People, (some who heard him
thought so) and depended wholly on the IMMEDIATE DIRECTION OF THE HOLY GHOST,
and that 'twas given him in that Hour, from Time to Time, what he should speak:
Also, that he knew nothing where he was to go next beforehand; but was
IMMEDIATELY INSTRUCTED as to that by the SPIRIT, from Day to Day. From this
Time likewise, he took it upon him to judge and determine the Spiritual State
of People with great Assurance; in all which Things Mr. DAVENPORT concerted
with him, and has ever since, in a great Measure, professed and acted
accordingly.

From the West End of SOUTHOLD, Mr. BARBER'S Spirit led him to an obscure Place
about twenty Miles forward, called the OLDMANS; where, at his Coming, he called
the People together, and spoke to them the same Things he had all along
declared. Here he abode some Months, refusing for a long Time to preach to them
any more, though often desired as I was informed about that Time: Neither could
he be persuaded to remove thence, or return to OYSTER-PONDS, though much
importuned there to by some of his best Friends, who went from thence for that
Purpose; but led an inactive idle Life, 'till he was grown very fat and ragged;
alleging in his Justification, that he had received NO DIRECTION FROM THE
SPIRIT TO REMOVE THENCE, and must remain stationed there, so long as the Cloud
abode upon the Tabernacle. At length, after some Excursions, he returned to
OYSTER-PONDS, and from thence, over a while, went to RHODE ISLAND to see Mr. W
-- D, and joined himself to him.

Before I go on with my Friend's Narration, I would just remark, that this
Gentleman brought this same Spirit along with him to RHODE ISLAND. Mr.
WHITEFIELD relates, See his Journal at NEW ENGLAND, Page 42.
that he told him, he came to RHODE ISLAND, under a full Conviction, that he
should see him there, and had been waiting for him eight Days; for he said,
these Words were MIGHTILY IMPRESSED ON HIS HEART, Is not AARON the Levite thy
Brother? I know he can SPEAK WELL; and also, behold, he comes forth to meet
thee, and when he sees thee, he will be glad in his Heart: And I will be with
thy Mouth, and with his Mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. But what is
more worthy of Notice is the Letter he sent to Mr. WHITEFIELD, which concludes
with this unheard of Paragraph. Ibid. Journal, Page 41.
I shall omit writing any Thing, and only hereby present my hearty Love; and
let you know, that I am now waiting at the Post of your Door for Admission.
Though I AM UNWORTHY, MY LORD IS WORTHY, IN WHOSE NAME, I TRUST, I COME. How Mr.
WHITEFIELD could think so well of this Part of the Letter, as to publish it to
the World, I am at a Loss to conceive. It appears to me to be an Act of
downright gross Idolatry. He makes Use of the GREAT SAVIOR as a Medium of
Approach to a frail mortal Man. I trust Mr. W -- D did not see it in this
Light; but it is the genuine Construction of the Thing: And I wish it may be
blotted out of every one of these Journals, as not fit to be seen among
Christians. I now proceed,

From the Time of Mr. B -- R'S passing through SOUTHOLD, in the Manner
abovementioned, which was, as I remember, in March 1740, Mr. D -- T betook
himself to much the same Method of addressing and exhorting his People, with
incredible Zeal and Earnestness, persuaded as he was, that the SPIRIT HAD
REVEALED TO HIM, that the Kingdom of GOD was now coming among them with Power,
and that he had an EXTRAORDINARY CALL to labor in the Advancement thereof.

Particularly, at a Meeting of many of his People, at his Lodgings, he
continued his Speech to them for almost twenty four Hours together, 'till he
was quite wild, and so spent and overcome, that he did not recover his strength
and Cahnness of Thought and Passions, 'till after some Days Confinement to his
Chamber; all which, was, with him, the pure Effect of the mighty Energy of the
Spirit upon his Mind.

At this Time, also, he began to make an open Difference between his
Communicants, such as he judged converted and others; calling the one BROTHER,
the other NEIGHBOR, both in speaking to them, and of them: Which, at length,
proceeded so far, that he publicly forbid the NEIGHBORS to partake of the
Sacrament, some of whom were accounted as substantial and valuable Christians
as any among them. By this new and strange Method of Conduct, ushur'd in as it
was, the People's Minds were presently thrown into mighty Tumults. Some
believed this Gentleman's Fancies to be REVELATIONS OF THE SPIRIT; and his
Words, ORACLES: But the most Part were astonished and confounded in their
Thoughts. Many were soon thrown into a tumultuous Concern and Terror, and
Numbers over a little while pronounced Converts.

I must acquaint you with one Thing more, worthy of Notice which happened the
Summer following. There was a poor Woman living in the next Parish to Mr.
DAVENPORT'S, counted religious, who had been totally distracted of a long Time,
and dumb for a Season. Mr. DAVENPORT, possessed with a Notion, that he could pray
her into her right Mind, and to the Use of her Tongue, though the philistines
could afford her no Relief, spent a Day of Fasting and Prayer for that Purpose,
with a Number of his admiring Brethren. At this Meeting (I think it was) he set
a certain Day, by which Time, if not before, he was assured, she would be
delivered, and recover her Speech. On that very Day, the Woman died, without
having spoken a Word, or discovering any Signs of being in her right Mind. When
this was objected to him, he said, his Faith was verfied, and Prayers answered,
in the Event; for that she was delivered that very Day by being received to
Heaven.

I was my self at SOUTHOLD sundry Days, about six Weeks after the first
beginning of these Things; and then and there received the Substance of this
Account, so far as it relates to Things transacted before my being there,
partly from Mr. D -- T'S own Mouth, and partly from a Gentleman of his Parish
of undoubted Credit, who had the greatest Advantages to know these Things,
perhaps, of any Man in the Place; Mr. D -- T then lodging at his House. And all
the other Parts of it have been so credibly related to me, and so often
confirmed, that I know no Reason to doubt their Truth.

When Mr. D -- T came to SAY-BROOK, which was the latter Part of August, 1741,
he had raised Expectations of making many Converts there. I had heard, sundry
Times, before he came from the ISLAND, of his Design to come to this Place, and
that he had expressed a strong Belief, that the LORD had much People to be
gathered out of SAY-BROOK. And while he was at LYME, where he tarried some
Time, I heard frequently of his expressing an Expectation of doing Wonders
here. Some of his Disciples, and intimate Friends, and of the Chief of that
Way, his own Parishoners, who came over to this Town, from him, when at LYME
told some of the People, that the LORD HAD REMARKABLY SIGNIFIED TO MR.
DAVENPORT, that he had a GREAT WORK to do at SAY-BROOK; and that some of the
BRETHREN had had the like INTIMATION, and that they themselves were FULL OF
THIS FAITH: And this seems to have been the general Expectation of his
Adherents so far as I can learn.

I suppose, while his Imagination was fired with the Prospect of doing Wonders
here, he either read, or happened to recollect in his Mind, the Story of
JERICHO, whereupon it occurred to his Thoughts, that the Conquest he expected to
make of SAY-BROOK, was well represented thereby: Upon which, his Imagination
took the Hint, and painted out a most pleasing Comparison, which raised his
Passions, gladdened his Heart, inflamed his Zeal, and increased his Confidence
of Success, and so beguiled him into a fond Belief, that the SPIRIT OF GOD HAD
REVEALED AND CONFIRMED to him what WONDERFUL THINGS were to be done, in this
Place, by his Hands, before hidden under the Disguise of that Piece of
Scripture History.

My Reason for this Supposition is, the Manner of his speaking of this People,
and himself, when here, both in his Praying and Preaching. JERICHO, according
to his Representation of the mystical Sense of that Piece of History, is
SAYBROOK; the Walls of it, the People's Opposition to his Spirit, or according
to his Sense of the Matter, to the SPIRIT OF GOD; The KING OF JERICHO, is the
MINISTER of the Place; the Priest's compassing the Walls, and sounding
Rams-Horns, is his compassing the Town about, and preaching the Word here; the
seven Days that they compassed the Walls, before they fell, signifies a set
Time for the People's falling from their Opposition to his Ways, to GOD and
Religion, according to him; and that, at that Time, the King, the Minister
should be slain, and the People made willing Captives to him. This set Time, he
had a great Mind should not exceed the Limits of seven Days, and expressed
himself pubickly, some of the first Days of his being here, as strongly
expecting that, in that Time, they should be brought over; though so far as I
can learn, he was so cautious as never to declare positively, that this would
be effected within the Compass of the seven Days. However, he had the
Mortification to carry his Days, and was obliged, at last, to leave the Walls
standing more firmly than when he came to demolish them.

Some of the last Days of this Gentleman's being in this Place, he declared
that the SPIRIT HAD NOT TOLD HIM, when the Work should be accomplished, but
only that it should be in the APPOINTED TIME; and that he was assured, it would
be, when the SET TIME was come, which, whether it would be, this Year or next,
he knew not.

Mr. D -- T came to this Town on Tuesday. On Thursday, or Friday, of the same
Week, Capt. JOHN LEE, of the east Parish in LYME came over, and brought the
following Story. A Number of little Children, of that Parish, held a private
Meeting among themselves, one Evening, after Mr. D -- T'S being at SAY-BROOK;
in which, among other Things, they prayed very earnestly, that Mr. DAVENPORT
might have great Success in that Place, using the Phrases, he was so very fond
of; viz. that at the sounding of his Rams-Horns, the Walls of JERICHO might
fall. The Children were, to Appearance, under a great and strong Impression;
many of them falling down. One of them ran and called Capt. LEE, who, coming to
the Meeting, found them exceeding full, and wonderfully transported. 'Twas
represented, and received by Mr. DAVENPORT'S Adherents as a very remarkable
Thing, that the Children, at the Distance of a dozen Miles, should be moved to
pray for Success to Mr. DAVENPORT'S Preaching in SAY-BROOK, in the same Phrases
which he himself used in the Place, when they could not be supposed to know
that he used the like; and as a clear Proof, that he was guided by a good
SPIRIT, and as a certain Earnest, that by the sounding of his Rams-Horns, the
Walls of the Town should be shaken to the Ground. It was remarked by others
upon the Occasion of this Story, that Mr. D -- T had publicly used the same
phrases, while yet at LYME, with Regard to SAY-BROOK; praying, that, at the
Sound of his Rams-Horns, the Walls of JERICHO might fall: And therefore, that
the Children might well know, that he had used these Expressions, and use them
themselves, in Imitation of him, without any EXTRAORDINARY dictating of the
HOLY GHOST.

'Twas also remarked, that this Story came very seasonably for Mr. D -- T, his
Rams-horns beginning, by this Time, to grow into Contempt among the People. And
indeed, so sunk was their Reputation, that this Story, with all the Colorings
that could be given it, could not procure them any Credit. Some were so
extravagant as even to imagine, that this looked very like a Romish Miracle,
and to suspect some pious Fraud in the Matter. -- The Impartial will doubtless
judge reasonably of this Affair.

This Account I received from the Revd. Mr. WILLIAM HEART of SAY-BROOK, who
stands ready to justify every Article contained in it. It may seem indeed to
some like a Romance, and be scarce thought worthy of the least Credit. I shall
therefore, to give Countenance to it, present the Reader with some Part of Mr.
D -- T'S Conversation with the Body of the Ministers in this Town, and the
Ministers of CHARLESTOWN, who, upon his coming here, sent to him to desire to
have some friendly Discourse with him: In which Conversation, will be seen (if
I mistake not) the same Spirit, operating in the same Manner, as has been above
described, however extravagant it may appear to the World. It is as follows,

Mr. D -- T, being present with the Ministers, was asked by the Rev. Dr.
COLMAN, in the Name of his Brethren, to give them an Account of his Opinion,
with Respect to the Operation and Influence of the SPIRIT of GOD on the Minds
of Believers; because they had heard, that he laid too much Weight upon
Impulses and Impressions. Mr. D -- T, after lifting his Eyes and Face to
Heaven, and praying to GOD as if he expected immediate Direction from him,
said, that he would answer as the LORD should assist him: And then began to
talk as if he meant to give the Doctor a direct Answer; but having talked it
may be, a Quarter of an Hour, without coming to the Point, or giving the
Ministers any Satisfaction, the Doctor stopped him, and desired him to give a
catagorical Answer to the Question proposed: Upon which, he said, he would give
them an Account of his Conversion, and GOD's Dealings with his Soul; and then
prayed again to GOD for Direction. When one desired him to be short, he
answered, he would be as short as possible, but that he would not stint the
SPIRIT of GOD neither.

The Account he gave of his Conversion, and GOD's Dealings with his Soul, or
his Experiences, as he at other Times expressed it, lasted from nine to eleven at
Night: and for an Hour and half next Forenoon, with but little Interruption.
Among a great many other Things he told us the two following Stories.

The first was occasioned by his being asked why he called his Fellow-Traveller
his ArmourBearer? In Reply whereto, he said, that before he commenced
Itinerant, this Brother that was now with him, and had been his FellowTraveller
from the beginning, proposed to him to go and preach the Gospel beyond the
Bounds of his own Congregation; to whom he gave no Answer, as not knowing the
Will of the LORD concerning that Matter. But after some Meditation upon it, and
Prayer to GOD, as he opened the Bible to read, the Story of JONATHAN and his
Armor-bearer cast up to him, without his having the least Thought of turning
to it. He read, and saw (as he said) every Line, every Word in a new Light; and
the LORD caused it to make a STRONG IMPRESSION upon him. As JONATHAN and his
Armor-bearer went to the Garrison of the Philistines, so he thought the LORD
CALLED HIM and the Man that was with him to go and preach to the People in
EASTHAMPTON. He communicated this IMPRESSION to the Man, who answered as
JONATHAN'S Armor-bearer did, do all that is in thine Heart, behold, I am with
thee. Then they prayed to the LORD, and the IMPRESSION upon his Mind to go to
EAST-HAMPTON was so strong, that he was as sure the LORD SENT HIM as he was of
his own Existence. Moreover, the LORD TOLD HIM, that he should convert as many
of the People at EAST-HAMPTON to CHRIST JESUS, as JONATHAN and his
Armor-bearer slew of the Philistines. But then, he told the MAN, that as the
Philistines. called to JONATHAN and his Armor-bearer, to come up to them, so
they must wait, till they should receive a Call from the People of
EAST-HAMPTON. Accordingly, some of the People, in a few Days, signified to Mr.
D -- T, that they would be glad, he would come and preach to them. Away they
traveled, he and the Man, up to their Knees in Snow; which he compared to
JONATHAN'S and his Armour-Bearer's climbing up, upon their Hands and upon their
Feet, to the Garrison of the Philistines. And according to the Faith which GOD
had wrought in him, he said, he slew twenty Persons in EAST-HAMPTON. i. e. He
converted twenty to JESUS CHRIST.

The other Story he told was this. The LORD COMMANDED him to go to a Town, the
Name of which I have forgot, to preach to the People. As he rode along, he
became very uneasy and troubled in his Thoughts, because he knew not what he
should say to the People, to whom he was going. He prayed to the LORD, and
these Words were brought to his Mind, and made a strong Impression on him, Take
no Thought what you shall say, for it shall be given you in that Hour. Upon
this his Trouble vanished, and he was as firmly persuaded GOD would assist him,
as he was of the Truth of his own Existence. [This Way of speaking he generally
used in such Cases] When he began to preach, he had neither Words nor Thoughts
enough to go on; but very soon, GOD all at once darted a great Light into his
Mind, so that for one Thought he was able to utter (and he said he spoke very
fluently too) GOD put ten into his Heart.

It may be remarked when he told the Ministers of his having done any Thing, or
gone to any Place, he always expressed it in some such Language as that, GOD
CALLED ME, or GOD COMMANDED ME, or GOD IMPRESSED IT UPON MYMIND; and
particularly he told them, that GOD SENT HIM TO BOSTON. Being asked, if by
GOD's Calling, or commanding, or sending him, or impressing it upon his Mind,
and such like Ways of speaking, he meant that GOD Inspired HIM as he did the
ancient Prophets; he answered, that they might call it INSPIRATION, or by what
other Name they pleased.

From which, and many such like Things. all the Ministers concluded, (as may be
seen in their printed Declaration) that he had upon him a STRONG TINCTURE OF
ENTHUSIASM.

His Fellow-Traveller was of the Same Stamp, for being desired to give an
Account of some Things, which he knew better than Mr. D -- T, he talked just as
he had done. The LORD CALLED me, the LORD MADE A STRONG IMPRESSION ON MY MIND,
I was as sure of it as of my own Existence, and the like.

N. B. This Fellow-Traveller is a Lay Man, of no Education, and but small
Capacity. We had often heard of him before he came to Town with Mr. D -- T: And
though he was always spoken of in the Style of his Armor-bearer, it was
generally thought to be only in a Way of Ridicule. But when Mr. D -- T came to
Town, it was soon seen to be the real Truth of the Case; for he went no where
without this Man, and he so far regarded the SOUND of his Character as his
ArmourBearer, that, wherever he walked with him, he would have him under one of
his Arms, to be, as it were, a Support to it. And in this Form he always went
to the Place where he was to preach, and in like Manner returned from it: And
all, no Doubt, in his own Imagination, by the Direction of the SPIRIT.

I have said so much about this Mr. D -- T, that I fear, I have been too
tedious. But I chose to be thus particular, as he has all along had so great a
Hand in the religious Stir, as it has appeared, more especially, in most Places
in CONNECTICUT, and LONG ISLAND. 'Twas he that began the Outcries, Swoonings,
Raptures, and the like Extraordinaries, in those Parts: Nor has any Man been
more successful this Way than he. He ought indeed to be always mentioned as the
most noted Instrument, in the Production of those Remarkables, which have made
so much Noise in the Land. And he has been as well spoke of by some of the
famous Men in the new Way, as any among them all. Mr. CROSSWELL says, Mr.
WHITEFIELD declared it as his Though It of him, BOSTON Post-Boy, Numb. 392.
"That of all Men living he knew of none, who kept a closer Walk with GOD;" and
that "Mr. TENNENT, in his Hearing, gave him the character of being one of the
most heavenly Men he was ever acquainted with." And for himself, "he prays GOD
to bless and prosper this wondrous Man, whom he has made strong for himself."
And giving an Account of his Preaching at STONINGTON, he says, Post-Boy Ibid.
The first Day he preached, he believed, near a Hundred were struck with deep
Distress almost in a Moment, enquiring what they should do to be saved? Many of
his Opposers, among the rest, came trembling, and asking Forgiveness of GOD,
and him, for all their hard Speeches, which they, ungodly Sinners, had ungodly
spoken against him. The Hand of the LORD was with him also, the following Days,
so that a considerable Number believed, and turned to the LORD.

He adds, To be brief, the Number of those who were thought to have received
the KING of GLORY into their Souls, in eight Days, in three Towns, was computed
to be about one Hundred; among which, some were Negroes; and, I think, about
twenty Indians; besides a vast Multitude, who were left under hopeful
Convictions.;

But from the Accounts I have given of Mr. D -- T is it possible, these
Gentlemen should think justly of him, or of his Success in Preaching. And if
the Converts of his making are of the like Spirit with himself, (as is commonly
the Cafe) what must be the Opinion of the World concerning them? I believe, in
general, they will entertain a just Thought of them, while they imagine them to
be such Sort of Persons as Mr. D -- T has himself been described to be.

And notwithstanding these high Encomiums of this Gentleman, by Mr. W -- D, T
-- T, C -- L, and others that might be mentioned, he has been actually
pronounced non compos mentis by the whole Government of CONNECTICUT. See the
Account at large, in the BOSTON NewsPaper, Numb. 1997.
The same Opinion 12 Men, under Oath, had of him, here at BOSTON. Evening-Post,
Numb. 370.
And the Ministers in this Town and CHARLESTOWN have declared it to the World
as their Judgment, Their printed Declaration.
That he is a Gentleman much acted by sudden Impulses, upon such Explications
of the Holy Scriptures to himself and his particular Friends, Designs and
Purposes, as they can by no Means approve of, or justify; but must needs think
very dangerous and hurtful to the Interest of Religion; For which Reason, among
others, they were united to a Man in refusing him their Pulpits.

After all, I deny not, but that Mr. D -- T may have been the Means of Good to
Souls. i. e. Accidentally, and as the Tendency of his Temper and Conduct may
have been overruled in GOD'S Government of the World; for in the natural Course
of Things, it led directly to Confusion and every evil Work; And this has, in
Fact, been the Effect, more or less wherever he has gone.

I pass now to some other Preachers of the same Spirit I have been describing;
among whom, if I should again mention Mr. D -- T, I hope the Reader will
forgive me; especially, when he ^ees it to be a Matter of Necessity, in order
to my carrying his Thoughts up to the true Source of this Quakerish Turn of
Mind, in all these Gentlemen, as well as those to whom, by their Means, it has
been propagated. The Gentlemen I have in View, besides Mr. D -- T, are
Messieurs POMROY, WHEELOCK, ALLEN, BLISS; all of whom, it is generally known,
are of one Soul, and have gone into the same Method of Conduct: Though I believe
Mr. D -- T has outdone them all. These are the Ministers (excepting Mr. BLISS
whose Residence now is in these Parts) who have had the chief Hand in raising
the Commotions in CONNECTICUT; where sudden Impulses and extraordinary
Pretenses to the Spirit, have been more general (in Proportion) and
Extravagant, than in any of the other Governments.

I have been at no small Pains to trace this Spirit in these Gentlemen up to
its true Origin: And as, I think, it will reflect great Light upon the present
religious State of Things in the Land, and be of public Service, to
communicate the Informations I have received upon this Head, I shall here do
it, without any further Apology.

I shall first transcribe a Letter from NEWMILFORD, dated Nov. 16. 1742. This
may seem at first View to be remote from the Business in Hand; but the Close of
the Letter, together with what may follow, will open its Design, and evidently
show forth the Rise of the Enthusiasm of the abovenamed Gentlemen. It is as
follows,

Dear Brother, Yours is before me, wherein you desire of me a Narrative of the
Rise, Transactions, and various Tenets, and present State, of those People
among us commonly called, QUAKERS; a Task very difficult, almost as much so as
that of the whole Affair of the NEWLIGHTS, as they are called; yet, for your
Satisfaction, I shall undertake the Business, and give a short, general, and
faithful Account, to the best of my Ability; though the doing of this will be a
renewing of Grief.

Take the Account in the following Order.

Some Time in the Year 1726 there appeared a flaming Zeal for Religion, among a
Number of our People; the Occasion of which (as was said) was the dying Counsel
of a loose young Man to his Companions. They set up Private Meetings, which
they carried on by praying, reading good Books, singing, etc. The Meetings were
chiefly of the younger Sort of People; of CHILDREN about FIVE or SIX Years of
Age, and so upwards to about twenty one, or two: And there were among them two
or three of thirty Years, or more; though they were mainly of the more youngerly
Sort. There seemed to appear so much of a Spirit of real Religion among them,
that we were greatly encouraged with the Hope, that true Christianity was
revived among us; and we were strengthened in this Hope by their abundant Zeal
and Warmth in religious Things, which was as great as you may any where behold
at this Day. After a while, they multiplied their Meetings to th^^e or four in
a Week, and I my self frequently met with them, and some elder Persons; and
were ready to rejoice with them in the seeming Appearance of Religion. The Town
was then but small, I suppose under the Number of forty Families; and yet,
there was such a religious Progress, that there was added to the Church, FIFTY,
or upwards, in about the Space of 17 or 18 Months.

About the Space of a Year after they set out, as I remember, Things evidently
appeared with another Face. They first discovered a great Degree of spiritual
Pride, which wonderfully grew and increased in them, and evidenced itself by
its Fruits; especially, a Spirit of discerning and judging the State of others,
so that there were scarce any that escaped their Censure, either among the
Living or the Dead, in their Memory. Upon this they began to purge their
Meetings, (to use their Language) and disallow the unconverted (as they termed
them) to meet with them; for they gave out, that there were false Brethren and
Betrayers: And they shifted from Place to Place that they might have none but
Converts among them. By this Time, we began to be much alarmed, elder Persons
withdrew from their Meetings, and restrained their Children; yet
notwithstanding, there remained a wonderful Itch in many to be with them, and
sundry did follow them; and they allowed them so to do, in Hope of proselyting
them.

Soon after this, they began to correspond with the Opinionists in the Country,
and to be the Occasion of Talk and Noise. The Anabaptists wrote to them from
RHODE ISLAND; and so did the ROGERS'S Crew, who afterward made them a Visit,
and brought them Books, with which they were very much pleased and captivated.
Now it was that the Spirit of Pride and Error began more openly and daringly to
appear in them. They speak very slightily of the Psalms of DAVID, and some
other of the Books of sacred Canon; not to mention many Books of human
Composure, which they treated with Contempt; though highly esteemed by others as
orthodox and judicious: Nor did it end in this only, but they proceeded
further, even to condemn Gospel Ministers in general, and the civil Magistrate
also. To our civil Rulers they gave no better Style than the BEAST. -- These
Things, with what followed, threw the Town into great Confusion, (as you may
well suppose) which is so well known, that I need only speak it: They were
indeed generally lamented and disapproved by the venerable Ministers about us,
as the Effects of a Spirit of Error. -- But to go on,

Upon their professing, and using Endeavors to spread these Things, with other
Errors, and discovering at the same Time great Rancour of Spirit, those, who
were before ensnared by their fair Show, were brought to consider; and many
left them, forsaking their Meetings. Upon this, the principal Persons in this
Affair, to the Number of about fifteen or sixteen in all, Men and Women, young
and old, SEPARATED themselves, went out from us, and were no more of us;
setting up and meeting by themselves, on the Sabbath, and also on the Thursday,
which were their chief and constant Meeting-Days. Though they met on the Sabbath,
yet they held no Sanctity in that Day more than in any other Day. They also
chose a Speaker (as they termed him) whom they principally depended on; yet
notwithstanding, any one preached that was moved by the SPIRIT, whether Man or
Woman; though not without they were thus moved by the SPIRIT: And so they went on
managing; yet, as I am credibly informed, some Years ago, there was a Time when
the SPIRIT failed them, and they had none but silent Meetings for a Year or
more. Besides their Speaker, they had another Kind of Officer among them, whose
Business it was to take Care of their Clothing, as to its Color, Fashion,
Make, etc. But his Title I have forgot. However, this is remarkable, that as
they began with spiritual Pride, so this confounded them; for it was their
Contention about their Officers that divided them. Part are returned to their
own Sheepfold, Part gone over to the Church of ENGLAND, and about six or seven
still remain under the Influence of the same Spirit, and in the same Errors,
unless (as in the Case of all Error) there may be a Variation in some Things:
Though I must add, that even these six or seven seemed, of late Years, to be
more moderate and sociable, and there was a Prospect of their returning back to
us, before the Appearance of the NEW-LIGHT; for now they seem to think, They
are the Stone cut out of the Mountain, that shall fill the whole Earth.

As for their particular Tenets, it is difficult, they are so much given to
change, to describe them; yet, in general, (besides their Notion of the
SPIRIT'S being in, and sensibly, and immediately leading them, as I above said)
their Opinion may be collected from the following Account.

At their first setting out, as they strongly magnified and asserted Assurance
in Believers, yea, all Believers; so they themselves had the Faith of
Assurance, and were not in Doubt, in the least Measure, for the Space of a
Year; Nay, they affirmed it to be a Sin, a great Sin, in any Measure, to doubt
of their good Estate: And they had an Assurance (as they themselves said) of
the Salvation of other Persons.

They deny the Necessity of human Learning, as a Qualification for the Work of
the Ministry. If Men are converted, that they think is sufficient: Nor may any
but such take upon them the Business of Preaching.

They likewise hold, that none are converted, but such as conform to them; and
therefore they join with none else in religious Affairs.

They used to deny and despise the external Ordinances of Baptism and the
LORD's Supper; though they pretended a Regard to them according to some
spiritual Sense and Meaning: But of late they have somewhat altered their
Principles upon these Points, and say they could receive the Ordinances, if
administered by a CONVERTED Man. And since the late Stir in the Country, some of
them have said frequently, they wished they could see Mr. W -- D, or T -- T,
they could receive the Ordinances from them.

And, as spiritual Pride seems to have been the Ground of all their other
Errors, so from this Root of Bitterness has sprung the vain Pretense they make
to sinless Perfection: For this absurd and wicked Opinion they assert and hold.

They also declare as well as judge, that none of our Ministers are fit to
preach, or adminster the Ordinances; and that none ought to hear them: They
have likewise an Opinion of our civil Rulers as not fit to set at the Helm of
Government, being unconverted.

I must not omit observing to you, that as several of these Persons have, at
Times, renounced their Errors, and confessed the Spirit of Delusion they were
under, so some of each of the three Parties. i. e. of those who have returned
to us, or gone over to the Church, or still retain their former Spirit, do, to
my Knowledge, assert, that much of the Spirit that is produced by the
ITINERANTS and their Preaching, is the SAME WITH THEIR'S: And some of the
standing QUAKERS, particularly (for such are the small Remnant of this Sect
remaining) will gladly hear some of these Itinerant Preachers; and say, they
have the same Spirit, they have, but don't know it; for they themselves did not
know at first, whither they were going.

As for DAVID FERRIS, of whom you desire an Account in particular; what I can
say is this, viz, That as he was one of the NUMBER and FAMILY that were
strongly attached to, and deeply tinged with, the Things above spoken of, so he
had also a strong Inclination to attain some humane Learning. He began his
Grammar with me. -- I had a great many Debates with him. -- At length, he told
me, in some Heat, that I and this Church were such Beasts as PAUL fought with
at EPHESUS: Upon which I dismissed him. From hence he went to Mr. Moss at DERBY;
but being uneasy there, went from thence to MILFORD, where he scattered some of
his Errors. From MILFORD he went to COLLEGE, where, it is said, he kept
somewhat hid for a Time; though I plainly told the RECTOR of his Errors, and
the Danger of his poisoning the Students. After some Time he appeared active,
and with his plausible Craft, and insinuating Behavior, and his Books,
corrupted and led away sundry; especially, WHELOCK, POMROY, BLISS, DAVENPORT,
etc.

Thus, Sir, I have given, as you desired, a Succinct, and short Account of our
long Affair. I only add, as to the Facts, they are the Truth. No more at
present, but that I rest yours etc.

DANIEL BOARDMAN.


The Gentleman to whom this Letter was sent, in his Letter conveying it to me,
speaks of the Author as the Minister of the Place where these Things happened,
and a worthy, honest, valuable Person; and adds, that he desired him to write
nothing but what might appear in public, and believes that I may, if Need be,
affix his Name without Offense: For which Reason I have ventured to do it.

The Reader will easily observe, how the unhappy Turn of Mind that prevailed at
NEW-MILFORD got into the College; and who the particular Gentlemen were, that
were led aside by it: Though these Things will more fully appear in the next
Letter I shall insert; which is as follows.

Sir, As you desired me, some Time ago, to send you what I know, concerning
those Enthusiasts who were my Contemporaries at YALE COLLEGE; agreeable thereto
I have written what follows. -- DAVID FERRIS, one of the NEWMILFORD Quakers,
came to NEW HAVEN in the Year 1729, and was admitted into College about June,
or July, in that Year; pretending to have forsaken his quakerish and
enthusiastic Tenets: But all was false, for though he at first did not think
proper to own them, yet he endeavored to lay a Foundation to propagate them,
and instill his Poison into all as far as he could; which he did by acting under
a Show of Zeal and Sanctity, where by some were ensnared by him, who have since
been the Propagators of his Doctrines and Tenets. This FERRIS was the greatest
Enthusiast I ever knew. I believe it was partly owing to his Constitution, and
partly to his ignorant, superstitious and illiterate NEW-MILFORD Companions. By
his Enthusiasm and Superstition, he was led into such wild Errors and
Absurdities, that a Man, who was guided by Reason and Scripture, would be
amazed at his Folly; for when he found his Mind strongly engaged in any Thing,
although inconsistent with Reason or Revelation, yet he would confidently
affirm THOSE IMPULSES to be from the SPIRIT OF GOD; and that he could not be
mistaken, any more than when the Sunshines and he sees it, it may all be a
Deception. It was impossible, under this strong Persuasion of his being
inspired, to convince him; and it was to little Purpose to reason with him, for
that Internal Light was his sole Guide; and by it he was led into all Manner of
Errors.

I cannot better describe the Man, than by relating what he said to me. He told
me, he was certain, not one in ten of the Communicants in NEW HAVEN Church
would be saved; but would go directly down to Hell when they died. He said, it
was a Call from Heaven, his coming to College; that it was revealed to him,
when he was sick, that he should recover; that when he died, he knew he should
have a higher Seat in the Kingdom of Heaven than MOSES, which Knowledge was
from the Illumination of GOD's SPIRIT; that he knew GOD's Will in all Things,
and lived agreeable thereto to that Perfection, that if he were to die that
Night, he would not desire to have an Alteration made in one Article of his
Life for six Years, for he had not been guilty of any Sin in that Time. He was,
to be short, filled with imaginary Revelations. He had a proud and haughty
Spirit, and appeared strongly desirous of Applause. He was blind to his own
Faults, and other Men's Virtues; but quick to spy out some Things amiss in his
Neighbors, and would judge and condemn all but his own Party, and enthusiastic
Zealots like himself. He would do all in his Power to advance his own Opinions,
and loved to head a Party, to whom he could dictate, and on whom he could
impose his Principles as Certainties: And as he would have it, so it happened;
for by hiding himself under a Cloak of Zeal, some gloomy Persons among the
Students were ensnared by him, who having mixed something of Devotion with
their melancholy Tempers, became his Admirers, and had his Person in
Admiration to that Degree, that they believed all he said to be true, and
entertained such an Opinion of his Worth, that they drank in all his Errors
without Examination. His Word to them was Demonstration. Verily, they seemed to
think, he could neither deceive, nor be deceived. They endeavored to imitate
him in all Things as far as they could. Mr. DAVENPORT, WHELOCK, POMROY, and
others, were those who lived with this FERRIS most familiarly, and have since
divulged his Errors, and filled Places where they have preached with the
Superstitions and groundless Opinions, they learned from him, who was their
FATHER and DICTATOR as to their Belief. This FERRIS lived with us until March,
1732; and then he returned back to NEW-MILFORD to his old Friends the Quakers,
before, and without ever taking his Degree at College.

The Gentleman in the Ministry, thro's whose Hands, this Letter came to me,
does not permit the publishing the Name of the Writer; but says, The Facts you
may depend upon as certain. -- He was not only of the same Class at College,
but boarded and lodged with FERRIS a considerable Time: -- And he may be
believed. -- I shall add in further Confirmation of the above Account, that,
for Substance, it is the same with what I had myself from, at lest, half a Dozen
Gentlemen last Commencement, when I was at Tale-College. The Affair indeed is
well known in CONNECTICUT. But to those not acquainted with it, it may not be
amiss to subjoin the Narrative of this Matter, as I Penned it down from the
Mouth of a Gentleman in the Ministry, of unblemished Character, who was
contemporary at College with Mess. DAVENPORT, WHELOCK, etc; and was himself, in
a Measure, beguiled by this FERRIS, and had the Honor, at Times, of making one
of his religious (...). It is thus,

DAVID FERRIS came from a Nest of Quakers at NEW-MILFORD, deeply tinged with
their Spirit. He made a great Show of Sanctity, while at the College; by Means
whereof, he was under Advantage to propagate his quakerish Notions, and did do
it, among a Number of the Students. Mr. POMROY, WHELOCK, ALLEN, DAVENPORT,
BLISS, were familiar with him, and led aside by him. They made a Club, and
often met together. They did not open their Principles to all, but to those
whom they imagined they could work upon. -- They laid great Stress upon
Impressions and Impulses; particularly, upon any Sense of Scripture that was
suddenly and strongly suggested to their Minds. -- They were strangely
uncharitable; expressing themselves censoriously of most others: They had
indeed no Opinion of any but themselves on a religious Account. -- They pleaded
for the SPIRIT'S immediate, extraordinary Guidance in the Manner it is now
pleaded for; and were in most Respects then as they have appeared since. FERRIS
left College before he took his Degree, professing himself a Quaker; and its
said to be now a Quaker-Preacher.

But, as a further Testimony to the Truth of the Account that has been given of
the Corruption of these Gentleman, at College, I shall still add a Letter that
was sent from Mr. ALLEN. when a Student at College, to Mr. BLISS then at a
Distance from it; wherein is discovered the very Spirit of their Father FERRIS,
as well as the Spirit, these Gentlemen have been remarkable for in these Times.
It was intercepted in its Progress, and brought to a Gentleman, who acquainted
the Governors of the College with it, and preserved it, and allowed me to take
a Copy of it; which, so far as the present Affair is concerned in it, is as
follows,

NEW HAVEN. July 1. 1734. YALE COLLEGE.
Worthy Sir, I have of late been greatly at a loss what I ought to do, with
Respect to my carrying at College; being fully persuaded, that GOD HAS CHOSEN
ME FOR HIS: And I Know, my Business is to serve GOD. But here is the Case; I
have not, for some Time past, thought, that I have long Time allotted me in
this World: Therefore, it seems I ought to improve while I have Opportunity;
and have been very much filled with this Thought, That I am not now preparing
aright for any Service of GOD, but that all this Time is and will be lost; for
it seemed to me, that I ought to be about the Work, which GOD has for me to do
in the World, appearing very plain to me, as I thought, that THE SPIRIT SHOULD
TEACH ME ALL THINGS, John 14. 20, 26. I thought sure, the Arm of the LORD is
not shortened, and therefore that I WANTED NOT HUMAN LEARNING, in order to
declare the Will of GOD to the World, which I see perishing by Heaps all around
me; and I desire not to come to Men with Excellency of Speech which is of Man's
Wisdom, which it seemed to me I was heaping up Treasures of. But I think, I
have found out to be contented here, until GOD shall call me in the best Way;
and I am not now concerned what GOD shall do with me. I am fully persuaded, he
designs me to get Glory to his Name, and to do much Service for him somewhere.
And therefore, seeing I am designed for others Good, I ought to be at GOD's
Dispose, who only knows how I can and shall effect this Thing; although it
seems to me very hard and grievous to be, as it were, under the Harrows, and at
the Mercy of evil Men so long in this Place. I think it may be best for the
Interest of Religion to tarry here. -- What has very much contributed to my
Comfort lately is, that I have found several Friends in Town among the common
People, and some whom I long to have more Opportunity with -- But whatsoever I
do of this Kind, must be done PRIVATELY: for there are those who daily and
continually watch for my Halting. --

Yours, etc. TIMOTHY ALLEN.

For Mr. DANIEL BLISS at SPRINGFIELD.

This TIMOTHY ALLEN was, for a while, the Paster of the Church at WEST-HAVEN;
but his old Spirit, reviving and operating in the late Times, in a Manner too
extravagant to be born with, his People entered their Complaints against him,
and he was, after a fair Hearing of the Case, dismissed from them according to
the Method of Discipline, in the CONNECTICUT Churches. Among the many Articles
exhibited against him, I shall single out one; and this I choose to mention
rather than any other, because it is so clearly descriptive of the dangerous
Length, this giving Heed to Impulses, and the Notion of the SPIRIT'S immediate
extraordinary Guidance will carry Men. It is in these Words of a Letter from a
Friend,

SIR,
at your Desire I have looked into the Papers on File, relating to Mr. T. A.
late Minister of WESTHAVEN; and find that one of the Articles charged and
proved against him was, that he had publicly said, that the Word of GOD, as
contained in the old and new Testament, is but as an OLD ALMANAC: For which,
and various other Crimes proved against him, he continuing obstinate, was
deposed by the Consociation.

Test. SAMUEL WHITTELSEY. Scribe.


But leaving this Head of Impulses, and Immediate divine Revelations, as the
Instruments in the late Commotion are concerned in it; I proceed to observe,

That the same Things are become prevalent among the common People, in one
Place and another, all over the Land. After the Example of the Preachers they
admire, they too commonly mistake the Motions of their own Minds for divine
Suggestions, and look for those Communications from the HOLY SPIRIT, which are
proper only to INSPIRED Persons. They talk not of the SPIRIT's Instuence in the
Language good Christians have been used to; but more in the Strain of those,
who, in the Apostles Days, were under his immediate, extraordinary Guidance.
They have many of them, a low Opinion of studied Sermons, as not savouring of
the SPIRIT's Help; while they will gladly hear any who will venture to speak to
them without previous Preparation, whether learned or unlearned (if converted);
imagining they are wonderfnlly assisted by the SPIRIT, as to Matter as well as
Manner: Nay, to such a Height have many got, that they not only see Visions and
hear Voices; but are enabled to such a Discernment of the internal State of
others, that, in a few Minutes, they will six their Character, whether they are
Ministers, or People, and speak of them, and act toward them, accordingly. And
what is still of more dangerous Consequence, the Notions many entertain of the
SPIRIT's Influence are such, as reflect great Dishonor on the written Word.
Their Expressions, on this Head, have been strangely extravagant; as we may
have Occasion to observe in another Place: And so numerous are the Persons who
give Heed to Impulses and Impressions, and such have been the evil Consequences
hereof, that some of the warmest Contenders for the good Work, have been
alarmed publicly to speak against this Spirit.

And I am glad, they begin to see the Necessity of such a Conduct. For this
enthusiastical Spirit, it appears to me, is one of the most dangerous ones that
can take Place in a Land. It Is indeed the true Spirit of QUAKERISM; the
Seed-Plat of Delusion, and has all along been found to be so.

Not that I would be though it to insinuate a Word against the genuine Operations
of the HOLY SPIRIT. There certainly is such a Thing (if we may believe the
Bible) as the Christian's being led, guided, taught, anointed, by the SPIRIT:
And this is as true of the present as of the apostolic Times; though not in the
same Sense: And the Want of Care to distinguish properly here has been the
Occasion of sinful Mistakes, touching the SPIRIT's Influence.

In the first Days of the Gospel, the Apostles and many of the primitive
Christians were under an extraordinary Influence from the SPIRIT. They were
supernaturally helped to speak without taking Though It beforehand what they
should say, to utter themselves in Languages they did not understand, to cast
out Devils, heal Diseases, and do many wonderful Things. But besides this,
there was, even in that Day, another Sort of Influence from the SPIRIT, forming
Men to a Resemblance of the divine Being in moral Holiness, and so a Meetness
for the Glories of the heavenly World. And this is that Influence which is
common to all Ages, and may be expected by Christians now, as well as in the
first Times of the Gospel. And hereby it is, that Faith, Hope, Charity,
Meekness, Humility, and all those other gracious Dispositions are wrought in
Men's Hearts, wherein the Image of GOD, the Power of Godliness, and the Life of
Christianity do truly consist.

This Influence of the SPIRIT does not consist in sudden Impulses and
Impressions, in Visions, Revelations, extraordinary Missions, and the like; but
in working in Men the Preparations for Faith and Repentance, by humbling them
for Sin, and showing them the Necessity of a SAVIOR; then by effecting such a
Change in them, as shall turn them from the Power of Sin and Satan, and make
them new Creatures; and in fine, by carrying on this good Work begun in them,
enabling them to grow in Grace, and patiently continue doing well, 'till of the
Mercy of GOD, through CHRIST, they are crowned with eternal Life: All which he
does in a Way agreeable to our Make as reasonable Creatures, by his Blessing on
the instituted Means for the Accomplishment of these Purposes of Mercy.

Accordingly, the Spirituality of Christians does not lie in secret Whispers,
or audible Voices, or visible Appearances; it does not lie in the Use of more
sublime and spiritual Phrases than are common among sober and good Christians;
it does not lie in immediate Revelations of Men's good Estate, without the
Testimony of Conscience upon through Examination, nor in such extraordinary
Teachings of the SPIRIT as set them above the Scripture, or their own
Endeavors, in an Attendance on appointed Means: I say, the Spirituality of
Christians does not lie in such Things as these; but in their being Partakers
of a spiritual Likeness to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, in Faith; in Purity; in
Lowliness, and Humility; in Love to GOD, and our Neighbors; in Patience,
Meekness and Gentleness; in Contempt of the World, Cont^^^edness with their
Condition, Resignation to God; and in a Word, a Zeal to honor him, and do all
the good they can in the World. This is the Way in which Christians are to be
one Spirit with CHRIST; and by this Spirit it is we know, that we dwell in him,
and be in us: And in this Sense it is, if any are led by the SPIRIT of GOD,
they are the Sons of GOD; and if any have not the Spirit of CHRIST they are
none of his. Such, in whom is found the Fruit of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, are,
properly speaking, spiritual Christians: And as this Fruit abounds more or less
in them, so are they more or less spiritual. And this ought always to be the
Rule of Judgment in this Matter.

It may be common in these Times, for Christians to think themselves spiritual,
not so much according to the spiritual Change of their inner Man, in a
Conformity to the Image and Will of CHRIST, as on Account of some supposed
extraordinary Manifestations of the SPIRIT, by open Vision, or secret Impulse,
or immediate Perception. But it is a dangerous Thing for Men to judge themselves
to be spiritual from these Things, which if they really experience, they may
not be at all the better Men. And the Danger is the greater, because when they
once come to entertain high-flown Notions of the SPIRIT's Influence, and expect
to be immediately and extraordinarily instructed by him, it is great Odds but,
by Degrees, they are led aside into Error and Delusion. 'Twould be no Wonder,
if their Imaginations soon brought them into some Kind of Equality, with the
Prophets and Apostles of old, and they should be carried away with the Conceit
of GOD's revealing himself to them, in a Manner not altogether unlike that of
Inspiration. And if they should now look down upon others with Pity and
Contempt, as Men in the Dark, not having the SPIRIT, to whom the Things of GOD
have not been inwardly revealed, and as guided by carnal Reason, and fleshly
Wisdom; -- it would be no other than might be expected. There are indeed no
Absurdities, either in Principle or Practice, but they are capable of falling
into them; Instances whereof have been common in all Ages of the World. An
Account of the extraordinary Conduct of the New-Lights at NEW LONDON; has
doubtless before this Time reached you at BOSTON; but having been variously
represented, the following Account (which may be depended upon) perhaps may not
be unacceptable.

The Separatists at NEW LONDON sent a Boat over to LONG ISLAND to invite the
grand Enthusiast D -- T over to Organize their Church, (as they termed it). He
arrived on, or about the second Day of March: He was no sooner come to Town,
than he began to rectify some Disorders, he supposed were prevailing among the
Children of God: He published the Messages which he said, he received from the
Spirit in Dreams and otherwise, importing the great Necessity of Mortification
and Contempt of the World; and made them believe that they must put away from
them every Thing that they delighted in, to avoid the heinous Sin of Idolatry,
that Wigs, Cloaks and Breeches, Hoods, Gowns, Rings, Jewels and Necklaces must
be all brought together into one Heap into his Chamber, that they might, by his
solemn Decree, be committed to the Flames; together with certain Books of
Devotion, etc. which he determined to be unsafe to be in the Hands of the
People. Accordingly, they seemed to be in a Strife who should be first in this
meritorious Action, and then was presently made a Pile of Men's and Women's
Apparel and Ornaments to which the grand Director added a Pair of Plush
Breeches which he wore to Town, and which now he would greatly want, were he
not confined in Bed by a Distemper for which I want a Name.

The Books which were committed to the Flames were as follows, BEVERIDGE'S
Thoughts on Religion, part of FLAVEL'S Works, one piece of Mr. HENRY'S,
RUSSEL'S seven Sermons, DYER'S Golden Chain, the Whole Duty of Man, one piece
Dr. INCREASE MATHER'S, one of Dr. COLMAN'S, one of Dr. SEWALL'S, and Dr.
CHAUNCY'S Sermon against Enthusiasm, Mr. ADAM'S Sermons, all that could be had;
FLYNT'S 20 Sermons, BARNARD'S, HOOPER'S, HART'S, SAMUEL RUSSEL'S, BECKWORTH'S,
TODD'S SEABERRY'S and BLISS'S Sermons, with a Book of WILLIAMS and WADSWORTH;
these being called over, were with much Noise and Outcry burnt on the Town
Wharf in the Afternoon of the Sabbath Day, March 6th, just as People were
coming from Meeting, who ran to see if Murder, or some other Mischief was not
about to be done, and so were Witnesses of this their horrid Delusion, and
heard them sing Hallelujahs and Gloria Patri over the Pile, and heard them with
a loud Voice declare, That the Smoke of the Torments of such of the Authors of
the above said Books, as died in the same Belief, as when they set them out,
was now ascending in Hell in like Manner, as they saw the Smoke of these Books
rise. The next Day sundry other Books (to me unknown) were burnt; and the
Clothes, etc. which were ready in a Pile for that Purpose, would certainly have
been consumed, but that one of the Fraternity who loved the World better than
the rest, and was more apprehensive of the ill Aspect this Transaction would
have on their Scheme and Party, came running and diverted them from it for that
Time.

The New-Light Ministers round about are at a loss how to conduct themselves,
and how to make a Plaster for this Sore. --

We are ready to hope, that God, who brings Good out of Evil, Light out of
Darkness, and Order out of Confusion, by Means of these extraordinary Things,
will open the Eyes of People, and put a Stop to the Growth of Error and
Enthusiasm in this Land.

N. B the New-Lights, by a solemn Decree, ordered Mr. PARSONS'S wonderful piece
(preached and printed at Boston) into the Flames at New London.


A remarkable Instance we have lately had at NEWLONDON, in the horrible Action
performed there, under the Influence of Messieurs DAVENPORT, and ALLEN; a
particular Account whereof was soon sent me by an able faithful Friend, and has
since been confirmed, and is now generally known and acknowledged to be the
Truth. It is in the following Words.


Pertinent here are the Words of the excellent Mr. FLAVEL. Says he, His Works.
Vol. 364, 365.
In the beginning of our Reformation by LUTHER, CALVIN etc, there sprung up a
Generation of Men, called SWENKFELDIANS, great Pretenders to Revelations, and
Visions, who were always speaking of Deifications; and an higher Strain of
Language they commonly used among themselves, than other serious Christians
understood, and therefore scornfully entitled orthodox and humble Christians,
who stuck to Scripture Phrase, and wholesome Form of sound Words, Grammatists,
Vocabulists, Literalists, etc. These Men (as SCULTETUS in his Annels, ad Annum
1525, observes of them) were so entangled in certain enthusiastic Snares, that
they though it it the highest Impiety to renounce them: And they had besool'd
Multitudes with their magnificent Words of Illumination, Revelation,
Deification.

Much of the same Spirit was THOMAS MUNTZER, JOHN of LEYDEN, DAVID GEORGE,
JACOB BEHMAN, etc whose cloudy Nonsense, enigmatical Expressions, and wilful
Obscurity, drew many into a strange Admiration of them: They all pretended to
an higher Knowledge of Mysteries than what the Gospel is acquainted with; and
yet give us, as Mr. BAXTER well observes, His Book of the Sin against the HOLY
GHOST. P. 148.
Neither Reasons with ARISTOTLE, nor Miracles with CHRIST and his Apostles, to
cause us to believe any of their new Revelations.

Of the same Bran were our late Familists in ENGLAND, of whom HENRY NICHOLS was
their chief Leader; who decried the written Word as a dead Letter, and set up
their own fond Conceits and Fancies, under the Notion of the SPIRIT; against
whom that heavenly and learned Man, Mr. SAMUEL RUTHERFORD, seasonably and
successfully appeared. HACKET, COPINGER, and ARTHINGTON, were of the same
Tribe, who lived a while wrapped up in ANTINOMIAN Fancies, which at last break
forth into the highest and most horrid Blasphemies.

Having mentioned these Instances of an enthusiastic Spirit, he observes upon
them in the following Words, The Design of Satan in these Things is, to gain
Credit to those Sects, as People peculiarly favored and beloved of GOD above
others, as if they were the peculiar Favorites of Heaven, as DANIEL was; and
so to draw the Multitude to admire their Persons, and espouse their Errors.

The Remedies he has provided against such Enthusiasm are these three, with
which I shall close this Head.

1. Whatever Doctrine or Practice seeks Credit to itself this Way, falls justly
thereby under Suspicion, that it wants a solid Scripture-Foundation. GOD has
not left his People to seek Satisfaction in such uncertain Ways as these; but
has given a surer Word of Prophecy, to which they do well to take Heed. 2 Pet.
2. 19.
He has tied us to the standing Rule of the Word, forbidding us to give Heed
to any other Voice, or SPIRIT, leading us another Way. Isa. 8. 19. 2 These. 2.
1, 2. Gal. 1. 8.
Scripture Light is a safe and sure Light, a pleasant and sufficient Light. The
Scripture (faith LUTHER) is so full, that as for Visions and Revelations, nec
curo, nec desidero. I neither regard, nor desire them. And when he himself had
a Vision of CHRIST, after a Day of Fasting and Prayer, he cried out, Avoid
Satan, I know no Image of CHRIST, but the Scripture. An bankering Mind after
these Things, Speaks a sickly and distempered State of Soul; as longing after
Trash in young distempered Persons, does a distempered State, or ill Habit of
Body.

2. Consider, how often the World has been abused by the Tricks and Cheats of
that officious Spirit, the Devil, in such Ways as these. What has propagated
Idolatry among Heathens and Christians more than this? Hinc fluxerent multoe
Perigrinationes, Monasteria, delubra, dies festi, et alia, faith LAVATER, in
Job 33. Pilgrimages, Monasteries, Shrines of Saints, Holy Days, etc. have been
introduced by this Trick. 'Twereendless to give Instances of it in the
Histories of former Ages. Of the Prophecies, Visions, and pretended
Inspirations, of STORKE, PFEIFFER, BECOLD, WARENDORP, etc. with the Efficacy of
them, on the deluded People, and the fatal Consequences, both to the deceived
and Deceivers; See Mr. SAMUEL RUTHERFURD of the Spiritual Antichrist. See also
the Gospel Way confirmed by Miracles, published in the Year 1649; where you
will find the free Confession of ANN WELLS, MATTHEW HALL, etc. deluding the
People of WHATFIELD, in SUFFOLK, with such pretended Voices, Visions,
Prophecies, and Revelations, the like to which have been scarcely heard of in
ENGLAND, since the Reformation. Multitudes were deluded by them.


3. Consider, how difficult, yea, and impossible it is for a Man to determine,
that such a Voice, Vision, or Revelation, is of GOD, and that Satan cannot
feign or counterfeit it, seeing he has left no certain Marks by which we may
distinguish One Spirit from another. Sure we are, Satan can transform himself
into an Angel of Light. And therefore abandoning all those unsafe and uncertain
Ways, whereby Swarms of Errors have been conveyed into the World, let us cleave
inseparably to the clear Word of Prophecy, the Rule and Standard of our Faith
and Duty.

Another Thing that very much tends, as I apprehend, to do Hurt to the Interest
of Religion, is the Ri^^ of so many Exhorters. A Stranger to this Land, and the
present Appearance in it, may be at a Loss to know, who are meant by these
Exhorters: And I Am really ashamed to say, that the Persons pointed out by them,
are Men of -all Occupations, who are vain enough to think themselves fit to be
Teachers of others; Men who, though they have no Learning, and but small
Capacities, yet imagine they are able, and without Study too, to speak to the
Spiritual Profit of such as are willing to hear them: Nay, there are among
these Exhorters, Babes in Age, as well as Understanding. They are chiefly
indeed young Persons, sometimes Lads, or rather Boys: Nay, Women and Girls;
yea, Negroes, have taken upon them to do the Business of Preachers. Nor has
this been accidental only, or in a single Place, or at a Private House; but
there is scarce a Town in all the Provinces, where this Appearance has been,
but there have been also these Exhorters, in smaller or greater Numbers:
Neither have they contented themselves to speak in the more private Meetings of
Christians, but have he^d forth in the public Congregations.

This has lately been, and still is, the State of Things in the Land, upon this
Head. And however some may have a good Opinion of the Exhortations of these
Persons, and encourage them in this Practice, it is certainly a very bad one,
and portends Evil to these Churches.

The Apostolic Canons, forbidding Women to speak in the Church, are so
peremptory, that not a Word can be said in Favor of their Exhortations. We
must give up all Pretense to the Scripture as our Rule, if we may depart from
it in a Case, wherein the Mind of CHRIST has been, in so express a Manner, made
known to us. Read 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35, and 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12; and then say,
whether their speaking in the House of GOD, can be reconciled with these
positive Injunctions to the Contrary.

And as to others, who abide not in their own Calling, but take upon them the
Business that is assigned to others, they throw the Body of CHRIST into great
Disorder. For as in the Body natural there are various Members, adapted to
various Uses; so it is in the mystical Body of CHRIST. All are not Apostles, and
Prophets, and Teachers; And if those who sustain the Place of one Member, will
take upon them to act the Part that is proper to another, what may be expected
but. Confusion? -- But having largely expressed my Thoughts upon this Head, in
some late Sermons that have been made public, instead of repeating what I have
already said, or offering any Thing further of my own, I shall transcribe what
some others have delivered to the World, whose Names. I know, are held, and
justly too, in great Veneration in these Churches.

The excellent Mr. GURNALL, in explaining what it is for Christians to stand,
among other Particulars, mentions this, See his Discourses upon Ephesians. 6. 14.
Page. 4.
To stand orderly, it is requisite that we keep the Bounds of our Place and
Calling. -- GOD allows no Stragglers from their Station in his Army of Saints.
As the LORD has called every Man, so let him walk, 1 Cor. 7. 17. Our Walk must
be in that Path which our Call beats out. We are therefore commanded every one
to do his own Business, 1 These. 4. 11. That which is the Commander's Business
in an Army, is not the private Soldier's; the Magistrate's, not the Subject's;
the Minister's, not the People's. That which is Justice in the Ruler, is Murder
in another. There are our own Things, that come within the Compass of our
general or particular Calling: Out of these we are out of our Diocese. O what a
quiet World should we have, if every Thing and Person knew his own Place! If
the Sea kept its own Place, we should have no Inundation; if Men had kept
theirs, we should neither have seen such Floods of Sin, nor Miseries, as this
unhappy Age has been almost drowned with. But it must be a strong Bank indeed
that can contain our sluid Spirits within our own Terms. PETER himself, was
sharply chid, for prying, out of a Curiosity, into that which concerned him
not. What is that to thee? John 21. 22. As if CHRIST had said, PETER, meddle
with thy own Matters, this concerns not thee: Which sharp Rebuke, says one,
might possibly make PETER afterward give so strict a Charge against, and set
so b^ack a Brand upon, this very Sin, as you may find, 1 Pet. 4. 15, where he
ranks the Busie-Body among Murderers and Thieves.

And among the Considerations, which this pious Divine proposes as of Weight,
in order to fix every one in his Place, this is one, The same Discourses, P. 5.
6.
That it is an erratic Spirit that usually carries Men out of their Place and
Calling. I confess (says he) there is an Heroicus Impetus, an Impulse, which
some of the Servants of GOD have had from Heaven, to do Things extraordinary,
as we read in Scripture of MOSES, GIDEON, PHINEHAS, and others. But it is
dangerous to pretend to the like, and unlawful to expect such immediate
Commissions from Heaven now, when he issues them out in a more ordinary Way,
and gives Rules for the same in his Word. We may as well expect to be taught
extraordinarily, without using the ordinary Means, as to be called so. When I
see any miraculously gifted, as the Prophets and Apostles, then I shall think
the immediate Calling they pretend to is authentic. To be sure, we find in the
Word, extraordinary Calling, and extraordinary Teaching, go together. Well, let
us see what that erratic Spirit is, which carries many out of their Place and
Calling. It is not always the same; sometimes its Idleness. First, Men neglect
what they Should do, and then are easily persuaded to meddle with what they
have nothing to do. The Apostle intimates this plainly, 1 Timothy 5. 13. They
learn to be idle, wandering from House to House, and not only idle, but
BusieBodies. An idle Person is a Gadder; he has his Foot on the Threshold,
easily drawn from his own Place, and as soon into another's Diocese, He is at
Leisure to hear the Devil's Chat. He that will not serve GOD in his own Place,
the Devil, rather than he shall stand out, will send him on his Errand, and get
him to put his Sickle into another's Corn. Secondly, Its Pride and Discontent
that makes Persons go out of their Place. Some Men are in this very unhappy,
their Spirits are too big and haughty for the Place GOD has set them in. Their
Calling, may be, is mean and low, but their Spirits high and towering; and
whereas they should labor to bring their Hearts to their Condition, they
project how they may bring their Condition to their proud Hearts. They think
themselves very unhappy, while they are shut up in such straight Limits. Shall
they be hid in a Crowd, lie in an obscure Corner, and die before they let the
World know their Worth? No, they cannot brook it; and therefore they must get on
the Stage, and put forth themselves one Way or other. It was not the Priest's
Work, that CORAH and his Accomplices were so in Love with, but the Priest's
Honor which attended the Work: This they desired to share, and liked not to
see others run away with it from them: Nor was it the Zeal which ABSALOM had to
do Justice, which made his Teeth water so after his Father's Crown, though this
must silver over his Ambition. These Places of Church and State are such fair
Flowers, that proud Spirits, in all Ages, have been ambitious to have them set
in their own Garden; though they never thrive so well as in their proper Soil.
In a third, it is Unbelief. This made UZZAH stretch forth his Hand unadvisedly
to stay the Ark that shook, which, being not a Levite, he was not to touch.
Alas! good Man, it was his Faith shook more dangerously than the Ark: By
fearing the Fall of this, he fell to the Ground himself. GOD needs not our Sin
to shore up his Glory, Truth, or Church. Lastly, in some it is misinformed
Zeal. Many think they may do a Thing, because they can do it. They can preach,
and so they may. Wherefore else have they Gifts? Certainly the Gifts of the
Saints need not be lost, any of them; though they be not laid out in the
Minister's Work. The Private Christian has a large Field, wherein he may be
serviceable to his Brethren. He need not break the Hedge GOD has set, and
thereby occasion such Disorders as we see to be the Consequence of this. We
read, in the Jewish Law, Exodus 22, that he who set a Hedge on Fire, and that
Fire burnt the Corn standing in the Field, was to make Restitution, though he
only fired the Hedge (may be not intending to hurt the Corn); and the Reason
was, because his firing the Hedge was the Occasion of the Corn's being burnt,
though he meant it not. I dare not say, that every private Christian, who has,
in these Times, taken upon him the Minister's Work, did intend to make such a
Combustion in the Church, as has been, and still sadly is among us. (GOD
forbid I should think so!) But O that I could clear them from being accessory
to it, in that they have fired the Hedge which GOD has set between the
Minister's Calling and their's. If we will acknowledge the Ministry a
particular Office in the Church of CHRIST (and this I think the Word will
compel us to do) then we must also confess, it is not any one's Work, though
never so able, except called to the Office.

The next Author I would transcribe from, is holy Mr. FLAVEL; and the rather,
because he has largely and clearly expressed himself upon this Head. Among the
most successful Methods used by false Teachers to draw Multitudes of Disciples
after them, one that he particularly mentions is, His Works, Vol. 1. Page 633,
634.
Their granting to the ignorant and ambitious among them the Liberty of
Prophesying; the flattering them into a Conceit of their excellent Gifts, and
Seize, when (as he says) GOD knows, they had more Need to be catechized,
and taught the Principles of Christianity, than undertake to expound and apply
those profound Mysteries to others.

Satan (he goes on) has filled the Church and World with Errors and Troubles
this Way. When ignorant and unexperienced Persons begin to think it a low and
dull Thing to sit, from Year to Year, under other Men's Teachings, and so fancy
that they are wiser than their Teachers, their Pride will quickly tempt them to
show their Ignorance; and that mischeivous Ignorance will prove dangerous to
the Truth, and troublesome to the Churches. The Apostle forbids the Ordination
of a Novice, left he be puffed up, and fall into the Condemnation of the Devil.
And in 1 Timothy 1. 7. he shows us the Reason, why some swerved and turned aside
unto vain Jangling; and it was this, that they desired to be Teachers of the
Law, neither understanding what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. That is,
they affected to be Preachers, though not able to speak congruously, with
tolerable Sense and Reason.

I do not here censure and condemn the Use and Exercise of the Gifts of all
private Christians. There are to be found among them some Persons of RAISED
PARTS, and ANSWERABLE MODESTY AND HUMILITY, who may be very useful, when CALLED
to Service, in EXTRAORDINARY CASES, by the Voice of Providence; or exercise
their Gifts in a probationary Way, or in DUE SUBORDINATION unto CHRIST'S
public Offices, and Ordinances, by and with the Consent of the PASTOR, and
Congregation.

But when unqualified and uncalled Persons undertake such a Work, out of the
Conceit or Pride of their Hearts, or are allured to it by the crafty Design of
erroneous Teachers, partly to overthrow a public, regular, and standing
Ministry in the Churches, to which End the Scriptures are manifestly abused,
such as Jer 31. 34. Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Pet. 4. 10. with many others; this
is the Practice I here censure, which, like a Trojan Horse, has sent forth
Multitudes of erroneous Persons into the City of GOD, to infest and defile it.

I cannot doubt, but many a sincere Christian may be drawn into such
Employment, which puts him in a Capacity of honoring GOD in a more eminent
Way, which is a Thing desirable to an honest and zealous Heart; and that the
Temptation may be greatly strengthened upon their, by the plausible Suggestions
of cunning Seducers, who tell them, that those Ministers who oppose and condemn
this Practice, do it as Men concerned for their own Interest, as desirous to
monopolize the Work to themselves, and as envying the LORD's People; and that
CHRIST has given them grater Liberty in this Case, than those Men will allow
them. By this Means they draw many after them, and fix them in their erroneous
Ways.

I have no Mind at all here, to expose the Follies and Mischiefs introduced
this Way; as neither being willing to grieve the Hearts of the Sincere on one
Side, nor gratify scoffing Atheists, and profane Enemies to Religion, on the
other Side: Only, this I will, and must say, that by this Means the sacred
Scriptures are most injuriously wrested, the Peace and Order of the Church
disturbed, and a great many Mistakes and Errors introduced.

The Remedies, he prescribes for the Cure of this Evil, are these that follow,

1. Let all that encourage others, or undertake by others Encouragement, such a
Work as this, for which they are not competently qualified, and unto which they
are not regularly called, consider seriously with themselves, what Danger they
cast their own and other Men's Souls upon. The Apostle tells us, 2 Pet. 3. 16.
That the unlearned and unstable do wrest the Scriptures to their own
Destruction. Danger enough, one would think, to scare them from it, did not the
same Sin of Ignorance, which makes them wrest the Scriptures, cause them also
to slight and overlook the Danger of so doing. Certainly, my Friends, it is a
great deal safer, and more excusable, to put an Ignorant Rustic into an
Apothecary's Shop to compound a Medicine of Drugs and Spirits, which he
understands not, and confidently administer the same to the Bodies of Men, than
for such Persons as are led by Ignorance and Confidence, to intermeddle with
the ministerial Employment. The one, perhaps, by Mistake, may poison Men's
Bodies; but the other their Souls. An ignorant Pilot or Master, that never
learned the Compass, are rather to be trusted, among Rocks and Quicksands,
than a proud, ignorant Person with the Conduct of Souls.

2. What daring Presumption is it to intrude ourselves into so great and
weighty an Employment, without any Call or Warrant of CHRIST? Romans 10. 14. If
every Phaeton, that thinks himself able, shall undertake to drive the Chariot
of the Sun, no Wonder if the World be set on Fire. Gifts, and Abilities of
Mind, are not of themselves sufficient to make a Preacher. Some Lawyers at the
Bar may be as skilful as the Judge upon the Bench; but without a Commission
they dare not sit there.

3. The Honor you affect, to vent your unfound Notions with Liberty, is, in
ScriptureAccount, your greatest Dishonor. The Scripture reckons false Teachers
among the basest of the People. The Prophet that teaches Lies, he is the Tail.
i. e. the basest Part of the whole Body of the People, Isa. 9. 15. And so far
is due Gospel-Liberty from countenancing such dangerous Irregularities, that we
find in a clear Prophecy of Gospel Times, what Shame GOD will pour upon them.
Zech. 13. 4, 5. They shall be brought with Shame enough to confess, I am no
Prophet, I am no Husbandman, or Man taught to keep cattle from my Youth.

4. How much more safe, regular, and advantageous were it for such as you, to
fill your own proper Places, under able and faithful Gospel Ministers, and to
suck the Breasts of fruitful Ordinances, than to consume and pine away by
sucking your own Breasts? I mean, living upon your own weak and insufficient
Gifts, in the sinful Neglect of CHRIST'S Appointments?

Worthy also of a Place here are the Words of the famous Mr. BOLTON; and the
rather, as they are admirably descriptive of some of the Exhorters of the
present Day. His general Directions for a comfortable Walking with GOD, P. 48,
49.
Others there are (says he) who may gloriously pretend, and protest with great
Bravery and Confidence, their Assent and Assistance to the best and holiest
Courses; put on a temporary counterfeit Profession, and fashionable Conformity
to the Communion of Saints, that thereby they may pass more fairly and
plausibly, out of one Calling into another; from a baser, lower, more
neglected, and toilsome Trade, into some other of more Liberty, Acceptance and
Ease: Or else break out of all Callings; and so, by the unhallowed Mystery of a
sacred Cozening, if I may so call it, live upon their Profession; and by
abusing the tender Consciences of weak Christians, with the controuling and
countermanding Tyrannies, as it were, of an affected, furious Zeal, suck out of
them no small Advantage, and prey too plentifully upon the People of GOD. Such
as these are ready to pretend, and intimate, that such base, earthly, and
worldly Employment, and spending of their Time, is disgraceful, and derogatory
to the Providence of GOD, and their Christian Liberty; that with unworthy
Detainments, and Avocations, it interrupts them in the Pursuit of their general
Calling; disables and hinders them in Discharge of holy Duties. But let them
know, that Christianity, if sound and true, does not nullify, but sanctify our
Particular Callings. Thou ought to continue with Conscionableness and
Constancy in that personal Calling, where thy Calling to Grace did find thee,
if it be warrantable and lawful. He proceeds in the next Paragraph,

If any Man then, upon giving up his Name to Religion, shall grow into Neglect,
Distaste, or Dereliction of his honest particular Calling; we may ever strongly
suspect him of Hollowness and Hypocrisy. It is the Confident Conclusion of a
very learned and holy Divine, PERKINS of Callings, P. 734.
Though a Man be endued with excellent Gifts, and be able to speak well,
conceive Prayer, etc. with some Reverence to hear the Word, and receive the
Sacraments; yet, if he practice not the Duties of Godliness within his own
Calling, all is but Hypocrisy. And a little onwards, A true Convert therefore
is so far from casting off his personal Calling, that after his calling, to
Christianity, he is will not to discharge the Duties thereof with far, more Care
and Conscience, though with a better Mind, more moderate Affections, and for a
blesseder End.

I cannot break off more pertinently than in the Words of Mr. BAXTER, which I
can heartily recommend, as containing the very Advice I would give at this Day.
His Works, Vol. 3. Page. 203.
Association, says he, breeds Familiarity; and Familiarity breeds Love; and
Familiarity and Love to the Godly does lead to Familiarity and Love to GOD and
Godliness. Use therefore often to meet together, besides the more public
Meeting in the Congregation; not to vent any unsound Opinions, nor yet in
Distaste of the public Meeting, nor in Opposition to it, nor at the Time of
public Worship; not yet to make a groundless Schism, or to Separate from the
Church whereof you are Members; nor to destroy the old, that you may gather a
new Church out of its Ruins, as long as it has the Essentials, and there is
Hope of reforming it; nor yet would I have you forward to vent your own
supposed Gifts, and Parts, and Teaching; -- nor to attempt that in the
Interpretation of difficult Scriptures, or Explication of difficult
Controversies, which is beyond your Ability, though perhaps Pride may tell you,
that you are as able as any. But the Work I would have you meet about is this,
to repeat together the Word you have heard in public, to pour out your
Joint-Prayers for the Church, and yourselves; to join in cheerful Singing the
Praises of GOD; to open your Scruples, and Doubts, and Fears, and get
Resolution; to quicken each other in Love, and Heavenliness, and holy walking:
And all this, not as a separated Church, but as a Part of the Church more
diligent than the rest in redeeming Time, and helping the Souls of each other
Heavenward.

I know that many of late do abuse private Meetings to Schism, and to vilisy
GOD'S Ordinances, and vent the windly Issue of their empty Brains. But betwixt
these Extremes I advise you to walk; and neither to forsake the Assembling of
yourselves together, as the Manner of some is; not yet to be carried about with
diverse and strange Doctrines: But let all your private Meetings be in
Subordination to the public; and by the Approbation and Consent of your
spiritual Guides, and not without them of your own Heads.

Another bad Thing, I must not omit to mention is, the Confusion that has been
so common, of late, in some of our Houses for Worship; I mean not only on
Account of the Screamings and Shriekings of the People, but their talking, and
praying, and exhorting, and singing, and laughing, and congratulating one
another by shaking Hands, and sometimes kissing; and all at the same Time, and
in the same Assembly: On which Things their Hearts have been zealously set,
that the same Houses have scarce been emptied for a Week together, Night or
Day. It may seem incredible simply to relate these Facts; but they are the real
Truth. Says a Friend, in giving an Account of some Things, he was himself a
Witness to, -- Half a Score of them would be exhorting all together, and more
many Times; and some would be praying; some again would do nothing but sing,
and that for an Hour, or more: And thus there would be exhorting, praying,
singing, all at the same Time by those different Persons; whereby the Noise was
so confused and loud, that a Person could scarce speak to another so as to be
heard. And a little onwards, -- The Meeting was carried on with what appeared
to me great Confusion; some screaming out in Distress and Anguish; some
praying; others singing; some again jumping up and down the House, while others
were exhorting; some lying along on the Floor, and others walking and talking:
The whole with a very great Noise, to be heard at a Mile's Distance, and
continued almost the whole Night. And yet again, Many of the young Women would
go about the House praying and exhorting; then they would separate themselves
from the other People, and get into a Corner of the House to sing and rejoice
together; and then they would break forth into as great a Laughter as could be,
to think, as they expressed it, that they should go Hand in Hand to Heaven. Then
they would speak it over again, and shout out into a great Laughter, laughing
and singing, jumping up and down, and clapping their Hands together; and some
would be so filled with Joy, as they pretended, that they could not stand or
walk: And all this, when, at the same Time, there were threescore Persons
lying, some on the Floor, some across the Seats, while others were held up and
supported in great Distress. And, after some other Things upon the Times he
adds, Thus they spent more than seven Days. The Meeting House was scarce empty,
but some or other were there, the whole of the Time, both Night and Day.
Agreeable whereto is another Account from another Part of the Country, -- They
had a public Exercise every Day, and for nine Nights successively. Numbers of
the People continued the greatest Part of the Night, in the utmost Disorder.
They were groaning, crying out, fainting, falling down, praying; exhorting,
singing, laughing, congratulating each other, which they did by shaking Hands
and Embraces. (the latter was commonly practiced by different Sexes) and by the
fifth Night, there were almost three Hundred thus affected, who were acting
their different Parts at the same Time; which occasioned inexpressible
Confusion, and rendered it impossible to make a just Observation upon all that
passed; but I evidently found. -- To the like Purpose is what we have printed
in the BOSTON Post-Boy, Numb. 391.
He (Mr. D -- T) and some other Ministers, and young gifted Brethren, held
forth every Day on the Commencement Week, and generally continued 'till ten or
eleven at Night, and then a great Part of their Carryings on was, not by
praying, singing, and Preaching upon a Text as usual; but one would make a
short Prayer, then another give a Word of Exhortation: Then one would propose a
Psalm, then another a Prayer, then another a Word of Exhortation, and so on,
without any certain Order, or Method; so that in one Meeting of two or three
Hours, there would be, it may be, 20 or 30 distinct Exercises carried on, by 5
or 10 distinct Persons; some standing in the Pulpit, some in the Body of the
Seats, some in the Pews, and some up Gallery; and oftentimes, several of them
would speak together: So that some praying, some exhorting, and terrifying,
some singing, some screaming, some crying, some laughing, and some scolding,
made the most amazing Confusion that ever was heard.

I could go on with Accounts of this Nature, as I have had them from Numbers of
Persons, upon the Evidence of their own Eyes and Ears; but it is needless in so
plain a Case. There are few Places, where the late Commotion has been;
especially, where it has been spoken of as remarkable, but there has been this
Appearance also in a less or greater Degree: Yea, and so high were the People
in their Opinion of it, as a Sigh of the extraordinary Presence of the SPIRIT
with them, that if you talked with them to show them the Indecency of such
Carryings on, they would only pity you, and speak of you, as poor carnal
Sinners, destitute of the SPIRIT, and in the broad Way to Hell.

To such as may still be of this Temper of Mind, I have nothing to say, as not
thinking them fit Persons to be reasoned with; and as to others in the sober
Exercise of their Understanding, the bare Relation of such Extravagancies is
enough to expose them; especially, when they are compared with the like
Disorders in the Church of CORINTH, condemned by the Apostle PAUL, 1 Cor. 14.
23, 26.
and upon this eternal Maxim of Truth, That GOD is not the Author of Confusion,
but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. V. 33.


The last Thing I shall mention as of dangerous Tendency, is that Spirit of
Error which is gone forth into the Land. And here it will be necessary to
descend to Particulars, under each of which I might easily enlarge, but find my
self obliged to contract, lest this Volume swell beyond its intended Size.

The first Error I would take Notice of, is that which supposes Ministers, if
not converted, incapable of being the Instruments of spiritual Good to Men's
Soals. Mr. WHITEEIELD very freely vented this Error. I have myself been
present, when he delivered that from the Pulpit, upon this Head, which I could
not but think very unsafe; and, in what he has wrote, his Language is such as
evidently tends to lead People into wrong Sentiments about the Preaching of
Ministers, if thought to be unconverted. His Words are these, Journal at
NEW ENGLAND, P. 70.
The Reason why Congregations have been so dead, is because they have dead Men
preaching to them. -- For how can dead Men beget living Children? Its true
indeed, GOD may convert People by the Devil, if he pleases; and so he may by
unconverted Ministers. But I believe, he seldom makes Use of either of them for
this Purpose. Mr. TENNENT'S Language upon this Head of unconverted Ministers is
much the same. In his Sermon at NOTTINGHAM, P. 8. He has these Words, Is a dead
Man fit to bring others to Life? Sad Experience verifies the Unprofitableness
of the Ministry of unconverted Men. -- What if some Instances could be shown of
unconverted Ministers being instrumental in convincing Persons of their lost
Estate? The Thing is very rare and extraordinary. And for what I know as many
Instances might he given of Satan's convincing Persons by his Temptations.
Indeed, its a Kind of Chance-Medley, both in Respect of his Father and his
Children, when any such Event happens.
No, the LORD will choose Vessels made meet by the Operation of the BLESSED
SPIRIT for his sacred Use. And a few Pages onwards, P. 85, 86.
I insisted much, in my Discourse upon the Doctrine of the New Birth, and also
the Necessity of a Minister's being converted, before he could preach CHRIST
aright. -- Unconverted Ministers are the Bane of the Christian Church. And in
his Sermon at GLASGOW, on Luke 4. 18, 19. It is absolutely necessary before a
Minister undertake to preach the Gospel, that he have an experimental
Acquaintance with JESUS CHRIST. Page 6. It is indeed impossible in the very
Nature of Things, that a Man should preach CHRIST who does not know him. Page
8. I believe GOD does not convert others by unconverted Men. P. 12.

I don't observe, in these Passages, any Distinction between Ministers in a
private Capacity as Christians, and as Officers in the Church of CHRIST. In the
first Sense, Conversion is as necessary for Ministers as People; nor can they,
except they be converted, enter into the Kingdom of GOD. But Conversion does
not appear to be alike necessary for Ministers in their public Capacity, as
Officers in the Church. That they should be converted is, no doubt, a Matter of
great Importance; nor will it be denied, that converted Ministers, coetcris
paribus, are much the best qualified Persons to serve the great Ends of the
Ministry, in forming Men to Holiness, and building them up through Faith unto
Salvation: But that this is necessary to their being true Ministers, we no
where find in the Word of GOD; much less that they can no more beget (i. e. as
Instruments) Children in the Spiritual, than dead Men can in the natural Sense:
Nor are they, any where in the Bible, compared to the Devil, and put upon a
Parwith him in Respect of Unfitness, as Instruments in the Business of
Conversion, or the Likelihood of GOD's making Use of them as Instruments in
this Work. Suggestions of this Nature are the Fruit of Men's own Imaginations,
and not what they have fetched from that unerring Rule, the Scripture of Truth.

Neither does this Gentleman distinguish between visible and real Conversion;
which is a very necessary Distinction in this Case. It Is readily owned, VISIBLY
unconverted Men are unfit to be Ministers, and ought not to be so. That is to
say, Men who are visibly unsound in the Faith, or of a bad Life, should, upon
no Terms, be admitted into the Ministry; or if, after they have been in the
Ministry, this should appear to be their Character, they ought to be turned out
of it. But can this be truly said of those who are visibly, though not really,
the Men it is required they should be? By no Means. The LORD JESUS CHRIST has
given his Church no Rule by which they can discover secret Hypocrisy: And
notwithstanding the closest Adherence to Scripture Directions, Hypocrites may
be admitted into the Ministry; and being admitted, cannot but on visible
Evidence be excluded; nay, as the Case may be, it would be an open Violation of
the Laws of JESUS CHRIST to displace them from their Office. And would CHRIST
have suffered it to be thus, if Persons visibly holy, though not really and
inwardly so, might not be employed in the Work of the Ministry? If such were as
unfit as the Devil for this Employment, and as unlikely to be used as
Instruments for Good to Men's Souls, is it possible the compassionate JESUS
should leave his Church without some certain Criterion, by which they might
know, who were inwardly hypocritical when their outward Appearance was good,
and who were not? And for Want of such a Mark, must not the Minds of serious,
well-dispos'd People, be in eternal Perplexities about their Ministers, as not
being able to know whether they are really converted, and not having sufficient
Means to k^ow?

The Truth of the Matter, in short, is this; VISIBLE Holiness is that alone,
the Laws of JESUS CHRIST will allow us to judge by; and if Ministers are holy
in this Sense, they are to be treated as the Ministers of CHRIST; and People
may in Faith attend their Preaching, hoping for a divine Blessing:

Nor is it reasonable to think a merciful GOD would withhold his Blessing,
merely because the Preacher is not the Man inwardly, he professes to be
outwardly. It Is indeed a downright popish Principle to make the Efficacy of
Ordinances depend on the unknown secret Holiness of the Administrators of them.

Agreeable to these Sentiments is the following Article, in the WESTMINSTER
Confession of Faith, Chapter 26. Sect. 3,
The Grace which is exhibited in, or by the Sacraments rightly used, is not
conferred by any Power in them: Neither does the EFFICACY of a Sacrament depend
upon the PIETY, or Intention of him that does administer it; but upon the Work
of the SPIRIT, and the Word of Institution, which contains, together with a
Precept authorizing the Use thereof, a Promise of Benefit to worthy Receivers.
It may be worth a Remark, this Article has a Place, Word for Word, in the
NEW ENGLAND Confession of Faith, drawn up, owned and consented to, by the
Elders and Messengers of these Churches, assembled in BOSTON, May 12. 1660;
being the Second Session of that Synod. Chapter 28. Sect. 3.
And consonant hereto is the 26th Article of the Church of ENGLAND. The Words
are. Although in the visible Church, the Evil be ever mingled with the Good,
and sometime the Evil have chief Authority in the Ministration of the Word and
Sacraments: Yet, forasmuch as they do not the same in their own Name, but in
CHRIST'S; and do minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their
Ministry, both in hearing the Word of GOD, and in receiving the Sacraments.
Neither is the Effect of CHRIST'S Ordinance taken away by THEIR WICKEDNESS, nor
the Grace of GOD'S Gifts diminished from such, as by Faith, and rightly, do
receive the Sacraments ministered to them; which be EFFECTUAL because of
CHRIST's Institution and Promise, although they be ministered by evil Men.

Upon which I would observe, This is one of the Articles, Mr. W -- D subscribed
at his Ordination; expressing both his Assent and Consent to it as the Truth of
GOD: Yea, this is one of those Articles, he, some Time before his Ordination,
made Observations upon, and proved by Scripture, as he himself declares. See
his Life, Page 40.
And as he has so often publicly chastis'd others for contradicting with their
Lips, and Pens, what they had subscribed with their Hands, I hope he will
consider his own Conduct, and, for the Time to come, pay a greater Regard to
this Article he has subscribed to as true, and proved to be so from Scripture;
or no more fault that in others, for which he is to blame himself.

The Words of Bp BURNET, in his Exposition of this Article will come in
pertinently here. Says he, His Exposition of the 39 Articles, P. 295, 296.
The Occasion that was given to this Article, was the Heat of some in the
Beginnings of the Reformation; who being much offended at the public Scandal
which was given by the enormous Vices that were, without any Disguise,
practiced by the Roman Clergy, did from thence revive the Conceit of the
DONATISTS, who thought that not only Heresy and Schism did invalidate sacred
Functions, but that personal Sins did also make them void. Upon which he thus
argues, Sacraments are to be considered as public Acts of the Church; and
though the Effect of them, as to him that receives them, depends upon his
Temper, his Preparation and Application, yet it cannot be imagined, that the
Virtue of those foederal Acts, to which Christians are admitted in them, the
Validity of them, or the Blessings that follow them, can depend on the secret
State or Temper of him that officiates. Even in the Case of public Scandals, --
we must distinguish between the Things which the Ministers of the Church do, as
they are public Officers, and what they do as they are private Christians.
Their Prayers and every Thing else that they do, as they are private
Christians, have their Effect only according to the State and Temper they are
in, when they offer them up to GOD; but their public Functions are the
Appointments of CHRIST in which they officiate: They can neither make them the
better, nor the worse by any Thing that they join to them. He therefore
concludes. This Opinion which was taken up, perhaps, from an inconsiderate Zeal
against the Sins and Scandals of the Clergy, is without all Foundation, and
must needs cast all Men into chidless Scraples, which can never be cured.

I shall only add, this Error, which, among us, took Rise from Mr. W -- D, has
been propagated to so many, that it is now the prevailing Opinion among our new
Converts, and I wish I could not say, among some of their Leaders also: And to
such a Height are they grown in it, that the worst Names are not thought too
bad to bestow upon many Ministers, A surprising Instance of this, we have in
Mr. TENNENT, notwithstanding his Character by Mr. WHITEFIELD, as a mighty
charitable Man. Perhaps, there cannot be produced, out of any Author, a greater
Number of more slanderous Names than he has freely bestowed upon the Body of
the Clergy of this Generation. I shall here present the Reader with a List of
them, as they have been collected out of his Sermon at NOTTINGHAM, and
published by the Synod at PHILADELPHIA. They are therein represented as
Hirelings; Caterpillars; Letter-learned Pharisees; Men that have the Craft of
Foxes, and the Cruelty of Wolves; plaistered Hypocrites; (...) the Seed of the
Serpent; foolish Builders, whom the Devil drives into the Ministry; dry Nurses;
dead Dogs that cannot bark; blind Men; dead Men; Men possessed with the Devil;
Rebels and Enemies to GOD; Guides that are Stone-blind, and Stone-dead;
Children of Satan, that, like their Father, may do good to Men's Souls by
Chance-Medley; Daubers with untempered Mortar; moral Negroes; Salt without
Savor, that sink in the Nostrils of GOD and Man; JUDAS'S, whose chief Desire
is to finger the Penny, and to carry the Bag; murderous Hypocrites, that are to
take Care lest they feel the Force of a Halter in this World, or an aggravated
Damnation in the next; subtle selfish Hypocrites, that would not let one honest
Man come into the Ministry if they could help it; Swarms of Locusts; Crowds of
Pharisees, that have as coveteously, as cruelly, crept into the Ministry, in
this adulterous Generation, who as nearly resemble the Character given of the
old Pharisees, as one Crow's Egg does another, whose Hearers are as blind as
Moles, and dead as Stones: Successors of NICODEMUS; blind Leaders of the Blind;
Formalists; dead Drones; Sons of SCEVA, with a fine long String of Prayers;
false Apostles; deceitful Workers, Ministers of Satan, etc.
not because of any Thing amiss in their Doctrine, or Conversation, but because
they are pleased, in open Violation of the Christian Law of Charity, to look
upon them as unconverted: And as to all such, however exemplary they may have
been for the Purity of their Doctrine and Manners; and this, for a Course of
Years, they are so far from owning them as true Ministers, that they freely
speak of them, as Pharisees, blind Guides, Wolves in Sheep's Clothing,
Ministers of the Devil, and what not. Which leads me to mention another Error
naturally springing from this, viz.

That which justifies People in a Withdraw from those Ministers they look upon
as unconverted, though sound in the Faith, and of a visible good Conversation.
The many separate Meetings in the Land are a Proof of the general Spread of
this Error: Nor are the Gentlemen unknown, who have gone up and down the
Country, preaching this Doctrine, and spiriting People to Schism and Faction.

It Is pretended, they ought not to hear unconverted Ministers. If so, they
ought surely to be well satisfied, that they are unconverted: Nor will evil
Surmisings, or unchristian Jealousies suffice in this Case. There must be good
Proof, visible Evidence; or, the Gospel of CHRIST will never justify them in
their Withdraw. And can this be justly pleaded, in Respect of any one
Separation in the Land? Will any venture to speak it out, in plain Words, of
any of the Ministers who are withdrawn from, that they are unsound in the
Faith, or of a bad Life? How then can it be proved, that they are unconverted?
They may be so, it is true, notwithstanding the most goodly Appearance; but it is
not evident to the World, that they are: And it is contrary to the Gospel to
judge ill of a private Brother, much more of a public Officer, but upon visible
Evidence.

But suppose they are unconverted, and this is evident by what is visible. Is
separating from their Ministry the first Thing necessary? Even a self-condemned
Heretic is not to be rejected, till after a first and second Admonition. The
first Thing to be done is, to enter a Process against them, according to
Gospel-Rule. They are CHRIST'S Officers, 'till the Discipline of his Kingdom
has been exercised upon them: And 'till then, they ought not to be separated
from, (unless it cannot be obtained) though we should think, and upon good
Grounds too, that they are unconverted: And this is the Method prescribed in
the ORDER of these Churches, and of every other Church in the whole Protestant
World.

But their Preaching is bad, and tends to lead Souls to Hell. But does this
necessarily follow upon their being unconverted? They may notwithstanding
preach the Truth as it is in JESUS; and, if they are Men of superior
Seize, may set it in a clearer and stronger Light, than others of smaller
Gifts, though converted. And can it be any other than the Fruit of gross
Prejudice to say, that the Truths of the Gospel lead to Hell, only because
preached by Ministers supposed to be unconverted? Are the same Truths saving or
damning, as delivered by converted, or unconverted Ministers? It Is impossible
the differing Characters of Men should make such a Difference in the moral
Effects of the same Truths. Or, if these Ministers, who are called unconverted,
preach Doctrines inconsistent with the Gospel, and in the Nature of them
destructive to Men's Souls, let it be made to appear: Nothing would be more
effectual to put them to Silence.

But it is seen there is no good Effect of the Preaching of unconverted
Ministers. If by unconverted Ministers be meant such, as have been guilty of
the most filthy Uncleanness, under the highest Aggravations, the Preaching of
such han't been without good Effect, even according to the Mind of those who
make this Objection. For it is generally known of a famous Preacher, horribly
guilty in this Kind, and proved to have been so, and deposed from the Ministry
on this Account, that the Effect of his Preaching, in the Extraordinaries of
the present Day, equaled, for a Time, all that the most noted among our new
Preachers could pretend to. He so preached as to be flocked after by Multitudes
of all Sorts; and so far as shrieking, and screaming, and falling down, and
being in Agonies of Distress, or Raptures of Joy, are a Sign of the good Effect
of Preaching, he might compare with any for the Evidences of it: But he was a
converted Minister, in the Opinion of the People; and there han't been, it is
true, these Extraordinaries following the Word preached by those called
unconverted; though they hope notwithstanding, they have not labored
altogether in vain. Other Effects they could speak of, which they think a Sign
of some Success; though they desire not to boast, and would lament that they
have seen no more real Fruit of their Endeavors. But if their Preaching had
been attended with less Success, it is no Argumeut, either that they are
unconverted, or that People should not own them as the Ministers of CHRIST. The
Wind blows where it lists. The best Ministers in all Ages have complained
for Want of Success: Even that mournful Lamentation of the Prophet, Isa. 53. 1.
Who has believed our Report? And to whom is the Arm of the LORD revealed? The
great SAVIOR of the World applies to himself, and the Unsuccessfulness of his
own Labors for the Good of Souls. John 12. 38.
And it is observable, when the Prophet ISAIAH had said, Chapt. 49. 4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my Strength for Naught and in vain, he
not only adds upon it, yet surely my Judgment is with the LORD, and my Work
with my GOD; but the LORD that formed him from the Womb to be his Servant, is
introduced declaring, Verse 5.
that he should be glorious in the Eyes of the LORD, and his GOD should be his
Strength.

In fine, it is pleaded these unconverted Ministers are to be withdrawn from,
because there is no Validity in their Administrations. This is more easily said
than proved. And People should be careful how they advance such a Principle as
this; for they may not be aware what it will end in. GOD only knows who, among
Ministers, are really converted; and if the Administrations of such only are
valid, who can with Safety venture to sit under the Preaching of any Minister
living? But this is not all; if real Conversion is necessary to the Validity of
ministerial Administrations, who can say they have been validity baptized, or
admitted into the Church? It must forever remain a Perplexity to a Man's Mind:
and the same Difficulty would return, if he was to be baptized, and admitted
into the Church ten Times over: Yea, so destructive a Principle is this, that
no Man can know whether there is any true Church, or valid Ordinances, in the
Town, Province, or Kingdom, he belongs to. The plain Truth is, the Validity of
Gospel-Administrations, (as has been said) does not depend upon the real
Conversion of the Minister, nor upon our Opinion of him in this Respect, but
upon his being CHRIST'S Officer, improved by him to dispense the Ordinances of
his Kingdom, which he may be, though he is inwardly another Man than he appears
to be outwardly.

Pertinent to this Purpose are the Words of Mr. JOHN STILLINGFLEET. Says he,
See his Demonstration of the Divine Presence in the Places of religious
Worship, Page 132, 133, 134, 135.
If the Minister be bad, yet if he preaches the Word of GOD, we must receive
the Word, because we are not so much to regard the Man preaching, as the Word
preached. -- It Is not the Person, but the Office; not the Man, but his
Ministry; not his Life, but his Doctrine, we are to look to. -- When CHRIST
sent out his twelve Apostles to preach, of all of them he says, He that
receivetb you, receivetb me; yet, one of these was JUDAS ISCARIOT, who also
betrayed him. We plainly see by CHRIST'S own Words, we may receive CHRIST by
the Ministry of JUDAS, a Traitor, I might say, a Devil. The Expression, it is
true, is harsh; but our SAVIOR fears not to speak thus of one, whom he had
personally sent to preach the Gospel, one of you is a Devil, meaning JUDAS:
Nay, the Scripture makes no Difference between JUDAS, and the other Disciples,
in the Success of the Ministry. They all twelve were sent out, they all did
Miracles, they all returned to CHRIST, and gave him an Account of their
Success. To them all CHRIST said, he had ordained they should go out, viz. in
preaching, and bear much Fruit, viz. in their Ministry. And Philip. 3. there
were false Apostles who preached CHRIST out of Envy, supposing to add more
Affliction to PAUL; which must needs be an high Degree of Malice and
Wickedness: Yet, PAUL said, he rejoiced that CHRIST was preached however; which
could not be, if their preaching did no Good. And a little onwards, If this
Principle once prevail, that a Minister ought not to be heard that is ungodly,
though he preaches nothing but sound Doctrine, it would lay a certain
Foundation for SEPARATION from the outward Means and Ordinances, at lest, from
the Administration of them, as now they are enjoyed. For the Case would
presently return hither, as it is with MANY ALREADY, not whether the Minister
be really ungodly or no, but whether he seems so to them; and if he answers not
those Characters of Godliness they have laid down, then they are obliged to
hear him no more. Such sad Works do bad Principles, and erroneous Consciences
make in the Church of GOD. A sad Example of this may be seen among the QUAKERS,
who, upon the forementioned Principle, reject and throw off all the now
Ministers of ENGLAND, making no Difference. -- How much better may we determine
thus, the Office of the Ministry is sacred, though Ministers may be ungodly. The
Promise of CHRIST'S Presence is made to Persons for the OFFICE SAKE, and not to
the Office for the Persons; so to the Office more than to the Persons.

A third Error of the Times is, a presumptuous Dependence on the blessed
SPIRIT. I say a presumptuous Dependence, because I mean not to blame in any a
true Gospel-Reliance. For the Divine SPIRIT is the great Operator in the
Kingdom of Grace. It Is he that begins a Work of GOD in Men's Hearts; it is he
that must carry it on; and by his Power only can they be kept from falling, and
preserved blameless to the heavenly World. And we are not only allowed, but
required, to place our Dependence on him for these Things: Nor can we, in any
other Way, expect to be formed to a Meetness for the Favor of GOD here, or the
Enjoyment of him hereafter. But instead of depending, Men, may presume upon the
blessed SPIRIT: And this is the Error of the present Day; and it appears in the
following Instances.

The first is, their so depending on the Help of the SPIRIT as to despise
Learning. To this it is owing, that so many speak slightily of our Schools and
Colleges; discovering a Good Will, were it in their Power, to raze them to
their Foundations. It may not be amiss to remark here, that the Churches, in
this Province, assembled together by their Elders and Messengers, particularly
mention it as a necessary Expedient in order to a Reformation, "that good and
effectual Care should be taken, respecting Schools of Learning." And they
reason upon it in the following Manner. "The Interest of Religion and good
Literature have been will not to rise and fall together. We read in the Scripture
of Masters and Scholars, and of Schools and Colleges. 1 Chronicles. 25. 8. Mal. 2.
12. Acts 19. 9. and 22. 3. And the most eminent Reformers, among the LORD's
People of old, thought it their Concern to erect and uphold them. Was not
SAMUEL (that great Reformer) PRESIDENT of the College at NAJOTH, 1 Samuel 19. 18,
19; and thought to have been one of the first Founders of Colleges? Did not
ELIJAH and ELISHA restore the Schools erected in the Land of ISRAEL? And JOSIAH
(another great Reformer) showed Respect to the College at JERUSALEM, 2 Kings
22. 14. Ecclesiastical Story informs, that great Care was taken by the
Apostles, and their immediate Successors, for the settling of Schools in all
Places, where the Gospel had been preached, that so the Interest of Religion
might be preserved, and the Truth propagated to succeeding Generations. It is
mentioned as one of the greatest Mercies that ever GOD bestowed upon his People
ISRAEL, that he raised up of their Sons for Prophets, Amos 2. 11. Which had
Respect to their Education in Schools of Learning. And we have all Cause to
bless GOD, who put it into the Hearts of our Fathers to take Care concerning
this Matter. For these Churches had been in a State most deplorable, if the
LORD had not blessed the College, so as from hence to supply most of the Churches
as at this Day. When NEW ENGLAND was poor, and we were but few in Number
comparatively, there was a Spirit to encourage Learning, and the College was
full of Students. whom GOD has made Blessings, not only in this, but in other
Lands; but it is deeply to be lamented, that now, when we are become many, and
more able than at our Beginnings, that Society, and other inferior Schools, are
in such a low and languishing State. Wherefore, as we desire that Reformation
and Religion should flourish, it concerns, us to endeavor that both the
College, and all other Schools of Learning, in every Place, be duly inspected
and encouraged. See the Result of the Synod, assembled Sept. 10. 1679. under
the Answer to their second question.
To the same Cause it may be ascribed, that such Swarms of Exhorters have
appeared in the Land, and been admired and run after, though many of them could
scarce speak common Sense, under the Notion of immediate Impressions from the
SPIRIT, and that his Assistance would more than supply the Want of Learning.
And to the same Cause still it must be attributed, that so many Ministers
preach, not only without Book, but without Study; and justify their doing so,
left, by previous Preparation, they should stint the SPIRIT.

But what is this better than Presumption? It Is not now as it was in the first
Days of the Gospel Men were then assisted in a miraculous and extraordinary
Manner; but they have now no Reason to expect the SPIRIT's Help, only in the
Way of Means; upon the due Use of their own Powers, by attending to Reading,
and Meditation, and Prayer.

This same Error was common in the Country, in former Times. It was then said,
they needed no Books but the Bible; and instead of using Learning, they must
rely on the SPIRIT. Private Men's Prophesying became too much the Practice, to
the Neglect and Contempt of the Ministry. They pleaded, there was no Need of
Learning in preaching, and that one of them could by the SPIRIT do better, than
the Minister by his Learning; as if the SPIRIT and Learning were Opposites:
which is so far from being the Truth, that Learning is a special Instrument,
the SPIRIT uses in the Business of Preaching. I have elsewhere shown at large,
the Sentiments of our Fathers upon this Head, and with what Faithfulness they
testified against such Notions of the SPIRIT, as rendered Learning a Thing
useless.

I shall only add here, some Words from the celebrated Mr. BAXTER, wonderfully
adapted to the present Case. It is (says he His Works. Vol. 2. Page 286
) a desperate and destructive Conceit in any Man, to think, that because he
has the SPIRIT, he is therefore more able to expound Scripture, or teach it to
the People, or understand Controversies, than learned Men who have not the
Spirit of Holiness, -- And upon this Account, Men cry down human Learning, and
Ministers for esteeming it, and cry up the SPIRIT, to a Use that GOD does not
intend it. I have no Mind, the LORD knows, to set up any Thing of Man against
GOD; nor GOD's common Gifts, above his special; not to draw any Soul into an
undue Esteem of any Thing that is in their Guides, but only to show them the
naked Truth. I would entreat therefore all poor deluded Souls, that are carried
away with these forementioned Mistakes, to lay by their Prejudice and Passion a
while, and to weigh impartially the following Things.

Can you understand any Scripture, without the Help of Learning in yourselves,
or others? The SPIRIT delivered it to the World in GREEK and HEBREW: Can you
understand it before it is translated? If not, then the Knowledge of those
Tongues is necessary in the Translators. And would you have us so wholly take
up all on Trust from them, from Age to Age, ever after, as not to know, whether
they translate it true or false? Or, whether there be any such Thing as they
tell us? If you yourselves must take it upon Trust, from those who do
understand it, when you do not methinks, you should so much the more honor and
reverence them, whom you are fain to be so much beholden to, and whom you must
trust in a Matter of such Concernment to your Salvation; as whether any of this
was ever in the Text of the Hebrew and Greek, which you find in the English.
Sure, that which is so laudable in the Translators, is not to be contemned in
your Teachers! What if the Rhemist Papists tell you, that the Bible is falsely
translated, I pray you, what Answer will you give them, if none of your
Teachers knew it to be otherwise, whose Words you must take as credible
Persons? Send a Hebrew and Greek Bible into WALES or IRELAND, and when that
converteth Souls without an Interpreter, then I will begin to think Learning
less necessary.

Consider, your very learning to speak, or read or write, is as much human
Learning, as the Learning to know the Nature of Creatures, and Sense of strange
Languages. And if you renounce these (which you neither have by Nature or
Grace) what Persons would you be? You may as well say therefore, that the
SPIRIT will serve without Learning to write, or read, or speak; for the
Difference in the Cases is only in Degree, and not in Kind.

Consider well, that there are several Employments that GOD has for Men in the
World, and in the Church; and accordingly, there are several Gifts of the
SPIRIT. For Salvation, he gives the Spirit of saving Grace, which shall teach
Men effectually their Need of CHRIST, the Evil of Sin, and the like; but not
every other Truth. Those whom he will employ as Interpreters of Scripture, and
Teachers, and Guides to others, he will furnish with Gifts that are necessary
for such Employments. And a Man may teach others, that may not be sanctified or
saved himself; and many are sanctified and saved, that are unfit to teach
others. Are all Prophets? Is all the Body an Eye, or Hand? GOD may give
Teachers a Spirit of Teaching, as he gave SAUL a Spirit of Government, and deny
it to better Men, because he intends not them to the same Use. Public Gifts
are for Public Uses.

Consider, whether, under Pretense of magnifying the SPIRIT, you do not bewray
most notorious Pride, in the magnifying of your selves, and the Contempt of
those, whom you are bound to learn of? Is it not palpable Pride, for you that
never bestowed the twentieth Part of the Study and Pains, as the Ministers of
the Gospel have done to understand the Scripture, to be conceited that you
understand it as well as they? -- Is not the SPIRIT, and diligent Study
together, like to do more for Increase of Knowledge, than the SPIRIT will do
without such Studies? Why should you, in proud Censoriousness, think, that
godly Teachers have not the SPIRIT as well as you? They value it as much; they
pray as hard for the SPIRIT; they confess their Need of it as much as you: They
have the same GOD, the same CHRIST, and the same Promise as you: They show
forth the Fruits of it in Holiness, as much as you: And yet, proud Men dare
lift up themselves in boasting of the SPIRIT, and despising their godly,
painful Teachers, as being without the SPIRIT! Not only saying, as CORAH and
his Conspirators, Ye take too much upon you; are not all the LORD'S People
holy? But also saying, It is only the People are holy, and the Priests are
unholy. -- You will confess, that a Man that has studied Physic all his Days,
is likely to be a better Physician than you that never studied it; and a Man
that has studied the Law, is likely to be a better Lawyer; and that he were a
proud Man that would say, though I never studied these Things, yet by the
SPIRIT I know them as well as you. And you would see your Pride as well in this
Case of Theology, if you did but know and consider, that the SPIRIT works by
Means, and Man's Industry; and that the Gift of Interpretation, understanding
Languages, and the Creatures, is not a Gift of sanctification; but such as is
common to unsanctified Men, and especially to make Men useful to others, and
publicly serviceable to the Godly where they live.

Lastly consider, whether it be not a most vile Abuse of the SPIRIT of GOD, to
make it a Patron and Shelter of Idleness. GOD sets Men to search the
Scriptures, to seek, and cry, and dig, for Knowledge; to inquire of Teachers,
and one another; to meditate, and study the Scripture, Day and Night, that
their profiting may be known to all: And these wretched Souls will not only
disobey GOD, and indulge the Flesh by Ease and Idleness; thinking these
laborious Studies too dear a Price to pay for Knowledge, or too hard a Means to
use in Subserviency to the SPIRIT: But besides this carnal Contempt of the
Light, they will reproach those that are more diligent and studious than
themselves, and most impudently lay their own Fault on their Teachers, calling
them Lazy Drones and idle, because they spend their life and Strength in most
laborious Studies, and searching of the Scripture: -- And which is the very Top
of their Wickedness, they dare father all this upon the SPIRIT; as if Labor
and Study were needless, because they have the SPIRIT. Is it not enough for you
to despise GOD and his Word by your fleshly Ease and Idleness, refusing to
study and meditate on Scripture, Day and Night, but you must also blame them
who are at more Pains than yourselves; yea, impudently blame them for your
Fault of Idleness; yea, and pretend the SPIRIT for all this Wickedness. No
Wonder if GOD be avenged on such Dealings by giving you up to a Spirit that
does indeed be friend, and own your Course.

Another Instance of undue Dependence on the SPIRIT, is that which opposes a
diligent Use of appointed Means. And such too commonly is the Dependence of
these Times. It has been declared from the Pulpit, and by one of the famous
Preachers too, in the new Way, that "for Ministers to advise Persons under
Concern to Pray to GOD and apply themselves to the reading the Scriptures for
Light and Direction, is the worst Advice that could be given; nay, as bad as
the Devil himself could give." And if a celebrated Minister could venture
publicly to speak after this Manner, it is no Wonder, if some of the Exhorters
have been heard, in Discourse with Persons under Conviction, to advise them,
not to pray. I know the Plea is, that the Thing meant by this Advice, is,
"That People should not rest in their Prayers, and Observances of the Means of
Religion." But whether, (as Mr. TURELL justly remarks See his Dialogue, 2 Edit.
P. 16.
) Those who deliver such unsafe Paradoxes are always careful (at the Time of
it) to distinguish and interpret, may be questioned. Some worthy Gentlemen (now
in these Parts) who have been discoursed with by me and others, say, they are
wanting. And it is too well known to need a labored Proof, that some Preachers
as well as Exhorters, have expressed themselves in a most unguarded Manner upon
this Point; and so as to lead People into an unhappy Mistake, as to their Use
of the Means of Divine Appointment.

For it is certainly a Mistake, and a dangerous one too, for any to depend on
the SPIRIT, so as to neglect an Attendance on Means. No one that has the Bible
in his Hands, and will look into it without Prejudice, can be at a Loss to
know, that GOD has appointed certain Means to be attended in Order to the
Obtainment of that Help from the SPIRIT which is needed: such as Prayer,
reading and hearing GOD's Word, and the like. And these being Duties of divine
Institution, it cannot be supposed, when we are called to depend on the SPIRIT,
it is in such a Sense as to exclude these Duties, or render an Observance of
them insignificant. This would be to oppose the SPIRIT's Influence to the
Appointments of GOD, and make one Part of the Scripture contradict another;
which is grossly absurd.

Some may imagine, it is more for the Honor of the blessed SPIRIT to ascribe
the Sinner's Conversion to him absolutely, and in Opposition to all Means; but
this is to be wise above what is written; yea, contrary to what is written.
It Is to set the SPIRIT OF GOD, and the INSTITUTIONS OF GOD at variance with
each other; which can never be for the Honor of the divine SPIRIT. It Is true,
GOD may be sought of them who asked not for him, and may be found of them who
sought him not: But this is not the ordinary Method, in which he gives his
SPIRIT to effect a Work of Grace in the Hearts of Sinners. The common Way is in
the Use of appointed Means: Nor is there Ground of Hope, in the Revelations of
GOD, to be saved any other Way. It Is indeed Presumption to expect GOD will be
sought of us, if we don't seek to him. He may manifest himself to us; but we
have no Reason to hope that he will; yea, all Hopes of this Kind are
unscriptural, as having no Bottom in the Word of GOD: And notwithstanding any
such Hopes, we may perish in our Sins; and what is more, the Hazard will be
infinite, lest this should be our unhappy Case.

The last Instance of this undue Dependence, is that which reflects Dishonor
upon the written Revelations of GOD. And who is ignorant, how common it has
been, in the past Months, to throw Contempt on the Scripture, under the
Pretense of being guided by the SPIRIT? The Talk of many, upon this Head, has
been just like that of Enthusiasts. Says the Letter to Mr. TURELL, See his
Dialogue, 2 Edition. Page 19.
Many assert, that the Bible is of no Service to the unregenerate; and though
they should read it, while in a State of Nature, they understand no more of it
than a Stone. -- They likewise maintain, that the receiving Light and Comfort
is a sufficient Evidence of a Man's good Estate: And he may depend upon it,
without examining whether it be agreeable to the written Word. And in another
Letter, in the same Book, among the Irregularities of the Times, this is
mentioned, Page 20.
People's speaking of the holy Scriptures very contemptuously, as if they were
a dead Letter, and it were not worth while for the unconverted to consult them.
And it has been too often suggested, as though the Word of GOD was needless to
such as have the SPIRIT. And what indeed is the Language of those inward
Whispers, and extraordinary spiritual Motions, which so many pretend to in
these Days, but that they are above the Scripture, as having a better and more
safe Guide, even the SPIRIT himself? And no Wonder, if, with them, the
Scripture is held in Contempt.

It may, perhaps, seem to such as though they magnified the blessed SPIRIT,
while they so depended on his Suggestions and Influences, as to make these
their chief Guide in all Things. But what if the Influences they take to be
from the SPIRIT, are the Fancies of their own Minds, or Suggestions of Satan
transforming himself into an Angel of Light? Who is their Guide now? And
instead of Honor, is not horrid Reproach reflected on the Divine SPIRIT? And
is there no Danger of such a Mistake? Han't it been common in the World? What
Age has there been, since the Times of the Apostles, wherein many have not, in
this Way, deluded themselves? And may not this always be expected to be the
Case, when supposed Influences of the SPIRIT are set up in the Room of
Scripture, and made, instead of that, the Guide in Matters of Salvation?

It ought to be remembered, It Is the SPIRIT OF GOD who speaks in the Scripture.
Though holy Men wrote it, it was not of their own Heads; but as both moved and
inspired by the HOLY GHOST. It Is not therefore the Word of Man, but of the
Divine SPIRIT; and as such, ought to be recurred to, as the only sure Rule in
Matters of Religion. GOD has given us no other; nor is there any other that
may, with Safety, be relied on. To the Law and to the Testimony. What says
the Scripture, ought to be the Question, not only in Points of Faith and
Practice, but in all Pretenses to Suggestions and Manifestations from the
SPIRIT: If they agree not with this infallible Rule, they are not from him; and
we may be as sure of it, as that he is the Revealer of the Things contained in
the Bible.

It Is a great Error, when Men have their Imaginations warmed, or feel within
themselves strong and unusual Impressions, at once to conclude they are under a
divine Influence, and to think and act accordingly, without examining their
inward Motions and Suggestions, by the SPIRIT's Declarations in the Scripture:
And it is this that exposes them to Delusion; to deceive themselves, and to be
deceived by the grand Enemy of Souls: Nor is there any one Thing that has led
on to more or wilder Extravagances, both in Principle and Practice. Observable
are the Words of Mr. JOHN STILLINGFLEET, speaking of such as depend only upon
the Teachings of the SPIRIT, without the Word of GOD. If, says he, there be any
Delusions in the World, we must own this as the BELZEEBUB among them. This is
the Master-Plot the Devil has used, in late Times, to lay Gospel Ordinances
under the Brand of the grossest Contempt. Oh! its an easy Way to be spiritual,
to say the SPIRIT teaches; and then we can condemn all for carnal that stick to
Ordinances, and call these outward Forms, beggarly Elements. -- It is an
endless Delusion, and grossly uncertain in the very Foundation, that such give
themselves up to, who wait for the SPIRIT's Teaching, without the Word. For
what Rule have I to try the SPIRIT by, but the Word revealed, and written in
the Scriptures? When as CHRIST says, Search the Scriptures; and St. JOHN, Try
the Spirits, whether they are of GOD or no. But how shall I know, whether I am
taught of the SPIRIT, or no, unless the Word direct me? As for those who are
deluded out of GOD's Way into this endless Path of Error, I look upon their
Case as sad and miserable; and yet, it calls for the Prayers of all their
Friends, Relations and Acquaintance. See his Divine Presence in the Places of
religious Worship, Page 222, 223, 224. To the like Purpose he speaks in a few
Pages preceding, NEW-LIGHT in the Faculty we acknowledge, NEW-LIGHTS as to the
Object we reject, as that, which if once admitted, proves the uncontrollable
Guide to the grossest Delusions. For when once the Mind is pre-possest with an
Expectation of such NEW-LIGHTS, then any Suggestion of the Devil is presently
embraced in its self, and propounded unto others, as divine Raptures, and
heavenly Visions and Revelations. And then how miserably forlorn are such
deluded Creatures, when, they, by such Courses, tempt GOD to work Miracles for
their Recovery, or they are forever undone. For the Pretense of the SPIRIT in
its Dictates of Truths, besides and above the Word, will fetch Arguments from
the same Spirit to maintain them (though the grossest Delusions); and so, the
Word, and all ordinary Means of reducing such Souls to their right Wits again,
become wholly useless and unprofitable. We have had too many Years Experience
of the dismal sad Effects of this grand Principle of Enthusiasm, and Delusions.
AFRICA was never more fruitful of Monsters of Nature, than ENGLAND has been of
Monsters in Morality and Divinity, since such NEW-LIGHTS and Revelations have
been owned, and greedily entertained. -- Admit once of NEWLIGHTS and Visions of
the SPIRIT, as they are termed, and you cannot keep out the most devilish and
damnable Errors from following after.
If Men will hastily judge themselves to be under the immediate Guidance of the
SPIRIT, they will soon be ready to say, we feel the Hand of GOD moving us
within, and the Impulses of his SPIRIT, and see and know that they are his, and
need no other Proof of it but their own Perceptions; and when they are come to
this Pass, they are got beyond the Reach of sober Argument; They Will despise all
Applications to their Understanding: And if they retain any Regard to the
Scripture, it is only in that Sense they fancy they are taught to understand it,
by the immediate Direction of the SPIRIT; and it is not the Scripture (Whatever
they may pretend) that is their Rule, but their supposed Dictates from the
SPIRIT. These are placed in the Room of Scripture, and the Scripture regarded
only as it may be interpreted to fall in with these. And having thus a Rule
superior to the Bible, even the immediate Teaching of the Holy SPIRIT, they are
prepared for whatever Delusions, a heated Imagination, or subtle Devil, may
suggest to them under the Disguise of divine Communications; and this, in
Opposition to the clearest Dictates of Reason, as well as the express
Revelation of GOD. How many Enthusiasts, vainly conceiting they were
extraordinarily taught and guided by the SPIRIT, have gone on from one
Absurdity to another, 'till they have appeared to the World to be quite wild?
There is scarce any Thing so extravagant, but they have been the Patrons of it,
and under the Notion too of being immediately instructed by GOD to do so.

It Is therefore exceeding dangerous for any to trust to any supposed
Influences, Dictates, or Suggestions, from the SPIRIT, to the Neglect of the
Scripture; much more in Opposition to it. This has never yet failed of leading
Persons into Error: And the Effect will be the same now as it always has been;
and it is indeed, in some Measure, seen to be so among our selves. We should
therefore be upon our Guard, consider the Scripture as the Revelation of the
blessed SPIRIT, and make it the grand Rule by which to try, not only our
Experiences, but all our supposed spiritual Suggestions, rejecting them as
Delusions, if they accord not with this only Test of what we are to receive as
coming from GOD.

A fourth Error of the Times is, the making Assurance essential to Conversion.
This, one of the most zealous Preachers, in the new Way, was so far from
denying, when it was publicly mentioned Mr. TURELL'S Direction to his People,
Page II.
as an Error prevailing in these Days, that he rather owns the Charge by
saying, Mr. CROSSWELL'S Letter to Mr. TURELL, Page 10.
For my Part, I believe also, that there is no true Believer, but has
Assurance for some Space of Time, longer or shorter; so that he could once say,
He knew in whom he had believed, and that he had passed from Death to Life.

But whoever the Persons be, who teach this Doctrine, they offend against the
Generation of GOD' s Children; many of whom do walk in Darkness, laboring of
Doubts and Difficulties, and even go out of the World with prevailing Fears,
left they should not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. -- The Causes of these
Doubts are various. -- Some Times, a humbling Sense of their own Unworthiness
may be so strong upon their Minds as to prevent their taking that Comfort,
which really belongs to them; and which others take, who have no better a Right
to it than they. And a humble Christian, afraid to hope so well of himself as
he may have Reason to do, is, in my Opinion, a much better Man than he that is
bold and confident; especially, when he has not been over-exemplary in his Life
and Conversation. -- Sometimes, even very good Men may be under Mistakes about
the Evidence of a good Estate, thinking that necessary which is not; and not
having had Experience of what they falsely suppose necessary, walk in Darkness.
-- Sometimes, there may be undesirable Out-Breakings of Corruption, where there
is not the reigning Influence of it; and no Wonder, when this is the Case, if
Men are in Perplexities about their State. -- Sometimes, a Sense of the Danger
of deceiving themselves may keep very good Christians too much under the Power
of Fear. They deny not, that they are possessed of that, which looks like Faith,
and Repentance, and New-Obedience; but they are disposed to be jealous of
themselves, in an Affair of such infinite Importance. Others have been
deceived, and why may not this be their unhappy Lot: They cannot be too-flow,
nor cautious, they imagine, in a Conclusion upon which their eternal Salvation
depends. -- Sometimes they may neglect the proper Means of coming to a true
Gospel Assurance; placing sudden Whispers, immediate Impulses, in the Room of
serious Self-Examination: And not having that Experience of these they
expected, they are under Clouds. Sometimes, there is an unhappy Mixture of
Melancholy in the Tempers of good People; and they are herefrom inclined,
especially, at Times, to turn every Thing against themselves, to their being
overwhelmed with gloomy and groundless Fears. --

But whatever be the Cause, whether the Things I have mentioned, or any other,
it is a real Truth, that good Men may be in the dark about their spiritual
Condition. So it was under the Old Testament; and no Reason can be given, why
it may not be so in the Times of the Gospel. -- The Scripture no where makes
Assurance to be of the Essence of saving Faith: -- Nor was it ever though it to do
so, by any of those experienced and sound Divines, whose Memory has been
precious in our Churches. The WESTMINSTER Assembly speak upon the Matter in
those peremptory Words, See their Confession of Faith, Chapt. 18. Sect. 3. And
Consumation of this Truth, from 1 John 5. 13. Isa. 50. 10. Mark 9. 24. Psalm.
68. throughout, and 77 to the 12 Verse. --
This infallible Assurance does not so belong to the Essence of Faith, but that
a true Believer may wait long, and conflict with many Difficulties, before he
be Partaker of it. And these are the very Words in which the Elders and
Messengers of these Churches expressed their Faith upon this Head, in the Year
1680 See the NEW ENGLAND Confession of Faith, Chapt. 18. Sect. 3.
; as they had done it before, when convened at CAMBRIDGE, in 1648. And it may
be worth Notice, the first Synod that was ever assembled in this Country; and a
famous Synod it was, consisting of the Pastors of the Churches of the
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, with many worthy Messengers; and all of them original
Planters: I say, the first Synod in this Country declare it to be an Error to
say, See the (...) of the (...) and Ruin of Antinomianism, etc. (...).
That a Man is not effectually converted,'till he has full Assurance; and
confute it as such in the following Words, This is cross to Scripture, Isa. 50.
10. Wherein we see, that a Man may truly fear GOD (therefore truly converted),
and yet walk in Darkness, without clear Evidence, or full Assurance.

A fifth the connecting a Knowledge of the Time of Conversion with the Thing
itself, as though there could not be the one without the other. It will not be
denied, that this has been the Way, in which many have talked in these Times;
and Abundance of serious, good People, who could not fix the precise Time, when
they suppose they were converted, have been deemed Hypocrites by their
Neighbors: And if they have not entertained such a Thought of themselves, their
Minds have been perplexed with needless Fears and Scruples.

I say, with needless Fears, because the Knowledge of the Time of Conversion is
a Circumstance only, and therefore separable from the Change itself: And it
actually is separated from it in many Instances, or there will be no Room for
the Exercise of Charity, in Respect of some of the best of Christains, so far
as we are able to judge. -- But I have elsewhere spoken largely upon this Head,
and therefore go on to say,

A sixth Error is, the vilifying of good Works. And who does not know, that
this is too generally the Spirit of these Times. A Man must be a great Stranger
to the religious State of Affairs in the Land, who is unacquainted with the
contemptuous Manner, in which good Works have been spoken of by many. The
Expressions, publicly delivered upon this Head, have been rash and unguarded,
almost beyond Example. I have myself been present, in a large Assembly, when
the Preacher (and he would take it ill not to be though it a first-rate one too)
spoke of good Works, with a loud and vehement Voice, in that Style, your
abominable, filthy, cursed good Works: At the same Time, assuring the People,
"that if they did good Works they would be damned; and the more of them they
did, the more they would be damned:" And this, without explaining himself upon
the Matter, and so as that I could not but judge, the Tendency of what he said,
was to lead People into a mistaken contemptuous Thought of good Works. And the
Preaching of some other Ministers has been too much in the same Strain;
insomuch, that those weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith,
are become low in the Esteem of many: Nay, to such a Height are Numbers, among
our new Converts, grown in their pretended Spirituality, that they can scarce
bear to hear a Sermon upon the Subject of good Works: And the Minister that
dares practice upon the inspired Command of the Apostle PAUL, Tit. 3. 8.
In affirming constantly, that they which have believed in GOD might be careful
to maintain good Works, may be sure of being branded with the opprobrious Name
of an ARMINIAN: Nay, the Apostle JAMES himself is too legal for these spiritual
Christians; and if they an't very much abused, they have some of them, given
him the Character of an ARMINIAN, and voted his Epistle not worthy a place in
the sacred Canon.

Nor is this Contempt of good Works peculiar to the present Day. It was the
Fault of some, even in the first Times of the Gospel. The Apostle JUDE Verse 4.
of his Epistle.
takes Notice of certain Men, who had crept in unawares, turning the Grace of
GOD into Lasciviousness. And St. PAUL has these same Abusers of the Doctrine of
Grace, several Times in his Eye. Hence those Passages in his Epistles. Romans 6.
1.
Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may abound? GOD forbid! And again, Verse
15.
Shall we sin because we are not under the Law, but under Grace? GOD forbid!
And yet again, Gal. 2. 17.
Is CHRIST the Minister of Sin? i. e. on Account of the Sinner's free
Justification through his Righteousness: GOD forbid!

And such has been the Wickedness of some, and the Weakness of others, (as Mr.
FLAVEL expresses it 2 Vol. Page 662.
that, in all Ages, Men have audaciously broken in upon the Doctrine of free
Grace, and notoriously violated, and corrupted it, to the great Reproach of
CHRIST, Scandal of the World, and hardening of the Enemies of Reformation.
Behold (said CONTZEN the Jesuit) the Fruit of Protestanism, and their Gospel
Preaching.

In the beginning of the Reformation, under the Pretense of exalting CHRIST,
and free Grace, Multitudes ran quite wild, throwing the utmost Contempt on the
divine Law. both in Word and Deed. CALVIN mournfully observes of those Times,
In Lib. adversus Libertin, Cap. 2.
"That under Pretense of Christian Liberty, they trampled all Godliness under
Foot."

And thus it was in this Country above an hundred Years ago; and in our Nation
at the same Time, and for many Years after. It was common to hear it then said,
"that GOD could not see Sin in Believers;" that "they were not obliged to be
sorry for Sin, or to beg the Pardon of it, because pardoned before committed;"
that "CHRIST by taking their Sins became as sinful as they, and they by having
his Righteousness as righteous as he;" that "CHRIST has repented, and believed,
and obeyed for them, and in their Stead, and therefore that they are not under
Obligations to these Things." Vid. RUTHERFURD'S Survey of spiritual Antichrist,
where there is a large Collection of such Stuff as this, from their Writings.
Bp HOPKINS observes it of these ANTINOMIANS, His Works. Page 4^8.
That they think the Grace of GOD is so free, as to supersede all Necessity of
working for it, or with it; and that it is enough for us to sit still and
admire it, and so to be hurried away to Heaven in a Dream: Nay, some have, upon
this Principle, arrived to that Height of Blasphemy as to affirm, that we can
never so much glorify free Grace as when we make Work for it by stout sinning.

I would not be understood to charge these Things, upon those, among our
selves, who have spoken contemptuously of good Works; though I am not without
Fear, I own, left they should be carried away with the like Errors. The Spirit
too generally prevailing, at this Day, is certainly the same for Kind with
that, which, in former Times, reflected so much Disgrace on Religion, and was
the great Obstacle in the Way of it is Progress. The old ANTINOMIANS began, at
first, with much the same Language about the Law and good Works, that is now in
Use: And it was gradually that they arrived at those Heights of Extravagance,
for which they have justly been stigmatized. And is there no Danger, lest this
should be the Case, with many, in these Days? The Danger is greater than we may
be aware of. -- Some are already grown quite wild; and, if the Mistakes of many
others are not in Time rectified, they may increase in their Malignity, and be
of fatal Consequence to the Interest of Christianity in these Churches.

I doubt not, but a Number of those, who have spoken, in a very unguarded
Manner, of good Works, are serious, honest Persons, having at Heart the Honor
of GOD and the REDEEMER. Their Abhorrence of the Error of placing Works in the
Room of CHRIST, or free Grace, may have led them into a dangerous Extreme, the
other Way. So it was at the Reformation. Through an indiscreet Zeal against the
Papists, who had corrupted the Doctrine of Justification by the free Grace of
GOD, through the Righteousness of CHRIST, They almost bended (as Mr. FLAVEL
expresses it His Works. Vol. 1. Page 663.
) the Grace of GOD as far too much the other Way, and spoke, and wrote, many
Things very unbecoming the Grace of GOD, and tending to Looseness, and a
Neglect of Duty. And there is always Danger of thus running from on Extreme to
the other: And this is that wherein Satan has commonly gained an Advantage, to
the Hindrance of the flourishing of Truth and Holiness.

I fault none for a Care to distinguish between good Works in a Gospel-Sense,
and such as may be so termed, only because the Matter of what is done is good.
Let Men speak as strongly as they please, against those Works as evangelically
good ones, which proceed from a View to the Applause of the World, or the
Prospect of some temporal Advantage; or, that are only the mere outward Acts of
Piety, Honesty, Generosity, Charity, and the like; or, that have no higher Rise
than carnal Nature, however civilized and polished. These are not good Works in
a religious sense; and Men ought to be plainly told so: Nor can Works be good,
(in the Sense I am now considering them) only as they proceed from a Principle
of Faith in CHRIST, and such a Temper of Soul as will argue Men to be the
Children of GOD, and born from above.

Neither would I be understood to blame any for their Christian Endeavors,
that the Grace of GOD, and Merits of CHRIST, might have the whole Honor that
is due to them in the great Affair of Man's Salvation.

It Is plain from the Scriptures, that we are Saved by Grace. To Grace do they
always lead up our Thoughts, as the original eternal Source of Man's Salvation.
To this do they always ascribe Salvation, ANTICEDENT to all other Causes and
Considerations, of whatever Nature, or Kind; and in a Sense so glorious and
exalted, that had it not been for this, we never should, never could have been
saved.

It Is plain likewise from the Scriptures, that we are saved by CHRIST. He was
the glorious Person who lay, in the Counsels of GOD, as the Foundation in the
Scheme of Man's Redemption; He it was that, in the Fullness of Time, appeared in
the World, in Fashion as a Man, and did, and suffered, all that was necessary
in Order to make Way for the Recovery of undone Man; and it is with a View to
HIM, for HIS SAKE, and on HIS ACCOUNT, that the Sinner is justified and saved.
These Blessings are made over to him, only in Consideration of the mediatorial
Performances and Sufferings of the LORD JESUS CHRIST: This is the true Reason
of their Bestowment, in Opposition to all Works of Righteousness, that he ever
did, or was capable of doing, to recommend him to the Favor of GOD.

And it is as plain from the same Scriptures, that Salvation by Grace, through
CHRIST, is in the Way of Obedience; such an Obedience as proceeds from a Heart
purified by Faith, and purged from dead Works to Serve the living GOD. This is
evidently the Doctrine of the BIBLE. -- It makes no Provision of Mercy for
Sinners continuing such; but positively excludes them the Kingdom of Heaven,
notwithstanding the Grace of GOD, and the Merits of the REDEEMER. The Texts to
this Purpose are scattered all over the Writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles: Nor is there any, Room for Dispute upon the Matter.

Nor is there the least Inconsistency between these Scripture-Doctrines; and we
may be sure, we mistake their Meaning, if we interpret them so as to make them
clash with one another. Neither the Grace of GOD, nor the Merits of CHRIST,
take away the Necessity of a holy Life, in Conformity to the Precepts of the
Gospel: And it is so far from honoring the Grace of GOD, or the Merits of the
REDEEMER, to suppose such a Thing, that it casts Reproach upon them both. It Is
to Separate between those Things, which GOD has joined together. Worthy of
Notice are the following Words of Mr. BAXTER. Says he, If you set up the Duties
of the Gospel in CHRIST's Stead, you err. CHRIST has his Place and Work; DUTY
has its Place and Work too. Set it but in its own Place, and expect from it
but its own Part, and you go right; yea more, (how unsavory soever the Phrase
may seem) you may so far as this comes to, trust to your Duty and Works. i. e.
for their own Part. For if Duty have no Share, why may we not trust CHRIST in a
Way of Disobedience as well as of Duty. In a Word, you must both use, and trust
Duty in Subordination to CHRIST; but neither use it, nor trust it in
Co-ordination with him. So that this derogates nothing from CHRIST; for he has
done, and will do all his Work perfectly, and enableth his People to do
their's: Yet, he is not properly said to do it himself. He believes not,
repents not, etc. but works these in them. i. e. enableth and exciteth them
to do it. No Man must look for more from Duty, than GOD, has laid upon it: And
so much we may and must. Vid. BAXTER'S Works, Vol.3. Page 11.


Men may, it is true, place good Works in the Room of CHRIST, or of divine
Grace; and so they may, under Pretense of exalting CHRIST, and Grace, entertain
the Notion as though good Works were needless. And in either of these Cases,
Dishonor is done to the REDEEMER, and that Grace of GOD, which it is impossible
should give Countenance to a Neglect of the Duties of Religion. What though good
Works are not the Motive to Salvation, but the free, unmerited Mercy of GOD?
What though it is not for the Sake of good Works, that we are justified, but on
Account of the Righteousness of CHRIST? Does this argue that good Works are not
necessary in other Respects? They are so in respect of the Appointment of GOD:
Nor was this Appointment a mere arbitrary Thing, but plainly founded in the
Wisdom of the divine Government. 'I was not fitting that GOD should save Men in
their Sin; that he should receive them to Heaven, While going on in Rebellion
against his sovereign, rightful Authority: Yea, it would be repugnant to all
the Conceptions we have of GOD, as a Being infinitely wise, and just, and holy,
for him to grant it to this Kind of Persons, to sit down with the LORD JESUS in
his Kingdom. In this View of the Matter, what must we think of his Holiness and
Justice? What would become of his Authority as Governor among the Nations?
What more effectual Method could be taken to lead Men to think, there was no
Difference between moral Good and Evil. That Virtue was of no Account in the
Eye of Heaven, and that the Distinction between that and Vice, was not worthy
to be regarded in Men's Conduct of themselves? And indeed, what would they have
to fear, either from the Perfections, or Government of GOD? And instead of
being under Restraint from Sin, would they not be very much at Liberty to
follow their own Inclinations, and to live and act just as they were moved by
carnal Nature? But far be it from our Tho'ts to suppose, that the alwise and
good GOD would allow of such a State of Things. He never would, he never could:
He has a greater Regard to his own Honor, and the Welfare of Man.

But besides all this, that Temper of Mind which always was, and will be, a
never-failing Source of good Works, is previously necessary, in the Nature of
Things, in Order to a Meetness for the Happiness of the heavenly World. This is
an intellectual, rational Kind of Happiness; consisting in the Contemplation of
the divine Perfections, ardent Love to the blessed GOD, and a perpetual
Employment in his Service. But can those take Pleasure in contemplating the
Glories of the infinitely perfect Being, the Temper of whose Souls is so
carnal, as to have the highest Relish for the Things of Time and Sense? Can
they Place their entire Delight in GOD, who have so fond an Affection for that
abominable Thing which his Soul hates? Or, is it possible they should be happy
in serving GOD, Night and Day, without Interruption forever, the Bent of whose
Minds is turned quite another Way? Light can as well have Communion with
Darkness, or CHRIST with Belial.

And let not any imagine, that CHRIST, by obeying the law in our Stead, has
made void the obligations we are under to conform to it, in our own Persons, as
a Rule of Life. The BIBLE, that sacred Test of all religious Truth, gives not
the least Encouragement to any such licentious Sentiments. On the contrary, it
every where represents our Obligations to Obedience as mightily inhanced, on
Account of CHRIST, and what he has done and suffered for sinners. Nor is there
so strong an Argument to enforce religious Practice, as that which is fetched
from the bleeding and dying of the SON of GOD, when he stood in the Place of
miserable, sinful Man. It Is indeed the great Gospel-Argument to Repentance and
a good Life; and of most weight and persuasive Influence to this Purpose. And
so far were the Apostles of our LORD, from thinking Men discharged from their
Obligations to obey the Law, on the Account of CHRIST, or any Thing he has
done, or suffered for them, that they particularly mention it, as one of the
great Ends of his giving himself for us, that Titus 2. 14.
he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People,
Zealous of good Works: Nay, the Reason expressly given, why he had the Name
JESUS called upon him was that, Matt. 1. 21.
For he shall save his People from their Sins. And the Apostle peremptorily
declares, I John 3. 8.
it was for this Purpose the Son of GOD was manifested, that he might destroy
the Works of the Devil. It Is therefore a base Reflection on CHRIST, and the
great Design of his Undertaking for Sinners, to entertain a Thought, as though,
by his Obedience, he had taken away the Necessity of our's. The inspired PAUL
was quite of another Mind. For though he concludes, after a Train of Reasoning,
Romans 3. 28.
That a Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law; yet to prevent
all Mistakes, he adds those observable Words in the Verse, or two following, Do
we when make void the Law through Faith? GOD forbid! Yea, we establish the Law.

And the Grace of GOD is so far from encouraging a Neglect of good Works, that
it is one of the strongest Excitements to the Performance of them. It applies
to our Ingenuity, and is wonderfully adapted to soften the Heart, and render
the most stubborn Will pliant and yielding. And if it is the Temper of any to
take Occasion from the Grace of GOD to Sin against him, rather than love and
obey him, they, of all Men, have the least Right to be looked upon as good
Christians. The Though It of continuing in Sin, under the Pretense of exalting free
Grace, the Apostle rejects with a GOD FORBID! And well he might, for it argues
a most accursed Frame of Mind. It Is a vile Abuse offered to the gracious and
merciful GOD. It Is a being evil because he is good. It discovers a Mind lost to
all Sense of Gratitude, and that is base and sordid to the last Degree. -- But
I may not enlarge. To go on,

The last Error I shall mention is that, which decries Sanctification as an
Evidence of justification. None, I believe, will deny, that this is a common
Tenet, in these Times. It has been pleaded for in Print. And it is indeed the
known Characteristick of a thorow-pac'd new Convert.

This was one of the Errors prevailing in this Country, soon after its first
Settlement; and as it was withstood and condemned by the whole Body of these
Churches, assembled at CAMBRIDGE by their Elders and Messengers, I shall,
instead of offering any Thing of my own, transcribe what THEY then said in
Confutation of it.

"A Man cannot evidence his Justification by his Sanctification, but he must
needs build upon his Sanctification, and trust to it," was one of the
Principles of the Opinionists in that Day; which the Synod confute thus. The
History of the Rise, etc. of Antinomianism etc. in this Country. Page. 15.
First, This is contrary to 1 John.3. 18, 19. Where the HOLY GHOST faith, that
by unfeigned and hearty Love, we may have Assurance; and yet, neither there,
nor any where else, would have us trust to our Sanctification: So Verse 7. He
that does Righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous. Secondly, If Poverty
of Spirit, which emptieth us of all Confidence in ourselves, may evidence a
Man's Justification, without trusting to it, then may Sanctification without
trusting to it; but the former is true, therefore also the latter. Thirdly, If
it be an Ordinance of GOD to evidence our Justification by our Sanctification,
then we may do this without trusting to it; but that is apparent from 2 Pet. 3.
10. Ergo.

Another of their Principles was, That it is a Fundamental, and Soul-damning
Error, to make Sanctification an Evidence of Justification: Upon which the
Synod express themselves thus, Ibid. P. 16.
This is contrary to these Scriptures. Romans 8. 11. They that walk after the
SPIRIT, are freed from Condemnation, and are in CHRIST, and so justified. So. 1
John 3. 10. In this are the Children of GOD manifest, and the Children of the
Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of GOD.

Another of their Notions was, "That the SPIRIT gives such full and clear
Evidence of my good Estate, that I have no Need to be tried by the Fruits of
Sanctification: This were to light a Candle to the Sun:"; To which the Synod
answer, Ibid. P. Ibid.
This Opinion, taken in this Sense that after the SPIRIT has testified a Man's
good Estate, state, the Person need not to be tried by the Fruits of
Sanctification, is contrary to the Scope of the whole first Epistle of St.
JOHN; where Variety of Arguments are propounded to all Believers, in common, to
distinguish the Persons of Believers from Unbelievers, 1 John 5. 13. These
Things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the SON of GOD, that
ye may KNOW that ye have eternal Life. The Water is annexed to the SPIRIT and
Blood, 1 John 5. 8.

Another of their unaccountable Fancies was, "That Sanctification was so far
from evidencing a good Estate, that it darkens it rather; and a Man may more
clearly see CHRIST, when he sees no Sanctification, than when he does: The
darker my Sanctification is, the brighter is my Justification." The Reply is,
Ibid. P. 17.
This is contrary to the Scripture of Truth, which rather gives the Name of
Light to Sanctification and Holiness, and even for this Use, to clear our
Justification, 1 John 1. 6, 7. For the HOLY GHOST concludes, as from a clear
and infallible Promise, and Proposition, that if we walk in the Light, as he is
in the Light, then does the Blood of CHRIST cleanse us from all Sin; meaning,
that then, and thereby, it appears, that it is done: As on the contrary,
Unholiness, and unholy Walking, is like Darkness, which obscureth all the
goodly Presumption, Flourishes, and Hopes, of an unregenerate Man, Verse 6. For
this Purpose, (1 John 5. 8.) The Water of Sanctification is made a Witness: Now
the Nature of a Witness is not to darken and obscure Matters in Question, but
to clear them. And when DAVID (Psalm 51. 10, 11, 12.) saw his Heart so unclean,
and his Spirit so altogether out of Order, his Justification was not then
brighter; for then he should have had the Joy of his Salvation more full, and
not so to sink, as that he begs it might be restored to him; as implying, that
his Joy, for the present, was wanting to him.

And one of the Sayings in that Day was, Here is a great Stir about Graces, and
looking to Hearts; but give me CHRIST. I seek not for Graces, but for CHRIST; I
seek not for Promises, but for CHRIST; I seek not for Sanctification, but for
CHRIST; Tell me not of Meditation and Duties, but tell me of CHRIST. To which
the Synod subjoin, Ibid. P. 21.
This Speech seems to make a flat Opposition between CHRIST and his Graces,
contrary to that, in John 1. 16. Of his Fullness we all received, and Grace for
Grace. And between CHRIST and his Promises, contrary to Gal. 3. 13, 14. CHRIST
was made a Curse, that we might receive the Promise of the SPIRIT; And, Luke 1.
70. with 74. And betwixt CHRIST and all holy Duties, contrary to Tit. 2. 14.
And therefore holds forth Expressions not agreeing to wholesome Doctrine.

In fine, another of their Sayings was, "If CHRIST be my Sanctificatiou, what
need I look to any Thing in my self, to evidence my Justification." Upon which
the Synod observe, Ibid. P. 22.
This Position is therefore unsound, because it holds forth CHRIST to be my
Sanctification, so as that I need not look to any inherent Holiness in my self;
whereas CHRIST is therefore said to be our Sanctification, because he works
Sanctification in us; and we daily ought to grow up in him, by receiving new
Supply and Increase of Grace, from his Fullness, according to 2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow
in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

But as this is an Error unhappily spreading among People, and of fatal
Tendency, I shall, as a further Guard against the Infection of it, be at the
Pains to lay before the Reader, what two Divines, of great Repute, in these
Churches, have said in Confutation of it.

The first is Mr. SHEPARD. He lived in the Times, when this Error was rise in
the Country; and he has strongly testified against it, particularly in his
Parable of the ten Virgins. Says he, Vid. P. 130, 137.
The Testimony of the SPIRIT does not make a Man a Christian, but only evidence
it: As it is the Nature of a Witness, not to make a Thing to be true, but to
clear and evidence it. And therefore, whether the SPIRIT, in the first, or
second Place, clears GOD's Love, I dispute not; because it is doubtful: Yet be
sure you find out the Difference; viz. SOME WORK IN YOU, that no Hypocrite
under Heaven has: Else what Peace can you have? And a little onwards, The great
Doubt of GOD's People is not only, am I elected? Am I justified, and accepted?
But am I called? Am I sanctified? Are not my Desires, my Faith, my Love,
counterfeit; which I may have, and yet go to Hell? Now, the SPIRIT, when he
comes, clears up all Doubts, not fully, but gradually; for it is the most
clearing Witness: And therefore, John 14. 18, 19, 20. At that Day, you shall
know, that I am in you, and you in me, and I in the Father. The SPIRIT does not
only say, CHRIST is out of you in Heaven, preparing and interceeding; but in
you, sanctifying, preparing thee for Glory, who art a Vessel of Glory; and you
in me by Faith, by Love, Desire, etc. Now, when a Man shall say, I look to no
Work, but only for the SPIRIT to reveal the LORD'S Love; in seeming to desire
the SPIRIT, he does resist the SPIRIT of GOD. And in a few Paragraphs
following. If you look to the SPIRIT without a Work, whilst you do seek
Consolation from the SPIRIT, you cannot avoid the Condemnation of the Word. You
say, the SPIRIT has given Peace to you: But do you love CHRIST? I look not to
that, but to the SPIRIT; why, the Word says, he that loves not him, let him be
Anathema. So, is the League between your Sins and your Souls broken? I look not
to that: Why, JOHN faith, he that commits Sin is of the Devil, 1 John 9. 8,
9. Are you new Creatures? I look not to that: Why, the Word faith, Unless you
be born again, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD. And the LORD knows,
but on your Deathbeds, thus Satan may assault you; and then the LORD will say,
nay, look to your self. The Word shall be BELSHAZZAR'S Terror. Consider Psalm
32. 1. 2. And yet more plainly a Page or two further, A Man is first a
Believer, and in CHRIST, and justified, called, sanctified, before the SPIRIT
does witness it: Else the SPIRIT should witness to an Untruth, and a Lie. For
Unbelievers are under Wrath. If the SPIRIT does not witness this peculiar Work
to be in you, and clear it up to you, tell me, how you can escape Anguish of
Conscience, and the Terrors of Hell in your Heart, unless Conscience be seared,
and blinded? When the LORD shall set Conscience to ask, and say, I choose none
but whom I call; I call none but whom I justify; I justify none but whom I
sanctify, and that not with a common, but peculiar Work; is it so with you? If
it be dark, or doubtful, can you but think all your JOYS have been DREAMS; and
your WITNESS, DELUSIONS: Therefore look to this. -- If you do not, you have no
Peace. For the LORD'S Sake, do it before Fire try you, or you stand scorching
before the Tribunal of GOD. -- If you despise Work, you despise Promises, and
so despise CHRIST; and the LORD knows what Use you may have of them before you
die.

The other is, the excellent Mr. FLAVEL, who has very clearly, and strongly,
expressed himself upon this Point. Speaking of the ANTINOMIANS, he says, His
(...), Vol. 1. Page 1678.
"They deny Sanctification to be the Evidence of Justification;" and reasons
against the Tenet in the following Words, P. Ibid.
(1) I grant indeed, that many vain Professors do cheat, and deceive
themselves, by false, unscriptural Signs and Evidences, as well as by true ones
misapplied. (2) I grant also, that by Reason of the Deceitfulness of the Heart,
Instability of the Thoughts, similar Works of common Grace in Hypocrites,
Distractions of the World, Wiles of Satan, Weakness of Grace, and Prevalency of
Corruption: The clearing up of our Justification by our Sanctification, is a
Work that meets with great and manifold Difficulties; which are the Things that
most Christians complain of. (3) I also grant, that the Evidence of our
Justification in this, or any other Method, is not essential, and absolutely
necessary, to the being of a Christian. A Man may live in CHRIST, and yet not
know his Interest in him, or Relation to him, Isa. 50. 10. Some Christians,
like Children in the Cradle, live, but understand not that they live; are born
to a great Inheritance, but have no Knowledge of it, or present Comfort in it.
(4) I will further grant, that the Eye of a Christian may be too intently fixed
upon his own gracious Qualifications; and being wholly taken up in the reflex
Acts of Faith, may too much neglect the direct Acts of Faith upon CHRIST, to
the great Detriment of his Soul.

But all this notwithstanding, the Examination of our Justification by our
Sanctification, is not only a lawful, and possible, but a very excellent and
necessary Work and Duty. It Is the Course that Christians have taken, in all
Ages; And that which GOD has abundantly blessed to the Joy, and Encouragement of
their Souls.

He has furnished our Souls, to this End, with noble self-reflecting Powers,
and Abilities. He has answerably furnished his Word with Variety of Marks and
Signs, for the same End and Use. Some of these Marks are exclusive, to detect
and bar bold presumptuous Pretenders, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Rev. 21. 8. 27. Some are
inclusive Marks, to measure the Strength and Growth of Grace by, Romans 4. 20.
And others are positive Signs, flowing out of the very Essence of Grace, or the
new Creature, 1 John 4. 13. Hereby we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his SPIRIT.

He has expressly commanded us to examine and prove ourselves; upbraided the
Neglecters of that Duty, and enforced their Duty upon them by a thundering
Argument, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove
your own selves: know ye not your own selves, how that JESUS CHRIST is in you,
except ye be R. probates. In a Word, for this End and Purpose, among others,
were the Scriptures written, 1 John 5. 13. These Things have I written to you
that believe on the Name of the SON of GOD, that ye may know that ye have
eternal Life. And therefore, to neglect this Duty are exceeding dangerous; but
to deny and deride it, intolerable. It may be justly feared, such Men will be
drowned in Perdition, who fall into the Water, by making a Bridge over them
with their own Shadows.

For my own Part, I verily believe, that the sweetest Hours Christians enjoy in
this World, is, when they retire into their Closets, and fit there concealed
from all Eyes, but him that made them: looking now into the BIBLE, then into
their own HEARTS, and then up to GOD; closely following the grand Debate about
their Interest in CHRIST. 'till they have brought it to the happy, desired
issue.

These now are the bad and dangerous Things of the present Day; for so I think
it just to speak of them, and not under the soft Name of Imprudences: leaving
it to the World to judge, whether they are not well worthy of such a Style.
Many, who are zealous for what is called, in the gross, the glorious Work of
GOD, will, probably, be, "heartily sick" of the above Representation: But if
they are become prejudiced (as has been publicly declared See Mr. EDWARDS'S
Book, on the late Revival of Religion in NEW ENGLAND. P. 188.
) against the very Sound of Imprudences and Disorders, they may not be supposed
to be in a proper Temper of Mind to receive the Truth: Nor is it any Wonder, if
they have unhappily fallen into Mistakes; justifying those Things, which, if
they had seen in their true Light, they would have condemned. Nothing more
tends to blind the Mind than Prejudice; and this, some have been made sensible
of, who could not be brought to believe, the Disorders in the Land were such as
had been represented, till Conviction was forced into them, by what they saw
with their own Eyes, and heard with their own Ears.

I shall only subjoin, in Confirmation of the above Accounts, two public
Testimonies, which I cannot but think worthy of particular Notice.

The first is from the Government of CONNECTICUT, in their Proclamation, this
Year, for a general Fast, which runs thus.

By the honorable JONATHAN LAW, Esquire Governor and Commander in Chief, in and
over his MAJESTY'S Colony of CONNECTICUT in NEW ENGLAND.
A Proclamation for a Day of public Fasting and Prayer.
Considering the various Frowns of divine Providence, Particularly, the mortal
Sickness which has prevailed in some of our Towns; the cutting short some of
the precious Fruits of the Earth by the Drought in the Summer past; the ill
Success of our Troops in the late Expedition against the Spanish West Indies,
in which most of them have perished by Sickness; the fearful Prospect that our
Nation and all Europe may be involved in a more general and bloody War, which
may prove much more fatal and distressing to these Plantations; and the unhappy
Divisions and Contentions which still prevail, both among Ministers and People,
in the Doctrines and Practice of Religion, and the bitter Spirit of
Uncharitableness and Disorder, which too much prevails, among all Orders in the
Land: All which call for our deep Humiliation before the LORD. Considering
likewise the Fruitfulness of the Year, and all the Mercies we hope for, depend
upon the Blessing of GOD, which we ought humbly to implore.

I Have therefore though it fit, by and with the Advice of the Council, to appoint
and do hereby appoint, Wednesday, the thirteenth Day of April next to be
observed as a Day of public FASTING and PRAYER throughout this Colony: exhorting
both Ministers and People deeply to humble themselves before the LORD, under
all the Tokens of his Anger and Displeasure, and humbly to confess and bewail
all our Sins which are the procuring Cause of them: PARTICULARLY, The great
Neglect and Contempt of the Gospel and the Ministry thereof, and the prevailing
of a Spirit of Error, Disorder. Unpeaceableness, Pride, Bitterness
Uncharitableness, Censoriousness, Disobedience, calumniating and reviling of
Authority; Divisions, Contentions, Separations and Confusions in Churches;
Injustice, Idleness, (...) Speaking, Lasciviousness, and all other Vices and
Impieties which abound among us.

And that fervent Supplication be made to Almighty GOD, that he would preserve
and bless our Sovereign Lord King GEORGE, their Royal Highnesses the PRINCE and
PRINCESS of Wales, the DUKE, the PRINCESSES the ISSUE of the PRINCE and
PRINCESS of Wales, and the rest of the ROYAL FAMILY: That all the public
Affairs of our Nation may be under the Conduct and Smiles of Heaven; that GOD
would direct and bless his Majesty's Councils, succeed his Arms in the War he
is engaged in; that he would mercifully interpose to still the Jarrs and
Confusions of Europe, to prevent the Effusion of Christian Blood and the
dreadful Calamities of a general War: That GOD would smile upon and protect the
British Plantations in America, and especially that we in this Colony may have
all our just Rights and precious Privileges CIVIL and SACRED continued unto us
inviolate: That GOD would bless our civil Rulers, and succeed all their
Administrations for the Promotion of Justice and Protection of Religion: That
he would direct the Ministers of the Gospel, heal their Divisions, and restore
Unity and Harmony in their Sentiments and Practices: That Religion might
flourish, and a Work of Conversion, vital Piety and true Holiness might be
powerfully carried on; and that all Errors, Censoriousness, Divisions,
Separations, Disorders and Confusions might cease and subside in our Churches;
and that Love, Charity, Peaceableness, Meekness, Humbleness of Mind and other
genuine Fruits of the Spirit may be manifest; that Religion might appear in its
native Excellency and Beauty: That GOD would bless the COLLEGE, and preserve
Purity and Order in that Society: That the Gospel might flourish among the
Heathen Natives: That GOD would bless the succeeding Year with Health, Peace
and Plenty; and prosper us in all our Affairs both by Sea and Land.

And all servile Labor on said Day is hereby strictly forbidden.

Given under my Hand at the Council Chamber in New Haven, this ninth Day of
February in the sixteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the
Second, of Great Britain, etc. KING. Annoque Domini, 1742, 3.

J. LAW.

GOD save the KING.
The other Testimony is that of the Pastors of these Churches, at their late
Convention, in this Town, in these Words,

We, the Pastors of the Churches of CHRIST in the PROVINCE of the
MASSACHUSETTSBAY in NEW ENGLAND, at our annual Convention, May 25th. 1743,
talking into Consideration several Errors in Doctrine, and Disorders in
Practice, that have of late obtained in various Parts of the Land, look upon
our selves bound, in Duty to our great LORD and MASTER, JESUS CHRIST, and in
Concern for the Purity and Welfare of these Churches, in the most public
Manner, to bear our Testimony against them.

1. As to Errors in Doctrine; we observe, that some in our Land look upon what
are called secret Impulses upon their Minds, without due Regard to the written
Word, the Rule of their Conduct; that none are converted but such as know they
are converted, and the Time when; that Assurance is of the Essence of Saving
Faith; that Sanctification is no Evidence of Justification, with other
ANTINOMIAN and FAMILISTICAL Errors, which flow from these: All which, as we
judge, are contrary to the pure Doctrines of the Gospel, and testified against
and confused, by Arguments fetched from Scripture and Reason, by our venerable
Fathers, in the Acts of the Synod of August 1637; as printed in a Book
entitled, The Rise, and Reign, and Ruin, of ANTINOMIANISM etc, in NEW ENGLAND.

II. As to Disorders in Practice, we judge,

1. The Itinerancy, as it is called, by which either ordained Ministers, or
young Candidates, go from Place to Place, and without the Knowledge, or
contrary to the Leave of the stated Pastors in such Places, assemble their
People to hear themselves preach, arising, we fear, from too great an Opinion
of themselves, and an uncharitable Opinion of those Pastors, and a Want of
Faith in the great Head of the Churches, is a Breach of Order, and contrary to
the Scriptures, 1 Pet. 4. 15. 2 Cor. 10. 12, to the End. And the Sentiments of
our Fathers expressed in their Platform of Church Discipline, Chapt. 9. Sect. 6.

2. Private Persons of no Education, and but low Seize in Knowledge, in
the great Doctrines of the Gospel, without any regular Call, under a Pretense
of exhorting, talking upon themselves to be Preachers of the "Word of GOD, we
judge to be an heinous Invasion of the ministerial Office, offensive to GOD,
and destructive of these Churches, contrary to Scripture, Numb. 16. 1 Cor. 12.
28, 29. And testified against in a faithful Advice to the Churches of
NEW ENGLAND by several of our venerable Fathers.

3. The ordaining and Seperating of any Persons to the Work of the evangelical
Ministry, at large, and without any special Relation to a particular Charge,
which some of late have unhappily gone into, we look upon as contrary to the
Scriptures, and directly opposite to our Platform, Chapt. 6. Sect. 3. And the
Practice of the protestant Churches, as may be seen in the Order of the
Churches vindicated, written by the very Rev. Dr. INCREASE MATHER.

4. The Spirit and Practice of Separation, from the Particular Flocks to which
Persons belong, to join themselves with and support, lay Exhorters, or
Itinerants, is very subversive of the Churches of CHRIST, opposite to the Rule
of the Gospel, Gal. 5. 19, 20. Jude ver. 19. 1 Cor. 12. 25. 1 Cor. 3. 3. And
utterly condemned by our Platform, Chapt 13. Sect. 1. 5. And contrary to their
Covenant Engagements.

5. Persons assuming to themselves the Prerogative of GOD, to look into and
judge the Hearts of their Neighbors, censure and condemn their Brethren,
especially their Ministers, as Pharisees, Arminians, blind, and unconverted,
etc. where their Doctrines are agreeable to the Gospel, and their Lives to their
Christian Profession, is, we think, most contrary to the Spirit and Precepts of
the Gospel, and the Example of CHRIST, and highly unbecoming the Character of
those who call themselves the Disciples of the meek and lowly JESUS, John 13.
34. 35. 1 Samuel 16. 7. Matt. 7. 1. Romans 14. 10.

6. Though we deny not, that the human Mind, under the Operation of the Divine
SPIRIT, may be overborn with Terrors or Joys: yet, the many Confusions (...)
have appeared in some Places, from the Vanity of Mind, and ungoverned Passions
of People, either in the Excess of Sorrow or Joy, with the disorderly Tumults
and indecent Behaviors of Persons, we judge to be so far from an Indication of
the Special Presence of GOD with those Preachers that have industriously
excited and countenanced them, or in the Assemblies where they prevail, that
they are a plain Evidence of the Weakness of human Nature; as the History of
the Enthusiasms that have appeared in the World, in several Ages, manifests.
Also 1Cor. 14. 23, 40. At the same Time, we bear our Testimony against the
impious Spirit of those, that, from hence, take Occasion to reproach the Work
of the Divine SPIRIT, in the Hearts of the Children of GOD.

Upon the whole, we earnestly recommend the Churches of this Country to the
gracious Care and Conduct of the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, with our thankful
Acknowledgement for his merciful Regard to them, in supplying them with
faithful Pastors, and protecting them from the Designs of their Enemies, and
advancing his spiritual Kingdom in the Souls of so many from the Foundations of
this Country to this Day; and where there is any special Revival of pure
Religion in any Parts of our Land, at this Time, we would give unto GOD all the
Glory. And earnestly advise all our Brethren in the Ministry, carefully to
endeavor to preserve their Churches pure in their Doctrine, Discipline, and
Manners, and guard them against the Intrusions of Itinerants and Exhorters, and
to uphold a Spirit of Love toward one another, and all Men; which, together
with their fervent Prayers, will be the most likely Means, under GOD; to
promote the true Religion of the Holy JESUS, and hand it incorrupt to
succeeding Generation.

Signed, NATHANAEL EELLS, Moderator. In the Name, and by Order of the
Convention.

And now, if it be Fact, as I have given too much Reason to believe it to be,
that these BAD THINGS have prevailed in all Parts of the Land, and among all
Sorts of Persons, the Answer is, at once, ready to what has been said, whether
in Vindication of some particular Disorders, or in Excuse of the whole taken
together.

Some particular Irregularities have been vindicated as Things right and good.
But how? Why, by stripping them, in a great Measure, of those Circumstances
which rendered them bad, and setting them forth, not as they really are, but as
they ought to be, or are wrongly supposed to be; and in this Way, reflecting
Blame upon the Complainers of these Things, instead of fixing it where it
justify belonged, upon the Things themselves. To illustrate this in a few
Instances.

The Manner of addressing to the Passions of People, in these Times, has often
been complained of: But the Complaint, it is said, Vid. Mr. EDWARDS'S Thoughts
on the late Revival of Religion in NEW ENGLAND. P. 149.
"has been without or beyond just Cause." And in order to make this appear, a
deal of Pains has been taken Ibid. P. 149. and onwards.
to represent the Propriety of applying to People with Affection and
Earnestness about eternal Things; and not in a dull, cold, and indifferent
Manner. And who are the Persons that ever thought otherwise? I know of none,
among those called Opposers but were always in the Sentiment, that the Passions
were planted in the human Constitution for very valuable Uses; that it was
reasonable they should be excited; and that it was one Part of a Minister's
Business to stir them up to a suitable Exercise. But what is all this to the
present Case? The Question is, whether it be'nt a plain, stubborn Fact, that
the Passions have, generally, in these Times, been applied to, as though the
main Thing in Religion was to throw them into Disturbance? Can it be denied,
that the Preachers, who have been the Instruments of the Commotions in the
Land, have endeavored, by all Manner of Arts, and in all Manner of Ways, to
raise the Passions of their Hearers to such a Height, as really to unfit them,
for the present, for the Exercise of their reasonable Powers? Nay, in order to
alarm Men's Fears, has it not been common, among some Sort of Preachers, to
Speak and act after such a wild Manner, as is adapted to affrighten People out
of their Wits, rather than possess their Minds of such a Conviction of Truth,
as is proper to Men, who are endowed with Reason and Understanding? And under
the Notion of speaking to the Affections, were the Things of GOD and another
World, ever preached with more Confusion of Thought; with greater Incoherence;
with the undue Mixture of more rash, crude, unguarded Expressions; or with
Conceit to a higher Degree, appearing in fulsome Self-Applauses, as well as
unheard of Contempt of others? These are Things of too public a Nature to be
denied: They have been too often practiced, and in Places of too great
Concourse, to admit of Debate. So that it is only reducing this Article of
addressing to the Passions of People, to the Test of Fact, and it will not bear a
Vindication: Nor can those who have complained of it be faulted, unless by
placing their Complaint in a wrong Light.

Another Thing that has been complained of is, The Speaking Terror to them that
are already under great Terror, instead of comforting them. But this Complaint
also is said to be "unjust;" Ibid. P. 156.
and in Order to show it to be so, the Way in which Terror ought to be
dispensed to this Kind of Persons has been opened, P. Ibid. and onwards.
with the Restrictions under which it should be done. I am far from thinking,
that what is here said is unexceptionable; but supposing it to be so, what is
it to the Point? The Matter in Debate is, whether Terror has not, in Fact, been
heaped upon Persons already distracted almost with Terror, in a Manner that
justly deserves to be blamed? And will any, pretending to be acquainted with
the late Managements in the Land, calmly deny this? Has no Method, but that of
a faithful Representation of the Truth of the Case of such Persons, been used
to heighten their Fears? Has not Voice and Action, even to an extravagant
Excess, been too often repaired to? Have no poor distressed Creatures been
practiced upon, and this by Numbers at a Time, and in Ways unfit to be
mentioned, whereby their animal Nature has been thrown into the most horrid
Confusion? I could mention a Plenty of Instances in this Kind, but that I
rather choose they should be buried in perpetual Oblivion. So that if this
Article also be brought to the Truth of Fact, it may still be complained of
with great Justice.

It has still been mentioned as an Objection against the Times, "that there has
been too great a Frequency of religious Meetings, and too much Time spent in an
Attendance on these Externals of Religion." But the Objection, it is said, is
in the general groundless. And why? Because it is fit, that, at such an
extraordinary Time, when GOD appears unusually present with a People, in
wonderful Works of Power and Mercy, that they should spend more Time than usual
in religious Exercises, to put Honor upon that GOD that is then
extraordinarily present, and to seek his Face Page Ibid.
And suppose this be allowed; is there notwithstanding just Ground of
Complaint? Is it not undoubted Fact, that People have generally, through the
Land, gone into an Excess upon this Head of attending Meetings, either public,
or private, or both? Han't there been too many Instances of Houses of Worship,
that have been scarce empty, Night or Day, for many Days together? Han't it
been common, among those who have been wrought upon, in these Times to devote
themselves, as it were, to the Business of attending Lectures and Meetings,
either to speak or hear, as though herein lay the Sum of Religion? And han't
this been done by great Numbers of Persons, to the Neglect of their Callings,
and the real Damage of their Families? And while People have expended so much
of their Time, in attending the Preachings and Exhortations of all Manner of
Preachers, and Exhorters, what has been their Care about those Laws of GOD,
which regard their Conduct, in the several Relations and Capacities of Life?
Have they been, in any Proportion, zealous to be better Husbands and Wives,
better Masters and Servants? Have they been as remarkably forward to speak the
Truth every Man to his Neighbor, to do Justice, and love Mercy, and walk
humbly with GOD? These are Duties to be attended, as well as religious
Meetings: But han't the Zeal of People to attend the latter, been so great, as
to leave little Room for the observable Practice of the former? This, I
believe, few will venture to deny. The plain Truth is, People have generally
behaved, in these Times, too much as though they thought Religion consisted,
chiefly, if not only, in an Attendance on Meetings for praying, and Preaching,
and exhorting, and singing and the like; which is certainly a Fault, and will
remain so, notwithstanding all that can be said to the contrary.

The Way in which Outcries, Faintings, and other bodily Effects, have been
spoken of as sure Arguments of a divine Influence accompanying the Word, has
likewise been complained of. And what is the Answer? Why, P. 172.
"that, they are indeed probable Tokens of GOD's Presence; and when excited by
preaching the important Truths of GOD's Word, urged and enfore'd with PROPER
Motives and Arguments, or are consequent on other Means that are GOOD, that
they may be spoken of, and rejoiced in as such. For that Cryings out, in such a
Manner, and with such Circumstances, is as much an Evidence of their general
Cause as Language. The Meaning of it has been learned the same Way that Persons
learn Language; viz. by Use and Experience." But what is all this to the
Purpose of those Outcries, and Swoonings, and bodily Agitations, that are not
effected so much by Truth as by other Things, or not by Truth PROPERLY urged
and enforced, nor yet by any other Means that are GOOD? And have there been no
such Outcries in the Land? Yea rather, have not the Outcries too generally
been of this Kind? Han't they been proved to be so in these Papers? And this, I
know, is the Though It of a very great Number of as wise, and pious, and judicious
Christians about them, as any we have in the Country; and they have been led
into this Sentiment, by attending to the Means, and Manner, and Circumstances
of their Excitement, which have been such as to leave them at no loss to judge
of the Cause, any more than others may be at a loss to judge of the Meaning of
Language. And what is the Way, in which these Outcries have been spoken of as
Tokens of an extraordinary divine Presence? Has it been commonly in Words
expressive of a Probability only? Or, have they been delivered with an Air of
Modesty, and as became those who might possibly be mistaken? So far from it,
that the most positive, peremptory Affirmations have been used; and these,
accompanied with bitter Language against those who could not bring themselves
to think, and speak after the same Manner with them. So that if this Complaint
likewise be considered as it relates to Fact, there is just Ground for it,
notwithstanding all that has been offered to make it appear unjust.

I might, had I Room, have mentioned many other Instances; though indeed there is
no real Need of it, for it is only doing by them as I have done by these, that
is, reducing them to the Truth of Fact, and they will appear at once not to have
been vindicated; nor could they have been, but by uncloathing them of such
Circumstances as are unalterably bad, and will be judged to be so as long as
there are any remains of true Sense and Reason in the World.

But besides a Vindication of some particular Disorders, the whole considered
in the Lump have been excused; but with such Arguments, as I cannot suppose will
be thought to carry in them much Weight. To illustrate this also by a brief
Animadversion on some of these Excuses.

It has been suggested concerning the bad Things of the present Day, taken
collectively, that they are only accidental Effects of a good Work Vid. Mr.
EDWARDS'S Thoughts on the late Revival of Religion in NEW ENGLAND, P. 33.
. But how do we distinguish between accidental Effects, and those that are
natural? Is it not by the Frequency, and Uniformity of their Production? If
such and such Effects are found, in Experience, to be the common and general
Attendants of such and such Causes, at one Time and another, in this Place and
the other, don't we always speak of them as natural, and never as accidental
only? Yea, is not the Doctrine of Causes and Effects wholly founded on this
Kind of Observation and Experience? And if, in this Way, we judge of the bad
Things prevailing in these Times, can it be thought they was nothing more than
accidental Effects of a good Cause? Will any pretend, that they are rare
Productions? Or, that they have been peculiar to here and there a Person, in
here and there a particular Place? Is it not a known, undeniable Fact, that
they have appeared in all Parts of the Land; yea, in every Place upon the whole
Continent, in a greater or less Degree; and this, among Persons of all Ranks,
Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, who have been wrought upon in these Days? And have
not these Effects been most remarkably visible in those, who have been spoken
of as the most remarkable Subjects of the present Operation? These are Truths
that cannot b disowned. They are as evident as the Light shining at Noonday.
And is it possible, if these Effects were merely accidental, that they should
be thus uniform, and almost universal? We must give up our Understandings,
before we can entertain such a Though It of them.

It has been said, P. Ibid.
more has been looked for from Persons under the Operations of the SPIRIT, in
these Days, than is reasonable; that, when any profess to have received Light,
and Influence, and Comfort, from Heaven, and so have had sensible Communion
with GOD, many are ready to expect that now they appear like Angels, and not
like poor, feeble, blind and sinful Worms of the Dust. For my self, I know of
none who ever had such Expectations; but if any were so weak and ignorant, they
have seen that which is abundantly sufficient to show them their Mistake. It Is
readily owned, it ought not to be expected of Persons under the saving
Operations of the SPIRIT, that they should appear like Angels; but yet, it may,
with all Reason, be expected, they should appear like Men who have been renewed
after the Image of GOD, in Knowledge, and Righteousness, and true Holiness.
It Is not enough that they have Heat in their Affections, but they must have
Light in their Minds; it is not enough that they talk speciously, and profess
highly, but they must be really possessed of a truly Christian Temper: And this
they must discover by putting away from them all Bitterness, and Wrath, and
Anger, and Clamor, and evil-speaking, with all Malice; and not only so, but by
living in the habitual Practice of that Piety toward GOD, and Righteousness
and Charity toward Men, in all the genuine Expressions of them, which are
required in the Gospel. It Is not too much to expect this of those, who have
been changed, by the Grace of GOD, into New-Creatures. It Is true, they are far
from being perfectly holy, notwithstanding this Change; but it is as true,
because the Bible affirms it, that they are not worthy to be spoken of as those
who have been turned from the Power of Sin and Satan to GOD, unless they are
such Persons as have been described. And has this generally been the Character
of those, who have been highly spoken of in the late Times? It cannot
reasonably be supposed, while so many, and such gross Disorders have been
prevalent among them.

It has been pleaded, P. 35.
so careful are some Persons lest this Work should be defended, that now they
will hardly allow, that the Influences of the SPIRIT of GOD on the Heart, can
so much as indirectly and accidently be the Occasion of the Exercise of
Corruption, and Commission of Sins. I don't believe, among the whole Number of
those called Opposers, one can be mentioned, who ever made the least Difficulty
of allowing this: Though they have always entertained so high an Opinion of the
real Influences of the Divine SPIRIT, that they cannot suppose, these should
GENERALLY be the Occasion of the Commission of Sin, and in repeated, barefaced
Acts, among those who are the Subjects of these Influences, and in a remarkable
Degree. If great Numbers of Persons, of all Capacities, Tempers, and
Educations, and in most Places throughout a Land, are betrayed into such a
Conduct as is plainly contrary to the most express, and peremptory Commands of
the Gospel of CHRIST, and go on in such a Conduct; and this, in Contempt of
Advice, and all Means of Conviction: I say, when this is the Case, I must think
better of the Influences of the SPIRIT of GOD; especially, when they are
powerful and extraordinary beyond what they were ever known to be before, than
to suppose they should be the Occasion of such Breaches of the Christian Law:
Nor do I esteem it an Instance of that Respect, which is due to the blessed
SPIRIT of Grace, to make him the Cause, though it be only in the Way of a sine
qua non, of those Effects, which are visibly owing to the Lusts of Men, venting
themselves without any tolerable Restraint, either from Reason or Religion, and
so as is not known among Multitudes, even of those who are thought to deserve
no better a Name, than Children of the Devil. And I have a worse Thought of
this Excuse for the bad Things reigning in the Lard, as so many Scripture
Examples have been misapplied in their Vindication.

It has been urged, P. 38,
It is a Thing not to be wondered at, that at a Time when Multitudes, all over
the Land, have their Affections greatly moved, that great Numbers should run
into many Errors and Mistakes with Respect to their Duty, and consequently into
many Acts and Practices that are imprudent and irregular. I own it is so far
from being Matter of Wonder, that its the very Thing that might be expected;
nor could it have been otherwise. When Men's Passions are in great Commotion,
and they generally act under the Guidance of them in this tumultuous State,
'twould be miraculous, if they did not run into the Wilds of Error and
Extravagance. Its the very Thing that has often happened in the World in former
Times: Nor may it be thought strange, if so it has happened now, or should so
happen yet again in Time to come. But then, great Care should be taken, not to
ascribe that Confusion in Men's Passions to the Divine SPIRIT, as its Author,
which will make it even a Wonder, if it does not run them into Errors and
Mistakes; and this, by Multitudes: Especially, should we be in the Exercise of
Caution, when the Mistakes are such palpable ones, and of such dangerous
Tendency, as many have been hurried into, at this Day.

It has been represented P. 39.
as no insuperable Stumbling Block, that Imprudencies and Irregularities of
Conduct should abound, when such Multitudes of all Kinds of Capacities, natural
Tempers, Educations, Customs and Manners of Life, are so generally and
variously affected; especially, in a State of Things so uncommon, and where the
Degree, Extent, Swiftness and Power of Operation is so very extraordinary, and
so new, that there has not been Time and Experience enough to give Birth to
Rules for People's Conduct, and so unusual in Times past, that the Writings of
Divines don't afford us Rules to direct us in such a State of Things. To all
which it is obvious to reply, if Multitudes of all Sorts of Persons were
affected, and the Disorders to be seen, were among only a few of them,
comparatively speaking, there would then be no just Occasion of Offense: But,
if they prevail among Multitudes, and these Multitudes are of all Kinds of
Capacities, Tempers, and Conditions, how does the Number of Persons affected,
or the Variety of their Characters, remove away the Ground of Exception? The
Difficulty, in this Case, remains just the same. -- Nor is the State of Things
in the Land, so new and unusual, as has been said. It Is true, there never was
such a Scene of Things before, in our Day; but there has seldom an Age past,
since the Days of the Apostles, but this has been the State of Things: And the
Degree, Extent, Swiftness and Power of the Operation, has often before been as
extraordinary; yea, in all these Respects, it has been far exceeded. The
Operation, its granted, has been swift; but not so swift, but Birth has, in
Fact, been given to many excellent Rules of Conduct; which, if they had been
received in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, and acted upon with the Temper of
Christians, would have made these Times happy, in Compare with what they now
are. And it is so far from being a just Remark, that the Writings of Divines
don't afford Rules to direct in this State of Things, that they are full of
them. There are no Disorders prevailing in the Land, but the most pious, and
orthodox, and well-approv'd Writers have (as we may see in these Papers)
expressly taken Notice of them, and laid down the wisest, and most effectual
Prescriptions, whether for the Prevention, or Cure of them. The same
Imprudences, Irregularities, Extravagancies, or whatever other Name any may
choose to call them, which now appear among us, were common in ENGLAND, no
longer ago than the last Century, lower down than the Middle of it; and they
were freely wrote against by some of the best Men that were then upon the
Stage, and such Cautions, Directions, Admonitions, and Warnings given, as would
have been effectual, if duly regarded, to have prevented much of the Madness of
the present Day: Nay, some of the worst Things that have been complained of,
were general even in this Land once before; and the Rules of Conduct then given
by our Fathers, are as well suited to the present State of Things, as any could
now adapt them had they ever so much Time to do it in; as may be seen in the
foregoing Pages. It could not therefore be from Want of good Rules of Conduct,
already prepared for the Use of People, in the Writings of Divines, that they
have been thrown into Disorder. Only the practical Works of that single Man,
Mr. BAXTER (which I heartily wish were in every Family throughout the Country)
afford every Direction needful at this Day; and are the more worthy of Notice,
because formed upon long Observation and Experience. -- But if there were no
Rules, in the Writings of Divines suited to the present Day, why need People
"abound in Imprudences and Irregularities," for Want of a Rule of Conduct, when
they are favored with the written Revelation of GOD? Is not the Scripture,
which was given by Inspiration of GOD, profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of GOD may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works? And can the SPIRIT be
supposed to be poured out, in such extraordinary Influences as to render the
Bible a Rule insufficient for the Behavior of those who are the Subjects of
them? Does this reflect due Honor upon the sacred Writings? Must they not be
conceived of, in this Light, as very defective, and imperfect?

It has been hinted, P. 40.
That the Weakness of human Nature has always appeared in Times of great
Revival of Religion, by a Disposition to run to Extremes, and get into
Confusion; especially in three Things, Enthusiasm, Superstition and intemperate
Zeal. So it appeared in the Time of the Reformation, very remarkably; and also
in the Days of the Apostles. It Is very true, there was in the Time of the
Reformation, the Prevalence of Enthusiasm, Superstition, and intemperate Zeal,
in all the Wildness and Extravagance, that can be conceived of: But who were
the Persons among whom these Things prevailed? Were they generally the Children
of GOD? Those who were under the special Guidance of the HOLYGHOST? It Is a
Dishonor to the SPIRIT of Grace to suppose such a Thing. They were rather vain
Pretenders to the SPIRIT; Men, who were spiritual only in their own fond
Imaginations. And so far were they from being Instances of the Work of
Reformation, that they were a Scandal to it, and the greatest Obstacle in the
Way of its Progress. And the same may be said of the Times of the Apostles.
There was then among those called Christians, the Appearance of Pride,
Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Schism, and many other evil Works. But
among what Sort of Christians did these Things appear? Were they those, upon
whom the HOLY GHOST had been poured out in his saving Graces? It may, perhaps,
upon Trial, be found a very difficult Task to prove this. There were many, in
those Days, who could claim the Character of Christians, only in Appearance and
Profession; yea, among those who had the Spirit sent down upon them in an
extraordinary Manner, i. e. in miraculous Powers, so as that they could speak
with Tongues, and show Signs, and work Wonders: I say, even among these, there
were many, concerning whom our SAVIOR himself has said, that they shall be bid
to depart away from him, at the last Judgment. And who will venture to affirm,
that the Disorders complained of, in these Days, were not prevalent, chiefly,
among this Kind of Christians? There was a Number, in this and the other
Christian Church, no Doubt, who were truly spiritual Men, making it evident
that they were so, by their bringing forth the Fruit of the SPIRIT, in all
Righteousness, and Goodness, and Truth: But at the same Time, there was a
Number, and perhaps a greater Number, of mere nominal Christians, puffed up
with Pride, and in a Temper to be led aside either by Satan, or their own
Lusts. And are not these the Persons, among whom it is most likely Disorders
should prevail? Those especially, which are gross, and seem to argue a Spirit
unmortisied to Sin and Lust.

The Language in which the inspired PAUL speaks of the false Teachers in this
and the other Church, and those who were led aside by them, if fairly examined,
would, I am apt to think, import thus much. And it is true, in Fact, (as we
shall see in its proper Place) of many, in these Times of the Apostles, that
they fell into Errors in Principle, as well as Practice, inconsistent with the
Being of real Christianity; and this, notwithstanding they had "infallible
Apostles to guide and direct them, to rectify Disorders, and reclaim them when
they were wandering."

It is still pleaded, P. 43.
If the Affair be seriously weighed in its Circumstances, it will be no great
Difficulty to account for it, supposing the Work, in general, to be from a
great Outpouring of the SPIRIT of GOD, that many have run into great Errors,
and just such Errors as they have. And in order to account for it,

It is said, P. Ibid.
That some who have been improved as great Instruments to promote this Work,
have been very young: And how natural is it for such, being newly brought out
of a State of Darkness, Insensibility, and Death, and having in View the
Reality, the Vastness, and infinite Importance and Nearness of spiritual and
eternal Things, and not having the Advantage of Age and Experience, and but
little Opportunity to study Divinity, or to converse with aged experienced
Christians and Divines; how natural is it for such to fall into many Errors.
The Answer to all which is ready at Hand; viz, That if some of the Instruments
in this Work were very young, and had but little Acquaintance with Divinity,
and were but newly brought to a Sense of the Importance of eternal Things, they
were, for these Reasons, very unfit to be employed as Instruments; and it may
be feared, whether great Dishonor han't been done to the Cause of GOD, and
Religion, by not checking their Forwardness to engage in the ministerial Work,
for which they were so evidently unqualified. It Is observable, the Apostle
PAUL, in his Directions to TIMOTHY about introducing Men into the Ministry,
particularly gives such a Caution as that, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
Not a NOVICE left being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of
the Devil. The Original Word, answering to the English one, NOVICE, is
Neophuton; which properly signifies, a raw young Christian, one who has but "
newly been waked out of Sleep, and had opened to his View, the Reality and vast
Importance of spiritual Things:" And it is the express Direction of an inspired
Apostle, that such an one should not be employed in the Ministry. And the
Reason he subjoins is very solemn and weighty, lest being puffed up with Pride,
he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil; obviously implying that Persons
newly brought over to Religion, and not fully instructed in it, are in great
Danger, if employed as Ministers, of falling into Pride, the Devil's Sin, and
hereby exposing themselves to Condemnation, the Devil's Punishment. And the
Apostle certainly judged right in this Matter. For none are more apt to be
proud and vain-confident, than this Kind of Persons; as has been abundantly
verified in Fact, in these Times: And the Danger is greatly increased, when,
together with the Newness of their Acquaintance with spiritual Things, they are
young, very young in Years. It Is vast Odds, whether the encouraging such
Novices to act as Ministers, will not be the Means of their falling into such
Mistakes, both in Judgment and Conduct, as may be destructive to themselves,
and the Interest of CHRIST too. It Is natural to expect Confusion, when mere
Youths in Age, as well as Christian Knowledge and Experience, are invited into
the Pulpit, and admired for their bold and ignorant speaking of Things they
little understand. And shall the Want of Years, and Knowledge, and Experience,
in these Persons, be pleaded in Excuse for the wretched Mistakes and Follies
they run into? It ought rather to be urged as one of the strongest Reasons,
against their taking upon them the Business of the Ministry; which would, at
once, prevent all this Mischief.

The Plea goes on, and in Substance is thus, P. 44, 45.
That as the Influences of the SPIRIT, upon those who have lately had
Experience of them, are what they were unacquainted with, and had never felt
before, its no Wonder they don't so well know how to distinguish one
extraordinary new Impression from another, and so (to themselves insensibly)
run into Enthusiasm, taking every strong Impulse to be divine. As Multitudes of
illiterate People (most of whom are in their Youth) are brought into such new,
and before (to them) unheard of Circumstances, its natural to suppose they
should pass wrong and strange Judgments both of Persons, and Things, beholding
them in such a new Light. And as they scarce ever heard of such a Thing before
as the Out pouring of the SPIRIT, or had no Notion of it, its nothing strange
that they don't know how to behave themselves in such a new and strange State
of Things: Nor is it unaccountable, that they should be ready to hearken to
those, who have been the Instruments of this Work, in them and others, or that
they should receive every Thing they say, and drink down Error as well as Truth
from them. To which I would return Answer, as follows. The Influences of the
SPIRIT are always new and unknown to Persons, in Experience, 'till they are the
happy Subjects of them: And why should they, at this Day, be more apt to run
generally into Mistakes about them, than at other Times: The Pretense, that
they are now more powerful and extraordinary, will not do; for the more powerful
these Influences are, when real and from the Divine SPIRIT, the less liable
Persons are to Mistakes, and the fewer of them, and of smaller Moment, they
will fall into. The true Account to be given of the many and great Mistakes of
the present Day, about the SPIRIT's Influence, is not the Newness of the Thing,
the not having felt it before; but a notorious Error generally prevailing, as
to the Way and Manner of judging in this Matter. People, in order to know,
whether the Influences they are under, are from the SPIRIT, don't carefully
examine them by the Word of GOD, and view the Change they produce in the moral
State of their Minds, and of their Lives, but hastily conclude such and such
internal Motions to be divine Impressions, merely from the Perception they have
of them. They are ready, at once, if this is unusual, or strong, to take it for
some Influence from above, to speak of it as such, and to act accordingly. This
is the Error of the present Day; and it is indeed the proton Pseudos, the first
and grand Delusion: And where this prevails, we need not be at a loss to know
the true Spring of other Errors. -- As to the Multitudes who are bro't into
such new, and (to them) unheard of Circumstances, it is true, they are
illiterate, and young People; but this notwithstanding, if the Newness of their
Circumstances is such as is proper to new Creatures, they will, in their
general Behavior, discover the true Spirit and Genius of this Sort of Persons.
It Is a great Mistake to think, that the new Nature, or those Influences that
produce it, however extraordinary, are apt to put Men upon making wrong and
strange Judgments, either of Persons or Things: They have a contrary Tendency:
and it is a Reproach to them both, to suppose otherwise. A mere passionate
Religion, it is true, has always led to this, and always will; but not that,
which enlightens the Understanding, renews the Will, and makes the Heart good
and honest. -- How far it is a Truth, that this People have scarce heard of such
a Thing as the Out-pouring of the SPIRIT of GOD, or had no Notion of it, may
admit of Dispute; but that the Out-pouring of the SPIRIT should introduce such
a State of Things, as that those upon whom he has been poured out, should not
know how to behave, will, I think, admit of no good Plea in its Defense. It Is a
plain Case, one of the main Ends of the Out-pouring of the SPIRIT, is to
dispose and enable People to behave as Christians, in their various Stations,
Relations and Conditions of Life; and if instead of this, they are thrown into
such a strange State, as that they cannot behave as they ought to do, not in
here and there a perplexed Case, but in some of the most obvious and essential
Points of Practice; let who will call this an Out-pouring of the SPIRIT, it is
not such an one as the Bible knows any Thing of. And it is nothing short of a
gross Reflection on the blessed SPIRIT, to speak of him as wonderfully poured
out upon a People, and, at the same Time, to suppose such a State of Things
arising therefrom, as that People may run into very ill Conduct, and it not be
thought strange, if they do so. -- What is observed of People's Readiness to
hearken to those, who have been the Instruments of bringing them into their
present Circumstances, I own, is no other than might be expected: Nor have I
any Doubt, upon my Mind, whether the Disorders, so general in this Land, had
their Rise from these Persons. But Schism, and Confusion, and other evil Works,
will not change their Nature, be their Origin in People themselves, or their
Leaders.

It is still urged, P. 45.
That when Persons are extraordinarily affected with a recent Discovery of the
Greatness and Excellency of the divine Being, the Certainty and infinite
Importance of eternal Things, the Preciousness of Souls, and the dreadful
Danger and Madness of Mankind, together with a great Sense of GOD's
distinguishing Kindness and Love to them; no Wonder that now they think they
must exert themselves, and do something extraordinary, for the Honor of God,
and the Good of Souls, and know not how to forbear speaking and acting with
uncommon Earnestness and Vigor. And in these Circumstances, if they ben't
Persons of uncommon Steadiness and Discretion, or han't some Persons of Wisdom
to direct them, it is a Wonder, if they don't proceed without due Caution, and
do Things that are irregular, and will, in the Issue, do more Hurt than Good.
It Is readily granted, Persons under a just and strong Sense of divine Things,
will exert themselves with an awakened Activity in the Business of Religion.
'Twould be no Wonder, if those who had extraordinary Discoveries of GOD, were,
to an extraordinary Degree, filled with Lowliness and Humility, and such an Awe
and Reverence of the divine Majesty, as would make them eminently circumspect
in their whole Deportment toward him; if from the uncommon View they had of
his Perfections, they were, in an uncommon Manner, transformed into his
Likeness, appearing in the World lively Images of that Goodness, Righteousness,
Faithfulness, Kindness, Mercy, Patience and Long-suffering, which are the moral
Glory of the infinitely perfect Being. 'Twould be no Wonder, if those, who had
upon their Minds an extraordinary Sense of the Preciousness of Souls,
discovered extraordinary Care and Pains in working out the Salvation of their
own Souls; if they were observably diligent in adding to their Faith, Virtue;
to Virtue, Knowledge; to Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance, Patience to
Patience, Godliness; to Godliness, Brotherly-Kindness; and to
Brotherly-Kindness, Charity: For they that lack these Things are blind to the
Worth of their own Souls; whereas, they that do them make it evident that they
regard their Souls: For so an Entrance shall be ministered to them abundantly,
into the everlasting Kingdom of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST. In like
Manner, 'twould be no Wonder, if those who had an extraordinary View of the
Danger and Madness of those who neglect their Souls, were proportionably
active, within their proper Sphere, in Endeavors to do them all the Service
they could; if they were ready with their Advice, their Counsel, their Prayers,
their Entreaties, to beget in them a just Concern about Salvation: Nor would
they be "worthy of Indignation, and be beyond Compassion," if, through an
indiscreet Zeal they should, now and then, be betrayed into Weaknesses and
Excesses. These are Things, not to be wondered at; they are no other then might
reasonably be expected. But the Wonder is, how an extraordinary Discovery of
the Greatness and Excellency of GOD, the Importance of eternal Things, and the
Preciousness of Souls, and the Danger of their perishing, should make Men vain
and conceited, full of themselves, and apt to throw Contempt on others; how it
should loosen Men's Tongues to utter such Language as would not be seemly, even
in those who profess no Sense of GOD, or divine Things; how it should lead them
into wrong Sentiments in Religion, blind their Eyes as to some of the most
plain Points of Doctrine; and in a Word, dispose them to such Things as are
called in Scripture, the Works of the Flesh.

These don't look like the Fruit of extraordinary Discoveries of GOD; but they
are the very Things which may be expected, where Men's Passions are raised to
an extraordinary Height, without a proportionable Degree of Light in their
Understandings.

Such high Affections, I know, are freely spoken of as owing to the Influence
of the SPIRIT of GOD; and this, when there is not given Strength of
Understanding in Proportion; and by Means hereof, the Subjects of these
Affections may be driven, through Error, into an irregular and sinful Conduct.
P. 48.
But it may justly be questioned, whether extraordinary Warmth in the Passions,
when there is not answerable Light in the Mind, is so much owing to the SPIRIT
of GOD, as some may be ready to imagine. For is it reasonable to think, that
the Divine SPIRIT, in dealing with Men in a Way of Grace, and in Order to make
them good Christians, would give their Passions the chief Sway over them? Would
not this be to invert their ^rame? To place the Dominion in those Powers, which
were made to be kept in Subjection? And would the alwise GOD introduce such a
State of Things in the human Mind? Can this be the Effect of the Out-pouring of
his SPIRIT? It ought not to be supposed. One of the most essential Things
necessary in the new-forming Men, is the Reduction of their Passions to a
proper Regimen, i. e. The Government of a sanctified Understanding: And 'till
this is effected, they may be called New-Creatures, but they are far from
deserving this Character. Reasonable Beings are not to be guided by Passion or
Affection, though the Object of it should be GOD, and the Things of another
World: They need, even in this Case, to be under the Government of a well
instructed Judgment: Nay, when Men's Passions are raised to an extraordinary
Height, if they have not, at the same Time, a due Balance of have and
Knowledge in their Minds, they are so far from being in a more desirable State
on this (...) that they are in Circumstances of extreme Hazard. There is no
Wildness, but they are liable to be hurried into it; there is no Temptation.
but they are exposed to be drawn aside by it: Nor has the Devil ever greater
Advantage against them, to make a Prey of them, and lead them captive at his
Will. And this has often been verified by sad Experience. Who can boast of
greater Transports of Affection, than the wildest Enthusiasts? Who have had
their Passions excited to a higher Pitch, than those of the ROMISH Communion?
Who have been more artful in their Addresses to the Passions, than Popish
Priests? Observable to this Purpose is the following Story, in the Book
entitled, The Frauds of the Romish Monks, and Priests, set forth in eight
Letters. The Author speaking of a particular Sort of Romish Missionaries mostly
Capuchins, tells us, that after they have furnished themselves with a good
Stock of Sermons upon different Subjects, they send to ROME and demand a
Mission from the POPE; that is, leave to go and preach their Sermons in certain
Towns and Provinces. -- The full, says he, that ever I saw of this Sort, was
at MONTEFIASCON, two Days Journey and an half from ROME. These were Capuchins,
who, besides their Habit which was very odd and antic, with their great
Beards, had on their Heads great red Calots, or these Caps to signify their
Zeal, and the red hot A^dour of their Charity for the Conversion of Souls. -- I
had the Curiosity to go and hear them preach. I entered the Church where I saw
one of them in the Pulpit, with a great Rope or Cord about his Neck, and a
Crucifix in his Arms, who did his utmost Endeavor, to excite sensible
Affections in the Hearts of his Auditors. The chief Aim of these Preachers is
to make the People weep; if they can once effect this they are happy, and this
is all they desire; for this procures them the Reputation of being great
Missionaries, and Men of a truly apostolic Spirit. To this End they make Use
of the most tender melting and affectionate Expressions they can think of, to
draw Tears from their Hearers.

The Preacher I heard at this Time, was paraphrasing the History of the Passion
of our SAVIOR, and after he had employed his utmost Skill in seting forth our
SAVIOR as the most lovely, beautiful of Men; he on the other Hand represented
those pitiless Tormentors, who with great Cords tied his fair Hands, white as
the driven Snow, and beat his lovely Countenance where the Lilly and the Rose
did urge for Mastery. He added to all these Expressions a most lamentable and
affecting Tone, with Gestures very proper, and according to the Subject. I
perceived that this Father was an excellent Declaimer, when on a sudden some
good Women wholly melted into Tenderness and Compassion (as were those Women of
JERUSALEM, who wept seeing JESUS CHRIST carrying his Cross to Mount CALVARY,
and whom out SAVIOR bad not to weep for him, but for themselves) caused their
Sighs to be heard aloud; and a few Minutes after, all that Quarter where the
Women sat, being all in Tears, the Emotion soon caught amongst the Men also; so
that the whole Church was filled with Groans, Sighs and Sobs. Whereupon, the
Capuchin resolved to prosecute his Conquest, cast himself down upon his Knees,
and fixing his great Crucifix upon the Pulpit, he lifted up both his Hands to
Heaven; and with a mournful and terrible Voice, twisting the Cord about his
Neck as if he had a Mind to strangle himself, he cried out, Mercy, Mercy; and
continued in the same Manner to repeat the same Word about 40 or 50 Times,
'till he had made all his Auditory cry so after him. Then there was a most
dreadful Noise heard in the Church, which continued for a good Quarter of an
Hour, 'till their Breaths being spent, the Noise began to lessen by Degrees,
and at last ended in Silence; which gave Occasion to the Father to resume his
Discourse, which he continued with the same tender Affections to the End. Vid.
Vol. 1. Page 261. This Author says of himself, That he was once a secular
Priest in the Church of ROME. Vid. Pres. 5th Edit. printed 1725.

He adds to what is before said, I don't pretend in the least to blame here the
Sensibleness and Tenderness of Men's Hearts, with Respect to our SAVIOR'S
Passion; I am so far from that, that I wish it were in my Power to make a most
deep Impression thereof in the Hearts of all Men: But withal, this shall never
hinder me from owning, that these Affections do ordinarily pass away like
Lightning; and that good solid Motives laid down in a Sermon, to engage People
to a truly Christian Life, make a longer Stay in a Man's Mind, and are there
ready upon Occasion to move the Will; and this is what these Missionaries
wholly neglect. Accordingly we don't find that the Italians (after all these
Missions) are yet a whit the better Men.

I have the rather inserted this Account, because agreeable to another I
received, some Time ago, from a Gentleman in NEW ENGLAND, known to many among
us, and of an established Reputation; who being in a Romish Country, went from
the high Character he had given him of a certain dignified ClergyMan to hear
him preach. He observed there was a beautiful Image of our SAVIOR hanging on
the Cross, near the Desk. He could not at first tell the Use of it; but
presently saw how very serviceable it was; for as the Gentleman was preaching,
though what he said was in Latin (a Language unknown to most of the Assembly);
yet by the rapturous Manner in which he hugged and kissed the Image, the
Congregation was thrown into a general Scream; and when he had several Times
produced this Effect by repeating this farce, the People were dismiss, no
doubt, greatly edified.


And who more successful, by heating the Affections of People, to establish
Error and Delusion? Nay, what Engine has the Devil himself ever made Use of, to
more fatal Purposes, in all Ages, than the Passions of the Vulgar heightened to
such a Degree, as to put them upon acting without Thought and Understanding?
The plain Truth is, an enlightened Mind, and not raised Affections, ought
always to be the Guide of those who call themselves Men; and this, in the
Affairs of Religion, as well as other Things: And it will be so, where GOD
really works on their Hearts, by his SPIRIT. It Is true, "the End of the
Influence of the SPIRIT of GOD is not to increase Men's natural Capacities:"
But it is to fit their Powers for religious Exercise, and preserve them in a
State of due Subordination. It Is as much intended to open the Understanding, as
to warm the Affections; and not only so, but to keep the Passions within their
proper Bounds, restraining them from usurping Dominion over the reasonable
Nature. It Is true likewise, "GOD has not obliged himself immediately to
increase civil Prudence, in Proportion to the Degrees of spiritual Light." But
if it shall please GOD to visit Men with the Influences of his SPIRIT, it may
justly be expected, that he should increase their moral or religious Prudence;
that, if he should give them spiritual Light, it should be for their
Instruction in the Knowledge of what is Sin, and what is Duty: Nor can it be
supposed, that those who are favored with extraordinary Measures of Light from
the SPIRIT of GOD, should be in gross Darkness as to the Knowledge of some of
the most important Points of Christian Practice: Which yet, may be truly said
of many in these Days; unless they are allowed to be under the Government of a
vitiated Will, which is much worse.

But besides what has been offered in Excuse of the Errors of the present Day,
from Man and his Infirmity, it is further observed, that if we consider them P.
49.
"in Respect of GOD, and his righteous Permission, they are not strange,
supposing the Work, as to the Substance of it, to be his." To which, nothing
more need be said than only this, that these Errors are as easily to be
accounted for, in Respect of the blessed GOD, supposing they are as many, and
as great, as any have represented them to be. The holy GOD may have wise Ends
in suffering such a Scene of Disorder to take Place in the Land."

If he intended it as a Punishment, it is no more than we justly deserve: Nor is
it a Punishment different in Kind, from what other professing, sinful People
have, often before, been visited with. False Pretensions to extraordinary
Communications from the SPIRIT; overheated Imaginations; vain Boastings of
high Degrees of Sanctity beyond other Men; Contempt of the standing Ministry;
Animosities, Contentions, Schisms and Separations, have often been the Scourges
of GOD upon sinful Churches. No new, nor strange Thing has happened to us: --
It has been a frequent Dispensation, in GOD's righteous Government of the World.

And the Dispensation is such, as is capable, in the Wisdom of GOD, of being
overruled to great spiritual Advantage. Hereby Occasion has been given for
great Talk about Religion; and many by this Means, may have been brought into
an Acquaintance with it, who might otherwise never have made any Enquiries
about it. -- Hereby Occasion has been given for the setting forth some of the
great Truths of the Gospel, in a clearer and stronger Light, than might have
been expected, if it had not been for such Errors. -- Hereby Occasion has been
given for many to look more critically into the Ground of their Hope, than they
might have done, if it had not been for that Spirit of rash Judging, which has
been so generally prevalent. -- Hereby Occasion has been given for an eminent
Display of many Christian Graces, in those who have been reviled, and had all
Manner of Evil salsly spoken against them, for Righteousness Sake; and by the
frequent Opportunities they have had for the Exercise of these Graces, they may
have been more firmly rooted and fixed in them. In a Word, hereby Occasion has
been given for a more particular and faithful Application to Multitudes of
Persons, by the Ministers of CHRIST, both in public and private, than otherwise
there might have been Opportunity for; which may, in Time, appear in the Fruits
of Righteousness. --

But whatever the Aim of GOD might be, in the Permission of these evil Things;
or, whatever Good they may be capable of being overruled to; there is no
Unrighteousness with him. Clouds and Darkness may be about him, but
Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of his Throne. His Mercy is in
the Heavens, and his Faithfulness reaches to the Clouds. His Righteousness is
like the great Mountains, and his Judgments are a great Deep.

In fine, it is remarked, in Excuse for these Disorders, P. 50, 52.
That we have no Cause to wonder at them, if we consider them, with Regard to
the Hand of Satan; who, because the Out-pouring of the SPIRIT is greater, than
has ever been in NEW ENGLAND, is now alarmed and enraged, and exerts himself
more powerfully to tempt and mislead those, who are the Subjects it, or it is
Promoters. Whatever may be the Reason, it is generally believed, Satan has been
very busy in these Times. He has, no Doubt, had a great Hand in something the
Divisions, and promoting the Extravagancies, which have, of late, been so
detrimental to the Interest of Religion: And if, instead of contriving Excuses
for these Things, we had been more vigilant, because our Adversary the Devil,
as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour; and had resisted
him more courageously, as those who are steadfast in the Faith, it might have
been as much for the Honor of CHRIST, and the Service of his Cause and
Kingdom. -- If it is no Wonder the Devil is now active and busy, and has had an
Influence in the Production of the bad Things among us, it ought not to be
wondered at, when these are so many, and of such dangerous Tendency (as has
been largely represented), if there are those who think they shall serve
CHRIST, while they oppose the Devil, in doing what they can to give Check to
such Disorders, and in opening the Obligations all are under to do so; which is
the next Part of the Work I have undertaken. I have purposely omitted taking
Notice of the large Description, which has been given of the Work of GOD said
to be going on in the Land; partly, because the whole of what has been hitherto
offered, may be looked upon as a just Correction of the Excesses of it; but
principally, because it is little else (excepting the 16 Pages which are taken
up with the Character of a single Person, who yet was not an Instance of
Conversion in these Times) but a Repetition of the Account before published to
the World, which has lately received an Answer, and particularly upon this
Head. Vid. Answer to Mr. EDWARDS'S distinguishing Marks, etc.


PART II.
Representing the Obligations which lie upon the Pastors of these Churches in
particular, and upon all in general, to use their Endeavors to suppress the
Disorders prevailing in the Land; with the great Danger of their Neglect in so
important a Matter.
WERE the bad Things, accompanying the present religious Commotion, no other
than a few accidental Imprudences, it would not be worth while to expend much
Pains to guard People against them: Neither would it look like Friendship to
the Cause of CHRIST, if any were "abundant in insisting on, and setting forth
such Blemishes;" especially, if it were so done as to "manifest that they chose
rather, and were more forward, to take Notice of what is amiss, than what is
good and glorious." But the Case is widely different, when the Disorders, which
may justly be complained of, are generally prevalent, and such as tend to the
Destruction of Peace, with Truth and Holiness. And as this is the real State of
Things in the Land, at this Day, (if any Credit is due to the foregoing Pages)
it is certainly Time, high Time, to appear openly and boldly for GOD, and lay
ourselves out to the utmost, in all proper Ways, to give Check, if possible, to
the Irregularities, which have so mingled themselves with Religion, as to
"eclipse the Glory of it, and beget Jealousies and ill Thoughts in the Minds of
many, about the whole of it."

The Obligations to this are solemn and weighty: And they are binding upon the
Pastors of these Churches in particular, and upon all in general.

We, who have been made Overseers of the Flocks in this Land, are peculiarly
obliged to use our Endeavors, in all suitable Ways, within our proper Sphere,
to suppress these Disorders.

Faithfulness to CHRIST requires this of us. We are his Servants by Office: And
our Business, as such, properly lies, in doing all we can to promote the
Interest of his Kingdom. This is what we have been called to, and set apart
for: And the Vows of GOD are upon us; and woe be unto us, if we are unfaithful!
And is this a Charge we shall be able wholly to escape the Guilt of, if we can
behold the Rise of Error, in Opposition to the Truth as it in JESUS; and the
general Spread of Disorders, in various Kinds, in Contradiction to the plain
Precepts of the Gospel; and yet sit still, and hold our Peace? Who will stand
up for CHRIST, if we don't? Who are called hereto, if not his authorized
Officers? This Matter belongs to us. It Is the proper Business of our Station;
and we shall neglect our Duty, and be faithless to the Charge committed to us,
if we are mere Lookers on, and insert not ourselves in the Cause of Truth and
Virtue, which is the Cause of CHRIST.

It Is true, we shall do well to cease from Strife about Words to no Profit: And
as for foolish and unlearned Questions, they ought to be avoided, lest they
increase to more Ungodliness. But when the Order of the Gospel is openly broke
in upon; the Faith once delivered to the Saints grossly misinterpreted, to the
subverting of Souls; and many evil Practices, in Consequence hereof, are
generally gone into: I say, when this is the Case, where is our Fidelity to our
MASTER and LORD, if we stand by unconcerned? Or, what is as bad, if we fold our
Hands together, and do nothing? Are we not set for the Defense of the Gospel?
And though as Servants of the Lord, we must not strive, but be gentle to all
Men; yet, ought we not in Meekness to instruct those that oppose themselves, if
peradventure GOD will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth?
And is not this the instituted Way of recovering such out of the Snare of the
Devil, who have been taken captive at his Will? Has not the Bible made it an
essential Ingredient in the Character of Gospel Ministers, Tit. 1. 9.
that they be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince Gainsayers?
And what will signify such an Ability, if, when there are many unruly and vain
Talkers, and Deceivers, who subvert whole Houses, teaching Things which they
ought not, we make no Use of it to stop their Mouths? Is it not the Command of
GOD, V. 13, 14.
that they be rebuked sharply, that they may be ^ound in the Faith; not giving
Heed to the Commandments of Men, that turn from the Truth? And can we satisfy
our Consciences, while we live in the Neglect of so plain a Duty? An't we very
Cowards in the Cause of CHRIST? Don't we discover a Want of Faithfulness
toward him, who has put us into the Ministry?

We may preach often, and profess a great Affection for the Work of GOD, and
have it perpetually in our Mouths; but if, at such a Day as this, when Error in
Doctrine, and Practice, covers the Face of the Land, we are silent about the
Matter, or mention it only after such a Manner, as to make it evident we are
not in earnest in what we say, how can we be any other than culpably defective
in our Duty to CHRIST? It Is for the Honor of his Name, and the Interest of his
Kingdom that we cry aloud and spare not. The Errors of the Times are not
speculative Niceties, nor Matters of doubtful Disputation, but evident Breaches
upon the Law of Faith, or the Rule of Duty, and in Instances of high
Importance. The Gospel severely testifies against them, and Faithfulness to the
REDEEMER should put his Ministers upon doing so likewise.

But Faithfulness to our People as well as CHRIST obliges to this. The
Oversight of them has been committed to our Charge; and we have solemnly
engaged before GOD, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the quick, and
the Dead, at his Appearing, and his Kingdom, not only to preach the Word to
them, being instant in Season, and out of Season; but to reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. And how shall we be able to
fulfill this Engagement, if, when the Time is come that they will not endure
sound Doctrine, but after their own. Lusts heap to themselves Teachers, having
itching Ears, and turn away their Ears from the Truth, and are turned unto
Fables: I say, how shall we approve ourselves faithful, if we are now wanting
in our Care to warn them of their Danger, and put them under the Guard of
heedful Caution? When can we more seasonably, or pertinently, apply to our
People for their Direction, Admonition and Rebuke, than at a Time when they are
either led into Error and Delusion, or are in Hazard of being so? We are set as
Watchmen to our Churches; and whose Business is it to espy Danger, and give
Warning, if not our's? Or, if, when we see Danger, we neglect to give Warning
where is our Faithfulness? We are called Shepherds; and shall we behave as
such, if, when the Wolf comes to devour the Flock, we don't watch in all Things
that we may be their Defense? Or, if they should wander out of the Path of
Truth and Holiness, we don't use our Endeavors to reduce and bring them back?

It Is one special Part of the Duty which we, who are Ministers, owe our People,
to guard them, as much as may be, against the bad Influence of all Error,
whether in Principle or Practice. And if Error should prevail, and begin
generally to appear in its bad Effects, we should now be upon the Watch more
than ever. Now is the Time, when we are particularly called to stand us for the
good old Way, and bear faithful Testimony against every Thing, that may tend to
cast a Blemish on true primitive Christianity. It Is the proper Work of the Day:
And if we are silent, I see not but we are sinfully so. Says the excellent
CALVIN, Pr^fat. advers. fanaticam Sectam Libert.
whose Words are as well worthy of Regard in this, as in other Articles, When
any pernicious Sect begins to arise, but chiefly when it grows, it is the Duty
of those whom GOD has appointed to build up his Church, to oppose it strongly,
and appear against it, before it gets Strength to corrupt and destroy all. And
certainly, when there are Pastors of the Churches, they ought not only to
dispense choice good Food to the Flock of CHRIST, but they must also watch
against Wolves and Thieves, that if they will come in to the Flock, they may
set them far away by their loud Outcries and Vociferations. And LUTHER speaks
much in the same Strain, Epist. ad SPALAT.
Ministers ought not only to build up, but to defend. In a Time of Peace, their
Duty is to teach; in a Time of War, to fight with and resist Satan, and
erroneous Men. And it is, as he elsewhere expresses it, A womanish Thing to sit
in a Corner, and lie hid in some Hole; but worthy a Man to plead the Cause of
GOD and Truth. And so bad a Thought had he of ministerial Silence in the Cause
of CHRIST, that, in a Letter to STAUPITIUS, he expresses himself in those very
strong Words, Let me be found any Thing, a proud Man, and guilty of all
Wickedness, so I be not convicted of wicked Silence, whilst the LORD suffers.

We may think it enough, if we preach good Doctrine, and are laborious therein;
but, at such a Day as this, if we don't show to our People a hearty
Disaffection to the abounding Disorders in the Land, but seem rather doubtful
and suspicious of their evil Tendency, we shall probably be the Occasion of
Hurt instead of Good. People will take Advantage from what they observe in us,
and be likely to make an ill Use of it: Nor would it be any Wonder, if, through
the Subtilty of Satan, they should be led into Error. We, who are in the sacred
Office, had Need to take Heed what we do, and how we behave at this Time. A
less Thing in a Minister will encourage Disorders than in other Men. If we are
silent, or say but little, in our public Prayers and Preachings, about the bad
Spirit appearing in so many evil Effects, or seem carefully to avoid speaking
of it in Conversation, it will, and justly may, be interpreted by our People,
that we, who are their Guides, and to whom they are to have their Eye for
spiritual Instruction, have no ill Opinion of it; and this will tend to produce
the same Sentiments in them, and what may be expected, as the Consequence, but
the Increase of Confusion? And may it not be feared, that the Extravagancies,
which are now so general are very much owing to the want of ministerial
Faithfulness in testifying against them, in Time? Are there none of the Pastors
of these Churches, who, instead of condemning the Things that were evidently
hurtful to the Cause of CHRIST, have pleaded on their Behalf? Or, at lest,
palliated and excused them? Nay, have none daubed and flattered, beyond all
Measure, the known Promoters of the worst, Things prevailing in the Land? And
is it any other than might be expected, when this has been their conduct, that
the People should be thrown into such a State of Disorder? Had we, who are
entrusted with the Care of Souls, been generally careful, in the Beginning of
these Times, to point out the Things that were amiss; and had we, upon their
first Appearance, used our faithful Endeavors to discourage their Growth, we
should have seen, I doubt not, a quite different Face of Things: And if we
would now give Check to the Evils, which have gained Strength by being let too
much alone, it must be by coming out boldly, and speaking plainly. And is it
not Time to do so? There are few of our Churches, but Disorders are to be seen
in them: And as to some of them, are they not broke to Pieces with Strife and
Schism? Were ever poor Churches in a State of more doleful Confusion? And shall
we still remain silent? Faithfulness to our People calls upon us to stir up our
selves, no longer standing by as idle Spectators, nor yet halting betwixt two.

And this is what we are further obliged to, from the Example of those holy Men
of GOD, who have gone before us in a bold an d open Testimony against the like
evil Things in their Day, which appear in our's. Soon after the Settlement of
this Country, there was (as we have already seen) the Rise of a Spirit very
like to that which now prevails: And it occasioned like Disturbance to the
Churches. And what was the Method, our Fathers, in the Ministry, took for the
Preservation of Religion, in a Time of such Disorders? Were they afraid to
speak freely against them? Were they disposed to make a mere nothing of them?
Did they strengthen the Hands of those who fomented them, by sacrificing undue
Honor to them? So far from it, that they did, in all the Ways they could
devise, lay themselves out to put a Stop to the Growth of them. They prayed and
preached against the Errors of their Day; they privately conversed with the
Opinionists, using their best Endeavors to enlighten and convince them; they
consulted with one another and with their Churches; and at length, there was a
general Assembly of all the Churches in the Province, by their Elders and
Delegates, who not only declared to the World their Disapprobation of these
Errors, but labored to show the People that they were Errors, by the Light of
Holy Scripture.

"And when the same Spirit, which now troubles us, appeared in ENGLAND the last
Century, what was the Behavior of those who were esteemed the most pious, and
eminently faithful Ministers of CHRIST? Why, they lifted up their Voice like a
Trumpet, testifying against the Enthusiasm which was crumbling the Church into
numberless Sects, and threatening to overrun the Nation. Many now approved
themselves Champions for the Church, and Cause of GOD; and their Names, on this
Account, have been handed down to Posterity with Honor. There has not appeared
among us any Error in Principle, any Wildness in Imagination, any Indecency in
Language, any Irregularity in Practice, but we might have learned how to
testify against it, from what they, in Faithfulness to CHRIST, and the Souls of
People, have left in their Writings."

And the same Method was taken by the first Reformers, when Enthusiasm and
Error began to lift up their Heads in GERMANY, and threaten to carry all before
them. They did not consult how they might please Men, but appeared openly for
GOD, and were resolved, at all Hazards, to plead for his Cause against the
Distraction of the Times, LUTHER had no less, than six public Disputations, at
WITTINGBURG, RUTHERFURD's spiritual Antichrist, Page 86.
against the Antinomians. I suppose the Persons he disputed with were STORK and
MUNCER, and those other pretended Prophets, who boasted of angelic Revelations,
and immediate Converse with GOD; for these were the Men, who scattered the
Seeds of false Doctrine in WITTINGBURG, and were hearkened unto by Reason of
their great spiritual Pretenses. Vita LUTHERI, a MELCH. ADAM. Page 124.


And he wrote an excellent Treatise, upon this same Subject, in a Letter to his
good Friend Mr. GASPER GUTTIL; admirably sated to these Times. It may be seen
in English, translated out of the high Dutch Original, in RUTHER FURD's Survey
of spiritual Antichrist, Page 69, and onwards.
He wrote likewise an Epistle to the People of ANTWERP, when in Danger of being
seduced by these Enthusiasts, tending to guard them against the Infection of
such erroneous Spirits. Vita. LUTHERI, Page 131.
And so far was he from giving out, in the Cause he was engaged, that, in one
of his Epistles, he expresses himself in the following noble Christian Style,
Epistol. ad SPALATINUM.
I have determined with myself, to fear nothing in this Cause, but to contemn
all Things; yea, the higher the Errors rise, and the more mighty they grow, the
more to rise up against them.

CALVIN also, that great Reformer, boldly set his Face against that very
Wildness in Opinion and Behavior, which is revived, in the Beginnings of it,
at this Day. The Book he published against the GERMAN Enthusiasts and
Libertines A very great Character is given of this Book, by the Writer of
CALVIN's Life, in these Words, "Eodem Anno (1544) CALVINUS, tum Anabaptistas,
tum Libertinos, (in quibus veteres omnes, quamtumvis portentosae, renovatae
sunt Haereses) duobus libellis ita refutavit; ut neminem iis attente lectis
arbitremur extitisse, qui vel ab istis, nisi Sciens et prudens, decipi
potuerit, vel si antea deceptus erat, non ultro in rectam viam redieret. Vit.
CALVINI a MELCH. ADAM. P. 96. 97."
is an illustrious Instance of this: In which he has these observable Words,
Instrustio adversus Libertin. P. 603. etc;
I am not ignorant, it will not be well taken by all, that I name these Men:
But what should I do, when I see three or four Seducers who lead to Destruction
many Thousands of Souls; making it their daily Work to overthrow the Truth of
GOD, to scatter the poor Church, to spread abominable Blasphemies, and to
disturb the World with Confusion? Ought I to be silent, or dissemble? O how
cruel should I be, for the sparing or pleasing of some, to suffer all Things to
be destroyed and wasted, and not to warn Men to take Heed!

But besides these, many other of the first Reformers boldly declared against
the Errors of the Times; among whom I shall further mention only the famous
ZUINGLIUS, who, instead of encouraging the Extraordinaries many pretended to,
publicly disputed, Vita ZUINCLII, a MELCH. ADAM. P. 30.
and wrote against them. In his Book upon this Subject, he has these Words in
his own Excuse, capable of a good Use at this Day. Elenchus ZUINCLII contra
Cataba^tistas. Page 17, 18,
Good Reader, these Things which I propound to thee may, perhaps, be somewhat
against thy Stomach, but be assured no Violence, or Rage of Mind has drawn me
to it, but my faithful Care, and Solicitude for the Churches. For there are
many of the Brethren, who, when they did not know what Kind of Men these were,
thought whatever was said against them, was too harsh and bitter: But now, when
their Flocks begun to be destroyed by them, they then, by Letters and Cries,
have called upon us, confessing those Things to be more than true, which before
they had heard.

I am sensible, these were but frail fallible Men, even the best of them, and
not worthy, on that Account, to be set up as perfect Patterns: Nor are we
obliged, by an implicit Faith, to do as they did. I therefore go on to observe,

That this Conduct of theirs, was the very same, the inspired Apostles went
into, upon the Appearance of Irregularities in their Day. This is particularly
evident, in what we find recorded of the Practice of the great St. PAUL. There
never was a more bold and faithful Servant of JESUS CHRIST. He readily ventured
his Name, his Interest, his Life, in bearing Testimony against every Thing that
reflected Disgrace on the Gospel, and tended to introduce Disorder and
Confusion into the Church.

When the Christians at CORINTH, had got into Parties, some crying up one
Minister; others, another, to the Disturbance of the common Peace; what is the
Behavior of the Apostle? Does he say a Word that might give Encouragement to
this Party Spirit? Does he stand by as a silent Spectator of the Envying, and
Strife, and Divisions, that were among them? So far from it, that he severely
chastises their Ignorance; faithfully points their View to the true Source of
these Disorders, the undue Prevalence of carnal Affections: and solemnly gives
it in Charge to them, Not to glory in Men. 1 Cor. 3. Chapt.


When they grew conceited of their extraordinary miraculous Gifts, and
exercised them after such a disorderly Manner, as that, if an Unbeliever had
come into their Place of Worship, he would have been apt to say, they were mad;
1 Cor. 14. 23.
how does he set himself to rectify so gross an Irregularity, not only by
calling them to Decency and Order, but by giving them an Idea of the blessed
GOD, as the Author, not of Confusion but of Peace, as in all the Churches of
the Saints? Ibid. Verse 33. 40.


When there appeared among them a Disposition to act out of Character, to turn
every one Exhorter or Preacher, leaving their own Business to do the Work which
was proper to Ministers; does he esteem this a Matter of slight Consideration?
Does he let them alone to go on in this Disorder? Instead of this, he
faithfully warns every Man to abide in the same Calling, wherein he was called;
1 Cor. 7. 20.
and repeats the Exhortation, Ver. 24.
Let every Man wherein he is called, therein abide with GOD: Nay, as though he
could not too strongly testify against this Humor of every one's setting
himself up for a Teacher, he spends a whole Chapter 1 Cor. 12.
in showing, that it evidently opposed the Wisdom of GOD in the Distribution of
his Gifts, as well as his Appointment of some, in Distinction from others, to
be Prophets and Teachers.

In a Word, when a Spirit of rash, censorious Judging discovered it self, in
their Treatment of one another, and arose to such a Height as even to reproach
and condemn him, though an Apostle of CHRIST; what is his Conduct? Does he go
about to excuse the Matter? Does he lead them into a Consideration of such
Instances of rash Judging as might be met with in Scripture, to reconcile this
Practice of their's with the Truth of a Work of GOD in their Hearts? Nothing
more distant from his Thoughts! -- He turns their View to the Judgment Seat of
CHRIST, and peremptorily charges them 1 Cor. 4. 5.
to judge nothing before the Time, until the LORD come, who will both bring to
Light the hidden Things of Darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the
Hearts: And as though he had not said enough upon a Matter of such high
Importance, he largely describes to them the Nature of Christian Charity, and
gives them plainly to understand, that if they were not possessed of it, they
were nothing in Point of real Christianity, though they should be able to speak
like Angels, and had Faith so that they could remove Mountains. 1 Cor. 13.
Chapter.


And this same Apostle was alike faithful, when he beheld any Thing amiss in
other Churches, to apply to them for their Correction, and Instruction in
Righteousness, as the Case required. Some signal Proofs of this, we have in his
Epistles to the Churches at ROME, and GALATIA; especially, the latter, who had
been perverted from the Truth of the Gospel, by the coming in of false Teachers
among them. The whole Drift of his Letter to them shows, that he sought not to
please Men, for that he should not then be the Servant of CHRIST. He severely
reprimands them for giving Heed to such as would pervert the Gospel of CHRIST;
and solemnly declares to them, as he had done before, That if any Man should
preach to them any other Gospel than that they had received, he ought to be
esteemed accursed. Gal. 1. Chap. and through the whole of the Epistle.


And is there no Regard to be paid to these noble Examples of Courage and
Faithfulness in the Cause of CHRIST? May we not learn our Duty, when we have
the Conduct of inspired Apostles for our Direction? Can it be thought, we are
OPPOSERS of the Work of GOD, while we tread in their Steps, and conform our
Practice to their's? Are not Disorders, in the Church, as dangerous to Religion
now, as in the Apostle's Days? Is it not as fit they should be courageously
testified against now as then? And are not the Ministers of CHRIST under
Obligations to exercise this Faithfulness, as they are compassed about with so
great a Cloud of Witnesses, among whom they may behold even the Apostles and
first Founders of the Religion of JESUS?

But we, who are CHRIST'S Ministers, are still further obliged to discourage
the Rise and Growth of Disorders in the Church, from the great Danger of a
Neglect in so important a Matter.

There will be Danger in Respect of ourselves. For we have the Charge of Souls;
and very awful is the Charge. It Is not altogether unlike that, 1 Kings 20. 39.
Keep this Man: If by any Means he be missing, then shall thy Life be for his
Life. Not that the Blood of any will be required at our Hands, if we have been
faithful to warn them of the Error of the Wicked. that they may turn from it:
In this Case, if they turn not from their Way, but die in their Iniquity, we
have delivered our Souls. But if through Cowardice, or a Man-pleasing
Disposition, they are let alone to be drawn into Error and Delusion, how can we
answer for our Conduct? Shall we behave like faithful Ministers of JESUS
CHRIST, if, at a Time when Disorders are become general, we take little or no
Notice of them? Is there no Danger in such a Neglect? Should those of our
Charge, by Means of our Silence, entertain a favorable Opinion of very ill
Things, and go into the Practice of them, should not we, in a Sense, be
chargeable with their Sin? It Is true, if, from an upright Heart we have
endeavored to do our Duty, according to our best Light, we may hope for the
Mercy of our Judge, though we should have fallen into Mistakes. But we had Need
take Heed to ourselves that we be found faithful.

To be sure, those ought to do so, in a particular Manner, who, instead of
guarding People against Error and evil Practice, have unhappily been the
Instruments of leading them into it. It may be worthy the special Notice of
such, that those are ranked among false Prophets, and threatened with awful
Judgments, in the Prophecies of Scripture, of whom the blessed GOD may say, I
have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they
prophesied. -- They speak a Vision of their own Heart, and not out of the Mouth
of the LORD. -- They prophesy Lies in my Name; yea, they are Prophets of the
Deceit of their own Hearts. Jer. 23. 16, 21, 25, 26.
It Is against this Kind of Ministers, or Shepherds, that Jer. 23. is
particularly written. And they are again mentioned, in the 14 Chapt. 14 Verse,
In the 29 Chapt. Ver. 8, 9. And in many Places, in other Prophecies. I don't
determine who the Persons are, to whom these Texts are applicable; but, in
general, it is too evident to be denied, that some in these Days, have run, when
they were not sent: And they have also delivered the Suggestions of their own
overheated Imaginations, in the Name of the LORD, and for his Truths; hereby
deluding many poor Souls. And however high an Opinion such may entertain of
themselves, or however well they may be thought of by their Admirers, they may
be in as great Danger of the Guilt of the Blood of Souls as others, they are so
free in fastening this Guilt upon. They have Reason to look to themselves: Nor
would it be amiss, if they would suppose themselves capable of being mistaken.
-- Their Danger is greater than they may be aware of.

But besides the Danger in Respect of ourselves, great will be the Danger of
our Churches, if we don't faithfully warn them. There is no Reason to expect
that Disorders, when they have arisen, will die of themselves; they will rather
increase, and to what a Height they will grow, without Discouragement, none can
tell. The fatal Progress of Error at other Times, and in this as well as other
Countries, may well fill us with Concern.

The Churches in this Land, upwards of an Hundred Years ago, were almost ruined
with their religious Disturbances. The Spirit which then operated was
suprisingly similar to the Spirit of these Times (as we have had an Account in
the Preface); and it swiftly spread through the Province, soon appearing in
above eighty Errors; some of which were destructive in their Tendency, and
must, in the End, root out Religion, wherever they take Place. I know it was
pleaded then, as it is now, "That as to some of these Errors, they were not
held by any." This was given, to the Synod convened upon these Affairs, as a
Reason why they should not enter upon the Consideration of them: To which the
Reply was in these Words, "That they were indeed maintained in the Country, by
some or other, either by their Speech, or else by Writing under their own
Hands, as the Elders were able to prove by two or three or four Witnesses, and
that in every Particular." This is a Transcript from a Manuscript Copy I have
now by me, of the Proceedings of the Synod in 1637; in which are some Things,
w^ll worthy of Notice; which have never yet seen the Light.


And in the English Nation, no longer ago than the last Century, to what a
monstrous Degree did Error, Faction and Confusion prevail, in a little Time?
Says Mr. BAXTER, in the Dedication of his Saints everlasting Rest to the People
of his Charge, Do not your Hearts bleed to look upon the State of ENGLAND? And
to think how few Towns or Cities there be (where is any Forwardness in
Religion) that are not cut into Shreds, and crumbled as to Dust, by Separations
and Divisions? To think what a Wound we have hereby given to the very Christian
Name? To think how we have hardened the ignorant, confirmed the doubting? And
are our selves become the Scorn of our Enemies, and the Grief of our Friends?
And how many of our dearest, best esteemed Friends are fallen to notorious
Pride, or Impiety; yea, some to be worse than open Infidels? These are Pillars
of Salt: See that you remember them. Yet more observable to our Purpose, are
the Words of Mr. EDWARDS, in his Address to Lord and Commons assembled in
Parliament See the Dedication to his Catalogue and Discovery of the Errors.
Blasphemies, etc. Of the Sectaries in ENGLAND from 42 to 46.
Things now are grown to a strange Pass (though nothing is now strange) and every
Day they grow worse and worse, and you can hardly conceive and imagine them so
bad as they are. No Kind of Blasphemy, Heresy, Disorder, Confusion, but is
found among us, or a coming in upon us: For we, instead of a Reformation, are
grown from one Extreme to another, fallen from Scylla to Charibdis, from popish
Innovations, and Superstitions to damnable Heresies, horrid Blasphemies,
Libertinism and fearful Anarchy. Our Evils are not removed and cured, but only
changed; one Disease and Devil has left us, and another as bad is come in the
room; yea, this last Extremity, into which we are fallen, is far more high,
violent and dangerous in many Respects. -- You have most noble Senators, done
worthily against Papists, -- you have made a Reformation; but with the
Reformation have we not a Deformation, and worse Things come in upon us than
any we ever had before? -- Many among us have put down the Scriptures,
slighting, yea, blaspheming them. We have those who overthrow the Doctrine of
the Trinity, oppose the Divinity of CHRIST, slight the Apostles. We have many
who cast down to the Ground all Ministers in all the reformed Churches; who
have cast cut the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; who make nothing
of LORD's Days; with whom all public Prayer is questioned, and ministerial
Preachings denied. Many of the Sectaries, in these Days, deny all Principles of
Religion; are Enemies t o all holy Duties, Order, Learning; overthrowing all.
What Swarms are there of all Sorts of illiterate, mechanic Preachers! Yea, of
Women, and BoyPreachers! What a Number of Meetings, of Sectaries in this City,
eleven at least in one Parish! And are not these Errors, Heresies, and Schisms,
Blots in our Reformation? Do they not blemish, and cast a dark Shadow upon all
the light Part? Are they not the dead Flies in the Apothecaries Ointment,
sending forth a stinking Savor? Are they not our Reproach, and the Rejoicing
of the common Enemy? The Scandal of the weak, and the blazing-Star of the Times?

And in the Book to which these Passages are prefixed, we are presented with a
most awful Account of the Power of Enthusiasm, in such Instances of Wildness,
both in Matters of Faith and Practice, as are enough to make one stand
astonished. No less than 172 Errors in Doctrine are particularly noted down,
with many blasphemous Speeches, and strange Actions; all which, there is Reason
to think, are Charges justly made against these Times: And they bespeak the
dangerous State of the Churches, when Men's Passions are overheated, and, as
the Effect hereof, Disorders begin to make Discovery of themselves in one Place
and another.

I might go on and show, that, in the Times of the first Reformers, the Spirit
of Error wrought after just the same Manner; proceeding from one Thing to
another, 'till it had deluded Multitudes with extatic Raptures, Visions and
Revelations; and, at last, prepared them, by false and dangerous Principles in
Religion, for Actions grossly criminal, and carnal. -- But I forbear; and only
add,

That even in the Apostle's Days, there was a dreadful Spread of Error, with
its usual mischievous Effects, through the wicked Craft of some, and the
misguided ignorant Zeal of others, who were admired as Preachers. Many, by
their Means, were then deluded, and kept under the Power of Delusion,
notwithstanding the Care of inspired Men to undeceive them: Nay, so strangely
were they beguiled, that they preferred false Teachers to the very Apostles;
yea, they were, at length, brought to entertain such Prejudices against them,
as actually to withdraw Communion, both from them, and the Churches under their
Inspection. THEY WENT OUT FROM US, says the Apostle JOHN. I John 2. 10.
And these are they, as JUDE expresses it, Verse 19.
WHO SEPARATE THEMSELVES. They were Men, it should seem, of two, great
Spirituality to hold Communion with the apostolic Churches: But it was only in
their own vain Conceit; for whatever Opinion they might have of themselves as
spiritual Men, they were really sensual, not having the SPIRIT. Jude Verse 19.
And so far were they from being a more holy Community, after their Separation,
that they might rather be called, the Synagogue of Satan; as the Phrase is in
the Revelation of JOHN. Chapt. 2. V. 9.
There were many Deceivers in the apostolic Times; and through their
Influence, many and great Errors got into the Church, to the Hindrance of the
Gospel. The Mystery of Iniquity began to work, while the Apostles were yet
alive. -- Damnable Heresies were broached in their Day; -- the main Doctrines
of Christianity, either wholly denied, or explained away, or so corrupted with
Jewish or Pagan Mixtures, as that they were removed from the Religion of CHRIST
to another Gospel. The Doctrines of Grace were abused then, as they have been
since, into an Occasion of LASCIVIOUSNESS; -- yea, the Quakerish Notion of
sinless Perfection began to take Place, in those Days, and almost every other
bad Tenet, or disorderly Practice, which has plagued the Church of GOD, in
other Ages.

We may see, from these Hints, the pernicious Tendency of Delusion, and what a
sad Effect it has on the Well-Being of the Church. And can it then be too
carefully guarded against? It Is true, it may do a great Deal of Mischief,
notwithstanding our most faithful Endeavors to suppress it. It has often made
sad Havoc in the World, as we have seen. But how much more fatal would have
been its Influence, if it had not been restrained and checked? What would have
become of the poor Church of GOD, if it had not been for the faithful Care of
the Apostles in their Day, and of other eminent Servants of CHRIST in their's,
to guard People against the Infection of it? This, under GOD, is the only Way
to stop its Progress. And shall we, who are Ministers, let it alone to take its
Course? What can be more dangerous to the Churches? How should it be, but they
should be filled with Confusion? And can we suffer our selves to sit still, and
not exert our selves to prevent the coming on of such a State of Things? We are
obliged to nothing, if not to the Use of our most faithful Endeavors for the
Preservation of our Churches, when in such Danger.

These now are the Obligations, we are under to appear against the Disorders of
the Times: They are thus solemn and weighty. And yet, what little Influence
have they had upon those, from whom better Things might have been expected, in
such a Day as this? What a strange Backwardness have some, in the Ministry,
discovered to speak plainly and freely, in the Cause of Truth and Holiness? How
ready have they been to excuse themselves? How easily persuaded to Silence,
upon one Consideration or another? --

Some have been unsettled in their Thoughts, not knowing what Judgment to make
about the State of Things in the Land. This was, at first, I believe, the real
Truth of the Case, as to many; and to this it might be owing, they said so
little, either one Way, or 'tother. But they have now had sufficient
Opportunity to form their Judgment: And it is indeed high Time, for all to know
their own Minds, and act steadily according to some fixed Principles or other.
Nor may it be supposed there are any, unless such as are evidently carried away
with their Imaginations, but must be convinced there have been horrid
Extravagancies acted in the Land: And however they behave in other Things, can
they be excused, if they don't con^emn these, and endeavor in all proper Ways
to guard People against the bad Influence of them, whether on the right Hand,
or the left?

Some, I doubt not, would have appeared against the Irregularities of the
Times, but that they were fearful, lest, if they spoke against what was bad,
they should discourage what was good. They saw the coming on of some Things
they could not but disapprove, yet dare not express, their Sentiments with
Freedom lest they should damp the good Work, they were in Hopes GOD was
beginning to carry on in the Land. This was, at first, the true Reason, and may
be so still, in Respect of some, why they have said and done so little, to the
Discouragement, even of such Things as they would be glad were suppressed. But
it is certainly an Error they have fallen into. For how shall Religion suffer by
pointing out such Things as are really evil, and endeavoring in reasonable
Ways to give Check to them? It Is true, the most Christian Methods of Conduct
may be abused by the Lusts of Men, and made an Occasion of Sin: But if this is
a good Reason, why we should sit still, and do nothing for the Suppression of
Disorders, we may, for the same Reason, be excused from ever exerting our
selves in the Cause of GOD; for we can neither say, or do any Thing, but it may
be turned to an ill Use. The only Question is, whether it is not reasonable,
when Disorders arise, all suitable Care should be taken for the Suppression of
them? And if it is, the Fear lest an ill Improvement should be made of our
faithful Endeavors to this End, is no sufficient Excuse for the Non Use of
them. This indeed should make us cautious; putting us upon our Guard against
all Methods of acting, but such as are just, and wise, and good: And while
these are the only ones we use, we are certainly in the Way of our Duty: And as
there is no other Way prescribed by the Law of Christianity to keep Things from
running into Confusion; so neither will any other be effectual to this Purpose:
And we have seen enough, one would think, fully to satisfy us of this. What has
been gained by Silence, and doing nothing? Has Religion been at all served?
Have Disorders abated? Have they not rather increased? Han't they spread
themselves all over the Land, and got such Head as to defy Opposition? Han't
they broke many of our Churches to Pieces, giving a most dreadful Shock to the
Interest of CHRIST in them? And will any be still afraid to rise up against
them? This ^ear of hurting the Work of GOD, by particularly pointing out the
working of Satan, or Men's own Lusts, and faithfully testifying against it,
has, I verily believe, been a Means of giving the Devil as great an Advantage
over us, as any one Thing in these Times: Nor unless it be taken out of his
Hands, may we expect but that he will baffle us in all our other Attempts.

Some, again, have been restrained from speaking, through that Fear of Man
which brings a Snare. And, if I may be free to declare my Thoughts, this I
take to have been the great Fault of the Clergy, in these Days. Have we not too
generally connived at some Things, we were clearly, satisfied were much amiss?
Have not we betrayed a Want of Courage openly to speak our Mind, and make a Stand,
in Time, against that which has proved very mischievous? Some, it may be, were
afraid of hurting their Usefulness among their People, and upon this Account
kept their Thoughts to themselves, instead of communicating them for the Good
of their Flocks; not having Faith enough to leave the Affair of their further
Serviceableness with their Master and LORD. -- Some, perhaps, may have been
under an undue Influence, through Fear of a Removal from their People, and being
turned out into the wide World, without the Prospect of any Means for the
Support of themselves and Families; not duly considering, that their heavenly
Father fcedeth the Fowls of the Air, and that he has taught them to argue
herefrom, are not ye much better than they? -- Others might be too much in Fear
of the Breath of frail, fallible, mortal Man. They soon saw the Fate of those,
who put on Resolution, and declared against the Errors of the present Day, that
they were reproached and (...), having all Manner of Evil falsely spoken against
them for Righteousness Sake; that all the opprobrious Names, that could be
thought of, were freely called upon them, as Pharisees, Hypocrites, Opposers of
the Work of GOD, Betrayers of CHRIST, Wolves in Sheep's Clothing, Instruments
of the Devil, and what not: And they might be too willing to escape these
Censures; not remembering, that it is a real Honor to be slandered (...) the
Name of CHRIST, and in Defense of his Cause and Kingdom.

And it is remarkable, the Slanders which have been cast upon such as have
ventured openly to stand up for the Truths, and Ways of CHRIST, at this Day,
are the very same, for Kind, with those which have been thrown upon the like
Discouragers of Enthusiasm and Disorder, in all Ages of the Church. In our own
Land, when the like Extraordinaries disturbed the Churches, in former Times,
which do now; what was the Language in which those eminent Servants of JESUS
CHRIST, who testified against the prevailing Errors, were then spoken of? Why,
they were thought worthy no better a Style than that, Legal Preachers, Baal's
Priests, Popish Factors, Scribes, Pharisees; yea, Opposers of CHRIST himself.
And these were the Names commonly bestowed upon the best Men, in our Nation, by
the Sectaries of the last Age. Mr. BAXTER carries the Matter yet further, when
he says, Vol. 2. P. 322.
As I have seen Letters of the Ranters so full of the most hideous Blasphemies
against GOD, as I thought had never come from any but the damned; so have I had
Letters from these Men my self, so full of railing and reviling from End to
End, as I never saw before, from the Pen of Man, either mad or sober, nor ever
heard from the Mouth of any. And the like Treatment, the most celebrated first
Reformers met with, in GERMANY, from the Visionaries and Errorists, in their
Day. LUTHER's Name was as odious to the Sectaries, as to the Papists. MUNCER,
that Ringleader of religious Disturbance, wrote a Book, against him, full of
Bitterness and Rage, wherein, among other Things, he reproaches him as one
destitute of the Spirit of Inspiration, and savouring only the Things that we
carnal. LUTHERUM flagellat, quod enthusiastico Spiritu careat; et nihil, nisi
carnalia, sapiat. Vit. LUTH. a MELCH. ADAM. Page 128.
He thundered out Raileries against him, saying, he was as bad as the Pope;
yea, worse than the Pope himself, and that he preached only a carnal Gospel:
And the like Reproaches were cast upon him by the other overheated Zealots,
against whom he desended the Truths of the Gospel. CALVIN also, that glorious
Leader in the Reformation, was basely reviled, not only by the Catholics, but
the Libertines and Enthusiasts; who charged him with Heresy, Ambition,
affecting a new Papacy, studying to heap up Riches; with being a Railer, and
every Thing that was bad: Yea, so hateful was CALVIN, to the Sectaries, in his
Day, that some named their Dogs CALVIN in Contempt of him; others changed
CALVIN into CAIN; many were so out of Charity with him, that they professed they
kept away from the LORD's Supper, because they could not hold Communion with
him. Vita CALVINI a MELCH. ADAM. et BEZA.
But more than all this, the Apostles themselves were spoken of with great
Contempt, by some bold Pretenders to Religion, in those primitive Times. There
were those then who could boast of their superior Excellencies, and set
themselves above the very Apostles of JESUS CHRIST. This is alluded to, in that
sarcastical Language of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 12.
We dare not make our selves of the Number, or compare our selves with some who
commend themselves. And in a few Verses onwards, Not he that commends himself
is approved, but whom the LORD commends. And at the same Time, that they thus
exalted themselves, they craftily endeavored to lessen the Character of the
Apostles, and lead People into a mean and pitiful Thought of them. His Letters,
say they are weighty; but his bodily Presence is weak, and his Speech
contemptible. 2 Cor. 10. 10.
Perhaps, the great St. PAUL was not able to deliver himself with that Noise
and Vehemence, for which these Preachers might be admired among the
CORINTHIANS; and they asperse him on this Account, as a contemptible Speaker,
scarce worth hearing. Nor is this the worst Treatment he met with: He had
probably been spoken of in Terms of great Ignominy and Disgrace, and so as to
put People out of all Conceit of him. Hence that Language of his, 1 Cor. 4. 12.
13.
Being reviled, we bless; being defamed, we entreat: We are made as the Filth
of the World, and are the Offscouring of all Things to this Day. -- But the
great SAVIOR himself could not escape the Revilings of Men. He was called as
bad Names as any of his Disciples have ever been since. Deceiver, Impostor,
Blasphemer; yea, Beclzebub, were the slanderous Names, freely heaped on him. --
And should it not reconcile us to the Reproaches we may have cast upon us, for
our appearing in Vindication of the Faith and Order of the Gospel, that we
suffer no more than the best and greatest Men in the World have done before us,
and in the same Cause? Yea, that that we are Fellow Sufferers with the Apostles
of CHRIST; yea, with CHRIST himself. Is the Disciple above his Master? Is tle
Servant above his LORD? If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub,
how much more shall they call them of his Household? What is it more than may be
expected? And shall we think much of it, when it is no other than our MASTER
and SAVIOR suffered before us?

IN fine, there are yet others, who may have been kept from testifying against
the bad Things of the present Day, from a Man-pleasing Disposition. They have
not, perhaps, been so careful to consult, what was their Duty, what was for the
Interest of the Redeemer and his Kingdom, as what would best secure them in the
good Opinion of the People. Are there none, whose Conduct has discovered them
to have been too much the Servants of Men? Have none criminally accommodated
themselves to the Times, behaving as might best take with the Populace? Would
to GOD it were injurious to suggest such a Thing against any one Minister in
the Land! And the rather, because it argues a Spirit so different from that
which appeared in PAUL, that glorious Champion for CHRIST. Do I seek to please
Men, says he? Gal. 1. 10.
He disdains the Thought; and for that noble Reason, If I pleased Men, I should
not be the Servant of CHRIST. V. Ibid.
And he triumphs in that Language, in the Behalf, not only of himself, but his
Fellow Laborers in the Kingdom and Patience of JESUS CHRIST, I These. 2. 4. 5.
6.
As we were allowed of GOD to be put in Trust with the Gospel, even so we
speak, not as PLEASING MEN, BUT GOD, who tries our Hearts: For neither at any
Time used we flattering Words, as ye know; nor a Cloak of (...): GOD is
Witness. Neither of Men, sought we Glory, neither of you, nor yet of others.

Let me add here two or three Things from Mr. BAXTER, well worthy the serious
Consideration of such of us, as may overvalue the Favor or Censure of Man,
and herefrom be under Temptation to fall into the base Sin of Manpleasing.

Consider, says he, Vol. 1. of his Works, P. 176. and onwards.
what a Slavery you choose when you thus make your selves the Servants of every
Man, whose Censures you fear, and whose Approbation you are ambitious of. What
a Task have Man-pleasers? How needlessly do they enthrall themselves? They have
as many Masters as Beholders! No Wonder, if it take them off from the Service
of GOD. -- Remember, what a pitiful Reward you seek. O miserable Reward! The
Thought and Breath of mortal Men! instead of GOD, instead of Heaven, this is
their Reward! -- If nothing else will cure this Disease, at lest let the
Impossibility of pleasing Men, and attaining your Ends, suffice against so
fruitless an Attempt. And here I shall show you, how impossible it is, or, at
lest, a Thing which you cannot reasonably expect. (1.) Remember, what a
Multitude you have to please, and when you have pleased some, how many more
will be still unpleased, and how many dipleased, when you have done your best.
-- (2.) You will have many factious Zealots to please, who are ruled by the
Interest of an Opinion or a Sect; and those will never be pleased, unless you
will be one of their Side or Party, and conform your self to their Opinions. If
you be not against them, but set yourselves to reconcile the Differences in the
Church, they will hate you as not promoting their Opinions. -- If you will be
Neuters, you shall be used as Enemies. If you be never so much for CHRIST, and
Holiness, and common Truth, all is nothing, unless you be also for them, and
their Conceits. (3.) You have Men of great Mutability to please: That may one
Hour be ready to worship you as Gods, and the next to stone you, or account you
as Devils; as they did by PAUL and CHRIST himself. What a Weathercock is the
Mind of Man? especially, of the Vulgar and the Temporanious? When you have
spent all your Days in building your Reputation on this Sand, one Blast of
Wind, at last, does tumble it down, and all your Cost and Labor is lost. Serve
Men as submissively and carefully as you can, and, after all, some Accident, or
failing of their unrighteous Expectations, may make all that you ever did
forgotten. If ever you put such Confidence in a Friend, as not to consider it
is possible, he may one Day prove your Enemy, you know not Man; and may,
perhaps, be better taught to know him to your Cost. (4.) There is, among Men,
so great a Contrariety of Judgments, and Dispositions, and Interests, that they
will never agree among themselves; and if you please one, the rest will be
thereby displeased. -- Church Differences and Sects have been found in all
Ages: And you cannot be of the Opinion of every Party; and if you be of one
Party, you must displease the rest. If you are of one Side in controver^el
Opinions, the other Side accounts you errone^us; and how far will the
supposed Interest of their Cause and Party carry them? -- You cannot be every
Thing; and if not, you must displease as many as you please. Yea, more, if
mutable Man should change never so of^, they will expect that you should change
as fast as they; and whatever their contrary Interests require, you must follow
them in: Whatever Cause or Action they engage in, be it ever so devilish, you
must approve of it, and countenance it, and all that they do, you must say is
well done. In a Word, you must teach your Tongue to say any Thing, and you must
sell your Innocence, and hire out your Conscience, or you cannot please them.
MICHAIAH must say with the rest of the Prophets, Go and prosper; or else he
will be hated, as not prophesying Good of AHAB, but Evil, I Kings 22. 8. And
how can you serve all Interests at once? It seems, the Providence of GOD has,
as of Purpose, wheeled about the Affairs of the World to try, and shame
Man-pleasers, and Temperisers in the Sight of the Sun. It is evident then, that
if you will please all, you must at once both speak and be silent, and verify
Contradictions, and be in many Places at once, and be of all Men's Minds, and
for all Men's Ways. For my Part, I mean to see the World a little better agreed
among themselves, before I will make it my Ambition to please them. If you can
reconcile all their Opinions, and Interests, and Complexions, and Dispositions,
and make them all of one Mind and Will, then hope to please them.

He was Abundance more upon this Head, which we may, some of us, do well to
consider, as what is well adapted to our Case at this Day.

I have hitherto considered Ministers as the Persons, more especially obliged
to discountenance the bad Things, prevailing in the Land; and now go on to
observe.

That this the Duty of all in general. Not that I would put any upon acting out
of their proper Sphere. This would tend rather to Confusion than Reformation.
-- Good Order is the Strength and Beauty of the World. -- The Prosperity both
of Church and State depends very much upon it. And can there be Order, where
Men transgress the Limits of their Station, and intermeddle in the Business of
others? So far from it, that the only effectual Method, under GOD, for the
Redress of general Evils, is, for every one to be faithful, in doing what is
proper for him in his own Place: And even all may properly bear a Part, in
rectifying the Disorders of this Kind, at this Day.

Civil Rulers may do a great deal, not only by their good Example, but a wise
Use of their Authority, in their various Places, for the Suppression of every
Thing hurtful to Society, and the Encouragement of whatever has a Tendency to
make Men happy in the Enjoyment of their Rights, whether natural or Christian.
And herein chiefly lies, (as I humbly conceive) the Duty of Rulers, at this
Day. It Is true, as private Men, they are under the same Obligations with
others, to make their Acknowledgments to CHRIST; and doubtless, if HE was
visibly and externally (according to the Custom among Kings and Governors) to
make his solemn Entry into the Land, as their SAVIOR and LORD, it would be
expected they should, as public Officers, make their Appearance, and attend him
as their Sovereign with suitable Congratulations, and Manifestations of Respect
and Loyalty; and if they should stand at a Distance, it would be much more
taken Notice of, and awaken his Displeasure much more, than such a Behavior in
the common People. (...) EDWARDS'S Book of the late (...) Religion, Page 125,
and some following Pages.
But the Case is widely different, where his supposed Entry is in a spiritual
Sense only, and after such a Manner even in this Sense, as that there is a
great Variety of Sentiments about it, among the best Sort of Men, of all Ranks
and Conditions: Nor does it appear to me, when the Case is thus circumstanc'd,
that it is either the Duty of Rulers, or would be Wisdom in them, by any
authoritative Acts to determine, whose Sentiments were the most agreeable to
Truth. And as to their Appointment of Days of Thanksgiving, or fasting, on this
Account, there must be an Impropriety in it, so long as that Complaint of GOD
against the Jews is to be seen in the Bible, Behold ye fast for Strife and
Debate! Their Duty rather lies in keeping Peace between those, who unhappily
differ in their Thoughts about the State of our religious Affairs: And their
Care in this Matter ought to be impartial. Each Party, without Favor or
Affection, should be equally restrained from Outrage and Insul^. Those, who
may think themselves Friends to a Work of GOD, should be protected in the
Exercise of all their just Rights, whether as Men, or Christians: So on the
other Hand, those who may be Enemies to Error and Confusion, have the same
Claim to be protected.

And if, one either Side, they invade the Rights of others, or throw out
Slander, at Random, to the Hurt of their Neighbor's Reputation and Usefulness,
and the bringing forward a State of Tumult and Disorder; I see not but the
civil Arm may justly be stretched forth for the Chastisement of such Persons;
and this, though their Abuses should be offered in the Name of the LORD, or
under the Pretext of the most flaming Zeal for the REDEEMER'S Honor, and
serving the Interest of his Kingdom: For it ought always to be accounted an
Aggravation of the Sin of Slander, rather than an Excuse for it, its being
committed under the Cloak of Religion, and Pretense for the Glory of GOD; as it
will, under these Circumstances, be of more pernicious Tendency. I am far from
thinking, that any Man ought to suffer, either for his religious Principles, or
Conduct arising from them, while he is no Disturber of the civil Peace; but
when Men, under the Notion of appearing zealous for GOD, and his Truths, insult
their Betters, vilify their Neighbors, and spirit people to Strife and
Faction, I know of no Persons more suitable to be taken in Hand by Authority:
And if they suffer, it is for their own Follies; nor can they reasonably blame
any Body but themselves: Nor am I ashamed, or afraid, to prosess it as my
Opinion, that it would probably have been of good Service, if those, in these
Times, who have been publicly and out-ragiously reviled, had, by their
Complaints, put it properly in the Magistrates Power, to restrain some Men's
Tongues with Bit and Bridle.

Private Christians also, of all Ranks and Conditions, may do something toward
the Suppression of these Errors, by mourning before the LORD the Dishonor
which has hereby been reflected on the Name of CHRIST, and Injury done to
Souls; by being much in Prayer to GOD for the Out-pouring of his SPIRIT, in all
desirable Influences of Light, and Love, and Peace; by taking good Heed that
they ben't themselves drawn aside, avoiding to this End, the Company and
familiar Converse of those, who, by good Words and fair Speeches, might be apt
to deceive their Hearts, but especially an Attendance on religious Exercises,
where the Churches and Ministry are freely declaimed against by those who have
gone out from them, under the vain Pretense of being more holy than they; and
in fine, by a faithful Performance of those Duties, which arise from the
various Relations they sustain toward each other: As thus, if they are
Children, by hearkening to the Advice of their Parents, and obeying and
honoring them in the LORD; and if they are Parents, by counseling, reproving,
warning, restraining and commanding, their children, as there may be Occasion:
If they are Servants, by pleasing their Masters well in all Things, not
defrauding them of their Time or Labor, but accounting them worthy of all
Honor, that the Name of GOD be not blasphemed; and, if they are Masters, not
only by providing for their Servants Things honest and good, but by keeping
them within the Rules of Order and Decorum, not suffering them to neglect the
Religion of the Family at home, under Pretense of carrying it on elsewhere;
especially, when they continue abroad 'till late in the Night, and so as to
unfit themselves for the Services of the following Day.

In these, and such like Ways, all may exert themselves in making a Stand
against the Progress of Error: And all are obliged to do so; and for this
Reason, among others I have not Room to mention, because the last Days are
particularly marked out in the Prophecies of Scripture, as the Times wherein
may be expected, the Rise of SEDUCERS. Says the Apostle PAUL, in his second
Epistle to TIMOTHY, Chapt. 3. Verse 1.
This know also, that in the LAST DAYS perilous Times shall come. And the
Description he gives of the Persons, on whose Account the Times would be
perilous, is, in Part, that, Verse 6. 7.
Of this Sort are they which creep into Houses, and lead captive silly Women;
laden with Sins; led away with diverse Lusts; ever learning, and never able to
come to the Knowledge of the Truth. He further characterises them, Verse 8.
as those who resist the Truth; and still adds, Verse 13.
But evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived, The like unhappy Times he has in his Eye, when he says, in his former
Epistle, Chapt. 4. Ver. 1
Now the SPIRIT speaks expressly, that, in the LATTER TIMES, some shall depart
from the Faith, giving Heed to seducing Spirits: -- Nor is this any other than
what our SAVIOR himself foretells, when he says, Mark 13. 22.
False Christ's, and false Prophets shall arise, and shall show Signs and
Wonders, to seduce, if it were possible, even the Elect. And very observable is
the Caution he adds hereupon, Ver. 23.
But take ye Heed: Behold, I have foretold you all Things. And it is certainly
very seasonable, as well as good Advice; and we shall be much wanting to our
selves, if we don't act upon it as those, who esteem themselves obliged, by it,
to the utmost Watchfulness and Circumspection.

It Is true, we read of the coming on of a glorious State of Things in the LAST
DAYS: Nor will the Vision fail. -- We may rely upon it, the Prophesies,
foretelling the Glory of the REDEEMER'S Kingdom, will have their Accomplishment
to the making this Earth a Paradise, in Compare with what it now is. But for
the particular Time when this will be, it is not for us to know it, the Father
having put it in his own Power: And whoever pretend to such Knowledge, they are
wise above what is written; and though they may think they know much, they really
know nothing as to this Matter.

It may be suggested, Mr. EDWARD's late Book, P. 96.
that the Work of GOD's SPIRIT that is so extraordinary and wonderful, is the
dawning, or, at lest, a Prelude of that glorious Work of GOD, so often foretold
in Scripture, which, in the Progress and Issue of it, shall renew the whole
World. But what are such Suggestions, but the Fruit of Imagination? Or at best,
uncertain Conjecture? And can any good End be answered in endeavoring, upon
Evidence absolutely precarious, to instill into the Minds of People a Notion of
the millennium State, as what is NOW going to be introduced; yea, and of
AMERICA, While I was writing this Page, I received a Letter from a worthy
Gentleman, in which, speaking of Mr. EDWARDS'S late Book, he has these Words, I
am surpised at his long Labor to prove the Millennium shall begin in AMERICA.
-- He has been so modest as to conceal the Reason of this; but it may easily be
gathered from what he has often said to private Persons, viz. that he doubted
not, the Millennium began when there was such an Awakening at NORTH HAMPTON 8
Years past. -- So that Salvation is gone forth from NORTHHAMPTON, and NORTH
HAMPTON must have the Praise of being first brought into it.

To which let me add a few Words, from the late venerable Dr. INCREASE MATHER,
which will show, how widely good Men may differ from one another, in Matters of
mere Conjecture They are these, I know there is a blessed Day to the visible
Church not for off: But it is the Judgment of very learned Men, that, in the
glorious Times promised to the Church on Earth, AMERICA will be HELL. And,
although there is a Number of the Elect of GOD to be born here, I am verily
afraid, that, in Process of Time, NEW ENGLAND will be the (...) (...) Place in
all AMERICA; as some other Parts of the World, once famous for (...), are now
the dolctullest on Earth, perfect Pictures and Emblems of (...) When you see
this little Academy [The Words were spoken in the College-Hail] fallen to the
Ground, -- then know it is a terrible Thing, which GOD is about to bring upon
this Land. Vid. MATHER'S Discourse on Man knows not his Time. P. 37.


as that Part of the World, which is pointed out in the Revelations of GOD for
the Place, where this glorious Scene of Things, "will, probably, first begin?"
How often, at other Times, and in other Places, has the Conceit been propagated
among People, as if the Prophecies touching the Kingdom of CHRIST, in the
latter Days, were NOW to receive their Accomplishent? And what has been the
Effect, but their running wild? So it was in GERMANY, in the Beginning of the
Reformation. The extraordinary and wonderful Things in that Day, were looked
upon by the Men then thought to be most under the SPIRIT's immediate Direction,
as "the Dawning of that glorious Work of GOD, which should renew the whole
World;" and the Imagination of the Multitude being fired with this Notion, they
were soon persuaded, that the Saints were now to reign on Earth, and the
Dominion to be given into their Hands: And it was under the Influence of this
vain Conceit, (in which they were strengthened by Visions, Raptures and
Revolutions) that they took up Arms against the lawful Authority, and were
destroyed, at one Time and another, to the Number of an HUNDRED THOUSANDS. Vid.
RUTHERFURD's spiritual Antichrist, Page 7.


It was owing to the same Delusion, propagated, the following Century, by
KOTTERUS, DRABRICIUS, and PONIATOVIA, under the pampous Show of immediate
Revelation from GOD, that great Disturbances were again revived. The learned
COMENIUS was carried away with this Dream; verily believing, that the happy
State of the Church was NOW to take Place. And it is well known, that this same
Pretense of the near Approach of the MILLENNIUM, the promised Kingdom of the
MESSIAH, was the Foundation-Error of the French Prophets, and those in their
Way, no longer ago than the Beginning of this Century: And so infatuated were
they at last, as to publish it to the World, that the glorious Times they spoke
of, would be manifest over the whole Earth, within the Term of THREE YEARS. And
what Set of Men have ever yet appeared in the Christian World, whose
Imaginations have been thoroughly warmed, but they have, at length, wrought
themselves up to a full Assurance, that NOW was the Time for the Accomplishment
of the Scriptures, and the Creation of the new Heavens, and the new Earth? No
one Thing have they more unitedly concurred in, to their own shameful
Disappointment, and the doing unspeakable Damage to the Interest of Religion.
-- A sufficient Warning, one would think, to keep Men modest; and restrain them
from Endeavors to lead People into a Belief of that, of which they have no
sufficient Evidence; and in which, they may be deceived by their vain
Imaginations, as Hundreds and Thousands have been before them.

There are unquestionably many Prophecies concerning CHRIST, and the Glory of
his Kingdom, still to be fulfilled; and it may be of good Service to labor to
beget in People a Faith in these Things; or, if they have Faith, to quicken and
strengthen it: But it can answer no good End to lead People into the Belief of
any particular Time, as the Time appointed of GOD for the Accomplishment of
these Purposes of his Mercy; because this is one of those Matters, his Wisdom
has thought fit to keep concealed from the Knowledge of Man. Our own Faith
therefore upon this Head can be founded only on Conjecture; and as it is only
the like blind Faith we can convey to others, we should be cautious, lest their
Conduct should be agreeable to their Faith. When they have imbibed from us the
Thought, as if the glorious Things, spoken of in Scripture, were to come
forward in their Day, they will be apt (as has often been the Case) to be
impatient, and from their Officiousness in tendering their Help where it is not
needed, to disserve the Interest of the Redeemer. Pertinent to the present
Case, and to these Times, are the Words of Mr. WILLIAM ALLEN, with which I
shall finish this Part of our Discourse. Says he, His Works, P. 676.
speaking of CHRIST, He stands in Need of no unrighteous, or irregular Help
from Men, to give him Possession of his Kingdom in the World. He who has given
Laws to his Subjects, to direct and govern them in their Actions, will never
take it well from any of them, if they shall break any of his Laws, in Zeal for
him, or to advance his Kingdom in the World. -- The Scripture faith, he that
believes, does not make haste, Isa. 28. 16. He does not use any indirect Means
to hasten that, which GOD has promised, as being impatient of his Delay to
fulfill and perform it. And therefore all irregular Practices of Men to hasten
the setting up of CHRIST's Kingdom in the World, are an Argument rather of
Diffidence and Distrust in CHRIST, as King of his Church; either of his Power,
as if he could not set up his Kingdom without such human Helps as they deem
necessary to that End; or, of his Wisdom, as not regarding the best Time, and
fittest Season to do it in; Or, of his Care of his Church, in not hastening
more to her Relief and Deliverance from all powerful Enemies. When Men will
take Christ's Work out of his own Hands, and lead the Way, and go before him in
it, as if they expected he should second them, and assist them in it, it is
never like to prosper in their's, who so usurp that Authority. -- And when they
find themselves entangled with insuperable Difficulties, its very likely they
will thereupon entertain hard and unbecoming Thoughts of CHRIST himself, as if
he had deserted his own Cause, in leaving them to themselves in their rash
Undertaking. And its well if they do not thereupon bring themselves under a
strong Temptation, either to Disobedience, or to question whether those
Grounds, upon which judicious and sober Christians expect the Churches great
Deliverance from the Hands of her Enemies, be true or no; Nay, its well if they
don't thereby bring themselves to question the Truth of the other great
Doctrines of Christianity, and slip into Atheism, as its certain some have
done, upon the Miscarriage of their rash Undertaking. Let none then out of a
hastly and mistaken Zeal, and under Pretense of ushering the Kingdom of CHRIST
into the World, attempt any Thing in Order thereto, that tends to disturb the
public Peace.

PART III.
Showing, in many Instances, wherein those, who have appeared against the
Disorders prevailing in the Land, have been injuriously treated.
IT will not be supposed, unless by Persons evidently weak, or prejudiced, that
I have it in View, in this Part of my Discourse, to plead for those who have
appeared against the Disorders of the Times, in every Thing they have said, or
done: Nor will any imagine, I am so unbounded in my Charity, as to entertain in
the gross, a good Opinion of ALL, who cry out of Irregularities, as though they
must needs be true Converts, because they speak against such Things as ought to
be condemned.

There are, no Doubt, both secret Hypocrites, and open Sinners, among those, on
the one Hand, who have an ill Thought of many Things going on in the Land, as
well as among those, on the other, who speak of the present Commotion as, in
the main, a mavelous Work of divine Grace: And on either Side, some may have
conducted themselves in a Manner not to be justified. Wherein any, in
testifying against what they might judge amiss at this Day, have acted unworthy
their Character as Men or Christians, let their Behavior be fairly pointed
out, and all the Blame fastened on them they deserve. I have nothing to object
against this. -- But what I think injurious is, the wrongfully and
indiscriminately accusing those who complain of the Times; or the doing this in
an unchristian Manner, and so as to reflect an unjust Odium on them.

To come to Instances; in mentioning of which, I shall not trouble my self
about Order, but set Things down as they may occur to my Mind.

The Discouragers of the bad Things of the present Day, have been publicly
faulted as to their Method of Judging about the "religious Operation, on the
Minds of Men, that has been carried on of late in NEW ENGLAND:" And "so far as
the Ground of their Error has been in the Understanding, and not in the
Disposition," it has been said, "Fundamentally to lie in three Things."

1. They are said to have greatly erred in the Way, in which they have gone
about to try this Work, whether it be a Work of the SPIRIT of GOD, or no; viz,
in judging of it a Priori, from the Way it began, the Instruments that have
been employed, the Means that have been made Use of, and the Methods that have
been taken and succeeded, in carrying it on If by this Remark, the Gentleman,
who makes it, intends, that they have formed a Vid. Mr. EDWARDS'S late Book,
Page 2. and onwards.
Judgment from the SOLE consideration of any, or all these Things, he grossly
misrepresents them to the World. I never yet heard of one, among the whole
Number of those, who think differently from him about the present religious
Affair, who settled his Opinion, in the Way he speaks of. If he knew of any, he
should have named them; and not charged this partial Manner of judging upon all
in general. But if he means only, that, in Order to judge fairly of the State
of Religion, in our Churches, they take into Consideration the Things he has
mentioned, among many other; they own the Charge, and think they should act
below their Character as Men, if it could not be made good upon them.

They are as willing as he can be to leave it with the alwise GOD, to use what
Means and Instruments he pleases, in beginning and carrying on his own Work, in
the Hearts of Men; and can heartily join with him in subscribing to the Truth
of every Text he has brought to View; though not to the Pertinency of any one
of them, to the Purpose to which has adduc'd them. For can it, with Justice, be
called "a directing the SPIRIT of the LORD, or a Being his Counselor," to make
the best Inquiry we are able into a Work said to be his, and to fetch in Light
in all the Ways proper to be made Use of by reasonable Creatures? It Is true, if
a Work has before been proved to be a Work of GOD, and nothing can be objected
against it, but only that the Means and Instruments employed in it, are such as
the Wisdom of Man would not have pitched upon, this is so far from being a just
Ground of Exception, that it would be to reply against GOD, to insist upon it;
and it might be proper in such a Case, to say, God gives no Account of his
Matters; his Judgments are a great Deep: He has his Way in the Sea, and his
Path in the great Waters, and his Footsteps are not known: And who shall teach
GOD Knowledge, or enjoin him his Way, or say unto him what do thou? But what
is this to the Affair under Consideration? Is it not the great Question of the
Day, how far, and in what Respects, the Work, going on in the Land, is the Work
of GOD? And are there not great and numerous Difficulties attending it, if
considered a Posteriori? Are not the Effects such, as the best and wisest Men
in the Country have though it themselves obliged to testify against? And in an
Affair so circumstane'd, should not we be justly chargeable with partial
Neglect, if we did not fairly consider every Thing that might give Light into
it? Is not this the Expectation of GOD concerning us? And can we otherwise
acquit our selves as Beings endowed with Reason and Understanding?

Besides, it ought to be remembered, though GOD may use what Means and Instruments
he pleases in carrying on his own Work; yet, he will never please to make Use
of those which are in themselves unfit and improper. And may not the Means and
Instruments, employed in a Work said to be his, be of this Sort? Is this
impossible? Han't it often been the Case in Fact? And how shall we know but the
Means and Instruments, said to be used by GOD, are unsuitable in their Nature,
or such as would reflect Dishonor upon the Word and Institutions of GOD, if we
may not, in the regular Exercise of our Understandings, judge of them? What
greater Arrogance is it to judge of Means and Instruments said to be employed
by GOD, than of a Work said to be his? If we may judge of the one without
"directing the SPIRIT of the LORD," we may with as much Propriety judge of the
other: Nor can we, in many Cases, form a just Judgment of the latter, without
duly considering the former; and if any have attempted to do this in the
present Case, "they may not wonder if they are perplexed in their Thoughts and
confounded." Perhaps, no one Thing will better enable serious, well-dispos'd
Persons, to make a true Judgment of the late Operation upon the Minds of
People, than an impartial and through Inquiry into the Means and Instruments of
it is Rise and Progress: Nor can I conceive, why any should object against so
reasonable a Method of Judging unless they are apprehensive, if these should
come under a strict Examination, the Use, at lest of some, of them would appear
to be inconsistent with the Perfections of GOD, or the standing Revelation of
his Will in the Scriptures.

I am sensible, with this Gentleman, that "this Work has been carried on by the
weak and foolish." and I may add, the sinful Things of this World: And if the
Work it self has, in many Instances, partook of the Weakness, and Foolishness,
and Sinfulness, of the Means and Instruments, these Things will mutually
illustrate each other, and mightily help in forming a true Judgment about the
State of our religious Affairs. And if this Gentleman has erred, in any
material Points, in the Sentiments he has expressed, upon this Head, one Reason
may be, his throwing out of his Mind those weighty Considerations, that might
have been suggested to him, had he duly thought upon the Means, and Manner, and
Instruments, of carrying on the present Work: Nor must he take it amiss, if
notwithstanding all that he has offered, others still think, these Things
require a distinct and full Examination.

I am sensible also, that "the Ministers who have been chiefly employed, some
of them have been mere Babes in Age and Standing." Nor do I deny, that "GOD has
suffered their Infirmities to appear in the Sight of others:" Nor that "he has
made Use of their Infirmities and Sins for the Chastising;" yea, the doing real
Service to others: But then, it ought to be considered, the Good that may arise
out of these Evils, is no Argument, either that GOD approbates them, or that we
should: And though we ought to make a wise and holy Use of all GOD's
Dispensations; yet, we may warrantably look upon those Things in Providence as
Evils, which really are so, and deprecate them, and do whatever is proper to
suppress them; and this, notwithstanding the Wisdom of GOD may know how to make
them work for good, to them that love him, and are the Called according to his
Purpose.

II. Another Foundation-Error of those, who don't acknowledge the Divinity of
this Work, is, the not taking the Holy Scripture as an whole, and in itself a
sufficient Rule, to judge of such Things by. The Meaning of this Charge is
explained in these Words which follow, Those that I am speaking of will indeed
make some Use of Scripture, so far as they think it serves their Turn; but
don't make Use of it alone, as a Rule sufficient by it self, but make as much,
and a great Deal more Use of other Things, diverse and wide from it, to judge
of this Work by. Who could have thought to have met with such a Charge as this
against those, who have ventured their Characters to stand up for the
Scriptures, in Opposition to Impulses; and publicly pleaded for them as the
one only Rule, by which to try all Matters of Faith, as well secret Whispers
and sudden Impressions? -- Are there any who have done more Honor to the
Bible, in these Times, by calling Men to the Law and to the Testimony, both
from the Pulpit and the Press, than the Persons here reflected on as making an
undue Use of this sacred Book? Was it not by Men of this Character, that a
famous Instrument in the late Extraordinaries, was deposed from the Ministry,
for the Contempt he had cast upon the inspired Writings? And shall they,
notwithstanding, be condemned, and by the Lump too, as paying a greater Regard
to other Things, than even the Bible, in judging of the State of Religion in
the Land? I cannot but look upon this Charge, in the Manner in which it is
levelled, as a downright Abuse; and would hope, the Gentleman, upon second
Thoughts, will be sensible of it himself. But he goes on to Particulars.

I. Some make Philosophy, INSTEAD of the holy Scriptures their Rule of Judging
of this Work; particularly, the philosophical Notions they entertain of the
Nature of the Soul, it is Faculties and Affections. There is an evident
Difference between using Philosophy as an Help in order to understand the
Scripture, and the placing it in the ROOM of Scripture. In the former Sense, I
suppose this Gentleman will not deny, but Scripture and Philosophy may very
well consist together. -- If no Use might be made of Philosophy, in explaining
the Scripture, how monstrous must our Conceptions of the infinite GOD be, while
he is represented, according to the Letter of numberless Texts, as having Eyes,
and Ears, and Hands, and Feet; and as being subject to the various Passions of
Love, and Hatred; Joy and Grief; Anger, Wrath, Revenge, and the like? We must
be allowed the Exercise of our Reason, (which is but another Name for what is
here meant by Philosophy) or we shall be liable to be wretchedly imposed on by
our Imaginations: Nor is there any Error, however extravagant, but we shall be
in Danger of falling into it. If we give up our Understandings, how shall we be
able to ascertain the Sense of any one Text of Scripture? What should hinder
our running into all the Wilds of Delusion? -- But this Use of Philosophy, I
conclude this Gentleman will not object against. If he does, I see not but he
will be self-condemned; for he has himself, under this very Head, made Use of
more Philosophy (and in a Manner not altogether unexceptionable, as we may see
afterward, if I can find Room) than any one that I know of, who has wrote upon
the Time. -- And as to the other Sense of using Philosophy, the placeing it in
the Room of Scripture, who among all those who are differently minded from this
Gentleman, about the present Work, have ever made such a Use of it? Can a
single Instance be produced? Some, perhaps, may have said, There is but little
sober, solid Religion in this Work; it is little else but flash and Noise.
Religion n^w-a-Days all runs out into Transport, and high Flights of the
Passions and Affections. And will it hence follow, that they make Ph^losophy,
INSTEAD of Scripture, their Ruse of judging in this Matter? Where the
Connection between these Things? Persons may undoubtedly be of the Opinion,
that the Religion of the present Day consists chiefly in a Commotion in the
Passions, and yet pay all due Honor to the Bible.

2. Many are guilty of not taking the holy Scriptures as a sufficient and whole
Rule, where by to judge of this Work, whether it is a Work of GOD, in that they
judge by those Things which the Scripture don't give us as any Signs or Marks
whereby to judge one Way, or the other; and therefore do in NO WISE belong to
the Scripture-Rule of Judging, viz; the Effects that religious Exercises of
Mind have upon the Body. This Gentleman, some may be ready to think,
inadvertently forgot what he was about, when he wrote this. For who are the Men
that judge of the present Work, by the Appearance of extraordinary bodily
Effects? Are they not known to be those, who have laid great Stress upon
Shriekings, and Swoonings, and convulsivelike Agitations, as though they were
sure Marks of a divine Influence? Han't they publicly pleaded for them as
such? Han't they openly given GOD Thanks for these Manifestations of his Power?
Han't they often prayed for the like Tokens of his Presence? And have not the
Persons here blamed for judging of the present Work by these Things, INSTEAD of
the Scripture, ever disclaimed doing so? Han't they perpetually testified
against these bodily Exercises as a sure Evidence of the SPIRIT'S Operations?
Yea, have they not, in this very Article, done Honor to the Bible, by pleading
that they are not, in that sacred Book, made a Mark by which to judge of a Work
of GOD upon Men's Hearts? I may appeal to all, acquainted with our religious
Affairs, whether any, in these Times, have spoken more freely against a
"Concern about the involuntary Motions of the Fluids, and Solids of Men's
Bodies?" Or, whether they have not, all along, been united to a Man in saying, as
this Gentleman here does, I cannot see which Way we are in Danger, or how the
Devil is like to get any notable Advantage against us, if we do but thoroughly do
our Duty with Respect to those two Things, viz, the State of Person's Minds,
and their moral Conduct; seeing to it, that they be maintained in an
Agreeableness to the Rules that CHRIST has given us. Is not this the very Thing
they have always spoken? And if some others had been alike plain and faithful
in urging upon People a Conformity to the Gospel, in the moral Temper of their
Minds, and Course of their Lives, as a more scriptural Evidence of the Reality
of a Work of Grace, than that which arises from a Commotion in their Passions,
we had probably been in better Circumstances at this Day.

I shall only add, if the " Effects that the Affections have upon the Body, do
in NO WISE belong to the scriptural-Rule of judging of this Work," there was no
great Need of the Labor of five or six Pages in their Vindication; and we may
hope for an easy Pardon, if we forbear remarking upon what is there offered.

3. Another Thing that some make their Rule to judge of this Work by, INSTEAD
of the holy Scriptures, is History, or former Observation. It may be here said
of History, as of Philosophy under the former Head, that, in Subordination to
the Scripture, it may be of good Service. And this is the Thought of this
Gentleman, or he condemns that in others, which he practices himself; for in
this very Place, where he is speaking against the Use of History, he has made
as free with it as those he finds Fault with. I conclude therefore, it is not
merely the Use of History he objects against, but the using it INSTEAD of the
Scripture. And if any, in these Times, have gone into such a Use of it, they
are certainly to Blame: But then, Care should be taken not to fasten Blame
publicly on them, without Evidence that they are really chargeable with it. It
is not sufficient to say, If there be any Thing new and extraordinary, in the
Circumstances of this Work, that was not observed in former Times, that is a
Rule with them to reject this Work, as not the Work of GOD. This is nothing
more than a Repetition of the Charge, by Way of mere Affirmation; which ought
to be looked upon as of no Weight, in a disputed Point. Nor does it much mend
the Matter to go on affirming, Another Way that some err in making History and
former Observation their Rule to judge of this Work, INSTEAD of the holy
Scripture, is comparing some accidental, external Circumstances of this Work,
with what has appeared sometimes in Enthusiasts; and as they find as Agreement
in some such Things, so they reject the whole Work, or, at lest, the Substance
of it, concluding it to be Enthusiasm. This is only asserting what others deny,
and are firmly persuaded cannot never be proved. Some show of Proof, it is true,
is here offered. So, great Use has been made, to this Purpose, of many Things
that are found among the QUAKERS. -- So, to the same Purpose, some external
Appearances that were found among the FRENCH PROPHETS, and some other
ENTHUSIASTS, in former Times, have been, of late, trump'd up with great
Assurance and Triumph. If instead of roundly affirming (which is the easiest
Thing in the World) this Gentleman had condescended to show, wherein the
Persons, he here blames, had made Use of any Thing, either among the QUAKERS,
or FRENCH PROPHETS, or other ENTHUSIASTS, as their Rule in judging of this
Work, INSTEAD of the Scripture, he might have done something toward confirming
his Point; but what he has offered, as it now stands, cannot be thought to be of
any Force, unless it be taken for granted (which is so unreasonable, I cannot
suppose, this Gentleman will desire it) that no Use may be made of the History
of ENTHUSIASTS, with Relation to the present Work, but to the Dishonor of the
Bible, and so as to place the former in the ROOM of the latter.

4. I would propose it to be considered, whether or no, some, INSTEAD of making
the Scriptures their only Rule to judge of this Work, don't make their own
Experience the Rule to reject such and such Things as are now professed and
experienced, because they never felt them themselves. As this is a Matter
proposed to be considered, I have accordingly taken it into Consideration, and
thereupon think, there is a very great Difference between making Use of
Experience with the Scripture, and in Subserviency to it, and the setting it up
as a Rule INSTEAD of the Scripture. The former, this Gentleman, I I am
satisfied, will not object against: And for the latter, it is so great a Fault,
that none ought to be publicly charged with it, unless upon better Evidence
than that of mere Insinuation by Way of Query. I will not say but some, among
those, who are Enemies to the present Disorders, may have made an undue Use of
Experience; though I know not of one who ever set it up as a Rule INSTEAD of
the Bible. This is not the Fault of the Persons, this Gentleman is here
speaking of, but of the Friends to that which is called without Discrimination,
the Work of GOD going on in the Land. I don't query, whether, among these,
there are not some, who make this Use of their Experience, but affirm that
there are; partly upon my own personal Conversation with them, and partly by
Information from others of known Judgment and Integrity. It Is with them a
sufficient Reason to think, and speak of a Man as carnal and unconverted, if he has not felt the like Extraordinaries they have experienced: Nor has it been an
uncommon Thing for them, to pronounce others pharisaical and unregenerate, upon
this Ground solely; as though what they had experienced was a sure Test to try
the State of their Neighbor by. And how this Gentleman came to charge the
known Fault of some of the Zealots of this Day, upon those who have ever
appeared against it, I am at a loss to conceive.

III. Another Foundation Error of those that reject this Work, is their not
duly distinguishing the good from the bad. I cannot but think this Gentleman
spoke more from a speculative Consideration of the Matter, than the Reality of
Fact, when he wrote this. For who are the Persons chargeable with not duly
distinguishing in the late religious Commotion? Are they not those, who have
accustomed themselves to speak of it, both publicly and privately, as an
extraordinary Work of GOD, in the gross, and without Distinction? And have they
not often been faulted for this indiscriminate Way of speaking upon the Matter?
Han't they been openly called upon, yea, seriously and solemnly argued with, to
distinguish and separate between the good and bad? And have they ever done it
to this Day? Do they not rather go on in the same general, indiscriminate Way
of speaking? Whereas, the Persons, this Gentleman blames, have plainly said, at
lest some of them, over and over again, what the bad Things of the present Day
are, which they condemn: And this indeed is that for which they have been so
basely treated. They are certainly in an ill Case; for they are misused for
pointing out the bad Things prevailing in these Times, and at the same Time
blamed for not doing that, for the doing of which all Manner of Evil has been
spoken against them, to the great Detriment both of their Reputation, and
Usefulness in the World. To proceed,

Another Thing charged upon those, who have spoken against the Disorders of the
Times is, Mr. EDWARDS'S late Book, P. 189.
That they have watched for the halting of the Zealous, and caught at any
Thing that has been wrong, and have greatly insisted on it, made the most of
it, and magnified it; especially, that they have watched for Errors in zealous
Preachers, that are much in reproving and condemning the Wickedness of the
Times. I never imagined, but, among those who have manifested a Dislike to the
present Commotions, there might be some of a profane Character; and how far
the Temper and Conduct of this Kind of Persons may be pointed out in these
Words, I dispute not: But the Charge is very unfair as laid against those, in
general, who are for keeping Things from running into Confusion; and the more
so, as the just Occasions of Offense have, of late been so frequent and
numerous. This Gentleman must be strangely unacquainted with the State of
Affairs in the Land, if he does not know, that the late Zealots, and the
Preachers among them too, have, in many Instances, behaved after such a Manner,
that others could not help observing the Extravagancies they fell into; and
instead of "catching at any Thing wrong," they were rather moved with Pity and
Grief, to behold the Mischief that was doing to the Cause of Religion: And so
far were they from "magnisying real Errors," that, I scruple not to say, they
have never yet set them in their full Light; nay, as to same of the Disorders
of the Times, I don't think it is in the Power of the worst Opposer of them all
to describe them to the Life. This Gentleman may further suggest, "that
Disorders have been too much insisted on;" but others, as much concerned for
the Honor of GOD, and the Interest of Christianity, are of Opinion, they have
not been insisted on enough: To be sure, they were not at first; if they had,
much of the present Confusions would, I believe, have been prevented. I shall
add, there are as awful Texts of Scripture, as well worthy a serious
Consideration as that, this Gentleman has here particularly mentioned: Such as
that, Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the
Just, even they both are Abomination to the LORD. And that, in the 24th
Chapter, the 24th and 25th Verses. He that faith unto the Wicked, thou art
righteous; him shall the People curse, Nations shall abhor him: But to them
that rebuke him shall be Delight, and a good Blessing shall come upon them.

Another Thing injuriously reflected upon those who have spoken against the
Disorders of the Times is, "That they are OPPOSERS of the WORK of GOD:" Nor
have they been thus charged by the Vulgar and Illiterate only, which is no
Wonder; but by those who would take it ill, not to be accounted Men of another
Character. And to this, as much as any one Thing, may be owing, the
Alienations, Contentions and Separations, that are now common in the Land.

But why must they be spoken of, in the harsh Language, of Opposers of the Work
of GOD? Is this their real Character? It Is true, they don't think the Work of
the Spirit lies in Impulses, Visions and Revelations; they don't think, that
Screamings, and Shriekings, and Swoonings, are sure Marks of a genuine
Conviction of Sin; they don't think, that extatic Raptures are an infallible
Sign of saving Faith: Nor have they any great Opinion of the Exhortations of
weak, illiterate Men, Women, or Labs, and other Extraordinaries, which are
common at this Day. And shall they, upon these Accounts, be called Opposers of
the Work of GOD? Will any, from hence, upon a mature Consideration of the
Matter, fix upon them this Character, and in such a Sense too, as that they
must be Enemies to the REDEEMER, and his Kingdom? Are not many of those, called
Opposers, Men of the best Character in the Country, so far as can be judged?
Han't they always been so accounted, 'till these Times? And is there not the
same Reason to think well of them now as formerly, save only that they have
testified against the bad Things of the present Day?

The Gentlemen, who are most free in speaking of others as Opposers of GOD's
Work, seem to look upon themselves as the only Friends the LORD JESUS CHRIST
has in the Land: But will their own Conceit of themselves make it true, that
they really are so? And if those, who think they are mistaken in the Judgment
they form of themselves, should follow their Example, and go into their
extravagant Way of speaking, what would be their Opinion of it? How would they
like to be called Opposers of CHRIST, Enemies of GOD and Religion? Would they
not esteem themselves shamefully reviled? And yet, I believe, it will not be
pretended, but some of them have so acted, as to bring as great Reproach on
CHRIST, and the Divine SPIRIT, and the Ways of true Religion, as many of the
worst Opposers (as they are termed) put together.

It has been remarked, those, who call others Opposers of the Work of GOD,
don't care to explain themselves upon the Matter: Nor has any one of them yet
done it that I know of, unless the Gentleman, I have so often referred to, may
be supposed to have attempted something of this Nature. He thinks it not enough
for Persons to say, Mr. EDWARDS'S Tho'ts on the late Revival of (...), P. 143,
144.
they believe there is a good Work going on in the Country; and that they
sometimes bless GOD, in their public Prayers, in general Terms, for any
Awakenings, or Revivals of Religion, there have lately been in any Parts of the
Land. Notwithstanding this, Some (as he goes on) are so far from acknowledging,
and rejoicing in the infinite Mercy of GOD, in causing so happy a Change in the
Land, that they look upon the religious State of the Country, take it in the
whole of it, much more sorrowful than it was ten Years ago. And, if it be
manifestly thus with us, (he adds) and our Talk and Behavior with Respect to
this Work be such as has (though but) an indirect Tendency, to beget ill
Thoughts and Suspicions in others concerning it, we are Opposers of the Work of
GOD. What is the plain English of all this, but that those who don't speak upon
the Times just as this Gentleman would have them, are Opposers of the Work of
GOD. It Is true indeed, it may, in a Sense, be said even of all who either do,
or say, any Thing that has only a remote Tendency to disserve the Cause of GOD,
that they are Opposers of GOD's Work: And just the same Thing may, with as much
Truth, be affirmed of those, who neglect what is proper for them to do, to
remove away that which hinders the flourishing of Religion. And should those,
upon this, whose Talk and Behavior, with Respect to the Errors and Disorders
in the Land, have been such as tend (though but) indirectly to beget favorable
Thoughts, in People, of the bad Things among us, or not so ill Thoughts of them
as they really deserve: I say, should such as these be represented to the World
as Opposers of GOD's Work; and this, though "they sometimes speak against
Disorders in their public Prayers, in general Terms," would it not be highly
resented? Especially, if it was before known, that the applying this Style of
Opposers to them, would be understood by Multitudes, as giving them no better a
Name than that of the Enemies of GOD and CHRIST, and the Cause of Truth and
Religion in the World. And if such a Representation would be unjust on one
Side, it is equally so on the other.

I am sensible, this Gentleman professes more Charity for Opposers than many
who give them this Name. He speaks of it as a difficult Thing, P. 300.
to determine how far, and how long, some Persons of good Experience in their
Souls, may be Opposers of this Work; and owns, that he has seen that which
abundantly convinces him, that the Business is too high for him, and that he
can leave it wholly in his Hands, who is infinitely fit for it, without meddling
at all with it himself. This is well said; and who that reads it would expect
to find this Gentleman declaring, in this very Page, against any Men's obliging
him to set under the Ministry of one be there marks out for an Opposer? Who
would think to see him ranking Opposers with Deists? As he does, when he
proposes it to Confideration, whether, P. 337.
any good Medium can be found, where a Man could rest with any Stability,
between owning this Work, and being a Deist? Who could suppose, that he should,
in all Parts of his Book, speak of Opposers in the most severe and bitter
Language? -- If a Collection was to be made of all the hard Speeches he has
freely made Use of, few, perhaps, would appear to have carried their
Uncharitableness to a greater Height.

And what is the true Reason of this Outcry against Persons, as Opposers of
the Work of GOD? Is it not this, and only this, that they don't think of the
Work going on in the Land, at this Day, just as some others do? And shall they,
on this Account, be stigmatized as Opposers of GOD's Work? Is there no
Difference between this Work, as the Phrase is vulgarly and indefinitely used,
and a Work of GOD in the Sense of the Gospel? May not Persons entertain a just
Idea of Faith, Conversion, the New Creature, or whatever else the Scripture
means by a Work of GOD, and yet differ from others in their Sentiments about
the Work that has, of late, been so much the Subject of Conversation? Even the
Friends to this Work vary in their Thoughts about it. Some think it has a
greater Mixture of Error and Disorder; others a less: Some think the Disorders
accompanying it, are of a very pernicious Tendency; others look upon them as
rather partaking of the Nature of Frailties and Infirmities: Some have a higher
Opinion of the good that has been done; others a lower. Perhaps, there are no
two Friends to this Work, but they differ in their Thoughts about it: Nay, have
not the same Persons conceived a very different Opinion of it, at different
Times? Yea, han't they changed their Sentiments in Respect of those very
Things, for opposing of which they once condemned others as Opposers of the
Work of GOD? -- And if those, who are called Friends to this Work, may differ
from one another, and from their own selves too; why may not the same Liberty
be given to others, without pointing them out by a Name of Odium and Disgrace?

In a Word, If any must be called Opposers of GOD's Work, they ought to be
particularly told, why they are spoken of in this Style: And then it will be
seen, whether it be, because they really oppose any Thing that the Bible makes
the Work of GOD to consist in, or only because they are faithful to testify
against such Errors and Disorders, as are a Dishonor to true Religion, and
tend to hinder its Progress in the Land. This has often been desired; and it is
a Request, I cannot but think, those Gentlemen are obliged, in all Reason and
Conscience, to give a plain, and distinct Answer to, who have publicly advised
People to separate from Opposers; as they would not incur the Guilt of
encouraging Strife and Schism, by the Use of certain loose, general and
indefinite Words, which People may put a Meaning to, just as they are led by
their Imaginations.

Another Thing mentioned to the disadvantage of those, who han't so good a
Thought of the Times as some of their Brethren is, Vid. Mr. MCGRECORY'S Sermon
on the Trial of the Spirits.
"That they are Men of ARMINIAN, PELAGIAN and DEISTICAL Principles." It is
conceded indeed, "that there are some weaker Brethren, both of Ministers and
People, who are led in to oppose this Work, who are yet no Arminians:" But for
the "most principal and inveterate Opposers, they are Men of ARMINIAN and
PELAGIAN principles; and those others are only Deputy, or second-band
Opposers." The Idea here conveyed to the World is evidently this, that the
Gentlemen of most Weight and Significancy, in the Opposition to the Disorders
in the Land, are known to be of bad Principles. And is this the real Truth of
the Case? So far from it, that a more palpable Mistake could not have been
published to the World; and the Man who published it, must be either grossly
ignorant of the Characters of those he undertook to write against, not knowing
whereof he affirmed; or otherwise, must be looked upon as acting a very
dishonest Part. For it is notorious to all, in any tolerable Measure, acquainted
with Men, or Things, at this Day, that the principal Opposers are among those
of an established Reputation for their Orthodoxy. CALVINISTS in Principle, now
are, and always have been from the Beginning, the principal and most inveterate
Enemies to our growing Confusions: Not such CALVINISTS as are weak, and fit
only to be made Tools of by Men of other Principles; but Men of as good Parts
and Learning as any we have in the Land, and universally acknowledged to be so.
I could wish it were here proper to mention Names: Nothing would so effectually
tend to wipe off this Reproach, which has been publicly reflected upon some of
the greatest Men, and best Friends to Religion, we have in the Country.

There are, no doubt, among those who speak against Disorders, some of bad
Principles; yea, of no Principles at all: [The Number of these latter, instead
of being diminished, has, perhaps, of late, been greatly increased] But to give
it as the Character of the principal Gentlemen, who have endeavored to prevent
Confusion in the Church of GOD, that they are ARMINIANS and PELAGIANS, because
this may be true of some, who an't much concerned about Religion, nor pretend
that they are, is very Abusive: It Is especially so, to suggest such a Thing of
the Ministers; and the rather, because they are generally in a quite different
Way of thinking. As for PELAGIANISM, it is a base Slander, to publish it to the
World, as if any Ministers in the Country entertained a favorable Opinion of
it: Nor can I suppose, there are so many, as some suggest, who think with
ARMINIUS. But if they were more numerous, yea, if they were generally
ARMINIANS, (which is far from the Truth) how would this justify the Disorders
they complain of? These may be as bad in their Nature and Tendency, and as of
great Extent, as if they were strong CALVINISTS. And to speak freely, the
raising a popular Clamor against Ministers, by giving them a Name of Odium,
carries with it no reasonable Ground of Conviction: Nor can it be of any real
Service. It may obstruct their Usefulness; but has no Tendency to clear up the
Truth: It may excite their Passions, and provoke to Wrath, and seldom fails of
doing so, to the great Hurt of Religion; but it can never instruct their
Understandings, or alter their Sentiments. -- It would discover a much better
Spirit, if they have opposed any Thing that is really good, to show plainly,
and distinctly, wherein they have done so, from the Bible, that sacred and only
Test, in all Matters pertaining to Conscience and Salvation. -- This would be
to speak to the Purpose, and to argue like Men and Christians. --

In fine, The Discouragers of the Things amiss, at this Day, have been
represented, as Men destitute of all serious Sense of Religion, as loose in
their Lives, and no real Friends to the Power of Godliness. And if this should
be allowed to be the Truth as to some, why must others be though it the worse of
upon their Account? Have none, among the Friends to the Extraordinaries of the
present Day, made it evident to the World, that they were the basest of
Hypocrites? Have none of them been guilty of Wickedness, aggravated to a far
greater Height, than can be proved upon the worst Opposer in the Land? And
would it be fair, because of the Hypocrisy and Vileness of some, to speak, in
general, of the Rest, as mere Pretenders to Religion? Would not this be
complained of as horribly unjust? And if it is so on one Side, must it not be so
on the other?

I know, the Instruments and Subjects of the present Work, do, many of them,
make high Pretenses to Sanctity above other Men; while those, who have
testified against the Disorders prevailing in the Land, have not, in like Ways,
commended themselves. They have not indeed though it it decent to proclaim their
own Goodness, so as to despise others, and it may be, their Betters? But they
may be good Men notwithstanding And, perhaps, if a strict Scrutiny was to be
made, as eminent Christians, both Ministers and People, would be found among
these, as are to be met with any where in NEW ENGLAND. Comparisons (as the
Vulgar phrase it) are odious; otherwise the Men might be called for, who should
equal many who are spoken of as Opposers. We know indeed the Persons that would
be pitched upon: And what are their Characters, in Compare with a very
considerable Number of those who have been evil-spoken of, in these Times? Have
the Men, through whose Means, a Clamor has been raised against them, ever
given the World, one tenth Part of the Evidence, either of their Goodness as
Christians, or Diligence and Fidelity as Pastors to the particular Flocks
committed to their Charge? Are not the Gentlemen, who have been most admired,
generally young in Years, and Christian Experience, as well as of small
Seize in Learning? And is it possible, they could have given such Proof
of a good Character as those, who, for a Course of Years, have said fully
preached the Truth as it is in JESUS, and set an Example to their People of all
the Virtues and Graces of the Christian Life? And may not this be justly said
of many who have been injuriously reflected on, for not falling in with the
Times? The plain Truth is, as valuable Men, in all Respects, as any we have in
the Country, are in the Opposition to the bad Things prevailing in it; and the
ranking them with Persons of loose Lives, and no Religion, is basely to
reproach them.

Other Instances, wherein Blame has been unjustly thrown upon the faithful
Witnesses against the Errors and Disorders of the Day, might have been
mentioned; but as they are of smaller Moment, I must leave them, to make room
for what yet remains to come under Consideration.

PART IV.
Showing what Things ought to be corrected, or avoided, in testifying against
the Irregularities of the present Day.
SOME, perhaps, of all Characters, have found Fault with the Disorders
prevailing in the Country, at this Day: And among such various Sorts of
Persons, it may not be thought strange, if there are those who have conducted
themselves in a Manner liable to Exception. Wherein any have been faulty, it is
reasonable they should submit to Correction, and take Care to avoid the like
Mistakes for the Time to come.

Some, it may be, have been too free with their Complaints against the Times,
who have had little Opportunity to know the real State of Religion in the Land,
and not a sufficient Capacity to form and adequate Idea of it. -- This, it must
be owned, is a Fault, and ought to be corrected. -- It Is a Disservice to the
Cause of Truth and Virtue, for Persons of weak Minds, and small Acquaintance
with Matters in Agitation, to speak of them with Assurance and Confidence, as
though all Knowledge would die with them. And this may be worthy the
Consideration of those, who would be thought the best Friends to the Work of
GOD, as well as others; for I cannot suppose it will be denied, that those among
them, whose Capacities and Advantages to know the Truth, have been smallest,
have yet been confident and out-ragious in their Speech, as well as Behavior:
Whereby, instead of serving any good End, they have rather excited the Pity,
and exposed themselves to the Contempt of others.

Some, it may be, have expressed themselves with too much Warmth, and in Language
savouring rather of Anger and Wrath, than that Meekness of Wisdom, which is the
Glory of Christians, as discovering in them a near Resemblance to the lovely
JESUS. -- Wherever there has been such a Spirit of Bitterness, appearing in
unkind harsh Words, it ought to be corrected, and, for the Time to come,
avoided. -- A soft Answer turns away Wrath, but grievous Words stir up Anger.
--

Some, it may be, have spoken of the Extravagancies they have seen others
running into, with an Air of Levity: Instead of being inwardly concerned for
the Dishonor reflected on GOD, and the Hurt done to Religion, they have rather
made merry with the unadvised Conduct of the Zealots of the present Day; taking
Notice of it only for their Diversion. -- Wherein this has been the Manner of
any, they will not, in calm Tho'ts, go about to justify themselves. -- It Is
certainly a Fault they are chargeable with; and it may disserve the Interest of
CHRIST, if it be not amended.

Some, it may be, have been severe in censuring the Mistakes of others, who
order their own Conversation, rather by fleshly Wisdom than the Grace of GOD;
who live according to the Course of this World, rather than the Divine Law: And
though they cry out of Irregularities, they have no View herein to the Honor
of the REDEEMER, and the flourishing of his Kingdom. Such are faulty in the
main Temper of their Minds. -- They cannot more properly be applied to, than in
our SAVIOR'S Words, Why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Brother's Eye,
but considerest not the Beam that is in thine own Eye? -- Thou Hypocrite, first
cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye; and then sh^lt thou see clearly to cast
out the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye. -- It would be more for the Interest of
Religion, if such were silent about the Imprudences and Follies of their
Neighbors. -- Their declaiming against them, puts those under a Disadvantage,
who are real Friends to the Cause of Virtue, and would gladly do what they
could to promote it. --

Some, it may be, have taken Occasion, from what they have seen in some
enthusiastical Persons, to speak flightily of the blessed SPIRIT, if not to
decry his Office, and ridicule his Influences upon the Minds of Men: Than which
there is scarce a (...) (...): Nor will any, who are Friends to (...), think
favorably of it. -- I could (...) wish, nothing had appeared, in these Day^,
that might have given a Handle to unworthy (...) on the Divine SPIRIT. It Is
true, its (...) Objection against the Operations of the (...) that some, under
the Power of an overheated h^^gination, have mistaken the Motion of their own
Minds, or the Suggestions of Satan, for divine Impressions. But an ill Use may
be made of such Mistakes: And it may be feared, whether this han't been too
much the Case, in these Times. If any, from the Wildness and Enthusiasm they
have seen, have had Prejudices excited in them against the SPIRIT, as the
appointed Dispenser of GOD's Grace; or been led to express themselves in an
unbecoming Manner of those Influences, by which the Work of GOD is begun, and
carried on, in the Souls of Men, they have much to be humbled for, and correct:
Nor can they be too much upon their Guard, for the Time to come; for it is only
by the Operations of the Divine SPIRIT, that they can be formed to a Meetness
for the Favor of GOD here, or the Enjoyment of him hereaster: And, of all Men,
they will be the most unlikely to be wrought upon by him, if they suffer
themselves to think or speak contemptuously of his Operations, as (...) they
were nothing more than Delusion and Imagination.

In fine, some, not sutably distinguishing between Religion in its own Nature,
and as (...) in the Conduct of some over zealous Persons, instead of
entertaining an ill Thought only of that which is ill, may have condemned
Religion in the whole, as a wild imaginary Thing. An unhappy Mistake this! --
Nor can it be too soon corrected. It is just Matter of Lamentation, thus any
have set Religion in such an ugly Light by their extravagan^ behavior, as to
excite Prejudices in the Minds of others against it: Though Religion, in
itself, is not really the worse, nor should it suffer in the Opinion of any,
because of the Impeadences and Follies of those, who call themselves it is very
good Friends. This is unreasonable. -- It ought not to be mentioned to the
Disadvantage of Religion, that some, who have made high Pretenses to it, have
set it forth, in their Conduct, as something wild and fanciful. Is Religion
accountable for the Madness of those, who say they have a Regard to it? Is it
fit, any should speak of it as a phrensical Business, because Men of an
enthusiastical Turn have given, in their Lives, such an Idea of it? In judging
of the Truth, or Sobriety of Religion, the Question ought not to be, what is it
as exemplified by its Professors? But what is it as contained in the Revelation
of GOD? If, as it is here exhibited, it approves itself to the Understanding and
Conscience, appears worthy of GOD, and in the best Manner calculated to promote
the Good of Mankind, it ought to be received, and submitted to, as the great
Rule of Faith and Practice; and this, notwithstanding its forbidding Aspect,
from the Copy of it, by Men of heated Fancies. -- We ought to be upon our
Guard, that we don't take up Prejudices against Religion; especially at a Time,
when such Things pass for high Flights in it, which rather argue some Degree of
Disturbance in the Imagination: And our Caution should be the greater, because
of the bad Influence of a wrong Biass on the Mind. -- It will strangely tend to
blind our Eyes, and prepare the Way to our treating Religion with Neglect, or
Contempt; than which, nothing can be more dangerous to our Souls, or put their
Salvation to a greater Risque.

These are the chief Things (so far as my Knowledge extends) that need
Correction, among the Complainers of Irregularities in the Land: Not that I
would insinuate as if all were faulty in these Articles; or, indeed any
considerable Number, unless among the loose and profane, of which Sort, it
must be owned, there are too many: And it has unhappily been an Occasion of
unkind Reflections on those of a very different Character. -- On both Sides of
the present Controversy, which is become general, there are, no doubt, bad Men
as well as good; but they ought to be denominated one, or 'tother, from their
known habitual Temper and Conduct, and not from their being on this, or the
other Side of the Question in Debate. This, is very unfair; and would certainly
be complained of as such, if those, who would be thought Friends to the Work of
GOD, should be spoken of as a Parcel of Hypocrites, because some among them
have discovered this to be their true Character. -- It were to be wished, that
all who call themselves the Friends of CHRIST really were so, and that all who
complain of Disorders had upon their Minds a just. Sense of the Importance of
eternal Things. This would have a good Aspect on Religion; and we might hope
soon to see a new Face of Things in the Land.

PART Vth. and last.
Directing more positively to what may be judged the best Expedients to promote
the Interest of Religion at this Day.
THIS is an important Head of Discourse, and would have required Enlargement,
but that many Things are well said upon it by Mr. EDWARDS, in his late Book;
which, if He, and I, and Others, would carefully attend to, it might do much
toward putting an End to our present Difficulties.

He is certainly right in saying, P. 328.
That a great deal need to be done at confessing of Faults, on both Sides;
though, perhaps, none are so proper to make a beginning, as some among the
chief Instruments in the late Commotion: For they are the Persons, who have
openly injured their Brethren, by exciting Prejudices in the Minds of People
against them, to the great Hurt of their Reputation and Usefulness in the
World: Nor can I see, how they will answer it to their own Consciences, or GOD,
unless, in this Way, they repair the Damage they have done their Character. And
wherein those called Opposers have, in like Manner, publicly done that which
is a Dishonor to GOD, or an Injury to their Neighbor, they also are equally
obliged to make public Satisfaction. -- But if Retractations are made, it may
be hoped, they will be different from some that have been published of late,
which seem rather calculated to qualify the Persons who made them to do still
more Mischief, than to take the Shame to themselves that is their just Due.

I heartily join with him likewise in calling People to 330.
the Exercise of extraordinary Meekness and Forbearance -- the contrary
whereto, 332.
is each Party's stigmatising one another with odious Names, as is done in many
Parts of NEW ENGLAND; which tends greatly to widen and propagate the Breach.
Such distinguishing Names (as it follows) do, as it were, divide us into two
Armies separated and drawn up in Battle-array, ready to sight with one another;
which greatly hinders the Work of GOD. I could wish this Gentleman had wrote
more under the habitual Influence of this Advice: He would not then, so often
in his Book, have spoken of those, who may not think just as he does upon the
Times, as Opposers of the Work of GOD, and under some other Names of known
Disgrace. And as he has here taken Liberty 337.
"to entreat those that oppose this Work, to leave off concerning themselves so
much about others, and look into their own Souls, and see that they are the
Subjects of a true, saving Work of the SPIRIT of GOD" I would, in the Spirit of
Love and Meekness, return back the same Entreaty to those, who call themselves
the Friends of GOD's Work, begging that they would look more narrowly into the
State of their own Hearts, and not censure and condemn others. Nor will it be
thought, that this Advice is unseasonable, so long as it is a known Fact, that
uncharitable censorious Judging is a Fault that has generally prevailed, and to
a high Degree of Guilt, among those who would be thought the best Wishers to
the Interest of CHRIST, at this Day.

" Prayer also with Fasting" is an excellent Means to be attended at such a
Time as this; though I see not of what peculiar Advantage it would be, 363.
if there could be some Contrivance that there should be an Agreement of all
the People that are in AMERICA, that are well affected to this Work, to keep a
Day of Fasting and Prayer, wherein they should all unite in humbling themselves
before GOD,etc. A warm Imagination may conceive of great Things from such a
Fast; but I know not that it would be more acceptable to GOD, or to better
Purpose, than one of less Extent.

Nor will it be denied, 349.
That Care should be taken, that our Colleges should be so regulated, that they
should be Nurseries of Piety, as far as is possible; though some take it amiss,
that this Gentleman has here said that which is capable of being interpreted as
an Insinuation of a Want of due Care in this Respect; especially at a Time,
when the Prejudices of many, against the Colleges, are strong, and operate much
to their Disadvantage. -- I cannot but think we have Reason for Thankfulness,
that these Societies are under so good a Regulation; having those at their
Head, who are so capable and well-spirited to serve the great Ends of their
Constitution. I have known the general State of the College in this Government,
upwards of 20 Years; And, if it might not be thought assuming too much, I would
venture to say, that it was never, in that Time, under better Circumstances, in
Point of Religion, good Order, and Learning, than at this Day. There are those,
I am sensible, who have said that which has a Tendency to hurt the Credit of
the Colleges; but they notwithstanding still flourish as our chief Glory: And I
pray GOD they may go on to do so, as long as the Sun and the Moon shall endure.

Another Thing I concur with this Gentleman in mentioning as of very great
Importance, at this Day; and that is, People's 367. and onwards.
taking Heed, that, while they abound in external Duties of Devotion, such as
praying, hearing, singing, and attending religious Meetings, there be a
proportionable Care to abound in moral Duties, such as Acts of Righteousness,
Truth, Meekness, Forgiveness and Love toward our Neighbor; which are of much
greater Importance in the Sight of GOD, than all the Externals of his Worship.
-- They are abundantly more insisted on by the Prophets, in the old Testament,
and CHRIST and his Apostles in the new. When these two Kinds of Duties are
spoken of together, the moral ones are ever-more greatly preferred. Often, when
the Times were very corrupt in ISRAEL the People abounded in external Duties,
but were at such Times always notoriously deficient in moral ones. --
Hypocrites and self-righteous Persons do much more commonly abound in the
former Kind of Duties, than the latter; as CHRIST remarks of the Pharisees,
Matthew. 23. 14, 15, and 34. When the Scripture directs us to show our Faith by
our Works, it is principally the latter Sort that are intended. -- And we are
to be judged at the last Day, especially by these latter Sort of Works. --
These latter Sort of Duties put greater Honor upon GOD, because there is
greater Self-Denial in them. The external Acts of Worship, consisting in bodily
Gestures, Words and Sounds, are the cheapest Part of Religion, and least
contrary to our Lusts: The Difficulty of through Religion don't lie in them. Let
wicked Men enjoy their Coveteousness, and their Pride, their Malice, Envy,
Revenge, and their Sensuality and Voluptuousness in their Behavior among Men,
and they will be willing to compound the Matter with GOD, and submit to what
Forms of Worship you please, and as many as you please; as is manifest in the
JEWS of old, in the Days of the PROPHETS, and the PHARISEES in CHRIST'S Time,
and the PAPISTS and MAHOMETANS in this Day.

Several Things, further offered to Consideration by this Gentleman, re well
calculated to promote the Interest of Religion, in this Day of Disorder: But
instead of repeating these, I shall add a few Expedients of another Nature, a
due Regard to which, I cannot (...) think, would happily tend, under GOD, to
set us free, in a good Measure, from our present Difficulties, and greatly
serve the Cause of CHRIST and his Kingdom.

The first is, the putting a Stop to Itinerant Preaching. This, I doubt not, is
the true Cause of most of the Disorders, we have seen in the Country: And 'till
this be removed, other Attempts to bring us into a better State, will be likely
to prove ineffectual. I know, it will be said, Good has been done by this Way
of Preaching; why then should it be discouraged? And don't the same Men who
say, Good has been done by the preaching of Itinerants, allow that Good also
has been done by the Exhorters, whether Male or Female? And yet they are now
made sensible, even the most zealous among them, that Exhorters ought to be put
down. And why not Itinerants? If they have been instrumental in doing Good,
have they not also been a Means of doing Hurt? -- If this Itinerancy is in it
self a disorderly Practice, (as has, I trust, been made evident in these Pages)
it ought, though some Good should have followed upon it, to be discouraged: Nor
otherwise may it be expected, Things will be reduced to an orderly regular
State in the Land. And it should be discouraged universally, if at all. The
doing it in respect of some, while others are encouraged in the Practice, is
downright Partiality. If the Thing it self is bad, it is so in one as well as
another. -- No one, let his Character be what it will, ought to be countenanced
in this vagrant Way of Preaching, where Churches are already formed, and have
Pastors fixed in them. -- If any Man thinks he may do more abundant Service by
Itinerating, let him go where he will not invade other Men's Rights, and promote
(...) and (...); and there will then be no Ground of Complaint. -- Let him go
among the Natives to the East, or West; or, if he don't choose that, let him go
into VIRGINIA, or rather NORTH CAROLINA, where (as I have lately had
Information that may certainly (...) be depended on) there is scarce a Bible to
be met with, in Multitudes of their Houses, or a Minister for a hundred Miles
together. I cannot indeed learn, that there are above two or three Ministers
within the Confines of that Government.

But how shall a Stop be put to this Itinerant Preaching? To which, if it might
not be thought taking too much upon me, I would say, that, if the Ministers, in
their several Associations, would come into an Agreement among themselves to
admit to Itinerant into their Pulpits, and propose their Agreement to their
respective Churches that they might strengthen them in it; I cannot but think,
it would have a powerful Tendency to give Check to this Practice, which has
occasioned so much Alienation in the Minds of Ministers toward each other, and
of People toward Ministers. I am sensible, all would not be pleased with such
an Agreement; but if I am not exceedingly mistaken in the Sentiments of by far
the greatest Part of the Ministers and Churches in this PROVINCE, they would
not act in Contradiction to their Principles, by coming into something of this
Nature. But whether this, or any other Method, may be judged most effectual to
discourage the Itinerancy, the Discouragement of the Thing it self appears to
me to be a Matter of no small Importance to the Well-being of these Churches:
And if the Ministers, at their Association Meetings, would seriously consider
of some Way, in which this might be best done, it would not be Time ill-spent.

It might also be of good Tendency, at this Day, if the Pulpits, in our several
Churches, were so guarded, as that no raw unqualified Persons might be
suffered, upon any Terms, to go into them: And if the Candidates of the
Ministry were obliged to pass other Trials than have as yet been in Use, before
they might preach, we should, I believe, in Time, see the good Effect of it.
The Want of proper Caution, in this Respect, has long been complained of;
though the Inconveniences arising herefrom have not been so sensibly
perceived, as in the late Times. I can think of no Remedy more suitable in this
Case than that, which, about 40 Years ago, was provided by a Convention of
Ministers at BOSTON, and published in the following Words. See Dr. COTTON
MATHER'S Account of the Discipline in the Churches of NEW ENGLAND, Page 118,
119, 120.


PROPOSALS; for the Preservation of Religion in the Churches, by a due TRIAL of
them that stand CANDIDATES OF THE MINISTRY.
It is a thing of Great Consequence to the Safety and Welfare of our Churches,
and the Interests of our Holy Religion are not a little concerned in it, That
the Candidates of the Evangelical Ministry, from time to time arising among us,
should still be offered unto the Acceptance of the Churches, under the
Advantage of their having undergone a due TRAIL of their Qualifications, for so
solemn, and sacred a Service. And it has long been the Wish of prudent Men,
who wish well to the Interests of Religion, That none of our Christian
Congregations may countenance any, who shall set up for public Preachers of
the Gospel, until they can produce a Testimonial of their having been duly
proved and approved, as Qualified for so Weighty an Undertaking.

Therefore,

1. It is proposed, that every Candidate of the Ministry, be furnished with a
TESTIMONIAL, under the Hands of at least Four or Five settled Pastors in our
Churches, of his having been Tried, upon the EXPECTED ARTICLES, and of his
being upon Trial found competently Qualified, for the Encouragements of a
public Preacher among the Congregations of GOD in the Land. And that none
presume to enter upon a Course of treating any of our Congregations with their
Sermons, until they have applied themselves unto such a Number of our Pastors,
for such a Testimonial.

II. It is proposed, That the EXPECTED ARTICLES on which the Candidates of the
Ministry shall be Tried, shall be these:

1. He shall be one of a Blameless Life; and therefore one that has actually
joined unto a particular Church, for Communion in all special Ordinances.

2. He shall give the Triers an Account of the Principles that act him, in his
Desire to Preach the Gospel; which may satisfy their Judicious Charity, that he
is acted by the Evangelical Principle of Love to CHRIST and Souls, in his
Intentions.

3. He shall be tried, how far he is acquainted with the Three learned
Languages, and with the Sciences commonly taught in the Academical Education:
And so much Acquaintance therewithal shall be required, as may be judged
absolutely needful for the Services whereto he is designed.

4. Before Three of the Triers at least, he shall Preach a Probationary Sermon,
on a Text, at a Time, and in a Place, which they shall appoint; and they shall
upon Hearing pronounce his Abilities for Preaching and praying to be such as
give them Satisfaction.

5. He shall be examined, What Authors in Theology he has read; and he shall
particularly make it evident, That he has considerately read, Ames his Medulla
Theologioe: [Or, some other generally allowed Body of Divinity.]

6. His Abilities to Refute Errors are to be tried, by putting Instances unto
him, as the Triers may judge most convenient.

7. He shall declare to the Triers his Adherence unto, the Confession of Faith,
agreed by the Churches of NEW ENGLAND, and the Assembly of Divines at
WESTMINSTER.

III. It is proposed, That if the Pastors of our Churches are so unadvised, as
to employ in public Preaching any Candidate of the Ministry who has neglected
or contemned the Trial propounded for such Persons, it shall be counted an
Offense; and it shall be, by the Pastors in the Neighborhood, signified unto
such an one, that if he do not acknowledge his Offense, he shall be dealt
withal, as one that Walks disorderly.

IV. It is proposed, That if any Congregations be so unadvised, as to invite
unto public Preaching any Candidate of the Ministry, who has avoided the Trial
aforesaid, the Pastors of the Churches in the Neighborhood, shall not only
refuse to concur in the Ordination of a Person who has so shunned the Light,
but also write unto the said Congregations a suitable Admonition for the
Disorder, by which they thus expose themselves to the Devices of Satan.

V. It is proposed, That when any Tried Candidate of the Ministry is to be
ordained unto the Pastoral Charge, he shall, unto the Elders and Messengers of
the Churches, who are invited unto his Ordination, make due answers unto such
Questions as their Moderator shall propound, relating to his present Capacities
and Inclination, to serve the Kingdom of GOD, and unto the Flock unto which he
should now become related.

If this, for Substance, or something of the like Nature, might be united in by
Ministers and People, as a Rule of Conduct, so as none but such as had gone
through the proper Trials might be set up in our Pulpits, it would prevent those
Disorders, which may naturally be expected, when mere Novices are encouraged,
(and without Examination) to take upon them the Work of Ministers.

A wrong Use of the Passions, in the Business of Religion, is likewise a Matter
highly needful to be guarded against at this Day. There is, no Doubt, a good
Use to be made of the Passions. -- They were not in vain planted in our Nature;
-- but because wisely adapted to serve many Purposes, in the religious as well
as the natural Life. -- But they are capable of being abused, and have actually
been so; as is abundantly evident from many of the Disorders prevailing in
these Times. --

As a Preservative against such Abuse, I know of nothing more effectual than
what has been wrote by the excellent Dr. WATTS, in his Discourses upon this
Subject. I shall transcribe from them a few Instances of the Abuse of the
Passions, which, I believe, will not be though it, by the more sober among us,
unworthy a heedful Attention at this Day.

The first is, Vid. His Discourses of the Use and Abuse of the Pas^^^, P. 222,
223.
When they run before the Understanding, or when they rise higher toward any
particular Object than the Judgment directs. As an Illustration of which he
observes,

Some Persons, as soon as they begin to find further Light dawning upon their
Minds, and are let into the Knowledge of some Doctrine or Sentiment which they
knew not before, immediately set their Zeal to work: Their Zeal is all on a
Flame to propagate and promote this new Lesson of Truth, before their own
Hearts are well established in it upon solid Reasonings. -- How common a Case
is it among Christians, and too often found among Ministers of the Gospel, to
give a Loose to their Affections at the first G^^mpse of some pleasing Opinion,
or some fresh Discovery of what they call Truth? They help out the Weakness of
the Proof by the Strength of their Passions: -- This confirms their Assent too
soon, and they grow deaf to the Arguments that are brought to oppose it. They
construe every Text in the Scripture to support this Doctrine, they bring in
the Prophets and Apostles to maintain it. They fancy they see it in a thousand
Verses of their Bibles; and they pronounce all Men Heretics that dare maintain
the contrary Opinions. -- He further observes,

There have been some weak Christians when they have heard a Sermon, or read a
Discourse full of sublime Language and Darkness, and especially if the Style
and Manner has been very pathetic, they have been raptured and transported, as
though it contained the deepest Sense, the noblest Truths of Religion, the
highest Discoveries of Grace and the Gospel: Whereas, perhaps, there may be
scarce any Thing in it which has a just Agreement with Reason or Scripture;
but, when well examined, it proves to be a mere Jargon of Words, a Mixture of
unintelligible and unmeaning Sounds, with some affectionate Airs among them,
whereby their Passions were fired, and that without Knowledge, and beyond all
Reason.

The next Abuse of the Passions he mentions is, P. 226, 227.
When we encourage them to rise high, and grow very warm about the lesser
Things of Religion, and yet are content to be cold and indifferent in Matters
of the highest Importance. There are too many Christians whose warmest Zeal is
employed about the Mint, the Anise, and the Cummin of Christianity, Mat. 23.
23. And have few Passions awakened, or engaged, in the weighty Things of the
Law, or the Gospel! They are suriously intent upon speculative Notions, and
some peculiar Opinions that distinguish the little Parties of Christendom, and
crumble the Church to Pieces: Their Fears, their Hopes, their Wishes, their
Desires, their Grief and Joy, are all employed in Party-Quarrels, and a Strife
of Words: But they are thoughtless about the momentous Duties of Love to GOD
and CHRIST, of Justice to Men, of Charity to Fellow Creatures, and
Fellow Christians. So a sickly Fancy is fond of Trifles, and careless of solid
Treasures: So Children have their little Souls wrapped up in painted Toys, while
the Matters of manly Life awaken no Desire, no Delight in them.

The last Abuse I shall mention from this valuable Author is, P. 234, 235.
When the Passions are suffered to entrench upon other Duties either to GOD or
Man, and withhold us from the proper Business of our Place and Station in the
World. Though the Passions should be indulged at proper Seasons, yet they
should not so far govern all the Powers of Nature, and ingross the Moments of
Life, as to make us neglect any necessary Work to which the Providence of GOD
has called us.

This is the Case, when Persons find so much Sweetness in their religious
Retirements, that they dwell there too many Hours of the Day, and neglect the
Care of their Families, the Conduct of their Children and Servants, and other
necessary Duties of Life, and let all Things run at Random in their Household,
under the Excuse of Religion, and Converse with GOD.

It Is the same culpable Conduct, when Christians are tempted to run from Sermon
to Sermon, from Lecture to Lecture, in order to maintain their spiritual
Pleasures, with a flight and careless Performance of relative Duties. It Is yet
more criminal in Persons of low Circumstances in the World, who would spend all
their Time in hearing, or reading good Things, or at some religious Assemblies
or Conferences, while they grossly and grievously neglect their common Duties of
providing for themselves and their Children. They are ready to expect the Rich
should maintain them, while they make their devout Affections an Excuse for
their shameful Idleness and Sloth. Let us remember there is a Time for working
as well as a Time for praying or hearing. Every Thing is beautiful in its
Season.

Instances of the Abuse of the Passions, in these Ways, have not been wanting
in these Times: Nor unless some Persons are made sensible of it, and take Care
to keep their Passions within the Restraints of Reason, may it be expected that
Things should be reduced to a State of Order. There is the Religion of the
Understanding and Judgment, and Will, as well as of the Affections; and if
little Account is made of the former, while great Stress is laid upon the
latter, it cannot be but People should run into Disorders. "A mere passionate
Religion lies very much exposed to all the wild Temptations of Fancy and
Enthusiasm:" Nor can it be too much guarded against.

Another Thing very necessary, at this Day, is the Use of a strict Discipline
in our Churches. From whence it arises, that our Discipline has been so lax,
especially in the Years that are lately past, I shall not take upon me to
determine. The Fact is notorious. -- Han't disorderly Walkers been suffered to
take their Course, without the Administration of those Censures which are
proper to the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST? Nay, where Persons have openly behaved
in an unchristian Manner toward those of the Community they were joined to,
both Pastors and People, have they been so much as reproved for it in a
Church Way? Have they not rather been left to themselves to act as they please,
without public Notice, any more than if they sustained no Relation to the
Church of GOD? And if it should, in a Measure be attributed to this, that there
has been the Increase of Disorders, would it be beside the Truth? -- Discipline
is necessary in all Societies whatever: And where this is neglected, if there
is the Appearance of Confusion, what is it more than may justly be expected? --
I presume not to dictate; -- But it is easy to foretell, without a Spirit of
Prophecy, if there is not a Revival of Discipline, there will be the
Continuance of Disorder. -- Our Fathers, under the like Difficulties with those
we now complain of, have set us an Example: And I wish, we their Posterity had
upon Minds as just a Sense of the Necessity of ORDER to the Well-being of the
Church of CHRIST, as they discovered in all their Managements.

The last Thing I shall mention as necessary, at this Day, is, a due Care to
prove all Things, that we may hold fast that which is good. This an inspired
Apostle has directed to: And, perhaps, there never was a Time when a Regard to
this Advice was more needful. We have seen enough to convince us, that Man may
not be trusted in; that the Determinations, whether of single Persons, or
public Bodies of Men, be they who they will, or their Pretenses what they will,
are not to be received with an implicit Faith. -- If we would act up to our
Character as Men, or Christians, we must not submit blindfold to the Dictates
of others; No, but we should ourselves examine into the Things of GOD and
another World: Nor can we be too sollicitous, so far as we are able, to see
with our own Eyes, and believe with our own Understandings.

Only in all our Inquiries of this Nature, let the Word of GOD be our Rule.
This only may with Safety be depended on. -- I see plainly, and with my own
Eyes, (said the excellent Mr. CHILLING WORTH), that there are Popes against
Popes, Councils against Councils, some Fathers against others, the same Fathers
against themselves, a Consent of Fathers of one Age against a Consent of
Fathers of another Age, the Church of one Age against the Church of another
Age. He adds the following noble Words, in which, if we could all heartily
join, it would be happy for us at this Day; There is no sufficient Certainty
but of Scripture only. -- This therefore, and this only, I have Reason to
believe: This I will profess; according to this I will live; and for this, if
there be Occasion, I will not only willingly, but even gladly, loose my Life.
-- Propose me any Thing out of this Book, and require whether I believe it or
no; and seem it never so incomprehensible to humane Reason, I will subscribe to
it with Heart and Hand: as knowing no Demonstration can be stronger than this;
GOD has said so, therefore it is true.

I have now finished what I at first proposed, though with the Omission of many
Things I intended to have said. -- The LORD give us Understanding in all
Things. -- The GOD of Peace make us perfect in every good Work to do his Will,
working in us that which is well-pleasing in his Sight, through JESUS CHRIST; to
whom be Glory for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

