AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mrs. Elizabeth Bury, Who Died, May the
11th 1720. Aged 76.

Chiefly collected out of her own DIARY.

Together with Her ELEGY, By the Reverend Dr. WATTS.

THE FOURTH EDITION, CORRECTED.

To recommend such Persons, the Virtues of whose Lives have been so bright and
exemplary, is not only a Piece of Justice due to the Dead, but an Act of great
Charity to the Living, setting a Pattern of Well-doing before them, very apt
and powerful to incite and encourage them to go and do likewise. --

Abp. Tillotson. BOSTON: Printed by Green, Bushel, and Allen, for D. Henchman
in Cornhil. 1743.

Courteous Reader,
I AM not such a Stranger to the captious Temper of the Age, in which I have
lived so long, as not to expect the Censures of many in undertaking this Work
myself, which every one (at first) will think ought to have been done (if done
at all) by a more indifferent and impartial Hand. And I am very ready to submit
to the Justice of their Censure so far, as to own, That the Pen and Patronage
of others would have recommended it to the World with less Suspicion and
Jealousy, and in a much better Dress, and with far greater Advantage and Liking
than I can do. But in Plea for myself, I must acquaint such, that I have not
been wanting in endeavoring to engage some of my Brethren in this Work, who
were best acquainted with the Deceased: But the constant Burden of necessary
Business upon some, the Modesty of others, and the great Distance of the rest
(from the Place where the Providence of GOD has at present cast me) has denied
me that Satisfaction, and the World that Privilege.

Since therefore it has fallen upon myself, I am chiefly concerned, that the
daily Work upon my own Hands, in such a Province as I am now acting in, and my
own bodily Infirmities, and the disconsolate Frame of my own Spirit, have
rendered me so incapable, and given me so little Leisure to peruse and digest
the several Volumes of Manuscripts, out of which the necessary Collections
should be made, to do Justice to her Memory.

However, lest all the Memorables of her Life should be lost at once, I have
ventured on all the Difficulties, and published the few following Fragments,
which will rather serve as a Specimen, than give any full Account of her Life,
in all the Duties, Trials, States, and Relations of a Christian.

Her Diary to me has been one of the most affecting Things I ever read; it is
large and particular, and runs through almost the Course of thirty Years. It
seems to me to be penned with great Sincerity, Humility, and Modesty, without
any Art of Affectation; in a great Variety of Expression, without Tautology;
and with such a Design to carry on the Interest and Power of Religion in her
own Soul, and to record the Works of the Lord in her, and for her, to the
Honor of the Riches of his own Grace, that whatever the Opinion of others
might be concerning it, I shall always reckon it amongst my greatest Treasures.

It has been one of the greatest Difficulties to me in the whole Performance,
to satisfy myself to leave out at least nine Parts in ten of what I though it was
truly valuable, and thereby to break the Connection, Dependence, and
Consistency of the whole Diary; and yet I found it was absolutely necessary, or
else the Volume must have swelled to such a Bigness, as to have been useless to
many for whom it was especially designed.

I hope I have given no just Occasion to any to suspect my Sincerity in what I
have done; I have acted (if I mistake not myself) under a more governing
Principle than that of Affection; and have not imposed any false or imaginary
Things upon the World, but can fully vindicate myself (in what I call Here Is) by
original Vouchers, which every one must allow (that calls not her own Sincerity
in Question) to be authentic.

Her LIFE, I am well assured, has been of great Service to many, and I would
hope these few Memorials of it may be useful to more. And that such as have not
been duly influenced by the Precepts of Religion, may be somewhat induced by
such an Exemplar to the Practice of it.

It is not for one in my afflicted State, and especially upon a Subject so
grievous as this, to have any Regard to Style or Language; it shall satisfy me,
and I believe it will be more pleasing to others, that I chiefly write with her
own Pen, having ever though it her Phrase and Expression more decent, concise, and
spiritual than my own.

Samuel Bury.

To the Dear Relations and Friends OF THE DECEASED, BOTH HERE IS and MINE.
My dear Friends and Relations,
I Have no Reason to think that the Manuscripts of the Deceased (committed only
to myself) were ever intended by her for public View. But being neither under
any Direction or Interdict concerning them, and thinking they are Valuable in
themselves, and such as have a probable Tendency to a Common Good: I have
ventured upon that which I never did before, to discover her thus far in her
Religious Secresies, since it is with no other View, than to Magnify the Grace
of GOD in her, to endear her Memory to Survivors, and to propagate Religion in
the World, and more especially amongst our selves, for whom she had an uncommon
Concern, and inviolable Affection, as almost every Page in her D^^ry abundantly
testifies.

It is, doubtless, a very great Instance of divine Benignity and Good Will to
Men, to Entrust us wi^^ the Lives, and allow us to observe the Deaths, of some
such Heavenly Creatures here on Earth, to teach us the Way of useful Living,
and to Reconcile us the more at last to the Thoughts of Dying.

It has often recommended Religion to me, to observe the Beauty, Light, and
Luster of it, in the unblemished Lives of some Eminent Professors; and made the
Thought even of Heaven it self more pleasant, as it is the Place and Center,
and Rest of such precious Souls, which we are hoping to enjoy with much greater
Advantage than in an embodied State: Nay, and rendered the Grave itself and all
the doleful Scenes of Mortality by far the less Formidable, since it is but our
Dwelling a while with such Sacred Dust, in Obscurity and Silence, to rise
together at last in Glory, to be for ever with the Lord.

If the Example of a Relative will any wise provoke you to an Imitation, I hope
it will be this; GOD was her Witness, and so am I, to the daily Travail of her
Soul, for the Eternal Safety and Happiness of yours. How many Hours of
Prayers, yea, and how many Days of Fasting and Prayer, has she spent for her
own Relations and mine, with equal Concern, as she has often said? How often
can I find her in her Diary Praying and Weeping, and Wrestling with GOD for
you, when you knew it not? And Recommending all your particular Cases, in all
the Circumstances of them in a most Pathetical Manner to GOD? Sometimes
Rejoicing, sometimes Mourning, but always Hoping and Waiting, even under
Discouragements.

By this you will know what a Praying-Friend you have lost; but GOD forbid that
her Prayers themselves should be lost too, I hope they will not, I hope they
cannot.

But give me leave, as a Friend to such that were dear to her, (and whither to
me let GOD be Witn^^^) to entreat, and beseech, and adjure you all to Pray for
yourselves, and for one another, as she did; and it may strengthen your Faith
and Hope, that she has laid up such a Stock of Prayers for you, which have been
long entrusted with the common Advocate.

What can I say to my dear Relations more? But that as ever you would see her
Face in Glory hereafter, you would conscionably Remember now her Heavenly
Instructions, her Faithful Reproofs, her Pathetical Warnings, and Compassionate
Entreaties, for your own Good, and the Good of your Families? How often has she
summoned your Consciences to an Account in Conversation with you? How often has
she reminded you of your Solemn Dedications to GOD in Baptism? And the many
Personal and Superadded Vows and Engagements you have been under since? How
seriously has she warned you never to forsake the GOD of your Fathers, nor be
ashamed of Religion in the Power, Purity, and Practice of it? How often has she
revived your Convictions, animated your Desires, encouraged your Beginnings
with GOD, and cautioned against a deceitful World, the Company of such as are
acted by the Devil, and are Agents for him; and especially of such, who have
treacherously departed from GOD, and the Interests of Religion? This has been
the Manner of her Life with you, her Generous Designs, and Religious Methods,
as I am sure you know, without any Recourse had to her own Papers.

Now, if all her Prayers, and Tears, and Distresses for you, should signify
nothing, but be lost at last, what a Wound will it be to the Hearts of
surviving Relations! What a Brand of Infamy upon yourselves, to set at naught
the Councils and Example of such a Friend! To degenerate from her Ancestors and
Family! And in spite of all her Kindness and tenderest Bowels of Compassion
toward you, to procure for your selves double Damnation.

I ask no Pardon for my necessary Plainness and Freedom with you, which (GOD
knows) proceeds form the Sincerity and Earnestness of my Affections. This is
(very probably) the last Time I shall ever Address myself to any of you in this
Public Manner; I am hastening Homewards, and should be glad to be called to my
Father's House and Family above; to see the Face of my Lord Redeemer, and to
join Consort with the Triumphant Choir, in their everlasting Hallelujahs; and
with her, amongst the rest, who was once my dearest Relation upon Earth (whom I
doubt not to know in her unbodied State.) And that I may meet you all in the
blessed Society and Church of the Firstborn, with mutual Gladness and Joy
hereafter, I am now

Your faithful Monitor, in all the Bonds of Affection and Religion, SAMUEL BURY.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Life and Death of Mrs. ELIZABETH BURY.
CHAP. I. Of her Birth, Parentage, and Family.
MRS. ELIZABETH BURY, was born (about) the Second of March, 1644. at Clare in
the County of Suffolk, and was baptized the Twelfth.

Her Father was Captain Adams Lawrence, of Lynton in Cambridgshire; a very
graceful Person, of good Character, and great Integrity, who died June 13. 1648.

Her Mother was Mrs. Elizabeth Cutts, Daughter of Henry Cutts, Esquire of Clare,
aforesaid; a Person learned in the Law, yet a great Peacemaker amongst his
Neighbors, and a zealous Promoter of the Interest of the Gospel, who died
August 23. 1657. and his most eminently religious Consort after him, August 5.
1667.

These were the holy and happy Parents of Mrs. Elizabeth Bury, who not only
bare their earthly, but much more their heavenly Image.

Her Mother was a Person well known to myself, and celebrated (I think) by most
that knew her, for her great Sagacity and Penetration, as well as her great
Piety and Zeal in Religion. She was an eminently serious, heavenly and
experienced Christian; an Ornament to her Family, a Blessing to her Children,
and the Delight of all her Friends: She lived long to adorn her Profession, to
exemplify Religion, and to testify her Constancy and Resolution for the
Interest of Christ. Her Conversation was pleasant and profitable: Her
Expectations of a better Life were steady, and for many Years unshaken: Her
Trials were many, and her Faith victorious. The constant Tenor, Course and
Business of her Life, the solemn Transactions between God and her Soul, her
sweet and near Communion with God, the full Acquaintance she had with herself,
and the weekly solemn Remembrance she had of her Family in her Closet, would
fully appear by her own Papers, which have been lately put into my Hands.

By her first Husband (Lawrence) she had several Children.

Anne, the first, who married Mr. Stavely, a Citizen of London, and died six
Weeks after, July 12. 1660. much lamented by her Friends, being a Person of
early Piety, ripe Judgment, and quick Parts and Capacity.

Elizabeth, the second, of whom you have the following Narrative.

Adams, the third, who was born October -- 1647. and died the August following.

Mary, the fourth, (who married Mr. John Mason of St. Ives, Huntingtonshire) a
Person of true Piety, but harassed with various Exercises in different Scenes
of Life. Se died June 29. 1717.

The Mother, about three Years after the Death of her Husband (Lawrence) was
married again to the Reverend Mr. Nathaniel Bradshaw, B. D. and one of the
senior Fellows of Trinity-College in Cambridge; a Person (says Dr. Calamy)
eminently holy; a strict Observer of the Sabbath, and a laborious Catechist in
his Family, to whom he constantly expounded the Scripture Morning and Evening;
a Boanerges, well adapted to the People of Wivelingham, in Cambridgeshire, to
whom he preached, whom he found very profane and ignorant; but in a little
Time had numerous Seals given to his Ministry among them: He left his Living of
between three and four Hundred Pounds per Ann. for the Ease and Safety of his
Conscience, August 24. 1662. -- He died October 16. 1690. in the seventy-first
Year of his Age.

By Him she had six Children:

The first was Thomas, born March 26. 1652. who died April 15. following.

The second was Elizabeth, a serious, circumspect, judicious, and exemplary
Christian; a common and compassionate Nurse to her Family and Friends, often
bowed down with Fears and Jealousies, as to her spiritual State; a Person of
great Knowledge, quick Parts, and tender Affections; frugal in her own
Expenses, that she might be charitable to others: Her own Papers (left in my
Hands) show her frequent and close Trials of her Heart and State, the Grounds
of her Fears, her secret Sorrows, and good Hope through Grace. She died of a
painful Asthma, (in a single State) March 29. 1720.

The third was Cathrine, who was married to the Reverend Mr. Thomas Salmon,
Rector of M^psall, in Bedfordshire; and is the only Survivor of her Family,
walking in the same Steps, and hoping for the same Blessedness with the Perfect.

The fourth was Nathaniel, born August 24. 1656. who died September 5 following.

The fifth was Dorathy, who married Mr. Sergeant Hook, sometimes Chief Justice
of Wales: She was a Person of excellent Parts, great Conduct, eminent Piety,
and most indefatigable Diligence in Instructing her Children in the Principles
and Practice of Religion; she made a very comfortable Exit, December the 8.
1693.

The sixth and last was Anne, a Person much esteemed for her fineness of Parts,
great Improvements, and remarkable Piety: She died very much lamented, April
21. 1689.

The Mother herself died full of Grace and Years, October 7. 1697. Aged 78.

CHAP. II. Of her Natural Temper, Parts, and Genius.
THE Frankness, Ingenuity, and Pleasantness of her Temper, was ordinarily known
to all that conversed with her: She was never reserved, but when she thought
her Company was disagreeable, or she could profit herself more by her own
Thoughts, than the Discourse of others.

She has often been taken notice of by others, as a Person of uncommon Parts,
ready Thought, quick Apprehension, and proper Expression: She was always very
Inquisitive into the nature and reason of Things, and greatly obliged to any
that would give her Information.

In common Conversation, upon the Flirts or Banter of others, she had often
such sharp Turns and ready Replies, that were very surprising; and yet
mollify'd, at last, with such Art, and Air, and Ingenuity, that they could very
seldom be resented by any.

In Writing of Letters, she had a great aptness and felicity of Expression; and
was always thought so close and pertinent, and full to the purpose; and withal,
so serious, spiritual, and pungent, that her Correspondence was greatly valued,
by some of the brightest Minds, even in very distant Countries.

Her Genius led her to the Study of almost every Thing, having such a natural
Capacity, accompanied with a very faithful and retentive Memory; and taking
such a continual Pleasure in Reading, and Conversation, she soon became
Mistress (in some measure) of any thing she aimed at.

She often diverted herself with Philology, Philosophy, History, Ancient and
Modern; sometimes with Music, Vocal and Instrumental; sometimes with Heraldry,
Globes, and Mathematics; sometimes with learning the French Tongue (chiefly
for Conversation with French Refugees, to whom she was an uncommon Benefactrix)
but especially in perfecting herself in Hebrew, which by long Application and
Practice, she had rendered so familiar and easy to her, as frequently to quote
the Original in common Conversation, when the true meaning of some particular
Texts of Scripture depended on it. Her very critical Remarks upon the Idioms
and Peculiarities of that Language, which I have lately found amongst her
Papers, have been very suprizing to me.

Another study which she took much pleasure in, was Anatomy and Medicine, being
led and prompted to it, partly by her own ill Health, and partly with a desire
of being useful amongst her Neighbors: In this she improved so much, that many
of the great Masters of the Faculty have been often startled, by her stating
the most nice and difficult Cases, in such proper terms, which could h^ve been
expected only from Men of their own Profession; and have often owned, that she
understood an humane Carcass, and the Materia Medica, much better than most of
her Sex, which ever they had been acquainted with.

But however she diverted herself with these, yet her constant Favorite and
darling Study, was Divinity; especially the holy Scriptures, having from her
very Childhood taken GOD'S Testimonies for the Men of her Counsel. And in the
latter Part of her Life, devoted the most of her secret and leisure Hours to
the Reading of Mr. Henry's Annotations, which she would often say were the most
plain, profitable, and pleasant she ever read, and the last Books (next to her
Bible) she should ever part with: She honored the Author, for finding so much
of GOD in him, and for speaking the Case of her own Heart better than she could
speak it herself. He always surpised her with something new, and yet so
natural and of such necessary Consequence, and unobserved by others, that she
still read him with a fresh Gust and Pleasure -- Next to the holy Scriptures,
her chiefest delight was in reading practical Divinity; and the plainer and
closer, and more penetrating any Author was, he was always the more acceptable.

But notwithstanding all her Knowledge, and unusual Seize, in so many
Professions, Faculties, kinds of Literature, spiritual and most concerning
Truths of Religion, she would always confess and bewail her own Ignorance, and
that she knew little of what others did, or what she ought to have known, in
any of those Matters.

She would often regret, that so many Learned Men should be so uncharitable to
her Sex, as to speak so little in their Mother Tongue, and be so loath to
assist their feebler Faculties, when they were any wise disposed to an accurate
Search into Things curious or profitable, as well as others; especially (as she
often argued) since they would all so readily own, That Souls were not
distinguished by Sexes. And therefore she thought it would have been an
honorable Pity in them to have offered something in Condescension to their
Capacities, rather than have propagated a despair of their Information to
future Ages. And as to herself, she would always speak with the greatest
Thankfulness, of her singular Obligations to her Father Bradshaw, Dr. Fulwood,
and some others, for the ready and kind Assistance they gave her, in all her
Applications to them, in order to the little Light and Knowledge she had
attained in such Things.

CHAP. III. Of her Conversion, and the earliness of it.
THE certain Time and particular Means of her Conversion, she could not
positively determine; but she thought it was about the tenth year of her Age:
She had been under many Convictions several Years before, but she feared the
Work was not done 'till then; and tho she had many suspicions and jealousies of
herself, and state after that, yet upon the most serious Searches, she thought
she had better ground of Hope than Fear.

Her early beginning in Religion gave her many opportunities of glorifying GOD,
of doing much good to others, and of gaining great experiences of the Grace,
and Goodness, and Faithfulness of GOD to herself: And from the Benefit and
Comfort she found in it herself, she always recommended it with much
Seriousness, Affection, and Importunity to others. And (as it has been observed
by many) there was something very peculiar in the disposition of her Mind, and
turn of Thought, that adapted itself to the Capacity, Temper, Genius, and
liking of most Children: Her first and principal attempt upon all such, was to
bring them into Love with their Bibles, to learn them some short Sentences, and
Prayers, and Pieces of pleasant History there, especially such as concerned
Children: And then to insinuate herself into their Affections, and so to
instruct and persuade, and oblige, to talk with them in their own Phrase and
Dialect, that her Company was generally very acceptable and pleasant to all,
and by the Grace of GOD made very profitable to many.

Having set out thus early in the Way to Zion herself, and allured and
persuaded all she could, into the same Way, she held on her own Course, with
great Steadiness, Resolution, and Pleasure; and proceeded from Strength to
Strength, and for the Joy that was set before her, outrun many of her
Fellow Christians: She thought it not enough to begin her Work in the Morning,
but she wrought hard at it all the Day long: She was always aware of the
Vigilance of her Enemies, and that kept her upon her Watch: She would always
say, she had much to do, and what must be done, and knew not how short her Day
would be, and therefore she had no Time to loiter: She often observed what was
said of Jacob, that after he had met with GOD, he gathered up his Feet, and
went on his Way; and thought that she herself ought to do likewise.

CHAP. IV. Her Diary.
HAVING set out for Heaven thus soon, and continuing her Resolutions for God,
and Religion, and the eternal Interests of her Soul: She often advised with
herself and others, upon the properest and most effectual means to promote and
carry on her spiritual and pious Designs; and at last determined upon this as
one, To keep a daily Memorial of what she did; which should be a Witness
betwixt GOD and her own Soul (as she expresses it.)

I cannot be certain when she began this; but, as I conjecture, it must be
about the 18th or 20th Year of her Age. After that, for betwixt twenty and
thirty Years, she concealed her Accounts in Short Hand, which cannot be
recovered by me, nor, I believe, by any other, because of many peculiar
Characters and Abbreviations of her own. The first I have gathered, begin the
Year 1690, (with some short References to formers Years) and from that Time she
continued them in Long Hand (for the most part) to the end of her Life.

In this Diary, both Morning and Evening, she strictly observes (with a very
great liberty and happy variety of Expression) the most remarkable Providence
of God, with respect to herself and others (and sometimes) in the minutest
Circumstances of them: The solemn Transactions betwixt God and her own Soul, in
her Closet, in her Family, in the Assembly, and in her daily Walk and
Conversation with others; the substance of what she had Read or Heard, that was
most affecting in her present Case, or might direct her future Practice* her
Preperations for holy Duties; the Influences, Impressions, Assistances,
Withdrawings, and Consolations of the Spirit of GOD in them; her daily
Infirmities, Afflictions, Supports, Self-Examinations, Evidences, and Foretasts
of eternal Life; her Advances in Religion, and her suspected Decays; the Matter
of her Prayers, for herself and others, and the Manner, Time, and
Seasonableness of God's Answers; the Temper of her Soul, especially on
Sabbaths, and at Sacraments; and in Days of solemn Fasting, and Humiliation,
and Thanksgiving, public, private or secret; and in Days she set apart for
Self-Tryal and Searches into her own Soul; the various Scenes of her Life; her
Comforts and Exercises in each of them; the State of her Servants, and others,
committed to her Care; her merciful Protections in Journies; the Directions of
Providence as to all the Places of her Abode, and the gracious Visitations of
God to her Soul in all such Places; the uncommon Events that either befell
herself or Family, or Friends, or the Church of God; the Burdens that pressed
hardest upon her; the Joys that most relieved her; the Manner and Form of her
Covenanting with God; God's Faithfulness to his Covenant, in every Relation and
State of Life; the Indulgences of Providence to her; the Advantage of Christian
Conversation; her constant Intercession for Ministers and their People; her
faithful Reproofs; her Success with Young ones; her Concern for the Health and
Maintenance of the Poor; her Reflections upon the unwary Slips of her
Conversation; her Esteem of the Holy Scriptures, Learned Expositors, and
Practical Writers; her Annual Recapitulation of Mercies and Sins, and
Afflictions, and Resolutions, and Self-Dedications; her special Remarks upon
Days of Mercy, either to herself, or Family; and the manner of her Entering
upon a New Year, etc.

It would be almost impossible to enumerate the several Heads and Articles of
which her Diary consisted. And therefore what is proposed to Public View, is
but a very little Part of what we find under her Hand, and must still remain
for private Use.

She found it of singular Advantage to herself, to observe this Method; and
would often say, that were it not for her Diary, she should neither know what
she was, or what she did, or what she had: But by her Recourse to this, in all
her Afflictions, and Trials, and Temptations, and Surprises, she had ordinarily
great Relief. Let her Mind be never so much muffled, the Exercise of Reason and
Grace never so much interrupted, yet the Review of former Experience was an
extraordinary help to future Confidence. And this brought her again to her
great Rock and Refuge, and Rest, 'till she recovered her usual Cheerfulness.
And hence it was she so often recommended this Practice to others, that God
might not lose the Glory, nor they themselves the Comfort of their Lives.

CHAP. V. Of her Christian Virtues and Graces.
IT was easy to observe a very lively Impression of God's Image upon her Soul;
and the whole train of Graces, in a beautiful Exercise, through the whole
Course of her Life and Actions.

Her Humility showed itself to others, in her courteous Carriage and familiar
Conversation with the Poorest, especially where she thought she could have any
Advantage of doing Good -- And when ever she appeared before God, her Diary
shows how exceeding Vile she was in her own Eyes; how much she abhorred
herself, by reason of the Lerna Malorum (as she often calls it) which she
always found in her sinful Nature, which made her a Burden to herself, and to
look upon her Heart as a Lump of Pollution, a Sink of Filth, a Mass of Sin. How
greatly did it humble her to observe the Condescensions of divine Grace under
all her Infirmities? What Grace, and such Grace to me, to unworthy me, to vile
ungreatful me! There was nothing that affected her Heart so much, as the Grace
of God to such a Sinner.

Her Patience was very observable under all the Chastisements of her heavenly
Father: She would often profess her unfeigned Submission to all his Discipline;
this (says she) or any other Method, Lord! to take away Sin; this Flesh shall
bear it, and this Spirit shall not repine at it; this is a part of thy
Covenant, and I am thankful for it; thou have done me good by Afflictions and
wilt do me more, and therefore I will glory in them -- And under the unkind
Treatments of some, whom she had studied to oblige to the uttermost, and whose
Interests she had often espoused, to the apparent Prejudice of her own, she
showed a very exemplary Carriage, by keeping the Possession of her own Mind,
and kissing the Rod that lashed her, and rendering Good to them for all their
Evil. Indeed, these were Trials that sat closest to her of most others; but by
the Grace of God she was Conqueror over all, she eyed God in all, and ever
referred her Cause to God.

As to this World, she was very thankful to God for the good Provision she had
in it, but often protested she would never take this for her Portion, since God
had offered Heaven and himself to her. The Cares, and Encumbrances, and
Vexations, but more especially the Sinfulness of the World, had wholly weaned
her Affections from it, and caused many restless, and almost incessant Cries,
to be delivered out of it. She was never elevated with its Smiles, unless in
Thankfulness to God; and never dejected at its Frowns, unless she apprehended
Sin as the Cause. Her Mind for the most part, was equal in every State, because
she was always longing for her heavenly Country and Inheritance: How often
would she wish, Oh! for those Realms of Light, and Love, and Purity!

Her Love to the Souls of others was manifest, by her Instructing, Examining,
Reproving, and Advising them upon all occasions. There were very few could
escape her (after some Acquaintance) but she would know whereabouts they were
in Religion; and when she had conversed with, she would earnestly pray for them
in her Closet, and be greatly Thankful when she found any Impression made --
She constantly bewailed the Ignorance, Impiety, Profaneness, and Immorality,
she saw or heard of, in any; but in a more especial manner, the Insensibleness,
Carelessness, and evil Practices of the Seed of the Righteous, Children of
Prayer, of Providence, and Vows.

Her Love to the Godly could not but be observed by all: She delighted greatly
in their Company, as looking upon them the excellent of the Earth, how mean and
contemptible soever they appeared to others: She loved them as the Children of
God, and Fellow-Heirs of the Kingdom; would diligently frequent their
Praying-Meetings, and always promote some spiritual Conversation, which, if not
forwarded by others, was a Disappointment and Grief to her. We often (by her
Diary) find her praying, that her Visits may be made profitable to herself and
others; that precious Time might not be wasted by empty Chat, but that they may
be helpers of each others Faith and Joy, and may have some comfortable Talk of
the Kingdom: She often bewai^ed it, that the Communion of Saints, which was an
Article of the Christian Creed, was so much forgotten by most Christians: And
sometimes, when she returned from unprofitable Company, would complain, That
though she had struck Fire so often, yet it always fell upon wet Tinder.

Her Zeal for God was manifest, in promoting his Worship, and every probable
method for public Service; having the Interest of God and Religion much more
at Heart, than any private or selfish Interest whatever.

Her Charity to the Poor was known to many, especially to the Household of
Faith, whether to Natives or Foreigners: She spared no Pains, and grudged no
Charges (in her Widow-State) to carry on her Designs, for the Relief of
miserable Families, exiled for Religion: For erecting of Charity-Schools, to
Educate the Poor; for the Maintenance of Ministers and Candidates; and for a
Stock of Bibles and Practical Books, to be distributed as she should see
Occasion. So many long and expensive Journies she had taken in promoting these
charitable Designs amongst her Acquaintance, that she had sometimes this
pleasant Remark upon herself, I have acted the part of a Beggar so long, that I
am now almost really one myself -- She very much approved of every one's
devoting a certain part of their Estates to pious and charitable Uses; for
then, says she, they will not grudge to give out of a Bag that is no longer
their own. And as to such as had no Children, she thought it was reasonable
they should appropriate a fourth Part of their Neat Profits (as well as she) to
such necessary Purposes.

Her Faith in Christ, and Dependence on God's Covenant, was the daily Exercise
of her Soul: Her first and principal Care was to clear up her Interest in
Christ, and the Promises, in which she was cautious and exact: She then
prepared and digested a very choice Collection of Promises, suited to every
State, Duty, Relation, Frame, Temptation, and Difficulty of Life. This was the
Food of her Faith, always prepared, and from which she had constant Strength
and Comfort: She grounded her Prayers upon these, took her Arrows out of God's
own Quiver, pleaded with God from his Word, and thus wrestled with him in his
own Strength, for herself and others, in every Ordinance, in every Business, in
every Circumstance and Turn of Life. Her Diary shows what fast hold she took of
God by his Covenant-Promise; and how she kept her hold, sometimes hoping even
against Hope, 'till she had baffled Temptation, conquered Corruption, and
surmounted all her Difficulties. The Reaches of her Faith after Christ, her
Solemn Dedications of herself to him, and steady Recumbency of Soul upon him,
as her only Rock and Refuge, were such as did not appear in common Christians.
It might well be said of her, O Woman! great is thy Faith! And it was often
said unto her, Be it to thee even as thou will.

CHAP. VI. Of her Walking with GOD.
WHEN she speaks of this in general, she says, it always implies a living as in
his Sight, in Conformity to him, and Communion with him. That a Christian
walking with God must be humble, under a sense of his own Vileness, and God's
great Condescension; and close, and steady, and persevering, and lively, and
cheerful, in opposition to Sluggishness and Melancholy -- And her own Practice
very much corresponded with her right Knowledge of the Duty. If we observe (by
her Diary) how she lived in a daily Awe of God's Omniscience, in holy
Meditation of him, in humble Expectations from him, and in constant Devotedness
of herself entirely to him.

She always began her Day with God, by consecrating her first and freshest
Thoughts to him, that she might guard against Vanity and Temptation, and
worldly Discomposures, and keep her Heart in Tune for the following Duties of
the Day.

She always accounted the Morning, not only a Friend to the Muses, but also to
the Graces, and found it the fittest Time for the best Services -- She never
(or very rarely) entered upon any worldly Business, 'till she had begun with
God, and consecrated the first Fruits of the Day to him in her Closet, by
Reading, Meditation, and Prayer, before Family Worship; often urging on herself
the words of the Psalmist, My Voice shall thou hear in the Morning, in the
Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up.

When Reading, Singing, and Prayer in the Family was over, she constantly
withdrew again to her Closet, and ordinarily spent most of her Morning there:
She first lighted her Lamp (as she expressed it) by Reading the holy
Scriptures, for the most part with Mr. Henry's Annotations; diligently compared
parallel Texts, and took a great Pleasure in Synchronizing the History of the
Bible, and reducing Things to their Place and Time: She then poured out her
Soul to God in Prayer, with constant regard to the Intercession of Christ,
would often bitterly bewail the wanderings of her Heart in that Duty, and plead
Covenant-Grace and Faithfulness, and so finish her Morning Work with some Hymn
of Praise, and giving herself an Account of all in her Diary.

Through the rest of the Day, she walked with God, and carefully observed her
goings; avoiding the occasions of Sin, watched over her Heart, and guarded her
Lips; accustomed herself to holy Conference with others; was frequently lifting
up her Heart to God in ejaculatory Prayers or Praises, upon any Occurrence.
When at any Time she had been surprised by Sin, she presently reflected,
confessed, repented, and had fresh recourse to the Blood of Christ, and
solemnly engaged to God for greater Circumspection for the future.

In the Evening (as early as she could) she called herself to an Account for
all that had passed in the Day, and again stated the Account in her Diary:
Having opened her Heart to God, and committed herself and her All to him, and
sung to his Praise, she then cheerfully joined in Family Worship.

CHAP. VII. Of her Behavior with others.
THE People of God were always the People of her Choice; but she was often
obliged to keep Company with others: When she expected to Visit, or to be
visited by any, she frequently begged of God his Grace, that she might order
her Conversation aright, that she might not partake with others in their Sins,
but know how to reprove them; nor suffer others to trifle away their Time, but
know how to employ them: She quickly observed the Gifts and Graces of others,
and endeavored to draw them out to her own Advantage: She always valued the
Conversation of Ministers, Physicians, and Persons of Reading and Ingenuity,
especially such as had the greatest savor of Religion.

She often visited the Sick, and relieved the Poor, and blessed God that she
was in Circumstances to give rather than to receive. And when (in her
Widow-State) she had sometimes given to the last Penny, (through the ill Payments
of Tenants) she often observes that speedy Supplies were sent in a very
unexpected Manner, As if giving to the Poor were the readiest way to bring in
her Debts.

Of all Company, there was none more offensive, or grievious to her, than
Tale-Bearers and Tatlers: She could not forbear reproving them, and often
frowned them out of her House: She had Business enough (she would say) of her
own, and therefore did not desire to intermeddle with her Neighbors: She durst
not defame others, or take up an evil Report against them, or countenance those
that did: She was never more palled in Conversation, than in hearing what
others did, and what they had, and what they said; what Dresses were worn, what
Entertainments were given, what Company was present, and what Discourse passed
amongst them; and therefore would often say, How happy would it be, if we might
Talk of Things, rather than Persons?

CHAP. VIII. Of her Afflictions, Losses, and Difficulties.
HER worldly Losses (especially in the latter part of her Life) were many and
very great; but, she would say, The World is not my Portion, and therefore
these Losses cannot be my Ruin. I have All in GOD now, and shall have All this
restored again, by one means or other, if not to myself, to those that shall
survive me, if God sees it good for us.

She was frequently exercised with Afflictions, even from her Youth. The
Inclemency of the Air where her own Estate lay, and many of her pious Friends
and Relations lived, often necessitated her Remove to distant Places. But
whenever exercised with extremity of Pain in Head or Breast (her usual
Complaints) she always submitted with exemplary Patience and Silence, to the
Sovereign Will of God; justifying him in his severest Discipline, and often
saying, She would not for all the World, but she had been afflicted.

CHAP. IX. Her Redemption of Time.
SHE greatly valued her Time, and especially the Seasons and Opportunities of
it, in which the Interest of her Soul was so nearly concerned, and thought she
could never do enough of that Work, in which she took the greatest Pleasure.

She would often say, she would not lose her Morning-Hours with God, though she
were sure to gain the whole World by it: She grudged that the poorest Labourer
should be ever found at his Work before her. And even from her Youth, agreed it
with her Servants, under great Penalties upon herself, that she would rise
every Morning at Four of the Clock, for her Closet: Which was her Practice (as
I have been told) from the Eleventh Year of her Age; and at Five (to my
Knowledge) if Sickness or Pain did not prevent her, for betwixt Twenty and
Thirty of the last Years of her Life.

She carefully endeavored to improve the Day in Company and Conversation with
her Friends, was always well furnished with Matter of useful Discourse, and
could make very happy Transitions from worldly to serious Talk: B^t yet would
often complain of the Lo^ of much precious Time in giving and receiving Visits;
and say, she could not be satisfied with such a Life, wherein she could neither
do nor receive Good, but must keep to her Closet and her Book -- She often
remarked it in her Accounts, entertained very kindly at such and such Houses,
but no good done to herself or others.

CHAP. X. Her Changes of Life, and Relative Duties.
SHE often prayed that Affection might never biass her Judgment, but that
Reason and Religion might govern her in every State and Turn of Life.

Her first Marriage was to Griffith Lloyd, Esquire of Hemmingford-Grey, in
Huntingtonshire, on the first Day of February, 1667, in the twenty-third Year
of her Age: He was a Gentleman of good Reputation and Estate, of great
Usefulness in his Country, whilst in Commission of the Peace; and afterward as
a Reconciler of Differences, and common Patron of the Oppressed: He was one of
a very active and generous Spirit, a Person of great Piety, and singular
Temper, and steady faithfulness to his Friends. They lived together about
Fifteen Years (to April 13. 1682.) with such a mutual Love and Pleasure, as to
be taken Notice of by all their Neighbors; envied by some, and gloried in by
others, especially their own Relations.

Her second Marriage was to my self, on May 29. 1697. but with what Care, and
Fea^, and cautious Procedure she managed the same, let her own Diary say: Sure
I am, had not she, and some of her particular Confidants, been fully satisfied
of the clear Conduct of Providence in the whole Affair, from first to last, it
could never have come to pass: What solemn Addresses did she make to Heaven
upon this occasion? And how solemnly did she adjure others to do the like? And
how Impartially did she compare God's Answers to both? What her Yearly Remarks
were upon this Day, is a Pleasure to me to find in her Diary, but does not
concern others.

As to her Relative Duties, she made great Conscience of them, and was very
Exemplary in them.

It was not possible (I think) there should be a more Observant, Tender,
Indulgent, and Compassionate Wife than she was: It was never in her Temper to
desire any greater Authority than God had given her.

I cannot, but with great Affection (and let others pardon me in it) read over
her constant and too solicitous Concern for me; and how many Hours and Days of
Prayer by herself (and by her Procurement) with others, were observed upon my
Account, for the Recovery of my Health, and Continuance and Success in my
Ministry: To which, I am persuaded (under God) I owe my Life, and many
Instances of Grace in the Course of my Preaching. It has grieved me to think,
how many weary Days, and waking Nights, and hazardous Journies, and anxious
Thoughts, the ill State of my Health has caused her from Year to Year.

Nor can I, without great thankfulness to God, reflect upon the many Comforts
of our Lives, our mutual Endearments, and unbroken Affection to each other: The
Peace and Pleasure we have had, without the Allay of any one Quarrel, Passion
or Dispute, for almost twenty-three Years together, which, next to the Grace of
God, was chiefly owning to her singular Prudence, and Patience, and the
excellency of her natural and christian Temper.

Nor must I forget, what others have never known 'till now, with what Meekness,
and Humility, and Submission, in the most Obliging, as well as Inoffensive
Manner, she has sometimes hinted what she suspected amiss in my Conversation
and Conduct: Innumerable Infirmities, no doubt, she industriously covered; but,
in Tenderness of Affection to me, she would never let any such Sin lie upon me,
which she thought might be observed by others, or prove any Blemish to my
Profession.

In one thing she was apt to be smart upon me; and that was, for not dealing
faithfully with her in the Slips I observed in her own Conversation; and would
often say, she left that Guilt upon me, which I observed in her, and she not in
herself: But I hope my Conscience can answer for me against that Charge.

As a Mistress, she was very careful in the Choice of her Servants, where she
could have Choice: Was always afraid of Strife and Contention in her Family,
lest she should be ruffled in her own Spirit, and the common Interest of
Religion obstructed by intestine Jarrs and Disaffection: She never took any
into her Service, 'till she had solemnly prayed to, and pleaded with God, and
submitted herself to his Direction: Whenever she treated with any, she did not
only acquaint them with the Business of their Place, but also with the
Religious Orders of the Family, to which she had their explicit Consent: When
once Admitted, it was her first and constant Care to enquire into the State of
their Souls, to instruct and catechize, to reprove and encourage; to warn them
of the Snares and Dangers of their Age, and Place; and to enjoin them to take
Time for Secret Prayer, reading the Scripture, Meditation, and Self-Examination
-- She always charged it as a Duty upon herself, to talk over every Sermon they
heard together, especially on Sabbaths, and to Inculcate that upon them, in a
particular manner, in which she thought they were most concerned: She sometimes
took an Account of them together; (...) at other Times, when her Health and
Strength would allow it, she examined them singly, and apart, that such as
could remember but little, might not be discouraged by those that could do
better: And that she might have a fairer opportunity of closer Application to
their particular State, as she saw Occasion. By this Means, she became a
Servant to her Servants, and took Pleasure in all her Pains with them, though
oftentimes to extreme Faintness. Her Servants themselves will own, what natural
Care she took of them in Sickness, as well as Health. And her Diary will
abundantly prove, how Incessantly she prayed for them, and suited her Prayers
to the particular Exigences of every State. How often do we find her there
Mourning over the Unteachableness of some? And melted into Tears for them, and
lodging her Appeals with God, as to the Sincerity of her Endeavors to have
done them good; and rejoicing over others, that God had answered her Prayers,
and blessed her Instructions, and brought them under the Bonds of the Covenant,
and planted them in Families and made them Blessings there. I cannot remember
any that were ever brought under her Care, but had learned something of the
Method of a Sermon, before they left her; and very many, whose Memories were
improved so far, as to bring Home all the particular Heads of two Sermons in a
Day, though many. Whenever she inclined to part with a Servant, she always
consulted God in it; would then take the^ into her Closet, and very
pathetically advise them, and teach them a proper Conduct of Life, and that
they might be acceptable in other Services. And such was the Success of these
her Religious Methods, that I know not of any one Servant she ever had, but
was, first or last, under some Awakenings of Conscience, and Spiritual
Convictions, and seeming Resolutions for God and Religion, however they wore
off afterward. It is common with some of them still, upon every Occasion, to
speak of their Mistress's Care of them, and Prayers with them, when the Family
was left with her, as in the necessary Absence of others, it often was.

If we consider her, with respect to her other Relations, we shall find her a
constant sharer with them in all their Joys and Sorrows: A more sympathizing
Spirit is very rarely to be found; she never ceased to pray for them, as Parts
of herself; was often Mourning for their Sins and Afflictions: Rejoicing in the
Piety of some, and thirsting after the Conversion and Return of others. When at
a Distance from any, she had a peculiar Talent in Writing to them: And such was
the Pertinency, Pathos, and Pungency of all her Letters, that every one valued,
and was greatly pleased with them. When present with others, she was always
feeling which way their Pulses beat; insinuating herself into their Affections;
instilling something proper into their Minds; observing, persuading, warning,
and directing, as she thought it necessary. She has an honorable Testimony in
the Consciences (I believe) of all her Relations, who honor her Memory, and
own her a Pattern of great Integrity, Piety, Ingenuity, and Faithfulness. Her
Animadverting upon her Friends (in the manner she used to do it) was so far
from offending, that it was oftentimes very pleasing to them; begat in them
some aweful regard to her Person, and a true Decorum in their own Lives.

CHAP. XI. Her Veneration for the Ministry, and Love to Ordinances.
OF all Orders of Men, she had the greatest Love for the Ministers of Christ:
She coveted their Company, in order to improve by it, and was never better
pleased than when her House and her Table were filled with them: She would
diligently enquire of them in all her Difficulties, and as carefully observe
all their Directions: She honored the Aged, Learned, and Grave, with a double
Honor; was often grieved for the Infirmities of others, but despised none for
their Weakness, if she apprehended they were faithful to God and his Interest,
and had been useful in their Places.

She thought it her Duty to pray for Ministers above all Men, inasmuch as they
are concerned in the Welfare of so many Souls. That this was her Practice,
appears by her Diary, from one end to the other; and particularly, from one
Remark she makes of a single Omission; I have heard a Sermon says she, to Day,
but I forgot to pray for the Minister, and I sped accordingly: Which shows,
that it had been her Custom to pray for every Minister before she heard him.

She looked upon God's Tabernacles as truly Amiable, which she had often seen
filled with his Glory, and where the Blessing had been commanded out of Zion:
She constantly attended upon Ordinances, if not prevented by insuperable
Difficulties, and would always be present at the Beginning of them: And would
often blame the Remisness of many, and say, Surely they felt not the Wants that
she did, or else they could not live in such common Neglects. There was no
Preaching so pleasant to her, as that which alarmed her Conscience, ransacked
her Heart, and came closest to her in such Matters where she susspected herself
most.

CHAP. XII. Her Concern for the Common Interest of Religion.
SHE greatly disliked a selfish and narrow Spirit, and had always a very
generous and Christian Concern upon her for the Public: She had many
melancholy Thoughts upon the account of the Impiety and Profaneness, the
Immorality and Licentiousness of the greatest Part of the Nation; and of the
Indifference, Formalities, and visible Declension and Apostaces, that were
found amongst the rest. Many private Days, either in her Closet, or in some
unobserved Appartment abroad, she devoted to Fasting and Prayer, either upon
the account of the Distresses of Foreign Churches, or the Dangers of our own,
and ordinarily concluded each, with some Instance of God's Favor, and further
hope in his Mercy -- She would always bless God, if Authority appointed any
Public Fasts, and look upon them as Presages of Good to the Church and Nation:
She bore her Part in them with great Fervency and Zeal, after she had very
solemnly prepared for them the Day foregoing. The Searches she made into her
Heart and Life upon those Days, were deep, and strict, and impartial; her
Confessions were particular and full; her Sorrows pungent and afflictive; her
Resolutions for future Conduct, were very solemn, but always with a special
Dependence upon the Grace of God to make them effectual* And the Success of
those Fasts is frequently observed in her Diary upon proper Occasions.

CHAP. XIII. Her Usefulness to the Bodies and Souls of others.
BESIDES her common Concern for the good of all Men, and her special Regard to
her Family and Relations, she would show upon all Occasions (when her own
Health would allow it) a very compassionate Concern for the Sick and Afflicted.

Though in some Cases it was very noisome as well as dangerous, yet she took
Pleasure in visiting the Sick, as it gave her an opportunity of enquiring into
the State of their Souls, and impressing upon them the Concerns of Religion,
and improving the Alarms of God upon their Consciences* for future Watchfulness
and Reformation. And however Matters appeared upon such private Enquiries, and
Conversation with any, she would always after that bring them into her Closet,
and spread them before the Lord, and pray them over, and observe what Answers
she had to such Prayers.

How much Knowledge and Skill soever she attained in the Practice of Physic,
by long Observation, Conversation, and Experience, yet she was always very
distrustful of herself in any Chronical Cases, and hardly persuaded to direct
without better Advice, 'till the Poverty of Patients, and their great
Importunity compelled her to it. When God gave her Success, she always
acknowledged it with great Thankfulness to him, that he should own so weak an
Instrument in the Preservation of humane Lives: And the Instances of such
Successes, in most Places where she had lived, were not easily numbered.

CHAP. XIV. Her Reproving, and taking Reproofs.
SHE always abhorred Flattering others, or being Flattered herself: She thought
that as evil Speaking moved Men to Sin, so evil Silence left them to Sin.

It was not to be uneasy to others, or Officious in Matters that did not
concern her, or because she thought herself more capable of it, that she
Reproved any; but because she thought others, for the most part, very sinfully
neglected it, and the Honor of God, and Credit of Religion, in the mean time,
suffered by it: And that she, as well as others, was bound in Conscience, not
to hate her Brother, by suffering Sin upon him, but in any wise to Reprove him
for it: She took it to be an Evidence of true Christian-Love to others; and
therefore having begged of God to guide her Tongue, to move their Hearts, and
bridle their Passions; she would, in great Compassion, in a proper Season, with
much Plainness and Freedom, tell them of their Faults, and plead with them
thereupon. The Younger, and her Inferiors, if the Case required it, were told
of them with some Severity and Smartness; but others with much Gentleness,
Meekness, and Modesty. If at any Time it so happened, that some Ministers
themselves were treated with this Freedom, she would always preface her
Addresses to them, with the Apostle's Words, Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat
him as a Father, and young Men as Brethren. And I have known some Instances of
great Success by this modest Plainness, for which they have thanked and
honored her so long as she lived.

Nor was she more ready to give, than she was to take Reproof: She ever
reckoned them her truest Friends, that took the greatest Freedom with her in
these Respects. And when in any thing she appeared to be blameworthy, would
she with an ingenuous Concern acknowledge it, and often profess that she had
not taken Notice of it in herself, but would endeavor a greater Circumspection
for the future.

CHAP. XV. Her steady Adherence to Protestant Dissenters.
SHE had a true Affection, Value, and Honor for all serious Christians,
whatever were their distinguishing Names and Characters: If she observed the
Reality and Power of Godliness, and a calm and peaceable Temper in any, she
equally approved and loved it, whether under a Cloak or Cassock.

Yet she statedly joined herself to Dissenters, and was never ashamed, or
afraid to own or plead for them.

It was not her Education that determined her in this Practice, but a faithful
Regard to Scripture and Conscience, and uncorrupted Antiquity: She read, and
considered, and fully weighed the Controversy; and after her most diligent and
serious Searches for Truth, she concludes at last, I must be a Dissenter in
Principle still, for ought I can see to the contrary: The Way I am in, so far
as I am capable of judging, is that which comes nearest to the Scripture Rule,
and by much the freest for my Conscience, and the Way wherein I have found most
of God, and therefore the Way in which I must still walk: Far be it from me to
Censure others, and be it as far from others to Censure me; they differ as much
from me, as I do from them, and therefore it is but just that we should have
equal Charity.

If any worldly Interest could have biased her Judgment in this Matter, she
wanted not Temptations, when in a single State, from Persons of very
unblemished Characters and prosperous Circumstances, (Sir P.T. Sir F.M. and B
-- p S.) if she could have been easy in the Communion, of the Established
Church: But she chose rather to suffer Affliction with poor Dissenters, than to
lose the Liberty and Peace of her own Conscience, for any Titles of Honor, or
worldly Grandeur, which she looked upon but as Toys and Bubbles, and therefore
what should never Charm her out of her Profession.

She saw many Clouds on the Dissenting Interest then, and shared in the
Sufferings that befell it since: But was moved at nothing, unless it were at the
unsteadiness of some that were dear to her, who forsook (as she thought) their
own Mercies, by leaving the Way in which they had their first Acquaintance with
God and themselves, and their first Tastes and Relishes of Religion.

She would often take Notice with what Scorn and Contempt, and Malignity, it
was treated by some, and how shamefully discredited by others, that had
seemingly embraced it: But nevertheless, was always fully persuaded, that God
would Patronize that Interest as his own, revive it out of its Bondage, and
make it Honorable at last: That all the Prayers, and Tears, and Treasures, and
Bonds, and Sufferings of its noble Confessors, should not be always forgot or
unrewarded -- She would often repeat the Words of the Prophet (to poor ejected
Ministers) Though your Brethren that hated you have cast you out, and said, Let
the Lord be glorified, yet he shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be
ashamed.

CHAP. XVI. Her Work on Sabbaths, and at Sacraments.
SHE always called the Sabbath a delight, and looked upon it, as the Holy of
the Lord, and Honorable: Was very uneasy if worldly Business was not
dispatched in Time, that the Sabbath might be remembered before it came: She
endeavored to awake with God, and possess her Mind at first with proper
Thoughts to fit her for following Work: She presently engaged in secret Prayer,
to bespeak the divine Presence and Assistance through the Day; then Read and
Sung, as she had Time, before Family Worship: When that was over, she retired
again to Read, and Sing, and Pray, and had a constant Remembrance of the
Minister, for Assistance and Success amongst the Hearers --

As she was early up on Sabbaths, so she was always early out, and her whole
Family with her, not so much regarding the Dressing of her own Dinner as the
Advantage of her Servants Souls. When Public Ordinances were over, she always
withdrew for Meditation; then examined her Servants, and inculcated upon them
what they had heard: Then prayed in her Closet, before Family Worship; and
after that filled up the spaces of the Evening with spiritual and edifying
Discourses.

She was never more pleased in any Ordinance, than in Singing, having a natural
Love to Music, and a good Understanding and Skill in it. But yet a Concord of
Voices could not satisfy her, without an Accord and Harmony of Heart with what
was Sung. And hence was it, that we find her in her Diary this smart Remark
upon herself, That in such a Place I was so charmed with the Novelty and
Sweetness of the Tune, that I had sung several Lines, before my Heart was
concerned in what I did.

As to Sacraments, she always showed a most religious regard to them, in
Obedience to the Precept, and in Sense of Interest; and for twenty three Years
together, I never knew her Absent from one, if bodily Illness did not prevent
her.

Nor durst she ever rush upon that sacred Ordinance without serious and solemn
Preparation for it: She carefully examined and proved her Graces, her Faith,
Love, Repentance, etc. and could not be satisfied only with former Trials: She
searched, and made diligent Search into her Heart and Life, to find out her
Sins, in order to confess and bewail them before God in secret. For this
purpose, she read over the Commandments, and some Expositor upon them, that she
might better know the Duties required, and the Sins forbidden in each, and the
several Aggravations of them: She then read over her Diary, and more especially
reflected upon the Sins she had been guilty of since the last Sacrament, that
she might watch and pray, and guard against them for the future.

When she had prepared herself thus, and endeavored to excite her Graces for
proper Exercises, she durst never trust to her own Preparations, but only on
the Strength, and Merits, and Mediation of Jesus Christ, for Acceptance and
Success. In his Strength she was strong, and went forth with longing
Expectations of much Grace and Consolation in that Banquet of Love, and seldom
failed of what she had prayed and hoped for.

She then attended the Ordinance, in an humble Sense of her own Vileness, with
an awful Regard to the Majesty of God, and great Fear and Care, lest any
worldly Trifle should carry off her Heart from its proper Work: Her Faith fixed
upon Christ, as the proper Ob^ect of it, to receive, and apply, and appropriate
him, and to live upon his Fullness: Her Love was engaged with great Intention
and Ardour upon God the Father and the Son, for the Discovery of such infinite
Grace and Love in the Redemption of Man, and the Blessings of an everlasting
Covenant, that she often, in her Diary, appeals to God concerning the Sincerity
of her Love to him; Lord! if I love not Thee, I love Nothing; I love not my
Friends, I love not my self, I love not any Thing in Heaven or on Earth, if I
love not Thee -- Her Heart was melted for Sin, when she looked upon him, whom
she had Crucified; and upon all the Scenes of his Sorrows, from God, and Men,
and Devils: Nor did any thing invigorate her Prayers, and Resolutions, and
Covenants, against it more, than the Love of God to her, and her Love to him.

When Sacraments were over, she would not suffer herself to be diverted, but
constantly withdrew to her Closet, to bless God on her Knees, for what she had
done, and for what she had received; to beg pardon for her Failings, the
continuance of present Impressions, and Grace to be faithful for Time to come.

CHAP. XVII. Her private Devotions.
SHE was a Praying Person indeed, and one that gave herself to Prayer, and in
the Scripture sense prayed always: She would often say, She would not be hired
out of her Closet for a thousand Worlds: She never enjoyed such Hours of
Pleasure, and such free and intimate Communion with God, as she had there; and
wondered how any could live Prayerless, and deprive themselves of one of the
greatest Privileges allowed to Men.

Her Gift in Prayer was very extraordinary, as many have observed, when the
Care of the Family was left upon her: And, as I myself have observed, when,
upon some very peculiar Occasions, we have prayed together in secret, I could
not but wonder at the Freedom and Aptness of her Expression, at the Warmth and
Vigor of her Affections, at her humble Confidence in God, and strong
Expectations from him when she poured out her Soul to him in that Duty: With
what a Satisfaction and Cheerfulness she would leave all her Complaints, and
all the Difficulties, Grievances, and Distresses of others with God, thus
casting her Burdens upon him, and finding Rest to her Soul in him.

She never determined any doubtful Cases, with respect to herself, her Friends,
or her Family, 'till she had first asked Counsel of God; and then whatever she
resolved in her Closet, upon that Direction was always unalterably fixed.

Many gracious Returns of Prayer, she often observes in her Diary; sometimes
God answered her whilst she was upon her Knees a Praying, either in the
Recovery of the Sick, whose Lives were despaired of by others; or in Ease to
the Pained, when in their Paroxisms and acutest Agonies; or in Comfort to the
Dejected, when under the blackest Apprehensions, and most dismal Confusions; or
in Relief to the Poor, when in the greatest Pl^^ges; or in extinguishing the
Violence of Flames, when the Towns where she lived, have been in the greatest
Danger of being consumed: In the last Case (of Fire) she always retired upon
the first Notice of it, being capable of giving no other Assistance, as she
used to say, but by Prayer. At other Times, she observes how long she waited
for God's Answers: At such a Time I prayed, and at such a Time God graciously
heard my Prayer; and concludes, Surely this was Mercy worth praying and waiting
for: She would often Remark the Seasonableness of God's Mercies, and how much
better they were, in God's Time of giving, than they would have been at the
first Time of her asking: And sometimes she would very thankfully own the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, in denying her Prayers, when she found she had
asked for what had not been Honorable for God to give, and would have been
hurtful to her, or others, to receive.

It cannot be said, upon how many Occasions she thus addressed herself to God,
or how often she opened the Treasuries of Grace, by this Key of Prayer. It is
most certain, this was her daily Refuge, and her daily Relief, in every
Distress: If she did not always gain what she asked in Temporals, she owns she
had an Equivalent, or better; and God fully satisfied her of the Reasonableness
of such Denials. And as to her Trials and Temptations, she acknowledges it with
great Gratitude to God, she had either present Deliverance, of Grace sufficient
(for the most part) to resist, and Power at last to overcome.

CHAP. XVIII. Of her Motto.
HER Hebrew Motto in her Closet for many Years, was, (...) i. e. Thou LORD
see me -- Plainly intimating her awful Adoration of God's Omniscience, and
that her Eye of Faith should be always upon him; and she would ever act under
the Influence of that Persuasion that God was present, whether in Reading,
Praying, Medicating, Examining, or Recording the solemn Transactions that
passed betwixt him and her Soul in that Closet.

She had this always before her, that as often as she entered in, and as long as
she continued there, and in every Duty she performed, it might be a Memorial,
that every Sin, and Folly, and Instance of her Departure from God, was
perfectly known to him: And every penitent Confession, Tear, and Groan, was in
the Sight, and under the Hearing of an Omnipresent God: And every Prayer and
Purpose, and Vow, and solemn Obligation made, and renewed, and ratified there,
was sacred and awful, as under the Eye and Notice of an All-seeing and
Heart-searching God. And this she often found had greatly restrained her from
Sin, and excited her to Duty, and disposed her for comfortable Communion with
God, and kept her Heart from Trifling in her Closet.

CHAP. XIX. Her Preparations for Death, clear Evidences and strong Consolations.
IT was the great Work of her Life to get ready for Death: She began it early,
and went on with it daily, and with great Success: She often reflected upon the
several Ages of her Life, and very penitently bewailed the Sins of her
Childhood and Youth, as well as of her riper Years, to the last; and could
never be satisfied 'till God spoke Peace and Pardon to her Soul, in the Blood
of Christ.

It was in her Youth (I think about the 20th Year of her Age) that God gave her
the sure Pledges of his Love, and clear Evidences for Eternal Life: And for
fifty-six Years after, to the Day of her Death, she lived in comfortable
Communion with God, and joyful Expectation of the promised Inheritance: She
carefully laid her Foundation at first, in God's Covenant with Christ, and with
Sinners in him, and her own hearty Consent to that Covenant; and then built
upon God's Promises, Christ's Righteousness, Merits, and Mediation: And would
often say, Though it should sometimes Rain in at the Roof, she must not therefore
pluck up the Foundation; or suspect her Safety from every Shock or Flaw, or
Failure in the Course of her Life and Actions.

She did not only believe, but knew in whom she believe, and to whom she had
committed herself, and her eternal All, and with the greatest Satisfaction and
Assurance left them there.

She was always complaing of a corrupt Nature, and many times of an evil Frame
of Heart, and Departures from God in Times of Duty, but still she anchored her
Soul on Christ, and kept hold on God's Covenant, and her hope was steadfast
even to the end.

She was often taken into God's Banqueting House, where she had the Displays
of his Banner of Love. What special Remarks has she in her Diary upon some
Days! and upon some Hours, as giving her greater Pleasure than all the rest, --
O joyful Morning never to be forgot! -- Blessed Day of God, a Day of Heaven to
my Soul! -- This Day in God's Court, was better than a Thousand! -- O how the
Face of the dear Redeemer shone on his unworthy Dust in that Ordinance! O the
Fullness of Joy, and ravishing Consolation of the Spirit of God this Morning in
my Closet! -- Was ever such Grace as this? What shall I render to the Lord?

She lived long at the Gate of Heaven, and knew where she was; and therefore no
wonder she so earnestly desired to enter in: How often would she say, The
blessed Hour will come! -- How fain would I enter into the Heavenly Courts? --
When shall I see God? -- O how I long to get out of the Tents of Kedar, and to
be at Rest! -- Come Lord Jesus! come quickly! I love my Relations on Earth,
yea, I love them dearly; but I cannot but love my God and Savior, and love
them better: Oh! for that Life of Purity! and Love! and Joy! where every thing
will be as I would have it.

CHAP. XX. Her last Sickness and Death.
FOR some of the last Years of her Life, she found herself in a declining
State, and was always waiting for her Dismission: The Clearness of her Thought,
Vigor of Mind, and Strength of Memory, held to the last; but as she was often
loaded with bodily Infirmities, and had many wearisom Nights and Days appointed
her, which still made her the more desirous of her eternal Rest.

While we were both afflicted together, the one with Nephritick, the other with
Hysteric Pains, it was advised by Physicians, that the one should make use of
Bristol Waters, the other of Bath, which were though it the properest Remedies in
both dangerous Cases. In pursuance of these Advices, in Autumn, 1719. we set
out for Bath, and spent the Season with good Success: At which juncture of
Time, just as we were leaving Bath, I was much surpised with very unexpected
Overtures from a Congregation in Bristol, to succeed in the Pastoral Charge,
upon the Death of their late Minister. How improbable soever my Compliance with
this Call seemed to me at first, by reason of some peculiar Circumstances that
perplexed it, yet I durst not dismiss it without some Thought: And the Call
being still urged, and the State of my Health growing worse, and threatening me
in a little Time with a total Disability for further Service in my former
Station, I resolved to refer myself entirely to the Conduct of Providence, and
the Choice that God should make for me. And by much Prayer, and careful
Observation thereupon, we both apprehended it our Duty, to make a Trial of the
Waters there for six Months, and then to be at our Liberty to return, if we
thought fit. Upon this Concession we set forward for Bristol, on the Fourth of
April following, and arrived there the Eighth. And to the third of May we both
of us enjoyed a very comfortable Measure of Health, and were purposing in a few
Days for Bath, though she often opposed it, alleging, that she found no need
of it, having never been better for Seven Years past, then she had been since
she came to Bristol.

But the Providence of God soon altered the Scene, and hung our Harps upon the
Willows. On the same third Day of May, as we had just entered into a Friend's
House, where we were to Dine, she was immediately struck with an exquisite Pain
in one Ear, which presently caused such a Deafness, as to render her
unsociable; upon which, she desired to withdraw and went Home. Her Deafness
continuing, a Pleuretick-Fever soon followed, and after that a Lethargy, which
deprived us, in part, of what Heavenly Conversation we promised ourselves from
her upon her Deathbed.

In former Illnesses, when she herself, and every one else thought her under
the Sentence of Death, she was always so far above the fear of it, (though
naturally of a very timorous Spirit) that she triumphed over it, and sang, O
Death! where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? Thanks be to God, who
gives me the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ -- I am fighting, says she,
under the great Captain of my Salvation, and can bid Defiance to all the Powers
of Hell, and boldly encounter Satan in his own Kingdom -- I am now in the dark
Valley, but I see Light at the end of it, and the Gate of Heaven stands open; O
let me go into endless Love, and live that sinless Life: When Lord! shall I
come to thee? Almost gone and yet I cannot go -- O, my dear Friends! why so
Cruel! What should I live any longer for? My Work is done, and why would you
not have me go to Rest? Give me up, I entreat you, to God, and do it
cheerfully? My constant Prayer has been, to be always waiting and hoping, and
this is my present Frame -- It is an abundant Answer to all your Prayers for
me, that I have Peace, and Hope, and Comfort, without any doubt, or fear, or
any suspicious thought of my Salvation -- I am sure I have not flattered myself
in the Trial of my State, nor been superficial in it, and am fully persuaded
that God will not deceive me -- I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine. It
is but one Push, and better now if God sees fit, or else I shall have all this
to do again -- Father! into thy Hands let me commend my Spirit -- With what
Pleasure would she feel her faultering Pulle, and say, When will thou b^^t thy
last? It is not Death yet, but blessed be God it is pretty near it -- I hope I
shall not return to Labor, and Sorrow, and Sin again -- O that I had the Wings
of a Dove, then would I fly and be at Rest -- She would often add, We have need
of Patience, that after we have done the Will of God, we might inherit the
Promises.

In her last Illness she had the same steadfast Faith and strong Consolations as
before, but a more difficult Passage than was expected: We thought, by her
Lamentable Groans for some Days together, that her Pains had been very
exquisite; but when it was asked her, she ordinarily answered, I feel but
little Pain, only am Restless. Her cold and excessive Sweats continued for many
Hours together, and were not more profuse in themselves, than affecting to
others.

Though the Nature of her Distemper forbad her to speak much, yet what she spoke
was always Rational and Spiritual; Her Mind was not only calm and sedate, but
every placid and cheerful, as often as she awaked. O my God, says she, I wait for
thy Salvation -- This Day I hope to be with Christ in Paradise -- The Promises
of God are all yea and Amen in Christ Jesus; and here my Faith lays hold, and
here it keeps it is hold.

On the eleventh of May she pray's us, with much entreaty, to detain her no
longer by our Prayers, but resign up her Soul to God, which we did with as much
earnestness as ever we had asked her Life before: Such are God's Ways to wean
us from our dearest Enjoyments in this World.

About ten a Clock that Night, the poor Prisoner was released from all her
Bonds, and obtained a gloriour Freedom: Her Heaven-born Soul (with its mighty
Guard) took Wing for the Realms of Light; has heard its Euge, and received its
Crown, and is for ever safely lodged in the Bosom of its dear Redeemer.

She died without any Regret, unless it was that she had lived so long; and has
left a Name behind her (more precious than that of Sons and Daughters) to the
Honor of her Sex, Relation, and Profession.

She had often made it her Prayer to God, That she might come Honorably off in
her last Encounter; that neither Religion might be discredited, or her Friends
discouraged by any thing that should then be observed in her. And as God had
abundantly answered so many of her Prayers before, so he very graciously
answered her in this; for such were the free and lively Exercises of her Faith
and Love, that they wholly triumphed over all her Fears, and carried her with
full Sail to Glory: And to the great Comfort of her surviving Friends, she left
this World at la^^ without either Sigh or Groan, and with the pleasantest Smile
that was ever observed in her Countenance before.

HER DIARY Abbreviated and Reduced UNDER SOME Proper HEADS.
CHAP. I. Her Self-Examinations.
1690. Sept. 27.] WHEN I was Nine or Ten Years old, I first began the Work of
Self-Examination, and begged the All-searching God to try and discover me to
myself: And I think, I may date my Conversion about that Time.

I have kept an Account of the Trials of my self since 1670. And though my
undutiful, ungrateful Returns have filled each Examination with just and bitter
Complaints, yet upon twenty Years review, to the Glory of free Grace, I take it
the Case has stood thus with me.

My Judgment has esteemed God, even his Holiness, the most desirable Good; and
I would be a Partaker of his Holiness, whatever it cost me; and have generally
been willing of, and thankful for the smartest Discipline, in hope of that
desired Effect, and still would be more holy, though by Sickness, Pain, or any
other Affliction; having always esteemed Sin the greatest Evil, and now for
many Years my bitterest Affliction, though in some Hurries, have not felt the
most sensible Mournings for it.

As I have chosen God for my Portion, so I stand by my Choice, and rejoice in
it above all the World; and through his Grace assisting, resolve never to forsake
him, though I die for it (which I shall never do, without extraordinary
Assistance, having no natural Courage.) I have chosen the Way of God's
Precepts, as the Means to this End, and have deliberately, entirely,
rejoycingly, given myself to Jesus Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life;
and prefer his Love to all the World: And by many sweet (though too short
Experiences) have found it lifting my heart up above all earthly Enjoyments,
and sometimes making it joyful under Smart, Pain, and Trouble; which has hinted
the Power of his prevailing Love, and made me hope it will cast out Fear, if he
calls me to Martyrdom.

My Hope is in God, through Christ; and all I have I would part with, rather than
his Love and my hoped Interest therein.

My Desires are after him above Gold, Health, Friends, Honor, etc. I long for
fuller Communion with Father, Son, and Holy Spirit here, and the uninterrupted
Communion of Heaven.

God knows, I fear nothing so much as Sinning, and losing his Favor.

My Love, says with Austin, Let me see thee, O Light of my Eyes! Joy of my
Spirit! Gladness of my Heart! Life of my Soul! great Delight! sweet Comfort! my
God! the whole Glory of my Soul! Desire of my Heart! let me embrace thee,
heavenly Bridegroom! let me possess thee!

My Sorrow and Anger are usually most intense against Sin, though too violent
Torrents often spent on Sufferings.

My Hands, Feet, Head, and Heart, follow not as I would; my Life is stained and
blotted with daily Sins, yet God knows I loath them; with daily Defects in
Duties, yet have I a respect to all God's Commandments: O wretched Creature!
Sin still dwells in me: I cannot do the things I would; but I would, upon any
Terms, be rid of Sin: I sin daily but I sorrow for, and hate it daily, and fly
to the Fountain opened, which alone can cleanse me.

I forsake and renounce the Devil's Dominion; and as I have received the Lord
Jesus Christ, so I watch and pray, and strive to walk after his Will, and holy
Example.

The World gets near and about me, and I am too ready to follow and serve it is
Pleasures, and Conveniences; but it is more solid Joy to my Soul to say, That
Christ is mine; than to be able to say, This Kingdom, this World, yea, all that
I ever loved, were still mine.

My own Righteousness I abhor; the best, most perfect, most sincere Service I
ever did, or hope do, gives me no Hope of Acceptance, but in and through Christ.

O Lord, Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, thou art my Portion; whatever
this Flesh would have, Lord! let me be thine at any Rate; truly I am and would,
and will be thy Servant, by Choice and Consent, whatever thou give me, or
whatever thou deniest me: Oh! how bountifully has God dealt with me, while he
has loved me from Death to Life.

Lord Jesus! thou art my Way unto the Father! my only Mediator! I have accepted
thee to each and rule, as well as to save my guilty Soul; I cry as loud for
purging, as for pacifying Grace: I am willing to be kept from mine Iniquity; I
except no Darling from thine Iron Mace; I ask no Mercy, nor would I show it any.

I approve and subscribe to all thy Precepts, as Holy, Just, and Good, as best
for me, at all Times, and in all Conditions: Let my Heart be searched, and I
will love the Word that does it -- I account thy Law my Liberty -- Thou have
drawn, and I have run -- Thou have made it my Love, Delight and Study, and it
is the sincere bent of my Life to keep thy Word: Oh! that I might keep it to
the End!

1692. August 29.] Examining my Heart by Mr. Allein's Rules, I find many sad
Defects in Duties; much distance from God, my Joy and Portion, and an
Inclination to a vain, vexing, and polluting World; yet I cleave to Christ, my
Righteousness, and my Soul rejoices in God my Savior.

Sept. 3.] Setting close to the Duty of Examination, my Heart was deeply
affected with it is wandering from God, amazed and sad at the Inconstancy of my
Love to God, which I take to be the Cause of my wandering Thoughts; I still
mourn over it, adoring the Patience of God, and his infinite Mercy, in Christ,
to such unstable and vile Dust; I abhor the Fountain and filthy Streams of my
polluted Nature; I fly to the Blood of sprinkling: Lord! shall I never be
cleansed? How long shall vain Thoughts lodge within me? I will still wait at
the Pool, where thou have, and wilt wash me in thine own Blood; and if I cannot
find less Sin, I will bless thee if I find more Grace, and wait, 'till by
Death, thou presentest me spotless, who have loved me, and already washed me in
part.

1693. March 3.] Comparing my Heart with God's Word, I have still good hope,
through Grace, that Sin has not Dominion there. Sad Strength and Prevalency -- I
confess, bemoan, abhor, and beg Cure of by any Method; yea, so vigorous are all
the Lusts of my depraved Soul, I know not which to call (long together) my
Master-Sin; what I most suspect, I most hate, watch, resist, beg divine Aids
against, and rely on the Lord Redeemer for Strength to subdue: I acknowledge
his Mercy, Power, Faithfulness, Patience, to me unworthy Wretch, from my Birth
to this Day; first sweetly overcoming my Will, by his invincible Power, and
since bearing all my ungrateful Backslidings; preventing, aiding, comforting,
conducting, chastening, recovering, and feeding me in all Places, Relations,
and Conditions.

1695. July 23.] I examined my Heart, and found much Dross mixed with its
purest Gold; and the holy Spirit of Grace and Supplication helped me to confess
and beg Pardon with some suitable Affection, and indicted many Petitions for my
self, Family, and Friends; all which I have left with my merciful Intercessor,
in Faith and Hope of a gracious Answer.

Ibid 27.] I examined and found much Folly and Unevenness in my Conversation,
my Wanderings from God, great Unsteadiness in my Covenant; yet through free
Grace, no allowed ill Behavior toward my dearest Lord Redeemer: I abhor all
the Ingratitude, Dullness, and Frowardness of my Spirit, to my wise and
gracious Father; I humbly begged Pardon and Peace in the Blood of Christ, and
believe the Atonement.

1696. Jan. 1.] Reflecting on part of this Year's Diary, there appears the
greatest divine Goodness and Bounty to the most unworthy and sinful Wretch: A
multitude of gracious Answers to my poor Prayers, and great Appearances of God
in public Ordinances; yet many afflictive Strokes, but followed with Support
and Usefulness: So that my very Soul confesses, in very Faithfulness, I have
been and am afflicted -- And now on the whole Year, I acknowledge God has been
faithful to his Covenant in all things, and I heartily renew my
Covenant-Obligation to him, and beg Strength to walk more stedsafely.

Ibid. 4.] Examining my Heart and Ways, I have good Evidences, through free
Grace, that God is my Covenant-God in Christ, and has made good his
Covenant-Promises to me, in convincing, converting, comforting, guiding,
strengthening, and rejoicing my Soul in his Ways; and in healing Infirmities
and Pains; conducting me, supplying my Wants, supporting and keeping my Mind
quiet under Troubles; sanctifying Corrections to wean me from this World,
giving Victory over Corruption; removing a Thorn in the Flesh, for which I be
sought him often, in Tears and sore Affliction; and so seasonable, as to
evidence my sincere Hatred of Sin, before the Smart of his Rod taught me
Wisdom, for which my Soul adores him.

August 4.] Oh! how much better than Life, or any thing in Life, is the
Loving Kindness of my God? So sweetly, so evidently, so abundantly manifested
to my Soul, this Morning! Lord! how free, how full, how humble, and ingenuous
my Confessions, when thy holy Spirit indites and assists poor hardened Dust?
What a View of Sin can thy Remembrance give forgetful Rocks? What melting Shame
and Sorrow? What Tears of Love? What Delight? What Panting after more Grace?
What calm and joyful Acquiescence in relucted Discipline? What cheerful
unreserved Resignation? Lord! how long have I struggled in vain for what thou
have of free Bounty given in one Hour? Lord! keep it for ever on my Heart.

1697. March 20.] I fell upon the Search of my Heart before the Sacrament, with
respect to the Nature and Effects of true Faith; and find, that I am glad of
the Discovery, even of such Truths as most directly strike at my strongest
Heart-Sins, and violentest Appetites: I am glad of the Threats that powerfully
work on me to reform me, as of the Promises that refresh me: I believe them all
in Thesi and Hypothesi, and wish their Energy in cleansing, as well as
comforting, so far as I can discern.

I embrace the Promises with delight, and find through free Grace, a spiritual
Taste and Relish in the Food of Life; such, as sometimes, quite weans me from
the Love of the World, gives me great Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy
Ghost, and Love to Christ's Appearing -- I find good Hope through Grace, that I
live by the Faith of the Son of God, who gave himself for unworthy me; for I do
delight in his Word, above my appointed Food: It has been, in some Measure, of
an Assimilating Nature; I hope I have attained to some, and pray and labor for
more Growth in Universal uniform Obedience to all God's Commands -- I depend on
the perfect Righteousness of Christ, and must own from the Beams of that Sun of
Righteousness, a gracious Illumination and powerful Inclination upon my Soul
unto all Good -- A tender Sympathy, for the most part, with the Church of God,
even when my particular State inclines me to a contrary Temper -- A free use of
spiritual Senses, seeing the Light of God more perfectly and frequently than
usual, hearing his Word with delight, tasting his Mercies with Comfort; I feel
and mourn under the Wounds and Pressures of Sin; I love divine Truths, not so
much because proportionable to my Desires, but because, conformable to God, I
resolve in all Estates to rely on God's Mercy and Providence; I wholly renounce
all Trust in myself, or any Concurrence of my own naturally in any good; I
build not my Hopes or Fears on Man, or make them or myself the Rule or End of
my Desires; I indulge no known Sin; I have no known Guile; I allow not the
least Sin, or appearance of Evil; I hate the first Risings of it, and bitterly
regret the least, the first, the most unavoidable Thought that Rebels against
the Law.

March 28.] Glorious Morning of this Day of the Son of Man: Lord! what is all
this World to me? Thy darkest Paths appear light and pleasant to my Soul: Thy
Will be done with all my Heart: All thy Ways are, and have been holy, just,
good, and true: In very Faithfulness thou have afflicted; in tenderest Bowels
pitied, spared, and born with thy peevish ungrateful Child; and yet say,
Thou art mine, and I am thine; and have filled my Soul with Joy, Adoration,
Love, Praise, Resignation, Acquiescence, Dependence, Hope, Trust, above what I
can remember I ever enjoyed: O that present Experience may strengthen my Faith
in future Combats. Amen.

School. June 22.] A cheerful Morning, my Heart appealing to God, that Christ in
my Choice, Religion my Business, the Holy Scriptures my Rule, Heaven my Design,
the Saints my beloved Companions, the Ordinances my Delight, when I meet God in
them, my Sorrow when I miss, etc.

1701. (...) In a serious Review on the Year past, I find (...) more abundant
Mercies to me, a poor, vile ungrateful, unprofitable Creature, than I could
ever have hoped for, notwithstanding the peevish ill Temper of my Heart in the
Beginning of it. How soon did the Lord pity, and pardon, and renew the
Evidences of his Love to my Soul, and drew out my own and others Hearts to pray
for d. Mr. B's Health, and heard, and answered sensibly and speedily, and has
continued his Health, in great Measure, ever since, etc.

Nov. 15.] Having begged the Assistance of the holy Spirit, and examined my
Heart as to divine Teachings, I find God has powerfully, plainly, sensibly,
affected my Heart; influenced the Means, my Mind, and Will thereby, in some
good Measure sanctified my Heart, renewed his Image, mortified Sin by hearty
Conflict and Sorrow, rather than by Victory and Triumph: That Sin lives not an
easy Life in my Soul, but is usually checked in its Birth by the Holy Spirit,
or followed with Shame and Sorrow, when not early stifled; and I am restless
'till Pardon and Peace be evidenced -- The Spirit of God I hope, is dwelling in
my Heart, by some tender Sympathy with Christ's Interest and Members; by
Assistance to, in, and after Prayer; by some, though too little
Heavenly-mindedness, and by practical Obedience agreeable to the Word.

1702. Jan. 3.] Having earnestly begged of God to search and try me; and if
there were any Deceit in my Heart, I could not discover, that he would show it
to me: I consulted the Scripture, and awed my Heart with the Thoughts of the
great Judgment before which I am shortly to appear; and then examined myself
seriously, faithfully, and impartially: And if I can know myself, the chief
Design of my Life, for more than thirty Years past, has been to approve myself
unto God: I have searched with Fears of Mistakes, and am willing to know the
worst of myself, and thankful for the most searching Sermons and Books: I hate
what Sins I find, and would be rid of them: My Heart begs Sanctification as
frequently and earnestly, and is as desirous of it as of any Blessing of God's
Covenant; and has mourned more under the delays of Answers of Prayer for this,
than for any other Mercy I have sought. The inward, secret, and first Risings
of Sin in my Heart, have been the most bitter Affliction of my Life: Nothing
have I deprecated more than being plunged into my own Filth; and been thankful
for nothing more than Prevention or Recovery. Though I have mourned for the Sins
of others, yet my greatest Hatred and Mourning has been for my own Sins, which
Hatred has been followed with true Edeavours to mortify them; yet I am doubtful
whether my Heart be so sensibly touched for God's Dishonor in Company, as my
own: In my Obedience, I find an Uniformity, as to the Object: I have a respect
to all God's Commands; and as to the Subject, my whole Soul and Body, so far as
renewed, moves the same Way: I trust on Covenant-Aids, and resolve to cleave to
God in all Trials: My Heart has been swayed by God's Command, beyond and
without any other Argument: The little I can do, has been hearty, as to the
Lord: When God enlarges my Heart, or uses me for any Service, my Soul has been
humbled -- I can do no more, no better, yet thankful for any thing, and freely
own all has been of his free Grace: That the bent of my Heart is for God, I
conclude from my inward desire joined with Love: This Inclination has been
habitual, no sudden Pang: I have daily purposed and endeavored a Conscience
void of Offense toward God, and Man; still aiming at more Degrees of Grace, to
walk more circumspectly: Yet much Weakness and Wanderings in Duties to God,
Inclinations to Partiality toward Men: Not so sensibly touched with Sorrow as
I ought, when in Company I hear the Name of God taken in vain, nor have I often
dared to reprove it, which makes me avoid Company, to the Censure of Morosness:
Yet I do hate the Sin, even where I do love the Company: I humbly hope my
hatred of Sin is of the whole kind, in its first Motions, least Degrees; as Sin
against God, more than for it is Trouble and Danger: I delight to be nothing in
my own Eyes, and love to be laid low before God: I have and do love God, when
smitten in my nearest Comforts, or lust, and have blessed God for every Twig of
his Rods: I love the Person of Christ, as his Benefits, and all that bear his
Image, though in nothing else lovely: I love his Service, even when I fail of
Comfort in it, and prefer his Image on my Soul to all his Benefits -- [ Jan.
4.] I dare not pursue my Examination farther; my Head failed, my Body fainted,
and I could pray but shortly with the Servants; my wandering Heart, weak Head,
and feeble Body, renders me very unable to pursue my Duty: Lord! strengthen,
unite, and assist to better or accept feeble Attempts.

Feb. 7.] Upon the best Search I can make, if I were now at the awful Bar of
God's Tribunal I must say, so far as I can judge of my Heart, it does hate all
Sin as Sin: It is and loves to be humbled before God; it loves God for every
Rebuke of its Lusts; it loves the Person of Christ in all his Offices, and
every Soul that bears his Image, though in nothing else lovely; it would approve
itself to God, when no Eye sees it; it chooses the Image of Christ more than all
Comforts.

March 24.] The good Spirit of God witnessed with my Spirit, to the marks of
true Repentance; in hating Sin as Sin, forsaking Sin, and flying to Christ for
Cleansing: Sorrow for Sin has been expressed by Tears, when Sense of pardoning
Mercy has frequently melted my Heart: It has been more general, voluntary,
and lasting, than for any Affliction; I therefore conclude God has pardoned my
Sin for the Glory of his Sovereign Will, Mercy, Riches of Grace, Goodness,
Truth, and Power, and has chosen, redeemed, and will receive me to Glory
hereafter.

1703. Jan. 1.] In reviewing past Examinations, I have good hope that my State
is safe; but comparing myself with Years past, and the Means and Mercies since
enjoyed, I suspect my growth in Grace.

1704. Dec. 31.] A most unworthy, froward, weak, and unprofitable Servant, yet
not cast out of God's Family, and Care, but received fresh Instances of his
Truth and Faithfulness to his Covenant-Promises; aiding and strengthening my
Soul in what I depended on him for, pardoning my peevish Spirit, encouraging my
Hopes of Life more abundantly: I confess my Ingratitude, Dullness,
Unfruitfulness under richest Mercies and Means of Grace, and begged Pardon, and
Help to renew my Covenant in Christ's Strength, and more growth in Grace, and
Meetness for Glory, of which I have some joyful Expectation that tunes my Heart
to Praise.

1705. Nov. 24.] Searching into the sinfulness of my Thoughts, I find great
Vanity, Inconsistency, Unfixedness, to my great Shame and Loss, and get little
Victory even now when freed from many vexing Cares, formerly unavoidable: My
Passions sly, and strong, and peevish, disquieting my Spirit too often on little
Temptation -- My Words too idle, careless, injurious, or not so profitable as
they should be --

My Spirit too slothful and dull. My Time little improved for God's Honor, my
own or others good. My Mercies more used for self than God -- My spiritual
Seasons add little to my growth: I am short in all personal and relative
Duties; my secret Duties seldom vigorous, or the Impression of public, lasting
I seem to languish and decay in my spiritual Vigor, ordinarily to my Shame and
Grief: Lord! pardon, and strengthen the things that remain.

1706. Feb. 21.] I heard a good Sermon on Reconciliation with God, and have
good hope, though Grace, all Hatred is ceased, and Friendship with God begun in
my Soul: That God, who has first loved me, has circumcised my Heart to love
him: I love all his Works, and hope he accepts mine, through Christ: I love his
Children, and have received many Love Tokens from him, and do unfeignedly give
myself to him: I bless the Lord for his transcendant Love, and beg, above all
Blessings, the Evidences of it; and act Faith on Christ for maintaining
Friendship with God: I renounce all contrary Friendships, and desire always to
please God, whatever I suffer for so doing.

October. 25, 26.] I set closely to examine my State, and begged of God to
discover whatever Mistake I might have been under in my former Trials, which I
reviewed, and the sad Instance of -- Still a fearful Apostate, did perplex my
Mind; his Knowledge of the Law was great; his Examination seemingly serious,
and with great Application of Mind; his cleaving to Christ seemed hearty, etc.
But I must try by Scripture, and have no reason to believe that will deceive
me, and I beg of God my Heart may not deceive me: I have reviewed the Trials I
have made, and cannot find I am mistaken -- Mr. Vines distinguishes the true
Christian from an Hypocrite thus -- His hatred to Sin, and liking to God arise
from an inward Nature or Principle. Lord! my Conscience does not reproach me
when I say, I hate the whole Species of Sin, and whatever appears so to me: I
love the whole Law of God for it is Purity, and my Soul pants daily for more
Conformity to it. -- The inward Man of a Christian is made up of Christ. Lord!
Thou know the little Knowledge of, and Faith in, and Love to, and Tastes of
Christ, I have had, have made me hate and mourn for Sin, and love Christ, and I
do fight against Sin in his Strength -- I have felt the Teachings of God, and
do love my adorable Lord Jesus, for himself -- My Repentance and Sorrow for Sin
is most pungent, when under the Power of Love -- I desire Grace for Service, as
well as Salvation; true Grace casts out Self-Love: It comes from and draws the
Soul into Union and Acquaintance with Christ: Lord! I love my Soul and Body
when they love and serve thee: I hate that either should dishonor thee: I am
willing to deny myself any thing for thee; yet I fear too much Indulgence of
Self, by Sloth, and Love of Ease -- To love and seek God for himself is above
the Power of all common Gifts: O Lord! thou have made my Soul to love thee for
thy glorious Excellencies and Perfections, as well as thy redeeming Love, though
not always so distinctly as I would -- From these and such like Evidences, upon
the most diligent Search I can make, I dare not but conclude, I am a sincere
Christian, and no Hypocrite.

December. 7.] On many Years Experience, I can discover no Guile in Covenanting
with God from 1689 to this Day: I still willingly, freely, constantly,
rejoicingly renew the same Covenant, and depend on it for Grace and Strength to
walk more evenly, constantly, and suitably to it: I bewail the frequent
Interruptions in my Communion with God, through my Sloth and Wandering; the
frequent Foils, by hated indwelling Corruptions: I fly for Refuge to the Hope
set before me; here will I cast my Anchor, Lord! let it secure my Rest, when
Storms in Life or Death arise.

1708. April 30.] I searched my Heart and Ways by reflecting on many Years
past; and from all, have good Hope and Evidence still of my true Conversion to
God, and can appeal my continued Resolution to be his ever since 1673. --

1709. April 11.] My Head is so dull and torpid, I can do little at
Heart-Examination; but so far as I can discern, I have, on most mature
Deliberation, embraced Christ in all his Offices: I entirely yield up myself to
his sanctifying and disposing Will, and bewail my short Performances, as my
greatest Affliction, and am willing to die for Cure: Lord! fit me for, and
hasten me to eternal Purity and Glory.

June 12.] Lord! thou know I love all that bear thy Image, so far as it
appears, though differing from me in lesser Things, though injurious to me: And
though I love not Thee, or them, as I ought and would, yet I aim at perfect Love
in Obedience to Thee.

December. 20.] In Meditation on the holy Law of God, my Heart consents to it,
and I acknowledge God my sovereign rightful Owner and Ruler, and Felicity: And
I would rather be more conformed to his holy Nature and Laws, than have all the
Honor and Pleasures this World can afford: I hate and mourn over the Obliquity
of my corrupted Nature, more than any Pain, Shame, or Loss, or earthly Cross I
ever felt: I adore, and love, and joy in Jesus, my Redeemer, more than all the
temporal Mercies I enjoy. The Lord knows that this is thus.

1710. Nov. 17, 18.] I reflected on the Covenant I have long since made, and
often, with Joy, renewed, and was never willing to retract: And I still find my
Grief, and Sorrow, and Shame for my natural Pollution and Estrangement from
God, exceeds all the Sorrow and Trouble I have for any Loss, Cross, or
Disappointment, in this World, though not so passionate, yet more durable: And I
do esteem it the worst Misery I feel, that I can love God no more; that I can
honor and serve him no better -- I am not a willing Subject to Satan, I resist
his Motions, I abhor his Rule, and fly to my Redeemer for Strength to overcome
all his Temptations -- I do not consent to, nor indulge the Interest of the
Flesh: I struggle against its Dominion: I would allow it nothing but what tends
to make it more serviceable to the Glory of God, and the Good of my immortal
Soul -- I don't take up with this World for my Portion, I had rather be denied
any Thing in it, if I may thereby enjoy more of God: I less desire it is
Honors, Riches, and Pleasures than formerly: I thankfully own thy Bounty, O
Lord! in supplying my Wants, in sweetning my nearest Relations, and a thousand
Comforts I enjoy: But, Lord! I will not take this for my Portion, I had rather
lose them all than the Light of thy Countenance, so far I know my Heart -- I do
daily, thankfully, joyfully accept of and rely on the Lord Jesus Christ, as
offered in the Gospel, to justify my poor, miserable, guilty Soul, that has
nothing in it but Sin and Misery, and must perish for ever, if thou will not
pity and save it; but hopes to cast it is Crown at thy Feet, and cry, Grace,
Grace: Lord! I accept thy Government with equal Desire, as any of thy Benefits,
and would be saved from my Sin, O Lord! thou know: I except not against thy
Cross, though thou call for Life itself, or any thing in it; but I am afraid of
my poor feeble, timorous Spirit: Lord! I rely on thy Strength never leave me to
desert thy Interest, whatever it cost me. Lord! Jehovah! Father! Son! and Holy
Spirit! I still give myself to Thee, to thy Praise: Lord! thy Glory is my
ultimate End: All I am, or have, or can do, is of the Lord, and from him; with
Joy and Thankfulness I recognize thy Right, and yield up my self to the
Sanctifying Power of the Spirit, consenting that thou should cleanse my
unholy Heart in what way thou please, and write thy Law there, and make me
Obedient: And to thy Disposing Will, as the Rule of my Patience, that thou
should subdue every murmuring Thought at any thing thou do with me, or
mine: Lord! I am a Fool, thou art Wise, let thy Will be done. Amen.

1713. March 22.] I cannot deny the Marks of a true Love to thee, O Lord! I do
value thee above all, and do verily hope that I can part with all for thee: I
am sure I have a Love for Ordinances, and a Thirst after thy self: That there
is no Pleasure so great to me as Communion with thee; no Grief so lasting and
so pungent, as a Distance and Strangeness from thee: I have not ordinarily and
hard Thoughts of thee; I am sure I allow of none: I have a filial Fear of
offending thee, especially when smiled on: I can mourn heartily for grieving
thee, when thou evidencest pardoning Love: My studied, allowed, and most
pleasant Meditations are of thee: I choose thy Interest, and would ever prefer
it to my own: I love thy Memory, and to commemorate thy dying Love at thy
Table: I do commend thy Love to all others; but Oh! that it were more feelingly
and fervently: I am grieved when thy Name is profaned, though not Valiant enough
in resenting the Affront: I love thy Image, but yet too apt to despite where
stained and faulty: I would obey all thy Commands more sincerely, freely,
constantly, in the most difficult Articles, and most dangerous Seasons; Lord!
help me: Eternal God-Man! I love thy Person, as thy Benefits: I love thy sweet
Disposition, and aim at Likeness, but get too little: I adore thee as Son and
Servant of God, as my Redeemer, Husband, and Advocate; I would submit, and be
faithful, loyal, and loving: I adore thy Suitableness; feel my Need, and accept
thee in all thy Offices: I adore and love thee for all thy Graces, and strive
to imitate them: I adore and love thee for all thine Ordinances, wherein thou
have many a time showed me thy unparalleled Love.

1715. June 18.] In searching my Heart, I still find good hope through Grace,
that I am thy Child, though the most unworthy one that could ever call thee
Father: And how often do I forfeit the Relation, and all its Privileges! by my
unruly, undutiful Carriage, and unfilial Temper of Spirit: O Lord! I own thy
Right to rule and dispose of me; and I own it my Happiness: I have solemnly,
willingly, cheerfully devoted myself to thee, to be taught thy Will, with a
full Resolution to obey and submit; to be healed of the Plague in my Heart, by
any Method thou shall choose: I rely on thy Satisfaction and Intercession alone
for Pardon and Reconciliation: I give myself to thy Direction, with Resolution
to follow thy Guidances always; and to thy Disposal, with Resolution to
acquiesce in all thou do: Yet Lord! my treacherous Heart rebels; obeys not
thy Precepts; frets at thy Methods of curing my sinful Soul; unapt to
understand thy Guidance, or negligent in following; and so fretful and pevish
at thy Disposals, as if it would be its own Carver, and base Self its own
Center: O Lord! I am amazed, ashamed, and sorrowful at these remaining Seeds of
the old Apostasy; this Pride Ingratitude, gratitude, Folly; Lord! when shall I
be healed! Wash me thoroughly; and make me clean: Renew thine Image, and it is
enough, whatever else thou deniest me: I willingly bind my Soul to thee against
all Sin, more especially this Sin that does so easily beset me, the Displacency
of my Spirit at thy wise and holy Disposals: Lord! I own it is most unjust,
unreasonable, ungrateful, yet I cannot conquer without thy Strength, and in
that I covenant never to indulge it -- I hate my uncharitable, peevish
Resentments of Injuries, and hardness to forgive and forget: Lord! increase my
Faith, that I may do better: I now will covenant in thy Strength to walk more
God-like, holily, and righteously, and be more inwardly and universally good in
all Places and Relations, in closer Communion with God, in Ordinances and
Providence, and to watch against all Sin, and be more diligent in all Duty:
But, Lord! without thee I can do nothing: I am oppressed, Lord! undertake for
me.

1716. June 30.] In searching my Heart, In have still good hope that my Beloved
is mine, and I am his, though still a poor, weak unworthy, defiled Child,
loathing myself, hating my Sin, ashamed I get no more Victory, under such Means
so many Chastisements, and more Mercies, but still find such Bubblings of
Corruption on every proper Temptation: Yet bless the Lord, O my Soul! for
speedy Recovery, and gracious Aids of the holy Spirit calming my Mind, and
raising my Affections above this World -- The Righteousness of Christ is
sufficient, and I depend on it for Pardon, Healing, Conduct, Perseverance to
Eternal Life -- I would be at thy Disposal, not my own, though too often my Flesh
would have what thou see good to deny -- Whatever Decays of Nature I feel, or
must yet suffer, let thy Grace grow and increase daily more and more, 'till
thou bring me to Glory: Many Dangers and Difficulties are still in my Way home:
Flesh and Heart may fail, the World frown or flatter, my Heart is deceitful,
the Devil subtle and malicious; but thou, Captain of my Salvation! have filled
that Character to all, that ever truly trusted thy Conduct: On thee my Soul
relies; O fail not to perform all thy Work in and for me, 'till I cast my Crown
at thy Feet, and sing Hallelujah to the Lamb for ever.

Sept. 22.] My Head was clouded, and much indisposed for Self-Examination; yet
in reviewing my Heart and Life since the last Sacrament, I find the Frailty of
my own Resolution, soon after the renewing of my Covenant; but since June 21. I
have found my Redeemer's Strength sufficient for his weakest Children; his
Pity, Pardon, and Patience to the most Unworthy: I long to feel the powerful
Influences of thy Love, making it more natural to me to love my Brethren, though
injurious, frail, ungrateful, as I have ever been to thee; to pity, forgive,
and do good to Enemies, as thou have done to me, while I was thy Enemy: Lord!
slay all Enmities in my Soul, and help me to resist every angry Resentment
faithfully in thy Strength: O holy Spirit of Love and Peace, rule in my Heart.

December. 31.] On review of the Year past, I must still witness to the Truth and
Mercy of God, who has not turned away from doing me good: I acknowledge with
Shame and Sorrow, the Pride, Passion, and Peevishness of my Spirit, under
slight Temptations, against Convictions, penitent Confessions, Resolutions,
Prayers, and Tears -- Innumerable, vain, and sinful Thoughts, and Words, yet
the Lord has spared me this Year also: Has restored my Hearing, continued my
Sight, preserved my Limbs, provided abundantly Food and Raiment, given me more
Health than many of my Age, eased my Pains healed my Diseases, many a time,
when I cried to him: But, Oh! the rich Grace and Mercy to my Soul, when almost
overwhelmed with Sorrow, to find such Remainders of Sin in myself, and others,
dear to God and me -- Very sweet the Sabbaths, and all the Sacraments of this
Year have been -- Many gracious Answers of Prayers for myself and sick Friends
-- And now, Lord! I acknowledge the Sweetness of following thy Conduct, relying
on thy Strength, depending on thy Word; the Pleasantness of thy Ways, only my
slips in, or stepping out of thy Paths, have made all the Bitterness of this
Year -- Lord! enable me to keep the Resolution of the Year; to leave every
Circumstance of my future Life and Death to God; to be watchful over my Words;
to do to others as I would they should do to me -- I acknowledge the Multitude,
the Seasonableness, the Extensiveness of the National Mercies, in Answer to the
Prayers of a poor Remnant, who cried to God by themselves, and obtained a
double Defeat of the Enemies at Dumblain and Preston, while praying on the
Lord's Day: But, Oh! how short our Returns of Praise and Duty.

1718. June 14.] Very dull and drowsy all this Day: I have often covenanted to
be the Lord's, with Soul and Spirit, Will and Affections, but yet how
treacherous and unprofitable: I have renounced Sin, Self, this World, yet how
often overcome by them? I have taken Christ Jesus, the Lord, on his own Terms, to
love, and obey, and serve him, but how short in all? I have given myself to God
through Christ, to the sanctifying Operations of the Holy Spirit, to the
commanding Power of his Law, and the Disposals of his Providence, and would be
to him a Praise, yet how often to him a Dishonor? Lord! I still resolve in thy
Strength; be Surety for thy weak, but willing Servant.

1719. Jan. 8.] I searched my Heart and Ways, and found I had been an ill
Subject to my Lord and King, but would be better; yet upon farthest Search, I
could not conclude I had been a Traitor to my dear Lord.

1720. April 30.] In searching into myself; Lord! how many of the Seven and
Seven Abominations are still in my Heart, even when they break not forth into
Words or Actions! For these I loath myself, and daily cry for Pardon and
Healing: Lord! increase my Faith in thy Power and Compassion to cleanse my
leprous Soul: For this it was I came first to, and still rely upon thee; and am
this Day devoting myself afresh to God, my Portion, Redeemer, and Sanctifier.

CHAP. II. Her Sabbath-Frames and Services.
1690. Jan. 18. GOD, that drew my Desires to meet him in the Mountains of of
Myrrh, has this Day met me there; and excited in poor Dust more lively
Desires, That my Soul would ever praise him.

1691. Sept 6.] Bless the Lord, O my Soul! who has not turned away my Prayer,
nor his Mercy from me: I cried to him under the bitterest Affliction, ( viz.)
Prevailing Corruption, and he has helped and strengthened me with Strength in
my Soul, though he leaves these Canaanites to humble me: Begging his Presence and
Blessing on Ordinances, I go forth in joyful hope this Morning -- Joyful in
God's House all the Day, while his Covenant Love was displayed, and the good
Spirit witnessed my Interest therein; with joyful Praise I spent the Evening.

Ibid 27.] Full of Pain and Pleasure: Lord! what thou will, with such
Assistance, it shall be no Burden to me: Sweet was the Word, commending Christ
as my Soul's Physician, and Faith as the Instrument of Application: Hy Heart
answering the Marks of the Healed, and yet not such lively Joy as in the
Morning.

Nov. 29.] Keep upon my Heart what thy Bounty has this Morning given thy
ill-deserving Dust: Bless the Lord, O my Soul! who has made his House the very
Gate of Heaven to me all this Day, especially in the close: Lord! pardon every
wandering Though It, and succeed my Resolutions to be more entirely thine.

Dec. 13.] O how his Presence in his Sanctuary filled my Soul this Day! I found
him whom my Soul loves, entertaining me with the Specialties of his Salvation:
Yet the poor Carcass tired, and in the Evening abated the Joy.

1692. Jan. 10.] O how his Spirit made me cry, Abba, Father! excited Love,
Delight, Praise, Resignation, Petitions for the Church, my Friends! was sweetly
refreshed by meeting God in public Ordinances, and found his Word doing good
to my Soul, according to his gracious Promise.

Ibid. 31.] Whence is this to me, that my Lord should come to, and abide with
me? So dull, so dark so dry, so hard, thus softened, made fat, enlightened,
quickened, by the All-conquering Spirit of Grace: O Lord! by this I know thou
can do all Things.

Feb. 7.] Under some abatement of Joys, that began to amaze and overcome me,
excited Desires to depart, and be with Christ.

Sept. 11.] Lost above an Hour in Sleep: Begging Pardon, and Assistance of the
Spirit on public Ordinances and Ministers; graciously heard and answered.

1693. Jan. 22.] Strong Consolation in Reading, sweet Influences of the Holy
Spirit in Prayer: My Soul followed hard after God for a Blessing this Day: And
he that taught me to pray, heard my Cry, and helped me against the Bands of
Rovers, that had like to have lost my Day.

April 30.] How lovely, Lord! were thy Tabernacles this Day! better than Life,
or all desirable therein! Lord how sweetly have thou made me to differ from
myself in the Morning! Oh! that my Dullness might never return more!

May 7.] Thy Vows, O God! are upon me, and my Resolutions to be more thine are
renewed, but the Grace and Strength to perform is thine. Lord! give what thou
command, possess what thou have purchased, and perfect what thou have begun.
Amen.

Sept. 10.] Oh! how gracious! how full! how sweet! the Answer of my poor
languid defective Prayer, in abundant Assistance in Body and Spirit to
Gospel-Heraulds, publishing freest Grace to vielest Dust; even the Holy Spirit
of Grace, trying and evidencing to my Soul its first coming to Christ; exciting
and encouraging renewed Acts of Faith: If such Joy in the outer Court, what is
Glory above!

October. 15.] Reflecting on the free and powerful gracious Conduct and Aids that
staid my youthful Slide, brought back my wandering Soul from tiresome Vanities
to God, its Felicity and Rest, and ever since preserved, supported, and
delivered me; my Soul acknowleg'd with Love and Praise the Truth and
Faithfulness of that gracious Covenant in the Lord, Mediator and Redeemer, by
which my Soul received Life, and is still held in Life, and hopes for Eternal
Life. Lord! what shall I render, even for the Smart of thy Rods, the Thorns in
the Hedges that turned back my Apostatizing Soul from Sin, and Self, and World
to God, on whom I depend for Strength to persevere in Grace to Glory.

Nov. 12.] Oh! glorious Morning of this Day, that the Lord has made! how
powerful sweet are thy secret Approaches to humane Spirits! while thou
breathest on poor dull Dust, and say, Receive the Holy Spirit; O Lord! it is
done: O let this foretaste, continue and increase this Day, and all my Days!

1694. Nov. 11.] The Lord spoke to my Heart, as my Servant read his Word: My
Redeemer said, It is I, be not afraid: My Soul answered, Call me then to Thee
through the Fire, or on the Water, and I will go: I was mounted on the Chariot of
Aminadab, and my fainting Flesh and Spirits were revived by the Consolations of
the Holy Ghost: I cried for his Presence and Power in his Sanctuary, to
Strangers and Children; and great and powerful was his Presence with his
Ambassador, setting Life and Death before us, yet the Souls I most earnestly
begged for, were ^ot moved.

1695. Jan. 20.] Joyful Morning, while Beams from divine Light turned my
Midnight into Day, I found God in all his Ordinances, choosing a Message for
one of his Ambassadors, contrary to his Intentions, and carried him through
with great Power and Vigor.

July 14.] Lord! how sweet are the Returns of thy Favor, after dark Desertion!
what can displease my Soul in all this Discipline, while thou encreasest and
helpest me to act my Faith on thy Truth, Power, and Promise: Lord! while thou
have taught me by thy Word, and helped me by thy Spirit to believe, how easy
are the Difficulties; how light the Afflictions; how reasonable the dark
Dispensations; how true thy Retributions; how clear the Mysteries of the
Gospel; how hopeful Death itself; and how certain the Promises that concern thy
Church! all which have so puzzled and afflicted my Soul of late.

Nov. 3.] I rested ill with fear of oversleeping, which gave little Advantage
to the Duties of the Day; yet going forth in Dependence upon God, I found him
present with his own Institutions to my Comfort.

1696. May 31.] A joyful Morning! sweeter to me than all the Delights this
World ever afforded: Sweet Sunshine after Clouds and Tears: My Soul pleaded
hard for a wandering Prodigal, and other young ones.

December. 6.] Reflecting on my own Sins, and shortness in all the Duties of the
Sabbath, I find Matter of Humiliation, especially in singing the Morning-Psalm,
I was so intent on the Tune, that I had sung several Lines ever my Heart went
along with the Words.

1697. April 4.] I awaked in sweet Sabbath Temper, beyond the Power of any to
give but the Lord of the Sabbath: Him I adore, on him, O my Soul! do thou ever
depend: Whoever did, or can quiet, comfort, satisfy, rejoice, and heal thee, as
he has done? Be this, Ebenezer, for ever thy Encouragement.

School. Octo. 9.] My Soul has been filled with Hope, and Love, and Joy, and
fain would have gone from my Lord's Table to the Mansion.

1699. Jan. 15.] Sweet were the Displays of God's Power to his People, awful
and terrible to his Enemies: Gracious was the Assistance to the Preacher; O let
the God of Power fix the Arrows in the Hearts of his Enemies.

1700. Nov. 24.] My Soul sought the Lord for the Blessings of the Sabbath, and
great was his Assistance to his Ambassador: Some Convictions revived in the
Congregation, and in one in our own Family: Some help afforded me in
Inculcating the Sermons on my Servants.

1701. March 23.] My Heart was much drawn out in Love to the Laws of God, as
holy, just and good: And my Soul rejoices in the Government of my dear
Redeemer, as much as in his other Benefits to me: I bewail the remaining
Disconformities of my Heart and Life, and beg every jarring Thought might be
subdued: And am thankful for Gospel-Threatnings to awe my disingenuous Spirit,
when Love cannot draw it to Duty as I would, nor keep it from what I would not.

July 13.] Very dull and indisposed in the Morning for holy Duties, 'till I
inculcated the Sermon at Noon upon my Servants: The Lord then pitied and drew
nearer to me in the Afternoon, and helped my Faith to rely on his sealed
Covenant for Life and Liveliness.

1702. April 5.] How much clearer and sweeter has my Persuasion of God's
Covenant-Love been this Day under a lively Sermon, than I ever gained by Light
of Reason -- How dull did I go out, how lively, warm and joyful did I return?
-- Lord! that did enable me to instruct my Family, and have drawn out my
Heart in Pity and Prayer for all under my Roof; bless the Labor of thy poor
Worm, and yet fulfill thy gracious Promise to Training up in thy Way, and accept
of all my Aims at thy Glory in the Son of thy Love whom thou hear always,
and all thine for his sake. Amen.

1703. October. 10.] My Beloved drew, and my Soul followed hard after him in
Family and Closet Worship: And I begged the sweet Force of his strong Charms
for all that assemble in God's House this Day; very gracious was the Lord to me
in going to and in his House, and returning to mine own; strengthening my
Memory to retain his Word, and assisting me to inculcate it on my Family; and
encouraging my Hope of better Success, by a more willing Disposition in our new
Servants to learn.

1706. Jan. 13.] Joyful Morning! God drew nearer than usual to my Soul, and the
Blessings of Abraham came on a poor Gentile, through Jesus Christ: O blessed be
God for Christ. Amen. The Day and Evening was comfortable.

1707. April 20] Sweet was this Morning's Retirement in reading Numbers XXI.
Lord! what Encouragement in looking unto Jesus, for healing the flaming Stings
of Sin in my Soul; what my Tears cannot quench, Faith in my exalted Lord can: O
send thy Spirit to be a Well of Life in my Soul: Spring up, O Well! this Day,
and cause me to sing to it, and let poor dark and defiled Souls be healed in
the Waters of the Sanctuary here and elsewhere.

Nov. 2.] Very gracious has the Lord been to me this Day; and sweet was the
Word, Prayer, and Singing, and the Minister lively in Preaching -- O immense,
active patient Being -- I was exhorted to Study, Meditate, and Talk of God's
Preservation of my natural and spiritual Life -- I lived when others died of
the same Fever -- God helped when Man could not: I deserved to die and perish:
I might have died ever my Peace had been made -- My Graces have been assaulted,
not slain: Languish'd, yet revived: God's Dishonor by my woeful Fall prevented:
Lord! that I may live more for thee, and more usefully for others: Let the Holy
Spirit dwell in me, who alone can preserve my spiritual Life; let me cast out
all that would offend or grieve him, give full room in my Soul to him, and be
fully governed by him: Love and attend thy Ordinances, observe thy Providence,
and plead thy Promises for spiritual Life and Growth -- I concluded the Day
with Thanksgiving for the Recovery of my natural and spiritual Life, and
earnest Prayer for my Sick and afflicted Friends, and the poor Servant under my
Care.

1709. March 20.] The Lord composed my Mind, and I begged more Communion with
the Father, Son and Spirit in the Worship of this Day, than yet before: And on
mature Debates with my own Heart, I desire ever to be kept in the Communion of
the Congregations with whom I still join, verily supposing their Pastors
chosen, qualified, and constituted according to Christ's Appointment; I love,
and pity, and pray for those submitting to a Yoke their Fathers could not bear,
and I hope will never be easy to them: I humbly implore the jealous God to
purge his Church from Superstition and Human Inventions; That all Terms of
Communion, Anti-scriptural and Extra-scriptural, may be taken away, and Peace
and Union follow; and the Gospel-Preachers, cast out by their Brethren, may
have abundant Recompense in the Success of their Ministry.

April 10.] I bewailed the Vanity of my Thoughts on this holy Day, wherein I am
discharged from what is my Duty on other Days: Lord! how kindly do thou allow
me Rest from vexing Vanities! but how cruel am I to myself, and ungrateful to
Thee! by undue, unnecessary Concern for Troubles on some* dear to me, which all
my anxious Thoughts cannot ease: Lord! curse this Fountain, and wither the
Fruit of my corrupted Nature, and lift my Mind upward in the public and
private Worship of this Day.

1711. Jan. 14.] The Lord assisted my Endeavors to fix my wandering Thoughts in
the Night, but too soon were they diverted in the Morning: Amazing Evil! my
Soul loves, approves, and chooses God, his Ways, his Precepts; and nothing is so
delightful to my Soul, yet I can fix on nothing of all these, but my foolish
Heart is easily interrupted with mere Impertinences: Lord! give me a wiser
Understanding, a fixed Heart, which I seek rather than Gold, but cannot find
'till thou give it.

1712. Jan. 27.] God assisted his Ministers, and helped my Memory to assist
others; and my Soul ascended in the Hymn after Sermon with unusual Flame, when
my Voice could not mix in the Consort.

1713. Sept. 13.] I awaked in great Pain, which continued, 'till in secret
Prayer I lost all Sense of bodily Pain in spiritual Pleasure, and Tears of
godly Sorrow for Sin, and Joy in my Redeemer.

October. 4.] I awaked and rose in Pain, which abated with such Tremblings,
Sickness, and Faintings, that my natural Spirits could give no Assistances to
the Joys of this Day: Yet never was my Heart more joyful, more pleased in
Meditation, Prayer, Hearing, Singing, Converse, when my Spirits were so sunk, I
thought I should have died in my Pow: How pleasant were the Thoughts of going
ou^ of that Tabernacle of Grace, to the glorious Temple above! Oh! holy Spirit
of Grace, how free, how ^weet, how powerful are thy gracious Operations!

1715. May 8.] I r^se early, and tugged long at my dull Heart in secret, but
could not reach the lively Frame sometimes allowed me; I renewed my
Self-Dedication to God, in Mr. Baxter's Words, and begged quickening Grace by
the Word and spirit, and was not dis^pp^inted.

1716. Sept. 16.] I found my dear Redeemer, my true ^^ving Way to the Father,
and for his sake I begged the Comforts and Pleasures of his Day: I diligently
sought God in secret, in Family, and public Worship, though too frequently
pestred with vain, idle, unprofitable Thoughts: amazing Evil! how dishonorable
to the God I adore! how mischievous in robbing my Soul of its chiefest Delight!
O cleanse this evil Fountain, that the Streams may be purer.

1717. Feb. 10.] Lord! how sweet has this Day of the Son of Man been unto me!
In secret Reading, and Meditation; in Prayer alone, and with the Family; in
public Prayer, Singing, Preaching, and After-reflection: O Son and Lamb of
God, who diedst for me, and have given me Life, let all my Interests ever bow
to thine; all my corrupt Passions be subdued by thee; my Life ready to be
parted with at thy Call: O holy Spirit of Grace, continue thy sweet and
powerful Influences on my Soul.

1719. July 12.] Reflecting on God's dealing with me for Fifty Years past, I
adore the unparellelled Love that first loved me; and then made me consent and
sweetly drew me into the Bands of the everlasting Covenant: My Soul was never
yet willing to depart from one Article of that Covenant: But, Oh! how often
faulty in, and short of what I have bound my Soul to do, or avoid; and still a
Captive, but not a willing Slave to Sin, World, or Satan: Jesus! thou Captain
of my Salvation, lead me on to more Victory; sanctify me more and more by thy
Word of Truth this Day -- I went out much indisposed, my Head and Heart failed,
that I could neither enjoy God nor my self, but forced to take my Bed at Noon.

1720. Jan. 17.] I arose, and begged ease to attend my Father's House, and his
Presence there, and in all the Assemblies of his Servants: God assisted the
Preacher in Public, and unworthy me, in private Instructions.

Feb. 21.] Sweet Entertainments! how excellent is thy loving Kindness, O Lord!
how gracious was thine Assistance to thy Ambassador in Public, and to a poor
Worm in Family Worship.

CHAP. III. Her Remarks on herself at Sacraments, and Covenanting with GOD.
1690. Nov. 16. O Joyful Day! whilst thou give what thou command, and
acceptest what thou give: Lord! how much Dross is mixed with my best Gold,
yet thou have eaten the Honey with the Comb, etc.

1691. Nov. 22.] While the King sat at his Table, my Spikenard sent forth the
smell thereof: God kindly melted my Heart, and fixed my Faith on the Efficacy
of Christ's Death for Mortification.

1692. March 20.] Faint, yet pursuing; dull, yet adoring; impure, yet loathing;
wandering, yet returning: Going to the Fountain opened, to be cleansed from all
Sin -- O that this Day may begin my eternal Hallelujah!

July 17.] Flesh and Heart fails, but God is the Strength of my Heart; thy
Spirit has excited ardent Desires after Righteousness: Lord! thou that workest
the Qualification, make good the Promise -- A joyful Day in the House of God,
and a joyful Banquet at his Table.

Sept. 4.] I cannot get that lively Frame of Spirit I had last Night, and
usually find in Secret, before I approach the Lord's Table: I beg and wait for
more suitable Affections in Public: And hope, my Lord, will provide himself a
Sacrifice in the Temple he has chosen, that I may record it to his Praise.

Nov. 6.] Somewhat drowsy and indisposed, yet not pestered as at some times
with Wanderings: I adore the redeeming Love I go to commemorate; and beg the
Spirit of God to act and shine upon Grace wrought, and to bless instituted
Means and Messengers, that my sinful filthy Heart that is so ^^ady to turn to
its own Bane, might be withheld -- I stand to my baptismal Covenant, and renew
my solemn Dedication to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, abhorring my unsuitable
Walking, begging more Strength to act Faith on Christ, my Rock, for all
Supplies in my Way to Glory -- My Soul rejoiced in the Assurance of God's Love,
in Christ, to unworthy me, and I approached to the Lord's Table with humble
Joy, with my Heart drawn out to my Beloved, by the lively Exhortation given
before the Sacrament; but losing the sight of the sacramental Actions, and
receiving the Elements from other Hands than I expected, brought me under
irrecoverable Dejection.

1693. Feb. 5.] I could not get my Heart into a lively Frame in secret Prayer
before I went out, nor in Meditation as I walked, or fix upon any thing
effectually: Had an amazing Sight of Sin, which begat Self-Abhorrance, Shame,
and Sorrow, that overwhelmed my Soul through the whole Day, but could discern no
Love, Joy, or Thankfulness through the whole Administration: But I returned
Mourning after my withdrawn Beloved, and my Soul follows with lamenting Love,
in hopes of rejoicing, that notwithstanding this gloomy Day, I shall yet see
the Light of his Countenance: I rely on Christ's Blood for cleansing, and
resolve, if he slay me, yet I will trust in him.

March 12.] Gracious Assistance this Morning, better than Health: Awake, O
North Wind, come thou South, blow upon my Garden still, and fill me with thy
Gales throughout this Day -- Oh! how lovely, Lord! were thy Tabernacles all
this Day! how much more glorious thy House, the City, the Kingdom, the
Paradise, to which I have been invited! If under thy Shadow such Delight, what
will the unvailed Glory be? Until the Day break, and the Shadows fly away, make
have my Beloved, etc.

June 4.] In sad and humble Sense of my own Unworthiness, I go out in hopes of
meeting my Beloved, begging the pardoning, purifying, quickening Virtues of his
Blood, may answer all my Wants, Desires, and Expectations, and out-taste all
the World, and make it little in my Eyes, and perfectly bow my Will to his
Pleasure, that I may return with Singing, and everlasting Joy. Amen. -- The
Lord heard and answered, and gave a joyful Day in his House, lifting up my
Heart to my Lord Redeemer, for Acceptance of all my Services, and melting my
Heart at his Table by a lively Discourse on, Behold the Man.

August 6.] By manifold Experience I find, that joyful Assurances of God's
Love, and lively Actings of Grace, do not depend on natural Vigours; my Health
Ease, Spirits as good in the latter, as forepart of the past Day; my Soul
quite different, and still straightened: Lord! I wait the sweet Gales of thy
Spirit; O blow again upon my Garden, and let this Day's Feast answer
Yesterday's Antepast; and through thy free undeserved Bounty, be much more
abundant and lasting -- The Lord was gracious, and took not his Spirit from his
Ordinances, but shined on his poor dull Creature, and made it a comfortable Day.

Sept. 2.] And now my Soul, (through free Grace still concluding I am my
Beloved's, and he is mine) rests on his perfect Righteousness alone for Pardon
and Justification, on his holy All-conquering Spirit and Blood for cleansing:
To which I go this Day in Ordinances of his own Institution, with Faith on his
Covenant-Engagement to convey himself and all his Benefits to me; and I renew
my solemn Engagement to be his, begging his help in all -- The Lord made it a
good Day to my Soul.

October. 1. Sweet Morning, while the Lord helped by healing bodily Lassitude:
Enlarged and comforted my Heart in sense of redeeming Love; melted my Soul into
Shame and Sorrow, for ungrateful Neglects remaining Enmity, Distance, and
Strangeness; peevish, selfish, carnal, unsuitable Frames of Spirit, after such
Love purchased, published, tasted to Soul-Ravishment, so often, after so many
turns again to Folly: Lord! what Bowels does my perverse Heart spurn against?
But what cannot thy Blood cleanse? And now, since by the Faith of thine own
Operation, thou show the Atonement of my so guilty Soul, O Lord! how can I
but love thee? O satisfy the Thirst thou have raised, and return thy poor Dust
in Triumphs of Praise, and more complete Victory over all her and thine
Enemies, and stronger, chearfuller Obedience, 'till I be ever with thee --
Continued 'till Noon, in sweet Temper, fullest Joy, nearest Communion with God
in Prayer, Reading, Singing, Hearing, with less Interruption than ever before
experienced, 'till approaching to the Lord's Table, surprised by an Accident,
the Devil took the Advantage of my Weakness, and so hurried and ruffled my
Thoughts with fear of losing the joyful Temper I had, that I soon lost it, and
sat under the most pathetick Invitations to Joy and Praise, all in Tears, and
returned in Shame and Sadness, and yet cannot recover; but am humbling my Soul
for it is unsuitable Temper, and relying upon Christ for Pardon and Strength,
and resolving to love and praise in spite of Sin and Devil.

December. 3.] The Lord graciously smiled upon me at his Table, and made the
whole Day comfortable; and I returned with Joy to praise the God of Love, but
was hindered by Company unavoidably surprising me at my Chamber Door, and found
not that Presence of Mind to spiritualize my Converse with them as I might:
Lord! pity and pardon a poor shallow Creature.

1694. Jan. 21.] Little Time in secret, yet sweetly succeeded -- My Soul in
joyful believing Expectation, attended the Word and Sacraments, and more
excited and refreshed in both, than many a Time when my Health and Retirement
have afforded more Advantage for due Preparation.

March 11.] A drowsy and indisposed Morning: Little Life in hearing the Word;
graciously revived and quick'ned at the Lord's Table.

June 17.] The Preparations of my Heart were from God, who quickens the Dead,
for I arose in great Pain and Languor, yet my Soul was made to ascend to God,
its Original and Felicity.

1695. Feb. 3.] The Lord was gracious, and met me in his House, and at his
Table; and made his Ambassador my Mouth to him, more than ever before: In
Confession, he spoke my very Heart, more than ever I could my self: And, Oh!
how the good Spirit of Grace melted me all into Tears; strengthened my Faith,
raised my Hope and Joy, confirmed my Resignation and Resolution, in renewing my
Covenant; and the Just dying for the Unjust, bro't me nearer to God than usual,
with Shame and Sorrow, that my wandering Soul so needed such a Remedy.

March 3.] I renewed my Covenant to be the Lord's, and to acquiesce in all he
does: My Desires after nearer and more immediate Communion with God were
increased: Meditating on the Providence of God in Brutes and humane Kind, that
loved their young Ones more ardently, and with increasing Endearments still,
after they had nourished them with their Milk, or lactified Blood; my Soul
pleaded hard with the God of Nature, Grace, and Glory, that the Wonders of his
Love might not be less in Grace than Nature: But while he so freely and
frequently nourished me with his Body and Blood, I might experience more and
more his inexpressible Endearments and vital Union, giving Joy, and Strength,
and Pardon, and Purging, and all I want.

May 5.] My Soul cleav'd to the Dust, and little Life of Grace appeared: A
sorrowful Sight of Strangeness and Distance from God, my Felicity, with less
lively Mourning over my Ingratitude: My Soul flies to the Blood of Sprinkling,
and begs the Holy Spirit to apply it this Day -- The Lord showed his Power and
Love to a poor unworthy Lump of Clay, and sweetly refreshed my Soul, and sent
me back rejoicing: But, ah! too soon abated, even ever I slept.

1697. Feb. 7.] My Soul was filled, as with Marrow and Fatness, and
acknowledged (with Love and Shame) never frowarder unworthier Child was more
indulged -- How amiable were thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, to me! whilst
thou made me feel what, through gracious Assistance, thine Ambassador feelingly
expressed of Communion with God: The Day was all sweet; I think, in the whole,
the best Day I ever enjoyed.

School. Jan. 9.] I long, and wait, and hope to touch my Lord Redeemer this Day,
'till I feel in my Soul that I am healed of all my Plagues -- I found a
gracious Answer to all my Prayers, at my Lord's Table, 'till I was loath to
leave the Place and the Assembly: I returned with lively Affections, joyful
Expectations, and Longings of Soul to drink the new Wine in my Father's Kingdom
-- I sought the Lord for my Family, and found some Encouragement to hope, that
Servants should be born in my House.

1699. Jan. 1.] With Shame and Sorrow, my Soul reflects on the Sins of my whole
Life, and particularly of the Year past: O Lord! Days and Years have not taught
me Wisdom; but after so long Experience of the tenderest Care, Compassion,
Pity, Patience, Pardon, and Provision, what a Monster of Ingratitude do I still
continue, after Resolution, Covenant-Engagements, hope of better? Lord! how
unfruitful, dull, wandering, slothful, and fretful is my Heart! And must it be
ever thus? Is not cleansing, quickening, strengthening, etc. promised and sealed
in thy Covenant, as Dedication and Resignation on my Part: Lord! I gave my Soul
and Body to thee for Sanctification as well as Justification; I renew my solemn
Covenant this Day, and go forth to the Gospel-Feast for all I want, and thou
have provided: O give Bread, not Stones, to thy starving Child, though unworthy
to be called so; yet, through Grace, I am thy Servant, thy Child, let thy Bowels
move toward me, and draw me 'till I follow hard after thee; wash me in the
vital Stream from my dear Lord's Side, 'till I feel I am cleansed, and return
with Praise -- My Heart was flat and dull at the Table, and I returned
discouraged and ashamed, and bemoaned my self in secret.

1700. June 30.] Still laboring with my dull torpid Spirit, I found some Aids
from above, and go forth in Hope and Expectation of more, to record to his
Praise, that has loved me and washed me in his own Blood -- The Lord has
abounded in Mercy to my Soul all this Day, and given me the fullest Assurance
of my Interest in Christ I ever yet enjoyed, and made me with Joy draw Water
out of the Wells of Salvation, and greatly enlarged my Hopes and Expectations
of more Life and Nourishment from Christ, my Head, than I have ever yet
experienced: My Soul pitched on the Covenant for Increase of Grace and
Perseverance therein; and I humbly wait the fulfilling his Promise of growing
stronger and stronger.

Nov. 3.] The Lord was gracious and drew near to my Soul in Preparative Duties,
and melted my Heart with godly Sorrow; strengthened* my Faith, inflamed my
Love, increased my Joy and Thankfulness, enlarged my Desires, etc. -- And now,
Lord! what wait I for, but nearer and nearer Touches of my Redeemer, 'till I
feel in my Soul I am healed: O hear my Prayer, indicted by thy Spirit, for my
own Soul, thy Ambassador, the Congregation, thy Church, for dear Relations in
Covenant, and others yet at distance. Amen. -- Gracious was the Lord in
entertaining my Soul at his Table; sweet was the Day, but dull and wandering
the Close.

1701. Nov. 16.] I bewailed my ungrateful wandering Heart, and begged of God to
unite and heal my planetary Spirit, and committed it to its holy Guardian, who
has helped in like Distress -- God, by his Ambassador, called me at his Table,
to trust in him for his Presence in his own Institution; and he did not reject
my Trust, nor suffer my Heart to wander, so much as I feared: I was after
exhorted to urge God's Covenant with him, and my own solemn Covenant with God;
and now, Lord! accordingly I plead for Pardon, and plead thy Covenant to put
thy Fear in my Heart, that I may never depart from thee, particularly not by
Wanderings in holy Duties: I solemnly charge on my own Soul my Vows to be ever
thine, and for thee, in all Estates, Conditions, and Relations, whatever it
cost, humbly protesting my Dependence on thy Strength, in which I made, and
without which I can never keep my Covenant with thee.

1703. October. 31.] My Heart trembles to read the Backslidings of Asa, after
long upright Walking, and Experience of God's Presence with him, and Mercy
toward him: I am sensible of my Instability, and dread, as Death, a partial
Departure from my God; and deprecate no Suffering, like being plunged in the
Mire of my own Filth -- My Heart grew flat and dull when drawing near the
Lord's Table; but the King came in, and excited the Graces he had given, and
very sweet was the Feast; yet through bodily Weakness, the Afternoon was not so
cheerful, but I was much encouraged by instructing my Family.

1705. Sept. 2.] Still I wander, and cannot unite my scattering Thoughts: Lord!
tha^ command Winds and Seas, show thy Power this Day on the hated tumultuous
Thoughts of my Mind, occasioned by Business thou have made my Duty in it is
Season, and my evil Heart makes Sin this Day -- Blessed be God, who has heard
my Prayer, rebuked my evil Thoughts, and given me a sweet Day in his House, and
at his Table.

1707. Jan. 19.] I rose early, and met my Beloved: Reviewed the Pages since
last Sacrament: Confessed with shame my wandering Thoughts, my Peevishness
under my Father's Rod, my Defects of Faith, Love, Desire, Delight in God: I
begged Pardon for Jesus sake, and renewed my Covenant in his Strength, to be
wholly and forever the Lord's; to submit to all his Discipline, and walk in all
his Commandments: I rely on his Truth and Faithfulness, who allows me to plead
all the Articles of his Covenant, as his Promises.

May 25.] Very drowsy and indisposed in my first Hours, but then the Lord had
pity, and remembered my Frame, and gave me some Life, ever I left my secret
Duties, and on him I rely for more in Public -- I gave myself to the Guidance
of God's Word and Providence; Lord! in thy Strength I submit to all thy
Methods, be Surety for thy Servant.

Aug. 17.] I go to this holy Feast for increase of Faith, that it may more
clearly apprehended divine Truths, and be more distinct and firm in the
Assurances of them: More certain and confident of them, my Consent to the
Covenant more free, resolved, delightful; my Love more inflamed, that I may be
more patient in suffering, and more diligent in doing the Will of God: I depend
on the sufficient Grace of God for Strength in all Duties; for Wisdom to
direct, for Victory over Sin and Temptation; help under all Affliction, and in
my last Change: Lord! these are thy Purchase, thy Promise in the Covenant, to
which the Seal is annexed: Thy Command is, That I Believe: Lord! I believe, and
wait for them: strengthen my Faith, Patience, and Diligence by this Ordinance.

Nov. 9.] I bewailed my unsuitable Walking to my Covenant, and go rejoycingly
to renew it this Day: To be wholly the Lord's in my Thoughts, Words,
Employments, and Enjoyments: I accept my Lord Jesus in his own Way, on his own
Terms: and with him Pardon, Adoption, Peace, Supplies of all Grace for Life,
and in Death, and Eternal Life: Lord! give what thou allowest me to expect.

December. 20, 21.] The Lord humbled and softened my Heart in Confession, and
gives hope in his pardoning Mercy: Innumerable are the Sins of my Thoughts,
Words and Actions, in every Age, State, and Relation: Aggravated by Knowledge,
Means of Grace, Experience of the Evil of departing from God, in whole or in
part, and the Pleasures of drawing near to him -- Lord! I loath my evil Heart,
and all its evil Frames: I am justly Jealous of its Weakness, Deceits, and
Perfidiousness; and rely on thy Strength and Righteousness; and rejoice in the
accepted Sacrifice, and thy everlasting Covenant, and would bind my slippery
Soul more firmly to thee -- While I strove for the most entire Resignation to
his disposing Will and Providence, too many disputing Thoughts rose in my Mind,
concerning his Discipline with his own Children, and his Covenant with their
Seed: O Lord! I know thou art infinitely wise and good in all thou do; help
my unbelief, and fit me for Glory, where all the dark Scenes shall be clear and
satisfying.

1710. Jan. 2.] Loathing my self for Sin, I renounce the Devil, Flesh, and
World sincerely, so far as I can discern: I accept my Lord, and give up my self
to him to be to his Praise, with all the Powers and Faculties of my Soul and
Body, resolving in his Strength ever to stand to this Covenant -- The Lord
sealed his Love, while I renewed my Covenant with him.

June 19.] In sense of Deadness, Earthlines^, and Formalities in holy Duties,
and multitude of vain unprofitable Thoughts, and Words, and Weakness of Grace,
I go sad and dejected to my Lord's Table, to bind my Soul faster to him against
all Sin, to all Duty; my Soul lays hold on thy Strength, to make my Peace for
former Breaches, and assist for better Performances; I give my self to thee,
through thy Son: Lord! accept me in him; thou give thy self by him in thy
Covenant; be mine, and make me more entirely thine, according to thy sealed
Covenant: I returned with Joy and Wonder.

1711. Feb. 11.] Lord! I go forth weeping, and wanting to thy House and Table,
I must always do so in this Wilderness; but blessed for ever be the Lord! my
Redeemer and my King, for his bountiful Provisions in the Way, of which I am
invited to eat, lest the Journey be too hard for me -- The Lord! my King, who
invited me to his Table, and gave me a spiritual Appetite and Expectation, sat
with me, and entertained my Soul, and sweetly excited my Repentance, Faith, and
Love, filial Fear, and Hope: And through his Strength I covenanted to love him,
and all his better; but, Lord! an House full of Gold cannot purchase what thou
only give.

June 17.] The Lord began some Cure upon my distant, dark, benumbed Soul, in
secret Reading and Prayer: But, Lord! how soon will it vanish without the fresh
Aids of thy holy Spirit? (which I have so often grieved) O show thy self to me
'till thou take me up to thee, or I shall wither and languish, and disparage
thy House here, and be unfit to drink the new Wine of the Kingdom, which at
present, through thy free Grace, I long for, and joyfully expect. Sweet and
joyful has this Day of the Son of Man been to my Soul; and my dear Redeemer
satisfied me of his Love, and sealed my Pardon at his Table; and my Soul
joyfully bound itself to be his entirely in Life and Death, and depends on his
Strength to keep my Covenant.

1712. July 27.] The Lord God of Nature, Grace and Glory, has been All in All
(...) my Soul and Body this Morning: Son of David, I feel thou have the Mercies
of a God, and the Compassions of a Man: O satisfy my craving Soul with nearer
and sweeter Communion with thee still in thy House, and at thy Table.

1713. April 25, 26.] O Lord! if I hate any Thing, I hate Sin; and if I love
any Thing, I love thee: But, O that I could find both in more intense Degrees!
-- I feel, Lord! in thy Strength I can do all; though so weak in myself, I can do
nothing: Lord! vouchsafe the benign Influences of thy Spirit, and I shall get
nearer, and taste more of thee this Day than ever: Awake, O Nort^ Wind, come
thou South -- blessed Spirit blow, and I shall praise.

October. 11.] Bless the Lord, O my Soul! that made Grace to abound: To thee, O
compassionate Physician, I owe the Cure of my wounded, defiled Soul: Lord!
perfect what thy Grace begun: I have thy Word, thy Oath, thy sealed Covenant to
depend upon, and thou will make good thy Word, in which thou have caused me to
hope.

1714. Aug. 29.] My Soul rejoices in the Institution of this sweet Love-Feast,
and my declining Body makes me hope I shall drink no more this Wine, 'till I
drink it new; ever new, with my dear Redeemer: 'Till th^n, excite every Grace,
and mortify every Corruption, O Lord! by this Ordinance -- Make haste, my
Beloved, when shall we meet, and part no more?

1715. March 27.] With saint and feeble Spirits I went out, leaning on my
Beloved: And while my outward Man declines, his Grace has renewed,
strengthened, and revived the inward: Lord! what Experience have I felt of the
good Word this Morning! and the good Spirit witnessing to my Soul the Truth of
Grace: I depend on and adore thy Love to poor vile Dust.

July 31.] The Lord! my unerring Physician, sees need still of rougher Physic:
And therefore made this, formerly joyful Time, to be now very melancholy to
me, and not only shut me out of his House in the Morning, for want of my
Hearing, but afflicted my Head with such Noise and Confusion, that I could
neither read, meditate, or pray, with any Vigor of Comfort, and could get but
one Hour for Preparation for the Lord's Table, in which I found some Sorrow of
Heart for the Sin of my Nature, and the mournful Remainders of the first
Apostasy still springing up in my Soul: Some sense of the adorable
condescending Love, Mercy, Goodness, and Wisdom, that found a Ransom for so
vile Transgressors; but all so short of the Subject, I knew not what to do, but
begged the holy Spirit to assist my dull Soul: I went out in hope of some
reviving, and heard some of the Sermon, and my Heart answered the Marks of a
deliberate, free, humble, thankful, hearty, unlimitted Consent to be the
Lord's: I renounce all other, and love to love and obey him: I love his
Precepts, and had rather conform to them all, than be pardoned for my breaking
any: I submit to his Discipline, but cannot be so cheerful under, or thankful
for it as I ought, or improve it as I should and would: Lord! help me, that I
may neither despise the Rod, nor faint when I am corrected -- I adore and love
all thy Perfections, even thy Justice, Power, and Sovereignty: I know thy
Goodness is commensurate to all, and is thy Glory: I adore and take thee for my
Portion here, and for ever: I desire no other, but more of thee, and then I
have a goodly Heritage -- I like and love thy People, though weak, infirm, and
with Spots, as I have: I love thy Institutions, and long to enjoy thee in all
Ordinances; to imitate thee in Holiness, Justice, Goodness, Patience, and
Humility: Lord! thou know this my Love and Choice; thou made me consent,
and therefore I hope thou have chosen me, poor, vile, infirm Wretch, for thou
betrothest in Righteousness to thy Covenant, with thy Son, my Redeemer: He has
paid my Debts to thy Justice, and thou will not be twice paid: Thou betrothest
in Judgment, on mature Counsel; thy Gifts and Callings are without Repentance:
Thou foresawest all Events, and how often I should abuse thy Mercy, grieve thy
Spirit, and yet betrothest in Judgment: O adorable mere Love and kindness! to
betroth a Creature so vile by Birth, so Deformed, so Lame, so Blind, so Weak,
Poor and Proved: O the multitude, original, actual, first, and continued
Mercies in this Espousal! when subject to so many Infirmities and worse
Transgressions, yet in Faithfulness: Though I sin, and he corrects, his faithful
Covenant fails not; he will never cast me off, and I shall never depart from
him. Amen. Amen.

1718. May 4.] After a dull Evening, and restless Night, I was very (...) sp^nt
this Morning, yet the Lord revived my (...) was the Word and Prayer, and I
sincerely renewed my Covenant, but could not reach the Joy of Faith in a sealed
Pardon of my hated Sins, as sometimes before: Oh! that the holy Spirit of Love
and Peace would evidence the Pardon sealed by farther degrees of Holiness.

1719. Jan. 10, 11.] Lord! if thou will thou can make me clean, and thy
Covenant is to pour Water on the dry Ground: I yield my Soul to thy Government
-- How sweet were the Smiles of my Beloved at his Tabl^, whilst I sat under his
Shadow in Tears of Joy, and Evangelical Sorrow: He sealed my Pardon, and
assured my Soul he is, and will be a God to me; and all he is, and has, shall
be mine, for ever mine: I solemnly devoted myself, and all I am and have, to
him, in a firm Dependence on his Strength, sealed in this Covenant: I returned
with Joy at the Oath, wherewith I had bound my Soul unto God; yet was quickly
seized with Torpor and Drowsiness again: Lord! what short Sweets am I allowed
here? O for the uninterrupted, full, and eternal Communion at Home.

1720. March 6.] I went out and heard the Sermon in great Pain, and renewed my
solemn Dedication of myself to God, with firm Resolution in his Strength, to
acquiesce in his All wise Discipline, as best for me, how grievous soever to my
Flesh -- I returned in great Torture, with Submission to the Rod, though very
sharp.

May 1.] While I looked inward, I was almost overwhelmed with Sorrow for the
sad Remainders of vain and evil Thoughts, Pride, Selfishness, etc. which damped
my Joy and Praise: O Lord! accept my broken Heart, which thou have said thou
would not despise: Teach me better how to rejoice and mourn together, and
give me more Victory over my Heart-Sins.

CHAP. IV. Her Accounts of herself on Days of Fasting and Prayer.
1690. Octo. 29. Indisposed in Body, and greatly afflicted in Mind, for the
Renitence of my Will, etc. I heartily mourned over, and loathed myself for the
Madness and Folly of my Heart, waiting for a gracious Return to the Prayers of
this Day.

1692. April 8.] In sad and serious Reflections on my polluted Nature and Life,
mourning over mine Iniquities from Childhood to riper Age; adoring the Patience
of God; abhorring the Ingratitude of my Soul; seeking Pardon, and purging in
the Blood of Christ, I was graciously assisted in Public and Secret all the
Day, yet drowsy in Family Prayer in the Evening.

Aug. 10.] Blessed be my God, and the Rock of my Salvation, that has not
forsaken his unworthy froward Child, but sweetly humbled and encouraged, cast
down and listed up my Soul, while my Body languishes; has made me taste of his
loving Kindness, and seek Mercy for his Church, Myself, and Relations, for
Mercy's sake: Sweet Day and Evening, my Soul held up while my Body ^ail'd, etc.

Sept. 14.] Sad Reflections on disordered Faculties and Affections; I drew
Water and poured out my Soul in secret Confession, and begged the Spirit of
Humiliation and Supplication, to carry Ministers and People through the Duties of
the Day; graciously answered, notwithstanding Unworthiness and guilty Fears:
God assisted his Ministers, and drew out my Heart in Confession, Petition, and
Praise: Encouraged, humbled, and directed by his good Word, my sinful and
disponding Soul, etc.

1693. July 12.] Indisposed when I awaked, yet God touched my Heart in Reading,
Meditation, secret Prayer; and I poured out my Complaint, and bewailed with
Shame and Sorrow my own and the Nation's Sins, and begged for pardon and
cleansing, and pouring out of the Spirit: The Lord heard and answered
abundantly all the Day, and I followed hard after God, with less Interruption
than usual.

Octo. 11.] Indulged Drowsiness in the Morning, hindered my due Preparation for
the Day, which grieved and vexed my Soul; yet the Lord was gracious, and in the
second Attempt in secret Prayer, drew out my Heart in Pleading* and he
graciously heard and answered, and melted my Heart, and turned it to hate the
Sins confessed, and enlightened and warmed me by his Word, and shined on the
Graces his good Spirit had wrought, and witnessed to the Marks of a true
Humiliation in my Soul: And I closed the Day in Evangelical Mourning.

1695. March 2.] I set apart this Day for Fasting and Prayer, to humble my
Soul for the Sins of all my Life: I began the Day with recollecting Particulars
as far as I could from my Birth, and sad and sorrowful was the View: I thus
poured out my Soul in Tears, and Sorrow, and Shame, to my offended Father, who
graciously touched my Heart by his good Spirit, and found himself a Sacrifice
that he has said he never will despise -- I reviewed the Mercies of my Life,
that aggravated my Sins, and increased my Sorrow, particularly of the Year past
-- My Soul is humbled within me for all the Rebellion, Enmity, and Peevishness
of my Childhood and Youth, and shameful Ingratitude of my riper Age: I abhor
myself, and acknowledge I am unworthy of any Mercy: I adore the Power, Pity,
and Goodness, that took me out, and sustained me from the Womb; and so long
bare my ungrateful unworthy Life, and yet called, and invited, and caused my
Return, after all the sturdy Refusals, or hypocritical partial Returns of my
Soul to God, my Creator, etc. I confess with bitterest Sorrow my Ingratitude,
since my more solemn Covenant Engagements, my Atheism, Unbelief, Distrust, etc.
-- I begged Mercy for Mercy's sake, and cleansing in the Fountain opened for
Sin, and for all Uncleanness -- I acknowledged all the Ways of God to be Mercy
and Truth to me and mine: And begged a gracious Answer of the last Years
Prayers, for my afflicted Family, in the Way, Time, and Measure, God shall see
best for his Glory and our good.

1697. Jan. 25.] Reflecting on the whole Conduct of God, in bringing me to
Bury, I acknowledge his great Goodness and Mercy -- The Lord directed me to,
and assisted me in secret Fasting and Prayer, for Health and Usefulness in this
Place* and drew out my Heart to the Relief of poor ignorant Souls, by
instructing, pitying, praying with, and for them: And I have found God faithful
to his Promise, in exciting and quickening his Graces freely bestowed on
unworthy me, while I have endeavored to quicken others -- When I cried, he
evidently heard and answered -- Light and Health has suddenly sprung up to
Soul and Body -- He has guided me in perplexing Difficulties -- He has
supported me in Languishings of Body and in Distress of Soul, and satisfied my
Mind in Doubts, and expressed the most watchful Care, and tender Conduct I ever
experienced -- Has never suffered me to want what I have given -- Therefore my
Soul praises my God, my Life, my All in All: And I depend on his future Care
and Conduct, and resolve to follow his Ducture, though against my Inclination.

1699. October. 4, 5.] I worked hard to spare the following Day for secret Prayer
and Humiliation, and begged of God for freedom from Interruption; God heard and
answered, and gave me the whole Day undiscovered: After Prayer with my Family I
retired, and begged the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, to discover and humble
for Sin; to indite my Petitions, and excite Thanksgiving and Praise: I reviewed
my State and Conversation for Ten Years past, in this Diary, and recollected
what I could before, wherein I found great Matter of Humiliation and Praise: I
began with Confession, in which my Heart was somewhat melted, and some Sorrow,
and Shame, and Hatred of, and Resolution to forsake my Sins followed, yet all
short of what I should and would have felt; I look to Christ for Pardon -- I
reviewed my Life since I came to this Place, with all the Circumstances that
brought me ^ither* and concurred to the Change of my State, and fixing me in
his Habitation: All which I take to be plainly directed by the All-wise God, in
Mercy to me -- I was carried through this Day with less Weariness and
Indisposition of (...) than us^^l, and my Mind calm and quiet, waiting a
gracious Answer, and resolving quiet Submission whatever it be.

17^1. Feb. 14.] Bodily Indisposition made me begin late; but I begged the
whole Day without Interruption, which God granted: And I began with searching
out Sin by the Assembly's Catechism, and my Heart was filled with Shame and
Sorrow for Dullness, Wandering, Straitness in Duties of religious Worship:
Sloth, and Selfishness, and Unfruitfulness in my Life, which I confessed,
bewailed, begged Strength against, and Direction for some more Usefulness -- I
pleaded Covenant-Mercies for all the Branches of my Family; that Prayers on the
File, by godly Ancestors, may have an Answe^ of Peace, and their natural and
adopted Seed, and Seed's Seed, may not be cut off from the Covenant of God with
Parents.

1703. Jan. 4.] I set apart the Forenoon of this Day to humble my Soul for Sin,
in confessing and bewailing of which I was helped with some Brokenness of
Heart: I thankfully renewed my Covenant, and hope and expect the promised Aids
of the holy Spirit, to subdue Sin, increase and quicken Grace, and guide me to
Glory -- O God! that have and do help, never leave thy poor, weak, wandering
Child, E. B.

1704. Jan. 1.] I rose early, and was much indisposed, but begged of God, that
encouraged me to secret Fasting and Prayer, that he would enable me for, and
accept me in the Duty: Some gracious Assistance I had in Prayer with my Family;
after which I retired to search my Heart, and was truly sorrowful for, and
ashamed of my Sins from my Childhood to this very Day -- I acknowledged with
Thankfulness, that God had been very gracious to me the Year past, in many
Answers of Prayer for my self and others, for Body and Soul; and that he had
spoke Comfort by my unworthy Mouth to some in Anguish of Mind: I solemnly
renewed my Dedication to God in Mr. Baxter's Words, which expresses my Heart's
Desire -- I concluded the Day with Praise, as I could, in great Pain and
Weakness of Body and Mind: And depending on the Sacrifice of my great High
Priest, I expect Atonement and Strength to walk more to his Glory, and resolve
to endeavor more Usefulness.

1706. March 19, 20.] In preparation for the approaching Fast, my Soul applied
to God for Assistance to Ministers and People, my Heart was deeply affected
with the Malignity of Sin, and longs for perfect Holiness: I mourned over the
Sins of the Nation and Church, and begged the Spirit of Reformation and
Supplication to be poured on all; particularly, that Bury might be a Bochim,
etc. and wrestle and prevail -- Faint and dispirited, I looked to God for
Strength -- I begged, and he has promised to accept a broken and contrite Heart
-- God gave me a gracious Answer.

1708. Jan. 14.] Blessed be God, who did not forsake his sinful unworthy
Creature in the public and secret Duties of this Day: Lord! who have humbled
and melted my Heart for the Breach of thy holy Law, and helped me to ask thy
holy Spirit; O give a more plentiful Measure to unworthy sinful me, and my
miserable Family: Lord! hear, for Jesus sake, the Prayers of this Day, and many
on the File, for the degenerate Race of godly Ancestors in Britain and Ireland
-- Lord! let thy Spirit stand with thy Minister this Day, and make everlasting
Impressions on all that hear him.

1709. Jan. 19, 20.] Mr. B. being abroad, I resolved on the following Day as a
secret Fast -- I awaked with Thoughts of the Aggrevation of Solomon's Sins,
after the Lord had appeared to him twice: I confessed the Sins of my Heart and
Life, of my Family, of the Church and Nation, with some sorrow and shame, though
far short of what they call for: I acknowledged the Justice of God in all his
smart Rebukes on my Family, and me in them: I begged for the Spirit of Holiness
to sanctify me more and more, and to revive decayed Piety; to reduce the Seed
of the Righteous; to provide for and dispose of poor helpless Relations -- I
begged the overruling Power of God on the Parliament, that Iniquity may not be
established by Law, and holy Institutions continue prostituted to vile Uses: I
solemnly devoted myself, and all dear to me, to God, his Service, and Interest;
resolving in his Strength against all Sin, and for all Duty; particularly to be
helpful, so far as God shall teach and enable me, to all that ask my Assistance
in Sickness of Body, or Trouble of Mind -- On review of the whole Day, I lay
down ashamed at the Dullness and Straitness of my Heart in all the Duties of it,
relying on the Lord, my Righteousness, for Pardon and Acceptance.

1711. Jan. 6.] The Lord indulged me with more Time and Freedom; but I found
great Reason to bewail the Vanity, Distance, and Darkness of my Thoughts: I
bemoaned my Defects; pleaded what I could for myself and others; but my
Strength failed in the Evening, my Spirit tired, and I was lost in Family
Worship, which makes me resolve against setting apart a whole Day again for
the future.

March 28, 29, 30, 31.] I began the Day with some Life in secret and public
Prayer, but was afterward faint and dizzy: Lord! how poor, how short, how
imperfect, are my best Duties! -- God refreshed my indisposed Head, and revived
my drooping Soul in the Morning -- Many gracious Answers of Prayer has God
given unworthy me; and a few of his poor Children met to seek his Face, for
recovering sick Friends, and preserving others from infectious Diseases: For a
Blessing on the Means of Grace, to many of Mr. B's Charge: For extraordinary
Support under extreme Pain, and Strength for his Work beyond Expectation: Lord!
who hear for Jesus sake, the Supplications of a few of thy poor Children in
particular and private Cases, will thou not regard the united Cries of thy
travailing Zion, and maintain her Cause so far as it is thine own?
Jehovah-Jesus! maintain thy Royal Power in thy Church, against all who would,
or do oppose it; and protect and encourage all, who, in the sincerity of their
Heart, seek the Preservation of thy sacred Institutions in their primitive
Purity: Lord! unite all that love thee, and bear thy Image; And though our
Breaches seem wide as the Sea, yet do thou pour out a Spirit of Love, and
Peace, and Purity, and heal them -- Lord! if Sodom might have been spared for
Ten Righteous, might not Britain for many more! -- The History of the Jewish
Church, after Jehoshaphat's Reign, made my Heart sad, yet I know not the length
of God's Patience, therefore pray and wait, in hopes that God may yet be
entreated for us, and deliver his Church from crafty proud Enemies, who own
their Resolution to suppress those that cannot comply with their dividing
Articles of Communion; but wherein Men deal proudly, God will be above them; he
turns the Counsel of the Froward headlong, and takes the Crafty in their own
Craft.

1718. October. 16.] My Heart was melted for Sin in Meditation on Gospel Grace
and Love: I was very desirous to join with the Congregation in Prayer on Mr.
Wright's Account: I begged Hearing, and hoped I might have heard more, but
struggling to attend confused my Head, and damped my Heart: Lord! reconcile me
to all thy Methods of humbling and cleansing my sinful Soul.

CHAP. V. Answers to Prayers, and Deliverances in Danger.
1690. Dec. 30. A Memorable Answer of Prayer: Solemn Resolution to value Prayer
more, and honor a God-Hearing-Prayer, by more humble Resignation, and joyful
Expectation.

1691. Jan. 20.] A gracious Answer of Prayer in opening a Way to the Gospel in
-- where there is great need, and many Adversaries.

Juy, 21.] Gracious Assistance in Prayer, and Return of it; while I cried, God
heard, and strengthened me with Strength in my Soul, and fulfilled his Promise:
Thee will I praise; to thee I commit my Ways, and thee will I serve all my
Days. Amen.

Dec. 4.] Memorable Answers of Prayers breathed forth to God for five Years
past, wherein he has shown his Covenant-Love and Faithfulness, upon which I
resolved to call upon him all the Days of my Life.

1692. Jan. 25.] God drew out my Heart in Prayer, and quieted my Spirit in
Dependence, and gave me memorable Instances of his hearing and answering Prayer
in the very Petitions asked for some here, and for others at a distance, etc.

1693. May 28, 29.] A God-Hearing-Prayer, that has the Week past been
entreated of poor Dust for Spiritual and Temporal, for Personal and Relative
Mercies, asked in many Instances; particularly Assistance and Success to a
Minister: Answered abundantly -- Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who has fulfilled
with his Hand, what his Mouth has spoken; and been the Lord, my Teacher, my
Healer, my Righteousness, that prepared my Heart to pray, and has showed me
all his Ways are Mercy and Truth, etc.

Sept. 10.] O how gracious, how full, how sweet, was the Answer of my poor,
languid, defective Prayer, in abundant Assistance in Body and Spirit, to
Gospel-Heraulds, publishing free Grace to vilest Dust, etc.

1694. Sept. 3.] A great Answer of Prayer, in the Recovery of a Child, by
immediate help from God, when thought to be past all Hope.

December. 13.] The Lord was gracious to my Sister in a miraculous Recovery, for
which I could not pray in Faith, or praise with that spiritual Joy, which the
Mercy called for.

1695. Jan. 9.] A gracious Answer of Prayer in a searching Sermon, in which my
Heart answered comfortably to the Articles of Enquiry.

April 20.] My Soul acknowledged the Truth and Mercy of my Prayer-Hearing-God,
that taught me to ask, seek, and knock; and made me receive, find, and opened
to his poor Suppliant many thousand times in this Place abundantly: I adore his
Wisdom, and confess his Love, even in Denials, and beg his Conduct and Presence
for the future.

May 9.] A gracious Turn of Distempers by God's immediate Hand.

Sept. 20.] The Lord has been gracious to me in this Place, and heard Prayer,
for myself, Friends at distance, for wicked Seed of godly Parents, for which my
Soul praised the Lord.

Ibid. 22.] I adore and praise the Lord for many and great Returns of Prayer;
particularly for such as occasions the Thanksgivings of this Day, some of which
were sought by a poor handful of People at -- July 23. past.

1696. March 16.] I engaged the three Pastors of the Congregation to seek God
for me and mine: I poured out my own Heart in secret Confession to God, and
prayed that God would prepare the Hearts of his Ministers to pray, and bow his
Ear and hear: And great was his Assistance to them and me, and great my Hope
and Expectation: Our Supplications were chiefly for healing a Child under sore
and strange Fits, but especially for her Conversion, urging God's Covenant with
her Parent, and Prayers and Tears, and solemn Dedications upon the File.

Ibid. 31.] My Soul praises God with Cheerfulness, for mitigating, and giving
us Hopes of removing the Child's Fits: I love the Lord, and depend upon him
more.

April 12.] I acknowledge the great Mercy of God to a young Woman under sore
Temptations, in Answer to Prayer for her, and with her.

School. March 4.] Surprised by a dreadful Fire, that seemed very near us; I
cried to God for sparing Mercy, to my own Habitation and the Town, and God gave
me a gracious Answer.

Ibid. 7.] I found God had heard my Prayer for a Word in Season, to awaken some
poor Sinners, even while my own Heart was dull and drowsy, God alarmed some
that before were dead in Sin.

1699. July 13.] We returned safe from London this Evening, to our own
Habitation, which we had committed to God's Care, who mercifully preserved it,
notwithstanding an Attempt to break it open.

1701. Sept. 7.] I pleaded hard with God to assist his Messenger this Day, to
convince, and convert, and quicken, and comfort by his Word; especially, one
that is under great Guilt and Stupidity -- It appeared God heard my Prayer for
convincing the Guilty, who was brought under great Terror: The Lord carry on
the Work to a thorough Conversion.

1702. Feb. 11.] I begged divine Protection this Day in Journeying, and we were
wonderfully delivered in a very imminent Danger: The Foot-board breaking, the
Coachman fell betwixt the Horses, one of which was very unruly, and had like to
have kicked his Brains out; and both ran several Yards, the Coachman being
within half a Foot of having his Back broke by the Fore-Axle-Tree, ever Mr. B
-- discerned him to be out of the Box: Yet the Lord mercifully stopped the
Horses, and we went on safely; and the Word was sweet to my Soul, and I hope
successful to others.

Ibid. 18.] A dreadful Fire brake out in the Wooll-Hall; the Wind high and
strong, threatening great part of the Town, and my House: In which I looked to
God, that gave me a plentiful Furniture, to preserve and continue what his
Bounty gave, without my Desert, and beyond my Hopes; and my Heart submitted to
his Will, and he soon extinguished the Flame.

March 27.] God answered, and by Conversation with others, I came now to
understand that God had graciously answered my Prayers for my little Niece,
though her Life was denied us; yet God ordained Praise out of the Mouth of that
Babe, who instructed and profited many, by her Discourse and Submission, and
rare Consolations in her Extremity; which I desire to acknowledge to God's
Praise, and my own Encouragement, as a full Answer to the Meaning, and much to
the Words of all my Prayers on her Behalf; and I do here record it for
strengthening my own and others Faith.

Ibid. 28.] Gracious Answers of Prayers, often while I am praying; sometimes soon
after, at other times long after praying but always very seasonable.

April 14.] I begged divine Protection, and went out to visit a sick Friend,
and went safely; but in my Return, the Horses being very unruly, ran us down an
Hill, and against a Bridge, and brake that and the Coach both, yet the Lord
preserved me and two Children with me, that we had no harm.

1703, Nov. 27.] A most tempestuous Night; but God heard Prayer, and preserved
the pleasant Habitation he bestowed upon us: Whilst abundance of other Houses
were laid waste, there was only a very little Glass broke in ours: We were the
wonder of our Neighborhood for Preservation: We gave Thanks to God in secret,
and in the Family, and begged to be distinguished by true Piety, as we were by
providential Care.

1704. July 17.] In great Pain till Noon, when a dreadful Fire raged near our
House: I went up to view it, and prayed to God to distinguish us in the common
Calamity, and preserve the Habitation we asked of, and solemnly dedicated to
him: God heard and turned the Wind to save us -- We committed our selves and
Habitation to God, and slept in Safety.

1705. March 9.] Ill Health inclined me to pensive Sadness; but I was cured in
the Evening by a sinsible Memorial of a gracious Preservation, while a Fire
brake out at Bury, which threatened great Part of the Town; and while Mr. B.
with his Family acknowledged God's Sovereignty and Justice, and our ill
Deserts, and pleaded Mercy, for Christ's sake to spare the Town, and
distinguish between the Pious and the Wicked; the Lord rebuked the Flames, and
spared some good Families in imminent Danger.

Dec. 27.] This Night we had a merciful Rescue from Fire, kindled in a Cellar
among small Wood, not discovered 'till the Morning, just before we met for
Family Prayer.

1706. March 30.] My Prayers for many Months past, now graciously and fully
answered, for a poor unstable Soul under Backslidings, who is now returning
with Shame and Sorrow to the holy Feast he has long neglected: I begged of God
to pity, pardon, comfort, and establish him in his House, and at his Table; and
gave Thanks for his Blessing on his Word preached, and private Conversation and
Prayer for his poor Ambassador.

1707. Jan. 12.] I pleaded God's Promise, to meet and bless his assembled
People, for Strength and Healing to his poor infirm Ambassador, and Success on
his Preaching, and private Instructions -- Bless the Lord, O my Soul! for a
cheerful Day and Evening.

July 17.] At Midnight, a doleful Cry of Fire raised the Town, and our Family
all went forth, save myself and one Servant: I retired to my Closet, and poured
out my Heart to God, and begged the Town might yet be spared, and reformed; his
People distinguished in the threatening Calamity; the Helps preserved and
succeeded: I acknowledged former distinguishing Mercies to me, and many of
God's Children in like Dangers: And the Lord sent a plentiful Shower, and held
the Winds from blowing; and when I went out of my Closet, I perceived an
Abatement of the Flames: I endeavored to improve the Midnight Cry in Discourse
with my Servant; then returned to secret Prayer again for the Town, and the
Lord heard the Cry of the Afflicted, and rebuked the Flames, which were
mastered in less than an Hour and half's Time.

1708. Jan. 22.] The Lord assisted me in pouring out my Heart in secret Prayer
for -- and he presently answered.

March 12.] I had heartily prayed for poor, doubting, trembling Souls, and
found by my Converse with them, that God had graciously heard my Cry, for
supporting them in horrid Temptations, and strengthening them to Combat with
prevailing Corruptions; and still uses unworthy me as an Instrument of some
good to others, though so evil myself: To thee, Lord! be all the Glory.

April 15.] The Lord has heard Prayer, and answered signally, in defeating the
French Invasion; dispersing the false Prophets from these Parts; softning the
Spirits Mr. B. labored with for Famil^-Peace, and obviating a Difficulty in
his Ministerial Office.

1709. April 5.] I was much indisposed and dispirited, and inclined to
Melancholy; and late, in secret Prayer in my Chamber, my Clothes took Fire I
know not how, nor could I discover it 'till I arose from my Knees; yet the
Lord, my Preserver, directed my Hands to subdue it; and my Servants (without my
Calling) came immediately to my Assistance, and I received no harm, blessed be
God!

May 26.] I spent the Forenoon in frequent short Addresses to the Throne of
Grace for seasonable speedy Relief to over-pressed Spirits; I pleaded Promises
to Hearing, and Prayer, and that the Peace of God may guard their Minds, and
make all to work together for good; and concluded with Praise for
distinguishing Mercy to unworthy me, and my Spirit was calm, and I wait in
Faith and Hope of a gracious Answer -- The Prayers of this private Fast were
mercifully answered, June 22. --

1711. Nov. 1.] I received my dear Mr. B. in safety, though pursued by an
Highwayman, late in the dark, so graciously has God heard Prayer for us
asunder.

1712. June 17. to July 9.] In the Morning with an unusual Faith and Fervency,
I was drawn out in secret Prayer for the Church of God, especially in these
sinful Islands -- In the Evening about Seven or Eight a Clock, I was seized
with a violent Rigor upon my Nerves, which lasted all Night, and the next
Morning a Fever succeeded, which affected my Head, that I was incapable of
directing those about me, what to do with me: Yet so graciously did the Lord
hear my daily and last Supplication in secret, that I was willing rather to
depart and be with Christ, and had not one Cloud, Doubt, or Fear of Death through
the whole Sickness: The Disease appeared desperate, and no Hope of my Life from
Humane help remained: But my dear Relations ceased not to pray, and call on
others to join; and many from whom I expected not so great a share of
Affection, were much enlarged in Prayer for me; and the Lord was entreated to
spare a poor, sinful, unworthy, unprofitable Creature, and say, Return; while
the strong Men bowed under the same Disease, and fell down slain, though the same
Physicians, and Means used for them as for my self -- So, Father! it has seemed
good in thy Sight; thy Will be done: But what shall I render? What shall I do?
-- I am thankful for Life; it is God's Gift; it is given in answer of Prayer:
But, Lord! if I improve it not to thy greater Glory, how sad shall I be? Thou
know I had no desire to live, but for better Service: And shall I be called
from a seeming abundant Entrance into Glory again, to struggle with Flesh and
Blood, World and Devil, and not be made more than Conqueror, through the
Captain of my Salvation? O Lord! on thee, through thy Assistance did I cast my
sinful Soul, and loathsome Body, when I thought them parting, without a
relucting Thought: And shall I distrust thy Power, or Love, in what thou have
for me yet to do, or suffer? Strengthen my Faith by this Experience of thy
Power and Goodness, for Jesus sake, whom thou hear always.

1714. Dec. 4.] Being with Mrs. W. in a deplorable Trav^l, she desired me to go
Home and pray for her; and not long after my poor dispatch of the Errand, and
while we were recommending her Case to God in our Family, she was delivered of
a living Son, to our great surprise.

1715. October. 1.] Having been extremely Deaf and Asthmatick, since July 24. I
now hear and breathe with usual freedom: My Hearing returned of a sudden, with
stretching Noise, which I cannot account for: Lord God of Nature! that made
and know every Part, thou can and have healed a poor Worm suddenly and
unaccountably, I will ever praise thee.

1718. Dec. 3, 4.] Thankful for former Experiences, I pleaded God's Promise for
Direction, in a very difficult Affair, resolved to wait his Time and Way -- In
one Hour God opened a promising Scene.

CHAP. VI. Some of her Morning and Evening Remarks.
1690. Sept. 28. O Infinite Love, that have Mercy on whom thou will have Mercy!
after what Indispositions, Sins, Uncomfortableness, and Discouragements, do
thou yet invite, excite, draw, and allure thy poor, wandering, returning,
un-deserving, ill-deserving Dust! Hemingford est mihi Phanuel, ibi apparuit
mihi Dominus.

October 3.] More sparing Communion in secret, more abundant in the Family,
very sweet in the Evening.

Ibid. 30, 31.] Strength to combat, rather than overcome; yet some Victory,
and more expected from the all-conquering Spirit of God, freely promised.

Nov. 4.] Happy Morning! while I enjoyed, what I never deserved to have tasted
more.

1691. Aug. 5.] Bewailing Pride and Peevishness, with little Victory, loathing
my self for dishonouring God, by uncomfortable walking; begging God to show me
why he contended with me, in withdrawing the comfortable Influences of his holy
Spirit.

Octo. 22.] God met his poor Dust in the Morning; but oh! whither did my Heart
wander afterward!

Ibid. 26.] O unstable Soul! how soon diverted from, or disturbed in Acts of
Love and Praise to God, who has given me Songs in the Night.

Nov. 11.] Sweet Assistance and Influence of the good Spirit of Grace this
Morning: Lord! what a Bethel do thou sometimes make my Chamber? What shall. I
render to him that taught me to pray, and so often and manifestly heard and
answered?

Ibid. 30.] O Lord! truly I am thy Servant, I am willing to be at thy Disposal;
and if ever I reluct thy Dispensations again, let this Morning's Entertainment
and Resolution witness against me.

1692. Jan. 16.] More lively, and satisfied in revolving the Thoughts of God,
than in expressing my Wants, Desires, or Acknowledgments in Prayer, yet in both
graciously assisted by the free Spirit -- Some better Temper under sad Tidings
than formerly.

Ibid. 29.] Lord! how unspeakably sweet has this Morning's Address been? Thy
Presence has been better than Life in its utmost Perfection: And if ever I
choose the best of sensual Pleasures before, or with the Abatement of ought I
have tasted this Morning, let these Lines witness against and recall my
backsliding Soul: Oh! that poor deceived Worldings might taste of thy
Provisions! and that thy dear distressed Children might feed joyfully thereon!
Lord, support in the Way those whom thy Grace has made Heirs and Expectants of
future Glory.

Feb. 5.] Three Hours spent at Thurlow-Hall this Day, were more sweet than a
Thousand elsewhere.

Ibid. 13] Lively Communications of the holy Spirit repeated, after all the
Dullness and drooping ^orpors of my Soul, under bodily Distempers: Oh! how
sweetly variegated are my heavenly Father's most wise Dispensations! and how
unthrifty my barren Soul under this rich Manuring! How much still remains of
uncured bewailed Distance from God? Of secret, sly Preferences of poor, sordid,
low, little Interests of this Flesh, to the Glory of my only Rightful
Sovereign, Lord, Owner, Benefactor, final Happiness, etc.

Ibid. 15.] Still adoring the divine Conduct, that by every Wind is driving his
poor, wandering Creature to Eternal Rest.

Ibid. 19.] Ashamed and sad, in consideration of the wonderful Structure of my
Cla^-House, informed by an immortal Spirit, capable of Reflection, etc. so long
utterly, useless to my Creator's Glory: St^ll so little answering the noble
Intentions to which Body and Soul were most wisely and right^^usly directed,
yet adoring the divine Bounty, Pity, and Patience, that pardons, adopts,
sanctifies such unworthy Dust: I resigned Body and Soul entirely to him that
made them, begging a willing, happy Dissolution.

April 5.] Sweet Morning! God has drawn, and my Heart ascended: His Spirit
indicted and urged strong Cries for more Grace, more Stability in Faith,
Obedience, Resignation, Adherence to God my Rock; Purging, Pity, Provision, for
poor, pained, tortured Friends; for Returns to the Erring; Taste of the
Provisions of God's House to Strangers; Success of the Gospel; Reformations of
Churches abroad and at home; particularly, a penitent Temper and Disposition to
England this Day.

Ibid. 7.] Unstable as Water, my Soul cannot excel: Where are the sweet
Influences lately tasted? O immutable, omnipotent Father of Spirits, in thee
only I live, move, and am; thy Gifts and Callings are without Repentance, thou
can raise the Dead, let my Soul revive.

Ibid. 19.] The Lord has made good his Word, on which he has caused me to
hope, evidencing Pardon of Sin, that I cannot say I am sick: So sweetning
bodily Langours, that my Heart chooses Pain and Sickness, with such
Manifestations of Covenant-Love, rather than the best Ease I ever enjoyed, with
less Light of God's Countenance.

July 2.] Pained Flesh, with a placed Mind, makes joyful Groans: Pleading my
Share, through free abounding Grace, in the rich Inventory my Lord has
bequeathed to such vile Dust as I am. If Paul or Apollos, if (...) and Death
are mine, why may I not expect the Promise, and what the holy Spirit has helped
me so often to beg? Lord! say, Amen.

Ibid. 19.] All the World never gave me such satisfying Delight as this
Morning's Communion with God: And whence is this to me, that my Lord will thus
visit, revive, and cherish his poor dull, languishing, unworthy Child! O what
shall the full, satisfying, assimilating, eternal, immediate Vision of God be!

Sept. 1.] My Joy soon abated; it is April Weather with me; I am still in a
floating Island: Lord! when shall I dwell on the Continent?

Ibid. 16.] Sorely afflicted with acute Pains, and threatening Symptoms; yet
encouraged and upheld by the Light of God's Countenance, better than Life or
Ease. My Soul thirsted after God; I was free from the Terror of the dark
Valley, to which I though it myself approaching: Desirous to be dissolved, yet
willing to live, if I might thereby more honor God.

Ibid. 20.] Awaked with God, but presently wandering from him, recovered in
Reading, Meditation, and Prayer: Lord! increase my Faith to a more steady
fixing on thee, my God, my All.

Ibid. 27.] Lord! how good art thou? How vile am I? Sad Reflection on the
Fountain that sends forth vain and evil Thoughts.

Ibid. 30.] The brightest Manifestation of divine Love soon hid by Clouds of
vain and wicked Tho'ts, which yet distilling in penitental Tears, are succeeded
with sweet Glances: Lord! if such Thorns in the Flesh must follow every Lift
which thou give me Heavenward, let it keep me more humble, watchful, and
prayerful, and strengthen my Faith in all.

October. 14.] The Lord is my Shepherd, Physician, Pilot, to him I cried and
cleave, and he has brought back my wandering, healed and guided my wounded
Soul, and spoke my tumultuous Thoughts and Passions into a sweet Calm: Return
to thy Rest, O my Soul! and let this Experience teach thee whither to fly in
future Storms, from Satan or thy raging Lusts.

Ibid. 19.] Still met, encouraged, and assisted; acting weak, and begging
stronger Faith on my Almighty Redeemer, with thankful Acknowledgment of his
powerful Aid, subduing my Corruptions, helping me to plead for a further
Effusion of the Spirit, and to long for spotless Perfection in Glory.

Dec. 14.] Glorious Sights of future Glory sweeter the World's Frowns and
Death's Terrors: And now Lord! let me see Man no more on Earth, if I may see
the Redeemer of lost Man in Glory: O the Triumphs of thy Love! And what can
vile Dust say more? Is this the manner of Men, O Lord! who is it that finds his
Enemy and lets him go? But how long, and how often have thou found me in Enmity,
and rescued me from my self-ruining Lusts? And now shined into my ungrateful
Soul, as if I had never grieved thy Spirit: Oh! keep for ever the Impressions
of thy mysterious Love on my unstable Spirit.

1693. Jan. 2.] I adore thy preventing Grace to an unworthy, yet returning
Prodigal: Lord! how have thou confuted my guilty Fears, and made me joyful in
the House of Prayer! O let unparalleled Love beget some suitable Affections
that may never wear off, and keep alive present Resentments, 'till I begin
Eternal Hallelujahs. Amen.

Ibid. 6.] Some Help, more Hope of the Spirit of Grace to purify, sanctify,
etc. Lord! what cannot free Grace make of the vilest Wretch! on thy
Righteousness alone I rest my guilty polluted Soul; help, Lord!

Ibid. 21.] Serious Reflections on the uncreature-like Temper of my Spirit from
Infancy to Age, humbled my Soul, and makes me adore divine Patience, and
thankful for a begun Cure, and good hope through Grace, of perfect Purity.

Feb. 1.] Pain continued, but greatly sweetened by Communion with God: Some
Tastes of, and Breathings after my heavenly Country -- A comfortable Meeting
with my Beloved in his House; I adored his condescending Love, in teaching
vile, dull, froward me by Word, Rod, and Spirit.

Ibid. 9.] Awaked with God, and found his good Spirit drawing my Heart upward;
and some H^lp against spiritual Enemies, that had made me weary of my Life:
Willing to follow where God leads, though sore against my natural Inclination.

Ibid. 11.] Crying to God that heals my bodily Infirmities, to perfect the Work
of Sanctification on my Soul, longing for Cleansing from the Leprosy of Sin,
though by pulling down the House.

Ibid. 16.] Continual violent Pains render me incapable of Reading, Prayer, or
Meditation: Yet willing of any Discipline for Cure of spiritual Maladies, under
which I still labor: Strike, Lord! so thou still healest; Wound for Cure, and
spare not.

Ibid. 27.] Adoring the Wisdom of God that reserved such full Discoveries of
Sin to Maturity, that might have sunk me in my first Conversion: Applying
Christ's Blood, pleading his Covenant, and Promises of Cleansing: Begging his
daily Aid in Temptation, and Conduct in Life, with entire Submission
endeavored and aimed at, bemoaning Reluctances, etc.

April 11.] Still indulged by smiling Providence, begging my corrupt Nature
may not turn Mercies to my Bane, or abuse the tender Love of God to his
Dishonor, but in all the Sweetness tasted in the Streams, be led to the
Fountain, and find this Day's expected Meeting in God's House blessed to that
End God heard and answered, and my Soul was encouraged against the Fear of
Death, and refreshed and comforted.

Ibid. 24.] I began the Day comfortably, but hastily accepted an Invitation to
a Journey of Pleasure, before I had Time to ask Counsel of God, made me fear
the Success; but the Lord was gracious, and preserved me, and sweetened the Day
by good Company in singing to his Praise.

May 6.] Reflicting on my sinful Soul, from my Childhood to this Day, I find my
Heart humbled with amasing Sorrow for what I still remember, and feel the
Remainders of, and astonished at the Patience of God, in whose sight all my
past, (remembered and forgotten Sins, as to me) are still present, that yet
waits to be gracious to an ungrateful and rebellious Creature: I acknowledge, I
deserve nothing but Hell, yet fly to his offered Mercy in Christ, and beg he
would deal with my Sins after his own hatred of them, and show Mercy to me,
miserable Sinner, according to the Tenor of his gracious Covenant in Christ
Jesus.

Ibid. 23.] Grieved at my rash Compliances, with missing the Lecture this Day
by my Friends soliciting and engaging me Yesterday to a Journey before due
Consideration) I cried to God for Pardon in the Blood of Christ, that cleanses
from all Sin, and begged his holy Spirit to compensate my guilty Loss of
public Ordinances by private Conversation, and resolve in his Strength against
hasty Resolutions for the future -- The Lord was gracious and heard my Prayer,
and made the Day comfortable.

Ibid. 30.] Interrupted in secret Duties by Business, sincerely designed to the
Glory of God; the Success answered not my Care, yet the Lord was gracious, and
heard the poor, wandering, short Requests of my Soul, and made me adore his
Love, and loath myself.

August 4.] The God of Love drew near to my Soul, and made me taste
inexpressible Instances of his Power and Love, that carried me above former
Temptations, that used to entangle and ensnare my Soul: And filled me with
joyful Hope of his eternal Love, that my Soul ascended in a Flame of Love and
Desire to be with him -- His powerful Influence this Morning experienced, makes
me submit to his Pleasure, in continuing my painful Combat with Sin, and
abates the Horror of Suffering, 'till he shall in Mercy call me from both, to
eternal Rest and Glory.

Ibid. 24.] I adore thy Goodness in Evidences of thy Love to me (such
ungrateful Dust) and of my Love to thee, though so mixed, imperfect, and languid,
that I loath myself -- O Lord! let Love beget Love; and now, when I begin to
cry, thou hear, and my Heart begins to burn.

Sept. 2.] Sadly disturbed with mere Trifles: Lord! how impossible is it to
watch one Hour without thee? Reviewing the Temper and Transactions of my Soul,
and the Dealings of God with me the Year past, I find Matters of deep
Humiliation from the constant Eruptions of my polluted Nature -- Unkind,
ungrateful, unnatural Carriage, to the most beneficent, indulgent, patient,
compassionate Father, Redeemer, and Comforter -- Sufficient Grace in doleful
Combats, encouraging Answers of Prayer in all my Distresses; so that the Joys
and Sorrows of the past Year, seem higher and deeper than in any preceding
Year.

Ibid. 4.] O Lord! that have promised, if I resist thou would make my Enemy
fly: And have enabled me to resist, make good thy Word to thy Servant, on which
thou have caused me to hope, and give me in due Time, a joyful Victory, and in
the mean Time sufficient Grace, for so thy sealed Covenant assures me, on which
I humbly challenge thee --

Ibid 16.] Indisposed Body clogging my ascending Soul: Relucting Flesh
struggling with a resigning Will: The holy Spirit assisting, some Victory;
sweet, calm, joyful Hope, Love, and Longing for the Coming of my Lord,
Redeemer; my Life, Love, Joy, and Crown.

Ibid 26.] Lifted up in Reading, Meditation, and Prayer, more than ordinary; so
far above the World that it was almost painful to converse in it.

Nov. 4.] Reflecting on my State, God gave me his Spirit to bear Witness with
mine, of his Grace in Conversion, rescuing my miserable, guilty, lost Soul, by
his precious Blood and almighty Power, and filled my Heart with Joy, and melted
it with filial Sorrow: Increased and encouraged its Dependence on my Lord,
Redeemer, and excited Love, and Longing after further Enjoyments of him.
Viewing my sinful Heart and Life more fully, my Soul was amazed to doleful
Dullness, and lost its lively Sense of Christ's dying Love.

Dec. 11.] I heartily and entirely resigned all I had, or would have, to God's
dispose, resolving to Praise and Love him, whatever he does with His, or Mine,
or Me -- Thus the God of Love laid in his Cordials to prevent the Fainting of
my Soul under a sharp Dispensation; and in a few Hours after, I received the
News of dear Sister H's Death, with more Composure of my Spirit than I
expected, and with more cheerful Resignation than I ever yet experienced, under
so afflicting a Stroke: Yet the awful Sense of God's Anger, together with
natural Affection to the Deceased, and her surviving Children, ruffled my Mind
into a Dispute of God's being a God hearing Prayer.

1694. Jan. 3.] A painful, thoughtful Morning: No Guess yet at God's Meaning in
this unpleasant Justle, from sweet Retirement in the Country, to sad Noise in
London; yet unfeignedly willing, and will be thankful for any Method that shall
cure the loathed Corruptions of my Heart, in hopes whereof I came, as I
supposed, at God's Call, and wait his Pleasure, and beg his Spirit to supply
all my Wants, and qualify for all Duty.

Ibid. 6.] I poured out my Complaints to God, and urged the Promise of his holy
Spirit; and appealed to his All-searching Eye the sincerity of my Heart in
following his Call to this Place, and begged his Direction and Presence in
Spiritual and Temporal Affairs, resting my guilty, weary Soul, and all secular
Difficulties, on him that came to minister to the Necessities of lost Man.

April 3.] Blessed be the God of all Mercy, who graciously preserved my
Habitation in the Country from Fire, kindled an Hour before it was discovered,
that I had no Injury thereby.

June 12.] Confined to my Bed 'till Four in the Afternoon, in great Pain and
Indisposition of Body and Spirit, yet supported to Patience, under my own and
Relations Calamity: When I arose, I cried to the God of Truth, to pay what had
been lent to him, in Pity to the Poor, and he heard and helped e're Sunset.

Octo. 20.] A Fire broke out near my Chamber in the Evening, which was
mercifully put out with little Disturbance to me; and another season^bly
prevented at Midnight, without my Knowledge or Care.

Ibid. 23.] Some sweet foretasts of the Pleasures of a disembodied State: Ah!
too short, imperfect, distant! Bless the Lord, O my Soul! for any thing in
present, with future Hope.

Nov. 5.] Blessed be God, my Rock and Strength, though my Joys are often
interrupted, my solid Peace and Satisfaction is continued.

Ibid. 14.] My Soul melt^d in Meditation on the free, boundless, surpassing
Love, Patience, Bowels, of my heavenly Father, so far above the tenderest,
earthly Parents: Ashamed at, and mourning over the shortness and peevish
Impatience of my Spirit, when I see not all I would in young ones: I went from
my Knees without begging a Blessing on public Ordinances, and succeeded
accordingly.

Ibid. 22.] I found gracious Assistance in Conversation with poor mistaken
Souls.

1695. May 20.] Very ill, and indisposed in Body and Mind; in sad Apprehensions
of a Decay of Piety in some dear to me.

June 20.] My Soul has still in Remembrance the Wormwood and the Gall: The
Sins that stained my Youth and riper Age, and still are the Plague, and Sore,
and Shame, which I bemoan and beg healing for, more than the remove of any
Sickness or Smart.

July 17.] A rash Word brake from my Lips, which my Heart smote me for
immediately; and I lift up my Soul for Pardon, and do believe it forgiven, and
do resolve to be more watchful for the future.

Aug. 14.] Sad Tidings of awful National Dispensations sent my Soul to my
everlasting Rock with more fervent Prayer and fixed Heart: Lord! increase
Faith, and fit for all Events, that Glory may redound to thee, whatever becomes
of poor Worms.

Ibid 30.] A comfortable Day filled with personal and relative Mercy. Excited
to Praise and Joy, Love and Thankfulness.

Sept. 8.] To the living God will I ever carry my dead Heart, for he quickens
it.

Ibid 13.] Refer^ing my own and my Friends Remove to God, I begged of him that
guides the Birds of the Air to their Nests, to appoint the Bounds of our
Habitation, where he might delight to dwell, and we may abide under the Shadow
of the Almighty.

October. 5.] I left Norwich comfortably and cheerfully, with good Hope, through
free abounding Grace of the Pardon of all my Sins in that, and all the Places
God has sent me to, and been with me in: I came safe to Katton, and praised the
Lord.

Ibid 18.] This Morning my Chamber has been sweeter to me, than a Thousand
elsewhere; Lord! what Approaches can thou make to a Soul in Clay! How sweet
thy Word read and meditated on, when thy holy Spirit assists! what strong
Consolations!

Ibid 19.] My Soul was tuned to Praise: Ruffled by a Surprise, but soon
recovered by looking from Instruments to God.

Nov. 1.] The Lord has guided and sweetly calms my Spirit, and gives some
Victory over Passion, Pride, Impatience; Reluctance at divine Disposals, and
Joy and Thankfulness in and for his redeeming Love -- Adoring my heavenly
Father in wounding and healing my sinful Soul and Body, praying for them that
ungratefully treat me, and for the Seed of his Servants.

Ibid 20.] Begging that free Grace may lay hold on young Ones under my Care,
and that all the Vanity and Vexation that stains my choicest Creature Comforts,
may wean me from over-lov'd Enjoyments.

Dec. 29.] A comfortable Day in God's House: A seasonable Supply, when I had
taken the last to give the Poor.

1696. Jan. 3.] Dull and pensive under ungrateful Treatment from Creatures, yet
well satisfied in my heavenly Father's Love and Discipline, choosing rather a
bitter Weaning from, than an inordinate Love to any Thing here, and far less
grieved thereat.

Ibid 29.] Thankful to God for innumerable Instances of hearing Prayer, healing
Diseases, especially spiritual; for gracious Ductures, bountiful Supplies;
secret Methods of Mercy to me, and mine, and His: Adoring his Grace in
honoring an unworthy Worm in sowing and affording Seed, blessing and returning
Seed sown in better Blessings: Lord! I adore thee, for what am I?

July 21.] I had ravishing Consolations from my Beloved, that filled my Heart
with Joy, and my Tongue with singing: While my pained Head and trembling Hand
forbid Writing, my Joys are beyond Expression.

Ibid 28.] My pained Head, and trembling Nerves, and fainting Spirits, hinder
not the Joys of the holy Spirit -- I heartily thank and praise God for every
chastising Rod, and pray (as for my own Soul) for those he has made Instruments
of my Trouble; I own the longest, sharpest Correction, far less then I deserve,
and no more than I have needed: I humbly bow to thy Will, and accept with Love
and Reverence, all thy Chastisements, and cast my self and all my Cares on
thee. Witness my Hand, E. Lloyd.

Aug. 28, 29.] The Lord was gracious and continued Health and Strength; and
which was far better, the Assistances and sweet Influences of his holy Spirit,
my Sanctifier, Supporter, Comforter, Advocate, and Pledge of eternal Life:
Lord! all my sweet Calms and Peace, my Dependence, Resignation, Acquiescence,
and Submission, is thy Gift, thy Work: O never leave thy ill-deserving Worm,
that can do nothing, or enjoy any thing without thee.

Sept. 1.] Angry Resentments of past Injuries rising in my Spirit, were sweetly
calmed by lively Meditation on the Life of Sorrow, and cruel Death of my Lord,
Redeemer; in which, his holy Spirit influenced my Soul, on whose enlightening,
sanctifying, comforting Operation I do and will rely for Mortification,
Vivification, Direction, help in Prayer, etc. and acknowledge to the Glory of
free Grace the good Experience of all for many Years.

October. 20, 21.] Having begged God's Direction, and following the Call of his
Providence as near as I can discern, I set forward for Bury; and though my Horse
fell down ^n a great Water, I was graciously preserved without hurt -- My Mind
grew pensive and sad at leaving the Place, and Instruments God had made greatly
comfortable to me: I renewed my Resignation, and bewailed my Reluctance, and
appealed to God my unfeigned Design to follow his Direction in the Change and
Choice of an Habitation, and the Lord mercifully preserved me, and brought me
safe to my Lodgings there, Ibid. 22. -- Where, I hope, he will be with me,
instead of Friends amongst Strangers.

Ibid. 28.] The Lord was gracious, and heard my Cry, and gave his sweet Spirit
to enlighten and quicken my Heart in Reading and Meditation, and helped my
Infirmity, and gave such sweet Tastes of the harmonising Praises of Angels, and
perfected Spirits, that my Soul ascended where it would ever, ever dwell: And
now my Midnight is turned into one of the most joyful Mornings I ever enjoyed:
I waited patiently on the Lord, and he has heard and answered, and my Soul
does magnify the Lord, and rejoices in God my Savior -- Lord! never be a
Stranger to thy poor Worm in the Habitation thou have chosen for me.

Ibid. 30.] A gracious return of Prayer in a comfortable Habitation; Friends
amongst Strangers, bountiful Supplies, kindest Intimations of my heavenly
Father's Love, Care, Wisdom, Pity, Pardon, to unworthy me all my Life long, and
most evidently in his late Dispensations of Providence.

Nov. 1.] Lord! how sweet are the Prelibations of an eternal Sabbath, while my
Soul follows after thee, and thou stoopest to converse with one single Worm in
secret Duties: Lord! for Fire out of the Mouth of thy Witness this Day to
consume my Dross, to quicken Grace, and to invigorate my Spirit.

1697. Jan. 3.] God taught me to Pray, and heard my Cry; he assisted his
Messenger to draw the Bow with full Strength, and to cry to him to direct the
Arrow, and gives hopes of answering: Lord! I look, and will wait for some of
the Arrows from thy Quiver this Day, to stick fast in my own and other's Souls:
I bless thy Name for sweet Directions to live on another's Life, to satisfy by
another's Righteousness, and to act in another's Strength: Lord! strengthen thy
weak Dust.

Ibid. 10.] I earnestly asked for more powerful Operations of the holy
sanctifying Spirit to heal, unite, and purge, my earthly wandering Soul, and
carry on hopeful begun Convictions, wherein poor unworthy Dust has been so much
honored -- A gracious Answer of Prayer for this.

Feb. 2.] Some suitable Affections to my dear Redeemer: Kindly Mourning for,
and hatred to my Sins* My Soul drawn out in Love, Hope, and Faith, to him that
so dearly puchased, so firmly purposed to sanctify it: Lord! what is all this
World to me, whilst thou thus expressest thy Love? Oh! keep it for ever on my
Heart; cloth me with the Sun of Righteousness, and the Moon will be under my
Feet.

Ib^d. 12, 13.] Some Passages of divine Providence made my Way dark, in which I
begged Direction in Prayer, and wait in Hope.

Ibid. 18.] Still flying to God to direct my Spirit, under Difficulties his
Providence has led me into; and I cannot, by all my Understanding, extricate
myself from: And therefore I do, and will cast my Care on him, believing his
Power, and Wisdom, and Truth, I rely on his promised Direction, and humbly beg
the Event in Mercy, not in Judgment.

Ibid. 25, 26.] Calm and quiet, begging and waiting for Direction in
Difficulties -- Confused again, and unquiet: Lord! what mutable unstable
Affections! I bemoaned the jarring Ataxy in my distorted Soul: I endeavored to
retrieve what had disquieted my Mind, yet not knowing what to do, my eyes are
to the Lord.

March 4.] Still begging my Way to be made plain, Providence seems to confine
me to the Place. God sent me a wise and faithful Friend, whose Counsel was
contrary to my Expectation, for complying with what I disputed.

Ibid. 9.] The Lord drew near, and taught me to Pray, and heard my Prayer and
made my Chamber his Presence Chamber, and assured me of his Love, and that all
his Ways should be Mercy and Truth: Lord! do what thou please in all
Occurrences of Life, and never suffer my Heart to reluct -- At Night I found
plain Directions of Providence to abide in this Place; and what I had
discouraged, was still continued.

Ibid. 23.] In the Multitude of my troubled Tho'ts thy Comforts delight my
Soul: I adore the Mercy of a free and frequent Address to God, my unerring
Counselor, and unchangeable Lover, who has given me Heart's Ease in Prayer,
and some hope of seeing the Beauty of late dark Dispensations.

Ibid. 27.] Sweet Morning Hours, while God descended, and my Soul ascended.

April 3.] The Lord helped me to cast my feeble, pensive, weary, wavering,
perplexed, tumultuous Soul, on the Conduct of my sweet Guardian, and found a
gracious Calm before I slept.

Ibid. 7.] I was again called to the Thoughts I had dismissed, and finding both
Counselors and Counseled had referred the Matter in Dispute to God's
Direction, and appointed some Hours next Morning to seek God apart, I resolved
to endeavor to unite my Cries, and to prepare my self this Evening accordingly.

Ibid. 8.] The Lord prepared my Heart to, and graciously assisted me in Prayer:
I wait with equal Mind the Event, and verily hope* the Issue will be Glory to
God, and Comfort to me: I have left it entirely to God's dispose, and beg plain
direction, and promise to follow cheerfully where God leads. Witness my Hand,
E. Ll.

Ibid. 9.] Not yet fully satisfied in God's direction in the Matter, I verily
think sincerely referred to him on both sides: Yet I stand to my Resolution,
neither to choose nor refuse for myself: I wait farther Advice of Praying
Friends, and observe all providental Hints: I cannot discern any Guile in my
own Spirit, but humbly appeal to God my willingness to be determined either
way; I still, through his Grace, love and long to be with him, rather than to
live here with the best Relation I ever saw, or hope to see -- I waited Counsel
from a godly grave Divine; and after some Hours Discourse and Prayer, my Mind
was quietly settled in the Affirmative, verily supposing God has called me
again to a married Life.

Ibid. 11.] A gracious Answer of what I had often asked, viz. that God would
evidence the late Dispensations of his Providence toward me, were in Mercy, by
more Communion with himself, etc. My Soul followed hard after God, and he drew
nearer and nearer still, and has made me see, and taste, and feel more of his
Grace, and Love, and powerful charming Influences on dull unworthy Dust.

Ibid. 12.] In a short Review of the mysterious Providence that have perplexed
my Thoughts for some Months past, I find reason to adore infinite Wisdom that
now unriddles the Ingratitude and Unkindness of some over-lov'd Friends, the
fond Inclinations of others to draw and drive me to the Center he has
appointed: I humbly appeal to him, I have not led but followed; and I depend on
his Wisdom and Strength for the Duties he calls me to, and the Troubles I shall
meet with in the change of my Condition: I adore his infinite Mercy for drawing
my Heart nearer to himself, by the solemn Addresses made for his Direction; and
for wi^e and godly Friends, Counsels, and Prayers, and for the perfect
Composure of my Spirit, while I supposed the Answer of Prayer in the Negative,
and yet no less acquiescence, since on solemn asking of God by four apart, I
verily conclude the Affirmative to be my Duty; and must say with the Prophet,
Thou have persuaded me.

May 4, 6.] My Way seems plain, and I follow as God leads.

I resolve, through assisting Grace, if my Health allows the change of my
Condition, that I will endeavor to spend my Health and Strength, given me in a
more active Life, to the glory of God and good of Man: But if my Work be done,
I am willing rather to be absent from this World, that I may be ever with my
dear Lord, my best Husband, Father, and Friend; and beg, with Submission, to
die in my present State, rather than live to the Injury of another.

Ibid. 28.] In Consideration of all Circumstances, resolved to publish my
Consent.

Ibid. 29.] God drew out my Soul in Prayer for Grace in the Relation he calls
me to, and encouraged my Hope in his Mercy, notwithstanding my Sins and
Unworthiness; and I went out free from Pain, and with less Fear than I expected.

June 26.] My Soul praised the Lord for manifold Mercies in his late Conduct of
my Concerns.

Sept. 20.] Leaving my Lodgings, I begged of God the Pardon of all my Sins in
that Place, and an Heart ready to forgive all Injuries, and God's Presence and
Conduct in the Place appointed for my Habitation; for Servants that may be his
as well as mine; for Wisdom to walk in my House in a perfect way.

October. 7.] A Messenger from St. Ives hastened me thither to bury my dear
Mother, who died with less trouble than she feared: Not more than half an
Hour's Struggle landed her safe where, for so many Years, she longed to be.

Nov. 18.] The Lord was gracious, and made one half Hour's Retirement better to
me than many Hours at another Time -- Great were the Mercies of the Day, God
was graciously present with all his Ambassadors, in Assisting and Dedicating
our New House and Family this Day to God -- The whole was a sweet Day.

Ibid. 25.] This Day we determined to seek God apart, but concluded it
together: God melted and humbled my Soul in penitent Confessions, and drew out
my Requests for Pardon and Cleansing.

Dec. 21.] How sweetly has God met and melted my Heart in secret, Lord! what
Love Tokens? what kind Regards? Answers of Prayer? Strength and Joy of Soul,
have thou allowed thy vilest, unworthy, froward Child!

School. Jan. 22.] Anxious Fore-thoughts spoiled my secret Duties; fain would my
Soul have wrestled and prevailed, but dull and drowsy, my Time was lost in
secret.

Ibid. 24.] Some hope that God has heard my Prayer for two Persons that came to
be instructed this Morning.

May 24.] The Lord supplied my Wants beyond Expectation, and I gave what I had
dedicated to maintain the Gospel, with a cheerful Heart.

Sept. 8.] I was much comforted at the Baptism of two adult Persons; and adored
the Mercy of God to me, that sealed with me the Covenant of Grace, and after
applied the Blood of Sprinkling, while in the Vanity of my Childhood and Youth,
I forfeited all Right to my baptismal Covenant, and that he has ever since
pitied, and pardoned, and healed my Backslidings.

Ibid. 14, 15.] The Lord preserved us from violent Men, and kept all our Bones
unbroken, though my Servant had a dangerous Fall, and a Person murdered on the
Heath.

1699. Jan. 25.] I walked to a Lecture safely, and without prejudice to my
Health, at Sixteen Miles distance, and had sweet Entertainment to my Soul there.

Ibid. 26.] My Servant returned safe from St. Ives, without loss of Money, or
any great Injury to himself or Horse, though pursued, as we supposed by Seven
Highwaymen upon the Road.

Ibid 29.] Almost discouraged at the Ignorance of Servants, I cried to God for
Light and Life for the Dark and Dead.

Feb. 17, 18.] God has graciously added many Answers of Prayer for Relations
under Difficulties, and for Family-Peace: No more Strife now among my Servants,
but who shall learn their Catechism soonest, my Soul praises the God of Peace,
etc.

May 19.] I returned safe from a Journey, and found my heavenly Father's Care
of my House and Servant, though the House had been often designed to have been
broken open, as my Servant overheard, th^o' a Window.

Ibid 29.] We gave Thanks to God apart and together, for all the Mercies of
our Lives, and particularly, for the divine Conduct that brought us together
(as on this Day) and has so firmly united our Hearts to each other: We prayed
for our Servants, and committed them, and our Habitation, and Affairs to God.

July 20.] I had Tidings of a Man killed on the Road, from London, at the same
Time that I and mine traveled safely 'till after Nine in the Evening, on the
Eleventh Instant -- Blessed be God.

Nov. 25.] Shortened in my Morning Retirement by Company, and in the Evening so
overcome with Sleep, that I totally forgot to pray in secret 'till next Morning.

Ibid 26.] I awaked in Sadness for my Evening Drowsiness and Neglect of Duty,
and cried to God for Pardon, and Help to overcome my Torpor, which is, to my
own Power, Invincible, and my continual Burden in Winter.

Dec. 22.] In the Night, God struck a young Relation with great Terror and
Distress of Spirit, which gives me hope of her Conversion: I begged of God to
direct his Work in Truth on her Soul; and that this may be a Pledge of the
Return of all the Souls under our Charge to God -- That this and other Seals
might be added to public and private Labors.

1700. Feb. 29.] My Soul was humbled in me for the Wickedness and obstinate
Impenitence of a Servant, which God had directed us to take, after we had
seriously sought divine Direction together and apart.

March 1.] With the most melting Entreaties we could, we renewed our
Exhortation, that the Criminal would make open and ingenuous Confession, and
begged earnestly of God to move her Heart thereto; but the poor Wretch left our
House in wilful Impenitency, however we continued our earnest Prayer for her.

April 18.] I found some Hearts-Ease in sending my Thoughts after Mr. B. in a
long Letter, and why should I not be as cheerful in pouring out my Heart to
God, my compassionate Father and Husband always present, ever willing and able
to answer all my Desires when good for me.

October. 11.] The epidemical Fever, carrying off so many Couples, made me
apprehensive we might soon follow, which put me upon more actual Preparation;
and I find myself willing, that Death should perfect that begun Work of
Sanctification, as soon as God pleases: I commit my Soul and Body, Relations,
Interests, and Designs, all to God's dispose.

1701. March 10.] I met my Beloved at a Meeting of praying Christians, where
every Mouth expressed much of my Heart to God.

Ibid 27.] I received an hopeful Account of a dear Relation, for whom my Heart
has long been drawn out in Prayer, and am now thankful for good Hope that God
has directed his Work in Truth on that Soul.

April 12.] In perplexing Difficulties about the Relief of my poor Relations,
for fear of dishonouring God, by intangling myself in Debts, or in denying what
Help might be in my Power to the Afflicted.

May 1.] I committed myself and Family to God, and begged divine Protection in
my Journey to London, and a Restraint on the Tongues of wicked Company, if such
should Travel with me -- Two such I found, but I left my Testimony against
them, 'till they were silenced.

Ibid 23.] God brought a Child of godly Parents into our Family in great
Anguish of Spirit, after many Convictions baffled, and about thirty Years
neglect of Gospel Grace, and now seems to lay hold on her; for which I blessed
God in my Closet, and begged the Work might go on in her, and begin in others
in my Family, and my Faith in that Promise of training up Children, though after
many Years, is strengthened by this Instance.

Ibid 29.] In a short Review of my Life past, I adored divine Patience,
Goodness and Wisdom, that have been exercised toward me from my Birth to this
Day; bringing me into so noble a Being; sustaining so polluted a Wretch, a
Transgressor from the Womb; bearing so long the Rebellions and Vanities of my
Youth; wisely chastning my proud Spirit by the Displeasure of some, and by
Disappointments from others; drawing me by his Word and Spirit, and driving me
by Affliction to Prayer, and encouraging my early Addresses to him; disposing
me comfortably into the World; imbittering over-lov'd Enjoyments, to wean me
from them; bringing me into nearer Communion with himself, graciously directing
by his Providence (as upon this Day) to a second Marriage; and giving me
Comfort in it, beyond my Faith or Prayers.

Aug. 3.] The Lord quieted my pensive murmuring Soul under Domestic
Discouragements, by reading Judas's Treason against the Lord. Alas! how little
can I bear the Perfidies of Servants, when (...) dear Lord, with such Meekness
and Patience, bear the Treason of one he had Prayed with and Instructed, and
indulged in his Family? I earnestly pleaded with God to touch the Hearts of
those that were under my Care; and thankfully adored the free Grace of God that
has already laid hold on some under our Roof.

1702. June 22.] The Lord still Corrects me with some disobedient Servants, but
not so bad as myself to a better Master.

Aug. 8.] God in his All-wise Providence necessitates me to Housekeeping, which
I desire cheerfully to submit to as his Choice, though against my own
Inclination.

1703. Feb. 19.] Reading the Diary of one formerly appearing to himself and
others in a state of Conversion, but since Apostatized, made my Heart tremble,
and cry to God to direct his Work in Truth on my own and others Hearts, and to
help me to search and try, and prove myself, least any Root of Apostasy should
be hid in my false and treacherous Heart.

May 24.] Having solemnly begged the divine Protection and Blessing, in my
Closet, in the Family, and in the Congregation, I am now committing myself to
God, and following his Call to Bath, if it may be for the Recovery of Mr. B.'s
Health and my own -- Hitherto God has led me in pleasant Paths, beyond all I
have asked or thought; and made what I once greatly feared, to be the greatest
outward Blessing I ever enjoyed -- I have met with sore Rebukes in my Servants,
that has brought the Idleness, Vanity, and Stubborness of my Youth to my
remembrance, and humbled my Soul: Lord! give me true Repentance and Pardon, and
yet choose and bless my Family according to the Multitude of thy tender
Mercies. Amen.

Ibid. 29, 30.] My (...) still continues, but God supports, and I submit.

Aug. 1.] I humbly appeal to God, I never consented to depart from him, and
depend on his Covenant I never shall.

Ibid 7.] If I were now before the awful Tribunal of God, I can still make the
same Appeal, that I never consented to depart from him, his House, or Service,
since I solemnly sealed my Covenant with him, 1673. All my involuntary Sins,
Ingratitude, Unprofitableness, Decays, Wanderings, etc. are my daily Griefs and
Burden, and weary me more of Life, than any Trouble I feel, or ever did feel
in this World.

October. 18.] I spent most of the Day in Company, where I could neither do or
receive the good I would, yet in Conscience of Duty, I dare not refuse common
Civilities.

Dec. 4.] Indisposed Health, with many Mercies, made me both sign and sing.

1704. Feb. 1, 2, 3.] The Lord abounds toward me in spiritual and temporal
Blessings, and I am jealous of my Heart being too well content to live here,
yet I do humbly protest against Ishmael's Portion, and beg to be willing rather
to depart and be with Christ, than to enjoy the greatest Mercies here allowed
me.

March 1, 2.] I have been now for Sixty Years God's Care and Charge; and
acknowledge to the Glory of his infinite Mercy, that never was more unworthy
Creature more indulged, pitied, faithfully and wisely chastened, drawn, and
driven to God, my chief Good, by Mercies, Afflictions, Ordinances, Providence,
all made successful by the holy Spirit's Influences upon my Soul.

October 6.] A poor Woman died in a Barn alone, too much neglected by the
Parish, but unknown to me: I adored the Mercy of God to me and mine, never
exposed to such Wants or Neglects.

Ibid 20.] I am purposed that my Lips shall not transgress; but, Lord! how apt
am I to repine at thy providential Dispensations! Oh! keep my Heart and Tongue
from Peevishness, and strengthen me for all thou call me to do or suffer,
'till thou take me to Rest and Joy for ever, with my Lord Redeemer, Amen.

Dec. 21.] I was deeply affected with sad and scandalous Enormities among some
Professors, an^ begged the Spirit of Grace to reform and sanctify by the Means
of Grace.

Ibid. 30.] In a short Review of the Year past, I find great Reason to adore
and love God, and abhor myself.

1705. Jan. 1.] Reflecting on the Year past, my Heart was humbled for much
Frowardness, Ingratitude, and Dullness: I adored the Patience and Kindness of
God to me: I begged his Blessing to accompany his Chastenings, and with
Thankfulness acknowledged the abundant Mercies of the last Year -- I reviewed
the State of my Soul, and find good hope, through Grace, that I am my Beloved's,
and he is mine. I spent two Hours in Prayer with Mr. B. acknowledging our Sins
and God's Mercies: Begging Pardon, and a Blessing on our selves, Relations, the
Church, the World, particularly on the Ministry of this Country. I was
encouraged to plead with poor Sinners for God, and with God for them, by
hearing of one I had conversed and prayed with in the Year 1692, owning, that
her first Impressions were from that Time: Many Instances I have had the Year
past of God's hearing my Prayer for, and blessing my Conversation with Friends,
in Diffi^ulti^^, and Trouble of Spirit -- In the whole Year, I have sung of
Mercy and Judgment. Mr. B.'s Health and my own have been much broken, and yet
the Lord (...) suported us under Pain and Languishing, and blessed some Means
for the Mitigation of Pains, and Abatement of Distempers! Sent us many loving
Friends to comfort and assist us, and given us faithful and religious Servants;
and which is far above all, has often lifted up the Light of his Countenance on
us, and given the Aids of his Spirit.

Ibid. 19.] Much comforted in reading Bishop Patrick's Witnesses to Jesus: My
Soul blessed God for every helping Hand to Faith, and begged more Unity and
Purity, for all that Profess the Christian Religion; the Taste of which, in
any, I find to unite my Heart to them without Distinction.

April 18.] Late in the Night, I received an Account of the Return of Mr. B.'s
Fever, at London, and great Hazard of his Life: I sought means to get to him;
but God shut me up at Home, which filled my Heart with Sorrow, and banished all
Sleep from my Eyes 'till Morning.

Ibid. 19.] I arose and devoted the Day to Fasting and Prayer, as my Strength
would bear -- Though poor and dull in all, I have some Hope in God's Mercy, through
my great Advocate, of an Answer of Peace to record to his Praise: I was all
Night laboring for a Conveyance to London, and succeeded by Two in the Morning
-- In sore Distress, I cried to God to preserve me in my Journey, but was in
great Pain, and sometimes convulsed in the Calash: [ Ibid. 22.] However, by Ten
in the Morning, I came safe to London, to a living Husband: I gave Thanks to
God, and begged to pay the Vows of my Distress -- [ Ibid. 23, 24.] My Strength
renewed to attend the Sick, not without Hopes that God would hear the fervent
Prayers daily offered for the Life in danger, 'till in the Evening, when Mr. B.
seemed to himself and others to be dying -- My own Hope of his Life was still
in some measure maintained, though all the Symptoms of Death appeared: I lift up
my Heart to God, and sent again for the Doctor, though late, and to others,
hopeless, yet in that sad Hour, the Lord gave some Rest and Reviving.

Ibid. 27.] Still the Lord is my Rock and Strength, and gives me more Hope of
the Life prayed for, and sent me a Minister that greatly helped my Faith and
Thankfulness in prayer.

Ibid. 28.] My Soul was filled with Praise, and begs to trust God more, and
live more to his Praise, after such Experience of his Power in raising the
Sick, calming my Mind, and carrying me so much above my Natural Temper.

May 10.] A sweet Day of Praise for Mercies to me and Mr. B. in the House, and
with the Ministers; where, and by whom, he was prayed for.

1706. Jan. 29.] In Meditation on the last Account, my Soul flies to God, through
Christ, my Advocate and Judge, for Pardon of lost and misspent Time, and too
little Improvement of Estate, Parts, Interests, Relations, and Society: In all,
I humbly appeal to my Judge, that it is the Desire of my Heart to improve them
more to the Glory of God, and beg divine Wisdom to direct me in all.

March 1.] I adore the Patience, Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God, that
protracts my sinful and unprofitable Life so long: I begged Assistance to
examine my Heart and past Life, and the Lord gave me some Strength of Body and
Mind for it: I endeavored to engage my Heart to more firm Trust in God, that
never yet forsook me; and gave Thanks for the innumerable Mercies of the Year
past, to my dear Yoke Fellow and myself, in Sickness, Pain, and threatened Death.

I acknowledged all his Mercies in all our Journeyings, and Sojournings, in
supplying all our Wants; in easing of Family-Cares, and choosing us a
comfortable Abode beyond our Expectations -- And now, Lord! I acknowledge the
faithful fulfilling thy Promise: Thou have been with me and blessed me; thou
have satisfied me with long Life: I am willing rather to be absent from the
Body this Year, if God pleases.

Aug. 18.] Blessed be God for full Assurance of Joy and Gladness, that is sown
for the Righteous: And good Hope, through Grace, that I shall reap a fuller Crop:
And for ever blessed be the Father, Son, and Spirit of all Grace and
Consolation, for what I have long experienced of Light and Gladness, after
Clouds and Darkness, and my remaining Hope of being shortly in the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light.

Dec. 8.] My Heart flat and dull, I cannot find my Work in the Morning, as I
left it in the Evening -- I depend on the Surety of my Covenant, to make good
his own and my Part therein.

Ibid 31.] The Lord gave me a sweet Conclusion of this Year; in secret my Soul
was filled with Praise, and in public it ascended in strong Desires and
believing Expectations of joining the triumphing Choir above -- Lord! how
manifold have been the Mercies of the Year past! what Assistance in Prayer!
what gracious Answers! but, oh! what Wanderings! what Ingratitude! what
Peevishness in my Spirit! Lord! engage my Heart to love, trust, obey and
glorify thee more.

1707. Jan. 5.] In meditating on Solomon's Apostasy in his old Age, after God
had appeared to him twice, I pleaded God's Covenant with Trembling for my own
Perseverance.

Ibid. 23.] My Heart was deeply affected with Hezekiah's Ingratitude, Pride,
and Distrust, after such a glorious Life, and such Wonders of Mercies in it:
Amazed at the Dispensations of God, in leaving his best and sincerest Children,
thus to stain his Glory and their own: But, Lord! thy Wisdom is past finding
out; my Heart trembles to meditate on David's, Solomon's, Asa's, Jehosaphat's,
and Hezekiah's woeful Falls: Lord! if thou Fayest me, let me see what is in my
Heart, oh! how sad must the Sight be! Leave me not, O Lord! to plunge in the
Mire of my own Filth, lest my Clothes abhor me.

Feb. 21.] Thankful for excellent Helps to understand and improve the Holy
Scriptures, by Mr. Henry, Mr. Burket, and Mr. Cr^d^ck: I blessed God for their
Labors, and begged they may be as sweet and useful to others, as God has
graciously made them to me.

March 23.] Very awful were the Word and Works of God upon my Soul: While, in
the Morning, Mrs. M. G. who went out in perfect Health, died instantly, as she
was stepping into her Seat in the Church: And in the Evening, the Word
preached, was an awful Trial of our State, in order to the general Judgment.

Ibid. 24.] I hope my Heart sincerely loves and longs to be with Christ, yet I
fear a long Encounter with my last Enemy, and cannot but desire sudden Death,
with Submission to my heavenly Father's Will: However, Lord! strengthen my
Faith and Patience, that I may glorify thee, living and dying.

Ibid. 31.] I inculcated the last Sermons on a poor giddy, vain Servant, with a
sad Heart, and with Tears pleaded with her as well as I could, to be more
careful of her Soul.

April 15.] I believe thy Power and Truth for Victory over Sin, and the safe
Possession of Heaven at last. O leave me not, and I shall shortly cast my Crown
at thy Feet, and cry, Grace, Grace, for ever to God, and to the Lamb, and to
the holy Spirit of Love.

May 19.] I spent one Hour in Talk with a poor distressed Soul; but, Lord! what
a Song to the Deaf is the Talk of the free Grace of the Gospel to deserted
Souls, 'till thou createst the Fruits of the Lips, Peace, Peace? O pity poor
tempted Souls, and injured Bodies!

July 4.] I cannot yet get the Art of awaking with God, giving him the noblest
firstborn Thoughts: Though graciously eased of acute Pains in the Night, yet
near an Hour after waking, ever my Heart fixed on heavenly Objects: Oh! how
short of due Improvement of flying Moments, of Sabbaths, holy Ordinances, and
Christian Conversation, though graciously assisted in all, and lately more than
formerly, blessed be God.

Aug. 19.] My Soul longs for more Life, and lively Communion with God, and am
satisfied with the Smiles of his Face, while even the Best of those who differ
from me in Things by them accounted indifferent, seem to justify a Strangeness
to me and all other Dissenters: Lord! appear to the Joy of those, whom their
Brethren have cast out of their Communion and Converse; and give more Charity
and Union to all that fear thee, and let my Conversation more adorn my
Profession, and express my greater Gratitude to thee.

Sept. 23, 24.] Being at London, and in the Chamber where God had raised Mr. B
-- as from the Dead, I quickly found my Heart lifted up to God in Prayer and
Praise, and particularly for the gracious Answers of Prayer in this Place.

Nov. 5.] An Instance of good Success of the Ministry upon one whom I had
particularly upon my Heart in my secret Addresses to God. The Efficacy of the
Word appeared in the serious Impressions it made upon his Spirit.

Ibid. 11.] Still I cannot get my Thoughts fixed upon God at my first awaking:
Lord! when I shall awake from this World, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness, but never 'till that happy Hour.

Ibid. 28.] Reading the Fourteenth of Deuteronomy, I adored the Goodness of God
to me in his Laws: The Language of all which is, Do thy self no Harm: And the
same goodness in all the Dispensations of his Providence; the Design of which
is, to prevent or cure the Mischief I would do myself or others: Blessed be God
for both.

Dec. 31.] Very gracious has the Lord been to unworthy me throughout this whole
Year, both at Home and Abroad, in Retirement and under public Ordinances: I
had one melancholy Sacrament, which made me very sad (not being usual, blessed
be God) but God did not long hide from me after that -- Many gracious Answers
of Prayer have I had in Bodily, Spiritual, and Town Calamities: Upon Journeys,
in Friends Houses; and many sweet Hours in Books, Sermons, and Conversation --
My Life mercifully preserved, while many have fallen on my Right Hand and on my
Left -- Yet, to my Shame and Grief, my Apprehensions of Truths heard and
learnt, and experienced, have been often but dark, cloudy, and unstable; My
Will often relucting under the wise and faithful Discipline of my heavenly
Father to me or mine: My Faith weak in Prayer, my Thoughts tumultuous in
Distresses, when speedy Answers did not come: Perplexed with Fears of long
Encounters with my last Enemy; yet the Lord has often relieved my Spirit, in
meditating on the holy Scriptures, by the help of good Expositors, with
unexpressible Pleasure: But my f^ail Memory too often let^ slip the precious
Truths I have found so very delightful and encouraging: And on sudden
Difficulties, my Faith, and Hope, and Dependence, have been to seek: Nor can I
so soon get into Temper to pray to my heavenly Father, as other of his Children
can: These and a thousand Evils I bewail, and my Heart takes part with the
holy, just, and good Laws which I daily break, and cannot reach such a
Conformity to, which I long and labor for: Lord! thou know al Things; thou
know that I love thee, and have chosen thee for my Portion and Felicity, and
never consented to leave thee; but am still devoted to thy Praise and Glory,
depending on thy everlasting Covenant for my Perseverance -- Lord! I cannot
sanctify this vain, unstable, and rebellious Soul, but beg above all Blessings,
that thou would do it: I depend on my strong and merciful Redeemer, (in whom
all the Fullness of God dwells) for Grace, and Grace for Pardon, Peace,
Righteousness, and Strength suitable to all my Needs here, and to eternal Glory
hereafter.

1708. Jan. 29.] The Loss of great Mr. Sylvester afflicted and humbled my Soul,
and I bewailed my own and others Sins, which bring such sad and frequent
Removes of great and useful Instruments: And my Soul followed hard after God,
for a more plentiful Effusion of the Spirit of Judgment, and of burning, on
Gospel Churches and Ministers.

March 12.] I found my Converse with poor doubting, trembling Souls, that God
had heard my Cry for Support in horrid Temptations, and Strength to combat
with prevailing Corruptions: And still uses unworthy me as an Instrument of
good to others though so evil myself: To the Lord be all the Glory.

June 16.] To my Sorrow and Shame I still find my waking to be wandering Hours:
Lord! when shall I awake with thee? Were my Soul more refined and fixed, surely
I should be more pleased with, and thankful for, my bodily Afflictions and
Decays.

December. 11.] In reviewing the Bounty of Providence to us the Year past, we
find and acknowledge the Truth of God's Promises of increase by scattering.

1709. Jan. 1.] I bewailed the (...) Life, especially the Pride, and Self-Love,
and Vainglory I am smarting for in my dear Relations Misery: Lord! I loath my
sinful Soul; I adore thy Patience, I accept the Punishment of my Iniquity, I
acknowledge thy Justice, I admire thy Mercy in thy everlasting Covenant: I
renew my Covenant with thee in thy Strength, to be entirely and eternally
thine; and can, through thy Grace, profess, That I have neither Power nor
Inclination to revoke my solemn Dedication to thee: I love and choose all thy
Laws and Precepts: I abhor every Deviation from them in heart or Life: I
deprecate Sin more than any Suffering: Accept, Lord! through Christ, thy poor,
willing, weak, sinful Child, in the Service and Duties of the ensuing Year.

Feb. 7, 8, 9.] The Defection of many, dear to me, from the sinking Truths and
Interests of God, kept me waking much of the Night past, and fills my Heart
with Sorrow: But, Lord! I cast all on thee: Remember thy Covenant to the Seed
of thy Servants, and in thy own Time and Method reduce their wandering Souls to
thy pure Faith and Worship, and make me willing to submit to any Chastisements
on them for that End; and for ever bless the Lord, who has kept unworthy me
from the Snares that entangle others.

Ibid. 19.] I daily beg to glorify God living or dying; and if in either my
Prayer is answered, let Survivors never despair of Divine Power to such as have
no Might or Courage.

March 2.] I adore, the Long-suffering and Patience, that has protracted my
sinful and unprofitable Life so long: That has prevented me with his Mercies,
and pitied and helped me in my Distresses, and made my latter Days so
uncommonly comfortable.

Ibid. 12.] My Soul offered at Thanksgiving for the Mercy of my Baptism on this
Day; but, Lord! how dull and short of the distinguishing Mercies are my best
Praises! O pardon and accept for Christ's sake, what I blush to reflect on.

Ibid. 24.] The Lord met and smiled on my unworthy Soul, and made his Word
sweet and instructive to me -- This Book, Lord! witnesses thy Goodness and my
Sinfulness.

Aug. 27, 28.] Having no Time for Catechizing 'till Nine at Night, I omitted
it, partly through fear of a drowsy Performance, and partly lest I should want
Rest sufficient* for the Sabbath, or take too much in the Morning -- I slept
ill in the Night, and was much indisposed on the Morrow, which, I fear, was a
Rebuke upon me, for omitting what I purposed to do, and resolve to try for the
future, even when drowsy and indisposed.

Sept. 15.] The Lord was pleased to visit my Soul in Retirement, and assured me
of his Friendship, and to give me inexpressibly delightful Communion with
himself: I begged like Mercy for his dear afflicted, deserted Children.

Octo. 22.] Lord! I am thine, or I know not what I am: Evidence thy Care of,
and thy Love to thine own (though unworthy) Child.

1710. Jan. 27, 28.] The Dissecting of Mrs. S. gave me adoring Thoughts of the
Wisdom and Power of God in making Man; and reconciled me to the Thoughts of
Death, the only Cure of Sin, and all the Diseases brought by it.

March 12.] Though the Lord foresaw all the Evil I should do, and how little
Good; yet I was (as) on this Day taken into his House, under the Bonds of his
Covenant -- Ah, Lord! I am ashamed and grieved at my Heart for the evil Returns
I have made for all thy Love, and Pity, and Patience: Oh! make me at last to
render, according to what I have received, in better Proportion: Lord! that
loved'st me at the worst, do not now repent.

July 16.] I was grieved to read that Assertion of Poquinus and Quintinus, in
Calvin's Time, That the only Mortification required of Sinners, was to
extinguish the Sense of Sin in their Hearts. But surely this is to mortify
Repentance, not Sin, to kill the New Man; not the Old; to outface Conscience,
and not to quiet it: Surely, where there is Sin, there must and will be Trouble.

Sept. 13.] On review of the Sermons I last heard, I have reason to hope that
my Resolutions against Sin, in the Strength of Christ, are sincere, serious,
solid, entire, habitual, peremptory, industrious and continued: I groan daily
under indwelling Sin, and appeal to the Omniscient God, that so far as I know
my Heart, it is the most distressing Evil ever felt, and nothing so much
reconciles me to Death, as the final Cure of that hated Evil: Lord! thou
know I am rather passive that active in it: I consent not to it, I watch and
strive against it, I mourn for it, and rely on Christ's Righteousness alone for
Pardon; and beg, as the chiefest of Blessings, a fuller Conformity to the holy
Nature and Law of God -- Lord! cleanse the Fountain, that the Streams may be
purer.

October. 16, 17, 18.] Lord! what havoc is there made of our Synagogues in the
Land! -- My Soul flies to thy Name as to it is strong Tower: Thou art, thou ever
wast, and will be known by thy Power, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, and Truth:
Thou have for many Ages maintained a little Flock amongst us, and increased
them from small Beginnings: Thine Enemies of late have roared against them, and
are for blotting out their Name and Memorial: But, Lord! we are thine, called
by thy Name, give not thy Glory to graven Images; prosper the Work of
Reformation, and yet save us from thine and our Enemies --

Ibid. 19.] The Lord yet seems to make our Enemies triumph over us; and those
we pitied, and prayed for, and lived peaceably with, are now expressing the
greatest Hatred of, and Malice against us, and choosing rather to go off to
Rome, than what they call Presbytery -- O Lord! hear and rebuke their Rage, and
chain their Hands, who are implacably bent against thee and thy hidden Ones;
and turn the Hearts, and open the Eyes of such as, through Ignorance, hate thy
People.

Nov. 7.] The Lord gave me sweet Communion with himself in Retirement, and I
renewed my solemn Dedication of myself to him with full Purpose of Heart to
part with all that is dear to me for his sake: Lord! I have set my Hope in
thee, let me never be ashamed.

Dec. 7.] The Lord prospered one dear to me in an amicable composing of a
Difference that seemed like the Bars of a Castle, and both Sides thanked the
Peacemaker.

Ibid. 9.] The pressing Wants of Friends and Relations, and danger of losing by
some, what may relieve many, is too apt to disturb and unfit my Soul for the
sweet Duty of Praise, though I daily endeavor to cast all on God.

1711. Jan. 28.] I bless God for the Reproofs of his Word, Spirit, and
Providence, and my own Conscience, of Parents, Ministers, Friends, and (...)
Let all warn and amend my foolish Heart, for the Lord's sake.

April 30.] Fain would I join the active triumphant Choir above, but I fear the
Passage: Lord! thy Presence can make the dark Valley lightsome: For that I
daily cry, and hope, and wait, and resolve to commit my departing Soul to thee
-- It has pleased God to encourage my Labor with a poor Servant, so far as to
give a tolerable Account of Sermons: I cry to God, whose work it is, for some
saving Impressions upon the Heart: He can raise the Seed sown when I am dead,
or be as the Dew to the Soul now, when I perceive it not.

May 29.] I commemorate the unparalleled Mercy of this Day with a joyful
Heart, and beg that every distinguishing Mercy might make me more cheerful in
active and passive Obedience, and that the Goodness and Patience of God to so
evil a Creature, may beget his likeness on my Heart: I acknowledge the
Peevishness, Carnality and Selfishness of my Heart, and Unprofitableness of my
Life; and the great Faithfulness and Mercy of God, notwithstanding my Falseness
and Folly -- Lord! we gave our selves to thee as thy Covenant-Children when we
met, and we have been thy Care and Charge together these Fourteen Years; and
thou have been our gracious Father, keeping Covenant and Mercy with us.

August 17.] Under sensible Decays of Nature, and Fears of a useless Life, I
cried to the God of Nature, Grace, and Glory, to support my declining Head and
Senses, or rather fit me for, and receive me into the better Mansions: I
acknowledge with shame the Sloathfulness of my Life, (...) Non-improvement and
Mis-improvement of the Talents I have been entrusted with* The impairing of my
Faculties, Strength, and L^mbs, is very just, and the total Loss of all would
^e less than my Sins deserve, yet I humbly deprecate so great a Judgment, and
beg my Life may be done if my Work is done.

Sept. 13.] My Soul offers at thy Praises, O Lord! but, oh! the faint Flutters!
when shall I dwell in perfect endless Praise, in mutual, endless, and
uninterrupted Love!

October. 6.] I was much revived at a Meeting of good Women for Prayer and
Repetition, in which my Heart was warm, and thankful for the Spirit of Grace
and Supplication poured out on his Handmaids, and was much ashamed of my self.

Dec. 28.] My Mornings and Days are cheerful, my Evenings dull and lumpish:
Lord! when shall my eternal Day come! when no Night shall follow! Oh! hide me
as thy Treasure in the Grave, and call thou to Death and Resurrection, and I
shall cheerfully answer, I come, I come, Lord! Blessed be God, who will have a
Desire to the Work of his own Hand.

Ibid. 31.] I acknowledge to the Glory of God, his Mercy and Truth to me a poor
sinful, unprofitable Creature: In hearing, accepting, and answering my Prayers,
for the Ministers and People I join with, for my own poor languishing Soul and
Body; for many refreshing Sermons, Prayers, Sacraments, Books, and Meditations,
through the whole Year past -- Lord! I sing of Mercy more than Judgment: Though
my outward Man has more sensibly declined this Year, than many past: I hope I
may say, through thine abundant Grace, that my inward Man has been renewed.

1712. April 5.] The Dullness and Torpor of my Spirit, the Inactivity and
Unprofitableness of my Life, is my great Affliction; and my Conscience does not
accuse me of indulging these Sins: The Lord knows I offer at my Work for his
Glory, and my Soul's Happiness, and some Good to all I converse with; but I
bring so little to pass, I am ashamed to view all I do each Day and Week, though
I daily beg Wisdom to direct my Way, and Strength to walk in it.

June 7.] My Heart was drawn out with unusual Faith and Fervency in secret
Prayer for the Church: But, Lord! how have I added to the Transgressions
thereof! how unworthy am I to plead for Mercy! how lame are my best Duties; yet
hear, O Lord! for Jesus sake, the Cries of thy mourning Children.

October 19.] I confess with shame and sorrow the Wanderings of my Heart in
Prayer; and acknowledged it just in God to deny me my Hearing, which I have so
little improved: I begged the Cure of this distressing Evil, and committed my
vain desultory Spirit to my holy and powerful Guardian.

1713. Jan. 19.] This Day we rejoiced together in good hope of a Regenerating
Work begun on one very dear to us in the Family.

March 8.] O God! I would be faithful to thee, to my own Soul, to all I
converse with: I am devoted to thy Fear, but my deceitful Heart is ready to
backslide and deal treacherously; I watch it daily, and beg to be found
faithful, and aim at it: Lord! make me so to the Principle and Profession I own
and choose.

May 29.] My Soul was tuned to Praise for the last Sixteen Years distinguishing
Mercies of the same kind -- But more and above all, for the Tastes of
Covenant-Love in all, through Jesus Christ -- I beg Pardon for all my Sins in
the Habitation I am now leaving, and Grace to serve God better in the Place I
am now going to -- In the Evening we gave Thanks, and prayed together in my new
pleasant Closet: Entreating the Continuance of the Divine Favor and Conduct we
had so long experienced.

October. 1] The Lord encouraged my desponding Spirit, with hopes of a saving
Work on the Heart of another dear one committed to our Care; and shows he can
still make use of the poorest Worms as Instruments to awaken drowsy Minds:
Lord! I loath my self for my dullness in, and weariness of Instructing, when I
see not a present good Effect.

Ibid. 9.] O Lord! I find it is no imaginary Rock my Faith builds upon, when it
depends on Jesus, the incarnate God, for salvation from Sin, Satan, and this
evil World.

Dec. 31.] In many close and searching Sermons this Year, the good Spirit has
often witnessed to my Soul the Marks of true Grace wrought, and some growth
therein: But yet my unstable Mind makes my Profiting appear but small -- God
has graciously restored my Hearing this Winter, when I almost despaired of it
-- Though I could do but little, yet God has sometimes succeeded my Endeavors,
to the Souls of some, even when I have despaired of Success.

1714. Jan. 11.] O sweet joyful Morning! while I met my Beloved in secret
Meditation and Prayer, and the good Spirit assured me of Pardon and Peace, and
the glorious Inheritance above; and gave me such Prelibations of Feasting at
Home, and of the Honors, Settlement, Employment, and Harmony of the heavenly
Society: Lord! what is Life here, or any thing in it to me, whilst thou show
me the Glories above? O might this running Banquet go on into the eternal
Entertainment I am hoping for in Glory! Come, Lord Jesus! come quickly. Amen.

March 31.] A threatening Fit of an Asthma, which I thought might have ended my
sinful, painful Life: I was willing this Night to have ventured my Soul into
Eternity upon the Truth of God; yet I felt not the Joy, I have sometimes had in
the Prospect of my approaching Change.

Sept. 30.] Lord! who see into the secret Recesses of my Heart, thou know
my most ardent Desires are after more Holiness, and likeness to thyself: Thou
gave this Thirst not to torment thy Creature; thou have pronounced a Blessing
to it, and promised that it should be satisfied; but how little do I find my
Soul as yet conformed to thy Image and Will? Lord! shall I have the Name of thy
Child so many Years, and yet no more of thy Nature! Oh! that I were more meek,
merciful, humble, thankful, patient, ready to give and forgive: O Lord! I have
chosen thee for my Portion, and verily hope thou art and wilt be my everlasting
Felicity, and yet what little selfish Designs and Thoughts perplex my Mind? I
know and daily feel, there is nothing in this World can satisfy my Soul, and
yet very little Disappointment in Creatures, discomposes my Spirit: I feel this
earthly Tabernacle falling, and yet what little Joy in the Prospect of my House
in Heaven? Lord! what unaccountable Contradictions are there in my deceitful
Heart? O search and heal me!

October. 20.] Blessed be God, who has preserved my Life to such a glorious Day
as this; and has preserved to us the Lamp ordained for us, and has brought our
King to his People, Palace, Throne and Crown, without War or evil Occurrent: O
let all the Mighty and the Mean, give to the Lord the Glory due to his great
Name, and make our Joy more spiritual and holy: Lord! what is the fading Crown
on a mortal Head, to the immortal eternal Crown of Glory laid up for all that
love the appearing of Christ?

1715. March 12.] How much earlier than many other, did God turn my inquiring
Soul to see it is Misery and Danger, and showed me the All-sufficient Remedy!
And when I was foolish and negligent in securing my Interest in Christ, and
hoping for great Things in this World, and Heaven at last, how wisely and
graciously did thou chasten my fond Hope, and by thy Word and Rod bring back
my wandering Soul to thee, it is Rest? And of thy abundant Bounty, give me all I
can reasonably desire here, and good Hope, through free Grace, of more perfect,
endless Happiness hereafter.

Aug. 4.] I adore the Mercy of God to me, that though my Ears are sometimes
bad, yet my Eyes are good, and my Reason holds: And some sweet Communion with
God in secret, and longing for more.

Ibid. 14.] My Hearing in good measure restored, of which I can give no account
from Natural Causes, or Medicinal Art: O Lord! my Healer, thou can do every
thing.

October. 2.] Lord! melt my dull Heart with the distinguishing unparalleled
Kindness always showed to unworthy me; planting me near the Waters of the
Sanctuary; watering my Fleece whilst the Ground has been dry round about me,
making the Word hit me that missed others: Oh! the Riches of immortal Grace! If
I outlive my Senses, I cannot outlive my Graces: Oh how beautiful! how
honorable! how dura^^e!

1716. Jan. 1.] Lord how innumerable are my Sins every Year against my own
Soul, against others, and against thee, my Sovereign Lord, my Owner and Ruler:
O! what Seeds of old Apostasy have I bewailed and begged Victory over, and yet
how often am I foiled in my Combats? Lord! I (...), undertake for me: How long
(...) Canaanites vex me? which thou have promi^ed shall never have Dominion:
Oh! hasten the final Victory, and 'till then help me to watch and pray, and
war, and to rely on thy Strength and Righteousness, O mighty Redeemer!

Feb. 20.] The Anniversary Day of Mr. W. and his Son M.'s wonderful Deliverance
at Sea -- The most lively Evening I ever enjoyed with my praying Neighbors:
While we paid the Vows of them who had been delivered, I was encouraged to hope
that God would pour out more of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication on his
Remnant among us -- I longed to join the triumphant Choir above: My Heart was
much lifted up all that Night.

Ibid. 29.] I was confined to my Bed all Day by Pain, very Deaf, almost Blind,
and quite Stupid: I could fix my Thoughts on nothing that was good, but so
peevish, I was amazed and ashamed of myself: Lord! what Seeds of the old
Apostasy still remain and spring up in my Soul! Thou gave me Sight and
Hearing, and may thou not take them away when thou please? How long shall
my foolish Heart pervert its Way, and then fret against the Lord! O humble and
pardon, and heal my proud Spirit.

June 2.] From what mine Eyes have Yesterday seen upon another, why should I
fear Death in the most formidable Shape? Can any Tyrant inflict such pungent
Torture so long, and yet support so under it? And will not Death deliver me
from all Sin and Sorrow, into a Joy superior to all the Joy of a Man Child's
being born into the World? And yet how does my Heart fail at the Antecedents
and Concomitants of a natural Death, though I have good Hope, through free Grace,
that the Consequences will be safe and joyful? Lord! (...) poor, weak, timorous
Child, and try me not above (...) ^^ou shall enable me to bear, without
dishonouring thee.

Ibid. 17.] I earnestly pleaded with God for his Church and Ministers, in Faith
and Hope, for what I am not likely to live to see myself: Lord! let me depart
and join the holy Society above, and I will leave the divided Church, and the
distracted World to thy Care and Cure.

July 1.] After Sermon, a poor Penitent, after long Suspension, was readmitted
to our Communion with great seriousness and solemnity by the Pastor: and, I
hope, true Repentance in the Offender: Lord! let this awaken others who stand
suspended.

October. 6.] Not so watchful over my Tongue as I ought to have been, having told
a Fault of a Member of the Congregation to another, before I had told the
Guilty: I begged Pardon for this, and resolve on more Watchfulness over my
Words for the future.

Ibid. 13.] The unevenness and sourness of my Spirit under ungrateful
Treatments, for the most unfeigned Kindness I have shown, made me ashamed and
grieved that I can get no nearer the Rule and Pattern of my dear Redeemer.

Nov. 18.] God graciously mitigated my Pains, and taught me to pray and plead
with David, I am thy Servant, give me Understanding, that I may know thy
Testimonies -- I teach my Servant, but I cannot give Understanding, Power, or
Inclination, but he can give all, and encourages me to expect all from him.

1717. Jan. 7.] My Rest was somewhat disturbed by a Letter from one dear to me,
departed from the Ordinances and Instruments of her Conversion, and pleading
for her Departure: I rose early, and cast my Burden upon the Lord, and begged
the down-pouring of his Spirit to enlighten and sanctify the World, and comfort
his despised Ministers and People.

Ibid. 15.] I went to visit a sorrowful Friend, who assured me God had made my
Conversation very useful to her -- All Glory to God, who uses the Weakest and
most Unworthy to serve his Purposes.

March 12.] In some apprehended Danger of losing a great part of what God had
liberally bestowed upon us; my Mind was easy in depending upon God, who has
hitherto secured what his Bounty bestowed.

April 5, 6.] Hard Struggles, with little Victory over Heart-Corruptions: Lord!
help.

July. 13.] I searched my Heart, and found too great a Difficulty in forgiving
ungrateful Returns for the most sincere and affectionate Treatment, I was
capable of showing to Relations; but how much worse have I treated thee, my
eternal Lover and Friend! What are their Pence, to the Talents thou have and
do forgive me? O Lord! forgive them and me, and prepare us all for mutual
endless Love and Purity.

Sept. 11.] I earnesty begged a Meetness for, and a speedy Reception into the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light: I am weary of living only to Sin, and
groan: Lord! if I may not glorify thee here, let me glorify thee in Heaven: I
wait thy Will, thy Will be done.

Nov. 2.] Still (...) Lord lifts up the Light of his Countenance on unw^^thy
me, while others are in dismal Darkness: Surely the Seeds of all those Sins are
found in me that make others a Terror to themselves, and a Grief to their
Friends.

Dec. 31.] In reviewing the Year past, I find how good the Lord has been to my
Body, in supplying it abundantly with Food, Physic, Raiment, Fuel,
Attendants: In preserving my Limbs in Falls: In easing me when pained: In
continuing my Sight, and restoring my Hearing -- But oh! how gracious to my
Soul! What sweet Communion with him the first Sacrament in January? How many
sweet Visits then in his House, in my Closet at Home, and at Bath? How few
Sabbaths in which I had not abundant Comfort? But one Sacrament I returned
melancholy from, being in great Pain.

1718. June. 15.] Lord! how sweet was the Even-Sun-shine, after the dark and
cloudy Morning! Let this repeated Experience of thy Mercy, Power, and
Faithfulness engage my Dependence on, and never fainting Prayer to God, my Rest.

Ibid. 19.] Joined in fervent Prayer for Mr. R. W. now called to Mr. B.'s
Assistance; and appealed to God, that in all that Affair, we have acknowledged
him, and hope he has directed the Choice for his own Glory and our Good.

Aug. 9.] Providence seems to threaten with the loss of most of our personal
Estate, but my Soul rejoices in God my Portion, and is thankful for the Corn,
and Wine, and Wool, and Flax, he has given me all my Days, with his Love.

Nov. 25.] Lord! we know not whether to choose or to refuse present Offers of
Provdience to a poor Orphan; but to God, who knows all Hearts and Events, we
unfeignedly refer the Disposal, and rely on his Promise to direct.

Dec. 31.] Infinite Patience has born with me this Year also, and pitied, and
pardoned, and revived my drooping Soul: When I have accepted the punishment of
my Sin, and returned to him with Weeping and Supplication, he has turned my
Midnights into joyful and bright Days: In all the Changes of this Year, God has
called and encouraged me to pray and wait and he has heard and answered; and my
Soul acknowledges his Truth and Goodness in all I have called upon thim for.

1719. May. 29.] In great Pain all the Day, but I offered at Praise for the
multitude of God's Mercies to us, in our happy Relation for Twenty Two Years
now past.

Ibid. 31.] Mr. B. in extremity of Pain from Five 'till Nine this Morning: In
our Distress we called upon God, and he very graciously gave some sudden Ease
(after a large triangular ragged Stone had passed) so that he was enabled to
Preach soon after Ten the same Morning.

July 26.] Mr. B. in violent Pain, that we had no hope of his Preaching; yet he
went out, relying on his Master, who never failed him, and while he stepped into
the Desk a Sone slipped, and he went on with his Work comfortably.

Aug. 13, 14.] Mr. B. extremely weak and dispirited, yet called upon to Preach
a Funeral Sermon Thirteen Miles off: In the Evening, a dreadful Fit of the
Stone followed, and lasted 'till Three in the Mourning; but as the Difficulty
was increased, the Power and Mercy of God was magnified, and enabled us both to
go out early, and gave Strength and Spirits beyond all Expectations -- After
which, a large Stone passed.

Nov. 30.] The Cries and Tears of Bury Friends (at the Thoughts of parting with
Mr. B.) affect my Heart: Yet I am entirely willing that God should dispose of
me where he pleases.

Dec. 1.] I devoted myself, and all I have, to God, and earnestly pleaded for
his Direction about the awful Change of our People and Country: He graciously
impressed upon my Mind his merciful Answers in Times past, that my former
Experience so strengthened my Faith this Morning, that while I was pleading, my
Mind was easy and cheerful, ready to go, or ready to stay: Lord! keep such
Tho'ts on my Heart still, whatever be the Event of the present Providence.

Ibid. 31.] Reflecting on the Year past, I acknowledge with great Thankfulness,
that I have had sweet Retirements, inexpressible Pleasure in reading the holy
Scriptures, with Mr. Henry's Annotations: Joyful Sabbaths and Sacraments (very
few excepted) sweet Family Worship, and some Assistance in Instructing Servants
and Children: Plentiful Supplies in all our Wants: Merciful Direction in
disposing of two Orphans: Constant Preservation in all our Travels -- It has
been a Year of many Afflictions, of strong Pains, yet of gracious Supports and
Mitigations: My Life prolonged, when despaired of: Meat, Drink, Fuel in
plenty: Servants, Friends, Physicians, and Medicines, as we needed them: But,
oh! how ungrateful, how fretful my Heart! how tumultuous and muttering have my
Tho'ts sometimes been, especially under long and sharp Pain, either upon my
self or others: Lord! teach me to bear and improve Chastisements better.

1720. Jan. 1, 2.] I ended the last and began this Year in extremity of Pain:
After a long waking Night, I could not fix my Mind on any thing with Comfort,
'till past Four in the Morning when I surrendered myself afresh to God, and
begged healing for my diseased Soul: I rose at Six in much Pain, begged of God
to reconcile me to his Discipline, and show me wherefore he thus contends with
me: Not long after had some Ease, was carried in a Chair to the House of God,
where I gave Thanks, and had a joyful Day -- Lord! pity and heal my Soul, and
prepare me for Glory! Oh! make have, my Beloved, and end these Days of Sin and
Sorrow to a poor distressed Worm that longs to be with thee.

Feb. 2.] In sorting of Letters and Papers of Friends, I found some of my own,
which humble and shame me, that I can practice no better, what I have
recommended to others under Affliction.

March 28.] I went to my dear Sister B.'s, but she could not speak to me, yet
seemed to lie without much Pain.

Ibid. 29.] In her last Encounter, though the Antecedents were sharp, yet the
Concomitants of Death were easy, and the Consequents happy: Thus was God better
to my dear Sister and me, than our Fears of a long Encounter with a
Mortification, etc. Lord! strengthen my Faith, and overcome my inordinate Fears
by this Experience of thy Power and Compassion.

April 11, 12.] The hurry of unpacking, and a great deal of Company at Home,
and where we dined Abroad, cut me short of my beloved Retirements, yet I had
some short Sweets and Freedom from great Pain.

Ibid. 13.] One of my Servants fell down the Cellar Stairs, and narrowly
escaped breaking her Skull and beating out one Eye: Blessed be God for sparing
Mercy.

Ibid. 18.] The Lord has hitherto helped under bodily Infirmities; I pray, and
hope, and wait for his gracious Aids under all my spiritual Complaints and
Maladies -- Thou know, O Lord! my Hunger and Thirst for more Righteousness,
and thou have said, I shall ^e filled: I rely on thee, O thou Eternal Amen; and
on thy Power, Compassion, and Faithfulness, for what I want and am longing for.

These are some of the many secret Memoirs, her solemn Transactions,
Self-Dedications, spiritual Reflections, profitable Remarks, her peculiar
Regards to the various Occurrences of Life, and special Charges to herself and
others: Which she committed to writing (as she often expresses it) to be
Witnesses betwixt God and her Soul -- It had been as easy to have collected
many Hundred more from her Original Manuscripts, would it not have swelled the
Volume beyond common Use -- It Is possible, some might be apt to Censure me for
having transcribed too much already; but when I considered that the apparent
Tendency of all is merely to Excite and Animate to a more vigorous and
spiritual Exercise of Religion, a more constant and industrious Observation of
Providence, a greater and steadier Zeal for the Glory of God, and a closer and
more acurate Regard to the eternal Interests of our own Souls; it has easily
overruled me in what I have done against all the Objections and Pleas that can
be urged to the contrary. And therefore I am determined, to be as little
Affected with the Censures of others, as they themselves can be profited by
them.

CHAP. VII. Her Miscellaneous Papers.
IT has been a very agreeable Entertainment to read over her Miscellanies. Her
very spiritual and correct Meditations on the Divinity of the Holy Scriptures.
The several Parts of the Creation. The Extent, Efficacy, and Mystery of
Providence. A Believer's Union with Christ. His Communing with his own Heart.
His walking with God. His regulating his Thoughts, Affections, Speech, and
Actions. The whole Duty and Happiness of Man. The grand Treasure of all
Scripture Promises. The unreasonableness of Freting against God. The Mansion of
the Soul of Man. The Resurrection of the Body, etc. -- Together with her
Critical Observations in Anatomy, Medicine, Mathematics, Music, Philology,
Rhetoric, etc. The general Mention of which, is all that must be expected in
this short Account.

CHAP. VIII. Her spiritual Corresponding with her Friends, by Letters, upon
particular Occasions.
SHE wrote often to her intimate Friends, especially to young ones, to persuade
them of the Reasonableness and Benefit of the great Duties of Religion. To warn
them against the Temptations of their Age and Stations. To improve their
Education. To excite them to an early and exemplary Piety. To confute their
Cavils. To impress upon them the Obligation of their Baptismal Covenants. To
satisfy their spiritual Doubts, and encourage their Hopes in God, and
Perseverance in their Christian Course -- The most of these, and the most
considerable, are supposed to be in the Hands of such, whom they immediately
concerned. Some part of the very few that are come to my Knowledge, since her
Death, are these that follow.

To one impatient under Crosses.
MY pensive Temper feeds not so much on future as present Troubles. Diversion
is my Misery. I never live 'till I get an Hour's Converse with Myself, and with
that God, in whose Hand my Times are: But when I can turn in and seriously
consider, the Cause and Effects of my impatient Struggles under the most just
and perfectly wise Disposals of Providence, I am cured for that Day by finding
worse Troubles within, than ever I found without. So true is great Mr. Dod's
Saying, viz. Where Sin sits heavy, the Cross sits light. I cannot but think it
unparalleled Ingratitude, that Creatures fallen from God, the chief Good, and
final Happiness of Immortal Spirits, and yet restored by God Incarnate, should
so basely dispute the Tasting of the Cup, The Dregs whereof he drank up himself
for Us. What can we suffer from Friends or Enemies, in Body, Soul, Name, or
Estate, that he has not waded though and triumphed over, for our Good, and in
our stead? And is not our quickening Head the second Adam as powerful to
conquer Sin and Sorrow, as the first Adam was to convey it? Oh! for a more
lively Faith in the great Redeemer, to heal our Souls of this Plague! could
Heathens say, It was glorious to Live, when it was easier to Die! and cannot we
be willing to Live, when all in Life pleases us not? Oh! how unworthy of
Christians is such Impatience? I long for Heaven more, for Freedom from such
Reluctances, at the divine Will, than from any Troubles this World makes me.

To One on the Death of a Child.
I Know your tender Love to your Children, must make a Wound in your Heart when
you lose any. But I hope Grace and long Experience of God's All Sufficiency,
Eternity, and the Unchangeableness of his love and Covenant, is better to you
than your own or your Children's Lives. And the good Assurance your Daughter
left of her entering into Immortal Glory, has set her above our Pity. And as to
our selves, our short remaining Moments here, and good Hope, through Grace, of
(...) shortly with all our departed perfected Friend (...) greatly moderate our
Sorrows. For why, for so short a Time should we be so much concerned, whether
we meet them next on Earth, or in the heavenly Mansions, since the last only
can afford us that Joy and Pleasure which is without Allay or Mixture? If to
hear that your Children are well at a Distance on Earth rejoices you, why not
to know any of them are well, and can never be otherwise in Heaven?

To One in Doubt, whether the certain Knowledge of a Christian's State is
attainable in this Life.
I Cannot but offer at some Assistance under your seeming Doubt. Whether a
Person might certainly know in what Estate he stands. If once we can persuade
our selves the greatest Good is not attainable, it ceases to be the Object of
our Hope and Endeavor. That wicked Men may without doubt conclude themselves
such, and consequently in a damnable State, possibly you might easier believe:
Than that a Person truly accepting Christ, upon Gospel Terms, may discern that
he does so, and consequently is in a State of Salvation: But that both are to
be known, I think is sufficiently evident from Scripture, since it puts us upon
Judging and Trying our selves, and making sure our own Salvation. And so many
of the Saints have affirmed their Knowledge and joyful Evidences of God's Grace
in them. And our blessed Redeemer himself has laid down this as an evident
Title to the heavenly Mansions; If our Hearts are there, our Treasures are also
there. Can we imagine the good Spirit of God would excite our Desires after
such an Inheritance, only to Torment or Deceive us? No surely, He that is gone
before to prepare a Place for his Disciples, has left them his Holy Spirit,
not only to fit them for that glorious Inheritance, but also to seal them up to
the Day of Redemption, and given them undoubted Pledges and Earnests of their
future Possession -- The major Proposition is undoubtedly true, He that
believes shall be saved; the Doubt will lie in the minor, but upon serious
Trial, you may come to know, that you are the true Beliver. That some upon
their first Conversion have been able to draw the Conclusion, I have no Reason
to doubt, but it is not God's ordinary Method to Convince, Convert, and Assure
at once. Therefore don't impatiently conclude it is not attainable because not
yet attained. But with strenuous Endeavous be still pursuing the making your
Calling and Election sure. Always remembering, that it is the same Spirit that
works Grace, that alone can shine on it, and discover and give you the clear
Knowledge of his Work. Pray hard and be very Thankful for his least Assistance,
than which I know not a more effectual Way to gain more. Have a care of
Grieving him by continuing in any known Sin, or neglecting any known Duty. If
you dally or trifle in your Return to God, it will not only make your Case seem
doubtful, but like a broken Bone might make you halt for many Years. The
smallest Sin if not resisted and mourned for, will breed Doubts and Troubles as
sure as rotten Flesh does Worms. Therefore fall to your Work in Earnest, and I
can assure you, the sooner you begin, the greater will your Honor and Peace
be. Though you may not presently be able to affirm an infallible Certainty of
your State, yet, if by such Means you attain a comfortable Hope to encourage
future Endeavors, who knows how soon you may Triumph over your conquered
Enemies!

On the Death of an Intimate Friend.
I Came hither to close the Eyes of my dear Friend -- And since she might shine
no longer amongst sinful Worms here, I bless God, who brought me to her
instructive Deathbed: Where Faith, Submission, Patience, and almost
uninterrupted Joy, in breathing after her dear Redeemer, more than equaled all
I ever saw that lay so long in sight of their last ghastly Enemy. And though I
cannot yet pray against sudden Death, yet her steadfast Hope and glorious
Conquest, have given me more tolerable Thoughts of languishing Sickness, since
in her I saw, that neither the Strength of Pain, or Weakness of the Patient,
can hinder a triumphant Exit, when God will make his Joy our Strength.

Against Disputes in Religion amongst young ones.
I Fear there is one that is very dear to you, has received no little Injury by
some of the Authors you have recommended to him. When I wrote pungently about
his Profaneness, he was much alarmed and penitently confessed his Sin, and
resolved upon devoting himself to God, as his true Felicity. But he said, he
had read some Books, and heard some Disputes at home, which so confounded his
Mind, that at last he thought there was no GOD or Devil, or Religion: Now though
I am far from supposing it the Design of your Author to form such Notions in
him, yet I can never think it Wisdom to put young Heads on disputable Points,
when they may be safely edified by plain practical Divinity. I know the
promised Spirit of Truth directs his Ministers by his Word, and if the Authors
you mention have had this Assistance in beating out their their Notions on that
Forge it is well; but if what they had formed in their own Brains is brought to
that, and Texts tortured to countenance them, they had need be examined by
better Heads than mine, lest they should do more hurt than good. I am thankful
for Sir P. K. on the Creed, yet if I believed a separate State, a State of
Suffering, the Thoughts of Death would make me melancholy. Mr. Flavel, and
others, allow it a State of imperfect Happiness, yet no suffering State,
because even then we are with Christ in Paradise. Whatever Mr. L. thought, I
cannot yet be brought to think that such Texts allow either any sleep to the
Soul, or any suffering in such a State to the Righteous. In short, I believe
the Quarrels of many to be either about Terms or insuperable Difficulties,
which neither Side shall understand 'till they get to Heaven. And, for my own
Part, I had much rather confute Atheism by holy Walking, than by any accurate
Disputing: And while I can taste Religion, let who will talk against it. If
your great Mind aims higher, yet put not young raw Heads on what is too hard
for them --

Directions how to instruct a Child.
I Am glad your Brother can so prettily divert you, I wish you Wisdom and Love
to instruct him. Be very watchful of his Conversation, and whatever you find
faulty, show him the Evil of it, rather than charge him with it, ^est you put
him upon Lying to hide his Guilt. Let him see you love him ever you chide him,
and are ready to hide or excuse his tolerable Faults. Be very frequent, but
not tedious in your Instructions: Often inculcate the Nature and Necessity of
Prayer for all we want, and the encouraging Promises of God to hear. Lisp to
him in his own Language what he prays for by his Form, and labor to excite in
him a Sense of his sad State by Sin, greater Desires after Grace, and fuller
Resolutions and Endeavors after the Life and Power of Godliness. (...) some
Part of his Catechism be daily recited, and what he most imperfectly repeats,
be said at his going to sleep, and at his first waking. Talk over the Sermons
you hear together in Language adapted to his Capacity. And fail not to beg of
God a Blessing on all your Labor, or else you will do little to Purpose. If
God makes you instrumental in the Conversion of your Brothers and Sisters, it
will be a great Honor and Comfort, and make the strongest Union amongst you.
Take special Care of them that are in the greatest Danger. Imitate your godly
impartial Mother, who, though she loved all alike, yet would often say, If she
knew to which Child she had conveyed most of her sinful Nature, she would pity
and endeavor the help of that Child most --

To One under great Dejection and Desertion.
IN these dark Hours of your Life, the Silence of your Friends may seem
unnatural. I cannot therefore but heartily condole you, and beg you would not
imagine your Case to be unusual, or out of the Road of God's fatherly
Discipline, for what good Christian's Diary did you ever read or hear of, that
has no such Lines of Complaints as yours: And no wonder when our Head and Lord
Redeemer almost dies with them in his Mouth. Why should we grudge to pledge him
in that bitter Cup, whose Soul was sorrowful and sore amazed? Can our Jealousy
argue a Dereliction more than his? Are not the Gifts and Callings of God
without Repentance? If your Soul has not been touched with the true Loadstone,
what makes it stand trembling toward its beloved Point? Is not Love in Desire,
and in lamenting after its beloved Object, as truly Love, as when resting in
the Enjoyment? If you find much Dross in your best Gold, will you throw away
both together? or would you change with one that Hopes without Trial? I find it
a mighty Craft of the old Serpent, when upon serious Search I have found out
Wickedness in my Heart, that did not discover itself upon transient Enquiries,
to be very ready to persuade me, there was nothing else to be found there. I
bless God, I can at present believe he lies, but how long I shall say so, I
know not: For, alas! I have some gloomy Days as well as others, especially
under bodily Langours. I doubt not but you address to spiritual Physicians
under your present Maladies. Blessed be God, you have many skilful and faithful
Ones. Search not without their Help. And God send you a Messenger, one of a
Thousand, that may show to you your Uprightness. I know he only that creates
the Fruit of the Lips Peace, can make your Help consolatory, yet wait in the
Way of instituted Means. And remember it was but a little farther the drowsy
Spouse went in her Search, ever she found her slighted and grieved Beloved. I
trust your present Temptation to throw away your Hope will not prevail: However
think not of throwing off Duty, especially your Attendance on that comfortable
sealing Ordinance, the Lord's Supper, which I have reason to recommend to all
my afflicted tempted Friends, since I find it no small Mercy to go and renew my
former Covenant, or if I cannot find my Fidelity therein, to make it anew; for
surely God does there renew his Covenant, with every fallen Child of Adam that
heartily consents, though he cannot perfectly reach the Terms according to his
Desire. If former stated Times of communicating afford you not a sufficient
Support, be more frequent, since every Lord's Day gives you an Opportunity in
the City. Remember my dear disconsolate Grandmother waited long at these Pools,
though with Sorrow complaining it was to her a sealed Fountain, yet her dutiful
Attendance ended in a triumphant Death: Before that Period, I hope to hear you
are emerging from under the Waves that now overwhelm you, and by that Time you
may be ready to strengthen weak Hands from more gl^ri^us Appearances of God to
your Soul. I beg that the God of all Consolation would shine on the Gra^u^ he
has wrought, and will by his own Methods perfect in your Soul, that when he has
tried you, you might come forth as Gold, and meet for the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light, where, no Doubt of God's Love to you, or yours to him, will
break your Peace, or interrupt your Joy more --

To a Relation on a fine Lady of mean Sense.
IN this Place of Concourse, I lately met with a vast Company of fine Ladies,
but above all the rest, with one of a charming Beauty, strait and tall, a fine
Face, glossy dark Hair, etc. all adorned with richest Atlas, splendid Diamonds,
finest Lace, etc. To this fine Creature, the amazed Beaus addressed, big with
Expectation of charming Conversation, agreeable to such an outside Appearance:
But presently the wondering Crowd betrayed such a Disappointment in their
sneering Countenances, as made me pity the poor insipid Mortal; and wish, that
all I love may study to adorn their Minds, rather than learn the Art of fine
Dressing. And while I bemoaned the unhappy Fair, a Friend Repeated the
following Lines, which possibly may please you, viz.

When Lesbia first I saw, the heavenly Fair,
With Eyes so charming, with that awful Air,
I thought my Heart, that durst so high Aspire,
As bold as his, who snatched Celestial Fire:
But soon as ever the beauteous Idiot spoke,
Forth from her Coral Lips such Folly broke,
Like Balm, the trickling Nonsense healed my Wound,
And what her Eyes enthralled, her Tongue unbound --
So true is the sacred Proverb, As a Jewel of Gold in a -- so is a fair Woman
without Discretion. And likewise that other, Favor is deceitful and Beauty is
vain, but a Woman that f^ars the Lord s^all be praised. May I and my dear
Relations have the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, and we will envy no
Ladies their Beauty or Jewels --

Cautions against spiritual Declensions.
A Declining State is incident to the best, and therefore to be feared by all:
How shamefully have some of our Acquaintance stained their Famalies, and
whither have their gradual Declensions at last hurried them -- I know there are
many that assert a total Apostasy in some from true Grace, but you and I have
been taught better and can comfortably conclude from God's unchangeable Love,
Decree, Almighty Power, engaged for Perseverance; and from our Union with
Christ, and his constant Intercession for us, that the Habits of true Grace
cannot be lost: But alas? what Abatements may there be in the Degrees and
Exercise, in the Life and Strength of it! And how sad and deplorable is such a
Case? Who can but pity a robust Body reduced to a Skeleton by a pining
Consumption? And is less Pity due to Souls declining in their Graces? When
ardent Love, strong Desires, humblest Mournings, liveliest Joys, are (...)
whithering or choked with a Confluence of wo^ldly Joys, Cares, or Pleasures!
Ah! the Sadness of (...) State! may I never weep over any of my dear R^^lations
in such a Case! The best are apt to decline in Duty, in their Love and
Affection to it; an^ sometimes find a sad Distance from God* a (...) to him,
and Shyness of him in (...) been the^r greates^ (...). Surely, restraining of
Prayer is a very sad Mark, and when our Hearts don't joyfully answer his Call
to seek his Face! And little better when our wandering Spirits are not watched,
called in, and made to ply their Work, but Flies light on the Sacrifices that
used to flame: Nay, if but our Cheerfulness in Duty should abate, how heavily
shall we drive? If what was once our Delight, becomes our Task and Burdensome?
If after Duty no Advantage, no nearer to God, no fuller Resolutions, no humbler
Resignations, how weary shall we quickly be of our choicest Happiness, for the
Enjoyment of some inferior Good, or foul Corruption, which our treacherous
Hearts have slily fallen in love with, while we yet profess to be entirely
God's? There are in the best such Remainders of Corruption, as ever incline to
Apostasy, for none are so completely sanctified, but the Flesh is still lusting
against the Spirit; and Corruption is an active Principle, very importunate,
and not easily to be denied: The Temptations of Satan are always assaulting,
and our own Corruptions ever ready to side with them: Yea* and God's just
Desertions often concur; for though he does not withdraw his Love and Care, yet
for our Neglects he often may, and does suspend his Influence and Assistance,
and then what are we? -- Let me entreat you not to lose these hasty Lines,
'till you have tried your present Case, whether you are growing or declining.
I^ Grace wi^hers, I am sure so must Comfort. If this be your Case, remembe^
whence you are fallen, and Repent, and do your first Works, and lay fresh hold
on the great Redeemer. If your Case be better, bless God, and rejoice my Soul
in letting me know it --

Pleading of GOD'S Covenant urged.
WHEN my Soul is almost overwhelmed within me for some of my dear Relations, I
solace my self in singing that Hymn of Dr. Woodroof.

GOD of my Fathers and their Seed,
For so thy Covenant is:
And thou will keep thy Covenant sure,
To Thousands of Degrees.
My Parents, Lord! devoting me,
Upon Thee I was cast:
And from my Mother's Belly thou,
My GOD in Covenant wast.
By all Engagements, and by Vows
Renewed, I am Thine:
And from that Time to this art thou
By the same Title mine.
When taken thus into thy House,
Thy Charge I there became:
Thou wast my Father and my God,
And then I bore thy Name, etc.
Surely, if the Blessings of Abraham are come on the Gentiles by Jesus Christ,
what God has spoken to them and our Fathers, is spoken to us, who, by Faith,
lay hold on that Covenant: And though it runs not so freely in Temporals under
the Gospel Dispensation, we have still the double Portion, though the younger
Children: The elder, indeed, had large and sure Promises of the fertile Canaan;
and, no doubt, their Hopes and Joys had higher Objects, when they dwelt in
Tents, and slept on Stones, left their Country and Relations: But yet, Life and
Immortality was veiled to them, in comparison of what is now brought to Light
by the Gospel. I am ashamed to think how Jacob lift up his Feet in his Way to
Padan-Aram, after his Vision at Bethel, while I go on so sluggishly in my Way
to Heaven, after so many signal Appearances of God to me and mine --

Cautions to a Friend about Marrying.
IT IS very odd, when you ask my Opinion in the Matter proposed, that you only
give me an Account of the Gentleman's Circumstances, and not of his Character:
So far as I know, I must freely own, that I fear the Estate is too great, and
likely to prove a Snare to you. Bishop Hall affirms, That Riches have made many
worse, but never any better. I hope you would rather choose to be better than
richer, and that you will never be biased by an Estate to an indifferent
Choice. You know, I have ever cautioned you and must caution you still against
too great a Fondness for Wealth. Alas! should you have it, how many Things may
imbitter it to you? Should you have a churlish Nabal, and you could only behold
it with your Eyes, and not be suffered to do any good with it, how uneasy would
that be to your charitable generous Mind? And should the Temper be good, yet if
Debts, or Provision for younger Children should cripple a Man's Estate, it is
but the Name and not the Thing that you enjoy: And if neither of these happen,
yet may not worse? Supposing there is no Piety, nor warm Devotion, but an
Aversion to your Attending on private Altars, where you have found more than
all this World can afford you, what Perplexity are you then tied to for Life? I
know what Troubles you have met with, but might you not, by avoiding present,
plunge yourself into future Difficulties: It Is better be miserable by Necessity
than Choice. What God inflicts is easier born, than what we bring upon our
selves -- Let me entreat you to moderate your Desires after wordly Grandeur.
Pardon my Freedom -- If I am apt to be too jealous of you, it is because I love
you --

On the Death of a good Lady and Friend.
I Am heartily concerned for the Country's Loss, and my own, of that excellent
Lady; and condole you especially, who had the Honor of her Friendship; I
believe as much as could consist with the Inequality of your Stations in this
World; and that Goodness levelled more than is usual, even in pious Ladies. A
Friend, wise, pious, compassionate, secret, etc. is a Rarity enjoyed, and a
Loss seldom repaired in this World: But, Oh! what a Friend is our Lord
Redeemer! not limited to one or few, like our contracted Minds, but condescends
to the Title and Offices of a Friend to all his faithful Followers. I am
thankful for the Tastes of his Goodness in Creature-Friendship; but the utmost
Perfection of that is but a faint Shadow of the Divine, and what I find in mine
eternal Lover and Friend the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Friendship has not the
Disparagement which all Creature Enjoyments have, of being but a short and
uncertain Pleasure --

On a Tradesman's casting up his Shop.
SINCE you pretend to be pleased with any of my Scrawles, I will give you a
short History of what has passed with us this Christmas: You remember, I now
live with a Tradesman, called a Milliner, (I suppose from the multitude of
Things that such ordinarily Trade in, especially in the Country.) It is a
prudent and laudable Custom with him, to cast up his Shop, for the most part
once a Year. I love not to be ignorant of any Thing that falls in my Way
without Trouble; and therefore, to divert my Mind, I have sometimes engaged
with him in some little Part of this comical Fatigue: The whole of which is a
thoro' Scrutiny into all that has been bought and sold, and got by it, and into
what remains. In order to this, abundance of Files, of Bills, Letters, and
Receipts, besides Books, were to be examined: But my Province was only to
assist in Measuring and Contenting (in English, to write on every Piece, after
measured, what it contained;) the Trial of Gains was left to themselves, and
held them to it Night and Day, and every one was pleasant and cheerful at the
Conclusion. I expostulated with my Landlord the unnecessary Trouble of this,
for one that had no reason to suspect his Circumstances; but was answered, That
besides the Pleasure of proving it, their future Trade could not be so
successful, easy, and beautiful without it: The Sale of what had been bought,
directs to what is best to be bought again, by finding out what had been sold to
best Advantage; what had been misplaced, and thought to have been lost, is now
in order again, and readily found: Besides, the Gain made a Recompense for the
Trouble, and was an help to Thankfulness, etc. -- Now, my dear Friends, if we
are so wise for this World, why should we be so weak for the other? And yet how
few are there, that with that unwearied Diligence, Dexterity, and Cheerfulness,
cast up in their spiritual Trade? I blush at my own Sloth and Folly, and
endeavor to commend Heart-Examination to my Thoughts by my Christmas
Diversion. The Result of all my Landlord's Trouble, assures him he has gained
by last Year's Trade, but can give him only some probable Conjectures how he
may thrive the next, together with many Fears of losing by some unfashionable
Goods, which he looks upon with heavy Sighs. But if upon serious Scarch, I can
find I have gained any true Grace, I am sure of its increase, and that it can
never be lost, or become useless. Can I but find Faith as a grain of
Mustard Seed, I can safely conclude, it will grow to a Tree: The Path of the
Just, as a shining Light, will shine more and more to the perfect Day. If I
sigh over the Weakness of my Grace, I am yet encouraged when I read the
Encomiums of my compassionate Redeemer, on the weak Faith of many that
addressed to him in the Days of his Flesh -- Therefore my good Friend, let us
call in the Assistance of others, and diligently search our Hearts and Ways,
and follow it to a comfortable Conclusion, and then my Diversion might be
Useful to myself and you --

Upon the Death of a Sister.
I Thought I could with less Disturbance have parted with a Sister, than I find
I can: I did hope Death would not have begun at the wrong end of the
Register-Book; but they are Seniors in the best Sense, who have soonest done
their Work, and are first fit for Glory: Though I could not have parted with a
Sister without Tears, to any distant Country upon Earth, tho it had been to her
own Advantage, yet Reason would have blamed and soon overcome such a fond and
foolish Passion: And surely Religion then should do no less, but more, when she
is in a far higher and happier Preferment than all this World could pretend to
offer. Our All-wise Creator first formed our massy Lump, and then inspired it;
and when he is pleased to dissolve the Compositum, it is not that either of the
constituent Parts should be destroyed: But the Dissolution, as to the
Righteous, with regard to their Souls, is immediate Glory; and with regard to
their Bodies, but a Refining, in order to a Reunion: The forsaken Mansion is,
indeed, a melancholy Object! and it is very affecting to close the dear Eyes
that were wont to delight us with their silent Rhetoric; but we more than
water the Body sown in Dust, while we dim our Prospect of their Glory. Why
should I wish the Soul in this Body still merely to say, I had a Sister in such
a Place? What if Heaven (where she is) be farther off? I am sure, as that is
more suitable, so it ought to be nearer to my immortal Part: And may I not
still have Communion with her, and with the glorious Company she keeps, by
loving, praising, admiring, and adoring the same God, though I am yet on Earth?
May I not rejoice in the Thoughts of meeting her among the Spirits of the Just
made Perfect? Surely, they have more Courage, better Success, or less
Difficulty than I who can wish that War protracted -- But she has now passed
the Pikes, O happy Soul! Her Body indeed, is sown in Corruption, and cannot
defend itself from Worms, and is putrefying and loathsome at present, but it
will not be always so. If the innate Desires of Reunion could not persuade me
of a Resurrection, yet the infallible Word of God has assured me of it; and
that it shall arise, not as it was sown, a natural and sluggish Body but agil
and sprightly, and fit to serve its superior and vigorous Soul. It is a
pleasure to me sometimes to think of the Luster and Activity of glorified
Bodies, which rest not either Day or Night, nor suffer any Decays,
Imperfections, Pauses, or Interruptions, in their high and happy Employments;
but the greatest Pleasure of all, to think of being for ever with the Lord --

To one under great Afflictions and spiritual Fears.
I Cannot forget my Promises of praying for you, and Writing to you: I daily
attempt the one, and wish I could perform it better: And as to the other, I
should be glad if my Pen could help your Faith and Patience, under the smarting
Rod (I hope I may say) of your heavenly Father, for so it may be, though
accompanied with angry Frowns: It Is true, Afflictions in themselves cannot be
Proofs of Sonship; but we are fully assured by the sacred Scriptures, that the
sorest Trials are very consistent with that Privilege: The Experience of many
of God's Favorites confirm it: All the Promises of Support under, Benefit by,
and Deliverance from such Troubles, suppose it; yet our guilty Souls are too
apt to misconstrue fatherly Chastisements, for the Revenges of any Enemy, or to
think their is more Anger than Love in them, and to murmur that they are so
long and heavy. But the All-wise Father of our Spirits cannot mistake in
measuring, timing, and appointing his Methods of healing Souls: If Guilt makes
you fear his Wrath, rather than taste his Love in your Afflictions, you should
cast your guilty Soul upon him for promised Rest; and may be well assured, that
God will not exact the Debt from the Offender and the Surety too: Fly daily to
that Refuge, that sure Hope, that justifying Righteousness, and then you will
find no Fury in God, how grievous soever your Afflictions are -- You have
liberty to pray for Pity and Help as well as David, who, when he had aching
Bones, had a sense of Guilt also, even of scandalous Sins -- If your own or
others Cries for you seem yet unheard, it might be our mistake, to urge for
present Ease, without a due Respect for future Cure, Sin is the worst Disease,
its Cure is to be fought, though by the roughest Methods: The Children of God are
agreed in this, and yet can scarce submit the Means to the infallible
Physician: Though we can trust a Surgeon to apply a Caustic (though of Lapis
Infernalis) and let it lie his Time, if there be any hope of Cure; yet how
hardly can we submit on higher Reason, surer Hope, or happier Experience, to
him, whose Word of Truth assures us, that every thing he does shall do us good,
both purge away our Sins, and make us Partakers of his Holiness. I must
confess, these Lines upbraid my own foolish Choice oftentimes for my self and
Friends, but I pray and wait for better Submission to the heaviest (...) on me
or them.

Various Dispensations argued and justified.
I Have been long your Debtor for a very kind and comfortable Letter, which
came seasonably to hand, as I was groaning under great Pain, and sympathizing
with others in bitter Affliction: Since then, I bless God, I have seen brighter
Days, but Clouds have returned after Rain upon others: And may not all this put
together commend the variegated Dispensations of Providence? Had all our Days
been Halcion, would they have been so safe or useful? Had all been Sable, how
disconsolate? Were all the Children in equal Smart, under the Rod together, we
should be too ready to make some unworthy Reflection on the All-wise
Discipline? Were not all alternatly so, we should be ready to suspect their
Sonship? O the Depth of Wisdom, that poor shallow Mortals can never fathom!
Yet how proud and peevish when any Thing denied, at our own Time, which we
fancy to be good for us! Had I been always well, and at Ease, how chill a
Sympathy must I have had with the dear afflicted Members of Christ? Had you
been never so, I had wanted your experimental Consolations. And if the brief
Hints of this beautiful Variety can afford such Pleasure here, how bright and
glorious, how ravishing and sweet, will it be when unfolded in eternal Glory!
And why should I be impatient of, or fear the darkest Scene, that shall end in
brightest Glory? Yet, with Shame and Sorrow, I confess, the Fear of what I may
feel, has been as afflictive to me, as most I have felt: Yea, when I have found
good hope of an Interest in God, and after a Thousand Experiences of his
never-sailing Compassions, confuting my guilty Fears. This childish, or rather
unchild-like Distemper, I think, increases with Years, and is partly occasioned
by frequent and close Converse with many of my Superiors in Grace, under bitter
Afflictions, living and dying: And when I see what is done to the green Trees,
I am apt to an excess of Fear what shall be done to the dry. Fain I would
cherish an awful, while I subdue a slavish Fear; but this I cannot do of
myself, and therefore beg it of the God of all Grace, in which I crave your
Assistance --

CHAP. IX. Some Fragments of Verses which she often repeated, not for their
Elegancy, so much at Suitableness to her State and Temper.
I. An Acknowledgment of Mercies.
IN Nature's Womb thy Fingers did me make,
And from the Womb thou did me safely take;
From Breast thou have me nursed my Life throughout,
That I can say I never wanted ought.
In youthful Wanderings thou have staid my Slide;
In all my Journies thou have been my Guide.
Thou have me saved from many an unknown Danger,
And given me Favor where I was a Stranger.
In all my Meals, my Table thou have spread,
In all my Lodgings thou have made my (...).
Thou have me clad with Changes of Array,
And made my House still better every Way.
In all my Troubles thou have heard my Voice,
In both my Matches thou have made my Choice.
Often have I felt the Workings of thy Grace,
And seen, through Christ, thy pleasant smiling Face.
This is the Heaven on Earth, if any be,
For This and All, my Soul thus Praises Thee.
II. A Reflection upon Age.
DIM Eyes, deaf Ears, cold Stomach, show
My Dissolution is in View:
The Shuttle's thrown, my Race is run,
My Sun is set, my Work is done;
My Span is out, my Tale is told,
My Flower's decayed, and Stock grown old.
The Dream is past, the Shadow's fled,
My Soul now longs for Christ, my Head.
I Have lived to Seventy Six, or nigh,
GOD calls at last, and now I Will die.
III. Musculus's Swan-like Song before his Death.
COLD Death my Heart invades, and I must die;
O Christ, my everlasting Life, draw nigh!
Why quiver'st thou, my Soul, within my Breast?
Thy Angel's come to take thee to thy Rest.
Quit cheerfully this tottering House of Clay,
GOD will rebuild it at the appointed Day.
I know thy Sins, but let not them be urged,
All those have with the Blood of Christ been purged.
Is Death affrightning? True; but yet withal,
Remember Christ, through Death, to Life does call:
He Will Triumph over Satan, Sin and Death,
Therefore with Joy resign thy dying Breath.
IV. The benighted Soul encouraged.
WHERE art thou now? Thy Day is Night;
Be not afraid, thou still art right:
The Way to Heaven lies by the Gates of Hell;
Cheer up, Believe, and all shall yet go well.
V. The Passing Bell.
COME, honest Sexton, take thy Spade,
And let my Grave be quickly made:
Thou still art ready for the Dead,
Like a kind Host to make their Bed:
^ now am come to be thy Guest,
In some dark Lodging give me Rest:
I Am very weary, full of Pain,
And of my Pilgrimage complain;
On Heaven's Decree I waiting lie,
And all my Wishes are to die.
Hark! hark! I hear my Passing Bell!
I hear my Passing Bell! Farewell!
Farewell! my loving Friends, Farewell!
CHAP. X. Some few Stanza's out of some of those many Hymns and Psalms, which
she had committed to Memory, and would often repeat with Peculiar Pleasure.
Mr. WATTS'S Hymns.
BOOK I.
HYMN 5.
THE dear Delights we here enjoy,
And fondly call our own;
Are but short Favors borrowed now,
To be repaid anon.
Peace all our angry Passions then,
Let each rebellious Sigh,
Be silent at his Sovereign Will,
And every Murmur die.
If smiling Mercy crowns our Lives,
Its Praises shall be spread;
And we'll adore the Justice too
That strikes our Comforts dead.
HYMN 6.
Great GOD, I own thy Sentence just,
And Nature must decay;
I yield my Body to the Dust,
To dwell with Fellow-Clay.
HYMN 15.
Let me but hear my Savior say,
Strength shall be equal to thy Day;
Then I rejoice in deep Distress,
Leaning on All-sufficient Grace.
HYMN 17.
O for an overcoming Faith,
To cheer my dying Hours;
To Triumph over the Monster Death,
And all his frightful Powers!
If Sin be pardoned I Am secure,
Death has no Sting beside;
The Law gives Sin its damning Power,
But Christ my Ransom died.
HYMN 86.
How should the Sons of Adam's Race,
Be pure before their GOD?
If he contend in Righteousness,
We fall beneath his Rod.
To vindicate my Words and Thoughts,
I Will make no more Pretense;
Not one of All my thousand Fau'ts,
Can bear a just Defense.
HYMN 87.
O may thy pardoning Grace be nigh,
Lest we should Faint, Despair, and Die!
Thus shall our better Thoughts approve,
The Methods of thy chastening Love.
HYMN 103.
Firm as his Throne, his Promise stands,
And he can well secure,
What I Have committed to his Hands,
'Till the decisive Hour.
Then will he own my worthless Name,
Before his Father's Face;
And in the New Jerusalem,
Appoint my Soul a Place.
HYMN 131.
Dear Father, let me never be
Joined with the boasting Pharisee;
I have no Merits of my own,
But plead the Sufferings of thy Son.
HYMN 146.
O let me climb those higher Skies,
Where Storms and Darkness never Rise?
Where Christ displays his Power abroad,
And Shines and Reigns Incarnate GOD.
Nor Earth, nor Seas, nor Sun, nor Stars,
Nor Heaven his full Resemblance bears;
His Beauties we can never trace,
'Till we behold him Face to Face.
BOOK II.
HYMN 3.
Why, do we mourn, departing Friends?
Or shake at Death's Alarms?
It Is but the Message Jesus sends,
To call them to his Arms.
Are we not tending upwards too,
As fast as Time can move?
Nor would we wish the Hours more slow,
To keep us from our Love.
The Graves of all his Saints he blessed,
And softened every Bed:
Where should the dying Members rest,
But with the dying Head?
HYMN 20.
Why is my Heart so far from Thee,
My GOD, my chief Delight!
Why are my Thoughts no more by Day
With Thee, no more by Night?
Why should my foolish Passions rove?
Where can such Sweetness be,
As I have tasted in thy Love,
As I have found in Thee?
Trifles of Nature, or of Art,
With fair deceitful Charms,
Intrude upon my thoughtless Heart,
And thrust me from thy Arms.
Wretch that I am! to wander thus,
In chase of fond Delight!
Let me be fastened to thy Cross,
Rather than lose thy Sight.
Make haste, my Days, to reach the Goal,
And bring my Heart to Rest,
On the dear Center of my Soul,
My GOD, my Savior's Breast.
HYMN 25.
My drowsy Powers, why sleep ye so?
Awake my sluggish Soul!
Nothing has half thy Work to do,
Yet nothing's half so dull.
HYMN 48.
How vain are all Things here below!
How false and yet how fair!
Each Pleasure has its Poison too,
And every Sweet a Snare.
And dearest Joys, and nearest Friends,
The Partners of our Blood,
How they divide our waving Minds,
And leave but half for GOD.
The Fondness of a Creature's Love,
How strong it strikes the Sense!
Thither the warm Affections move,
Nor can we call them thence.
Dear Savior, let thy Beauties be
My Soul's eternal Food;
And Grace command my Heart away
From all created Good.
HYMN 50.
Now let the Lord, my Savior, smile,
And show my Name upon his Heart;
I would forget my Pains a while,
And in the Pleasure lose the Smart.
But, oh! it swells my Sorrows high,
To see my blessed Jesus frown;
My Spirits sink, my Comforts die,
And all the Springs of Life are down.
Yet, why, my Soul, why these Complaints?
Still while he frowns, his Bowels move;
Still on his Heart he bears his Saints,
And feels their Sorrows and his Love.
HYMN 54.
My GOD, the Spring of all my Joys,
The Life of my Delights;
The Glory of my brightest Days,
And Comfort of my Nights.
HYMN 61.
My Soul, come meditate the Day,
And think how near it stands,
When thou must quit this House of Clay,
And fly to unknown Lands.
HYMN 102.
No, I Will repine at Death no more,
But with a cheerful Gasp resign,
To the cold Dungeon of the Grave,
These dying, withering Limbs of mine.
Let Worms devour my wasting Flesh,
And crumble all my Bones to Dust;
My GOD shall raise my Frame anew,
At the Revival of the Just.
Break, sacred Morning, through the Skies,
Bring that delightful dreadful Day;
Cut short the Hours, dear Lord, and come,
Thy lingering Wheels, how long they stay!
HYMN 145.
I love the Windows of thy Grace,
Through which my Lord is seen;
And long to meet my Savior's Face,
Without a Glass between.
O that the happy ^our were come,
To change my Faith to Sight!
I shall behold my Lord at Home,
In a diviner Light.
Haste, my Beloved, and remove
These interposing Days!
Then shall my Passions all be Love,
And all my Powers be Praise.
Mr. WATT'S Psalms.
PSALM 3.
Tired with the Burdens of the Day,
To the I raised an Evening Cry:
Thou heardst when I began to Pray,
And thine Almighty Help was nigh.
Supported by thine heavenly Aid,
I laid me down and slept secure:
Not Death should make my Heart afraid,
Though I should wake and rise no more.
PSALM 16.
Though in the Dust I lay my Head,
Yet, gracious GOD, thou will not leave
My Soul for ever with the Dead,
Nor Lose thy Children in the Grave.
My Flesh shall thy first Call obey,
Shake off the Dust, and rise on high;
Then shall thou lead the wondrous Way,
Up to thy Throne above the Sky.
PSALM 17.
This Life's a Dream, an empty Show,
But the bright World, to which I go,
Has Joys substantial and sincere;
When shall I wake, and find me there?
Oh! glorious Hour! O blessed Abode!
I shall be near, and like my GOD!
And Flesh and Sin no more control
The sacred Pleasures of my Soul.
My Flesh shall slumber in the Ground,
'Till the last Trumpet's joyful Sound;
Then burst the Chains with sweet Surprise,
And in my Savior's Image rise.
PSALM 18.
That Sin that close besets me still,
That works and strives against my Will;
When shall thy Spirits sovereign Power
Destroy it, that it rise no more!
PSALM 23.
Though I walk through the gloomy Vale,
Where Death and all its Terrors are;
My Heart and Hope shall never fail,
For GOD, my Sheperd's, with me there.
PSALM 71.
Let me thy Power and Truth proclaim,
To the surviving Age,
And leave a Sav'our of thy Name,
When I shall quit the Stage.
PSALM 84.
Blessed are the Saints who sit on high,
Around thy Throne of Majesty;
Thy brightest Glories shine above,
And all their Work is Praise and Love.
Blessed are the Souls that find a Place,
Within the Temple of thy Grace;
There they behold thy gentler Rays,
And seek thy Face, and learn thy Praise.
PSALM 89.
The sacred Truths GOD'S Lips pronounce,
Shall firm as Heaven endure;
And if he speaks a Promise once,
The eternal Grace is sure.
IBID.
My Covenant I will never revoke,
But keep thy Grace in mind,
And what eternal Love has spoke
Eternal Truth shall bind.
PSALM 90.
Our Vitals with laborious Strife,
Bear up the crazy Load,
And drag these poor Remains of Life,
Along the tiresome Road.
Our Souls would learn the heavenly Art,
TO improve the Hours we have,
That we may act the wiser Part,
And live beyond the Grave.
PSALM 92.
Then shall I see, and hear, and know,
All I desired, or wished below;
And every Power find sweet Employ,
In that eternal World of Joy.
PSALM 119.
When Nature sink^, and Spirits droop,
Thy Promises of Grace
Are Pillars to support my Hope,
And there I write thy Praise.
IBID.
Father, I bless thy gentle Hand;
How kind was thy chastising Rod,
That forced my Conscience to a Stand,
And brought my wandering Soul to God!
PSALM 139.
Lord! search my Soul, try every Thought,
Though my own Heart accuse me not,
Of walking in a false Disguise,
I beg the Trial of thine Eyes.
PSALM 144.
For ever blessed be the Lord,
My Savior and my Shield;
He sends his Spirit with his Word,
To arm me for the Field.
When Sin and Hell their Force unite,
God makes my Soul his Care,
Instructs me to the heavenly Fight,
And guards me through the War.
A Friend and Helper so divine,
Does my weak Courage raise;
He makes the glorious Victory mine,
And his shall be the Praise.
PSALM 149.
The Lord has Eyes to give the Blind!
The Lord supports the sinking Mind;
He sends the laboring Conscience Peace,
He helps the Stranger in Distress,
The Widow and the Fatherless,
And grants the Prisoner sweet Release.
He loves his Saints; he knows them well
But turns the Wicked down to Hell;
Thy GOD, O Zion, ever reigns;
Let every Tongue, let every Age
In this exalted Work engage:
Praise him in everlasting Strains.
I Will praise my Maker with my Breath,
And when my Voice is lost in Death,
Praise shall employ my nobler Powers;
My Days of Praise shall never be past,
While Life, and Thought, and Being last,
Or Immortality endures.
AN ELEGY On the much lamented DEATH OF Mrs. Elisabeth Bury.

To the REVEREND Mr. SAMUEL BURY.
REVEREND SIR,
WHEN I received your Request of an Elegy on the late excellent Mrs. BURY, I
found my self unwilling to deny a Person of your Merit: Yet I knew not how to
resume a Study I had abandoned so many Years, except what I devoted to the
Imitation of the Psalms of David. Though I do not use to bind myself with solemn
Vows, yet I had long ago purposed to write no more such Poems, but when the
Occasion itself should be so extraordinary as to awaken my old Idea's almost
from the Grave, and constrain Fancy to the Work.

Such an unexpected Occasion, Sir, was given me when you put into my Hands the
Memoirs of her LIFE, which you had collected. The Character of the Deceased so
far exceeds what I could have imagined, that drew my Thoughts and Verse out to
all this Length, almost contrary to my own Resolutions.

Accept it, honored Sir, as a Tribute paid to the Memory of so uncommon a
Virtue, and a Life of Piety so sublime. And may the Publication of it to the
World be attended with some happy Imitations of so shining an Example. Amen.

AN ELEGY On the much lamented DEATH of Mrs. Elisabeth Bury,
Late Wise of the Reverend Mr. SAMUEL BURY, of Bristol, annexed to some Memoirs
of her Life, drawn up by him, but collected out of her own PAPERS.
SHE must ascend: Her Treasure lies on High;
And there her Heart is. Bear her through the Sky
On Wings of Harmony, ye Sons of Light,
And with surrounding Shields protect her Flight,
Teach her the wondrous Songs your selves compose
For your bright World; she will learn 'em as she goes;
The Sense was known before: Those sacred Themes,
"The GOD, the Savior, and the flowing Streams
"That tinged the cursed Tree with Blood divine,
"Purchased a Heaven, and washed a World from Sin;
"The Beams, the Bliss, the Vision of that Face,
"Where the whole Godhead shines in mildest Grace;
These are the Notes for which your Harps are strung;
These were the Joy and Labor of her Tongue
In our dark Regions. These exalted Strains
Brought Paradise to Earth, and soothed her Pains.
Souls made of pious Harmony and Love,
Can be no Strangers to their Work Above.
But must we lose her hence? The Muse in Pain
Regrets her Flight, and calls the Saint again.
"Stay, gentle Spirit, stay. Can Nature find
"No Charms to hold the once unfettered Mind?
"Must all these Virtues, all these Graces soar
"Far from our Sight, and bless the Earth no more?
"Must the fair Saint to Worlds immortal climb,
"For ever lost to all the Sons of Time?
O, no; she is not lost. Behold her here;
How just the Form! how soft the Lines appear!
The Features of her Soul, without Disguise,
Drawn by her own blessed Pen; a sweet surprise
To mourning Friends. The Partner of her Cares
Seized the fair Piece, and washed it over with Tears,
Dressed it in Flowers, then hung it on her Urn;
A Pattern for the Sex in Ages yet unborn.
Daughters of Eve, come, trace these heavenly Lines,
Feel with what Power the bright Example shines:
She was what you should be. Young Virgins, come,
Drop a kind Tear, and dress you at her Tomb:
Gay Silks and Diamonds are a vulgar Road:
Her radient Virtues should create the Mode.
Matrons, attend her Hearse with Thoughts refined,
Gaze and Transcribe the Beauties of her Mind,
And let her live in you. The Meek, the Great;
The Chaste and Free; the Cheerful and Sedate;
Swift to Forgiveness, but to Anger slow;
And rich in Learning, yet averse to Show;
With Charity and Zeal that rarely join,
And all the Human Graces and Divine
Reigned in her Breast; and held a pleasing Strife
Through every shifting Scene of various Life,
The Maid, the Bride, the Widow, and the Wife.
Nor need a manly Spirit blush to gain
Exalted Thoughts from her superior Vein.
Attend her Hints, ye Sages of the Schools,
And by her Nobler Practice frame your Rules.
Let her inform you to address the Ear
With conquering Suasion, or Reproof severe,
And still without Offense. Thrice happy Soul,
That could our Passions and her own control!
Could weild and govern that unruly Train,
Sense, Fancy, Pleasure, Fear, Grief, Hope and Pain,
And live sublimely Good! Behold her move
Through Earth's rude Scenes, yet point her Tho'ts Above:
Seraphs on Earth part for their Native Skies,
And Nature feels it painful, not to rise.
Ye venerable Tribes of holy Men,
Read the Devotions of her Heart and Pen,
And learn to pray, and die. Burissa knew
To make Life happy, and resign it too.
The Soul that often had walked the Ethereal Road,
Pleased with the Summons, took her farewell flight to GOD.
But never shall Words, or Lines, or Colors paint
The immortal Passions of the expiring Saint.
What Beams of Joy (Angelick Airs) arise
Over her pale Cheeks, and sparkle through her Eyes,
In that dark Hour! how all serene she lay,
Beneath the Openings of Colestial Day!
Her Soul retires from Sense, refines from Sin,
While the descending Glory wrought within;
Then in a sacred Calm resigned her Breath,
And as her Eyelids closed, she smiled in Death.
O may some pious Friend, that weeping stands
Near my last Pillow, with up-lifted Hands,
Or wipes the Mortal Dew from off my Face,
Witness such Triumph in my Soul* and trace
The Dawn of Glory in my dying Mein,
While on my lifeless Lips such heavenly Smiles are seen!
Sept. 29. 1720. I. WATTS


