Dr. Sewall's SERMON ON A Day of Prayer.

GOD's People must Enquire of Him to bestow the Blessings promised in his Word.

A SERMON Preached February 26. 1741, 2. On a Day of Prayer observed by the
South Church and Congregation in BOSTON, to seek of GOD the more Plentiful
Effusion OF His HOLY SPIRIT Upon them and his People.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. One of the Pastors of said Church.

Luke xi. 9. Ask, and it shall be given unto you: seek, and ye shall find:
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. BOSTON, Printed by D. FOUL for D.
HENCHMAN in Cornhill. 1742.

GOD will be sought unto for promised Blessings.
EZEKIEL XXXVI. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the House of Israel, to do it for them.
THE Prophecies contained in this Chapter may relate to the Deliverance of
God's ancient People out of the Babylonish Captivity; but then, they doubtless
look further, and may refer to the Calling of the Jews; yea to the flourishing
State of the whole Israel of God. Here are temporal, but especially spiritual
Blessings promised. And it is said that God would do these great Things for
them in Answer to Prayer. God had before put his People in Mind of their own
great Unworthiness, and declared that he would not do this for their Sakes, but
for his holy Name's Sake: However, he would be enquired of by the House of
Israel, to do it for them. The Words may imply a Command, that God required his
People to seek him for the Accomplishment of these precious Promises. They may
also comprehend in them a further Promise, that God would put it into their
Hearts, and incline them thus to enquire after him. The Word here used is
observed to signify their seeking and inquiring with all Diligence. The Words
may also imply that GOD would manifest himself ready to be found of them
Inveniendum me exhibebo. Piscator.
.

DOCT. GOD will be enquired of, and sought unto by his People, to bestow the
Blessings which he has promised to them in his Word.

I. GOD has in his Word promised to bestow all needed Blessings upon his
People.

II. GOD will be enquired of and sought unto by his People, to bestow these
Blessings upon them.

I. GOD has in his Word promised to bestow all needed Blessings upon his
People.

In the Bible we have the great Charter of God's Covenant People, in which is
contained, and confirmed to the Faithful all those blessings, which God is
pleased of his free Grace, through the Merits of Christ, to confer upon them, 2
Pet. 1. 3, 4. According as his divine Power has given unto us (...). Things
that pertain unto Life and Godliness, through the Knowledge of him that has
called us to Glory and Virtue: Whereby are given unto (...) exceeding great and
precious Promises; that by these you might be Partakers of the divine Nature,
having escaped the (...) that is in the World through Lust. That Godliness
which is taught and pressed upon us in the Word, is profitable to all Things,
having Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. But the
Design of our present Meeting leads me to speak of spiritual Blessings, which
if we obtain, other Things shall be added, so far as God shall see these to be
truly Good for his People. And here, I would consider some of the spiritual
Blessings which are promised to God's People in this Chapter, for which God
declares he will he enquired of. -- Ver. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean Water
upon you, and ye shall be clean. -- God here assures his People that by his
Word and Spirit, He would apply the Virtues of the Blood of Jesus, that Blood
of Sprinkling, to wash them from the Guilt and Defilements of Sin. The Blood of
Christ the then promised Messiah, is the Blood of Atonement, and it cleanses
from all Sin. ver. 26. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will
I put within you, and I will take the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will
give you an Heart of Flesh. God here promises that he would savingly convert
them, and form in them a new Frame, and excellent Disposition in spiritual
qualities: He would renew his Image upon them in Knowledge, Righteousness and
Holiness. Thus they should be made new Creatures in a spiritual Sense; old
Things should pass away, and all Things become new. God promises also to take
away the stony Heart which was hard and insensible, and refused to yield to
good Impressions. And in Opposition to that evil Heart, God would give a soft
and tender Heart which like living Flesh is quick and sensible, and ready to
yield to the living Soul that animates it. In like Manner God's People being
quickened and governed by the Spirit, should be ready to receive Impressions
from him. Agreeably it follows 27 Ver. And I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in his Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them.
God would not only send his Spirit to strive with them; but he would
effectually bestow him upon them, and send him to dwell in their Hearts by his
saving Operations as a renewing sanctifying and comforting Spirit, by whom God
communicates all spiritual Blessings to his People. And to crown all, God says
28 Ver. And ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers, and ye
shall be my People, and I will be your God. God would enable them to discharge
the Duties of their Covenant Relation to him, and he would fulfill his Part in
giving them the sure Mercies of the new Covenant; he would bless them as their
Covenant God with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Things in Christ Jesus.
This then is all our Salvation, and should be all our Desire, even to inherit
the great and good Things contained in the Promises.

II. I proceed to show that God will be enquired of, and sought unto hy his
People, to bestow these promised Blessings upon them.

We may under this Head speak to the following Things. 1. What Is implied in our
inquiring of God and seeking him for the Blessings promised in his Word. 2. How
and after what Manner should we attend this Duty? 3. We may consider our
Obligations thus to enquire of the Lord.

I. What is implied in our inquiring of God to bestow these promised Blessings
upon us?

A. In general, That in the Ways of God's Appointment we seek these Blessings,
and wait upon God for them.

More particularly,

1. It supposes a realising Apprehension of our Need of these Blessings, and
that God alone is able to bestow them.

Men will not be solicitous to enquire after that which they imagine they have
in Hand, or do not need. When therefore the Laodiceans presumed that they were
rich, and had Need of nothing; our Savior first declared to them, that they
were upon spiritual Accounts wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked; and then counsels them to come to him for Gold tried in the Fire, --
Rev. 3. 17, 18. If we are not sensible of our spiritual Maladies; we shall not
seek after God to cleanse and heal our Souls. If we are not sensible how we are
become guilty before God, and obnoxious to his Wrath and Curse as Transgressors
of the Law; we shall not with any due Concern enquire after Christ, and seek an
Interest in him as the Lord our Righteousness: If we are not sensible of our
being empty of Grace, and of our Need of it; we shall never go to God by Jesus
Christ, that of his Fullness we may receive and Grace for Grace. Unless we see
and feel our Need of the gracious Influences of the Spirit to renew us, and
change our Hearts; we shall not in a due Manner ask this great Gift of God. In
a Word, We must behold God as the God of all Grace, and Father of Mercies in
Christ Jesus; or we shall not leave our broken Cisterns to go to him as the
Fountain of living Waters, for all needed Supplies. Agreeably when God was
about to invite his People to return to him as their only Savior, he says to
them, Hosea 13. 9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine
Help.

2. It intends that we Value and Desire these Blessings as the best Things.

In Order to our searching after any Blessing, we must have a due Value for it,
and Desires after it excited in us. Prove. 18. 1. Through Desire a Man having
separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all Wisdom. Would we then
enquire of God concerning spiritual Blessings? We must count them to be the
most excellent Things, and accordingly search for them as for hid Treasures. We
must esteem the Promises to be exceeding great and precious, and earnestly
desire the good contained in them. We must open our Mouths wide, enlarge our
Desires, that we may be filled. Thus do we seek the Lord as our God? We must
thirst for him. Psalm 63. 1 -- 3. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek
thee: my Soul thirsts for thee, my Flesh longs for thee in a dry and
thirsty Land, where no Water is: To see thy Power and thy Glory, so as I have
seen thee in the Sanctuary. Because thy loving Kindness is better than Life. We
must count all Things but Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and that we may be found in him; or we shall not seek him in a right
Manner. And as the Gift of the Holy Spirit virtually contains all spiritual
Blessings, we must value and desire this above all temporal good Things. That
Invitation is made to such. Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye
to the Waters, and he that has no Money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy
Wine and Milk without Money, and without Price. And the Promise is indeed made
to them, Matthew. 5. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness: for they shall be filled. And without this Value for and Desire
after spiritual Blessings, we shall never seek first the Kingdom of God.

3. These Desires after promised Blessings must be made known to God in fervent
Prayer.

And this seems to be in an especial Manner intended when it is said, For this,
I will be enquired of. -- We read of seeking God, and enquiring early after
him. Psa. 78. 34. Does God then say to us seek ye my Face? Our Hearts should
answer, thy Face Lord, we will seek. Does God in these Promises declare that he
is ready to communicate the best of Blessings to his People? We must then put
them in Suit, and plead them with him. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
and call upon him while he is near. God is pleased to manifest himself to us in
his Word and by his Providence, as the God who hears Prayer; and he does
great Things for his People in Answer to their Prayers. Accordingly our Lord
says to us, Luke 11. 9. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. We must then by Prayer make our
Requests known to God in the Name of Jesus Christ, and thus enquire of the
Lord, concerning the Fulfillment of his Promises: These are not given to
supersede, but to encourage our Prayers. Ver. 36. Context. I the Lord will do
it. I will yet for this be enquired of. -- Prayer is one of the Means of Grace
which God would have his People use continually in their Closets, in their
Families, and in the Places of their public Worship; that he may bless them as
their Covenant-God with all spiritual Blessings. And in our Attendance on this
great Duty, we must approve our selves the true Seed of Jacob who wrestled with
the Angel of the Covenant, the Son of God in humble Importunity, refusing to
let him go until he had blessed him. Then we shall find that good Word fulfilled
to us. Isai. 45. 19. I said not unto the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.

4. Enquiring of the Lord may intend that we consult the Word of God as to the
Way and Manner of our seeking the Lord.

The Scriptures are called the Oracles of God. Romans 3. 2. They are of
infallible Truth, and given for our Instruction in Righteousness, that we may
be furnished unto all good Works. And therefore we must consult these lively
Oracles, if we would enquire of God in a right Manner concerning the Bestowment
of promised Blessings. We must search the Scriptures that we may know these
Promises, and how we may obtain a Title to them. This is needful that we may
seek the Lord so as to find him, and Life in the Light of his Countenance. John
5. 14. And this is the Confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any Thing
according to his Will, he hears us. The Will of God then revealed in his Word
must be our Rule and Directory, while we thus enquire of the Lord. Thus, are we
seeking temporal good Things? we must observe God's Word as to the Manner of
attending this Duty, and not seek them absolutely as the best Things; but only
so far as may be for the Glory of God, and consistent with our eternal Welfare.
But then, when we are seeking spiritual Blessings, as at this Day; We must seek
these with our whole Hearts as of absolute Necessity in Order to our glorifying
God in this Life, and preparing to enjoy him in Heaven. Matthew. 6. 33. Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all other Things shall be
added unto you. Here our All lies at Stake, and we must accordingly seek the
more earnestly. While the many and mighty of this World enquire, Who will show
us good? Our great Petition must be, Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us. Now we must lie down at the Foot of sovereign Grace, and
say, with the deepest Humility; Lord, I cannot bear a Denial. For we ought not
to be willing to perish in that Place of Torments where the damned curse God,
and die forever. Nor shall we ever be thus miserable, if we seek the Grace of
God in Christ, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost, in the first and chief Place,
with longing Desires that cannot be satisfied without them.

5. It intends that we wait upon God in the Use of those Means which he has
appointed for our obtaining the spiritual Blessings contained in the Promises.

To seek this or the other Good, without looking up to God for it, is profane.
And for Men to sit still, and say, Lord help! without using the Means God has
ordained; this is presumptuous, and to tempt the Lord. While we therefore pray
to God to heal our spiritual Maladies, and fill us with his Grace; we must also
be found in the diligent Use of all other Means. We must attend to reading, and
take Heed how we hear the Word of God. We must meditate on divine Things;
consider their Reality, Importance and Excellency, that we may be quickened to
the more earnest Pursuit of them. In a Word, We must wait upon God in all Ways
of Duty, that we may receive his Spirit, and so his Blessing. We must strive to
enter in at the strait Gate, and then to walk in that narrow Way which leads to
everlasting Life.

II. How and after what Manner should God's People enquire of him to bestow
promised Blessings upon them?

A. 1 In the Exercise of Faith on God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 11. 6.
Without Faith it is impossible to please him: For he that comes to God, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
We must by Faith which is the Evidence of Things not seen, behold that God who
is invisible, and realise his divine Perfections as manifested in his Word; his
Knowledge, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Mercy, Truth, Holiness, etc. And then we
must remember there is one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus;
through whom we have Access unto the Father. Accordingly we must believe in God
and believe also in Jesus Christ, that through him our Faith and Hope may be in
God. Out of Christ God is a consuming Fire to the apostate Children of fallen
Adam; in him God is the Father of Mercies, and blesses his People with all
spiritual Blessings. We must therefore look to Jesus as the Propitiation for
our Sins, and our Advocate with the Father, in our Approaches to God. Our
Dependence must be on the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, when we ask of
God the Blessings promised in his Word. We must make Mention of his worthy Name
before the Lord, and rely upon it as the only Name, in which we can prevail.
John 14.13, 14. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that
the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any Thing in my Name, I
will do it. All the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, they are
all confirmed as true and certain; and we must accordingly place our Trust and
Confidence in him. As our Lord Jesus was obedient unto Death that he might
purchase all saving Blessings for his People; so he ever lives in Heaven to
make Intercession, and offer the Prayers of the Saints with much Incense, Rev.
8. 3, 4. And the Prayers of his People being thus recommended, receive an
Answer of Peace.

2. We must attend this Duty with an abasing Sense of our own great
Unworthiness, and penitent Confession of our Sins.

In this Respect we should imitate the Father of the Faithful in his pleading
for Sodom. Genesis 18. 27. And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but Dust and Ashes. He acknowledges
before the most high God that he was formed out of the Dust, and had deserved
to be consumed in the Fire of God's Wrath for his own Iniquities. And thus must
we lie down in the Dust before the Lord, when we come to ask the best of
Blessings; and confess with Jacob, that we are not worthy of the least of all
God's Mercies. We must abhor the Self-Conceit of the proud Pharisee, who had
the vain Confidence to plead his religious Performances, as if he had made God
a Debtor to him by them: And rather with the abased Publican, say, Lord, be
merciful to me a Sinner: For every one that exalts himself, shall be abased;
and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Luke 18. 14. God resists the
Proud, but gives Grace to the humble. We must then humble ourselves before God
under a deep Sense of our spiritual Poverty, and be willing to receive these
Blessings, as the Gifts of free Grace; if we would receive them at all, from
that God who has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. In this Sense we may expect
that Word shall be fulfilled, Luke 1. 53. He has filled the Hungry with good
Things, and the Rich he has sent empty away. And then, there must be a
penitent Confession of Sin whereby we have forfeited our Lives, and all our
Enjoyments into God's Hand. Now we must say with Daniel when he sat his Face to
seek the Lord by Prayer. 9. Chapter 5. Verse. We have sinned and committed
Iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy
Precepts, and from thy Judgments. 7. V. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us Confusion of Faces, as at this Day. We must mourn with the
godly Sorrow which works Repentance, upon the Account of our Transgressions,
whereby we have grieved the good Spirit of God, and provoked him to depart from
us. We must with our Prayers offer to God this Day the Sacrifice of a broken
Spirit; for a broken and contrite Heart, God will not despise. Thus shall we be
prepared to receive the strong Consolations contained in the Promises. Matthew.
5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. In this Manner
did God's ancient People seek the Lord, and the Prophecy may look forward even
to Gospel Times. Jer. 50. 4, 5. In those Days, and in that Time, says the
Lord, the Children of Israel shall come, they and the Children of Judah
together, going and weeping: they shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They
shall ask the Way to Zion with their Faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let
us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten.

3. We must attend this Duty with holy Importunity, and persevering Diligence.

We must heartily and earnestly engage in this Duty, sensible of the great
Excellency and Importance of spiritual Blessings. Jam. 5. 16. The effectual
fervent Prayer of a righteous Man avails much. Thus Elias a Man subject to
like Passions as we are, prayed earnestly, and God answered him both by
withholding and giving Rain. May we seek the Lord with like Fervency, 'till he
come, and rain Righteousness upon us! Our Savior spoke a Parable to this end,
that Men ought always to pray, and not to faint. Luke 18. 1. And we have a most
encouraging Example to this Purpose in the Woman of Canaan. Matthew. 15. 22 --
28. She cried to our Savior with Regard to her Daughter vexed with a Devil,
Have Mercy, on me, O Lord! Our Lord appeared to be deaf to her Cries, He
answered not a Word. Then his Disciples besought him to send her away. And our
Lord said, I am not sent but unto the lost Sheep of the House of Israel.
Notwithstanding this, she came and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. Our
Lord seems then not only to give her another Repulse, but to deny her Request
with Disdain: It is not meet to take the Children's Bread, and cast it to Dogs.
Carnal Reason would have concluded that this poor Woman had enough now to have
overwhelmed her with Despair of ever finding Relief; but behold! her
persevering Importunity rises and grows stronger under these Pressures, and
she makes a Plea of this Answer in which our Lord seemed to reproach her as a
Dog; Truth Lord: yet, the Dogs eat of the Crumbs which fall from their Master's
Table. And then our Savior's Answer is most gracious, and full of tender
Mercy. V. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy
Faith: be it unto thee even as thou will. And her Daughter was made whole from
that very Hour. And now wheresoever the Gospel is preached, the humble, and yet
brave and bold Importunity of this Woman is told for a Memorial of her, and for
our Encouragement in Prayer. Let us as true Israelites go, and do likewise; and
we shall have Power with God, and prevail. Let us pray always with all Prayer
and Supplication in the Spirit, watching thereunto with all Perseverance.

4. We must attend this Duty with thankful Acknowledgment of Blessings received.

When God is pleased to draw nigh to us in a Way of Grace and Favor, and to
give spiritual Blessings with a liberal Hand; we must bless his glorious Name
which is exalted above all Blessing and Praise. Psalm 13. 6. I will sing unto
the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with me. In an especial Manner
should we praise the Lord for that unspeakable Gift of his only begotten Son,
and for the great and comprehensive Gift of the Holy Ghost, by whom Application
is made of the Redemption purchased by Jesus Christ. We should bless God for
the wonderful Effusions of his Spirit in the first Times of Christianity,
whereby miraculous Gifts needful for the first Propagation of the Gospel, and
abundant Grace were communicated: And we ought also to praise the Lord that He
has not left us without a Witness of his divine Power and Grace in the
wonderful Operations of his Spirit in our Times. We are bound in Duty and
Gratitude to obey that Word. Philip. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing; but in every
Thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made
known unto God. While God's People enquire of him concerning the Bestowment of
promised Blessings, they must not forget to give Thanks.

Let the redeemed of the Lord then devoutly say, Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in
heavenly Places in Christ.

III. We proceed to show the Obligations which lie upon God's People thus to
enquire of the Lord for the Bestowment of spiritual Blessings.

1. In this Way God's People must glorify him as the Author of all spiritual
Blessings.

God appears in his Glory when he gives spiritual Blessings to his People. In
the Works of his Spirit on the Hearts of Men his glorious Power, Wisdom,
Goodness. Truth, Holiness, Grace and Mercy are displayed. We must pray then
that God would in this Way show us his Glory, and proclaim his Name before us.
And thus must we give him Glory as the Father of Lights from whom comes down
every good Gift, and every perfect Gift; and adore him as the God of Salvation.
When we thus enquire of the Lord we acknowledge that whoever are the
Instruments, the Excellency of the Power whereby Sinners are converted, must be
of God. Thus we give Glory to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, as to the
Father of Mercies; to the Son of God as exalted to be a Prince and Savior, and
as having received Gifts for Men; to the Holy Spirit as the Sanctifier and
Comforter of his People.

2. We must attend this Duty in Obedience to the Will of God declared in his
Word

Our Lord says to his People, I will for this be enquired of by the House of
Israel. God commands his People to pray always, with all Prayer. And in his Word
declares that we must wait on him in the Ways of his Appointment, that we may
receive spiritual Blessings, and that abundantly. Isai. 55. 1 -- 3. Ho, every
one that thirsts, come to the Waters, and he that has no Money; come ye, buy
and eat, yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without Money, and without Price.
Wherefore do ye spend your Money for that which is not Bread? and your Labor
for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that
which is good, and let your Soul delight itself in Fatness. Incline your Ear,
and come unto me: bear, and your Soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David. And the
Commandment is given with a gracious Promise annexed to it. Matthew. 7. 7. Ask,
and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be
opened unto you.

3. It is our Duty in this Way to declare our high Esteem for the Blessings
contained in the Promises, and to express our longing Desires after them.

We must thus acknowledge that the Promises are exceeding great and precious,
and reach after the Accomplishment of them. Prove. 4. 7. Wisdom is the principal
Thing, therefore get Wisdom: and with all thy getting get Understanding.

4. We stand in absolute Need of these Blessings that we may glorify God upon
Earth, and prepare to enjoy him forever in Heaven.

Now this is the chief End of Man, the great Errand upon which God has sent us
into the World. And unless we mind this one Thing needful, we live in vain, and
shall die without Wisdom; yea must perish in Hell forever. Alas! We are all
fallen short of the Glory of God as Children of apostate Adam, and unless it
please God by his Holy Spirit to form us to show forth his Praise, we shall
become Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction. Unless the Means of Grace are
accompanied with the divine Spirit and Blessing, they will be the Savor of
Death unto Death. We shall be like that Ground which bears Thorns and Briers;
and so is nigh to cursing, whose End is to be burned. But if we receive this
Blessing from God, we shall bear that Fruit whereby our heavenly Father is
glorified.

And thus shall we enjoy the Blessings of the Kingdom of Grace in this World,
Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and be prepared for the
Kingdom of Glory.

APPLICATION.
Let us now apply these Things to the Work and Duties of this Day.

We are assembled to ask of God the plentiful Effusions of his Spirit upon his
People, more particularly of the Flock who usually worship God in this Place;
and to bless his Name for spiritual Blessings already received in the
remarkable Revival of his Work among us, and in many other Towns. We are also
met together to entreat the Lord that he would preserve us and his People from
every Thing that has a Tendency to quench his Spirit, and obstruct the
Progress and Success of his good Work; that it may go on and prosper, till the
whole Land shall be filled with the blessed Fruits of the Spirit. An important
Errand indeed! O that there was a Spirit in us to cry mightily to God for this
great Blessing; while we humble our selves before the Lord for our past
Unfruitfulness, and all those Sins whereby we have grieved the Spirit of God!
We have formerly once and again observed such Days of Prayer to seek the Lord
for spiritual Blessings, the comprehensive Sum of which is the Gift of the Holy
Ghost. And may we not hope that God is now giving a gracious Answer to the
Supplications which have in this Way been offered to him in Years past? And
ought not this to encourage us now to pray the more earnestly? Yes surely. We
wait for thy Salvation, O Lord, who have received Gifts for Men, even for the
rebellious; and art pleased to say unto us, If ye, being evil know how to give
good Gifts unto your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the Spirit to them that ask him? Let us then with an high Esteem of these
spiritual Blessings, lift up our Hearts with our Hands to God this Day that he
would bless us indeed; Bless us with the more abundant Effusions of his Spirit,
to convince us more and more of Sin, that Sinners pricked to the Heart may say,
What shall we do? to convert us, that many may be born from above, and so enter
into the Kingdom of God; to carry on his Work in his Children, that they may
grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to comfort
the Mourners in Zion, that they may rejoice together in the Salvation of God.
And let us then all unite in our diligent and prudent Endeavors to promote
this Work, each one keeping within his own Line. Let the Ministers of our Lord
Jesus Christ give themselves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word; that by you God may delight to give his People the Fullness of the
Blessing of the Gospel, which is the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8.
Let us in the Way of Duty wait upon God that we may be strengthened with all
Might, by the Spirit. For who is sufficient for these Things? Brethren, pray
for us, that the Word of the Lord may have free Course, and be glorified. Let
us seek the promised Presence of our ascended Savior, and in the Way of Study
and painful Labor depend on him for all that Ability and Skill we need to make
us wise to win Souls, and lead them unto Christ. And let us unite our
Endeavors in this great and difficult Work, as Fellow-Helpers to the Truth;
that we may promote each other's Usefulness in the right Improvement of those
Gifts which our glorious Head has in various Kinds and Degrees communicated to
us for the Edification of his Body, the Church. And let the Success which God
has of late given to the Ministry of the Word above what we have known in
Times past, animate us to labor more abundantly. Blessed are they that sow
beside all Waters, when the Spirit is poured from on high. Certainly, it will
be an abundant Recompense for all our Pains, if God's People may be our Crown
of Joy in the Day of the Lord. I mention these Things in Humility, as one
sensible of my own great Defects in the Work of the Ministry.

Again, Let these Churches hear what the Spirit says to them in his Word, and
by his Works of Grace. Walk together in the Faith and Order of the Gospel. Obey
that Word, of our Lord. Rev. 2. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works. O that our religious Assemblies
might be as fruitful Fields which the Lord has blessed, in which the good Seed
of the Word plentifully sown, shall take Root, spring up, and bear Fruit an
hundred Fold! The Lord multiply the Seed sown, and increase the Fruits of your
Righteousness.

Again, Let our Honored Rulers be entreated to give an helping Hand to this
Work by your Example and Influence, and by your Authority. God has put Honor
upon you; Do you then honor him by leading in the great and necessary Work of
a general Reformation. Be not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil. In vain
shall we boast of the Christian Name, if the great Things of the Moral Law are
counted as a strange Thing among us. Let Judgment run down as Waters, and
Righteousness as a mighty Stream. Furthermore,

Let Heads of Families be exhorted to encourage the Work of God by their
Prayers, by their Example and Authority in their Houses. That God who sets the
Solitary in Families, and builds the House; has committed this important Trust
to you with a solemn Charge to bring up your Children and all under your Care,
in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. You must therefore take up Joshua's
Resolution. 24th Chap. 15. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. When
God promises to pour out the Spirit of Grace and Supplication upon the House
of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem; it is said, that they should look to
him whom they had pierced and mourn; yea, that the Land should mourn, every
Family apart -- Zech. 12. 10 -- 13. And then follows the most gracious Promise
of God's opening a Fountain to the House of David, and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, to wash away their Sins. Chap 13. Let Heads of Families then call
upon the Name of the Lord in their Houses, that he may pour out his Spirit on
them, and so bless them in Christ Jesus, in whom all the Families of the Earth
are blessed. Imitate King David, who after he had worshipped God with his
People, returned to bless his Household. 2 Samuel 6. 20. Let our Family Prayer be
in the Morning set before God as Incense, and the offering up of our Hands as
the Evening Sacrifice. Lest that dreadful Curse fall upon us and our Houses.
Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the
Families that call not on thy Name. And let us all walk before God in our
Houses with a perfect Heart, and in a perfect Way, saying with the Psalmist, O
when will thou come unto me? And then, call upon all under your Roofs to seek
and serve the Lord. Travail in Birth again with your Children, till they are
born of the Spirit, and so have Christ formed in them. And use your best
Endeavors that your Servants may become the Children of God, and Heirs
according to the Promise, by Faith in Jesus Christ. Let your Children and
Servants have Leave to attend the Means of Grace as there may be Opportunity,
and the Business of your Families will allow of it. And in an especial Manner
Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy in your Dwellings; for the Lord has
blessed this Day, and hallowed it to be a Day of communicating spiritual
Blessings to his People. O wait upon God with your Houses on the Lord's Day,
and labor for the Meat which endures to everlasting Life! And on others Days,
abide with God in a diligent Attendance upon your particular Calling. Do your
own Business, and let there be no just Occasion for that Complaint. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
11. We hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at
all, but are Busybodies. The great Evil, of neglecting our own Affairs and
meddling with those Things which do not belong to us, is both the Parent and
Nurse of many shameful Vices that have a Tendency to dishonor God, and grieve
his Holy Spirit.

Again, Let our Children and young People go to God for the great Blessings
promised in the Gospel. Thirst after these living Waters, and plead that
Promise with God. Isai. 44. 3. I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry Ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
Blessing upon thine Offspring. Hear the Wisdom of God speaking to you, Prove. 8.
17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me. Hear
the Son of God, the essential and eternal Wisdom, Matthew. 6. 33. Seek first the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these Things shall be added unto
you. And to awaken you, Consider how many of your Age and Time will rise up in
Judgment and condemn you, if you go on walking in the Ways of your Heart, and
in the Sight of your Eyes, in this remarkable Day of Grace. Consider how
dreadful it will be for you to be left behind to perish in your Sins, when
others are taken. And look diligently least any of you should fail of the Grace
of God, Least there be a profane Person as Esau, who for one Morsel of Meat
sold his Birthright; and afterward when he would have inherited the Blessing,
he was rejected. But I hope better Things of many of you, our dear Children.
May you imitate Jacob in his holy Importunity, and bear away the Blessing.

Or are there any grown old in Years, and yet standing as barren Trees in God's
Vineyard? Have you stood more than ten Times three Years under the Means of
Grace, and yet remain dead in Trespasses and Sins? Hear that Word, and tremble.
Matthew. 3. 10. The Ax is laid unto the Root of the Trees: Therefore every Tree
that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire.
Admire the Patience of God, and despise not the Riches of his Goodness, and
Long-suffering; not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to
Repentance. O take Heed least after your Hardness and impenitent Heart, you
treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath! O be sensible of the deep
Corruption of your Hearts which have resisted all the Means God has for so long
Time used with you, and cry to God for the inward and effectual Call of his
Spirit; that you may be born again, even when you are old; and that in you
Christ may show forth all Long-suffering, for a Pattern to them which shall
hereafter believe on him to Life everlasting. O remember, it will be a most
dreadful Thing to go down to Hell after a long and clear Day of Gospel Grace.
To such is reserved the Blackness of Darkness forever. Do not then grieve and
vex the Holy Spirit any longer, but attend to what he says in his Word, To Day
if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts.

Again, Let such as are under the Convictions of the Spirit, seek a saving
Conversion unto God. O beware of quenching the Spirit! Now strive to enter in
at the strait Gate; press into the Kingdom of God. Are you made sensible of the
Plague of your own Hearts? Pray to God, to heal your Souls. Plead that Promise,
I will take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh. Do not And while you
continue in the diligent Use of the Means of Grace, beware of depending on
religious Duties, and outward Reformations. Go weary and heavy laden to Christ,
that in him you may find Rest. The Lord draw you to him, the Lord make you
willing in the Day of his Power!

Or have any obtained Joy in believing. Adore that God who has Mercy on whom he
will have Mercy; and say, not unto us 0 Lord, not unto us; but to thy Name give
Glory. Rejoice with holy Fear, and great Humility.

And here give me Leave to say, If any of you have been pressed down under
uncommon Degrees of Terror, and then been raised with proportionable Joys; look
to it that the Foundation of your Joy be laid in a graciously broken Heart, and
a sincere Closing with Jesus Christ upon Gospel-Terms; and then, that it be
followed with a close humble Walk with God, and with Fruits meet for Repentance.

As for the Outcries, Tremblings, and Faintings which have been experienced in
some Places, I apprehend the Cause must be judged of by the Effect. We may not
limit the Holy One. The Jailor came trembling, and fell down before Paul and
Silas. -- They who heard Peter's Sermon were pricked in their Heart, and said
to Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
Acts 2. 37. A wounded Spirit who can bear? If such Persons therefore have an
holy Awe of God, a deep Humiliation under the Sense of Sin, and earnest Concern
about Deliverance from it; here is the Finger of God. And if it shall please
God to impress such a Sense of Sin, and of his Wrath on Men, that they are
forced to cry out under it; they are to be pitied, and proper Means used for
their Relief; and not to be censured as mad and out-ragious. But then, if any
would indulge themselves in these Outcries, especially in Time of public
Worship, when there is no real Necessity for it, and they might restrain
themselves; I think they are disorderly, and do that which has a Tendency to
disturb the quiet attentive hearing of God's Word. Nor may we make a Judgment
of a Work whether genuine or no, merely by such extraordinary Commotions. For
there have been Tremblings which have not proceeded from the Spirit of Truth
and Holiness. Let us not then presume to confine the free Spirit of God, but
regard the Substance of the Work itself. I make no Doubt but that in our
Congregations many have been deeply wounded for Sin without these Outcries,
and that the Convictions have in considerable Numbers issued in a saving
Coversion to God. Nor can I suppose that it is the Duty of Ministers to try to
excite these Schreamings; but rather to set the Terrors of the Law and gracious
Invitations of the Gospel before Men in the most powerful Manner they are able;
and than leave it to the only wise God to take his own Way, who can if he
pleases order these Things to the Awakning of others; as we are informed has
been the Case, in some other Places. Let not such then as have not felt this
Degree of Terror, judge them that have; and let not such as have been thus
wrought upon, judge them that have not: But let both prove their own Work, and
examine by the Word of God whether the Fruits of the Spirit are found in them,
such as Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; Love to
God, and our Neighbor, Meekness, Humility, and the like. If upon an impartial
Trial you find these Things in you, you will have rejoicing in yourselves, and
not in another. And let not any who have been made sensible of their perishing
Condition, and then enabled to submit to Christ as their only Savior, deny the
Work of Grace God has wrought in them because they have not felt such a Degree
of Terror, and then such rapturous Joys as others may have experienced. But
rather be encouraged to wait upon God in the Way of Duty for the Assurance and
Joy of Faith. And let not your Eye be evil, because God is good. May not God do
what he will with his own? Do not then behave as the elder Son in the Parable,
who was angry upon the Account of the Joy expressed in his Father's House, when
his Prodigal Brother returned a true Penitent. There is Joy in Heaven over the
Sinner that repents; and there must be just Occasion for Joy upon Earth, when
the Dead are thus made alive, and the lost are found.

Again, As to those extraordinary Appearances in Trances, and the Things
uttered by Persons that have fallen under them; No Stress may be laid on these
Things to determine the present or future State of Men. Secret Things belong to
God. His Word is given us for our Rule. To the Law, and to the Testimony.

Again, Let not new Converts imagine that they are called and qualified to be
Teachers of God's Word. Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12. 29. No
certainly, our ascended Savior has appointed the Gospel Ministry, and given to
his Church Pastors and Teachers. Nor may any take upon them this Office, who
are not called to it according to the Order appointed in God's Word. Let your
Zeal then be expressed according to Knowledge, and sound Judgment. It is
granted, you may out of the Abundance of your Hearts utter the Praises of the
great God your Savior, and with Humility declare what he has done for your
Souls, in proper Time and Place; and edify one another by Christian Conference,
and the like. But then, there is a great Difference between this, and setting up
for Teachers. And I am persuaded that the natural Tendency of this, however God
may overruled it, is to introduce Disorder, and to bring the Gospel Ministry
into Contempt: as if there needed no Study, Gifts and Learning to qualify Men
for this difficult and important Office. The Apostle's Rule is that. 1 Timothy 3.
6. Not a Novice, least being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the
Condemnation of the Devil.

Again, Let the more private Meetings of Christians be encouraged, and well
regulated. Exercise your selves in such Duties as are proper for you, and let
good Hours be observed, that Family-Religion and Closet-Piety may have their
due Proportion of Time. Solomon observes, that to every Thing there is a
Season; and that God has made every Thing beautiful in his Time. Eccl. 3. 1 --
11. Accordingly, that Duty is like to be performed in the best Manner, which is
done seasonably. There Is a Time for public Worship, a Time for Family and
Closet Devotion, and a Time for our needful Rest in the Night, that being
refreshed with Sleep, we may be prepared for the Business of the Day, when Man
goes forth to his Labor. And if for Want of a due Regard to these Seasons,
our Families should suffer in their Spiritual or Temporal Interests, the God of
Order will be displeased with us. I am not now speaking of this or the other
extraordinary Case, the Apostle Paul continued his Speech until Midnight, being
to depart on the Morrow: But of the ordinary Practice of Christians in their
more private Meetings. In a Word, Let all Things be done decently, and in Order.

Again, Avoid all rash judging and censuring one another, as Hypocrites and
unconverted. For our Lord has said, Judge not, that ye be not judged. Matthew.
7. 1. Indeed the Tree is to be known by its Fruits. And we ought to exercise
such a Judgment of Discretion and Charity toward our Neighbor, as to watch
over him, and keep our selves pure. But then to pronounce concerning Persons
professing Godliness, without Heresy or moral Scandal openly inconsistent with
such a Profession, that they are Hypocrites and Pharisees; this is a bold
Invasion of God's Prerogative, who searches the Heart; and says to us, Judge
nothing before the Time. And for any to utter such Censures is a great Injury,
and Breach of Christian Charity. And this Sin is aggravated, when such Censures
are passed on Men of public Character, particularly on the Ministers of the
Gospel; for hereby not only is their personal Character wounded; but also,
their public Usefulness may be obstructed. Let us then avoid this Evil. Romans
14. 10. Why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at naught thy
Brother? for we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. This is not
the Way to reclaim Men; but rather to exasperate them, and stir up that
Contention which leads to Confusion, and every evil Work.

In a Word, Let us be zealous for God, and good Wories; and at the same Time
beware of the dangerous Extreaty of Enthusiasm.

And thus I have taken Liberty to touch upon several Things which I apprehend
worthy of our serious Consideration under the present Circumstances, if we
would avoid giving the great Adversary Advantage to blemish God's Work; and if
we would stop the Mouths of Gainsayers. May we resist the Devil, not being
ignorant of his Devices! May we, in this critical Conjuncture, walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise! It is my Judgment that the prudent
Regulation of our religious (...), is of great Moment in order to our defending
and preserving the Work of God, as we are unworthy Instruments in his Hand. And
this is what I have sincerely designed and endeavored in the present
Discourse, and not to reproach any Person whatsoever, or to discourage any good
Work. Let not any then pervert what has been said to prejudice themselves or
others against that wonderful Work of Grace, which I verily believe, God has
wrought in this Town, and other Places. It is no strange Thing if (...) Men are
chargeable with Imprudences and Irregularities. But as for God, His Work is
perfect. Let us then hear our Lord and Judge, Woe unto the World because of
Offenses, and beware least we be offended in Christ. And let not God's People
be alienated from each other because of some Difference in Judgment. Be valiant
for the Truth; and at the same Time, follow the Things which make for Peace,
and Things wherewith one may edify another. Let those Words sink deep into your
Hearts. Ephesians. 4. 29 -- 32. Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your
Mouth, but that which is good to the Use of edifying, that it may minister
Grace unto the Hearers. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are
sealed unto the Day of Redemption. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger and
Glamour, and evil-speaking be put away from you, with all Malice. And be kind
one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you. And let us all unite in seeking the Advancement of
Christ's Kingdom among us. Let us pray that Ministers and People may have all
needed Wisdom and Grace to know and attend their Duty in this Day of
Visitation. Let us pray as Psalm. 90. 16, 17. Let thy Work appear unto thy
Servants, and thy Glory unto their Children. And let the Beauty of the Lord our
God be upon us: and establish thou the Work of our Hands upon us, yea, the Work
of our Hands establish thou it. May we be more and more enriched with the
Showers of Blessing from the third Heaven! May these holy Waters increase and
spread far and wide, like the Waters in Ezekiah's Vision! May they be for the
quickening, cleansing, and healing of Sinners; and for the refreshing of God's
Children, and the causing them to abound in the Fruits of Righteousness! Thus
we shall be prepared for the best Prosperity. Thus shall we obtain Fruits more
precious than those which are put forth by Virtue of the Light and Rain of
Heaven. God, even our own God, will bless us, and we shall obtain Salvation
from the Light of his Countenance. Ezekiel. 39.29. Neither will I hide my Face any
more from them: for I have poured out my Spirit upon the House of Israel, says
the Lord God.

FINIS.
Page 24. at the Bottom, dele Do not.


