SMITH's ANIMADVERSIONS UPON, AND REFUTATIONS Of sundry Gross Errors, Mistakes
and Blunders, Contained in a certain Pamphlet handed about in this Government,
in the form of a SERMON or SPEECH.

Although I am not of the Society of the People called Quakers, yet I believe
that the Gospel Covenant has long since fully taken Place, and that the
Dispensation which all Christian Men ought to acknowledge, is a Dispensation of
Peace, Love, Unity, etc. and not of Envy, Strife and Discord: And I believe
that the Spirit of Truth that leads into all Truth, abid^^^ in all true
Christians, and teaches this ^^y Truth.

Philadelphia: Printed for, and Sold by the Author, at Duck-Creek. Sold also at
the Bible in Front-street. And at several other Places. 1742

Impartial Reader,
WHereas it is become a common Thing amongst Men, to put false Constructions
upon other men's Words and Works, contrary to the Real Intent and Meaning of the
Author: In order to prevent which, I have thought it good to perfix a Summary
to the following Tract; being the surest Master of my own Mentals, to let all
Men know that what ever I say to the Author of those Religious Chapters, in my
Animadversions upon his Speech or Sermon, I speak to him or of him, as a
Preacher, and no otherways; and as it seems to me a Holder-forth of a new and
strange Doctrine, as to his temporal and secular Affairs; he may be a Man
blameless for ought I know. So know ye all that read the following Tract, that
it is to, and of his Divinity, I only intend to Speak, and I would be so by you
all Understood.

Eos qui peceant in conspectu Omnium.
Argue ut and Reliqui metuant.
Smith 's Animadversions, etc.
IT has been an old Failing in Men, even as ancient as the Fall of Man, to be
apt and quick sighted in other Men's faillings, and as blind and ignorant in
their own Infirmities: Certainly its a great unhappiness unto the whole human
Race, that they cannot comply with this one Gosple Instruction (viz.) Cast
first the Beam out of thine own Eye, and then shall thou see clear to cast the
Mote out of thy Brothers Eye; the Misfortune of which sad and unhappy Dissaster
have been the chief cause of my appearing once more to public View, as the
Author of and Voucher to the following Discourse, by way of an Answer to a
certain Pamphlet handed about in this Government under the unproper,
unseasonable, inconsistent, undescreat, Denomination of A Speech or Sermon made
by way of a Charge unto a Grand Jury, which suits the Time, Purpose and Season,
just as much as the Proposition whereupon the Theme is grounded suits good
Christian Men's Ears, or the Theme suits Gospel and Truth, even just so much,
after my Opinion: With what Views, Aims and Ends the honorable Author of such
Religious Chapters Exhibited, such Oration, at so an unsuitable, unseasonable a
Time, and so inconsistent to the Matter at that Time in Hand: I shall not here
undertake to determine, least I should control the Authors Mentals, seeing he
is so pleased to tell us, that it is purely out of Love and Good Will to
Mankind and love of Truth: And if this be true its a good Morral; how Mean and
Shallow so ever the Senses be that it proceeds from: And in that Nature it
bespeaks a very greatful Acceptance: But suppose that I mistake the Authors
Intentions, and suspect the verity of his Pretentions, and should humbly
conceive that it was some other Object that gave Conceptions to this Religious
Plan: Why yet it fortuneth any ignorant mistakes, that the Master of these so
laudable and plauseable Performances, is said to be a wise, politic, grave
Man, and has no doubt Wit enough to look upon the sharp rebuke of Religious
Admonitions, as they proceed from godly Love to his Soul, with such Aspects of
good and godly Friendship, as all such things in their own Nature require;
therefore I begin to say, if I have good reason to believe that the Author of
such a clashing, inconsistent Heap of Folly and Madness, is seven fold more
under Mistake and Error than those that he travels to correct and reform,
certainly if ever he did himself expect any Thanks suitable to his Toil,
Labor and Expense, for their Recovery; he will be so Modest as to return the
same Measures unto any that at least with as good Reason and Will labor to
recover him from the like or worse Dissaster.

I am bound in Conscience to try to lift you out of the Bogg of the diabolical
Nature, and out of the dark Dungeon of Ignorance, and set you in the Light of
the glorious Gospel; and in order to that purpose it seems to me the best way
to take a retrograde Order, according to the Gospel Rule, of beginning with the
last first; for should I first begin with the Proposition upon which the
Doctrine of your Pamphlet is grounded, that will certainly prove False at the
first Chop, and so then, according unto the Rules of Reason, my Work will be at
an End as soon as I begin; because it is a general Rule in Reasons, That if the
Proposition be False the Conclusion cannot be True: And it can be nothing but
superfluity to look any further into a Place that we are sure has little or no
Truth in it.

These Things being thus premised, as an Introduction; I come now to the Matter.

In an Advertisement, in the Gazette of March the 3d 1741-2, the Gentleman, the
Author of the Speech and Pamphlet, was pleased to tell us that he was a united
Member of a Society of Religious People called Quakers: And that Men might not
take him for an Atheist or a Deis-Man, he sums up some of these extraordinary
Principles that he would have Men think he holds in common with that Society,
as Meekness, Humility, Charity, Patience, Brotherly Love, Not rendering Evil
for Evil, nor Revilling even for Reveilling; I suppose for shortness sake, he
went no further, to show what Principles he held in common with them of CHRIST
and the Gosple; No, he has done me so much Hardship as to leave me that Task
to endeavor to do: I confess Indeed, that it was no Prudence in the
Remark-Maker, be he who he will, to use such provoking Language; nor can I take
it for any Produce of any thing Divine, or of even good Morals either; for it is
really absurd to think to reduce Men to Reason by a huff of foul Words. And on
the other Hand, I must say too, Men ought not to erect Hobgoblings and
Mockings, fit for no other Purpose but to start Passions in the weaker Part of
Mankind: I declare I do not know the Remark-Maker, nor do I aprove of his
Method: But this is worthy to be said of him, he really had more Wit then to
Sum up the religious Principles he held, of not Rendering Evil for Evil, nor
even Reviling for Reviling: Whilst he was in the act that these Principles so
expressly forbid: Nor was it a small Surprise to me to see our so reported wise,
grave, polite Author, make use of the like Paranomasia, by mystic Allusions,
and by express Words to and by false Accusations too, that are plain enough
seen through: For through the Epithetes might show him to be a passionate and
hot Nature or Temper: Yet the Epithetes do not show him to be an apostate Tool
nora Time-server either: But let not Truth any longer offend you [suppose I
tell you in Truth and Honesty, for I am no respecter of Persons, I regard no
Man's Person in these Cases] that its greatly believed amongst all Societies,
that you measured your Remarker's Corn by your own Bushel, when you past your
Judgment upon the Symptoms of the Epithetes, as shall full plainly appear by
and by: I am really Sorry to tell you that it is a shocking Surprise to me and
many others, that would sain harbor an Opinion of the Authors being a polite
wise Man; Is it possible that you should be a Member of a Religious Society of
People, that profess themselves taught by that Spirit of Truth that leads
unto all Truth, and teaches all things, that is true and is no lie? And this
Society, and you as a United Member of that Society, has held forth that the
Gosple Dispensation is a Dispensation that knows nothing but Love, Peace,
Unity, Patience, Charity, and c. all love to God and goodwill unto Men, and
averseth all Strife, Envy, Malice and Bloodshed; and after you have held
forth for a long seer of Years back, as well Exampleary as by Doctrine, that
this has been taught you by this infalable Teacher (and so well it agrees with
the reveiled written Word) and now, for a Man that Declares himself a united
Member, to stand forth and declare against the Dictates of that infalable
Teacher, that it is both false and erroneous; how can this hang together any
better then Ropes of Sand, as the old saying is; is it possible in any Case,
that you could ever be any Member of that Society of People that have all ways
held forth that the Gosple Covenant, Jeremiah Chap. 31. has long since taken
Place, and that Christ had appeared in a Spiritual Manner, without Sin, unto
Salvation, the Second Time; in a Spiritual Manner, to as many as look and wait
to receive him in that order, and than he has taken Possession of his
Spiritual Kingdom in the Hearts of true Believers, and there he and only he is
the sole Teacher in the aforesaid Spiritual Manner: And could thou then be a
Member of this Society that has so many Years past held this Doctrine forth by
Doctrine and Examples, now at this time a Day, be so Ignorant as to make such
harangues hapy and hapy and hapy again will that Day be when Swords shall be
turned Plough-Sheers; if ever thou had believed there would come such a Day, is
it possible that thou should Averse, and with all thy might, oppose every thing
that has any show of the dawn of that Day: Consider that the Epithites of
these things leave but a bad Aspect, I am apt to think that the Author of the
Remarks was some what of my Opinion, that if no Religion could be true but what
is agreeable to the Law of Nature, and seeing the Gosple must be admitted to
describe the Law of Nature unto all that believe the Gosple; then certainly if
this should pass without Annimadversion, the Stones would cry out against the
Christian World: I need not inform any Gospler that we are all by Nature the
Children of Wrath, under the Malidiction of Gods Wrath and Hatred, and that we
through Disobedience have utterly lost that state of Nature in which we were
first created, from which dismal State no Medicene can deliver us, but only
that salivateing Antidote of Faith in Christ, which Antidote purges out all
Envy, Strife, Wrath, Bloodshed, Murders, etc. and forms us by a Transmutation
into a new Creature that knows nothing in its Nature but Love, Concord, Peace
and Unity, which all have attendance unto the Prophitecal Day in the very
Natural Effects of it: Could it ever be possible, that a Man of Honesty and
Honor, that was Compus-mentus, could ever have composed such a Quile of
Sand-Rope Contradictions, not only to all Reveled Gosple Rules and Precedents
of Christ and his Apostles, but utterly inconsistent with the fundamental
Principles of that very incorporated Society and Body that he publishes
himself a Member of: What then may be called Apostate, but he that Revoulteth
from his acknowledged consessed Principles that he has owned to have held in
common with a Society as a united Member of the same. What is a Tool but a
secondary Mean in the Hands of a Prime Labourer, that acts suitable to the Mind
and Motions of the User, to effect his designed Aims and Views with? What is a
Time Server, but a mutable un-stable Person that changes to suit that side of
the Question where he thinks his Interest may be the Greatest and Securest:
Such a Persons Epithetes shows him to be an Apostate, Tool and Time-Server,
in my Semple Opinion: However I leave every Reader to Judge for himself whether
the Pamphlet-Writer or the Remark-Maker is showed by the Epithetes to be an
Apostate, Tool and Time Server; and proceed now to Cast an Eye into the
Pamphlet it self, as the original Head-Spring of the whole Dispute, where first
I met with excuse begged for, that the Author of the following Piece is about
to use so much Supperfluity, as to go about to prove a Thing that proves it
self in it is own Nature, as (he says) I must needs be so Vain as to think how
I am under full as great an Obligation to pray Pardon for the same Fault.

And now follows that (so called) impregnable Proposition, Foundation or
principle Head-spring, upon which all this Bull-work and Rampant Edifice
bottoms, which matter consists of the following Meterials, No Religion
founded upon any pretended Refutation of the Will of God can be True, that is
inconsistent with, and repugnant to the Law of Nature: Thus it seems stands the
Case; Well, and if this be the Case, then we are of all Men in Christ most
miserable, as says the Apostle. Note the Proposition is General, viz. To THE
LAW OF NATURE; Well, is God then bound to the Law of Nature; sure this
Obligation Must be either from the great Connection of Peace, Love and
immuteable espoused Unity between God and Nature, and that be Universel,
because the Law of Nature has but one only Property in the whole (at least)
human Race, whether Turks, Barbarians, Jews, Indians, Negros, etc. which they
all hold in common with Christians.

How this natural Philosophy does agree, I shall not here stand to censure, but
say it must be this Obligation or some other Obligation; but it can be no other
Obigation, for any other Obligation must needs tend to make God Nature's
Bond-slave, which would be abominable; this must spring then from the
Wolston-^^^ Deis-men's Opinion, that is, that God made all Things in the State
and Nature that they now, stand, and in closed up in an Onus, or Sphere, out of
which they cannot pass; nor to any thing particular has God any regard: So
that every thing answers it is Purpose, and every Action that is done,
answers to the good of one another; and that every one has Free Will to do
what he lists to do, and every Action is Good, and so God cannot be so
Contrary to Himself, as to destroy Nature, which is his own Work, of which God
himself is Principle and Head.

Of these I hinted before, under the Name of Modern Sadduces; I am realy apt to
think I have now hit the Mark well: But my Reader will say, What do they hold
concerning the Devil? Answer, That it is a fained Fable: There is no such
Thing, say they. And this nothing differs from downright Atheism and
Annihilation.

I could make many notable Observations, and show it demonstrably Plain in the
current Course of Actions and Things, but as it Interfereth not with my Design
here, I now turn back to the Matter.

Seeing God can do nothing Inconsistent to the Law of Nature: If I can prove
from the Holy Records, That Nature and it is Law is at this Time contrary to
God, and not Subject unto Gods Law, either the Gospel Record must be False, or
the Pamphlets Proposition False. In St. Mathew's Gospel, Chap. 5. v. 38.
Christ, says, Ye have heard say, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth:
Every Body that knows what the Law of Nature is, will say this is agreeable
to the Law of Nature: but then what must be said of this Teacher, and his
Doctrine? But I say unto you, resist not evil, but if any Man Smite thee on the
right-Cheek, turn the other, and if any Man sue thee at the Law, and take thy
Coat, give him thy Cloak also; and if any Man compel thee to go with him a
Mile, go with him twain ver. 39, 40, 41. It has been said by them of Old, Thou
shall Love thy Friend and Hate thine Enemies. This still agrees with the Law of
Nature: But who is this that Preaches this Doctrine? Love thine Enemies, etc.
why truly, if there were any Truth in our Pamphlet Writers Proposition, he is
an Imposter, and his Doctrine False, being repugnant to the Law of Nature: And
this well agrees to the Principles of the Deis-Men: Well; But is it possible
that a Member of a Society of People that hold Christ to be their Teacher,
should thus toil and labor to prove that Teacher an Imposter. Can this be
called a Member; rather, can this Man call himself a Member, and not confess
himself an Imposter, with the same, and in the same Breath that he Spends, to
call himself a Member. I have often heard say that a Child will Laugh and Cry
in one Breath; but I never, I think, heard of a wise Man to say and unsay the
self same thing in a Breath.

Again, he here either must avouch it to be inconsistent with the Nature of God
to Destroy his Enemies, or that God has no Enemies: If God has no Enemies,
then he here again holds the Testimony of Scripture False; if God has Enemies,
and can and does destroy his Enemies, I am to ask him who or what may be called
Gods Enemies; if God does not, cannot, or will not destroy his Enemies; then
the Quakers are highly to be commended, to follow Gods own Example, and the
Pamphlet-maker highly to be blamed to offer to Seduce them from such heavenly
Examples. From all the Reasons aforesaid, I declare the Proposition notoriously
False, Ergo, the Conclusion. Nor can I see any Chance or Choice for any other
Man, but he must either hold the Proposition False, or the Gospel False, for I
think it a moral Impossibility to save both, and so, according to the
School-mens Rules of Reason, ends the Matter.

But for as much as I am but an ignorant Person, and none of those Schoolmen,
excuse me if I pursue the Theme so far as to make two or three farther
Observations upon it: And first, our pretended Religious Member, in some of his
Performances, was pleased to say, That such things as were put forth without
Reason to support them, were truly worthy of but little Credit; If he pleases
to render some Reason, why he, after he had dipped his Pen in those glorious
Scriptures in such Order and Form as a Man in a doze migh have dipped his Fingers
into a hot Pitch Pot, and when it stuck to his Fingers and burnt him, he waked,
shuffled this way and that way, and could find no way with either Honor or
Honesty; or tolerable Sense, to get clear of it again, till at last he shuffls
and wipes it off upon the Apostles: What Reason I say has he to show for
binding up such heavy Burdens to lay upon the Apostles that were so
intolerable for himself to bear. If you had not told, that you was a Quaker, I
should have taken you for a Friar that was about with his Baskit picking up the
superfluities, or over-and-aboves, of the Apostles, to supply the want of the
Professors of this Age: Indeed if you had proved the Gospel Rules in part or in
the whole, limited in part or in the whole, to some particular Persons, or that
they were any way appealed in part, so that they concerned not the Christians
of this Age; you had showed some Reason for what you said: But how you have
showed just the same Reason for what you have said, as a Man would have had to
plead a Law not to concern a Subject of this Age, because it was made a long
time a go, and just the same Reason: But what say you; Was not this the same
that Christ taught his Apostles? Was not this the same that they taught others?
Was not that the same that was carefully made Matter of Record of, and handed
down from Age to Age, for a Rule of Life and Manners, to all Christian Men of
all Ages.

Observation the second: It was some what of a Mystry to me, and still is so
how you first laid down your Proposition upon general Terms; and after good
Part of your Argument grounded upon it, You attempted to restrict it to a scrap
of the Law of Nature: I should have been so foolish as to have thought a Man
might as well have moved the Foundation of a Stone Building, when the Edifice
was in great Part erected upon it. No, no more then you can mend an original
Write made by good Instructions, after Issue is joined upon it: And I am apt to
think that you have made so demonstrably Plain what you intended and meant by
the Law of Nature, at first, that I am doubtful that you will get the same
Praise and Aplaud from the Learned, as those good House-Wives give those
corrupt Tinkers that mend one Hole in their Pan and make two.

Observation the third: Suppose that you and I are convinced that the Law and
Wars both bottom upon one Bottom, and that they are great Evils, and many evil
Consequencies attend them both, as both are Harbingers of Strise, Wrath,
Discord, Envy, and c. as you say, so say I in that Case; and to your Question (
viz) does it therefore follow that its good in no Case: I answer, it is good
for a Christian Man to shun even every Appearence of Evil: Yet it is good
amongst such as have no Faith in God, such as are without God in the World,
that have not the Grace of God in them to enable them to be a Law to
themselves, that depend in the Arm of Fresh more than in the Power of God; such
as look upon things altogether after the outward Appearence, and choose to
cleave to the Practice of other Pagan Notions, that know not God, nor naught
believe of his Promises; to all such the Laws of Wars are good: But it does not
follow that Men are Convinced of all Evils, therefore they are convinced of
none.

Can any reasonable Creature allow it to stand with Love to Truth and Mankind,
to preach up, that because Men are not convinced of all Evils, therefore they
ought not to say they are convinced of any Evil: Because they are not convinced
that the Law is an Evil, therefore they ought not to pretend to be convinced
that War is an Evil: Because through frail Infirmity Men are attended with many
Evils, therefore they must Object against no Evil: Because Men are not
Convinced that the Law is Evil therefore they must not Object against War as an
Evil, though they are convinced it is an Evil. For all the drift and scope of all
the doctrine contained in the Pamphlet is, why if War be an Evil: So is this,
and so is that: Woe be to them that set evil for good. The whole scope of
Doctrine tends not to refute Evil by Scripture Authority and good Reason, but
aims and strives to support one Evil by another, or a greater Evil by a lesser;
and in that order to secure and fortify all Evils securely together: And this
is the real drift of the Pamphlet, as far as I can see into it.

So you may see, that no Truth can come of a False Proposition, and altogether
savoureth of the Atheistick, Deis-Mens, Sadducetical Principles in my Opinion;
and the Author was pleased, in one of his Religious Chapters, with a great Sum
to sum up the Principles of his pretended Society: With Submission, did you by
your Religious Pamphlet intend to show us, your poor ignorant Readers, those
Performances as the Fruits and Produce of these Principles, or to thereby let
us know you were clean departed from all such like Principles? As to my own
part, I do freely confess I am not qualified with such Aquirements as to put me
in a Capacity to judge of your Religious Performances from the Symtoms of the
Epithete, with certainty, for should I with my weak Abilities consult the
Epithets, it would, I doubt, be the first Question to be determined, whether or
no you and those Principles (that you cast up with such great Sum, in order to
let us know what extraordinary Principles you are Master of, as Member of that
Society) ever met in any other Manner than a Borrower may meet with a Thing to
be lent? and then it will fall out odly: If the first Question should determine
negatively, it might chance to give Cause from my ignorant Judgment upon the
Symptoms of the showing Nature of the Epithets, to conclude you as great a
Pelliculator and Hypocrite in Cases of Religion, as ever trod Kentish Ground:
From hence it might rise these Conjectures from natural Consequences, That he
that was such a gross Pelliculator and Hypocrite in Cases of Religion, and
Things belonging to God and Conscience; why not in all other Cases? So, I say,
to avoid all this, I refuse to Consult the Epithets or Concrete, and content my
self only to ask the Question, and wait my Answer from you, the Author of those
Religious Chapters.

I may well assure you that its not with any Pleasure, and much less in any
insulting Manner, that I am obliged to treat the Author of those Religious
Performances in this sort of sreedom of Words: No, it is realy a pity, and I am
sorry that a Man, that I believe otherwise, in most other Cases, is a politic,
prompt, wise, discrete Man: It is lamentable, and realy a pity that ever he
has bound himself Voucher to such a confused Heap of Contradictions, Folly and
Madness, that I never saw the like in all my life, exposed to public View in
such Cobweb Dress.

In my simple way of thinking, I do know myself to be a Man but of weak
Capacities, and yet I should have realy thought it but a Piece of good Justice
done me, if Mr. Bickerstaff had put me into his Bedlem, for Tatling over such a
Huffe of Vaniety: It would have been much more surprising then it is to me, had
I not been acquainted with the stories of the old Religious Fathers, who when
they attempted to make use of Religion as a Cloak or Screen to infoist Aims,
Vews and Ends of Thing, of a contrary different Nature; why they always have
thereby runned themselves into Redicule and Confusion.

And now, finaly, I can assure you that I have no envious Eye upon the Person
of my Antagonist, but would serve in any reasonable Service that I may: Nay, I
may say farther, I should greatly delight in such grave Persons Conversation
and prudent Conduct in State Affairs, were it not for that I cannot for my Life
help conceiting [tho' perhaps its nothing but Conceit] that all his Words and
Actions sent and savor of the Woolstonnitish Deis-Mens Principles, which I
abominate. As to my Method of delivering of my Mind, every Man may easily
conjecture the Cause of my Order of Words, my Reason for my appearing in
Public, has no other View but to defend my own Christian like Principles in
the first Place; secondly, to defend the Gospel of Christ as the Foundation of
my Principles; thirdly, to refute, if possible, what seems to me may hurt weak
Consciencies, by setting open a Floodgate to let in Persecution, and lay heavy
dooms of Constraint upon realy and truly tender Consciences; and lastly, out of
Good Will and Respect unto my Antagonist, to let him see that he himself is as
subject and liable to the common Infermities, Errors and Mistakes of human
Creatures, as any Man at all.


