THE Sound Believer. A TREATISE OF Evangelical Conversion. Discovering the Work
of Christ's Spirit, in reconciling of a Sinner to GOD.

By Thomas Shepard, Sometime of Emanuel-College in Cambridge, since Preacher of
God's Word in New England.

Matthew. xviii. 11. I came to save that which was lost.

BOSTON: Printed by GREEN, BUSHEL, and ALLAN, for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhil.
1742.

To his dear Friend, Mr. W. Greenhill.
SIR,
MANY Struglings I have had about publishing these Notes: I have looked up to
GOD, and at last been persuaded upon these Grounds,

1. The many Desires both of Friends and Strangers, both by private Speeches
and Letters, which I though it might be the Voice of Christ.

2. Some Good (as I hear) those which are already out have done, and which the
rest might do, which I have looked on as a Testimony of the Lord's Acceptance
of them.

3. I knew not what the Lords Meaning should be to bring to Light by his
Providence, without any Privity, Knowledge or Will, the former Part, unless it
was to awaken and enforce me (being desired) to publish the rest; our Works, I
though it, should resemble GOD'S Works, not be left imperfect.

4. I considered my weak Body, and my short Time of sojourning here, and that I
shall not speak-long to Children, Friends, or GOD'S precious People; I am sure
not to many in England, to whom I owe almost my whole self, whom I shall see in
this World no more; I have been therefore willing to get the Wind, and take the
Season, that I might leave some Part of GOD'S precious Truth on Record, that it
might speak (oh that it may be to the Heart!) among whom I cannot (and when I
shall not) be.

I account it a Part of GOD'S infinite Grace, to make me an Instrument of the
least Good to any.

If the Lord shall so far accept of me, in publishing these Things, it is all
that I would desire; If not, yet I have desired Forgiveness in the Blood of his
Son, for whatever Errors or Weaknesses may be in it, or are in my self, which
may hinder Success, and frustrate its End; only what I have in much Weakness
believed, I have written, and sent it unto you, leaving it wholly with your
self, whom I much love and honor, that you would add or detract any thing you
see meet, (so as it be not cross to what I have writ) and if you then think it
meet for public View, you see upon what Grounds I am content with it; but if
you shall bury it in Silence, it shall be most pleasing to him, who thinks more
meanly of it than others can.

Those. Shepard.

THE Sound Believer.
CHAP. I. As the great Cause of the eternal Perdition of Men is of themselves,
so the only Cause of the actual Deliverance and Salvation of Man is Jesus
Christ: View this Text.
HOSEA XIII. ix. O Israel, thou have destroyed thyself, but in me is thy Help.


SECT. I.
THESE Words as they are set down in the Hebrew, are (according to the Style of
this Prophet) very short and sententious, and therefore difficult to translate
into English without some Periphrasis; but the Sense is here truly expressed,
In me is thy Help; which you may see confi^^^d from ^.4. There is no Savior
beside me; and v. 14. I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave, O Death,
I will be thy Plague, O Grave, I will be thy Destruction. Suppose the Prophet
should speak here of temporal Salvation, Help and Ransom, (which he does not)
yet the Argument is strong; if there be no Savior from temporal Woe and
Misery, but only the Lord Jesus, how much more is there from Woes eternal? Only
understand me here aright; I am not now speaking of Man's Deliverance and
Salvation by Price, in Way of Satisfaction to Justice, (for that I have already
handled) but of his Deliverance and Salvation by Power; not of Man's purchased
Deliverance, which is by the Blood of Christ, but of Man's actual Deliverance,
which is by the Efficacy and Power of the Spirit of Christ. Some Captives among
Men, are redeemed by Price only, some by Power without Price; but such is the
lamentable Captivity of all Men, under the Severity of Justice, and Power of
Sin, that without the Price of Christ's Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. and the Power of
Christ's Spirit, John 8.36. there is no Deliverance; the Lord Jesus having paid
the Price for our Deliverance. Yet it is with us, as with a Company of Captives
in Prison; our Sins like strong Chains hold us; Satan, our Keeper, will not let
us go, the Prison Doors, through Unbelief, are shut upon us, Romans 11.32. and
thereby God and Christ are kept out from us; what Power can rescue us, that are
held fast under such a Power, even after the Price is paid? Truly it can be no
other but that in my Text, In me is thy Help: When our Ransom is paid, the Lord
himself must come and fetch us out by a strong Hand, Isai. 53.1. To whom is the
Arm of the Lord revealed? Truly to very few, yet to some it is* and certainly
look as they ma^e Christ no Savior indeed, who deny his Salvation by Price and
Satisfaction; so those also make him an imperfect Savior, who deny Salvation
and actual Deliverance of Man, to be only the almighty Arm and Efficacy of his
Spirit and Power: Excellent therefore is the Speech of the Apostle, Acts 5.30,
31. God has exalted Jesus to give Repentance and Remission of Sins unto
Israel; look as Jesus was abased to purchase Repentance and Remission, so he is
now exalted actually to give and apply Repentance and Remission of Sins. Whose
Glory is it to remit Sins, but God's in Christ, and by Christ only? Whose Glory
is it to give Repentance (which in this Place, comprehends the Work of
Conversion and Faith, as Bez^ observes) whereby we apply Remission, but the
same God only? The one is as difficult to be conveyed as the other, and we
stand in as much need of Christ to do the one as the other; all the Power of
Christ exalted, is little eno' to give us Repentance and Remission, the
Condition of the Covenant expressed in Repentance, and the Blessings in the
Covenant, summed up in the Forgiveness of Sins; the Socinians deny Redemption
and Salvation by Price; the Arminians, by Christ's Power, leaving Swasion only
to him, but Power of Conversion to the Power and Liberty of the Will of Man; O
adulterous Generation, that are thus hacking and cutting the Cords of their own
Salvation! I shall here speak only to one Question, which is the principal and
most profitable, and that is this,

Quest. How does Christ redeem and save us by his Power, out of that miserable
Estate; and consequently what is the Way for us to seek, and so to find and
feel Deliverance by the Hand of Christ's Power?

Answ. As there are four principal Means and Causes or Ways, whereby Man ruins
himself. 1. Ignorance of their own Misery. 2. Security and Unsensibleness of
it. 3. Carnal Confidence in their own Duties. 4. Presumption, or resting upon
the Mercy of God by a Faith of their own forging. So on the contrary, there is
a fourfold Act of Christ's Power, whereby he rescues and delivers all his out
of their miserable Estate.

The first Act or Stroke is Conviction of Sin.

The second is Compunction for Sin.

The third is Humiliation, or Self-Abasement.

The Fourth is Faith.

All which are distinctly put forth (when he cease extraordinarily to work)
in the Day of Christ's Power; and whoever look for actual Salvation and
Redemption from Christ, let them seek for Mercy and Deliverance in this Way,
out of which, they shall never find it; let them begin at Conviction, and
desire the Lord to let them see their Sins, that so, being affected with them,
and humbled under them, they may, by Faith, be enabled to receive Jesus Christ,
and so be blessed in him. It is true, Christ is applied to us nextly by Faith,
but Faith is wrought in us in that Way of Conviction and Sorrow for Sin; no Man
can or will come by Faith to Christ, to take away his Sins, unless he first
see, be convicted of, and laden with them. I confess the Manner of the Spirit's
Work in the Conversion of a Sinner unto God, is exceeding secret, and in many
Things very various; and therefore it is too great Boldness to mark out all
God's Footsteps herein; yet so far forth as the Lord himself tells us his Work,
and the Manner of it in all his, we may safely resolve our selves; and so far,
and no farther, shall we proceed in the Explication of these Things. It is
great Profaneness not to search into the Works of common Providence, though
secret and hidden, Psalm. 28.5. and 92.6. much greater is it, not to do thus
unto God's Work of especial Favor and Gra^e upon his chosen.

I shall therefore begin with the first Stroke of Christ's Power, which is the
Conviction of Sin.

SECT. II. The first Act of Christ's Power; which is the Conviction of Sin.
NOW for the more distinct Explication of this, I shall open to you these four
Things,

1. I shall prove, That the Lord Christ by his Spirit, begins the actual
Deliverance of his Elect here. 2. What is that Sin the Lord convinces the Soul
thus first of. 3. How the Lord does it. 4. What Measure and Degree of
Conviction he works thus in all his.
1. For the first, It is said, John 16.8, 9. that the first Thing that the
Spirit does when he comes to make the Apostle's Ministry effectual, is this, it
shall reprove or convince the World of Sin; it does not first work Faith, but
convinces them that they have no Faith, as in Verse 9. and consequently under
the Guilt and Dominion of their Sin; and after this, he convinces of
Righteousness, which Faith apprehends, Verse 10. It is true, that the Word
Conviction here, is of a large Extent, and includes Compunction and Humiliation
for Sin, yet our Savior wraps them up in this Word; because Conviction is the
first, and therefore the Chief in order; here the Lord is not speaking now of
ineffectual, but effectual and thoro' Conviction, expressed in deep Sorrow and
Humiliation. Now the Text says, the Lord begins not thus with some one or two,
but with the World of God's Elect, who are to be called home by the Ministry of
the Word; which our Savior speaks (as any may see who considers the Scope)
purposely to comfort the Hearts of his Disciples, that their Ministry shall be
thus effectual to the World of Jews and Gentiles; and therefore cannot speak of
such Conviction as serves only for to leave Men without Excuse, for greater
Condemnation; (as some understand the Place) for that is a poor Ground of
Consolation to their sad Hearts. Secondly, I shall hereafter prove that there
can be no Faith without Sense of Sin and Misery; and now there can be no Sense
of Sin without a precedent Sight or Conviction of Sin; no Man can feel Sin,
unless he does first see it; what the Eyes see not the Heart rues not. Let the
greatest Evil befall a Man, suppose the burning of his House, the Death of his
Children, if he does not first know, see and hear of it, he will never take it
to Heart, it will never trouble him; so let a poor Sinner lie under the
greatest Guilt, the sorest Wrath of God, it will never trouble him until he
sees it and be convinced of it, Acts 2.37. When they heard this they were
pricked; but first they heard it, and saw their Sin, before their Hearts were
wounded for it, Genesis 3.7. they first saw their Nakedness, before they were
ashamed of it. Thirdly, The main End of the Law is to drive us to Christ, Romans
10.4. If Christ be the End of the Law, then the Law is the Means subservient to
that End, and that not to some, but to all that believe; now the Law though it
drives us to Christ by Condemnation, yet in order it begins with Accusation. It
first accuses, and so convinces of Sin, Romans 3.20. and then condemns. It Is
Folly and Injustice for a Judge to Condemn and bring a Sinner to Execution
before Accusation and Conviction; and is it Wisdom or Justice in the Lord to do
otherwise? And therefore the Spirit in making use of the Law for this End,
first convinces, as it first accuses and lays our Sins to our Charge. Lastly,
Look as Satan when he binds up a Sinner in his Sin, he first keeps him (if
possible) from the very Sight and Knowledge of it; because so long as they see
it not, this Ignorance is the Cause of all their Woe; why they feel it not, why
they desire not to come out of it; the Lord Jesus (who came to untie the Knots
of Satan, 1 John 3.8.) begins here, and first convinces his, and makes them
see their Sin, that so they may feel it, and come to him for Deliverance out of
it. O consider this, all you that dream out your Time in minding only Things
before your Feet, never thinking on the Evils of your own Hearts; you that heed
not, you that will not see your Sins, not so much as ask this Question, What
have I done? What do I do? How do I live? What will become of me? What will be
the End of these my foolish Courses? I tell you if ever the Lord save you, he
will make you see what you cannot, what you now will not; he will not only make
you to confess you are Sinners, but he will convince you of Sin, this shall be
the first Thing the Lord will do with thee.

Quest. But you will say, What is that Sin which the Lord first convinces of?
Which is the second Thing to be opened. I answer in these three Conclusions.

Answ. Concl. 1. The Lord Jesus by his Spirit does not only convince the Soul
in general, that it is a Sinner, and sinful; but the Lord brings in a
convicting Evidence of the Particulars; the first is learnt more by Tradition
(in these Days) by the Report and Acknowledgment of every Man, rather than by
any special Conviction of the Spirit of Christ; for what Man is there almost
but lies under this Confession that he is a Sinner? the best say they are
Sinners, and if we say we have no Sin, we deceive ourselves, and I know I am a
Sinner; but that which the Spirit principally convinces of, is some Sin or
Sins in particular: The Spirit does not arrest Men for Offenses in general, but
opens the Writ, and shows them the particular Cause, the particular Sins, Romans
3.9. We have proved, says the Apostle, that Jews and Gentiles are under Sin,
but how does the Apostle (being now the Instrument of the Spirit, in this Work
of Conviction) convince them of this? Mark his Method, Verse 10, to 18, wherein
you shall see it done by enumeration of Particulars; Sins of their Natures,
there is none Righteous; Sins of their Minds, none understands; Sins in their
Wills and Affections, none seek after God; Sins in their Lives, all gone out of
the way; Sins of Omission of good Duties, there is none that does good, their
Throats, Tongues, Lips, are Sepulchers, deceitful, poisonful, their Mouths full
of Cursing, their Feet swift to shed Blood, etc. And this is the State of you
Jews, ( verse 14.) as well as of the Gentiles, that all Flesh may stand
convinced as guilty before God. If it be here demanded, What are those
particular Sins which the Lord convinces Men of? I Answer, In Variety of Men
there is much Variety of special Sins, as there is of Dispositions, Tempers and
Temptations; and therefore the Lord does not convince one Man at first of the
same Sins of which he does another Man, yet this we may safely say, usually
(though not always) the Lord begins with the Remembrance and Consideration of
some one great, if not a Man's special and most beloved Sin; and thereby the
Spirit discovers gradually all the rest: That Arrow which wounds the Heart of
Christ most, the Lord makes it fall first upon the Head of the Sinner that did
shoot it against Heaven, and convinces, and as it were hits him first with
that: How did the Spirit convince those 3000, those Patterns of God's
converting Grace? Acts 2.37. Did not the Lord begin with them for one principal
Sin, viz. their Murder and Contempt of Christ, by embruing their Hands in his
Blood? There is no Question but now they remembered other sinful Practices, but
this was the Imprimis, which is ever accompanied with many other Items, which
are then read in God's Bill of Reckonings, where the first is set down, Israel
would have a King, 1 Samuel 8.19. Samuel, for a Time, could not convince them of
their Sin; herein what does the Lord do? surely he will convince them of Sin,
before he leaves them, and this by such terrible Thunder as shall make their
Hearts ache; and how is it now? What Sin do they now see? They first see the
Greatness of that particular Sin; but this came not to Mind alone, but they
cried out, 1 Samuel 12.19. We have added unto all our Evils this, in asking to
our selves a King. Look upon the Woman of Samaria, John 4. The Lord Christ
indeed spoke first unto her about himself the Substance of the Gospel, about
the Worth of this Water of Life; but what good did she get until the Lord began
to convince her of Sin, and how does he that, he tells her of her secret
Whoredom she lived in, the Man that she now had was not her Husband; and upon
the Discovery of this, she saw many more Sins; and hence Verse 29, she cries
out, Come see the Man that told me all that ever I did in my Life. And thus the
Lord deals at this Day; the Minister preaches against one Sin, it may be
Whoredom, Ignorance, Contempt of the Gospel, Neglect of secret Duties, Lying,
Sabbath-breaking, etc. This is thy Case, says the Spirit unto the Soul,
remember the Time, the Place, the Persons with whom you lived in this sinful
Condition; and now a Man begins to go alone, and to think of all his former
Courses how exceeding Evil they have been; it may be the Lord brings upon a Man
a sore Affliction; and when he is in Chains, crying out for that, the Lord
says to him as to those, Jer. 30.15. Why cryest thou for thy Affliction? For
the Multitude of thine Iniquities I have done this; it may be the Lord
sometimes strikes a Man's Companion in Sin dead, by some fearful Judgment; and
then that particular Sin comes to mind, and the Lord reveals it armed with a
Multitude of many other Sins, the Causes of it, the Fruits and Effects of it:
As the Father whips a Child upon occasion of one special Fault, but then tells
him of many more which he winked at before this, and tells him, Now, Sirrah,
remember such a Time, such a froward Fit, such undutiful Behavior, such a
reviling Word you spoke, such a Time I called, and you ran away, and would not
hear me, and you though it I liked well eno' of these Ways, but now know that I
will not pass them by, etc. Thus the Lord deals with his, and hence it is many
Times, that the Elect of God civilly bro't up, do hereupon think well of
themselves, and so remain long unconvinced of their woeful Estates, the Lord
suffers them to fall into some foul, secret, or open S^^ and by this the Lord
takes special Occasion of working Conviction and Sorrow for Sin; the Lord makes
them hang down the Head, and cry, Unclean, unclean. Paul was civilly educated,
he turned at last a hot Persecutor, Oppressor, Blasphemer: The Lord first
convinced him of his Persecution, and cried out from Heaven to him, Paul, Paul,
Why persecutest thou me? This struck him to the Heart, and then Sin revived,
Romans 7.9. Many secret Sins of his Heart were then discovered, which I take to
begin and continue in special in those three Days, Acts 3.9. wherein he was
blind, and did (through Sight ^f Sin and Sorrow of Heart) neither eat nor drink.
As a Man that has the Plague, not knowing the Disease, he hopes to live; but
when he sees the Spots and Tokens of Death upon his Wrist, now he cries out,
because convinced that the Plague of the Lord is upon him; so when Men see one
or more special Sins break out; now they are convinced of their lamentable
Condition; yet it is not always (though usually thus) for some Men the Lord may
first convince of Sin by showing them the Sinfulness of their own Hearts and
Ways; the Lord may let a Man see his Blindness, his extreme Hardness of Heart,
his Weakness, his Wilfulness, his Heartlessness; he cannot pray, or look up to
God, and this may first convince him; or all that he does is sinful, being out
of Christ: The Lord may suddenly let him see the Deceits of his own Heart, and
the secret sinful Practices of his Life; as if some had told the Minister, or
as if he spoke to none but him; that he is forced to fall down being thus
convinced, and to confess, God is in this Man, 1 Cor. 14.25. Nicodemus may
first see and be convinced of the Want of Regeneration, and thereby feel his
Need of Christ; the Lord may set a Man upon the Consideration of all his Life
part, how wickedly it has been spent; and so not one, but a Multitude of
Iniquities compass him about: A Man may see the godly Examples of his Parents
or other godly Christians in the Family or Town where he dwells, and by this be
convinced, that if their State and Way be good, his own (so far unlike it) must
needs be stark naught: The Lord ever convinces the Soul of Sins in particular,
but he does not always convince one Man of the same particular Sins at first as
he does another, whether the Lord convinces all the Elect at first of the Sin
of their Nature, and show them their original Sin in and about this first
Stroke of Conviction, I doubt not of it, Paul would have been alive, and a
proud Pharisee still, if the Lord had not let him by the Law see this Sin, Romans
7.9. And so would all Men in the World, if this should not be revealed first or
last, in a lesser or greater Measure, under a distinct or more indistinct
Notion: And hence arise those Confessions of the Saints, I never though it I had
such a vile Heart, if all the World had told me, I could not have believed
them, but that the Lord has made me feel it, and see it at last; was there
ever such a Sinner (at least in Heart) which is continually opposing of him)
whom the Lord at any Time received to Mercy, as I am?

Concl. 2. The Lord Jesus by his Spirit does not only convince the Soul of its
Sin in particular, but also of the Evil, even the exceeding great Evil of those
particular Sins. The Lord Jesus does not only convince of the Evil of Sin, but
of the great Evil of Sin. Oh thou Wretch, says the Spirit, (as the Lord to
Cain, Genesis 4.10.) what have thou done, whose Sins cry to Heaven, who have thus
long lived without God, and done this infinite Wrong to an infinite God, for
which thou can never make him amends! That God w^^^ could have long since cut
thee off in the midst of thy Sins and Wickedness, and crush thee like a Moth,
and sent thee down to these eternal Flames where thou now see some better
than thy self mourning Day and Night, but yet has spared thee out of his mee^
Pity to thee: That God have thou resisted and forsaken all thy Lifetime; and
therefore now see and consider what an Evil and bitter Thing it is, thus to
live as thou have done, Jer. 2.19. Look, as it is in the Ways of Holiness, many
a Man, void of the Spirit, may see and know them in the literal Expressions of
them, but cannot see the Glory of them but by the Spirit, and hence it is he
does not esteem and prize them, and the Knowledge of them above Gold: so in the
Ways of Unholiness, many a Man void of the Spirit of Conviction of Sin, may,
and does see many particular Sins and confess them, but he does not, cannot see
the exceeding Evil of them, and thence it is, though he does see them yet he does
not much dislike them, because he sees not the great Hurt or Evil in them, but
makes a light Matter of them; and therefore when the Spirit comes, it lets him
see and stand convinced of the exceeding Greatness of the Evil that is in them,
Job 36.8, 9. In the Time of Affliction (which is usually the Time of Conviction
of a wild unruly Sinner) he shows them their Transgressions, but how? that they
have exceeded, that they have been exceeding many and exceeding vile. Oh
beloved, before the Lord Jesus comes to convince, we have Cause to pray for and
pity every poor Sinner, as the Lord Jesus did, saying, Lord, forgive them, they
know not what they do. You godly Parents, Masters, how often do you instruct your
Children, Servants, and convince them of their Sinfulness, until they confess
their Faults? Yet you see no Amendment, but they go on still; what should you
now do? Oh cry out for them, and say, Lord, forgive them, for they know not
what they do. Their sins they know, but what the Evil of them is, alas! they
know not; but when the Spirit comes to convince, he makes them see what they
do, and what is the exceeding Evil of those sins they made light of before;
like mad Men that have sworn, and cursed, and struck their Friends, and when
they come to be sober again, and remember their mischievous Ways, and how
abominable their Courses were. Oh you that walk on in the Madness of your Minds
now, in all Manner of Sin, if ever the Lord do good to you, you shall account
your Ways Madness and Folly, and cry out, Oh Lord, what have I done in kicking
thus long against the Pricks?

Concl. 3. The Lord Jesus by his Spirit does not only convince the Soul of the
Evil of Sin, but of the Evil after Sin, I mean the just Punishment which does
follow Sin, and that is this, viz. That it must die, and that eternally for
Sin, if it remain in this Estate it is now in, Romans 4.15. The Law works Wrath,
i. e. sight and sense of Wrath, Romans 7.9. When the Law came, Sin revived, and I
died, i. e. I saw my self a dead Man by it; so the Soul sees clearly, God has
said, The Soul that sins shall die: I have sinned, and therefore if the Lord
be true, I shall die; to Hell I shall if the Lord stop my Breath, and cut off
my Life, which he might justly and may easily do. Death is the Wages of Sin,
even of any one Sin, though never so little; what then will become of me, who
stand guilty of so many, exceeding the Number of the Hairs on my Head, or the
Stars in Heaven? Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, the Minister has
said so, the Lord himself has told me so, Heb. 13.4. I am the Man, my
Conscience now tears me and tells me so, what will become of me? The Lord Jesus
will come in flaming Fire, to render Vengeance against all that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel. This I believe, for God has said it, 2 These.
2.7, 8, 9. and now I see that I am he that has lived long in Ignorance, and
know not God; I have had the Gospel of Grace thus long wooing and persuading my
Heart, and oftentimes it has affected me, but yet I have resisted God and his
Gospel, and have set my filthy Lusts, my vain Sports, my Companions, Cups and
Queens at a higher Price than Christ, and have loved them more than him; and
therefore, though I may be spared for a while, ^et there is a Time wherein Christ
himself will come out against me in flaming Fire. To this Purpose does the
Spirit work: For, Beloved, the great Means whereby Satan overthrew Man at first
in his Innocence, was this Principle, although thou do eat, and so sin against
God, yet thou shall not die, Genesis 3.4. Ye shall not surely die, the Serpent
does not say, Ye shall not die, for that is too gross an out-facing of the
Word, Genesis 2.17. but says, Ye shall not surely die; that is, there is not such
absolute Certainty of it; it may be you shall live, God loves you better than
so, and is a more merciful Father than to be at a Word and a Blow. Now look as
Satan deceived and bro't our first Parents to Ruin, by suggesting this
Principle; so at this Day he does sow this accursed Seed, and plant this
accursed Principle in the Soil of every Man's Heart by Nature; they do not
think, they cannot believe they are dead Men, and condemned to die, and that
they shall die eternally for the least Sin committed by them; Men nor Angels
cannot persuade them of it, they cannot see the Equity of it, that God so
merciful will be so severe, for so small a Matter; nor yet the Truth of it, for
then they think no Flesh should be saved; and thus when the old Serpent has
spit his Poison before them, they sup it up, and drink it in, and so Thousands,
nay, Millions of Men and Women are undone. The Lord Christ therefore when he
comes to save a poor sinner, and raise him up out of his Fall, convinces the
Soul by his Spirit, and that with full and mighty Evidence, that it shall die
for the least Sin, and tells him, as the Lord told Abimelech in another Case,
Genesis 20.3. Thou art but a dead Man for this; and if the Spirit set on this, let
who can claw it ^ff. I tell you, Beloved, never did poor condemned Malef^ct^r
more certainly know and hear the Sentence of Condemnation past upon him by a
mortal Man, than the guilty Sinner does his, by an immortal and displeased God;
and therefore those three Thousand cry out, Acts 2.37. Men and Brethren, What
shall I do to be saved? We are condemned to die, what shall we do now to be
saved from Death? Now the Soul is glad to enquire of the Minister, Oh tell me
what shall I do? I once though it my self in a safe and good Condition as any in
the Town or Country I lived in; but now the Lord has let me hear of other
News; die I must in this Estate, and it is a wonder of Mercies I am spared alive
to this Day. There is not only some blind Fears and Suspicions that it may
possibly be so, but full Persuasions of Heart, die I must, die I shall in this
Estate: For if the Spirit reveal Sin, and convince not of Death for Sin, the
Soul under this Work of Conviction, being as yet rather sensual than spiritual,
will make a light Matter of it, when it sees no sensible Danger in it, but when
it sees the bottomless Pit before it, everlasting Fire before it, for the least
Sin, now it sees the heinous Evil of Sin; the Way of Sin, though never so
peaceable before, is full of Danger now, wherein it sees there are endless Woes
and everlasting Deaths that lie in wait for it, Romans 6.21. And now says the
Spirit you may go on in these sinful Courses as others do, if you see meet, but
O consider what will be the End of them; what is it to enjoy the Pleasures of
Sin for a Season, and to be tormented for ever for them in the Conclusion, for
be assured that will be the End: And hence the Soul seeing it self thus set
apart for Death, looks upon it self in a far worse Estate than the brute
Beasts, or vilest Worm upon the Earth; for it thinks, when they die there is an
End of their Misery, but Oh then is the Beginning of mine for ever: Hence also
arise those Fears of Death and of being suddenly cut off, that when it lies
down, it trembles to think I may never rise again, because it is convinced, not
only that it deserves to die, but that it is already sentenced for to die:
Hence also the Soul justifies God, if he had cut him off in his Sin; and
wonders what kept him from it, there being nothing else due from God unto it:
Hence lastly, the Soul is stopped and stands still, goes not on in Sin as before;
or if he does, the Lord gives it no Peace, Jer. 8.6. Why does the Horse go on
in the Battle? because it sees not Death before it; but now the Soul sees Death
and therefore stops: O remember this all you that never could believe that you
are dead condemned Men, and therefore are never troubled with any such Tho'ts
in your Minds; I tell you that you are far from Conviction, and therefore far
from Salvation: If God should send some from the Dead to bear Witness against
this secure World concerning this Truth, yet you will not believe it, for his
Messengers sent from Heaven are not believed herein; woe be to you if you remain
unconvinced of this Point.

3. But you will say, How does the Lord thus convince Sin, and wherein is it
expressed; which is the third Particular.

Answ. All Knowledge of Sin is not Conviction of Sin, all Confession of Sin is
not Conviction; there is a Conviction merely rational, which is not spiritual;
there are three Things in spiritual Conviction.

1. There is a clear, certain, and manifest Light, so that the Soul sees its
Sin, and Death due to it clearly and certainly; for so the Word, John 16.9.
(...) signifies to evidence a Thing by Way of Argumentation, nay Demonstration;
the Spirit so demonstrates these Things that it has nothing to object, a Man's
Mouth is stopped, he has nothing to say but this; behold I am vile, I am a
dead Man: For if a Man have many strong Arguments given him to confirm a Truth,
yet if he have but one Objection or doubtful Scruple not answered, he is not
fully as yet convinced, because full Conviction by a clear Sun-light scatters
all dark Objections, and hence our Savior, Jude 15. will one Day convince the
Wicked of all their hard Speeches against him, which will be chiefly done by
manifesting the Evil of such Ways, and taking away all those Colors and
Defenses Men have made for their Language: Before the Spirit of Christ comes,
Man cannot see, will not see his Sin nor Punishment; nay, he has many Things
to say for himself as Excuses and Extenuations of Sin; One says I was drawn
into it, (the Woman that thou gave me) and so lays the Blame on others:
Another says, It is my Nature; others say, All are Sinners, the Godly sin as
well as others; and yet are saved at last, and so I hope I shall: Others
profess they cannot part with Sin, they would be better, but they cannot, and
God requires no more than they are able to perform: Another says, I will
continue in Sin but a little while, and purpose hereafter to leave it: Others
say, We are Sinners, but yet God is merciful, and will forgive it: Another
says, Though I have sinned, yet I have some Good, and am not so bad as other
Men: Endless are these Excuses for Sin. In one Word, I know no Man, though never
so bad, though his Sin be never so grievous, but he has something to say for
himself, and something in his Mind to lessen and extenuate Sin: But, Beloved,
when the Spirit comes to convince, he so convinces as that he answers all
these, pulls down all these Fences, tears off all these Fig Leaves, scatters
all these Mists, and pulls off all these Scales from the Eyes, stops a Man's
Mouth, that the Soul stands before God, crying O Lord, Guilty, Guilty; as the
Prophet Jeremy told them, Jer. 2.23. Why do thou say, I am Innocent? look
upon thy Way, etc. so the Spirit says, why do thou say thy Sin is small? It
is Disobedience, (as Samuel said to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.23.) which is Rebellion,
and as the Sin of Witchcraft, and is that a small Matter? The Spirit of
Conviction by the clear Evidence of the Truth, binds the Understanding that it
cannot struggle against God any more, and hence let all the World plead to the
contrary, nay, let the Godly come to comfort them in this Estate, and think and
speak well of them, yet they cannot believe them because they are certain that
their Estates are woeful: Hence also we shall observe the Soul under Conviction,
instead of excusing Sin, it aggravates Sin, and studies to aggravate Sin, Did
ever any deal thus wickedly, walk thus sinfully, so long, against so many
Checks and Chidings, Light and Love, Means and Mercies as I have done? And it
is wonderful to observe that those Things which made it once account Sin light,
make it therefore to think Sin greater: Ex. gr. my Sin is little, the more
unkind thou (says the Spirit) that wilt not do a small Matter for the Lord: My
Sin is common; the more sinful thou, that in those Things wherein all the World
rise up in Arms against God, thou joinest with them: God spares me after Sin,
the greater is thy Sin therefore that thou have continued so long in, against a
God so pitiful to thee: The dearest Sins are now the vilest Sins, because though
they were most sweet to him, yet the Spirit convinces him they were therefore
the more grievous unto the Soul of God: You poor Creatures may now hide, and
color, and excuse your Sins before Men, but when the Lord comes to convince
you cannot lie hid; then your Consciences (when Jesus Christ the Lord comes to
convince) shall not be like the Steward in the Gospel that set down fifty for
every hundred Pounds; no, the Lord will force it to bring in a true and clear
Account at that Day.

2. There is a real Light in spiritual Conviction, rational Conviction makes
Things appear notionally, but spiritual Conviction, really: The Spirit indeed
uses Argumentation in Conviction, but it goes further and causes the Soul
not only to see Sin and Death discursively, but also intuitively and really:
Reason can see and discourse about Words and Propositions, and behold Things by
Report, and to deduct one Thing from another, but the Spirit makes a Man see
the Things themselves, really wrapped up in those Words: The Spirit brings
spiritual Things as well as Notions before a Man's Eye, the Light of the Spirit
is like the Light of the Sun, it makes all Things appear as they are, Job.
3.20, 21. It was Jerusalem's Misery, she heard the Words of Christ, and they
were not hid from them, but the Things of her Peace shut up in those Words were
(...) from hey Eyes, (Luke 19.41.) Discourse with many a Man about his Sin and
Misery, he will grant all that you say, and he is convinced that his Estate is
most wretched, and yet still lives in all Manner of Sin; what is the Reason of
it? truly he sees his Sin only by Discourse, but he does not, nay cannot see
the Thing Sin, Death, Wrath of God, until the Spirit come; which only
convinces or shows that really. A Man will not be afraid of a Lion when it
is painted on a Wall; why? because therein he does not see the living Lion;
when he sees that he trembles. So Men hear of Sin, and talk of Sin and Death,
and say they are most miserable in Regard of both; yet their Hearts tremble
not, are not amazed at these Evils, because Sin is not seen alive, Death is not
presented alive before them, which is done by the Spirit of Conviction only,
revealing these really to the Soul: And hence it is that many Men in seeing see
not, (Isai. 6.3.) how can that be? thus, in seeing Things notionally, they see
them not really. And hence many that know most of Sin, know least of Sin,
because in seeing it notionally, they see it not really. And therefore happy
were it for some Men, Scholars and others, that they had no notional Knowledge,
for this Light is their Darkness, and makes them more incapable of spiritual
Conviction. The first Act of spiritual Conviction is to let a Man see clearly
that he is sinful and most miserable; the second Act is to let the Soul see
really what this Sin and Death is. O consider of this; many of you know that
you are sinful, and that you shall die; but do thou know what Sin is, and
what it is to die? If thou did, I dare say thy Heart would sink; if thou do
not, thou art a condemned Man, because not yet a convinced Man. If you here
ask, how the Lord makes Sin real; I answer, by making God real: The real
Greatness of Sin is seen by beholding really the Greatness of God who is
smitten by Sin; Sin is not seen because God is not seen, John 3.11. He that
does Evil has not seen God. No Knowledge of God is the Cause why Blood
touches Blood, (Hos. 4.4.) the Spirit casts out all other Company of vain and
foolish Thoughts, and then God comes in and appears immediately to the Soul in
his Greatness and Glory, and then the Spirit says, Lo, this is that God thy
Sins have provoked. And now Sin appears as it is, and together with this real
Sight of Sin, the Soul does not see painted Fire, but sees the Fire of God's
Wrath really, whither now it is leading, that can never be quenched but by
Christ's Blood: And when the Spirit has thus convinced, now a Man begins to
see his Madness and Folly in Times past, saying, I knew not what I did. And
hence Questions, Can the Lord pardon such a Wretch as I, whose Sins are so
great? Hence also the Heart begins to be affected with Sin and Death, because
it sees them now as they are indeed, and not by Report only. A Man accounts it
a matter of Nothing to tread upon a Worm, wherein there is nothing seen worthy
either to be loved or feared; and hence a Man's Heart is not affected with it:
Before the Spirit of Conviction comes, God is more vile in Man's Eye than any
Worm; as Christ said of himself in another Case, Psalm. 22. I am a Worm and no
Man; so may the Lord complain, I am viler in such a one's Eye than any Worm,
and no God: And hence a Man makes it a Matter of Nothing to tread upon the
glorious Majesty of God, and hence is not affected with it; but when God is
seen by the Spirit of Conviction, in his great Glory, then as He is great, Sin
is seen great; as his Glory affects and astonisheth the Soul, so Sin affects
the Heart.

3. There is a constant Light; the Soul sees Sin and Death continually before
it; God's Arrows stick fast in the Soul, and cannot be plucked out; my Sin is
ever before me, said David, (in his renewing the Work of Conversion.) For in
effectual Conviction the Mind is not only bound to see the Misery lying upon
it, but it is held bound: It is such a Sun-light as never can be quenched, though
it may be clouded. When the Spirit of Christ darts in any Light to see Sin, the
Soul would turn away from looking upon it, would not hear on that Ear,
Felix-like. But the Spirit of Conviction sent to make thoro' Work on the Hearts
of all the Elect, follows them, meets them at every Turn, forces them to see
and remember what they have done; the least Sin is now a Mote in the Eye, is
ever troubling. Those ghastly, dreadful Objects of Sin, Death, Wrath, being
presented by the Spirit near unto the Soul, fix the Eye to fasten here; they
that can cast off at their Pleasure the Remembrance and Thoughts of Sin and
Death, never prove sound, until the Lord make them stay their Thoughts, and
muse deeply on what they have done, and whither they are going. And hence the
Soul in lying down, rising up, lies down and rises up with perplexed Tho'ts,
What will become of me? The Lord sometimes keeps it waking in the Night season,
when others are asleep, and then it is haunted with those Thoughts, it cannot
sleep; it looks back upon every Day and Week, Sabbath, Sermon, Prayer,
Speeches, and thinks all this Day, this Week, etc. the Goodness of the Lord and
his Patience to a Wretch has been continued; I sin in all I do, in all my
Prayers, in all I Think, the same Heart remains still not humbled, not yet
changed.

And hence you shall observe, that Word that discovered Sin first to it, it
never goes out of the Mind; I think, says the Soul, I shall never forget such
a Man, nor such a Truth. Hence also if the Soul grow light and careless at some
Time, and casts off the Thoughts of these Things, the Spirit returns again, and
falls a Reasoning with the Soul, Why have thou done this? What Hurt has the
Lord done thee? Will there never be an End? Have not thou gone on long eno' in
thy lewd Courses against God, but that thou should still add to the Heap?
Have thou not Wrath enough upon thee already? How soon may the Lord stop thy
Breath? And then thou know thou had bett^r never to have been born; Was
there ever any that thus resisted Grace; that thus adventured upon the Sword
Point? Have thou but one Friend, a patient, long-suffering God, that has left
thy Conscience without Excuse long ago, and therefore could have cut thee off,
and do thou thus forsake him, thus abuse him? Thus the Spirit follows; and
hence the Soul comes to some Measure of Confession of Sin: O Lord, I have done
exceeding wickedly, I have been worse than the Horse that rusheth into the
Battle, because it sees not Death before it, but I have seen Death before me in
these Ways, and yet go on, and still Sin, and cannot but Sin: Behold me, Lord,
for I am very vile. When thus the Spirit has let into the Soul a clear, real,
constant Light, to see Sin and Death, now there is a thoro' Conviction.

But you will say, In what Measure does the Spirit communicate this Light?

I shall therefore open the fourth Particular, viz.

4. The Measure of spiritual Conviction in all the Elect, viz. so much
Conviction of Sin as may begin and work Compunction for Sin, so much Sight of
Sin as may bring in Sense of Sin, so much is necessary and no more. Every one
has not the same Measure of Conviction, yet all the Elect have and must have
so much: For so much Conviction is necessary as may attain the End of
Conviction. Now the Finis proximus, or next End of Conviction in the Elect is
Compunction or Sense of Sin; for what Good can it do unto them to see Sin, and
not to be affected with it? What greater Mercy does the Lord show to the Elect
therein, than unto the Devils and Reprobates, who stand convinced, and know
they are wicked and condemned, but yet their Hearts altogether unaffected with
any true Remorse for Sin? Mine Eye, says Jeremy, (Lam. 3.51.) affects my
Heart. The Lord opens the Ears of his to Instruction, that he might humble,
(Job 33.16, 17.) Some think that there is no thoro' Conviction, without some
Affection. I dare not say so, nor will I now dispute whether there is not
something in the Nature and Essence of that Conviction the Elect have,
different from that Conviction in Reprobates and Devils; it is sufficient now,
and that which reaches the End of this Question, to know what Measure of
Conviction is necessary. I conceive the clear discerning of it is by the
immediate and sensible Effect of it, viz. so much as affects the Heart truly
with Sin.

But if you ask, What is that Sense of Sin, and what Measure of this is
necessary? That I shall answer in the Doctrine of Compunction.

Let not therefore any Soul be discouraged, and say, I was never yet convinced,
because I have not felt such a clear, real, constant Light to see Sin and Death
as others have done; consider thou, if the End of Conviction be attained, which
is a true Sense and Feeling of Sin, thou have then that Measure which is most
meet for thee, more than which the Lord regards not in any of his; but you that
walk up and down with convinced Consciences, and know your States are miserable
and sinful, and that you perish if you die in that Condition, and yet have no
Sense nor Feeling, no Sorrow nor Affliction of Spirit for those Evils, I tell
thee the very Devils are in some Respects nearer the Kingdom of God than you
be, who see, and feel, and tremble; woe, woe to Thousands that live under
convicting Ministries, whom the Word often hits, and the Lord by the Spirit
oftens meets, and they hear and know their Sins are many, their Estates bad,
and that Iniquity will be their Ruin, if thus they continue: yet all God's
Light is without Heat, and it is but the shining of it upon the Rocks, and cold
Stones; they are frozen in their Dregs: Be it known to you, you have not one
Drop of that Conviction which begins Salvation. Before I pass from this to the
second Work of Compunction, let me make a Word of Application.

USE 1. If the Spirit begins thus with Conviction of Sin, then let all the
Ministers of Christ, co-work with Christ, and begin with their People here; be
faithful Witnesses unto God's Truth, and give Warning to this secure World,
that the Sentence of Death is past, and the Curse of God lies upon every Man
for the least Sin: Lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, was the Lord's Word to
Isaiah, Isa. 58.1. and tell them of their Sin: Those Bees we call Drones that
have lost their Sting. When the Salt of the Earth (the Ministers of Christ,
Matthew. 5.) have lost their Acrimony and Sharpness, or Saltness, what is it good
for but to be cast out? Our Hearts will putrify and corrupt by hearing such
Doctrines only as never search. When the Lord inflicted a grievous Curse upon
the People, Ezekiel. 3.26. the Lord made Ezekiel dumb, that he should not be a
Reprover to them. What was the Lamentation of Jeremy? Thy Prophets have seen
vain and foolish Things for thee, and have not discovered thine Iniquity, (Lam.
2.14.) How would you have the Lord Jesus by his Spirit to convince Men? Must it
not be by his Word? Verily you keep the Spirit of Christ from falling down upon
the People, if you refuse to endeavor to convince the People by your Word.
Other Doctrines are sweet and necessary, but this is in the first Place most
necessary. Beware of Personating, beware of Bitterness and Passion, but Oh
convince with a Spirit of Power and Compassion; and he that shall be
instrumental unto Christ, in this or any other Work for Christ's Sake, unto him
the Lord will be the principal Agent, and by him will attain his own Ends,
finish his great Work, gather in his scattered Sheep, who are in great
Multitudes throughout the Kingdom scattered from him; if once they be thoro'ly
convinced that they are utterly lost, and gone out of the Way.

USE 2. May not this also be a sad Reproof and Terror to them that stand it out
against all Means of Conviction, and will not see their Sin, nor believe the
fearful Wrath of God due to them for Sin; not a Man scarce can be found, that
will come to this Conclusion, I am a sinful Man, and therefore I am a dead Man,
I am a condemned Man: But like wild Beasts fly from their Pursuers into their
Holes, and Thickets, and Dens, their sinful Extenuations, Excuses, and
Apologies for Sin, and for themselves, and if they be hunted thither, and found
out there, then they resist and article against that Truth which troubles them;
they flatter themselves in their own Eyes, until their Iniquities be found most
hateful, (Psalm. 36.2.) Many a Man dislikes the Text, the Use, the long Use
wherein his Sin is touched, and his Conscience tossed; especially if it be his
darling Sin, his Herodias, his Rimmon, especially if withal he thinks the
Minister means him, he will not see it, nor confess it; especially, if he
apprehends he shall lose his Honor, or his Silver shrines and Profit by it: He
will not see his Sin, that he may not be troubled in Conscience for his Sin,
that so he may not be forced to confess and forsake his Sin, and condemn
himself for it before God and Men. O Lord, I mourn that I can scarce meet with
a Man that either cares to be, or will be convinced; but has something always
to say for himself, their Sins are not so great, they are not so bad, but have
some Good, and therefore have some Hope; and if God be merciful, it is no great
Matter though they be exceeding sinful, or some such Thing; their Mouths are not
stopped to say nothing for themselves but guilty. There is less Conviction in
the World in this Age, than many are aware of. For I believe that all the
Powers of Hell conspire together to blind Men's Eyes and darken Men's Minds in
this great Work of Christ: Principiis obsta, it is Policy to stop Christ in his
Entrance, in this first Stroke upon the Soul; but Oh! little do you think what
you do herein, and what Woe you work to your selves thereby; Do thou stifle
and resist the first Breathings of Christ's Spirit, when he comes to save thee?
What Hurt will it be to know the worst of thy Condition, now when there is hope
hereby of coming out of it; who must else one Day see all thy Sins in order
before thee to thy eternal Anguish and Terror? Psalm. 50.21. When the Lord shall
say to thee as unto Dives, Remember in thy Lifetime thou had thy good
Things, remember such a Time, such a Place, such a Sin; which then you would
not see: But now thou shall see what it is to strike an infinite God. Remember
thou wast forewarned of Wrath to come, but thou would not believe thy self
accursed, that so thou might have felt thy Need of him that was made a Curse
to bless thee; and therefore feel it now: Oh you will wish then that you had
known this Evil in that your Day. What do thou talk of Grace? Thou think
thou have Grace, when as thou have not the first Beginning, nay, not the most
remote Preparation for it in this Work of Conviction; what should we do for
such as these, but with Jeremy, Jer. 13.17. If you will not hear, my Soul shall
weep in secret for your Pride.

USE 3. Oh be persuaded therefore to remember your Sins past, and to consider
of your Ways now. All the Profaneness of thy Heart and Life, all the Vanity of
thy Youth, Eccl. 11.9. all your secret Sins, all your Sins against Light and
Love, Checks and Vows: Thus God's People have done, Ezekiel. 6.9. thus all the
Elect shall do; Oh consider the Lord remembers them all, and that with Grief of
Heart against thee, because thou forgettest them, Hos. 2.7. He that numbers thy
Hairs, and tells the Sparrows that fall, numbers much more thy Sins that fall
from thee, they are written down in his black Book. They are no Trifles, for he
minds not Toys; the Books must be opened, oh reckon now, you have yet Time to
call them to mind, which it may be shall not continue long; it is the Lord's
Complaint, Jer. 8.6. of a wicked Generation, that he could hear no Man say,
What have I done? Winnow your selves, (as the Word is, Zeph. 2.1.) O People not
worthy to be beloved. I pronounce unto you from the eternal God, that e're long
the Lord will search out Jerusalem with Candles, he will come with a Sword in
his Hand to search for all secure Sinners, in City and Country, unless you
awaken; he will make Inquisition for Blood, for Oaths, for Whoredoms, which
grow common; for all secret Sins we are frozen up in: Oh be willing, be but
willing that the Lord should search you and convince you, now in this Evening
Time of the Day, before the Night come, wherein it will be too late to say, I
wish I had considered of my Ways in Time; of all Sins, none can so hardly stand
with Uprightness, as a secret Unwillingness to see and be convinced of Sin,
John 3.20, 21. The Helps and Means for attaining hereunto are these,

1 Help. Bring thy Soul to the Light, desire the Lord in Prayer as Job did,
What I see not, O Lord, show me, Job 34.32. Set the Glass of God's Law before
thee, look up in the Ministry of the Word unto the Lord, and say, O Lord search
me: The Sun of this holy Word discovers Motes: On the Sabbath Day attend to all
that which is spoken, as spoken unto thee, then examine thy self when thou have
Leisure. When David saw ( Psalm. 19.) how pure the Law was, he cries out, Who
knows his Errors?

2 Help. Look upon every Conviction of thy Conscience for Sin, as an Arrest and
Warning given from the Lord himself; for sometimes the Word hits, and
Conscience startles, and says, This is my Sin, my Condition; yet how usual it
is then for a Man to put a merry Face upon a foul Conscience? How of do Men
think this is but the Word of a Man who has a Latitude given him of reproving
Sin in the Pulpit, and we must give Way to them therein? Or else their Hearts
rise and swell against the Man and Word also; and why is it thus? because he
thinks it is Man only that speaks, whereas did he see and believe that this was
a Stroke, a Warning, an Arrest, a Check from the omnipotent God, would he then
grapple think you with him? Would it pass lightly by him then? When Eli heard
Samuel denounce sad Things against his House, It is the Lord, said Eli, 1 Samuel
3.18. When Paul heard Jesus speaking, Why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. he falls
down astonished, and dares not kick against the Pricks any longer. An Arrest in
the Kind's Name comes with Authority, and awes the Heart of the Man in Debt.

3 Help. Do not judge of Sin by any other Rule, but as God judges of it,
according to the Rule of the Word by which all Men's Ways shall be judged at
the last Day. What made Saul, 1 Samuel 15. extenuate his Sin to Samuel? he judged
not of it as the Lord in his Word did: for had he done so, he would have seen
Disobedience to a Command as bad as Witchcraft, as Samuel told him; which also
made his proud Heart sink, and say, I have sinned. Remember for this End these
Scriptures, Romans 1.18. Romans 2.9. Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10 by which thou may see,
either I must die, (in the State I am) or God himself must lie. Remember that
an angry Look or Word is Murder in God's Account; a wanton Eye, an unchaste
Thought is Adultery, (2 Cor. 5.10.) before a holy God, before whose Tribunal
thou must give an account of every vain Thought and Word. And therefore do not
judge of Sin by the present Pleasure, Gain, Honor, or Ease in it; for this is
a false Rule: Moses forsook the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, Heb. 11.25. Nor
yet by not feeling any Punishment for it, for God reserves Wrath, Nahum 1.2.
till the Day of Reckoning: Nor yet by the Esteem that others generally have of
it, who make no more of wounding the Son of God by Sin, then they do of
crushing Vermin under their Feet: Nor yet by the Practice of others; every Man
sins, and therefore I hope I shall do as well as others: Nor yet by seeing thy
self better, and thanking God thou art not as other Men; it may be so, thou
did never steal, nor whore, nor murder as yet, but have thou had any one
vain Though It in Prayer? Have thou heard one Sermon unprofitably? Have thou
sinned? Then know God spared not the Angels that sinned, and how will thou
escape, unless the Lord die for thee? Nor yet, lastly, judge of it by thy own
Opinion of God, in thinking God is like unto thee, that as thou make Light of
it, so he makes less, Psalm. 50.21. Oh take heed of judging the Evil of Sin by
any of these Rules: Oh remember all Men are apt to think of themselves better
than they are; are we blind also? say the Pharisees: Take heed that by judging
of Sin by these false Rules, you deceive not your selves.

USE 4. Let this, lastly, be a Use of Thankfulness, to those whose Eyes the
Lord has opened to see, and so convincing you of your Sins. When David was
going in the Heat of his Spirit to kill Nabal, and Abigail met him and stopped
him, what said he? Oh blessed be the Lord for thy Counsel; (1 Samuel 25.32, 33.)
so when thou were going on in the Heat and Pursuit of thy Sin, toward eternal
Death, that the Lord should now meet thee in thy Way, and convince thee of thy
Folly, and so stop thee, what a World of Sin else would thou have committed,
how vile would thou have been? Oh say therefore, blessed be that Minister of
the Lord, and blessed for ever be the Name of the Lord that gave me that
Counsel. It is said, (John 16.7.) Christ will send the Comforter to convince of
Sin; is it a comfortable Thing to see Sin? Yes, it shall one Day be Matter of
unspeakable Comfort to you that ever you saw Sin; that ever he showed thee that
Mystery of Iniquity in thy Heart and Life, those arcana imperii, those secrets
of the Power and Dominion of Sin over thee: Thou shall not hate but reprove thy
Brother, (Lev. 19.17.) If the Lord should secretly keep thy Sin glowing in his
own Bosom against thee, and never reprove thee for it, nor convince thee of it;
no greater sign of God's everlasting Hatred against thee. Oh it is infinite
Love that he has called thee aside, and dealt plainly and secretly with thee;
and will you not be thankful for this? The Lord might have left thee in thy
brutish Estate, and never made known thy latter End; never have told thee of
thy Sin or Flood before it comes.

Object. It may be you will say, If I felt my Sin, and were deeply humbled for
it, I could then be thankful that ever I saw it; what is it to see Sin?

Answ. This is a Favor the Lord shows not to all Mankind, many have no Means
to bring them to the Knowledge of it, and those that have, yet are smitten with
a deep sleep under those Means, that they know not when Death is at their
Doors, nor what Sin means; and this it may be is the Condition of some of thy
poor Friends and Acquaintance, that think it strange that thou runnest not with
them in the same Way as they do.

2. Suppose some Reprobates do see Sin, yet the Lord puts a secret Virtue in
that Work of Conviction upon thee, which makes thee cry to Heaven for a Spirit
of Brokenness for Sin; which without this Sight of Sin, thou would never so
much as have desired; and this they have not.

3. However, Conviction is a Work of the Spirit, though it should be but
common; and wilt not thou be thankful for common Mercy, suppose it be outward?
How much more for this that is spiritual, though it should be common? Especially
considering that it is the first fundamental Work of the Spirit, and is
seminally all. Sense of Sin begins here, and arises hence; as Ignorance of Sin
is seminally all: Remember that the Discovery of Faux in the Vault, was the
Preservation of England. We use to remember the Day and Hour of the Beginning
of some great and notable Deliverance; Oh remember this Time wherein the Love
of Christ first brake out in convincing thee of thy Sin, who else had
certainly perished in it: And thus much of this first Work of Conviction; now
the second follows, Compunction.

SECT. III. The second Act of Christ's Power, in working Compunction or Sense
of Sin.
COmpunction, pricking at the Heart, or Sense and Feeling of Sin, is different
from Conviction of Sin; the latter being the Work of the Understanding, and
seated in that principally; the other is in the Affections and Will, and seated
therein principally: A Man may have sight of sin, without sorrow and sense of
it, Dan. 5.22. Jam. 1.24. Romans 3.20, 21. Yet that Conviction which the Spirit
works in the Elect is ever accompanied with Compunction, first or last. For the
better unfolding this Point, let me open these four Things to you.

1. That Compunction or Sense of Sin immediately follows Conviction of Sin in
the Day of Christ's Power. 2. The Necessity of this Work to succeed the other.
3. Wherein it consists. 4. The Measure of it in all the Elect.
1. That Compunction follows Conviction, is evident from Scripture and Reason,
Acts 2.37. When they heard this, that is, when they saw and were convinced of
their sin in crucifying the Lord of Life, which they did not imagine to be a
sin before, what follows next? it is said, they were pricked at the Heart, lo,
here is Compunction. Ephraim also in turning unto God, Jer. 31.19. has these
Words, After that I was instructed, I sm^^e upon my Thigh; (as Men in great
Calamity befallen them use to do) I was ashamed, even confounded, because I did
bear the Reproach of my Youth. The Men of Nineveh hearing by the Prophet they
were all to die within forty Days, it is said, they believed God, (in the Work
of Conviction) and then they fell to Sackcloth and Ashes (in the Work of
Compunction) which did immediately follow. Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. in his
renewed return unto God, after he heard the Words of the Law, his Heart melted,
and he wept before the Lord. For what is the End of Conviction? Is it not
Compunction? For if the Lord should let a Man see his sin, and Death for Sin,
and yet suffer the Heart to remain hard and unaffected, the Lord did but leave
him without Excuse; nay, the Lord should but leave him under greater Misery,
and under a more fearful Judgment, viz. for a Man to see and know his sin, and
yet unaffected with it, and hardn^d under it, Hardness of Heart is one of a
greatest Judgments: To see sin and not to be affected with it, argues greater
Hardness. For it is no wond^r if they that see not and know not sin, remain
senseless of sin; alas; they know not what they do: But for a Man to be
enlightened, and see his sin, and yet unaffected; Lord, how great is this
Hardness, and how unexcusable will such a Man be lest before God, when the Lord
shall reckon with him for his Hardness of Heart! What is the End of that Light
the Lord lets into the Understanding in other Things? Is it not that thereby
the Heart might be affected thoro'ly with it? Why does the Lord let in the
Light of the Knowledge of Christ and of his Will? Is it that this Knowledge
should like Froth float in the Understanding, and be imprisoned there? No
verily, but that the Heart might be thoro'ly and deeply affected therewith. And
do you think the Lord will in the Light of Conviction imprison it up in the
Mind? I^ there not a further End that by this Light the Heart might be deeply
affected with sin? If any say that the End of Conviction is to drive the Soul
to Christ, I grant that this is the remote and last End of it, but the next End
is Compunction. For if the Understanding be convinced of Misery, and the Heart
remain hard, the Mind may see indeed that Righteousness and Life only is to be
had in Christ; yet the Heart remaining hard, the Will and Affections will never
stir toward Christ, it is impossible a hard Heart, remaining such, wholly
unaffected with Sin or Misery, should be truly affected with Jesus Christ; but
of this more hereafter.

2. What Necessity is there of this Compunction to second Conviction?

Answ. I speak now of Necessity in way of ordinary Dispensation, not of God's
usual and extraordinary Way of Working, where he uses neither Law not Gospel
(as ordinarily he does) to work by. Many have been nibling lately at this
Doctrine, and demanded, What need is there of Sorrow and Compunction of Heart?
A Man may be converted only by the Gospel, and God may let in Sweetness and Joy
without any sense of Sin or Misery, and in nay Experience I have found if so;
others godly and gracious also feel it so: Why therefore do any press such a
Necessity of coming in at this back Door unto Christ? This Point I confess is
very weighty, and much danger in denying the Truth of it; yet withal, there
needs much Tenderness in handling of it, l^st any stumble; and therefore before
I lay down the Reasons to show the Necessity of it, give me leave to propound
these Rules, both for the clearing of the Point, and answering sundry
Objections usually about this Point.

1. Rule. In this Work of Compunction, do not think that the Lord has not
wro't any true sense of sin, because you find it not in such a Measure as you
imagine you should desire to have, and that others feel; sense of sin admits
Degrees. I doubt not but Joseph's Brethren were humbled, yet Joseph must be
more, he must be cast into the Ditch, and into the Prison, and the Iron must
enter not only into his Legs, but into his Soul, Psalm. 105.18. He must be more
afflicted in Spirit, because he was to do greater Work for God, and was to be
raised up higher than the rest, and therefore did need the more Ballast: some
are educated more civilly than others, and thereby have contracted less guilt
and stoutness of Heart against God and his Ways, and therefore these have not
such Cause of Trouble; and being less rugged, have less need of Axes to hew
them: some Men's sorrow breaks in upon them more suddenly, like storms and
breaches of the Sea, and the Lord is resolved to hasten and finish his Work in
them more speedily, and it may be more exemplarily; (for every Christian is not
a fair Copy) as in those, Acts 2.37. In others their sorrows soak in by
Degrees, Gutta cavat lapidem, the Lord empties them by continual Droppings, and
hence feel not that Measure of sorrow that others do: Every Christian is not a
Heman, Psalm. 88. who suffers distracting Fears and Terrors from his Youth up,
verse 15. who is afflicted with all God's Ways, verse 7. for he was a Man of
exceeding high Parts and Gifts, as you may see, 1 Kings 4.31. and therefore the
Lord had need of hanging some special Plumets on his Heart to keep it ever low,
lest it should be lifted up above Measure. Some sense of sin the Lord will work
in all he saves, but not the same Measure; the Lord gives not always unto his,
that which is good in it self, (its good I confess to be deeply affected and
humbled) but that which is fit, and therefore best for thee.

2. Rule. Do not think there is no Compunction or Sense of Sin wro't in the
Soul, because you cannot so clearly discern and feel it, nor the Time of the
Working and first Beginning of it. I have known many that have come with
Complaints, they were never humbled, they never felt it so, nor yet could tell
the Time when it was so, yet there has been and many Times they have seen it
by the Help of other Spectacles, and blessed God for it. When they in Isai.
63.17. complained, Lord, why have thou hardened our Hearts from thy Fear: Do you
think there was no softness nor sensibleness indeed? Yes verily, but they felt
nothing but a hard Heart, nay, such Hardness as if the Lord had plagued them
with it by his own immediate Hand, and not born and bred with them only, as
with other Men. Many a Soul may think the Lord has left it, nay, smitten it
with a hard Heart, and so make his Moan of it, yet the Lord has wro't real
Softness under felt Hardness, as many Times in Roprobates there is felt
Softness, when within there is real Hardness. The stony-ground Hearers were
plowed and broken on the Top, but were stony at the Bottom. Some Men may be
wounded outwardly and mortally, this may easily be discerned. The Lord may
wound others and they may bleed out; their sorrow is mere inward and secret,
and therefore cannot point with their Finger to their Wound as others can.

3 Rule. Do not think the Lord works Compunction in all the Elect in the same
circumstantial Work of the Spirit, but only in the same substantial Work: The
Lord works a true sense of sin for Substance and Truth of it, yet there are
many circumstantial Works, like so many Enlargements and Comments upon one and
the same Text, e. g. The same sin that affects Paul, it may be does not affect
Lydia or Apollos. The same Notions for the Aggravation of sin in one, do not
come into the Mind of the other; the same Complaints, and Prayers, and Turnings
of Spirit in the one, may not be in the same Circumstances, and with the like
Effects as in the other, and yet both of them feel sin, and therefore complain;
they both feel Sin, yet by means of various Apprehensions and Aggravations.
This I speak, because you may the better understand the Meaning of God's
Servants in opening the Work of Humiliation. You may hear them say, the Soul
does this, and thinks that, and speak another Thing; it may be every one does
not so think in the same individual Circumstances, and therefore are to be
understood as producing only exemplum in re simili; something like this or for
the Substance of this is there wrought.

4 Rule. In this Work of Compunction we must not bring Rules unto Men, but Men
to Rules; crook not God's Rules to the Experience of Men (which is fallible,
and many Times corrupt) but bring Men unto the Rule, and try Men's Estates
herein by that: For many will say, some Men are not humbled at all, never had
any precedent sorrow for sin. God's Mercy only has melted their Hearts, and
Experience proves this, and many find this, who are sincere and gracious
Christians. I answer,

We are not in this or any other Point to be guided by the Experience of Men
only, but attend the Rule; if it be proved, that according unto the Rule Men
must be broken and affected with their sin and Misery before Mercy can be truly
apprehended or Christ accepted; What tell you me of such or such Men? ^et the
Rule stand; but let Men stand or fall according to the Rule: Many are accounted
gracious and godly for a Time, much affected with Mercy and Christ Jesus; yet
afterward fall or wizen into nothing; and prove very unsound.

What is the Reason?

Truly the Cause was here, their first Wound and Sorrow for Sin was not right,
as hereafter shall be made good; many Thousands are miserably deceived about
their Estates by this one Thing, of crooking and wresting God's Rules to
Christians Experience; let all God's Servants tremble and be wary here; wrack
not the holy Scriptures, nor force them to speak as thou feel, but try all
Things by them, 1 These. 5.21.

5. Rule. Do not make the Examples of converted Persons in Scripture Patterns
in all Things of Persons unconverted: Do not make God's Work upon the one, run
Parallel with God's Work upon the other.

Some say, That many in Scripture are converted to Christ without any sorrow
for sin, and produce the Example of Lydia, whose Heart God sweetly opened to
receive Christ; and the Eunuch, Acts 8. converted in the same Manner.

I answer,

These are Examples of Persons converted to God before, who did believe in the
Messiah, but did not know that this Jesus was the Messiah, which they soon did
when the Lord sent the Means to revea^ Christ; and therefore Lydia, a Jewish
Proselyte is called a Worshipper of God, Acts 16.14. and so was the Eunuch,
Acts 8.27. and in the same Condition was the Centurion, Acts 10.2. who feared
God, and whose Prayers were accepted. ver. 4. (which cannot be without Faith)
yet did not know that this Jesus crucified was the Messiah, until Peter came
unto him So that suppose here was no sense or sorrow for sin, at this Time;
does it therefore follow they never had any when the Lord at first wro't upon
them? Are these Examples in Persons converted, fit to show forth God's Work in
Persons unconverted? In some Things indeed they are Examples, in others not so:
Their Examples of believing in Christ are not in that act Examples of sorrow
for Want of Christ. And yet, let me add, To say that God opened Lydia's Heart
to believe in Christ, and yet opened not her Heart to lament her Sin and Misery
in her Estate without Christ (suppose she were without Christ) is more then can
be proved from the Text; for it is said, Her Heart was opened to attend unto
the Things that were spoken by Paul: And can any think that Paul, or an
Apostle, ever preached Christ without Preaching the Need Men had of him? And
could any preach their Need of Christ, withing Preaching Men's undone and
sinful Estate without Christ? And do you think that Lydia was not made to
attend unto this? Do you think that when Philip came to open the 53d of Isaiah
to the Eunuch, that Christ was bruised for our Iniquities; that he did not let
him understand the infinite Evil of Sin and Misery of all Sinners, and of him
in special, unless the Lord Jesus was bruised for him.

6 Rule. In Examples recorded in the Scripture of God's converting Grace, do
not think they had no Sorrow for Sin, because it is not distinctly and expressly
set down in all Places: For the Scripture usually sets down Matters very
briefly; it oftentimes supposes many Things, and refers us to judge of some by
other Places; as Acts 6.7. it is said, Many of the Priests were obedient to the
Faith; does it therefore follow that they did immediately believe without any
Sense of Sin? Look to a fuller Example, Acts 2. and then we may see, as the one
were converted to the Faith, so were the other, having a Hand in the same Sin,
1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Paul, he was a Persecutor, but the Lord received him to Mercy,
and that God's Grace was abundant in Faith and Love: Does it hence follow that
Paul had no casting down, because not mentioned here? If we look upon Acts 9.
we shall see it otherwise.

7. Rule. Do not judge of general and common Workings of the Spirit upon the
Souls of any to be the Beginnings of effectual and special Conversion; for a
Man may have some inward and yet common Knowledge of the Gospel and Christ in
it, before there be any sorrow for sin; yet it does not hence follow that the
Lord begins not with Compunction and Sorrow, because common Work is not special
and effectual Work; when the Spirit thus comes, he first begins here, as we
shall prove.

8. Rule. The Terrors, and Fears, and Sense of Sin and Death, be in themselves
Afflictions of Soul, and of themselves drive from Christ; yet in Hand of
Christ, by the Power of the Spirit, they are made to lead, or rather drive unto
Christ, which is able to turn Mourning into Joy, as well as after Mourning to
give Joy; and therefore it is a vain Thing to think there is no need of such
Sorrows which drive Men from Christ; and that Christ can work well enough
therefore without them; when as by the mighty Power and Riches of Mercy in
Christ, the Lord by wounding, nay, killing his of all their carnal Security and
self-confidence, saves all his alive, and drives them to seek for Life in the
Son.

These Things being thus premised, let us now hear of the Necessity of this
Work to succeed Conviction.

Reas. 1. Else a Sinner will never part with his Sin; a bare Conviction of Sin
does but light the Candle to see Sin; Compunction burns his Fingers, and that
only makes him dread the Fire, Cleanse your Hearts ye Sinners, and purify your
Hearts ye double-minded Men, (says the Apostle James, Chap. 4. Verse 8.) But
how should this be done? He answers Verse 9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep,
turn your Laughter into Mourning. So Joel 2.12. the Prophet calls upon his
Hearers to turn from their Sin unto the Lord; but how? Rend your Hearts, and
not your Garments. Not that they were able to do this, but by what Sorrow he
requires of all in general; he thereby effectually works in the Hearts of all
the Elect in particular; for every Man naturally takes Pleasure, nay, all his
Delight and Pleasure is in nothing else but Sin; for God he has none, but
that. Now so long as he takes Pleasure in Sin, and finds Contentment by Sin, be
cannot but cleave inseparably to it: Oh it is sweet, and it only is sweet; for
so long the Soul is dead in Sin. Pleasure in Sin is Death in Sin, 1 Timothy 5.6.
So long as it is dead in Sin, it is impossible it should part with Sin; no more
than a dead Man can break the Bonds of Death. And therefore it unde^^^ably
follows, that the Lord must first put Gall and Wo^mwood to these Dugs, before
the Soul will cease sucking, or be weaned from them; the Lord must first make
Sin bitter, before it will part with it; load it with Sin, before it will set
down and desire Ease: And look as the Pleasure in Sin is exceeding sweet to a
Sinner, so the Sorrow for it must be exceeding bitter, before the Soul will
part from it.

It Is true, I confess, a Man sometimes may part with Sin without Sorrow; the
unclean Spirit may go out for a Time, before he is taken, bound and slain by
the Power of Christ. But such a kind of parting is but the washing of the Cup,
it is unsafe and unsound, and the End of such a Christian will be miserable; for
a Man to hear of his Sin, and then to say, I Will do no more so, without any
Sense or Sorrow for it, would not have been approved by Paul, if he had seen no
more in the careless Corinthians, (2 Cor. 7.10.) in tolerating the incestuous
Person; but their Sorrow wro't this Repentance. No, the Lord abhors such
whorish wiping the Lips; and therefore the same Apostle, (1 Cor. 5.2.) when he
reproves them for not separating the Sinner, and so the Sin from them, he sums
it up in one Word, You have not mourned, that such a one might be taken from
you: Because then Sin is severed truly from the Soul, when Sorrow or Shame,
from Sense and Feeling of the Evil of it, begins it. Not only Sin is opposite
to God, but when the Lord Jesus first comes near his Elect in their sinful
Estate, they are then Enemies themselves by Sin unto God. And hence it is they
will never part with their Weapons, until themselves be thoroughly Wounded: And
therefore the Lord must wound their Consciences, Minds and Hearts, before they
will cast them by. Now if there be no parting with, no Separation from Sin, but
Sin is as strong, and the Sinner as vile as ever before, has Christ (who now
comes to save his Elect from Sin) the End of his Work? What is the Man the
better for Conviction, Affection to Christ, name what you can, that remains
still in his Sins? When the Apostle would sum up all the Misery of Men, he does
it in those Words, (1 Cor. 15.17.) Ye are yet in your Sins: So I say, thou art
convicted, but art yet in thy Sin; art affect with Christ, and take hold of
Christ, but art yet in thy Sin; he that confesses and forsakes his Sin, shall
find Mercy.

Object. You will say, May not the Sweetness of Christ in the Gospel, and Sense
of Mercy, separate from Sin, without any Compunction?

I answer,

1. Sense of Mercy and Christ's Sweetness (I conceive serve principally to draw
the Soul unto Christ. Jer. 31.3. With loving kindness have I drawn thee. But
Compunction or Sense of Sin principally serves in the Hand of Christ, to turn
the Soul from Sin. Aversion from Sin is district from, and in order goes before
our Conversion unto God.

2. Sense of the Sweetness of God's Grace in Christ keeps out Sin, but it does
not thrust out Sin at first.

3. Christ cannot be effectually sweet, unless Sin be first made bitter; there
may be some general Notice of Christ's Excellency, and some thirty Pieces given
for him; some Esteem of his Grace, and Hope of his Mercy, which may occasion
Sorrow; but I dare not say, that this is any sound or thoro' Work, till after
Sorrow, Isai. 50.4. Christ has the Tongue of the Learned given him to speak a
Word in Season: Unto whom? It is added, unto the Weary. They are the Men that
will prize Mercy, and they only to purpose; they that have felt the Bitterness
of Sin and Wrath, find it exceeding hard to prize Christ, and to taste his
Sweetness; how shall they do it indeed that find none at all? Sweetness before
Sense of Sin, is like Cordials before purging of a foul Stomach; which usually
strengthen the Humor, but recover not the Man.

Reas. 2. Because without this, no Man will either Care for Christ, or feel a
Need of Christ; a Man may see a Want of Christ by the Power of Conviction, but
he will never feel a Need of Christ but by the Spirit of Compunction. The Whole
need not the Physician, but they that are Sick. A whole Man may see his Want of
a Physician, but a sick Man only feels his Need of him, will prize him, send
for him. By the Whole are not to understand such as have no Need of Christ (for
what Sinner but has Need of him?) but such as feel no Need of him: As by Sick
cannot be meant such as are sinful and miserable, for then Christ should come
actually to save all Men; but those that did feel themselves so, as a sick Man
that feels his Sickness; these only are the Men that feel a Need and Necessity
of Christ; these only will come to Christ, and be glad of Christ, and be very
thankful for their Recovery of Christ. And hence arises the great Sin of the
World in despising the Gospel, not at all affected with the glad Tidings of it,
because they are not affected with their Sin and Misery; or if they be affected
but in Part with the Gospel, it is because they are not thoro'ly affected with
their Misery before.

And hence it is, that when the Lord called his People to him, yet they would
not come to him (Jer. 2.31.) because they were Lords, and well eno' without
him. Why did not they come to the Supper, being invited? It wat because they
had Farms and Oxen and Wives to attend unto; they felt no Need of Coming, as
the poor, lame, blind, and halt did, ( Luke 14.) The Prodigal cares not for
Father not Father's House, until he comes to see, Here I die, (Luke 15.17.) It
is true, the Grace of the Gospel draws Men unto Christ; but it is very
observable, that the Gospel reveals no Grace, but with Respect and in Reference
unto Sinners, and Men in extreme Misery; the Gospel says not that Christ is
come to save; but to save Sinners, and to save his People from their Sins. It
reveals not this, that God justifies Men, but he justifies the Ungodly; it
reveals not this, ( Romans 5.6, 7, 8.) that Christ died for us, but that he died
for them that were Weak, for Sinners, for Enemies. And if so, can any Man
imagine that this News will be sweet, unless Men see and feel the infinite
Misery of Sin, and the Fruits of it? Will not Men say or think, what great
Matter is there in that? suppose we be Sinners and Enemies, yet we are well
enough; ( Col. 3.7.) before Christ comes a Man's Life lies in his Sin. Now
suppose any should proclaim to a Company of Men the great Favor of their
Prince toward them, that he is such a gracious Prince, as will take away all
their Lives; will this be glad Tidings? Gospel Grace cannot be set out, much
less felt, but in Reference to Sin and Misery, (2 Cor. 5.14.) which must be
first felt, before it can be sweet.

Reas. 3. Because Christ will never come but only unto such as feel their
Misery; for you will say, a Man may come to Christ without it: I say again, If
he does (as he has many Followers) yet Christ will not come to him, nor commit
himself to him; (Mat. 9.13.) I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance; in which Place note, that as by the Righteous is not meant such as
are sincerely so, but such as think and find themselves so; so by Sinners, is
not meant all Manner of impenitent and hard-hearted Sinners, but such as think
and feel themselves such, and lament under it: Now God the Father sent him only
unto such; he is sent not to heal the hard-hearted, but the brokenhearted; (
Luke 4.18.) Indeed he is sent to make Men brokenhearted, who have hard Hearts;
but he is not sent to heal them until then; the Lord leaves the Ninety nine
that needs to Repentance to wilder for ever; the one lost Sheep, who feels
itself so, and feels a Need of a Savior to come and find it out; who cannot
come and find out him: The Lord Jesus will come unto, and unto him only,
leaving all the Ninety nine, Luke 15.7.

Reas. 4. This may lastly appear, by considering the End of Man's Fall into
sin, and the publishing of the Law to reveal sin; and of the Gospel also in
Reference unto Sin and Misery; why did the Lord suffer the Fall of Man? What
was his great Plot in it? It is apparent this, that thereby Way might be made
for the greater Manifestation of God's Grace in Christ. The Serpent poisons all
Mankind, that the Seed of the Woman might have the Glory of recovering some:
This was God's last End: The Perdition of some (of themselves) being but
subordinate unto this, Romans 9.22, 23. Surely Adam might have glorified Grace if
he had stood, and God had revealed his Grace in preserving him (made mutable)
from falling. But the Lord saw Grace should not be sufficiently advanced to its
highest Dignity by this, and therefore suffers him actually to fall, and that
into an extreme Depth of Misery. Now consider, Man's Fall in it self cannot be
a Mean of glorifying Grace, but rather obscures all the Glory of God; how shall
the Lord attain his End then hereby? Truly if the Lord let Men see and feel
their Fall and Misery by it, now Grace offered will be accepted and glorified.
And therefore the Lord sends the Law to reveal sin, and make it exceeding
sinful; and Death for sin that this End might be attained, Gal. 3.22. And
therefore feeling of Sin and Death and Misery being the Means, must precede the
other as the End; and therefore as Grace may be seen by Conviction of Misery,
so the Sweetness of it only can be felt by feeling Misery in this Work of
Compunction.

But you will say, What is this Compunction, and wherein does it consist?

This is the third Particular to be opened; in general it is, whereby the Soul
is affected with sin, and made sensible of sin; but more particularly,
Compunction is nothing else but the pricking of the Heart, or the wounding of
the Soul with such Fear and Sorrow for Sin and Misery, as severs the Soul from
Sin, and from going on toward its eternal Misery; so that it consists in three
Toings;

1. Fear. 2. Sorrow. 3. Separation from Sin.
The Lord Jesus when he comes to rescue his Elect; look as Satan held them in
their Misery; first, by blinding of their Eyes from seeing of it; secondly, by
hardening their Hearts from feeling of it; so the Lord Jesus having cut asunder
the first Cord of Satan by Conviction, breaks asunder the second by
Compunction, and causing the Soul to feel and be affected with its Misery; and
as the whole Soul is unaffected before he comes, so he makes the whole Soul
sensible when he comes, and therefore he fills the Conscience with Fear, and
the Heart with Sorrow and Mourning, so as now the Will of sin is broken, which
was hardened before these Fears and Sorrows seized upon it. Let me open these
particularly, that you may taste and try the Truth of what I now deliver.

1. I say the Lord Christ in this Work of Compunction lets into the Heart of a
secure ^^nner a mavelous Fear and Terror of the direful Displeasure of God,
of Death and Hell, the Punishment of sin; O beloved, look upon most Men at this
Day, this is the great Misery lying upon them, they do not fear the Wrath to
come, they fear not Death nor Damning, even then when they hear and know it is
their Portion; but their Hearts are set to sin, Eccl. 8.11.

The Lord Christ therefore lets in this Fear, that look as the Lord when he
came to conquer the Canaanites, Exodus 23.27, 28. He sent his Hornets before
him, which were certain Fears, which made their Hearts faint in the Day of
Battle, and by this subdued them; so the Lord Christ when he comes to conquer a
poor sinner that has long resisted him, and would go on to his own Perdition,
lets in these Fears, that the Soul shrinks in with the Thoughts of its woeful
Estate, and cries out secretly, Lord what will become of me, If I die in this
Condition? Paul (Acts 3.6.) trembles astonished at his Misery and Wickedness,
and now he cries out; the Jailer was very cruel against Paul, (Acts 16.) but
when the Lord Jesus comes to rescue him from this Condition, you shall see him
trembling. The Lord has let in that Fear, that now he is content to do any
Thing to be saved from the Danger he saw he was now in; when a Man sees Danger
and great Danger near and imminent, now Man naturally fears it: Before Christ
come, the Soul may see its Misery, but apprehends it far off, and hoping to
escape it, and hence does not tear it; but when the Lord Jesus comes, he
presents a Man's Danger, Death, Wrath, and Eternity near unto him, and hence
has no Hope to escape it, as now he is, and therefore does fear; and seeing
the Misery exceeding great, he has an exceeding great (though oft-times deep)
Fear of it; as Men near Death, and apprehending it so, begin then to be
troubled, and cry out when it is too late. The Lord Jesus deals more mercifully
with the Elect, and brings Death and Eternity near them before they draw near
to it; whiles it is called to Day: The poor Jailer began to think of killing
himself when Fears were upon him, ( Acts 16.) and so many under this stroke of
Christ, have the same Tho'ts, because they see no Hope; but this Measure is not
in all, this Work is in all. Put them in fear, O Lord, that they may know they
be but Men, (Psalm. 9, 20.) before this Fear comes, Men are above God, and think
they can stand it out against him; the Lord therefore lets in this Fear to make
them know they be but Men, and that as proud, and stout, and great as they are,
yet that they are not above God, and that it is in vain to kick against the
Pricks, and go on as they have done; for if they do, he will not endure it
long: The Spirit of Bondage makes Men fear, before the Spirit of Adoption
comes, those Fears therefore are such, as the Regenerate, after they have
received the Spirit of Adoption, never have; and therefore they are such as
pursue the Soul with some threatening of the Word, pronouncing Death and
Perdition to him in that Estate: e. g. He that believes not is condemned
already, thus the Word speaks to Conscience, John 3.17. Thou believe not
says a Man's own Conscience, the Spirit Witnessing with it, therefore thou art
Condemned says Conscience; now the Spirit of Bondage, is the Testimony of
God's Spirit Witnessing to both the Premises and Conclusion: Now this Spirit no
Regenerate Man indeed ever has after this Time, but the Fears he has arise
from another Principle of Corruption of Conscience, and Malice of Satan through
the present desertion of the Spirit leaving him; not from any positive Witness
of the Spirit of any such untruth, which yet is truth, while the Soul is under
this Stroke and not Regenerate: Mark therefore diligently that this Fear is the
Work of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, and hence it follows.

1. That these Fears are not merely natural, (as those, Romans 2.15.) arising
from natural Conscience only, which only accuse of Sin, but never affect? but
they are supernatural, they are Arrows shot into the Conscience by the Arm of
the Spirit; so dreadful that no Word nor Meditation of Death and Eternity can
beget such Fears, but creates them.

2. Hence it follows, that they are clear Fears, (for the Spirit's Work is ever
clear before he leaves it, Ephesians. 5.13.) they are not blind confused Fears, and
suspicious and sad Conjectures, whereby many a Man is afraid and much afraid
and affrighted like Men in a Dream, that think they are in Hell, yet cannot
tell what that Evil is which they fear; but they are clear Fears whereby they
distinctly know and see that they are miserable, and what that Misery is.

3. Hence it follows that they are strong Fears, because the almighty Hand of
the Spirit sets them on, and shakes the Soul; they are not weak Fears which a
Man can shake off, or cure by weak Hopes, Sleep or Business, etc. like some
Winds that shake the Tree, but never blow it down: But these Fears ca^^ down
the tallest Cedar, and appall the Heart, and cool the Courage and Boldness of
the most impenitent and audacious Sinner. The Spirit presenting the greatest
Evil in eternal Separation from God: hence no Evil in this World is so dreadful
as this, I had better never been born than to bear it (says the Soul) and
hence casts off all other Thoughts, and cannot be quiet; and hence it is that
these Fears force a Man to fly and seek out for a better Condition. A Man like
Lot lingers in his Sin, but these Fears like the Angel drive him violently out,
the Lord saying to him, Away for thy Life, lest thou perish with the World, for
thy sins are come up to Heaven, the^ may die before one Day be at an End,
and their what will become of thee? Ah thou sinful wretched Man! May not the
Lord justly do it? Are not thy sins grown so many and great, that they are an
intolerable Burden for the Soul of God to bear any longer? And hence you shall
observe, if the Soul after sad Fears grows bold and careless again, the Spirit
pursues it with more Cause of Fear, and now the Soul cries out, Did the Lord
ever elect thee? Christ shed his Blood to save his People from their sins, thou
live yet in thy sins, did he ever shed his Blood for thee? Thou have sinned
against Conscience, after thou have been enlightened, and fallen back again,
have thou not therefore committed the unpardonable Sin? Thou have had many a
fair Season of seeking God, but have dallied and dreamed away thy Time; is not
the Day of Grace therefore now past? It is true, the Lord is yet patient and
bountiful, and lets thee live on common Mercy, but is not all this to aggravate
thy Condemnation against that great and dreadful Day of the Lord which is at
Hand? Are there not better Men in Hell then thou art that never committed the
like sin? Thus the Spirit pursues with strong Fears, till proud Man falls down
to the Dust before God. The Soul is now under Fears, not above them; and
therefore cannot come out of these Chains, by the most comfortable Doctrine it
hears, nor particular Application of it by the most merciful Ministers in the
World, until the Lord say, as Lam. 3, 57. Fear not; the Lord only can assuage
these strong Winds, and raging Waters, in which there is no other Cry heard of
this Soul thus tossed with Tempests, but O I perish? Only the Lord making Way
for the Spirit of Adoption by these in his Elect; drives them out to seek if
there be any Hope, and so they are not properly desperate Fears, yet as I say,
strong Fears, not alike extensively, yet alike intensively strong in all; a
small Evil when Tidings is bro't of it he does not fear, but if the Evil be
apprehended great and near too, the very Suspicion of it makes the Heart
tremble; when a House is on Fire, or a mighty Army entered the Land and near the
City, Children that know not the Greatness of the Evil fear them not; but Men
that know the Danger are full of Fear. The Wrath of the Lord that fire those
Armies of everlasting Woes, are great Evils, the blind World may not much fear
them, but all the Elect whose Minds are convinced to see the Greatness of them,
cannot but Fear, and that with strong and constant Fears; nor is it Cowardice,
but Duty, to fear these everlasting Burnings. And hence the Soul in this Case
wonders at the Security of the World, dreads the Terrors of the Lord that are
near them, and usually seeks to awaken all its poor Friends. I once though it my
self well, and was quiet as you be, but the Lord has let me see my Woe, which I
cannot but fear; O look you to it.

Thus the Lord works this Fear in some in a greater, in others in a lesser
Measure. O consider whether the Lord has thus affected your Hearts with fear;
Oh, secure Times what will God do with us! Many of you having heard the Voice
of the Lion roaring, and yet you tremble not. The Lord has foretold you of
Death and eternal Woe for the least sin, do you believe it, and yet fear it not?
How art thou then forsaken of God? Many of you that like old Mariners can
laugh at all foul Weather, and like Weather-Cocks set your Faces against all
Winds; and if you be damned at last you cannot help it, you must bear it as
well as you can, you hope to do it as well as others shall do: Oh! how far are
such from the Kingdom of God, the Lord not yet working nor pricking thy Heart
so much as with Fear?

2. Sorrow and Mourning for Sin is the second Thing wherein Compunction
consists. And look as Fear plucks the Soul from Security in seeing no Evil to
come; to Sorrow takes off the present Pleasure and Delight in sin, in a greater
Measure than Fear does. The Lord therefore having smitten the Soul, or shot the
Arrows of Fear into the Soul; it therefore grows exceeding sad and heavy,
thinking within it self, What good do Wife or Children, House or Lands, Peace
and Friends, Health and Rest do me? in the mean Time, condemned to die, and
that eternally; it may be reprobated, never to see God's Face more: The Guilt
and Power of sin in Heart and Life living still upon me? And hereupon the Soul
mourns in the Day, and in the Night, desires to go alone and weep; and there
confesses its Vileness before God, all the Days of Vanity, and Sins of
Ignorance, thinking, Oh what have I done! and seeks for Mercy, but not one
smile, nothing but Clouds of Anger appear; and then thinks, if this Anger, the
Fruit of my Sin, be so great, Oh what are my Sins, the Cause hereof! When the
Angel had set out the Sin of the Israelites in making a League with the
Canaanites, (Judges 2.1.) and told them that they should be Thorns in their
Sides, they sat down, (Verse 4.) and lift up their Voice, and wept: so it is
with a contrite sinner. Note narrowly that eminent Place of Scripture, Isai.
61.3. the Lord Christ is sent to appoint Beauty for Ashes, and the Oil of Joy
for the Spirit of Heaviness to them that mourn. Out of which Note these four
Things for the Explication of this Sorrow or Mourning.

First, It is such a Mourning as is precedent unto spiritual Joy. And hence it
is not said, I will give the Spirit of Gladness to beget Mourning, (though the
Lord does so after Conversion) but this goes in order before that. Ephraim
like, who seeing what an unruly Beast he had been, unaccustomed to God's Yoke,
smites upon his Thigh, and bemoans himself, (Jer. 31.18.) It is God's Method
(after his Pe^^^le have sinned) to sad their Hearts, and then to turn Mourning
into Joy; much more at first Beginning of God's Work upon the Soul, they shall
first mourn, and lament, and smite upon the Thigh: If God wounds the Soul for
sin, it shall smart, and bleed too, before God will heal.

Secondly, It is a great Mourning, because it is called a Spirit of Mourning,
Hos. 6.1, 2. As a Spirit of Slumber is a deep Slumber. When the poor Jews shall
be converted, their great Sin shall then be presented before them, of cursing
and crucifying the Lord of Life; as it was to those, Acts 2.36. And by reason
of this, there shall be a great Mourning, Zech. 12.11. that they shall desire
to go alone in secret every one apart, and take their Fill of Mourning, before
the Lord open the Fountain of Grace, Chap. 13.1. It is not a Summer Cloud, or
an April Shower, that is soon spent, but a great Mourning. For,

1. Before this Spirit of Sorrow comes, a Man's Heart takes great delight in
his sin, it is his God, his Life, and sweeter than Christ, and all the Joys of
Heaven; and therefore there must be great Sorrow, sin must be made exceeding
bitter. A Man that is very hungry and thirsty after his Lust, must find such
Meat and Drink exceeding bitter, else he will feed on it. Solomon took great
Content in Women, but what says he when the Lord humbled him? I find a Woman
more bitter than Death, Eccl. 7.26. Hear this you Harlots, and you that live in
your wanton Lusts, the Lord will make your sweet Morsels more bitter than Death
to you, if the Lord saves you.

2. Because the greatest Evils are the Objects of this Sorrow, viz. Sin and
Death. It is true, a Man may mourn for smaller Evils sooner; but when the
Spirit sets on the greatest Evils, then they sad much more. Mine Iniquities are
too heavy to bear, Psalm. 38.1, 2. Why so? Many a Man can bear them without
sinking. True, but in the Elect the Spirit sets on, loads the Soul herewith, A
wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. Because the greatest Evils lie upon
the most tender Part of a tender Soul, pressed down by the omnipotent Hand of
Christ's Spirit: For now the Multitude of sins more than the Hairs on the Head,
(Psalm. 32.2, 3. and 40.12.) come now to Mind; as also the long Continuance in
them, Cradle sins. No sooner, says the Soul, did I begin to live, but I began
to sin. Obstinacy also in them lies very heavy; I have had Warnings, Checks,
Resolutions against them, and yet have gone on, ( Jer. 31.19.) The Power of sin
also sads it; that it is said, Prove. 21.9. When the Wicked reign, the People
mourn; so does the Soul when it feels sin reign. I cannot subdue it, nay, the
Lord will not, that I fear, the Lord has left me over to it. The Increase of
Sin it feels, makes it mourn also ( Dan. ^.12.) I grow worse and worse, says
the Soul; the Leak comes in faster than he can cast it out. The Greatness of
sin makes it mourn: Was there ever such a Sinner as I? And lastly, the Sense of
Condemnation for sin lies upon him; this is the Fruit of your evil Ways, says
the Spirit, Jer. 3. ult. The Soul does not let sin pass by it now as Water down
the Mill, but being stopped by Conviction and fear of the Evil of it, it swells
high, and fills the Heart full of Grief and Sorrow, that many Times it is
overwhelmed therewith.

3. Because Christ will not be very sweet, unless this Mourning under Misery be
very great; the healing of a cut Finger is sweet, but of a mortal Wound is
exceeding sweet; a little Sorrow will make Christ sweet, but great sorrow under
sense of deadly Wounds is exceeding sweet; and without this Christ has not his
Honor due to him, if he be not only sweet, but also exceeding sweet and
precious.

4. Because it is such a sorrow, as nothing but that that has wounded the Soul
can heal it. Let Men have the greatest outward Troubles, outward Things can
cure them; or else they will wear away. As if a Man be sick, or in debt,
Physic and Money can cure these; but this Wound, neither can, or ever shall be
healed but by the Hand that wounded it, Hos. 6.1, 2, 3. And hence a Man can
take no Comfort in Meat, Drink, Sleep, Friends, Mirth, nor Pastime, while this
Wound, this Sorrow lasts; for if any Thing else can heal it, it is not the
right Wound or Sorrow the Lord breeds in his Elect. An adulterous Heart indeed
may be quieted with other Lovers; Cain can build away his Sorrow: Nay, I Will say
more, this wounded Soul cannot comfort it self by any Promises, till the Lord
come: David had a Promise of Pardon from Nathan, yet he cries out to the Lord
to make him hear the Voice of Joy and Gladness, that his broken Bones might
rejoice, Psalm. 51.8. Did not the Lord make him hear the Voice of Joy by Nathan:
Yes, outwardly; but the Lord that had broke his Bones, must make him hear
inwardly. Nay, when the Lord comes himself to comfort, much ado the Lord has
to make him hear it; as the Israelites that hearkened not unto Moses's Voice
because of their hard Bondage, that unless the Lord did invincibly Comfort, it
would lie bleeding to Death, and never live. It must needs therefore be great
Sorrow, which all the World, Men nor Angels can remove.

5. You may be confirmed in this, if lastly you consider the many Ways the Lord
takes to beget great Mourning, if the Soul will not be sorrowful: As, sometimes
great Afflictions; Manasseh must be taken in the Bushes, and be cast into
Chains, (2 Chronicles. 53.11, 12.) Sometimes strange Temptations, hellish
Blasphemies, Is there a God? Are the Scriptures his Word? Why should the Lord
be so cruel as to Reprobate any of his Creatures, to torment it so long, etc.
Sometimes long Eclipsing of the Light of God's Countenance; no Prayers
answered, but daily Bills of Indictment. And sometimes it thinks it hears and
feels a secret Testimony from God, that he never had a thought of Peace toward
it, and that his Purpose is immutable. Sometimes it questions, Can God forgive
sins so great? Can it stand with his Honor to put^ud so much Wrong? Sometimes
it feels its Heart so extreme hard and dedolent, that it thinks the Lord has
sealed it up under this Plague till the Judgment of the great Day. And
sometimes the Lord makes Melancholy a good Servant to him to further this Work
of sorrow. But thus the Lord rebukes many a hard-hearted sinner, that will not
bear the Yoke, nor feel the Load; and now the Lord turns the Beauty of the
proudest into Ashes, and withers the Glory of all Flesh. Nay, sometimes you
shall observe the Lord though he comes not out as a Lion to rend, yet as a Moth
he frets out by secret pinings and languishings, the senseless security of Man,
that he shall mourn to purpose before he leave him. I do not mean by this, as
if all Men had the like Measure of sorrow; but a great sorrow it is in all.
Every Child is delivered by some Throws; those that stick long in the Birth may
feel them longer and very many.

Nor yet do I press a Necessity of Tears, or violent and tumultuous Complaints;
the deepest Sorrows run with least Noise. If a Man can have Tears for outward
Losses, and none for sins, it is very suspicious whether he was ever truly
sorrowful for sin; otherwise, as the greatest Joys are not always expressed in
Laughture, so the greatest sorrows are not always expressed in shedding of
Tears; what the Measure of this great sorrow is, we shall hear hereafter.

Thirdly, It is a constant Mourning, for so it is here called, a Spirit of
Heaviness; as that Woman that had a Spirit of Infirmity, and was bowed down
many Years: Hannah constantly troubled, is called, a Woman of a sorrowful
Spirit, 1 Samuel 1.12, 15. As the Spirit of Pride and Whoredom, Hos. 4.12. is a
constant Frame, where though the Acts be sometime suspended, yet the Spirit
remains; so a Spirit of Mourning, such sorrow, as though the Acts of Mourning be
sometime hindered, yet the spirit and spring remains; Hypocrites will mourn
under Sin and Misery, but what is it? It is the hanging down the Head like a
Bull-rust, Isai. 58.5. in bad Weather for a Day. Oh how many have Pangs and
Gripes of Sorrow, and can quickly ease themselves again! these Mourners come to
nothing in the Conclusion: I grant the sorrow and sadness of Spirit may be
interrupted, but it returns again, and never leaves the Soul until the Lord
look down from Heaven. Lam. 3.48, 40, 50. The Cause continues, guilt and
strength of sin, and therefore this Effect contiues.

Fourthly, It is such a Sorrow as makes Way for Gladness, for so it is here
said, the Lord gives Beauty for these Ashes, and hence it is no desperate
hellish Sorrow, but usually mixed with sense of some Mercy, at least common, and
some Hope; not that which apprehends the Object of Hope particularly (which is
done in Vocation) but that the Lord may find out some way of saying it, Jonah
3.9. Acts 2.37. which Hope, with sense of Mercy waiting so long, preserving
from Hell and Death so often, etc. does not harden the Heart, (as in Reprobates)
but serve to break the more, and to load it with greater Sorrow; thus the Lord
works this Sorrow in all his Elect. I know it is in a greater Measure, and from
some other Grounds after the Soul is in Christ; but this Sorrow there is for
Substance, mentioned for the Reasons given; if Christ hate you, you shall
mourn, but never till it be too late; if he love you, you must mourn now; how
great and many are many of your sins, how near is your Doom? The Lord only
knows how fearful your Condemnation will be, you have often heard; but yet how
^^w of your Hearts are sad and very heavy for these Things? Sin is your
Pleasure, not your Sorrow; you sly from Sorrow as from a Temptation of Satan
who comes to trouble you, and to lead you to Desp^ir; David's Eyes ran down
with Rivers of Waters, because others brake God's Law, and Jeremy wished he had
a Cottage in the Wilderness to mourn in, and yet you do not, you cannot pour
out one Drop, nor yet Wish you had Hearts to lament your own sins: But Oh know
it, that when the Lord Christ comes, he will sad thy Soul, when he comes to
search thy old sores by the Spirit of Conviction, he will make them sinners and
ble^^^ abundantly by the Spirit of Compunction.

3. S^paration from sin is the third Thing wherein Compuncti^n consists, such a
fear and sorrow for sin, under a sinful Estate, as s^parates the Soul from sin,
is true Compunction: without which the Lord Christ cannot be had: The Soul is
^^t and wounded with sin by fear and sorrow, but it is cut off by this stroke
of the Spirit, not from the B^^ng, but from the growing Power of sin; from the
Will to sin, not from all sin in the Will which is mortified by a Spirit of
Holiness, after the Soul is emplanted into Christ; for Compunction, Contrition,
Brokenness of Heart for sin (call it what you will) is opposite to Hardness of
Heart which is in every sinner while Christ leave him; now in Hardness (as in a
stone) there is, First, Insensibleness. Secondly, A close cleaving of all the
Parts together, whereby it comes to pass that hard Things make Resistance of
what is cast against them: so in Compunction there is not only sensibleness of
the Evil of Sin and Death, by fear and sorrow, but such as makes a separation
of that close Union between Sin and Soul: And hence it is that the Lord abhors
all Fastings, Humiliations, Prayers, Tears, unless they be of this stamp, and
are accompanied with this Effect. The Lord flings the Dung of their Fastings
and Sorrows, (Isai. 58.5.) in their Faces, because they did not break the Bands
of Wickedness; to mourn for Sin and Misery, and yet to be in thy sin, is the
Work of Justice on the damned in Hell, and all the Devils at this Day, that are
pincht with their black Chains not loosened from them; and not the Work of the
Grace of Christ in the Day of his Power, He that confesses his Sin shall have
Mercy; that is true, but remember the Meaning of that Confession in the next
Words, and forsakes, he shall find Mercy, ( Prove. 28.13.) What is the End of
the Mother in laying Wormwood and Gall upon her Breast, but that the Child by
tasting the Bitterness of it might be weaned and have his Stomach and Will
turned from it? What is the End of fear and sorrow, but by this to turn away
the Soul from sin? This Point is weighty and full of Difficulty, of great Use,
and worthy of deep Meditation, ( Job 33.15, 16, 17.) For as the first Wound and
stroke of the Spirit is, so it is in all after-works of it, both of Faith and
Holiness in the Soul, if this be right, Faith is right, Holiness is right; if
this be imperfect, or naught, all is according to it afterward: The greatest
Difficulty lies here, to know what Measure of Separation from sin the Spirit
makes here; for after we are in Christ, then sin is mortified; how then is
there any separation of the Heart from it, before it does fully believe; or
what Measure is there necessary? Here therefore I shall answer to the fourth
and last Particular, viz.

Fourthly, What is the Measure of Compunction the Lord works in all the Elect?

Answ. So much Compunction or sense of sin is necessary as attains the End of
it: Now what is the End of it? No other but that the Soul being humbled might
go to Christ (by Faith) to take away his sin; the Finis proximus or next End of
Compunction is Humiliation, that the Soul may be severed from sin, as to
renounce it self for it; the Finis remotus, or last End is, that being thus
humbled, it might go unto Christ to take away sin: For, beloved, the
Condemnation of the World lies not so much in being sinful under Guilt and
Power of Sin as in being unwilling the Lord Jesus should take it away: This I
say is the greatest Hindrance of Salvation, John 3.19. and 5.40. O Jerusalem
will thou not be made clean? Jer. 13.27. that was their great Evil, they were
not only polluted, but they would not be made clean: The Lord Jesus therefore
rolls away this stone from the Sepulcher, beats down this Mountain; and because
it must first believe in Christ before it can receive Grace from Christ, it
must come to Christ to take away sin, before the Lord will do it; hence so much
loosening from sin as makes the Soul thus to come, is necessary. So much fear
and sorrow as loosens from sin, and so much loosening from sin as makes the
Soul willing, as at least not unwilling that the Lord Jesus should take it
away, is necessary: For who ever comes to Christ, or is not unwilling Christ
should come to him to take away all his sin, has (whatever he thinks) some
antecedent loosening and separation from sin.

Oh, says a poor sinner, when the Lord has struck his Heart, and he feels
Guilt, and Terror, and mighty strength of Corruption, if the Lord Jesus would
take away these Evils from me, though I cannot, Means cannot, that will be
exceeding rich Mercy. The Lord does not wound the Heart to this End, that the
Soul should first heal it self, before it come to the Physician, but that it
might seek out, or feeling its Need, be willing and desirous of a Physician,
the Lord Jesus, to come and heal it. It is the great Fault of many Christians,
either their Wounds and Sorrows are so little, they desire not to be healed; or
if they do, they labor to heal themselves first, before they come to the
Physician for it; they will first make themselves holy, and put on their
Jewels, and then believe in Christ. And hence are those many Complaints, What
have I to do with Christ? Why should he have to do with me that have such an
unholy, vile, hard, blind, and most wicked Heart? If I were more humbled, and
more holy, then I would go to him, and think he would come to me. O for the
Lord's sake dishonor not the Grace of Christ. It is true, thou can not come
to Christ, till thou art laden, and humbled, and separated from thy sin. Thou
can not be ingraffed into this Olive, unless thou be cut, and cut off too
from the old Root* Yet remember for ever, that no more sorrow for sin, no more
separation from sin is necessary to thy Closing with Christ, than so much as
makes thee willing, or rather not unwilling that the Lord should take it away.
And know it, if thou seek for a greater Measure of Humiliation antecedent to
thy Closing with Christ than this, thou show the more Pride therein, who
wilt rather go into thy self to make thy self holy and humble, that thou
might be worthy of Christ, than go out of thy self, unto the Lord Jesus, to
take thy sin away. In a Word, who think Christ cannot love thee, until thou
make thy self fair, and when thou think thy self so (which is Pride) wilt
then think otherwise of Christ. The Lord therefore when he teaches his People
how to return unto him after grievous Sins, directs them to this Course, not to
go about the Bush to remove their Iniquities themselves, or to stay and live
securely in their sins, until the Lord did it himself; but bids them come to
him and say, Take away Lord) all Iniquities, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3. You shall see
Ephraim bemoaning himself, Jer. 31.18. But how? Does he say he feels his sins
now all removed? No, but he desires the Lord to turn him, and then (says he) I
shall be turned.

As if he should say, Lord, I shall never turn from this stubborn vile Heart,
nor so much as turn to thee, to take it away, unless thou do turn to me, and
then I shall be turned to purpose. What says the penitent Church? Come, say
they, let us go unto the Lord, Hos. 6.1. They might object and say, Alas, the
Lord is our Enemy, and wounds us, and has broken us to Pieces, we are not yet
healed, but lie dead as well as wounded; shall such dead Spirits live? Mark
what follows, True indeed, he has wounded us, let us therefore go to him, that
he may heal us, and after two Days he will revive us. The Lord requires no more
of us than thus to come to him. Indeed after a Christian is in Christ, labor
for more and more sense of sin, that may drive you nearer and nearer unto
Christ. Yet know before you come to him, the Lord requires no more than thi^,
and as he requires no more than this, so it is his own Spirit (not our
Abilities) that must also work this; and thus much he will work, and does
require of all whom he purposes to save. If thou will not come to Christ to
take away thy sins, thou shall undoubtedly perish in them. If the Lord work
that sorrow, so as to be willing the Lord should take them away, thou shall be
undoubtedly saved from them.

If you would know what Measure of Willingness to have Christ take away sin is
required; you shall hear when we come to open the fourth Particular in the
Doctrine of Faith.

If you further ask, How the Spirit works this Loosening from Sin in the Work
of Compunction?

I answer, The Spirit of Christ works this by a double Act,

1. Moral. 2. Physical.
As in the Conversion of the soul by Faith unto God, the Spirit is not only a
moral Agent persuading, but also a supernatural Agent, physically working the
Heart to believe, by a divine and immediate Act; so in the Aversion of the soul
from sin, the Spirit does affect the Heart with fear and sorrow morally, but
this can never take away sin, as we see in Judas and Cain deeply affected and
afflicted in Spirit, and yet in their sin. And therefore the Spirit puts forth
its own Hand physically or immediately, and his own Arm brings Salvation to us,
by a further secret immediate Stroke, turning the iron Neck, cutting the iron
sinnews of sin, and so makes the Disunion or Separation. You think it is easy
to be willing that Christ should come and take away all your sins; I tell you
the omnipotent Arm of the Lord that instructed Jeremy in a smaller Matter, can
only instruct you here; both these Acts ever go together, according to the
Measure mentioned; the latter cannot be without the first, the first is in vain
without the latter.

Quest. But what Evil in Sin does the Spirit morally affect the Heart with, and
so physically turn it from Sin?

Answ. He affects the soul with it as the greatest Evil: by Sin I mean not as
considered without Death, (for at this Time the Soul is not so spiritual, as
that Sin, without Consideration of Death, and the Wrath due to it should affect
it) but Sin and Death, sin armed with Wrath, sin working Death, pricks the
Heart as the greatest Evil, and so lets out that Core at the Bottom, as may fit
the Soul for healing.

For,

1. If the Spirit make a Man feel sin truly, the Soul feels it as it is; it is
not the Name and Talk of the Danger of sin that trouble it, but the Spirit
(ever making Things real) loads the Soul with it indeed, and as it is; now it
is the greatest Evil, and therefore so it feels sin. Believe it, you never felt
sin indeed as it is, if you have not felt it thus.

2. Else no Man will prize Christ as the greatest Good, without which no Man
shall have him, Mat. 10.37.

3. Else a Man will live and continue in sin. If sin had been a greater Evil to
Pilate than the Loss of Caesar's Friendship, he would never have crucified
Christ. If sin had been a greater Evil to Jehu than the Loss of his Kingdom, he
had never kept up the two Calves. If sin were a greater Evil than Poverty,
Shame, Grief in this World, many a Professor would never lose Christ and a good
Conscience too, for a little Gain, Profit or Honor. Beloved, the great Curse
and Wrath of the Lord upon all Men in the World almost is this, that the
greatest Evils should be the least of all felt; and the smallest Evils most of
all complained of. What is Death that only separates thy Soul from thy Body, to
sin that separates God blessed for ever from thy Soul? ( Acts 3.16.) And
therefore the Lord Jesus will remove this Curse from whom he saves.

Quest. But you will say, What is that Evil the Soul sees at this Time, that
thus affects the Heart with it, as the greatest Evil? This is the last
Difficulty here.

Answ. There is a threefold Evil especially seen in sin:

1. The Evil of Torment and Anguish. 2. The Evil of Wrong and Injury to God. 3.
The Evil of Separation of the Soul from God.
The first may affect Reprobates, as Saul and Judas, who were sore distressed
when they felt the Anguish of Conscience by sin.

The second is only in those who are actually justified, called, and
sanctified, who lament sin as it is against God, and a God reconciled to them,
and as it is against the Life of God begun in them; and hence they cry out of
it as a Body of Death.

The third, the Elect feel at this first stroke and wound which the Spirit
gives them; the Anguish of sin indeed lies sore upon them, but this much more.
Christ is come to seek that which is lost, Luke 15.7. The Sheep is lost, when,
first, it is separated and gone from the Owner; secondly, when it knows not how
to return again, unless the Shepherd find it and carry it home: so that Soul is
properly and truly lost, that feels it self separated and gone from God,
knowing not how to return to him again, unless the Lord come and take it upon
his shoulders, and carry it in his Arms: This lies heavy upon it, viz. that it
is gone from God, and wholly separated from all Union to him, and Communion
with him. You may observe, John 16.9. that the Spirit convinces of Sin; how?
because they believe not in me, i. e. Because they shall see and feel
themselves quite separated from me; they shall hear of my Glory and Riches of
Mercy, and that Happiness which all that have me, shall and do enjoy; but they
shall mourn that they have no Part nor Portion in these Things; they shall
mourn that they live without me, and that they have lived so long without me.

I confess many other Considerations of the Evil of sin now come in, but this
is the main Channel where all the other Rivulets empty themselves. And hence it
is that the Soul under this stroke is in a state of seeking only, yet finds
nothing; it seeks God and Christ, and therefore feels a Want, a Loss of both by
sin; for the End of all the Fears, Terrors, Sorrows, etc. upon the Elect, is to
bring them back again to God, and into Fellowship with God, the only
Blessedness of Man. Now if the Soul ordained and made for this End should not
feel its present Separation from God by sin, and the Bitterness of the Evil of
it, it would never seek to return again to him as to his greatest Good, nor
desire ever to come into his Bosom again; for look as sin wounds the Soul, so
the Soul seeks for healing of it; if only the Torment of sin wound, ease of
Conscience from that Anguish will heal it: so if separation from God wounds the
Heart, only Union and Communion with God will heal it, and comfort it again.
The Lord Christ therefore having laid his Hand upon the Soul to bring it back
to himself first, and so to the Father, being designed to gather in all the
Outcasts of Israel, those he ever makes to feel themselves Outcasts, as cast
away out of God's blessed Sight and Presence, that so they may desire at last
to come home again: Reprobates, not made for this End, have not this sense of
sin, the Means of their return. And hence it is that the Souls of those God
saves, are never quiet until they come to God, and have Communion with him;
but they mourn for their Distance from him, and the Hiding of his Face, until
the Lord shine forth again; Whereas every one else though much troubled, yet sits
down contented with any little odd Thing that serves to quiet them for the
Time, before the Lord return to them, or they enter into their Rest, in that
ineffable Communion with him.

Let me now make Application of this, before I proceed to open the next
Particular of Humiliation.

USE 1. This may show us the great Mistake of two sorts;

1. Such as think there is no Necessity of any sense of Misery before the
Application of the Remedy or their Closing with Christ; because, say they,
where there is Sense there is Life: (all Sense and Feeling arising from Life)
and where there is Life, there is Christ already. And hence it is that they
would not have the Law first Preached in those Days, but the Gospel; the other
is to go round about the Bush.

I answer, that for my own Part this Doctrine (of seeing and feeling our Misery
before the Remedy) is so universally received by all solid Divines both at Home
and Abroad, that I meet with; and the contrary Opinion so cross to the Holy
Scriptures, and general Experience of the Saints, and the Preaching of the
other so abundantly sealed to be God's own Way by his rich Blessings on the
Labors of others of his Servants faithful to him herein; that were it not for
the sake of some weak and misled, I would not dare to question it; the Lord
himself so expressly speaking, that he came not to call the Righteous, but on
the contrary only to heal the sick, who know and feel their sickness chiefly by
the Law, Romans 3.20. Do thou think therefore, that there is spiritual Life
where ever there is any sense? Then I say, the Devils and Damned in Hell have
much spiritual Life, for they feel their Misery with a Witness.

As for the Preaching of the Gospel before the Law to show our Misery; it is
true, that the Gospel is to be looked at, as the main End; yet you must use the
Means, before you can come to the End, by the Preaching of the Law, or Misery
in despising the Gospel, End and Means have been ever good Friends, and you may
join them well together, you cannot sever them without Danger. I do observe
that the Apostles ever used this Method: Paul first proves Jews and Gentiles to
be under Sin, in almost the three first Chapters of the Romans, before he opens
the Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ. I do not observe that ever
there was so clear and manifest opening of Man's Misery, as by Christ and his
Apostles, who bro't in the clearest Revelations of the Remedy. I do not read in
Moses, or in all the Prophets, such full and plain Expressions of our Misery as
in the new Testament: The Worm that never dies; the Fire that never goes out;
the Wrath to come, etc. and therefore assuredly they though it this no Backdoor,
but Faith the Door to Christ, and this the Way to Faith. To say that a Man must
first have Christ and Life, before he feel any spiritual Misery, is to say,
that a Christian must first be healed, that he may be sick; cured, that he may
be wounded; receive the Spirit of Adoption, before he receive the Spirit of
Bondage; and that he may receive the Spirit of Bondage to fear again.

If Ministers shall preach the Remedy before they show Misery, woe to this Age,
that shall be deprived of those Blessings, which the former gloried in, and
blessed the Lord for. Mark those Men that deny the Use of the Law to lead unto
Christ, if they do not fall in Time to oppose some main Point of the Gospel.
For it is a righteous Thing but a heavy Plague, for the Lord to suffer such Men
to obscure the Gospel, that in their Judgments zealously dislike this Use of
the Law. You must preach the Remedy; that is true: But you must also first
preach the Woe and Misery of Men, or rather so mix them together, as the Hearts
of Hearers may be deeply affected with both; but first with their Misery. It
argues a great Consumption of the Spirit of Grace, when Christians lives are
preserved only by Alchermys and choice Cordials, Notions about Christ, nay,
choice ones too, or else the old and ordinary Food of the Country will not
down. I tell you, the main Wound of Christians is want of deep Humiliations and
Castings down; and if you believe it not now, it may be Pestilence, Sword, and
Famine shall teach you this Doctrine, when the Lord shall make these Things
wound you to the very Heart, and put you to your very Wits End, that were not,
that would not in season be wounded at the Heart with sin.

Are we troubled with too many wounded Consciences in these Times, that we are
so solicitous of Coining new Principles of Peace? What is every Man by Nature,
but a Kind of an infinite Evil? All the sins that fill Earth and Hell, are in
every one Man's Heart, for sin in Men is endless; and can not thou endure to
be cast down? Nothing is so vile as Christ to a Man not humbled, and can you
easily prize him, and taste him, without any casting down?

2. Such as think there is a Necessity of Sense of Misery by the Work of the
Law, before Christ can be received; but they think there is no such Feeling of
Misery, as has been mentioned; but that it is common to the Reprobate as to
the Elect, and consequently, that in sense of sin there is no such special Work
of the Spirit as separates the Soul from sin before it comes unto Christ, but
that this is done after the Soul is in Christ by Faith, viz. in Sanctification,
being first justified by Faith.

This is the Judgment of many holy and learned; and therefore so long as there
is no Disagreement in the Substance of this Doctrine, it should not trouble us;
only let it be considered, whether what is said, is not the Truth of Christ;
and if it be, let us not cast it aside. The Jewish Rabbis have a Speech at
this Day very frequent in their Writings, Non est in leg^ unica literula aqua
non magni suspensi sunt montes: It is much more true of every Truth; and if I
much mistake not, much depends upon the right Understanding of this Point.

That therefore,

1. There must be some Sense of Misery, before the Application of the Remedy.

2. That this Compunction or Sense of Misery is wro't by the Spirit of Christ,
not the Power of Man to prepare himself thereby for further Grace.

3. That these Terrors and Sorrows in the Elect do virtually differ from those
in the Reprobate, the one driving the Soul to Christ, the other not; these are
agreed on all Hands. The Question only is, Whether there is this farther stroke
of severing the Soul from sin, conjoined with the Terrors and Sorrows in the
Elect before their closing with Christ, which is not in the Reprobate? Or in
one Word, Whether there is not a special Work of the Spirit turning (at least
in order of Nature) the Soul from sin, before the Souls returns by Faith unto
Christ.

For the Affirmative I leave several Considerations,

1 Consi. That there is gracia actualis, or actual Grace, as well as
habitualis, or habitual Grace, Scho. orth. Spec. cap. 50.31, 35.
learned Ferrius makes a vast difference between them; and therefore to think
that there can be no Power of sin removed but by habitual or sanctifying Grace,
is unsound; for actual Grace may do it, the Spirit may take away sin mediately
by habitual Grace, and yet it can do it immediately also by an omnipotent Act,
by that which is called actual actuating or moving Grace; Christ can and must
first bind the strong Man, and cast him out by this working or actual Grace,
before he dwells in the House of Man's Heart, by habitual and sanctifying
Grace. The Gardiner's Knife may immediately cut off a Cyen from a Tree, thereby
taking away all its Power to grow there any more, before it has a Power to
bring forth any Fruit, which is wro't only by implanting it into another Stock:
New Creation (which is at first Conversion) may well be without habitual Graces
that are but Creatures.

2 Consi. Whether any Man since the Fall is a subject immediately capable of
sanctifying or habitual Grace; or whether any unregenerate Man is in a next
Disposition to receive such Grace; as the Air is immediately of Light, out of
which the Darkness is expelled by Light, and so the Habits of Grace do expel
the Habits and Power of Sin (say some) I suppose the Affirmative is most false,
and in near Affinity with some gross Points of Arminianism. Adam, in his pure
Naturals, and considered merely as a living Soul, was such a subject; like a
white Paper, fitted immediately to take the Impression of God's Image; but
since, by his Fall, sin is fallen like a mighty Blot upon the Soul, whereby a
Man not only wants Grace, as the dark Air does light, but also resists Grace,
John 14.17. Hence this Resistance must be first taken away, before the Lord
introduce his Image again. To say that a Man can of himself dispose himself
unto Grace, was Pelagianism in Aquinas his Time: Yet some Disposition is
necessary, says Ferrius; not unto actual Grace, or that which wro't upon a
Man, per modum actus, (as he says) but unto the Reception of habitual or
sanctifying Grace, it being in the Soul per modum formae, no Form being
introduced but into materiam dispositam, i. e. Matter fitted or prepared, or
into such a Vessel which is immediately capable of it.

There is in Man a double Resistance against Grace.

1. Of a holy Frame of Grace, by original Corruption, which is opposite to
original and renewed Holiness, or to this holy Frame.

2. Of the God of Grace himself when he comes to work it, Job 21.14. Ezekiel.
24.13.

The first is taken away in that which we call the Spirit of Sanctification,
after Faith; the second is taken away not only in the Act of it, (as by Terrors
it may be in Reprobates, Psalm. 66.2.) but in some Measure in the inward Root
and Disposition of it, only in the Elect) there being (as has been said) no
more Separation from sin, at this Time required, then so much as may make the
Soul come to the Lord to take it away, or at least not unwilling, nor resisting
the Lord, when he comes to do it himself.

3 Consi. Whether does not the Work of Union unto Christ, go before our
Communion with Christ? I suppose it is undeniable, that Union must be before
Communion; and that Union to Christ is a Work of Grace as peculiar to the
Elect, as Communion with him.

Now Justification and Sanctification are two Parts of our Communion with him,
and follow our Union, Romans 8.1. Our Union therefore must be before these, of
which there are two Parts, or rather two Things on our Part, necessarily
required to it:

1. Cutting off from the will Olive Tree, the old Adam. 2. Implanting into the
good Olive Tree, the second Adam. The first must go before the second; for
where there is perfect Resistance, there can be no perfect Union. But take a
Man g^^^^ing upon his own Root of Nature, there is no^^^^ but perfect
Resistance, Romans 8.7. And therefore that Resistance must first be taken away,
before the Lord draw the Soul to Christ, and by Faith impl^nt it in^o Christ.
In a Word, I see not how a Man can wholly resist God and Christ, and yet be
united unto him at the same Instant: And therefore the one (in order of Nature
at least) goes before the other: And therefore let any Man living prove his
Union to Christ, and to his Lust also if he can. You will believe in Christ,
many of you, and yet you will have your Whores, and Cups, and Lusts, and World
too, and oppose all the Means that would have you from th^se also. I tell you,
you shall find one Day how miserably deceived you have been herein. You cannot
serve God and Mammon. How can ye believe, says Christ, John 5.44. that seek
Honor one of another? If you can have Christ, and be ambitious too, take him;
but how can you believe till the Lord has broken you off from thence.

4 Consi. Whether Vocation (as peculiar to the Elect as Sanctification) does
not go before Justification and Glorification, Romans 8.38. Whether also there
are not two Things in effectual Vocation:

1. Is not Christ, that Good, the Term to which the Soul is firstly called?

2. Is not Sin and World, that Evil, the Term from which the Soul is called? I
suppose it is evident, that the Soul is effectually called, and therefore
actually and firstly turned from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan
unto God. First from Darkness, then unto Light; first from the Power of Satan,
then unto God; as is evident by the Apostles own Words, Acts 26.18. where he
methodically sets down the wonderful Works of Christ's Grace by his Ministry;
the first is to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power unto
God, which are the two Parts of Vocation, that they may receive Forgiveness of
Sins in Justification, (Vocation being a Means to this End) that they may
receive an Inheritance in Glorification among such as being justified are
sanctified also by Faith in his Name. The Apostle does not say, that he was to
return Men to Light and unto God, and so turn them from Darkness and from the
Power of Satan, (though this is true in some sense) but he was first to turn from
Darkness and Satan, and so to return them unto Light, and God in Christ. For
how is it possible to be turned unto Christ, and yet then also to be turned to
Sin and Satan? Does it not imply a Contradiction, to be turned toward Sin,
(which is ever from Christ) and yet to be turned toward Christ together? All
Divines affirm generally, that in the Working of Faith, the Lord makes the Soul
willing to have Christ, Psalm. 110.2, 3. but withal they affirm, that of
unwilling he makes willing, and therefore it follows, that the Lord must first
remove that Unwillingness, before it can be willing, it being impossible to be
both willing and unwilling together.

5 Consi. Whether the Cause of all that counterfeit Coin and Hypocrisy in this
professing Age, does not arise from this Root, viz. Not having this Wound at
first, but only some Trouble for sin without separation from it, sore Throws
without Deliverance from sin? Is not this the Death of most, if not all wicked
Men living? How many are there that clasp about Christ, and yet prove Enemies
to the Cross of Christ; fall from Christ scandalously or secretly afterward?
What is the Reason of it? Certainly if the Lord had cut them off from their
sin, they had never fallen to everlasting Bondage in sin again; but there the
Spirit of God forsook them, the Lord not owning so much Love to them. Consider
seriously why the stony and thorny Ground Hearers, Mat. 13. came to nothing in
their Growth of seeming Faith and sanctification; Was the Fault in the seed? No
verily, but only in the Ground; the one was broken, but not deep enough, the
other was broken deep, but not through enough, the Roots of Thorns choked
them, the Lusts and Cares of the World were not destroyed first, and therefore
they destroyed that Ground.

I conclude therefore with that of Jeremy, Jer. 4.3, 4. Break up your fallow
Grounds, seek to the Lord to break them for you, and sow not among Thorns, take
heed of such Brokenness which removes not the Thorns of sinful secret
stubbornness, lest the Wrath of the Lord break out against you, and burn that
none can quench it. Do not cut off John Baptist's Head, you that can be content
to hear him gladly, and to do ma^y Things, but he must not touch your Herodias,
and make a Divorce there, but suffer him to come in the Spirit and Power of
Eliah, nay, of Christ Jesus, to beat down your Mountains, fill up your Valleys,
make your crooked rough Ways smooth, that you may see the Glory of the Lord
Jesus, without which he shall be ever hid from you. Cry you faithful Servants
of the Lord, that all Flesh is Grass, and all the Glory of Man, of Sin, of
World, is a withering Flower; that the Lord Jesus may be revealed ever fresh,
and sweet, and precious in the Eyes of the Saints.

The Evidence of this Truth in the general, put blessed and learned P^mble upon
another Way; for when he perceived (as himself confesses) that it is the
Doctrine of all orthodox Divines, viz. that actual Faith is never wro't in the
Soul, till beside the supernatural Illumination of the Mind, the Will be also
first freed in Part from its natural Perverseness, (God making all Men of
unwilling, willing) hereupon he concludes that this is done by the Spirit of
Sanctification, and one supernatural Quality of Holiness universally infused in
all the Powers of the Soul at once; so that the Spirit instantly first
sanctifies us, and puts Life in us; then it acts in Sorrow for, and Detestation
of Sin, and so we come actually to believe. And because he foresaw the Blow,
viz. that in this Way Christians are sanctified before they be justified; he
answers, yes, we are justified declaratively after this.

Others (who follow him) answer more roundly, viz. that we are sanctified
before we are really and actually justified, and herein differ from him.

Now when it is objected against this, viz. that our Vocation is that which
goes before our Justification, Sanctification being a Part of Glorification
following after, Romans 8.30. Hereupon some others (treading in his Steps)
affirm, that Vocation is the same with Sanctification, and not comprehended
under Glorification.

Others perceiving the Evil of this Error, viz. to place Sanctification before
Justification, good Fruits before a good Tree, they do therefore deny any
saving Work, whether of Vocation or Sanctification, before Justification. And
hence on the other extreme, they do place a Christian's Justification, before
his Faith in Vocation, or Holiness in his Sanctification: so that by this last
Opinion a Christian is not justified by Faith, (which was Paul's Phrase) but
rather (as he said wittily and wisely) faithed by his Justification. Before I
come to clear the Truth in these spiritual Mysteries; let this only be
remembered, viz. That Sanctification, which Pemble calls our spiritual Life,
may be taken two Ways:

1. Largely. 2. Strictly.
1. Largely, for any Awakenings of Conscience, or Acts of the Spirit of Life,
and so it is true, we are quickened by these Acts, and so in a large sense
sanctified first.

2. Strictly, for those Habits of the Life of Holiness, which are opposite to
the Body of Death in us; and that we are not first sanctified before we are
justi^^ed in this Sense, we shall manifest by and by. Only let me begin to show
the Error of the last Opinion first, viz. That a Christian is not justified
before Faith, or Vocation, may appear thus:

1. It is professedly cross to the whole Current of Scripture, which says, We
are justified by Faith, and therefore not before Faith: and to say that the
Meaning of such Phrases is, that we are justified declaratively by Faith, or to
our Sense and Feeling in fo^^ conscientiae, is a mere Device; for our
Justification is opposed to the State of Unrighteousness and Condemnation going
before, which Condemnation is not only declarative, and in the Court of
Conscience, but real, and in the Court of Heaven: for so says the Scripture
expressly, John 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already: and Verse 36.
The Wrath of God abides on him: And Gal. 3.22. The Scripture which is the
Sentence in God's Court) has concluded all under Sin. Hence a second Argument
arises.

2. If a Man be justified before Faith, then an actual Unbeliever is subject to
no Condemnation; but this i^ expressly cross to the Letter of the Text, He that
believe ^ot, is cond^mned already, John 3.18. and the Wrath of God does lie
upon him. The Subjects of Non-Condemnation are those that be in Christ, by
Faith, Romans 8.1. not out of Christ by Unbelief. Romans 11.20. there is indeed a
merited Justification by Christ's Death, and a virtual or exemplary
Justification in Christ's Resurrection, as in our Head and Surety; and both
these were before not only our Faith, but our very Being; but to say that we
are therefore actually justified before Faith, because our Justification was
merited before we had Faith, gives us a just Ground of affirming that we are
actually sanctified while we are in a State of Nature unsanctified, Ephesians. 2.1.
because our Sanctification was merited by Christ before we had any Being in him.

We must indeed be first made good Trees by Faith in Christ's Righteousness,
before we can bring sorth any good Fruits of Holiness, John 15.3, 4, 5. God
makes us not good Trees without being in Christ by Faith, no more than we are
bad Trees in contracting Adam's Guilt without our being first in him; God gives
us first his Son (offered in the Gospel, and received by Faith) and then gives
us all other Things with him; he does not justify us without giving us his Son;
but having first given him, gives us this also.

2. That Sanctification does not go before Justification, may appear thus:

1. If Guilt of Adam's Sin go before original Pollution, Romans 5.12. then
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness before renewed Sanctification.

2. To place Sanctification before Justification, is quite cross to the
Apostle's Practice, (which is our Pattern) who first sought to be found in
Christ, Phil. 3.9. (in the Work of Union) not having his own Righteousness in
the Work of Justification (which in order follows that) that he may then know
him in the Power of his Death and Resurrection in Sanctification (here comes in
Sanctification) if by any Means he might attain to the Resurrection of the dead
in Glorification, (the last of all.)

3. This is quite cross to the Apostle's Doctrine, which makes Justification
the Cause of Sanctification, and therefore must needs go before it, Romans 5. As
Sin goes before spiritual and eternal Death, so Righteousness goes before
spiritual Life in Sanctification, and eternal Life in Glory: The Lord holds
forth Christ in the Gospel first as our Propitiation, Romans 3.24. and then in
comes dying to Sin, and living to God in Sanctification, Chap. 6.1. Holiness is
the End of our actual Reconciliation, Col. 1.21, 22.

4. If Sanctification go before Justification by Faith, then a Christian's
Communion with Christ, goes before his Union to him by Faith; but our Union is
the Foundation of Communion, and it is impossible there should be Communion
without some precedent Union. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made Righteousness and
Sanctification; unto whom? read the Beginning of the Verse, and then you shall
see, it is only to those that be in Christ, which is by Faith.

Let none say here (as some do) that we have Union to Christ, first by the
Spirit, without Faith, in order going before Faith: For understanding of which,
let us a little consider of our Union unto Christ; our Union to Christ is not
by the essential Presence of the Spirit, for that is in every Man, as the
Godhead is every where, in whom we live and move. This is common to the most
wicked Man, nay, to the vilest Creature in the World. Hence it follows that our
Union is by some Act of the Spirit peculiar to the Elect (who only shall have
Communion with Christ) working some real Change in the Soul, (for of real, not
relative Union I now speak) this Act cannot be those first Acts of the Spirit
of Bondage, (for they are common unto Reprobates) they are therefore such Acts
as are essential unto the Nature of Union. Now look as Disunion, is the
Disjunction or Separation of diverse Things one from another; so Union is the
Conjunction or joining of them together, that were before severed. Hence that
Act of the Spirit in uniting us to Christ, can be nothing else but the bringing
back the Soul unto Christ, or the Conjunction of the Soul unto Christ, and into
Christ, by bringing it back to him, that before this lay like a dry Bone in the
Valley separated from him. Thus, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined, or (as the
Word signifies) glewed to the Lord, is one Spirit with him. The Spirit
therefore brings us to the Lord Christ, and so we are in him. Now the Coming of
the Soul to Christ, what is it but Faith? John 6.35. Our Union therefore is by
Faith, not without it: for by it only we that were once separated from him by
Sin, and especially by Unbelief, Heb. 3.12. are now come not only unto him, as
Iron unto the Lodestone, John 6.37. but (which is most near) into him, as
Branches into the Vine, and so grow one with him; and hence those Phrases in
Scripture to believe in Christ, or into Christ, I speak not this as if we were
united to Christ without the Spirit on his Part; (for the Conjunction of Things
several must be mutual, if it be firm) I only show that we are not united
before Faith by the Spirit unto Christ; but that we are by Faith (wro't by the
Spirit) whereby on our Part we are first conjoined unto him: And then on his
Part he by the Person of the Spirit is most wonderfully united unto us. The
Spirit puts forth Variety of Acts in the Soul; as it acts us to good Works,
it is the Spirit of Obedience; as it infuseth Habits of Grace, so it is the
Spirit of Sanctific^^^^^; as it assists us continually, and guides us to our
End, and witnesses Favor, it is the Spirit of Adoption; as it works fears of
Death and Hell, it is the Spirit of Bondage; but as it draws us from Sin to
Christ, so it is the Spirit of Union; and therefore to imagine Union before and
without Faith by the Spirit, is but a Spirit indeed, which when you come to
feel it, you shall find it a Nothing, without Flesh, or Bones, or Sinews. As
our Marriage Union to Christ must have Consent of Faith on our Part, wro't by
the Spirit, or else the Lord Jesus is a vain Suitor to us; so now the Spirit on
Christ's Part must apprehend our Faith; and dwell in us, who otherwise shall
suddenly go a Whoring from him, 1 Pet. 1.5. Ephesians. 3.17.

3. That Vocation is not all one with Sanctification, may appear thus:

1. Vocation is before Justification, Romans 8.30. But Sanctification is not
before Justification, as we have proved, and therefore they are not the same.

2. Sanctification is the End of Vocation, 1 These. 4.7. therefore it is not the
same with it.

3. Faith is the principal Thing in Vocation: the first Part of it being God's
Call, the second Part being our Answer to that Call, or in Coming at that Call,
Jer. 3.22. Now Faith is no Part of Sanctification strictly taken, because it is
the Means and Instrument of our Justification and Sanctification, Acts 26.18.
Our Hearts are said to be purified by Faith, Acts 15.9. not our Lives only in
the Acts of Holiness and Purity, but our Hearts in the habitual Frame of them.
Gal. 2.20. I live by the Faith of the Son of God, says Paul. We pass from
Death to Life, John 5.24. therefore it is no Part of our spiritual Life: You
will not come to me (which is Faith) that you may have Life, John 5.40. and
6.50, 51. therefore Faith is the instrumental Means of Life, and therefore no
Part of our Life: As Faith comes by Hearing, and therefore Hearing is no Part
of Faith; so Justification comes by Faith, and therefore is no Part of
Sanctification: All our Life both of Justification and Sanctification is laid
up in Christ our Head; this Life according to God's great Plot shall never be
had but Coming to Christ for it, Heb. 7.25. else Grace and Christ should not be
so much honored, Romans 4.16. It is of Faith, that it might be of Grace;
Sanctification therefore is the Grace applied by Faith, Faith the Grace
applying; by Coming to Christ for it, we have it; and therefore have it not,
when first we come.

I am sorry to be thus large in less Practical Matters; yet I have thought it
not unuseful, but very comfortable to a poor Passenger, not only to know his
Journey's end, and the Way in general to it, but the several Stadia or Towns h^
is orderly to pass through; there is much Wisdom of God to be seen not only in
his Work, but in his Manner and Order of Working; for want of which, I see many
Christians in these Days fall very foully into Erroneous Apprehensions in their
Judgments, the immediate ground of many Errors in Practice; the Objections made
against what has been delivered, are for the Principal of them Answered; the
main end (my Beloved) of Propounding these Things is, that you would look
narrowly to your Union, Oh take heed you miss not there: If you close with
Christ, believe in Christ, and yet not cut off your Sin, viz. that Spirit of
Resistance of Christ, you are utterly and eternally undone. This is the
Condemnation of the World, not that Men love Darkness wholly, and hate Light,
but that they love Darkness more than Light; not that the unclean Spirit is not
gone out, but that he is not so cast out, as never to return again; the Wound
of all Men, yea the best of Men that profess Christ, and yet indeed out of
Christ, lies in this: they were never Severed from their Sin by all their
Prayers, Tears, Fears, Sorrows; and hence they never truly come to Christ; and
hence Perish in their Sin.

Trouble me no more therefore in asking Whether a Christian is in a State of
Happiness or Misery in this Condition? I Answer, he is preparatively Happy, he
is now passing from Death to Life, though not as yet wholly passed: nor yet,
whether there is any saving Work before Union? I Answer, No; for what is said,
is one necessary Ingredient to the working up of our Union, as cutting off the
Branch from the old Stock, is necessary to the Ingrafting it into the new;
indeed, without Faith it is impossible to please God; nor do I say that this
Work does please: i. e. it does not pacify God, (for that is proper to Christ's
perfect Righteousness received by Faith) yet as it is a Work of his own Spirit
upon us, it is pleasing to him; (as the after-work of Sanctification is) though
it neither does pacify him; nor do I see how this Doctrine is any way opposite
to the free offer of Grace, and Christ, because it requires no more Separation
from Sin, than that which drives them unto Christ; nay, which is less, that
makes them (by the Power of the Spirit) not Resist, but Yield to Christ; that
he may come unto them and draw them: You cannot Repent nor Convert yourselves;
Be converted therefore, says Peter, Acts 3.19. that ye may receive Remission
of Sins; and in this offer the Spirit works; and verily he that can truly
receive Christ without that sense of Misery as Separates him from his Sin, (as
explained to you) let him believe notwithstanding all that which is said; and
the God of Heaven speak Peace to him; his Faith shall not trouble me, if he be
sure it shall not one Day deceive himself.

USE 2. Of Lamentation for the Hardness of Men's Hearts in these Times: As it
is said the Lord Jesus mourned when he saw the Hardness of the People's Hearts,
Mark 3.5. Are there not some so far from this, as that they take Pleasure in
their Sins, they are Sugar under their Tongues, as sweet as Sleep, nay, as
their Lives? And you come to pull away their Limbs when you come to pluck away
their Sins: Though they have broke Sabbaths, neglected Prayer, despised the Word,
hated and mocked at Saints, been stubborn to their Parents, cursed and swore,
(which made Peter go out and weep bitterly) though lustful and wanton, (which
broke David 's Bones) though guilty of more Sins than there be Motes in the Sun
or Stars in Heaven, though their Sins be Crimson, and fill Heaven with their Cry,
and all the Earth with their Burden, yet they mourn not; never did it one Hour
together; nay, they cannot do it, because they will not: If you were weary and
laden, where are your unutterable Groans? If wounded and bruised, when are
your dolorous Complaints? If sick, where is your Enquiry for a Physician? If
sad, where are your Tears, in the Day, in the Night, Morning and Evening, alone
by your selves, and in Company with others? Oh how great is the Wrath of God,
hardening so many Thousands at this Day! Whence comes it that Christ is not
prized, but from this Senselessness? Name any Reason, why the blessed Gospel of
Peace, and all the sweet Promises of Life are under-valued, but from hence: And
what do you hereby poor Creatures, but only aggravate your Sins, and make those
that are little exceeding great in the Eyes of God? Whence is it that you
treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, Romans 2.2, 3, 4, 5. This Hardness is
that which blunts the Edge of God's Ordinances, whence God's poor Ministers sit
sorrowful in their Closets, seeing all God's Seed lost upon bare Rocks: Oh this
is the Condition of many a Man, and which is most fearful, the Means which
should make the Heart sensible, make it more proud and unsensible. Tire, and
Sydon, and Sod^m, are more fit to mourn, than Chorazin and Capernaum that have
enjoyed humbling Means long. Nay, how many are there that mourn out their
Mournings, confess out their Confessions, and by their own Humiliations grow
more senseless afterward? Did we ever live in a more impenitent secure Age? We
shall seldom meet with one broken with Sin, but how few are broken from Sin
also? And hence it is many a tall Cedar that were s^t down in the Table Book
for converted Men, once much humbled, and now comforted; stay but a few Years,
you shall see more dangerous Sins of a second Growth; one turns Drunkard,
another Covetous, another Proud, another a Sectary, another a very dry Leaf, a
very Formalist; another full of humorous Opinions, another laden with
scandalous Lusts: Woe to you that lament not now; for you shall mourn. Do thou
think that Christ shall ever wipe off thy Tears that sheddest none at all? Do
thou think to reap in Joy, that sowest not with these Showers? Verily God will
make his Word good, Prove. 29.1. He that hardens his own Heart, shall perish
suddenly; hear this you secure sorrowless Sinners, if ever God's Hand be
stretched out suddenly against thee, in blasting thy Estate, snatching away thy
Children, the Wife of thy Bosom, the Husband of thy Delight; in staining thy
Name, vexing thee with Debts and Crosses, sharp and sore, or lingering
Sicknesses; know that all these come upon thee for a hard Heart: But Oh mourn
for it now, you Parents, Children, Servants, the Tokens of Death are upon you;
desire the Lord to break your Hearts for you: Lie under God's Hammer, be not
above the Work, and suffer the Lord to take away that which grieves him most,
even thy stony Heart, because it grieves thee least: Meditate much of thy woeful
Condition, chew the bitter Pill; remember Death and rotting in the Grave, that
many are now in Hell for thy Sins, that Christ must die, or thou die for the
least Sin; remember how patient and long-suffering the Lord has been to thee,
and how long he has groaned under thy Burden, that it may be, though he would,
yet he cannot bear the Load long: Let these Things be mused on, that thy Heart
may be at last sorrowful before it be too late. But Oh the sad Estate of many
with us, that can mourn for an Evil, except it be for the greatest, Sin and
Death, and Wrath that lie upon them.

USE 3. Of Exhortation: Labor for this Sense of Misery, for this Spirit of
Compunction: How can you believe in Christ, that feel not your Misery without
him? A broken Christ cannot do thee good, without a broken Heart: Be afflicted
and mourn, ye Sinners, turn your Laughter into Mourning, tremble to think of
that Wrath, which burns down to the Bottom of Hell, and under which the eternal
Son of God sweat Drops of Blood: Great Sins which thou know thou art guilty
of, cause great Guilt, and great Hardness of Heart, and therefore are seldom
forgiven or subdued without great Affliction of Spirit; they have loaded the
Lord long, they must load thee. Little Sins are usually slighted, and
extenuated, and therefore the Lord accounts them great; and therefore thy Soul
must be in Bitterness for them, before the Lord will pass them by: It is not
every Trouble that will serve the Turn; look that it be such as separates thy
Soul from thy Sin, or else it will separate between thy Soul and God. I know it
is not in your Power to break your own Hearts, no more than to make the Rocks
to bleed, yet remember he that bids thee cast up and prepare the Way of the
Lord, he has promised that every Mountain shall be brought low, and the
crooked Ways made plain, and the rough smooth, and the Valleys filled: He only
can do it for thee, and will do it for some, it may be for thee; he that broke
the Heart of Manasseth and Paul after their Blood and Blasphemies, when they
never desired any such Thing, he can break thine much more when thou art
desiring him to do it for thee; here are many of you that fear you were never
humbled nor burdened enough; I say fear it still, fear least there be a Stone
in the Bottom, not so as to discourage and drive thy Heart from Christ, but so
as to feel a greater Need of his Grace to soften thy Heart, and to take thy
Senselessness away: The Lord does purposely command thee to plough up the
fallow Ground, that thou might feel thy Impotency so to do, and come to him
to take it away: Every Thing will harden thee more and more, until the Lord
come and take thy stony Heart away by his own Hand: All God's Kindnesses will
make thee more bold to sin, and all God's Judgments more fierce and obstinate
in sin, unless the Lord put to his Hand; if Pharaoh's Heart be softened for a
Time, yet it will grow hard again, if the Lord take it not away; the Means
therefore for the to get this Compunction is, 1. To feel the Evil of thy hard
Heart; no surer Token of Reprobation than Hardness, if continued in; especially
for thy Heart to grow hard under or after softening Means, at it was in
Pharaoh. 2. To look up to the Lord in all Ordinances, that he would take it
away.

USE 4. Have you not great Cause of abundant Thankfulness, into whose Hearts
the Lord has let in Fears and Sorrows, concerning your Estates? The blind
World looks upon all Troubles of Conscience as Temptations of the Devil to
Despair, and the very Way to run mad; but to consider what the Lord has done
for you that have such: What if the Lord had left you without all Feeling, as
those in Ephesians. 4.19. What if the Lord had smitten you with a Spirit of Slumber,
as those, Romans 11.8. would not your Estate have been then lamentable? And have
you no Hearts to acknowledge his unspeakable Goodness in awakening of you, in
shaking the very Foundations? Do thou think that any ever had such a hard
Heart as thou have? Do not say so in secret before the Lord sometimes? Oh
then what rich Grace is this to give thee any Sense and Feeling of thy Sin and
Danger by it, though it be never so little in thine Eyes! Some think these
Terrors are a Judgment; it is true, if they were merely imaginary, or worldly
and desperate; but says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.7. I thank God I made you sorry.
Suppose thy Sorrow should be only in Regard of the Punishment of Sin, yet this
is the Lord's Goodness to make thy Heart so far sensible; that once did go like
a Beast to the Slaughter, fearing no Danger at all; the very Means to prize
Favor from God, is to feel Wrath, (as well as Sin) and the very Reason why the
Lord has let thee feel thy Punishment heavy, is, that thy Soul might feel the
Evil of Sin, by considering that if the Fruits be so bitter, what then is the
Cause? Jer. 30.15. Be not therefore weary of thy Burden, so as to think the
Lord powers out his Vengeance on thee while thy Trouble remains; Oh consider
that this is the Hand of the Lord Jesus, and that he is now about to save thee,
when he comes to work any Compunction in thee; especially such, as whereby he
does not only cut thy Heart with Fears and Sorrows, but cut thee off from thy
Sin; so far only as humbles thee and drives thee to the Lord Christ to take
them away. And so I come to the third Particular of Humiliation.

SECT. IV. The third Act of Christ's Power, which is Humiliation.
THE Lord Jesus having thus broken the Heart by Compunction, is not like a
foolish Builder that leaves off his Work ^^fore he has fully finished it, and
th^^^fore having thus wounded a poor Sinner ^ goes on to humble him also; for
though in a large (...) a wounded contrite Sinner is an humble Sinner; yet
strictly taken there is a great Difference between them; and therefore he is
said to dwell with the contrite and humble, Isai. 57.16. i. e. not only with
those that be wounded with Sin, but humbled for Sin; although it is certain the
Soul is seldom or never effectually wounded, but it is also humbled at the same
Time. A Man may be wounded sore even unto Death, and yet the Pride of the Man
is such that he will not fall down before him that smites him: so it is with
many a poor Sinner, the Lord has sorely wounded him that he will resist no
more, yet he will rather fly to his Duties to heal him, or die alone and sink
under his Discouragements, than stoop. O Beloved, Man must down before the Lord
Christ will take him up: and therefore in Isai. 40.5, 6, 7. The Glory of the
Lord is promised to be revealed: But what Means must be used for this End? Cry,
says the Lord: What shall I cry? says he; the Lord answers, that all Flesh is
Grass, and that the Glory of it fades, and that the People are this Grass, i.
e. not only that Men's Sins are vile, but that Themselves also are Grass; nay,
their Glory and Excellency is withering and fading; and therefore not only
Mountains must be pulled down, but all Flesh, and the Glory of it wither,
before the Lord shall be revealed.

I shall briefly open these four Things:

1. What is this Humiliation. 2. What Need there is of it. 3. What Means the
Lord uses to work it. 4. What Measure of it is here required.
1. What is this Humiliation?

Answ. Look as Pride is that Sin, whereby a Man ^^^ceited of some Good in
himself, and seeking some ^^cellency to himself, exalts himself above God; so
Humiliation (in this Place) is that Work of the Spirit whereby the Soul being
broken off from Self-Conceit, and Self-Confidence in any Good it has or does,
submits unto, or lies under God, to be disposed of as he pleases, I Pet.
5.6. Lev. 26.41. That look as Compunction cuts the Sinner off from that Evil
that is in him, so Humiliation cuts it off from all high Conceits and
Self-Confidence of that Good which is in him, or which he seeks might be in
him, and so the Soul is abased before God.

2. What Need or Necessity is there of this?

Because

Answ. 1. When the Lord has wounded the Hearts of his Elect, this is the
immediate Work of their Hearts, (if the Lord prevent them not by his Grace, as
many Times he does) they look to what Good they have, or if they find little or
none, then they seek for some in themselves, that thereby they may heal their
Wound, because they think thus, that as their Sins have provoked God to anger
against them, so if now they can reform and leave those Sins, or if not, repent
and be sorry for them; if now they pray, and hear, and do as others do, they
have some Hope that this will heal their Wound, and pacify the Lord toward
them; when they see there is no Peace in a sinful Course, they will therefore
try if there be any to be found in a good Course: And look as Adam when he saw
his own Shame and Nakedness, hid himself from God in the Bushes, and covered
his Nakedness with Fig Leaves; so the Soul not being able to endure to see its
own Nakedness and Vileness, not knowing Christ Jesus, and he being far to seek,
(...) therefore labor to cover his Wickedness and Sinfulness which he feels,
by some of these Fig-Leave^ And hence, Micah 6.7. they enquire wherewith (...)
should come before the Lord, should they bring Rivers of Oil, or Thousands of
Lambs, or the first born of their Body to remove the Sin of their Soul? Paul
did account these Duties Gain, Phil. 3.7. and set them at a high Rate, because
he thought that God did so himself: When the Lord has wounded the Soul, the
first Voice it speaks, is, What shall I do? Do; says Conscience, leave thy
Sins, do as well as others, do with all thy Might and Strength, pray, hear, and
confer, God accepts of good Desires, and requires no more of any Man but to do
what he can. Hence the Soul plies both Oars, though against Wind and Tide, and
strives, and wrestles with his sins, and hopes one Day to be better, and here
he rests. And observe it, look as Sin in his greatest Evil, so the casting away
of his Sins, and seeking to be better, is very sweet to him; and being so
sweet, rests in what he has, and seeks for what he wants, and so hopes all
will be well one Day, and so stays here; although (God knows) it be without
Christ, nor cannot rest on him, though he has heard of him a thousand Times. And
hence it is if they cannot do any Thing to ease themselves, then their Hearts
sink, or it may be quarrel with God, that he makes them no better. But,
Beloved, it is wonderful to see how many Times Men rest in a little they have
and do.

2. But while it is thus with the Soul, he is incapable of Christ; for he that
trusts to other Things to save him, or makes himself his own Savior, or rests
in his Duties without a Savior, he can never have Christ to save him. Romans
9.32. it is said, the Jews lost Christ's Righteousness, because they sought it
not by Faith, but sought Salvation by their own Righteousness. He that makes
Flesh his Arm, (as all Duties and Endeavors of Man be, when trusted to) the
Lord says, Cursed be that Man, Jer. 17.5, 6. Only the Lord does not leave his
Elect here; he that is married unto the Law, Romans 7. cannot be matched unto
Christ, till he be first divorced, not from the Duties themselves, but from
trusting to them, and resting in them. And therefore says Paul, Gal. 2.19. I
through the Law am dead to it, that I might live unto God. He that trusts to
Riches, cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, no more than a Camel through a
Needle's Eye, because it is too big for so narrow a Room: so he that trusts
to his Duties and Abilities, is too big to enter in by Christ; the Lord must
cut off this Spirit, and lay it low, and make it stoop as vile before God,
before it can have Christ in this Estate; the Lord must not only cut it off
from this Self-Confidence in Duties, but also so far forth as that the Soul may
lie under God, to be disposed of as he pleases. And the Reason is, because
such a Soul is unwilling to stoop, is unhumbled; and he that is so, does not
only on his Part resist God, but the Lord also resists him, Jam. 4.7, 8. And
hence you shall observe, many a one has lain long under Distress of
Conscience, because they have either rested in their Duties, which could not
quiet, or because they have not so cast off their Confidence in them, so as to
lie down quietly before God, that he may do what he will with them; being so
long Objects of God's Resistance, not of his Grace.

3. By what Means does the Lord work this?

Answ. In general, by the Spirit immediately acting upon the Soul; but after a
Christian is in Christ he has, by the Habit of Humility, and the Virtue of
Faith, some Power to humble himself: But now (...) Spirit of Christ does it
immediately by its own omnipotent Hand; else the proud Heart would never down:
For we are first Created in Christ (which is by God's Omnipotent immediate Act)
unto Good Works, before we do from ourselves, or by the Power of Faith, put
forth Good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. These Acts of Self-confidence may not be stirring
in all Christians; but in all Men there is this Frame of Spirit, never to come
to Christ, if they can make any thing else serve to heal them or save them; and
therefore the Spirit cuts off this sinful Frame in part in all the Elect; he
hews the Roughness and Pride of Spirit off, that it may lie still upon the
Foundation it is now prepared for. Now though the Spirit works this, yet it is not
without the Word; the Word it works chiefly by, is the Law, Gal 3.19. I through
the Law am dead to it, (i. e. from seeking any Life or Help from it) that I
might live unto God.

Now the Law does this by a fourfold Act,

1. By discovering the secret Corruptions of the Soul in every Duty, which it
never saw before; it once though it, I shall perish for my Sin, if I continue
therein, without Confession of them, or Sorrow for them; but it also did think
that this Confession, Sorrow, and Trouble for Sin will serve to save it, and
make God to accept of it: But the Law (while the Soul is earnestly striving
against his Sin) discovering that in all these there is nothing but Sin, even
secret Sins it did never see before, hereupon it begins thus to think, Can
these be the Means of saving me, which being so sinful, cannot but be the very
Causes of condemning of me? I know I must perish for the le^st Sin, and now I
see that in all I do, I can do nothing else but sin. What made Paul alive
without the Law? You shall find, Romans 7.7. it was because he did not know that
Lust, or the secret Concupisences and first Risings of the Soul to sin, were
Sin; he saw not these secret Evils in all that which he did: And hence he
rested in his Duties, as one alive without Christ: But the Lord by discovering
this, let him see what little Cause he had to lift up his Hand, for any good he
did: so it is here, when the Soul sees that all its Righteousness is a
menstruous Cloth, polluted with sin: now those Duties which, like Reeds, it
trusted to before, run into the Hand, nay, Heart of a poor Sinner; and
therefore now it feels little Cause of resting on them any longer: Now it sees
the infinite Holiness of God by the exceeding Spiritualness of the Law, it
begins to cry out, How can I stand or appear before him with such continual
Pollutions?

2. By irritating or stirring up of original Corruption, in making more of that
to appear than ever before; that if the Soul thinks, all I do is defiled with
sin, yet my Heart is good, and so it rests there; the Lord therefore stirs that
Dunghill, and lets it see a more hellish Nature than ever before, in that the
holy and blessed Command of God (to its feeling) makes it worse, more
rebellious, more averse from God: Romans 7.9, 10, 11. When the Commandment came,
Sin revived, says Paul, and that which was for Life was Death to him, Sin
taking occasion by the Law; and hence Paul came to be slain and die to all his
Self-Confidence. It was one of Luther's first Positions in opposing the Pope's
Indulgences, that Lex and voluntas sunt duo aversarii sine gratia
irreconciliabiles: For the Law and Man's Will meeting together, the one holy,
the other currupt, make fierce Opposition when the Soul is under any lively
Work of the Law; and by this Irritation of the Law, the Lord has this End in
his Elect, to make them feel what wretched Hearts they have, because that which
is in it self a Means of Good, makes them (through Man's Corruption) more vile to
their own Feeling than ever before; and hence comes those sad Complaints on a
Soul under the humbling Hand of Christ, I am now worse than ever I was, I grow
every Day worse and worse, I have lost what once I had, I could once pray, and
seek God with Delight, and never well, but when one Duty was done, to be in
another; but now I am Worse, all that Joy and Sweetness in seeking of him, and
in holy Walking, is gone; I could once mourn for sin, but now a hard Heart
takes hold of me, that I have not so much as a Heart to any Thing that is good,
nor to shed a Tear for the greatest Evil. It is true, I confess you may grow
(to your Feeling) worse and worse, and it is fit you should feel it, that the
Lord hereby might pull down your proud Heart, and make you lie low; it is the
Lord's glorious Wisdom to wither all your Flowers, which refreshed you without
Christ, that you might feel a Need of him; and therefore I say the Lord pulls
away all those broken Planks the Soul once floated and rested upon, that the
Soul may sink in a holy Despair of any Help from any Good it has; the Lord
shakes down all Building on a sandy Foundation: And then the Soul cries out, It
is ill resting here.

3. By loading, tiring, and wearying the Soul by its own Endeavors, until it
can stir no more; for this is in every Man by Nature; when he sees that all he
does is sinful, and all he has, his Heart and Nature to be most sinful; yet he
will not yet come out of himself, because he hopes though he be for the present
thus vile, yet he hopes for future Time his Heart may grow better, and himself
do better than now; and hence it is that he strives, and seeks, and endeavors
to his utmost to set up himself again, and to gain Cure to all his Troubles by
his Duties: Now the Law, whose Office is to command, but not to give Strength,
and the Spirit that should give Strength withdrawing it self, because it knows
the Soul would rest therein without Christ; hence it comes to pass that the
Soul feeling it self to labor only in the Fire and Smoke, and to be still as
miserable and sinful as ever before, hereupon it is quite tired out, and sits
down weary, not only of its Sin, but of its Work, and now cries out, I see now
what a vile and undone Wretch I am, I can do nothing for God or for my self,
only I can sin and destroy my self; all that I am is vile, and all that I do is
vile, I now see that I am indeed poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked; and
the Truth is, Beloved, here comes in the greatest Dejections of Spirit; for
when the Lord smites the Soul for sin, it hopes that by leaving of sin and
doing better it may do well; but when it sees that there is no Hope here of
healing the Breach between God and itself, now it falls low indeed: And I take
this to be the true Meaning of Matthew. 11.28. Ye that labor, i. e, you that are
wearied in your own Way, in seeking rest to your Souls by your own hard Labor
or Works (as the Greek Word signifies) and are tired out therein* and so are
now laden indeed with Sin, and the heavy Pressure of that, finding no Ease by
all that which you do: Come to me, says Christ, and you shall then find rest
unto your Souls: The Jews seeking to establish their own Righteousness, seeking
I say, if by any Means they might establish it, lost Christ: The Lord therefore
will make his Elect know they shall seek here for Ease in vain; and therefore
tires them ou^.

4. By clearing up the Equity and Justice of God in the Law, if the Lord should
never pity nor pardon it, not show any Respect or Favor to it; for this is the
Frame of every Man's Heart, if he cannot find Rest in his Duties and
Endeavors, as he once expected he should, but sees Sin and Weakness, Death and
Condemnation wrapping him about (like Jonah's Weeds) in all he does, then his
Heart sinks, and quarrels, and falls off further from Christ by Discouragement,
and grows secretly impatient that there should be no Mercy left for him,
because it thinks now the Lord's eternal Purpose is to exclude him; for if
there were any Thoughts of Peace toward him, he should have found Peace before
now, having so earnestly and frequently sought the Lord, and having done so
much, and forsaken his sinful Ways, according to his own Commandment from him;
and hence it is you shall find it a certain Truth, that the Soul is turned back
as far from God by sinking discouraging Sorrow for sin, as ever it was to a
state of Security by the Pleasures of sin; and hence sometimes it thinks it is
in vain to seek any more, and hence leaves off Duties; and if Conscience force
them to it, yet it sinks again, because it is Foot is not established upon the
Rock Christ, but upon the Weakness of the Waters of it is own Abilities and
Endeavors; what therefore should the Soul do in this Case, to come to God? It
knows not, it cannot; fly from him it dare not, it shall not; the Spirit
therefore by revealing how equal and just it is for the Lord never to regard or
look after it more, because it has sinned and is still so sinful, makes it
hereby to fall down prostrate in the Dust before the Lord, as worthy of nothing
but Shame and Confusion, and so kisseth the Rod, and turns the other Cheek unto
the Lord even smiting of him, acknowledging if the Lord show Mercy, it will be
wonderful, if not, yet the Lord is righteous, and therefore has no Cause to
quarrel against him for denying special M^^^^ to him, to whom he does not owe a
Bit of Bread. And now the Soul is indeed humbled, because it submits to be
disposed of, as God pleases; thus the Church in her Humiliation, Lam. 3.22.
having in the former part of the Chapter, drunk the Wormwood and the Gall, at
last lies down and professes, it is the Lord's Mercy, it is not consumed; and
Verse. 29. he puts his Mouth to the Dust, if there may be any Hope; and Ver. 39.
Why should a living Man complain, for the Punishment of his Sin? You think the
Lord does you Wrong, and neglects your Good and his own Glory too, if he does
not give you Peace and Pardon, Grace and Mercy, even to the utmost of your
asking, and then think you have good Cause to fret, and sink, and be
discouraged: No, no, the Lord will pull down those Mountains, those high
Tho'ts, and make you lie low at his Feet, and acknowledge that it is infinite
Mercy you are alive, and not consumed; and that there is any Hope or
Possibility of Mercy, and that you are out of the nethermost Pit: And that if
he should never pity you, yet he does you no Wrong, but that which is equal and
just, and that it is fit your sinful forward Wills should stoop to his holy,
righteous, and good Will, rather than it should stoop and be crooked according
unto yours. Believe it Brethren, He that judges not himself thus, shall be
judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.31. How can you have Mercy that will set
yourselves up in God's sovereign Throne to dispose of it, and will not lie down
humbly under it, that it may dispose of you? For are you worthy of it? Has the
Lord any Need of you? Have you not provoked him exceedingly? Was there ever any
that dealt worse with him than you? Oh, Beloved, lie low here; and learn of the
Church, Micah 7.9. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. It was a most blessed Frame of Spirit in Aaron, Levit.
10.3. when he saw God's Hand against him in cutting off his Children, and Aaron
held his Peace; so if the Lord should cast thee off, cut thee off, never take
Pleasure in such a polluted broken Vessel unfit for any Use for him, hold thou
thy Peace; quarrel not, be silent before him, and say as they did, 2 Cor. 12.5.
The Lord is Righteous, but I am vile; let him do with me what seems good in his
own Eyes: And thus the Lord Jesus by the Law does dead the Soul to the Law,
until it be made to submit like Wax, or like Clay to the Hand of the Potter, to
frame it a Vessel to what Use he pleases; and as the Apostle most excellently,
Romans 7. divorceth it from its first Husband, (i. e. Sin and the Law) that it
may be married unto Jesus Christ. In a Word, when the Lord Christ has made the
Soul feel not only its Inability to help it self, and so says as Paul, Gal.
2.20. It is not I, but also its own Unworthiness, that the Lord should help it,
and so cries out with Job, Behold, I am vile; now at this Instant, it is vas
capax; a Vessel capable (though unworthy) of any Grace, James 4.6.

4. The last Question remains, What Measure of Humiliation is here necessary?

Answ. Look as so much Conviction is necessary which begets Compunction, and so
much Compunction as breeds Humiliation; so, so much Humiliation is necessary as
introduces Faith, or as drives the Soul out of it self unto Christ: For as the
next End of Conviction is Compunction, and that of Compunction is Humiliation;
so the next End of Humiliation is Faith, or Coming to Christ, which we shall
next speak unto.

And hence it is that the Lord calls unto the weary and heavy laden to come
unto him, Matthew. 11.27. So much as makes you come for Rest in Christ, so much
is necessary, and no more. If any can come without being thus laden and weary
in some Measure, let them come and drink of the Water of Life freely; but a
proud Heart that will make it self its own Savior, will not come to the Lord
Jesus to be his Savior; he that will be his own Physician, so long cannot send
out for another. Nay, let me fall one Degree lower, if the Soul cannot come to
Christ, (as who feel not themselves unable when the Lord comes to draw?) and
find not the Lord Jesus coming unto them, to draw them, and compel them in; yet
if the Soul be so far humbled, as not to resist the Lord, by quarrelling with
him, and at him, as unworthy of the least Smile, as worthy of all Frowns;
verily the Lord will come to it, and no more is requisite than this, and thus
much certainly is: For thus the whole Scripture runs, He gives Grace to the
humble, James 4.6. I dwell with the contrite and humble, Isa. 57.16. The poor
afflicted shall not always be forgotten, Psalm. ^.12, 18. When their
uncircumcis^d Hearts are humbled, so as to accept of the Punishment of their
Iniquity, the Lord then remembers his Covenant, Lev. 26.41, 42. Conceive it
thus: There can be no Union to Christ, while there is a Power of Resistance and
Opposition against Christ. The Lord Christ must therefore in order of Nature
(for I now speak not of order of Time) first removere prohibens, remove this
Resistance, before he can, and that he may, unite. I do not mean Resistance of
the Frame of Grace, but (as was said) of the Lord of Grace, whereby he comes to
work it.

Now there is a double Resistance or two Parts of this Resistance, like a Knife
with two Edges.

1. A Resistance of the Lord, by a secret Unwillingness that the Lord should
work Grace: Now this the Lord removes in Compunction, and no more Brokenness
for Sin or from Sin is necessary there than that.

2. A Resistance of the Lord by sinking Discouragements, and a secret
Quarrelling with him, in Case the Soul imagines he will not come to work Grace,
or manifest Grace. Now this the Lord takes away in Humiliation; and no more is
necessary here, than the Removal of the Power of this which makes the Soul in
the Sense of its own infinite Vileness and Unworthiness not to quarrel at the
Lord, and Devil-like grow fierce and impatient before and against the Lord, in
Case he should never help it, never pity it, never succor it; the Lord will
not forsake for ever, if the Soul thus lies down, and puts its Mouth in the
Dust, Lam. 3.30, 31.

Which Consideration is of unspeakable Use and Consolation, to every poor empty
Nothing, that feels it self unable to believe, and the Lord forsaking it, from
helping it to believe. And I have seen it constantly, that many a chosen Vessel
never has been comforted till now, and ever comforted when now; they never
knew what Hurt them till they saw this, and they have immediately felt their
Hurt healed, when this has been removed. In comforting Christians under deep
Distress, tell them of God's Grace and Mercy, and the Riches of both, you do
but torment them the more, that there should be so much, and they have no Part,
nor Share in it, and think they never shall, because this is not the immediate
Way of Cure; tell them rather, when they are full of those Complaints, that
they are as they speak, vile and sinful, and therefore worthy never to be
accepted of God, and that they have Cause to wonder that they have their Lives,
and are on this side Hell, and so turn all that they say to Humiliation and
Self-loathing; verily you shall then see, if the Lord intends good, he will by
this do them good, and the weakest ^hristian that cannot come to Christ, you
shall see first or last shall see Cause to lie down, and be silent, and not
quarrel, though the Lord should never come to him. And that this is necessary,
may appear thus: Otherwise,

1. The Lord should not advance the Riches of his Grace; the Advancement of
Grace cannot possibly be without the Humiliation and Abasement of the Creature;
the Lord not only saves, but calls Things that are not, that no Flesh might
Glory, 1 Cor. 1.28, 29.

2. Otherwise the Lord should not be Lord and Disposer of his own Grace, but a
sinful Creature who quarrels against God, if it be not disposed of, not as the
Lord will, but as the Creature will. If a Stranger comes to our House, and will
have what he wants, and if he has not, he quarrels and contends with the
Master of the House, what would he say? Away proud Beggar, do think to be
Lord of what I have? Do draw thy Knife to stab me, if I do not please thee
and give thee thy asking? No, thou shall know that I will do with my own as I
see good, thou shall lie down on the Dust of my Threshold before I give thee
any Thing. So it is with the Lord, It is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God that shows Mercy. It is his principal Name, I will
be merciful to whom I will be merciful; and therefore if you will not believe
me, yet believe the Lord's Oath, Isai. 45.23. Unto me shall every Knee bow, and
do you come to lord it over him, and quarrel, and fret, and sink, and grow
sullen, and vex, if the Lord stoop not unto your Desires? No, no, you must and
shall lie upon his Threshold, nay he will make thee lay thy Neck upon the
Block, as worthy of nothing but cutting off; then when this Valley is filled,
all Flesh shall see the Glory of the Lord, Isai. 40.5. Thus Humiliation is
necessary in this Measure mentioned. Not that I deny any subsequent
Humiliation, after a Christian is in Christ, arising from the Sense of God's
Favor in Christ, than which nothing makes a Christian of an evangelical Spirit
more ashamed of himself: Yet I dare not exclude this which is antecedent,
arising from the Spirit of Power immediately subduing the soul to Christ, that
it may be exalted by Christ, 1 Pet. 5.6. It is true, all Things that pertain to
Life and Godliness are received by Faith, 2 Pet. 1.3. yet Faith itself is a
saving Work, which is not received by another precedent Faith. Faith therefore
is to be excepted, not only as begotten in us, but as it is in the begetting of
it in the Conviction and Humiliation of every Sinner.

USE 1. Hence see what is the great Hindrance between the Mercy of God, and the
soul of many a Man; if it be not some sin and Hardness of Heart under it,
whereby he cares not for Christ to deliver him, then it is Pride of Spirit,
arising from some Good he has, whereby he feels no Need of Christ, hoping his
own Duties shall save him, or else is above Christ, and not under him, willing
to be disposed of by him. And hence the Lord makes this the Highway to Mercy,
Levit. 26.40. if first they shall confess their Sin, secondly, humble
themselves, (both which I know the Lord must work) then he will remember his
Covenant. Look as it is with a Vessel before it can be fit for Use, it must
first pass through Fire, and the Earth and Dross severed from it, then it must be
made hollow and empty, which makes it vas capax, a Vessel capable of receiving
that which shall be poured out into it; if (O Brethren) the Lord has some
Vessels of Glory, which he prepares beforehand, and makes capable of Glory,
Romans 9.21, 22. if the Lord does not s^v^r you from sin in Compunction, and
empty you of yourselves in Humiliation, you cannot receive Christ, nor Mercy,
you cannot hold them; and if ever you miss of Christ by Faith, your Wound lies
here. How many be there at this Day, that were once Profane and Wicked, but now
by some Terrors and outward Restraints upon them, they leave their Sins, and
say they loath them, and purpose never to run Riot as they have done, and hence
because they think themselves very good, or to have some good, they fall short
of Christ, and are still in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the midst of all
Evil. It were the Happiness of some Men, if they did not think themselves to
have some good, because this is their Christ. O you that live under precious
Means, and have many Fears you may Perish and be deceived at the last: But why
do you fear? I knew you will Answer, Oh some secret and unknown Sin may be my
Ruin; It is true, and you do well to have a Godly Jealousy thereof. But
remember this also, not only some Sin, but some Good thou think thou have,
and rests in without Christ. And lifting thee up above Christ, may as easily
prove thy Ruin, because a Man's own Righteousness rested in, does not only hide
Men's Sins, but strengthens them in some Sin by which Men Perish; Trusting
(...) ones own Righteousness, and committing Iniquity are couples, Ezekiel. 33.13.
Nor do I hereby run into the Frenches of that wicked Generation of the Fa^^
lists, denying all Inherent Graces; Evidence of Favor from any Christians
Obedience, or Sanctification in Holy Duties; or that a Christian should
Profanely cast off all Duties, because they cannot save themselves by them: No,
no, the Lord will search with Candles one Day for such Sons of Darkness, and
exclude such foolish Virgins that they have neither Oil in their Vessels, nor
Light in their Lamps: I only speak of that Good, that Righteousness which is
rested in without Christ, and lifts up Men above Christ, which in Deed and in
Truth is not true Righteousness, but only a true Shadow of it. And therefore as
Beza well observes from Romans 9.32. Why did not Israel, that followed after
Righteousness attain it? Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by
the Works of the Law: they were not fruits of sincere Obedience to the Law, but
as it were the Works of the Law; now this, says the Apostle, ver. 33. is the
Stumbling-Stone in Sion. Christ will have all Flesh vail, and be stripped Naked,
and made nothing before him, before they shall ever be built upon him; now this
Men stumble at, they must bring something to him, they will not be Vile,
Emptiness and Nothingness, that he may be all to them; verily observe your
selves and you shall find, if there be little Humiliation, there is little of
Christ; if much Humiliation, much of Christ; if unconstant Humiliation,
uncertain fruition of Christ; if real Humiliation, real possession of Christ;
if false Humiliation, imaginary fruition of Christ. Know it, you cannot Perish
if you fall not short here, you must Perish if you do.

USE 2. Be exhorted therefore to lie down in the Dust before the Lord, and
under the Lord; nay, entreat the Lord that he would put thee upon his Wheel,
and mould thy Heart to his Will: Why will you (...) in any Good you have? O
remember thy Father was a Syrian ready to perish, and thy self polluted, an
infinite, endless Evil. Whatever Good thou do, is it not a polluted Stream,
of a more polluted Spring? Nay, suppose the Spirit works any Good in thee, yet
is it not polluted by thy unclean Heart? Nay, suppose any Actions should be
perfect, yet remember that the Lord spared not the Angels that sinned:
Perfection present cannot satisfy Justice for Pollution past. Cry out
therefore, and say, O Lord, now I see not only that my Sin is vile, but that my
Self and all my Righteousness is vile also; and now though the Lord stands at a
Distance, speaks no Peace, hears no Prayers, yet because thou art very vile,
lie down under him, that if he will he may tread upon thee, and thereby exalt
himself, as well as lift thee up, and exalt thee. Be not careless whether the
Lord help or no, but be humbled, not to quarrel in Case he should not: For,

1. Suppose thou art not only miserable, but sinful, and the Lord (thou say)
takes it not away, yet remember that to quarrel with God for withdrawing his
Hand, is a Sin also, Lam. 3.39. And will thou add Sin to Sin?

2. Why art thou quiet and still when the Lord denies thee any common Mercy? Is
it not because the Lord will have it so? Now look as we say of him that hates
Sin as Sin, that he hates all Sin; so he that is meekened with God's good
Pleasure in any one Thing because of his good Pleasure in it, upon the same
Ground will at least desire to stoop in (...) Thing. Suppose therefore it be
the Lord's good Pleasure to deny thee Mercy, I grant you must pray for it, yet
with Submission to the good Will of the Lord, saying, the Lord's Will is good,
but mine is evil, otherwise, thou have no Meekness in any Thing, that art not
meekly subject to his Will in every Thing.

3. The greatest Pride that is in Man, appears here; for suppose the Lord
should deny thee Bread, or Water, or Clothes, was it your Duty to murmur now?
Nay, was it not Pride, if the Heart would not lie down, and say, Lord, I am
worthy to have my Bread plucked from my Mouth, and my Clothes from my Back. Now
if it be Pride to murmur in Case the Lord denies you smaller Matters, the
Offals of this Life, do not thou see that it is far greater Pride for thee to
sink and quarrel with him, if he denies thee greater, and the Things of another
Life? Is he bound to give thee greater, that does not owe thee the least?
Suppose a Beggar murmur at thy Door, if thou do deny him Bread, or a Cup of
Drink, will thou not account him a proud stout Beggar? But if thou do give
him that, and then he quarrel and murmur at thee because thou do not give him
a thousand Pounds, or thy whole Estate when he asks it, will you not say, I
never met with the like Insolency? The Lord gives you your Lives, blessed be
his Name, but you ask for Treasures of Grace and Mercy, Thousands of Pounds,
Christ himself, and all that he is Worth, and the Lord seems to deny you, and
now you sink, and grow sullen, and discontented, and quarrel, and murmur at
God, not directly, but secretly and slily; may not the Lord now say; Was there
ever such Pride and Insolency? And therefore as Christ spoke of himself, John
12.24, 25. A Corn of Wheat cannot live, unless it die first; so know it, you
shall never live with Christ, unless you die and perish in your selves, unless
you be sown and lie under the Clods of your own Wretchedness, Faith will never
spring up in such a Soul. As it is in Burnings, the Fire must be first taken
out, before there can be any healing; so this impatient Spirit which torments
the Soul, must be first removed, before the Lord will heal thee.

4. Consider the approaching Times: I do believe the Lord at this Day is coming
out to shake all Nations, all Hearts, all Consciences, all Conditions, and to
tear and rend from you your choicest Blessings, Peace and Plenty, both External
and Internal also; for there is need of it, our Age grows Full, and Proud, and
Wanton, Man's price is fallen in the Market, unless his Looks and new Fashions
commend him to the World. O consider, when God comes to read all from you, then
you may find a need of the Exercise of this Duty; it may be the time is coming
wherein you shall have nothing to support your Hearts, you shall find rest in
no way but this: I know Assurance of God's Love may quiet you; but what if the
Lord shake all your Foundations and deprive you of that! What will you then do?
And therefore as Zeph^^^, Chap. 2.3. having foretold of the evil Days; cries
unto his Hearers, Seek meekness ye meek of the Earth; seek Meekness; so say I
to you; for you will find all little enough. Come down from thy Throne and he
the Footstool and Threshold of Christ Jesus, before the Days of Darkness come
upon you; be content to be a Cipher, a Steping-stone, the very Offall of the
World.

Quest. But you will say, Wherein shall I express this Humiliation and
Subjection?

Answ. 1. Be highly thankful for any little the Lord gives, Lam. 3.22, 23.

2. Be Humble and judge thy self worthy of nothing when the Lord denis; and
verily you shall find the Lord Jesus e're long speaking Peace unto you, and
giving thee rest in his Bosom, that now art quietly contented to lie still at
his Feet.

For some Helps thereunto,

1. Remember whose thou art, viz. the Lord's Clay, and he thy Potter, and
therefore may do with thee what he will, Romans 9, 20.

2. Remember what thou art, viz. a polluted Vessel, a kind of infinite endless
Evil, as I have often said; see the Picture of thy own Vileness in the Damned in
Hell who are full, and shall through all Eternity pour out all manner of Evil,
Job 40.3, 4.

3. Remember what thou have been, and how long thou have made War against
Christ with all thy Might and Heart, and Strength; why should the Lord
therefore choose thee before others, Jer. 3.5. when as, (ask thy Conscience)
was there ever such a Wretch since the World began as thou have been.

4. Remember what thou will be; fit for no use to Jesus Christ, good for
nothing, but to pollute his Holy Name when thou medlest with it; and why should
the Lord take up such a dry Leaf, Isa. 64.6. and breath upon such a dry Bone?

5. Remember how good the Lord's Will is, even when it crosses thine; he shall
have infinite Glory by all his denials to thee of what thou would; he shall
gain that, though thou loosest thy Peace and Quietness, that Good which thy
foolish sinful Will desires at his Hand, John 12.27, 28. And if so, blessed be
his Name, let God live, but let Man die and perish, that he may be exalted of
vile Man.

6. Remember the sweet rest thou shall have by the Subjection to the Lord;
nothing is Man's Cross, but Man's Will; a stubborn Will like a stubborn Heifer
in the Yoke galls and frets the Soul; Learn Meekness, says our Savior, of me
in taking my Yoke on you, and then you shall find rest. Hell would not be Hell,
to a Heart truly humbled. Sometimes you find Enlargements, then you are glad:
Sometimes none, then you sink: Sometimes you have hope of Mercy, then you are
calm: Sometimes you loose your hopes, then the Sea works: When the Lord
pleases you, then you are well, but if a little cross befall you, then your
Spring is Muddy, and a little thing troubles: Oh be humble and vile in thine
own Eyes, and verily such uncertain fits of Peace and Trouble are done, and the
Days of all your Mourning are now ended.

USE 3. Of Thankfulness, to all those whom the Lord has truly humbled: Time
was, when the Lord first convinced you, that so long as you could make any
Shift, find rest in any Duties, you would never lie down at Christ's Feet, now
the Lord might have left you to have stumbled at that Stumbling-Stone, and to
have stuck in those Bushes, but you may see that the Lord will save you even
then when you would not be saved by him: And especially take Notice of two
Passages of God's Dealings with you, wherein usually you find Matter of
Discouragement, rather than of Acknowledgment of God's Goodness to you therein.

1. That the Lord has withdrawn all Feeling of any Good, which it may be you
once felt, and that the Lord has let out more of the Evil of your Hearts than
ever you imagined was in them, nay so much Evil that you think there is none
like unto you, who have now no Heart nor Power to stir, think, desire, will, or
do any Thing that is Good: O bless the Lord for this, for this is God's Way to
humble, and empty, and make thee poor; the Lord saw (though it may be you did
not) that you rested in that Good you felt, and was or would be lifted up by
these, and therefore the Lord has broke those crazy Crutches, famished now,
brought you down to nothing, made you like dry Deserts; all the Hurt the Lord
aims at in this, being only to humble you, and though these Desertions be
bitter for the present, yet that by these he might do you Good in your latter
End, Deuteronomy. 6.19. O Brethren, the Apostle stands at a stay, and desires the
Corinthians to consider, You see your Calling, faith he, 1 Cor. 1. Not many
Mighty, not many Wise, but Things that are not does he call, that no Flesh
might glory: The Lord, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3. suffered thee to want, (that
was the first) and then fed thee, that he might prove thee and humble thee;
remember this, says he; so say I to you, remember this Mercy, that when the
Lord makes you worst of all (not real, but) in your own Eyes, that then the
Lord is about this glorious Work.

2. That the Lord has kept you (it may be a long Time too) from Sight and
Sense of his peculiar Love; one would wonder why the Lord should hide his Love
so much, so long, from those to whom he does intend it; the great Reason is,
because there is in many a one a Heart desirous of his Love, and this would
quiet them if they were sure of it: They never come to be quieted with God's
Will, in case they think they shall never partake of his Love: But are above
that, oppose and resist, and quarrel with that, unhumbled under that, the Lord
therefore intending to bestow his Favor only upon a humbled Sinner, he will
therefore hide his Face until they lie low, and acknowledge themselves worthy
of nothing but Extremity of Misery, unworthy of the least Mercy: The People of
God, Lam. 1.16. cry out that the Comforter which should refresh their Soul, was
far from them: What was God's End in this? You shall see the End of it, ver.
18. The Lord is righteous, (here the Church is humbled) for I have rebelled; or
(as Zanchius reads it) I have made his Mouth bitter, that the Lord speaks no
Peace to me, but bitter Things. The Cause is in my own self, and therefore if
he never comfort me, nor speak a good Word unto me, yet he is righteous, but I
am vile; and you will find this certain, that as the Lord therefore humbles
that he may exalt, so the Lord never refuses to exalt (in hiding his Face) but
it is to humble. And is this the worst the Lord aims at, and will you not be
thankful? Why are you then discouraged when you find it thus with you? Do not
say the Lord never dealt thus with any as with me; suppose that; the Reason
then is, because the Lord sees, never had any such an high Heart as thou have;
but Oh be thankful, that notwithstanding this, he will take the Pains to take
it down.

4. Thus much for Humiliation; I come now to the fourth and last, which is
Faith.

SECT. V. The fourth and last Act of Christ's Power, is the Work of Faith.
THE Lord having wounded and humbled his Elect, and laid them down dead at his
Feet, they are now as unable to believe as they were to humble their own Souls;
and therefore now the Lord takes them up in his Arms, that they lean and rest
on the Bosom of their Beloved by Faith. After Joseph had spoken roughly to his
Brethren, and thereby brought the Blood of their Brother to Remembrance, and so
had humbled them, and then he can contain no longer, but discovers himself to
them, and tells them, I am Joseph whom you wickedly sold, yet fear not; so does
our Savior carry it toward his Elect, when he laid them low: Now is the very
Season for him to advance the Glory of his Grace, he cannot now contain himself
any longer; but having torn and taken away that Vail of Sin and of the Law from
off their Hearts, now they see the Lord with open Face, even the End of that
which was to be abolished, 2 Cor. 3. The Explication of the great Work, is of
exceeding great Difficulty; nothing more stirring than Faith in a true
Christian, because he lives by it, yet it is very little known; as Children in
the Womb, that know not that Navel-string by which they principally live: I
shall therefore be wary, and leaving larger Explications, acquaint you with the
Nature of Faith, in this brief Description of it.

FAITH is that gracious Work of the SPIRIT, whereby an humbled Sinner receives
CHRIST; or whereby the whole Soul comes out of itself to CHRIST, for CHRIST
and all his Benefits, upon the Call of CHRIST in his WORD.

Before I open this Particular, give me Leave to premise some general
Considerations; Faith is the Complement of effectual Vocation, which begins in
God's Call, and ends in this Answer to that Call; the Lord prevents a poor
humbled Soul, with his Call, either not knowing how, or not able, or not daring
to come; and then the Soul comes, and hence Men called, and believing are all
one, Romans 9.24, with 33. Many a wounded Sinner will be scrambling after Christ,
from some general Reports of him, before the Day and Hour of God's glorious and
gracious Call Now for any to receive Christ, or come to Christ, before he is
called, is Presumption; to refuse Christ when called, is Rebellion, to come and
receive when called, is properly and formally Faith, and that which the
Scripture styles, the Obedience of Faith, Romans 1.5. And now Christ at this
Instant is fully and freely given, on God's Part, when really and freely come
unto and taken on our Part.

This receiving of Christ, or coming to Christ, are for Substance the same,
though the Words be diverse; the holy Ghost uses to express one and the same
Thing in Variety of Words; that our Feebleness might the better understand what
he means. And hence in Scripture, believing, coming, receiving Christ,
rolling, trusting, cleaving to the Lord, etc. set out one and the same Thing;
and therefore it is no Wonder if our Divines have different Descriptions of
Faith in Variety of Words; which if well considered, do but set out one and the
same Thing: And I do conceive they do all agree in this Description I have now
mentioned; I know there are some who tread awry here, whom I shall briefly note
out, and so pass on to what we intend,

1. The Papists, with some others of corrupt Judgments, at least of weak
Apprehensions among ourselves, describe Faith to be nothing else but a
supernatural Assent to a divine Truth, because of a divine Testimony: ex. gr.
To assent to this Truth, That Christ is come, that he is the Son of God; that
he was dead and is risen again, that he is the Savior of the World, etc. and
to confirm this they produce Matthew. 16.16. 1 John 4.3.

Answ. It is granted that this Assent is in Faith, for Faith always has
Respect to some Testimony; for Man by his Fall has lost all Knowledge of
divine and supernatural Truths; hence God reveals them in his Word; hence Faith
sees them and assents to them, because God has spoken them: To see and know
Things by Vision, is to see Things in themselves intuitively and immediately;
but to see Things by Faith is to see them by and in a Testimony given of them,
John 20.20. Blessed is he that has not seen, (i. e. Christ immediately) but
believed, i. e. his Testimony, and on him in it; this Assent therefore is in
Faith (for we must believe Christ before we can believe in him) but this
comprehends not the whole Nature of Faith; I mean of that Faith we are now
speaking of; viz. as it unites us to Christ, and possesses us with Christ. For,

1. This Description places Faith only in the Understanding, whereas it is also
in the Will, as the Words, trusting, rolling, etc. intimate.

2. This Assent is merely general, without particular Application, which is
ever in true Faith, Gal. 2.20.

3. This is such a Faith as the Devils may have, Jam. 2.19. and reprobate Men
may have, 2 Pet 2.20, 21. Heb. 10.26. There is a wilful refusing of the known
Truth.

4. It is the Papist's Aim to vilify Faith hereby, by describing it by that
which is one Ingredient in it, but excluding that which is principal; those
Phrases therefore of believing Christ is come in the Flesh, 1 John 4.3. and
that he is the Son of God, Mat. 16.16. as if this were the only Object to
Faith, are not to be understood exclusively, excluding other Acts of Faith,
which the Scripture in other Places, sets down clearly; but inclusively, as
supposing them to be contained herein: For as we in our Times describing Faith
by relying upon Christ for Salvation, do not exclude hereby our believing that
he is the Messiah; but we include it, or suppose it, because that is not now
questioned, the Truth of the G^spel being so abundantly cleared; so in those
Times, they described Faith by one principal Act, to believe that he was the
Son of God, and come into the Flesh, because this was the main and principal
Thing in Question then: And if the Lord had not set our Faith by other Acts in
Scripture, we shall not vary from our Compass in such Expressions in the Word
in these Days: For their Faith then is exemplary to us now; because the Word
does more fully s^t it out in more special Acts, hence we set it also by them;
for it is evident, as the Jews did believe in a Messiah to come, so they did
also believe and look for all Good from him, John 4.25. He will teach us all
Things when he comes; and therefore their Faith did not confine itself to that
historical Act that a Messiah should come, or that this was the Messiah, but
they did expect and look for all Good from him: And hence the Apostle
expounding this Saying, viz. believing that Christ is dead and risen again, we
shall hereby be saved: Romans 10.9, 10. If thou believe (says he) with thine
Heart this Truth, thou shall be saved. Now to believe with the Heart, as it
does not exclude Assent, so it necessarily includes the Acts of the Will and
Affections in relying upon him, and coming to him. And hence, when Peter had
made that Confession, Matthew. 16.16. Christ tells him, Thou art Peter; i. e. a
Stone resting upon the Rock, (as some good Interpreters expound it) and
therefore Peter's Faith did not exclude these principal Acts of resting on
Christ, cleaving to Christ, but did include and suppose them.

2. Some run into another Extreme, and make Faith nothing else, but a
Persuasion or Assurance that Christ died for me in particular, or that he is
mine. That which moves some thus to think, is the universal Redemption by the
Death of Christ; they know no Ground or Bottom for Faith but this Proposition,
Christ died for thee, and hence makes Redemption universal: And hence the
Arminians boast so much of their Quod unusquisque tenatur credere, etc. But,

1. This is a false Bottom, for Christ has not died for all, because he has
not prayed for all, John 17.2.

2. This is a sandy Bottom and Foundation, which when a Christian rests upon,
it shakes under him, when the Soul shall think, though Christ has died for me,
yet no more for me, than for Judas, or Thousands of Reprobates now in Hell.
Indeed after Faith, a Christian is bound to believe it, as Paul did, Gal. 2.20.
1 Cor. 15.1, 2.

I conceive therefore those holy Men of ours who have described Faith by
Assurance, have not so much aimed at a Description of what Faith is in it self,
as it possesses us with Christ; but of what Degree and Extent it may be, and
should be in us; they describe it therefore by the most eminent Act of it, in
full Assurance: And therefore consult with the Authors of this Description, and
enquire of them, Is there no Doubting mixed with Faith? Yes, say they, Man's
Doubtings sometimes are even unto a Kind of Despair, but then (say they) it
should not be thus. The Papists commend Doubtings, and deny Assurance, place
Faith in a general Assent; our Champions that were to wrestle with them,
maintained it to be a particular Application, (and not only a general Assent)
and that with a full Assurance of Persuasion, which being the most eminent Act
of Faith, excludes not other inferior Acts of it, which as they are before it,
so may possess the Soul with Christ without it. Although withal, it is certain,
that there is no true Faith, but it has some Assurance, of which afterward.

Let me now come to the Explication of the Description given, where note these
five Things.

1. The efficient Cause of Faith, it is a Work of the Spirit. 2. The Subject,
or Matter in which it is seated, viz. the Soul of an humble Sinner. 3. The Form
of it, viz. the Coming of the whole Soul to Christ. 4. The End of it, viz. for
Christ and all his Benefits. 5. The special Ground and Means of it, viz. the
Call of Christ in his Word.
I. The efficient Cause of Faith.
Faith is a gracious Work of the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit therefore is the
efficient Cause or principal Workman of Faith; the Spirit does not believe, but
causes us to believe; it is not Principium qu^d, the Principle which does
believe, but Principium quo, the Principle by which we do; the Souls of all the
Elect (especially when humbled) are, of all other Things, must unable to
believe: Nay look as before Compunction and Humiliation, Satan held the Soul
captive chiefly by its Lusts and Sins; so now when the Lord has burnt those
Cords, and broken those Chains, all the Powers of Darkness strengthen
themselves, and keep the Soul under mightily, by Unbelief. What do you tell me
of Mercy? says the Soul) it is Mercy which I have continually resisted,
desperately despised; why do you persuade me to believe? Alas I cannot; it is
true, all that which you say is true, if I could believe, but I cannot see
Christ, I cannot come at Christ, I seek him in the Means, but he forsakes me
there, and I am left of God desolate; and here, Beloved, the Soul had not
formerly so many Excuses for its Sin, as now it has Clouds of Objections
against believing; the Spirit therefore takes fast hold of the Souls of all the
Elect, draws them unto Christ; and therefore it is called the Spirit of Faith,
2 Cor. 4.13. and that by an omnipotent and irresistible Power, Isai. 53.1. Who
has believed? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? That the Soul must
and shall believe now. Compel them to come in, says the Lord of the Supper,
Luke 14.23. This the Arminians will not believe, for (say they) the Question is
not, Whether we are enabled to believe by Grace? but, Whether it be after this
Manner, and by this Means, viz. modo irresistibilli? Consider therefore these
Reasons, to clear this Point,

1. Whence does our Call and Coming to Christ arise, but from God's immovable
and unchangeable Purpose? Romans 8.28. The Lord therefore must either alter his
Purpose, or prevail with the Soul to believe, and overpower the Heart
thereunto.

2. Is not Christ Jesus bound by Office and Promise to the Father to bring in
all his lost scattered Sheep, that so the Father and he may be glorified in
them? John 10.16. Other Sheep I have, those I must bring home, and they shall
hear my Voice. You that complain you cannot believe, nay, that you have no
Heart to believe, the Lord must fetch you in; and you shall hear the
Bridegroom's Voice with Joy.

3. Is not the Act of believing wrought by a creating Power? Ephesians. 1.9. Ephesians.
2.10. Isai. 57.18, 19. I create the Fruit of the Lips Peace, Peace to him that
is near, and afar off: And is not a creating Voice irresistible, though there
be nothing for it to work upon? So though you have no Ability, Heart, Head, or
Strength to believe, yet the Lord will create the Fruit of the Lips of God's
Messengers, Peace, Peace.

4. Does not the Lord let in that infinite and surpassing Sweetness of Grace,
when he works the Soul to believe, standing in extreme Need of that Grace, that
it cannot but come and cleave to it? Psalm. 63.2.3. I long to see thee, says
David, for thy Loving Kindness is better than Life; it is impossible for a Man
to cleave to his Life? Much more to that which is better than Life: The Light
is so clear, it cannot but see and wonder at Grace; the Good is so sweet, it
cannot but taste and accept what God so freely offers; Psalm. 36.7. And
therefore the poor Canaanitish Woman, Matthew. 15. could not be driven away, though
Christ bid her in a Manner be gone; but she made all the Objections against her
Arguments for her (as usually Faith does, when under this Stroke of the Spirit)
the Violent take the Kingdom of Heaven by Force; the Spirit puts a Necessity
upom them, and irresistably over-powers them, and this is the Cause of it.

And is not this matter of great Consolation to all those who feel themselves
utterly unable to Believe? You think the Lord would give Peace and Pardon, Life
and Mercy, if I could Believe; Oh consider the Lord has undertaken in the
Covenant of Grace to work in all his the Condition of the Covenant, as well as
to convey the good of it, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. He has done this for others
by an irresistible Power, Heb. 12.1, 2. Look up to Jesus the author and
finisher of your Faith, He came out of his Father's Bosom, not only to give
Life by his Death, but to enable his to Eat and Close with him by Faith, that
they might never Die, John 6.50. So that the Lord may work it in thee; it is
true also, he may not, yet it is unspeakable Comfort to consider, that if the
Lord had put it over unto thee to Believe, it is certain thou should never
have Believed, but now the Work is put into the Hand of Christ; that which is
impossible to thee, is possible, nay easy, with him; he can comprehend thee,
when thou can not apprehend him: This is exceeding sweet when the Body is
Sick, and Soul is Deserted, incredible things to be Believed, are Propounded,
an impossible Work to thy Weakness Urged, upon Pain of God's sorest and most
unspeakable Wrath; to consider it is not in me, but in the Lord's own Hand, and
it is his Office, his Glory to work Faith, and as the Apostle speaks, to show
Mercy unto them that are shut up, not only under Sin, but also Unbelief; Romans
11.32. But why has the Lord made thee feel thy inability to Believe? Truly the
end of our Wants is not to make us Sin and shift for our selves, but to ask and
seek for Supply, and the end of the continuance of those Wants is, that we
should continue to ask and seek. And do thou think thou shall seek to the
Lord by his own Hand to create Faith, and fetch thee in, and will not the Lord
take his time to work it? He that Believes, says the Apostle, Romans 10.11.
shall not be ashamed; why so? Because the Lord, says he, who is over all, is
rich unto all that call upon him, ver. 12. If thou have not a Heart shut up
from asking of it; the Lord who has Power, has not a Heart shut up toward
thee from working it.

But withal be thankful exceedingly, all you whose Hearts the Lord has drawn
and overcome; he came to his own People the Jews, and would often have gathered
them, but they would not, and therefore he forsook them, and left their
Habitations desolate; Oh how often would the Lord have gathered you, and you
would not! yet the Lord has not forsaken you, but called you in whether you
would or no; the Lord has taken many a Man at his first Word, and left him at
his first Repulse, shaken off the Dust of his Feet against him presently, Mat.
10.14. without any more Entreaties to accept of Mercy; yet thou have not only
refused, but even crucified the Son of God, yet he has not been driven from
thee, but his Bowels have been often kindled together, when he has been ready to
give thee up: When thou have been under the Hedges, and in the high Ways that
lead to Death, and did never think of him, nor did desire him, yet he has
compelled thee to come in; he has made thee feel such an extreem ^eed of him,
and made himself so exceeding sweet, that thou have not been able to resist his
Love, but to cry out, Lord, thou have overcome me with Mercy, I am not able to
resist any more, nay, which is more wonderful, when thou have been gathered,
and gone from me, and lost thy self, and him also again, and it may be have
been offended at him; yet he has gone before thee into Galilee, and gathered
thee up when thou have been as Water spilt upon the Ground; What should be the
Cause of this, but only this? The Work of Faith lies upon him, both to begin
and finish; he must gather in all his lost Sheep, and therefore he has put
forth an irresistible Power of his Spirit upon thy Heart, which must carry thee
Captive after him.

Object. I am afraid my Faith has been rather Presumption, a Work of my own
Power, than Faith wrought by the Spirit's Power; how may I discern that?

Answ. 1. If you are wrapped up in God's Covenant, if any Promise be actually
yours, it is no Presumption to take Possession by Faith of what is your own;
do thou seriously will Christ, and resolve never to give the Lord rest, until
he give thee rest in him? Then see Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will let him take of
the Water of Life. Do thou thirst after Christ? Then read Isai. 55.1, 2, 3.
John 7.37. If any Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. When Christ saw
their Faith, Matthew. 9.1, 2. What said he? Son, be of good Cheer, thy Sins be
forgiven, the Word signifies, be confident. It is no Presumption to believe
Pardon of Sins now thou art come unto me, not only for the Healing of thy Body,
but especially for Pardon of Sin. It is the great Sin of many Saints, when they
do thirst, and believe, and come to Christ, and so are under the Promise of
Grace; yet they think it Presumption now to Believe and take Possession of all
those Treasures that be in Christ, but look that the Lord should first make
them feel, and then they will believe; whereas Faith should now receive and
drink in abundantly of the Fullness of Christ: Shall it be accounted Presumption
for any Man to eat his own Bread, and drink his own Drink, and put on his own
Clothes? The Promise makes Christ and all his Benefits your own, therefore it
is no Presumption to apply them.

2. Suppose you cannot find your self within any Promise, and you see no Reason
to believe, only you have the Lord's Call and Command to believe; do you now in
Conscience and Obedience to this Command, or to God's Invitation and Entreaty
in the Gospel, believe, because thou dare not dishonor God by refusing his
Grace? Thou do therefore accept of it, this is no Presumption, unless
Obedience be Presumption; nay, the most acceptable Obedience, which is the
Obedience of Faith, John 6.38. For what was the Ground on which those three
Thousand believed? Acts 2.38, 39, etc. Peter said, Repen^ that you may receive
Remission of Sins; now what follows? they that gladly received the Word were
Baptized: Oh that Word, Repent, i. e. as Beza expounds it, return to God and
come in, was a most sweet Word to them, and therefore they received it; this
was no Presumption, either for Peter to exhort them to repent, or for them to
take the Lord (as that godly Man said) at his first Word. I know there is a
Subjection to the Gospel arising only from slavish Fear and carnal Hopes, Psalm.
66.3. and 18.44. This may be in presumptuous Reprobates, but there is a
Subjection arising from the Sense of the Sweetness and exceeding Goodness of
God's Call and Promise, Psalm. 110.2, 3. As a Woman that is overcome with the
Words of her loving Suitor, the Man is precious, and hence his Words are very
sweet, and overcome her Heart to think, why should such a one as I be looked
upon, by one of such a Place; it is no Presumption now, but Duty to give her
Consent: So it is here; when the Lord is precious, and his Words [O accept me,
O come to me] are exceeding sweet; and hereupon out of Obedience gladly yields
up itself to the Lord, takes Possession of the Lord, this is no more
Presumption, than to sanctify a Sabbath, or to pray, or hear the Word, because
the Lord's Commands are herein very sweet.

3. If Repentance accompanies Faith, it is no Presumption to believe; many know
the Sin, and hence believe in Christ, trust to Christ, and there is an End of
their Faith; but what Confession and Sorrow for Sin, what more Love to Christ
follows this Faith? truly none; nay, their Faith is the Cause why th^^ have
none; for they think, if I trust to Christ ^ forgive them, he will do it, and
there is an End of the Business. Verily this Hedge Faith, this Bramble Faith,
that catches hold on Christ, and pricks and scratches Christ by more
Impenitency, more Contempt of him, is mere Presumption, which shall one Day be
burnt up, and destroyed by the Fire of God's Jealousy. Fie upon that Faith that
serves only to keep a Man from being tormented before his Time. Your Sins would
be your Sorrows, but that your Faith quiets you. But if Faith be accompanied
with Repentance, Mourning for Sin, more Esteem of God's Grace in Christ, so
that nothing breaks thy Heart more than the Thoughts of Christ's unchangeable
Love to one so vile, and this Love makes thee love much, and love him the more;
as thy Sin increases, so thou desire thy Love may increase, and now the
Stream of thy Thoughts run, how thou may live to him that died for thee.
This was Mary's Faith, who sat at Christ's Feet weeping, washing them with her
Tears, and loving him much, because much was forgiven; who though she was
accounted a presumptuous Woman by Simon; and Christ himself suffered in his
Thoughts, for suffering of her to come so near unto him; yet the Lord himself
clears her therein, and justifies her before God and Man: Many a poor Believer
thinks, If I should Believe, I should but presume, and spin a Spider's Web of
Faith out of my own Bowels: And hence you shall observe, this not Believing
stops up the Work of Repentance, Mourning and Love, and all cheerful Obedience
in them; and on the contrary, if they did believe, it would be with them as
themselves think many Times, ^f I knew the Lord was mine, and my Sins pardoned,
(...) how should I then bless him, and love him, and ^^nder at him! How would
this break my Heart before him! etc. Now, I say, let all the World judge, if
that which thou think would be Presumption, be not Rebellion, because it
makes thee worse, and stops up the Spirit of Grace in thee. Whereas that Faith
which lets out those blessed Springs of Sorrow, Love, Thankfulness, Humbleness,
etc. what can it be else but such a saving Faith as is wrought by the Spirit,
because it l^ts in the Spirit more abundantly into a dry and desolate Heart?

II. The Subject or Matter of Faith.
This is the second Thing in the Description of Faith, the Soul of an humbled
Sinner is the Subject or Matter of Faith. I do not mean the Matter out of which
Faith is wrought, (for there is nothing in Man out of which the Spirit begets
it) but that wherein Faith is seated. I mean also the Habit of Faith, not the
Principle of it; for that is out of Man in the Lord Jesus, who is therefore
called our Hope, as well as our Strength; the Soul therefore is the Subject of
Faith, called the Heart, Romans 10.9. compared with Matthew. 6.21. For we cannot go
or come to Christ in this Life with our Bodies, we are here absent from the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5. but the Soul can go to him, the Heart can be with him, as the
Eye can see a thousand Miles off, and receive the Species or Image of the
Things it sees into it, so the Soul enlightened by Faith, can see Christ afar
off, it can long for, choose, and rest upon the Lord of Life, and receive the
lively Image of Christ's Glory in it; 2 Cor. 3. ult.

If Christ were present upon Earth, the Soul (not the Body) only could truly
receive him; Christ comes to the Elect only by his Spirit, and hence on Spirits
only are fit to receive him and close with him. Thousands hear Christ
outwardly, that inwardly a^ deaf to all God's Calls, their Spirits see not,
taste not, feel not; it is therefore the Soul that is the Subject of Faith:
And, I say, it is an humble empty Soul which is the Subject; for a full, proud,
broken Spirit cannot, nay, will not, receive Christ, as we have proved; and
therefore Luke 14. the Servant is commanded to bid the poor, halt, and blind,
and Lame to come in; they would not make Excuses as others did: They that were
stung to Death with fiery Serpents, were the only Men that the brazen Serpent
was lifted up for them to look upon, and to be healed, John 3.14. And therefore
the Promise does run, If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask it, but if any Man
want Wisdom, Jam. 1.5. so if any Man want Light, want Life, want Peace, Pardon,
want Christ and his Spirit, let them ask, and the Lord will give, away with
your Money if you come to these Waters to buy, and take freely: If any Man
would be wise, let him be a Fool, (says the blessed Apostle) an empty Nothing:
A Soul in a perishing, helpless, hopeless Condition, is the Subject of Faith;
such only feel their Need of Christ, are glad at the Offer of Christ, and
therefore such only can and will receive Christ, and come unto Christ by Faith:
And truly if we had but Hearts, the Consideration of this might be Ground of
great Comfort and Confidence unto all God's People, whose Souls come unto Jesus
Christ; for that which was in Thomas, John 21. is in all Men naturally, if we
could see Christ with our Eyes, and feel him with our Hands, and embrace him
(as Mary did) with our Arms, if we could hear himself speak, we could then
believe as they said, if he will come from the Cross, so we say, if he will
come down from Heaven thus unto us, we will then believe; if we want this, we
fear we may be at last deceived, because we want Sense, and cannot come to
close with our Eyes and Hands the Objects of our Faith; but Oh consider this
Point, we are made Partakers of Christ's Life and Salvation by him, Acts 10.43.
only yet certainly by Faith. Now this Faith is not by seeing him with our Eyes,
coming near to him with our Bodies, but coming to him with our Souls; the Soul
is the Seat of Faith. Now this you may do, though you never thus saw him, whom
though you see not, yet believing you rejoice, 1 Pet. 1.8. This Coming of the
Soul to Christ, does make a firmer Union between thee and Christ, than if thou
were bodily present with him in Heaven. For many touched and crowded him, that
never were truly united to him, or received Virtue from him. If our Souls were
in the third Heaven with Christ, who of us would then doubt of our Portion in
him? I tell you, if your Souls go out of Sin and Self, unto Christ Jesus, and
there rest, this makes you nearer to him, than if your Souls were under his
Wing in the highest Heavens. The poor Seaman when he is near dangerous Shores,
when he cannot go down to the Depth of the Sea to fasten his Ship, yet if he
can cast his Anchor twenty or forty Fathom deep, and if that holds, this quiets
him in the forest Storms; when we are tossed and cannot come to Christ with our
bodily Presence, yet if our Souls can come, if our Faith, our Anchor, can reach
him, and knit us to him, this should exceedingly comfort our Hearts.

Object. How, and where should my Soul come to Christ, who is now absent from
me?

Answ. Christ comes to you in his Word and Covenant of Grace, there is his
Spirit, his Truth, Goodness, Love, Faithfulness: receive this, you receive him;
embrace this, you embrace him; as among our selves, you see great Estates are
conveyed and surrendered by Bond and Writings. Acts 2.41. when they received the
Word, they received Christ. John 15.7. If my Words abide in you, i. e. If I
abide in you by my Words, you shall be fruitful.

By the Word let thine Eye pitch upon the Person: do not only account the
Promise true, but with Sarah, Heb. 11.11. account him Faithful who has
promised; and then let thy Heart roll it self upon that Grace and Faithfulness
revealed in this Word, lean upon the Breast of this Beloved: And thus the Soul
by the Chariot Wheels and Wings of the Word, is Possessor of Christ in it, and
carried up to Christ's Cross, as dying, Gal. 3.1. and from thence to his Glory
in his Kingdom by it, Heb. 10.19, 20. As a Man that gives a great Estate by
some Writing to us, we believe it as if he were present; and by this we do not
only believe the Writing to be true, but the Man to be faithful and loving to
us; and hereupon our Hearts are carried after the Man himself, though afar off
from us. Thus we ascend to Christ in the Cloud of Faith; as Jacob, though he
could hardly believe, yet as soon as he was persuaded Joseph was yet alive, his
Spirit presently revived, and it was immediately with him, before his Body came
to him: So it is with Faith; the Soul goes unto Christ, before our Bodies and
Souls both together shall have immediate Communion with him.

III. The Form of Faith.
This is the third Thing in the Description of Faith; the coming of the whole
Soul out of itself unto Christ is the Form of Faith, and that wherein the Life
and Essence of it consists, and which does difference it from all other Graces
of the Spirit. The first Act of Faith, as it unites us to Christ, is not
Assurance that he is mine, but a coming to him with Assurance that hereby he is
become mine. Come unto the Waters, and so buy Wine and Milk, Isai. 55.1, 2. i.
e. now make them your own. The weary and heavy laden shall not have rest,
unless they come to Christ for it, Matthew. 11.28. Faith does nothing for Life,
(for that is the Law of Works) it only receives him who has done all for it,
it comes out of all it has or does, (like Abraham that left his Servants
behind him, when he went up to God in the Mount) unto Christ for Life. Conceive
it thus; Adam had a Principle and Stock of Life in himself, in his own Hand,
and therefore was to live by this, to live of himself, and from himself, and
therefore had no Need nor Use of Faith; he lived by the Law of Works; which the
Apostle sets in a direct Opposition to the Law of Faith; but Adam being now
fallen, has lost his Life, and became not like the Man that fell among Thieves
betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho, stripped, wounded, and half dead, but wholly dead,
Ephesians. 2.1. so that let any Man seek Life from himself, it is impossible he should
live: For if there had been a Law that could have given Life, our Righteousness
should have been thereby, Gal. 3.21. Hence it follows, if any Man will have
Life, he must go out of himself to another, viz. the Lord of Life for it, John
5.40. and 6.27, 28, 29.

Now observe it, this very Coming, this very Motion of the Soul to Christ, (a
Grace which Adam neither had, nor had Power to use) is Faith; the Spirit of
Christ moving or drawing the Soul, the Soul is thence moved, and so comes to
Christ, John 6.64, 65. The Soul by Sin is averted from God, and turns his Back
upon God; the Turning or Coming of the Soul (not unto Duties of Holiness, for
that is Obedience properly, but) unto God, in Christ again, is properly and
formally Faith. All Evil is in Man's self, and from himself; all Man's Good is
in Christ, and from Christ. The Souls of all God's Elect, seeing these Things,
forsake and renounce themselves, in whom and from whom is all their Evil, and
come unto Christ, in whom and from whom is all their Good. This Motion of the
Soul between these Extremes, through that vast and infinite Distance that is
between a sinful wretched Man and a blessed Savior, is Faith; for by Faith
principally we pass from Death to Life, John 5.24. The Soul of a poor Sinner
wounded and humbled; sometimes knows not Christ, and then cries out, as those
Acts 2.37. What shall I do? Whither shall I go? Sometimes dares not, sometimes
cannot, it has no Heart to stir or come, it therefore looks up, and longs, and
goes unto the Lord to draw it, like poor Ephraim, Jer. 31.18. Oh turn me Lord,
and then I shall be turned, Lam. 5.21. and this is the lowest and least Degree
of Faith. But at some other Time, the Soul mourning for Want of the Lord, the
Lord comes unto it with great Clearness, Glory and Sweetness of Grace and
Peace; and hence the Soul cannot but come and close with him, and cry, Rabboni,
and say, Oh Lord, is it thy good Pleasure to have Respect to such a Clod of
Earth, to render such Riches of Grace to one so unworthy, and to bid, nay, to
beseech me to come and take? Lord, behold I come: This is Faith. Would you have
a Proof of it? Consider therefore these Particulars, 1. Consider these
Scriptures: John 6.35. I am the Bread of Life, he that comes to me shall never
Hunger, and he that believes in me shall never Thirst. Where you see Coming to
Christ, and believing in Christ are all one. So John 7.37. In the last Day of
the Feast the Lord Christ cries out with much Vehemence, If any Man thirst, let
him come unto me and drink. Now in the next Verse our Savior expounds this
Coming; for says he, He that believes on me, out of his Belly, etc. So to
come to Christ, as upon this to drink in of Christ's Fullness, is believing in
Christ. So Heb. 11.6. the Apostle says, Without Faith it is impossible to
please God; and then in rendering the Reason of this, explains what he meant by
Faith, viz. to be our Coming unto God, upon a double Testimony, believing first
that he is, secondly, that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him diligently,
or (which is all one) who do come unto him. So John 1.12. So many as received
him, (which is all one with Coming) he adopted them as Sons, even to them that
believe in his Name. And hence we shall observe, that the Scripture does not
attribute our Righteousness and Life to our believing of Christ, but to our
believing on Christ, in Christ, (a Phrase peculiar to heavenly Language, and
therefore not found in any human Writer) because it is not the bare believing
of a Testimony that saves us, unless we so believe it, as to believe in
Christ, which cannot be but by Coming to him, and as it were in him, or into
him, our Union with Christ being made complete hereby.

2. That upon which the Lord promised Life, and Salvation, and Mercy, cannot be
Works, but Faith, Gal. 3.21. Heb. 11.6. but through out all the old and new
Testament, the Lord promises Life and Salvation to Comers, or to them that
return, Jer. 3.12. Ezekiel. 33.10. Joel 2.12, 13. Heb. 7.25. John 5.40.

3. If Unbelief be nothing else but a departing fr^^ God, Faith can be nothing
else but a coming (...) God: But that is the Nature of Unbelief, (...) 3.12.
and 10.38. John 6.64, to 69. and 12.37, to 40. The Lord's great Plot is to
gather all his Elect under the Wings of Christ, Matthew. 23.37. Ephesians. 1.9, 10. and
therefore calls them to come under them by the Voice of the Gospel. The coming
under them therefore can be nothing else but Faith, the proper Obedience to the
Gospel, as Works are under the Voice of the Law. Thus Faith is the Coming of
the Soul to Christ. But you will say, Did not many come to Christ that were
never saved by him?

Yes, many came to him with their bodily Presence, that were excluded from him,
John 6.36.

But you will say, Do not many Men's Souls come, are not many Men's Hearts
moving toward Christ, and yet excluded from Christ? Do not many cry, Lord,
Lord? Are not many enlightened and taste of this heavenly Gift, and yet fall
away? I confess it is very true; and therefore it is set down in this
Description of Faith, that it is the coming of the whole Soul unto Christ.
Never did any yet come to Christ, and receive him with their whole Souls, with
all their Hearts, but they had Fruition of him, and Blessedness by him; Faith
therefore is not the coming of the Soul, but the coming of the whole Soul unto
Jesus Christ; and this you may be established in upon these Grounds.

1. The Scripture expressly calls for this, Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with
all thine Heart. Acts 8.37. If thou believe with all thy Heart thou shall be
saved. Joel 2.13. Turn unto the Lord with all your Hearts. Jer. 29.13. You
shall find the Lord, when you seek him with your whole Hearts. As when we have
a great Gift to bestow, and we ask a poor Man to whom ^e intend to give it,
whether he will accept of it or no? Yes, says he, with all my Heart; so it is
here, the Lord asks those he intends to bestow his Son upon, and says to them,
You have lived thus long without him, and thus long abused him, will you now
have him, and accept of him? Yes, Lord, with all my Heart; this is all the Lord
requires. Does the Lord require no more of me, but to come? Lord, this Voice is
most sweet, I come with all my Heart, I come.

2. Because Christ is worthy of the whole Heart, all must be sold away to buy
this Field, this Treasure. Matthew. 13.44. He that loves Father or Mother more
than me, is not worthy of me. A filthy Lust, a base Harlot has had thy whole
Heart, and do thou think the Lord Christ will have it divided? Is not one
Heart too little for him? Are not ten thousand Souls too few to embrace him, or
to cleave to him?

3. Because without this, your coming to him is but feigned, Jer. 3.10. They
return to me not with their whole Heart, but feignedly. To cleave to Christ and
a Lust, to Christ and a proud Heart, cannot be unfeigned Faith; to go to your
Lusts in Time of Peace, and fly to Christ in Times of Extremity is damnable
Hypocrisy. When Conscience troubles you, you then go to Christ to ease you, and
when your unruly Wills and Lusts trouble you, you go to the World to ease you,
and so your Hearts are divided, and you come not wholly and only unto Christ
for it. Believe it, it is such a Faith by which you may, as Samuel did on
Readiness Garment, take hold of him, but the Lord will never take hold of you. Set
a Branch in the Stock, if it stays loosely in it, it will wither in Time; and
this is the great Cause of withering Christians, and of so many Apostates in
these evil Times. Those that came to Christ, John 6. and followed him for a
Time, but afterward fell away, ver. 66. what was the Reason of their Fall? viz.
when they were offended at Christ, they knew whether to go from Christ; but
what says Peter? Lord, Whither should we go? ver. 68. If you lay the Pipes
that are to convey Water from a full Fountain, but one Foot, or one Inch short
of it, there cannot be any Water derived from thence. Oh, Beloved, what is the
Reason, that many a Man's Faith does him no Good, derives no Life, Spirit,
Blood, Efficacy, Peace, Power from the Lord Jesus? Is it because Christ is a
dry Christ, and unwilling to communicate? No, no, the Wound is in their Faith,
that Pipe is laid but half Way to him, they fall one Foot short of him, their
Souls come, but their whole Souls do not come to him, and hence they never
reach Christ; they lie not in Christ, and therefore receive not from Christ,
Christ is precious, (here their Souls come) but not exceeding precious,
Preciousness it self, as the Word is, 1 Pet. 2.7. (here the whole Soul does not
come) they cleave to Christ, and rest upon Christ, (here their Souls come) but
they cleave not to Christ only, Psalm. 62.5. (thus their whole Souls do not
come.)

4. If the whole Soul by Unbelief departs from God, then the whole Soul must
return and come again unto God.

5. If the Want of this be the great Cause why Men are rejected of God, then
the whole Soul must return to him: But this is the Cause why all Men under the
Means are rejected of God. Israel would ^^^e of me, Psalm. 81.12, 13. i. e.
would not be content alone with me, would not take quiet Contentment in me, (as
the Hebrew Word signifies) the Lord was not good enough for them; but their
Hearts went out from him to other Things, and therefore the Lord gave them up
to their own Hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels. The Woman
that forsakes the Guide of her Youth, and sets her Heart as much upon other Men
as her Husband, is an Adulteress, for which only she shall have a Bill of
Divorse.

6. Because as the Gospel first reveals Christ to the Mind, and then offers him
to the Will; so Faith which runs Parallel with the Gospel, first sees Christ,
(there the Mind, one Part of the Soul, goes out) then receives Christ gladly,
(there the other Part, the Will, goes out) and so the whole Soul comes to
Christ. The Gospel comes to all the Elect, first in great Clearness and
Evidence of the Truth of it, 1 These. 1.5. to which the Understanding assents,
and is persuaded of; secondly, in great Grace and Goodness, surpassing Beauty
and Sweetness, Lam. 3.24. with which the Will is drawn, and so the whole Soul
comes unto Christ: For the Gospel is not only true, but glad Tidings to all the
Elect, especially when humbled at God's Feet, 1 Timothy 1.15. in whom says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. you believed, after that ye heard the Word of Truth,
(there is the Object of the Understanding) the Gospel of your Salvation, (there
is the Goodness of it, the Object of the Will) so that the whole Soul is drawn
to Christ in the Work of Faith. He that understands how liberum arbitrium may
be in two Faculties, must not wonder, if one Grace be seated in both Faculties
of Understanding and Will; no Grace can be completely seated in diverse
Faculties, but gradually, and imperfectly it may; the Work of Faith is not
complete, when the Understanding is opened only to see and wonder at the
Mystery of Mercy in the Gospel; but when the Will adheres and clasps about that
infinite and surpassing Good it sees, then it is perfected and not before, John
6.40. And this is the Reason, why saving Faith (as it is called) does not look
only to a bare Testimony and Assent unto it, as human Faith does; because in
the Gospel not only divine Truth is propounded to the Mind to assent unto; but
an infinite and eternal Good is offered to the Heart and Will of Man to
embrace, and thence it is that it is not sufficient for a Christian to believe
God or to believe Christ, but he must also believe in him, or else he cannot be
saved; the Object of believing of him being verum, or Truth; the Object of the
second, bonum, or Good: Take heed therefore a poor lost Sinner, undone in its
own Eyes for ever, not knowing what to do, unless it be to lie down, and lie
still at God's Feet as worthy of nothing but Hell; what does the Lord now do?
The Lord Christ by his Gospel first lets in a new Light, and it sees the Lord
Jesus there bleeding before its Eyes, and held forth as a Propitiation to all
that believe, to all that come to him; the Mind sees this Mystery, this
exceeding rich Grace and free Mercy, and thinks happy are they that share in
this Mercy, but will the Lord look upon such a Nothing as I? Can such infinite
Treasures be my Portion? The Lord therefore calls and bids them come away and
enter into the Possession of it: Thy Sins indeed are great, says the Lord, yet
remember, blood-thirsty Manasseh, persecuting Paul, was pardoned; nay, remember
my Grace is free, for whose Sake I invite thee: I beseech thee to come in, thy
Wants indeed are many, yet remember that thou have therefore the more Need and
Cause to come, and that it is I that have made thee empty and poor on purpose,
that thou might come: It is true, I have an eternal Purpose to exclude many
Thousands from Mercy, yet my Purpose is unchangeable, never to cast off any
that do come for it; I never did it yet, I will not do it unto thee, if thou
do come: It is true, many may presume, yet it is no Presumption, but Duty to
obey my great Command; and it is the greatest Sin that ever thou did, or
can commit; now to reject it, and refuse this Grace: Come therefore poor,
weary, lost, undone Creature. Hereupon the Heart and Will come, and rest, and
roll themselves upon these Bowels, and there rest, thus the whole Soul comes,
and this I say again is Faith. Just as it is with the Lodestone drawing the
Iron, who would think that Iron should be drawn by it? But there is a secret
Virtue coming from the Stone which draws it, and so it comes and is united to
it; so who would think that ever such an iron, heavy, earthy Heart, should be
drawn unto Christ; yet the Lord lets out a secret Virtue of Truth and Sweetness
from himself, which draws the Soul to Christ, and so it comes.

May not the Consideration of this be of great Consolation to those that want
Assurance, and therefore think they have no Faith? Oh remember that if thou
come unto Christ, as that poor Woman of Canaan, she had no Assurance she
should be helped of Christ, nay, Christ tells her to her Teeth, that he would
not cast Children's Bread to such Dogs, yet she came to him, and looked up to
free Mercy, and claspt about him, and would not go away; you will say, Was this
Faith? Yes, our Savior himself professes it before Men and Angels, Oh Woman
great is thy Faith, Matthew. 15.28.

So I say unto all you poor Creatures whom the Lord has humbled, and made vile
in your own Eyes, unworthy of Children's Bread as Dogs; yet you look up unto,
and rest upon Mercy with your whole Heart; this is precious Faith in the
Account of Christ.

Object. But how shall I know when the whole Soul comes to Christ?

Answ. When the Eye of the Soul so sees Christ, and the Heart so embraces and
rests upon Christ, as that it rests in Christ, as in its Portion and
all-sufficient Good: Many rest upon Christ that do not rest in him, that is,
that are not abundantly satisfied with him; and hence their Souls go out of
Christ to other Things to perfect their Rest, and so their Hearts are divided
between Christ and other Things; O fear this, says the Apostle, lest there
being a Promise left us of entering into his Rest, any of you fall short of it,
Heb. 4.1. for (faith he) we that have believed do enter into Rest, verse 3. so
say I to you; of all Delusions, fear this, lest when you come to Christ, and
rest upon Christ for Life and Salvation, that you rest not in Christ: I tell
you (says Christ, to those that came to him, and were constant Followers of
him, John 6.53. Except you eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of
God, you have no Life in you: what is this eating and drinking? Verily, sipping
and tasting is not properly eating and drinking, tasting your Meat will not
satisfy you, and therefore will not nourish Life inyou; to eat and drink Christ
is to receive him, as to satiate and satisfy the Soul with him; to quench all
your Desires, your Hungring and Thirsting in him; until thy Soul says, as he
did in another Case, it is enough that Joseph lives, so, Lord, I have enough
now I have this Love, this Grace of Christ to b^ my Portion; now you rest in
Christ. For if there be some great Good a Man enjoys, if there be any Good
wanting in it, it is not possible that his whole Heart should be set upon it,
ex. gr. A Man has Food, but if he wants Clothes, and his Bread will not cloth
him, his whole Heart will not be set upon his Food, but upon that which may
cloth him also: So, on the contrary, if there be an eminent Good, wherein he
finds all in one, no Good out of it, that is wanting in it; it is certain, that
the whole Soul is carried after this Good; so it is, here when the Soul so
comes to Christ, as that it comes for all Good to him, and so finds all Good in
him, that he now only supports the sinking Soul, verily the whole Soul is now
come; because as it felt before it came all Wants and Evils out of him, so now
it finds all Fullness in him, and whither should the whole Soul be carried but
after such a Good? When the Lord calls to the Soul to come and take all with
Nothing, take all or nothing. And hereupon it comes and drinks, as it is John
7.37. satisfying it self there and professing, Lord, I now desire no more, I
have enough. Oh Brethren, what Faith there is among Men at this Day I cannot
tell, but this I am sure was Abraham's Faith, Genesis 17.1. and David's Faith, 2 Samuel 23.5. and Peter's Faith, John 6.68. and Paul's Faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. Gal.
6.14. When the Soul thus rests upon the Rock Christ, the Gates of Hell may
avail, but never prevail against such a one; he that has set the whole World
at his Heels, and sold himself out of all for this Pearl, and this abundantly
recompenceth all his Losses, such a one has Christ for his own, and shall
never be deprived of him again; the Lord never gives his Elect any rest out of
Christ, that they may find rest at last in Christ. When thus the Soul is entered
into Rest, the whole Soul is drawn here, and this is the great Reason why many
Men famous in their Generations and Times in the Eyes of others for Faith; yet
rotten at the Heart, and thence turn Apostates, one proves covetous, another
ambitious, another voluptuous, another grows conceited, another grows
contentious, another grows formal. What is the Reason of this? Verily they did
rest upon Christ, but did never find rest in Christ, and therefore their whole
Soul never came to him: Christ after some Time of Profession grew a dry and
common Christ unto them, though at first they wondered at him, and he was very
sweet unto them; and hence they departed from him, as from an empty dry Pit in
Summer time, where they found nothing to refresh them: But the Lord Jesus
carries it toward all the Faithful; as Elkanah did toward Hannah; though she
was in a Fit, much vexed and troubled for want of Children, yet because he
loved her exceeding dearly, he quiets her again with this, Am not I better unto
thee than ten Sons? So though they may be unquiet for some odd Fits for want of
many Things, yet because Christ loved them, he brings them back unto their
Rest, saying, Am not I better than all Friends, all Creatures, all Abilities,
all spiritual and created Excellencies; and hereby they find Rest to their
Souls in him again.

Object. But is there any Believer's Heart so knit unto Christ but that there
is a Heart also after other Vanities? Do they find such Rest in him, as that
they find no Disquietness? Is there not an unregenerate Part and much Unbelief
remaining? Is any Man's Faith made perfect, that the whole Soul must come, or
else there is no true Faith?

Answ. It is true, there is an unregenerate and a regenerate Part in a godly
Man, but not a Heart and a Heart (the Note of a wicked Man in Scripture Phrase)
there are Disquietings in the Hearts of Saints after that they be in Christ,
even Solomon himself may sometime seek out of Christ for rest in his Orchards
and Gardens, Knowledge and Wisdom; yet there is a great Difference between
these that are in the Saints arising from the unregenerate Part, and those that
be in the Wicked, arising from a Heart and a Heart, or a double Heart; and this
Difference is chiefly seen in two Things,

1. A double minded Man, who has a double Heart, makes not a daily War against
that Heart which carries him away from resting only in Christ: For Christ
quiets his Conscience, and the World comforts his Heart. Christ gives him some
rest; and because this is not full, his Heart runs out to the Creature, and to
his Lusts for more; and so between them both he has rest, and he is quieted
with this, because he feels what he sought for: And therefore he must have
Christ, else his Conscience cannot be quiet, and he must needs have his Lusts,
his Ease, and this World too, else his Heart is most unquiet; but let him have
both, he is now quiet, Micah 3.11. The Priests teach for Hire, (there the World
quiets them) yet they will lean upon the Lord too, because this also comforts
them; what do they now do? Do they make War against this woeful Frame? No, no,
but bless themselves in it, saying, No Evil shall come to us; but a poor
Believer whose Heart is upright, it is true, there are many Runnings out of his
Heart after other Vanities, and much Unquietness of Spirit, yet the regenerate
Part makes War against these, as God's Enemies, and the Disturbers of the Peace
of Christ's Kingdom. Psalm. 42. David professes, his Tears were his Meat Night
and Day, Verse 3. and his Heart was woefully sunk and fallen, yet what does he?
first he chides himself; Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and then secondly,
he makes his Moan to the Lord of it, Verse 5, 6. Lord, my Soul is cast down, Oh
Lord pity me; you shall see also, Psalm. 73.2. his Eyes were dazzled with the
Glory of the World and the Wicked in it, that he had almost forsaken God; yet
within a little while after he gets into the Sanctuary of God, and then loathes
himself for such brutish and foolish Thoughts, and closes with God again,
saying, Whom have I in Heaven or Earth but thee, Verse 25.

2. All the Out-runnings of the Hearts of the Faithful, and their Disquietness
of Spirit thereby, make them to return to their Rest again, and give them the
more Rest in the Conclusion: David was a Bird out of his Nest for a Time, and
therefore when he considered how the Lord had saved his Eyes from Tears, his
Soul from Hell, returns again, and says, Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, Psalm.
25.13. It is said, his Soul shall dwell at Ease, or (as the Word signifies)
shall lodge in Goodness; some hard Work full of Trouble, some strong Lust, or
sad Temptation, Desertion, Affliction, the Lord exercises the Soul withal for
some Time, and so long as the Soul is in Heaviness and much Weariness of
Spirit, as it is, 1 Pet. 1.6. yet when this Day's Work is done, when the Sin is
subdued, and the Temptation has humbled him, then the Believer's Soul shall
lodge in Goodness; he shall have an easy Bed, and soft Pillow to rest on at
Night; When have the Faithful sweeter Naps in Christ's Bosom, then after sorest
Troubles, longest Eclipses of God's pleased Face? When do their Souls cleave
closer to the Lord, than when they are ready to forsake the Lord, and the Lord
them? Certainly Fire is wholly carried upward, when that which suppresseth it,
makes it at last break out into greater Flame: Peter falls from Christ, yet he
is Peter, a Stone cleaving most close unto Christ, above all other the
Apostles, because his Fall being greater, his Faith clave the closer to the
Lord Christ for ever after it: Solomon's Heart certainly never clave so
inseparably unto the Lord, as after his Fall, wherein he did more
experimentally find and feel the Emptiness and Vanity of those Things, wherein
he did imagine before something was to be found; but he that has a double
Heart, never enters into Rest, but the longer he lives, the more common Christ,
his Truth, and Promises grow; they are but fading Flowers, whose Beauty and
Sweetness affect him for a Time; but they wither before the Sun set: And
therefore the longer he lives the less savor he finds in these Things, and
therefore takes less Contentment therein; the Lord Jesus and all his Ordinances
grow more flat and dry Things to him, and therefore though at first he might
Rejoice (as John's Hearers, John 5.35.) in these burning and shining Lights;
yet it is but for a Season; at last he discovers himself, not by a renewed
returning to his Rest, but by a wearyish forsaking of it.

The Raven never returned to the Ark again, because it could live upon the
floating Carrion on the Waters; whereas the Dove finding no rest there, returns
again.

IV. The End of Faith.
This is the fourth Particular in the Description of Faith: The whole Soul
comes to Christ, for Christ and all his Benefits; and this is the End of
Faith, or of a Believer's coming unto Christ: The End of Faith is sometimes
expressed by a general Word Life, John 5.40. but you must remember that hereby is
meant the Lord of Life first, and so all the Blessings of Life. The Falseness
and Hypocrisy of Christ's Followers appeared in this, John 6.26. you seek me,
says Christ, for Loaves, that was their End; as many a one in these Days if
they be in outward Misery, seek to Christ for outward Mercy, Corn in Time of
Famine, Health in Time of Sickness, Peace upon any Terms in Time of War; and if
they be in any inward Distress, now they seek to Christ for Comfort and Quiet,
and so like many sick Patients desire the Physician, not to have him married to
them, but for some of his Physic only, to be healed by him: But what says our
Savior to these Persons, ver. 27. Labor not for the Meat that perishes, what
should be the End of their Labor then? He tells them, but for that Bread that
endures to everlasting Life; What is this Bread? See the 33d, 35th, and 48th
Verses, he tells them, I am the Bread of Life; seek for me therefore, come for
me; and look as none can have Life from the Bread, unless he first feed upon
the Bread it self, so none can have any Life or Benefit from Christ that comes
not first to Christ for Christ. Conceive of this thus: God in Christ is the
complete Object of Faith under a double Notion: First, as Sufficient, in being
all we want unto us: Secondly, as Efficient, in communicating all to us, and
doing all for us. In the first Respect, he is El-shaddai, in his Promise; in
the second Respect he is Jehovah, Exodus 6.3. in making good his all-sufficient
Promise; hence Faith comes to him for a double End, first, that he would give
himself and be all to it; secondly, that he would communicate all his
Blessings, and the Benefits also, and so do all for it. For in the Covenant of
Grace, the Lord does not only promise a new Heart, Pardon of Sin, with the rest
of those spiritual Benefits, but also himself, I will be their God, and they
shall be my People. Hence Faith comes first for that which the Lord principally
promises, viz. God himself, and then for all the rest of those heavenly and
glorious Benefits; and hence it is, if any Man come for Christ himself without
his Benefits, and regard not the Conveyance of them, as the Familists at this
Day do, who abolish all inherent Graces, and some of them all Ordinances,
because Christ is all to them; or if any come for the Benefits of Christ
without Christ himself, as many among our selves do, who never account
themselves happy in him, but only by some Abilities they receive from him;
neither of these come with a single Eye, nor fix a right End in their Closing
with Christ: You must first come for Christ himself, and so for all his
Benefits.

For establishing your Hearts in which Truth, consider these Things.

1. Consider what drives any Man to Christ. Is not Sense of Wants one main
Thing? Now what are a Christian's Wants, when the Lord has humbled him? Are
they not, first, want of Christ; and secondly, of all the Benefits of Christ?
viz. Righteousness, Peace, Pardon, Grace, Glory, John 16.9. It therefore the
Souls of all the Elect feel a Want of both, does not Faith come to Christ for
both? John 4.10. If thou knew the Gift of God (i. e. the Worth of him, and
thy Want of him) thou would ask, and he would give thee Water of Life.

2. What does the Lord offer in the Gospel? Is it not first Christ himself, and
then all the Benefits of Christ? Isai. 9.6, 7. To us a Child is born, to us a
Son is given; in the receiving therefore of Christ by Faith, what should the
Soul aim at, but that it may have the Son himself, and so all his Benefits with
him?

3. Can any Man have eternal Life, that not only has not the Benefits flowing
from the Son, but that wants the Son himself? I am sure the Apostle expressly
affirms it, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has Life, he that has not the
Son, has not Life: Faith therefore must come for Christ himself: As in
Marriage the Woman consents first to have the Man, and so to have all other
Benefits that necessarily follow upon this.

4. The Happiness of all the Saints consists in two Things: First, Union to
Christ; Secondly, Communion with Christ. Faith therefore pitcheth first upon
Christ himself, that it may have sure and certain Union to him (for our Union
is not unto any of the Benefits flowing to us from Christ; we are not united
unto Forgiveness of Sins, nor Peace of Conscience, nor Holiness, etc. but unto
the Person of the Son of God himself) and then secondly, comes for the
Communication of all the Benefits arising only from Union; as Paul, Phil. 3.9,
10. esteems all Things Dung and Loss, first, to be found in him, that so he
might have his Righteousness in Justification, and feel the Power of his Death
and Resurrection in Sanctification, etc. In one Word, Faith first buys the
Pearl it self, and then seeks to be enriched by it; it finds the Treasure of
Grace, Glory, Peace, Mercy, Favor, Reconciliation in Christ, but then buys the
Field it self, that it may have the Treasure also, Mat. 13.44. The Lord
Christ's great Desire is, that all his might be with him to see his Glory, John
24.17. and Faith desires first to have him, and be for ever with him, and so to
partake of that Glory: The Lord's great Plot is first to perfect the Saints in
Christ, Col. 2.10. Ye are complete in him; then to make them like to Christ by
communicating Life, Grace, Peace, Glory from him. Col. 3.3, 4. 1 John 3.1, 2.
Faith therefore first quiets it self in him, then seeks for Life from him; it
comes first for Christ, and then for all the Benefits of Christ.

Oh that this Truth were well considered, how would it discover abundance of
rotten counterfeit Faith in the World, some seeking for Peace and Comfort, and
catching at Promises without seeking first to have the Person of Christ
himself; in whom only all the Promises are Yea and Amen. Others despising the
Benefits of Christ, especially Grace, Holiness, and Life from him: Because (say
they) Christ is all in all to them. Ask them, Have you any Grace, Change of
Heart, etc.? Tush! What do you tell them of Repentance, and Faith, and
Holiness? They have Christ, and that is sufficient; they have the Substance,
what should they do now with Shadows of Ordinances, Ministries, or Sacraments?
They have all Graces in Christ, why should they look either for Being of or
Evidence from any Grace inherent in themselves? They have a living holy Head,
but Christ's Body they say is a dry Sskeleton, a dead Carcass, and they are but
dry Bones; and is it so indeed? Then look that God should shortly bury thee out
of his Sight; assuredly you that Want or Despise the Benefits coming from him,
shall never have Part nor Portion in him at the great Day of Account; Christ is
a Savior to save Men from their Sins; not to save Men and their Sins; Christ
is King and Priest of his Church, holy and separated from Sinners, Heb. 7.26.
and if you have any Part or Portion in him, he has made you Kings and Priests
also to God and his Father, and has not left you in your Pollutions, but
washed you from it in his own Blood, Rev. 1.5, 6. The Law of God is written on
the Heart of Christ, Psalm. 40.8. with Heb. 10.5, 6, 7. and if ever he wraps you
up in the Covenant of Grace, he will write his Law in your Hearts also, Heb.
8.10.

Let all deluded Familists tremble at this, that in advancing Christ himself,
and free Grace, abolish and despise those heavenly Benefits which flow from
him, unto all the Elect. Let others also mourn over themselves, that have with
much Affection been seeking after Christ's Benefits, Peace of Conscience,
Holiness of Heart and Life, Promises to assure them of eternal Glory, but have
not sought first to embrace and have the Person of the Lord Jesus himself.

Oh come, come therefore unto the Lord Jesus for Christ himself, and for all
his Benefits; I say for all his Benefits. This is that which the Apostle prays
for with bended Knees for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.14, 18. That they might (not
take in a little, but) comprehend the Height, Depth, Length, Breadth of
Christ's Love, that so they might be filled with all the Fullness of God. This
is that which our Savior expressly with much Vehemence calls for, John 7.37.
Let all that Thirst come unto me and drink; not sip and taste a little, as
Reprobates and Apostates do, Heb. 6.4, 5. but drink and drink abundantly, as it
is, Cant. 5.1. And observe it, that upon these very Terms the Lord tenders
Grace and Mercy, Romans 5.17. the Apostle does not say, They that receive a
little, but abundance of Grace, shall reign by Righteousness unto eternal Life.
Open thy Mouth wide and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.11, 12. And most certainly
this is one principal Difference between the Faith of the Elect and the
Reprobates, (and if I mistake not, the principal) the Elect close with Christ
for that End, for which the Father offers him, which is, that they might
possess his Son, and all his Benefits, and therefore come poor and empty for
all; the Reprobate come not for all, but for so much and no more than will
serve their own Turn; in Misery they would have Christ to deliver them, but
what care they for spiritual Mercies? In Trouble of Conscience, or after their
Soul falls into filthy Lusts and Sins, they come to Christ to forgive them and
comfort them, but what care they for Holiness and a new Nature? Some Sins they
would have Christ save them from, but they regard not Redemption from all; they
cannot come to Christ, that all the Powers of Darkness may be perfectly
subdued, that their own Sins, and Selves, Conceits, and Wills may be led away
Captive by this mighty Conqueror; that Christ in all his Authority, Grace,
Peace, Life, Glory, might be forever advanced in them and by them.

It was Austin's Complaint in his Time of many of his Hearers, that Christum
assequi, to have Christ was pleasing to them; but sequi Christum, to follow
Christ, this was heavy. To close with Christ's Person, is sweet to many; but to
close with his Will, and to come to him that he would give them a Heart to lie
under it, this Benefit they desire not. All Christ is useless and needless; but
something from Christ is precious to them: For the Lord Jesus sake, Beloved,
take heed of this Delusion. If any Thing have been bought for us at a dear
Rate, and cost much; if the Man should offer to hold any Part of it back, we
will not abate him any Thing, we will have it all, because it cost dear: I tell
you, Pardon of Sin, Peace with God, the Adoption of Sons, the Spirit of Grace,
Perseverance to the End, the Kingdom of Glory, the Riches of Mercy, have been
bought for you by a dear and great Price, the precious Blood of Christ; and
therefore if the Justice of God should hold back any Thing, or thy own Belief
tell thee these are too great and many for so vile a Creature as thou art to
enjoy, yet abate the Lord nothing; say thou art vile, yet Christ's Blood that
bought not some, but all these, is very precious, and therefore take them all
to thy self, as thy Portion for ever, and bless the Lord, as David does, Psalm.
16.7. that gave thee this Counsel. Whiles you are in Peace, it may be you may
neglect so great Salvation; but the Time of Distress and Anguish may come
wherein you may feel a Need of all, even of those hidden Depths of Mercy above
your Reach and Reason; and therefore, as Bees gather in your Honey in Summer
Time, and with Joseph lay up in these Times of Plenty, wherein the exceeding
Riches of Grace is opened and poured out at your Heels, for those Times of
approaching Famine, and for those many Years of spiritual Desertion and
Distress, wherein you may think, Can it stand with the Honor of God to save
such a poor sinful Creature as I am? What Iron Heart is not drawn by this Love,
for the Lord to invite you to possess all or nothing? Dives in Hell was
desirous of a Drop to cool his Tongue, and behold the very Depths and Seas of
Grace are opened for thee to come in and partake of, if the Lord Jesus should
be offered unto thee to pardon some Sins, but not all; to pardon all Sins, but
not to heal thy Nature also; or to heal some Backslidings, but not all; to
supply thy spiritual Wants, but not outward also, as may be best for thee; or
to supply outward, but not inward and spiritual; if he should offer to do thee
Good in this Life, but not in Death nor after Death, you might refuse to come
in; but when all is offered, all that Mercy, which no Eye ever saw to pity
thee; all that Love wherewith Abraham, David, Paul, etc. were embraced, now to
refuse to come up and possess these; how can you escape the forest Vengeance of
a jealous God, that neglect so great Salvation? Oh Lord! What Extremity of
Anguish and Bitterness will thou one Day be in, when the Contempt of this
Grace, glowing upon thy Conscience, shall press thee down with these Thoughts,
I am now under all Misery, but I might have had all God's Grace, all Christ's
Glory, but Wretch that I am, I would not. Methinks if your own (Good hereby
should not draw you, yet the exceeding great Glory the Lord shall have thereby,
should force you to accept of all this Grace; for if thou did receive a
little Grace, believe a little Mercy toward thee, this makes thee sometime
exceeding thankful, does it not? And the very Hope of more makes thy Heart
break forth into a holy Boasting and Glorying in Christ, Who is a God like unto
thee? Suppose therefore you drank in all, and received all that which the Lord
freely offers, shall not the Lord be exceedingly magnified then? Could thou
contain thy self then, without crying out, Oh Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen, and my Soul has now
Possession of thy Salvation? Would thou not call to the Hills, and Seas, and
Earth, and Heavens, and Saints, and Angels, to break forth into glorious
Praises, and bless this God.

Object. But what have I to do to come, that am so poor, and empty, and full of
Woes, and Wants, and Sins? never was any so miserable, and blind and naked as I.

Answ. If Faith comes for all to Christ, and fetches all from him, then never
be discouraged because thou have nothing to bring unto him; let all thy Wants
and Miseries be Arguments and Motives therefore to come unto him, Rev. 3.17,
18. Because thou art poor and naked, nay, because thou know it not, and art
not affected with it, therefore come unto me, and buy Eye Salve, and Gold, and
white Raiment. Psalm. 25.11. Lord, Pardon my Sin, says David, because it is
great: Have Mercy upon me, for I am consumed with Grief, and am in Trouble,
Psalm. 31.9. Let Mercy and Truth continually preserve me, for innumerable Evils
have compassed me round about, Psalm. 40.11, 12. Let us return unto the Lord,
because he has wounded us, Hos. 6.1, 2. I am a Dog, therefore let me have
Crumbs, said the Woman of Canaan: Oh this is cross to Sense and Reason, and we
cannot believe while we are so exceeding poor, empty, vile, that the Lord
should look upon us; but, Beloved, you little think what Wrong you do to your
selves, and the Lord Jesus hereby: For by this Means Christ is not so much
exalted, nor the Creature humbled, both which concurring in Faith, make those
Acts of Faith most precious; for while you stand upon some thing, and would
have something to bring to Christ, you hereby exalt your selves; but when you
come with Sense of nothing else but Woes and Wants, and see Christ now making
of you welcome, Oh this is not only Mercy, but ravishing Mercy. If you should
come with Sense of somewhat to Christ, and to see his Love to you; you might
glorify Mercy in the Height, and Length, and Breadth, of it, but not in the
Depth of it, unless you see it reaching its Hand to you, when you are fallen
into so low and poor a Condition as Nothingness, and Emptiness, and Misery it
self. And therefore do not come to Christ only for the Benefits of the
Covenant, but for the Condition of it also, when you feel a Want of Faith it
self, as Hezekiah did, Isai. 38.14. Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me, 1
Kings 8.57, 58. Do not undertake to fulfill any Part of the Covenant, or any
Condition in it, or any Duty required of thee, of thy self, but go empty to
Christ, and say as David, Lord, I will run the Ways of thy Salvation, if thou will set my Heart at Liberty, Psalm. 119.32, 33. Quicken me, and I will call
upon thy Name, Psalm. 80.18. Be strong in the Lord, and the Power of his Might,
but not of thine own.

Object. 1. But I come for all, and am never a whit the better, but as poor and
miserable still as ever I was.

Answ. If the Lord keeps you poor and low, yet the same Motive that made thee
come, let it make thee stay; it may be the Lord sees thou would grow full and
lifted up if he should give thee a little, and therefore keeps thee low; better
be humble than full and proud. Let us go unto the Lord, because he has
wounded, broken, and slain us, Hos. 6.2, 3. But they might object, we do come,
but find no Help, no Cure. It may be so; yet it is said, After two Days he will
revive us, and the third Day we shall live in his Sight, and we shall know him,
if we shall follow on to know him, Verse 6. His goings forth are prepared as
the Morning, it may be Night for a Time, but the Sun of Righteousness will
arise gradually and gloriously upon thy Soul.

Truly, Brethren, when I see the Curse of God upon many Christians that are now
grown full of their Parts, Gifts, Peace, Comforts, Abilities, Duties; I stand
adoring the Riches of the Lord's Mercy to a little Handful of poor Believers,
not only in making them empty, but in keeping them so all their Days; and
therefore come to the Lord poor, empty, naked, nothing, cursed in the Sense or
their Want of all Things, but for all Things, and then receive with Gladness,
yet Boldness and holy Confidence, not only Pardon of some Sins, but of all;
believe, answer not to some Prayers, but all. Embrace in thy Bosom, not some
few Promises, but all. It is a great Ease of Conscience, when may a Christian
take a Promise without Presumption as spoken to him, and given to him in
particular? And the Rule is very sweet, but certain: When he takes all the
Scripture and embraces it as spoken unto him, he may then take any particular
proper Promise boldly; my Meaning is, when Christian takes hold and wrestles
with God for the Accomplishment of all the Promises of the new Testament, when
he sets all the Commands before him, as his Rule and Compass and Guide to walk
after, when he applies all the Threatenings to drive him nearer unto Christ the
End of them; this no Hypocrite can do, this the Saints shall do, and by this
may know when the Lord speaks in any particular to them; go I say again
therefore unto the Lord for all, and in the Sense of all your Emptiness be
abundantly comforted, that though you do not find supply from Christ, yet you
come unto the Lord Christ for it: It is a certain Rule, you shall not always
want that Good which you come to Christ to supply, nor always be mastered with
that Sin which you come to Christ with, to take away; only then besure you come
for all; otherwise you do not come truly: Come first for Christ himself, and
then (as I said) for all his Benefits.

To conclude; This is the direct and compendious Way of living by Faith, so
much urged and pressed of God's Servants: For to live by Faith properly is to
live upon the Promise in the Want of the Thing, or to apprehend the Thing in
the Promise, Heb. 11.1. Now the Promises are not given to the Elect immediately
without Christ, but first Christ is given, i. e. offered in the Gospel and
received by Faith, and then with him all Things also: And therefore the
Scripture runs thus, Isai. 55.1, 2, 3, 4. Come unto the Waters and drink, and
then I will make an everlasting Covenant, (which contains all the Promises)
even the sure Mercies of David: The Apostle expressly disputes the Case, and
says, Where a Testament is, (containing evangelical Promises) there must first
be the Death of the Testator, Heb. 9.15, 16. to whom we must first come by
Faith, before we can have Right to any Promise, Heb. 7.22, 25. and 10.16, 17,
18, 22. Being justified by Faith, now we have Peace with God, nay, we have
access to God, nay, now we are of sure standing, now we hope in the Glory to
come, Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4. all follows the first.

How shall a Christian therefore live by Faith? Truly, first receive Christ and
come to him for the End I mention; and then thou may be sure all other Things
shall be given to thee. As for Example: Do want any temporal Blessing?
Suppose it be Payment of Debts, thy daily Bread, Provision for thy Family, a
comfortable Yoke Fellow, look now through the Scripture for Promises of these
Things, and let thy Faith act thus: If God has given me Christ, the greatest
Blessing, then certainly he will give me all these smaller Matters as may be
good for me; but the Lord has given me Christ, and therefore I shall not want,
Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my Shepard, says David: What follows? I shall not
want: There is the like Reason in all other Things, suppose it be in Care of
Protection from Enemies, if the Lord has given me Christ to save me from Hell,
then he will save me from these fleshly Enemies much more: You shall see, Isai.
7. a Promise given that Syria should not prevail against Judah; they doubted of
this, how does the Lord seek to assure them? You shall see, ver. 14. it is by
promising a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and his Name shall be
Emanuel; this is a strange Reason, (yet you may see the Reason of it if you
consider this Point) so Isai. 9.5, 6. The Oppressors Rod shall be broken. For
unto us a Child is born, a Son is given. By Faith they put to fright the Armies
of Aliens, brake down the Walls of Jericho, did Wonders in the World. What did
they chiefly look to in their Faith? You shall see in Heb. 11.39, 40. it was by
respecting the Promise to come, and that better Thing Christ Jesus himself,
which we now see with open ^^^ce, and therefore he concludes, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.
Having such a Cloud of Witnesses, that thus lived and died by Faith, let us
look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of ours. The Prophet Haba^^^us, Heb.
2.5. affirms, that the Just shall live by Faith; What Faith is that? Consult
with the Place, you shall see it was in the Promise of Deliverance from the
Chaldean Tyranny, yet the Apostle Paul applies it to Faith in Christ's
Righteousness, and that truly, because if their Faith had not respected Christ
himself, in the first Place, they could never have expected any Deliverance by
the Promise of Deliverance from the Chaldeans, but thus they might.

V. The special Ground of Faith.
The last Thing in the Description of Faith is, That the Soul thus comes upon
the Call of Christ in his Word; and this is the special Ground of Faith,
wherefore the Soul comes to Christ: Take a Sinner humbled and broken for Sin,
he cannot prevent the Lord by coming of himself unto Christ, and therefore the
Lord prevents him, by his gracious Call and Invitation to come in: Whom God
has predestined, them has he called, Romans 8.30. Our Translation from
Darkness into God's mavelous Light, is by being called. The Soul is lost in
Humiliation, the Lord Jesus who is come to save that which is lost, seeks it
out in Vocation, or Calling, 1 Pet. 2.9. Sanctification is the restoring of us
to the Image of God we once had in Adam, as Corruption is the defacing of that
Image, Vocation is the Calling of the Soul unto Christ, this Voice Adam never
heard of; he did not need any Call to come to Christ, and therefore was
immediately sanctified, as soon as he was made: But we need Vocation unto
Christ before we can be sanctified by Christ; we need this Call to make us come
to Christ, to put us into Christ, and therefore much more before we can receive
any Holiness from Christ; the Ground of our coming by Faith, is God's Call, 2
These. 2.13.14. Chosen to Salvation through Sanctification, (the remote End of
Vocation) and Belief of the Truth (the next End of it) whereunto he has called
you, there is the Ground of it.

The Explication of this Call is a Point full of many spiritual Difficulties;
but of singular Use and Comfort to them that are faithful and called; I shall
omit many Things, and explicate only those Things which serve our Purpose here,
in these three Particulars.

1. I shall show you what this Call is, or the Nature of it. 2. The Necessity
of it. 3. How it is a Ground of Coming, and what Kind of Ground for Faith.
1. The Nature of this Call, I shall open for your more distinct Understanding,
in several Propositions, or Theses.

Our Vocation or Calling is ever by some Word or Voice, either outward, or
inward, or both; either ordinary or extraordinary; by the Ministry of Men, or
by immediate Visions and Inspirations of God. I speak not now of extraordinary
Call, by Dreams and Visions, and immediate Inspirations, as in Abraham, and
others, before the Scriptures were penned and published: Nor of extraordinary
Call, by the immediate Voice of Christ; as in Paul, and some other of the
Apostles; for those are ceased now, Heb. 1.1. unless it be among People that
want ordinary Means, and elect Infants, etc. whose Call must be more than by
ordinary Means, because they want such Means; we speak now of ordinary Call by
the Ministry of Men.

2. This Voice in ordinary calling home of the Elect to Christ, is not by the
Voice of the Law, (for the proper End of that is to reveal Sin and Death, and
to cast down a Sinner) but by the Voice of the Gospel bringing glad Tidings;
written by the Apostles, and preached to the World. He has called you by our
Gospel, 2 These. 2.14. These Things are written that you might believe, John
20.31. By the Foolishness of Preaching, the Lord saves them that believe, 1
Cor. 1.21, with 26. I mean Preaching at the first or second Rebound, by lively
Voice, or printed Sermons at the Time of Hearing, or in the Time of deep
Meditation, concerning Things heard; the Spirit indeed inwardly accompanies the
Voice of the Gospel, but no Man's Call is by the immediate Voice of the Spirit
without the Gospel, or the immediate Testimony of the Spirit breathed out of
free Grace without the Word, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. And therefore that a Christian
should be immediately called without the Scripture, and the Scripture only
given to confirm God's immediate Promise, as a Prince gives his Letter to
confirm his Promise made to a Man before; (as Valdesso would have it) is both a
false and dangerous Assertion.

3. This Voice of the Gospel is the Voice of God in Christ, or the Voice of
Jesus Christ, although dispensed by Men, who are but weak Instruments for this
mighty Work sent and set in Christ's Stead; but the Call, the Voice is
Christ's; it is the Lord's Call, Romans 1.6. It is certain some of the Messengers
of Christ called the Romans by the Gospel, yet Paul says, They were called by
Christ Jesus, the Dead hear his Voice and arise and live, John 5.29. 2 These.
2.12, 13. And when the Time of Calling comes, they listen to it as his Call:
And hence it is styled, Heb. 3.1. because the Lord Christ from Heaven speaks,
takes the written Word in his own Lips, as it were, Cant. 1.1, 2. and thereby
pierces through the Ears to the Heart, through all the Noise of Fears, Sorrows,
Objections against Believing, and makes it to be heard as his Voice; the Bowels
of Christ now yern toward an humbled lost Sinner, bleeding at his Feet,
therefore can contain no longer, but speaks and calls, and makes the Soul
understand his Voice: So that this Call is not a mean Business, because the
Lord Jesus himself now speaks, whose Voice is glorious.

4. The Substance of this Call, or the Thing the Lord calls unto, is to come
unto him: For there is a more common Calling (or as some Term it a particular
Calling) of Men, as some to the Masters or Servants, 1 Cor. 7.20, 21, 24. or to
Office in Church or Commonwealth, as Aaron, Heb. 5.4. and the Voice there is
to attend unto their Work to which they are called. There is also a remote End
of Vocation, which is to Holiness, 1 These. 4.7. and unto Glory also, 2 These.
2.14. Phil. 3.14. But we now speak of more special Calling, the next End of
which is to come unto Christ, the Soul has lived many Years without him, the
Lord Jesus will now have the lost Prodigal to come home, to come to him: The
Soul is weary and heavy laden, and the Lord Jesus could Ease it without its
Coming to him: But this is his Will, he must come to him for it: Matthew. 11.27.
Jer. 3.7, 22. I said after she had done these Things, Turn unto me, come unto
me ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings. Jer. 4.1. If
thou returnest, return unto me. This Voice, Come unto me, is one of the
sweetest Words that Christ can speak, or Man can hear, full of Majesty, Mercy,
Grace, and Peace: A poor Sinner thinks; Will the Lord ever put up such Wrongs
as I have offered him, heal such a Nature, take such a Viper into his Bosom? Do
any Thing for me? If there be but one in the World to be forsaken, is it not I?
The Lord therefore comes and calls, Come unto me, and I will pardon all thy
Sins, I will heal all thy Backslidings, I will be angry no more, Jer. 3.12,
13. Though thou have committed Whoredom with many Lovers, yet return unto me,
says the Lord, Jer. 3.1. Though thou have resisted my Spirit, refused my Grace,
wearied me with thine Iniquities, yet come unto me, and this will make me
amends; I require nothing of thee else but to come, Isai. 55.1, 2. For God's
Call is out of free Grace, Gal. 1.6. and therefore calls for no more but only
to come up and possess the Lord's Fullness, Luke 14.17. 1 Cor. 1.9.

5. This Call to come, is for Substance all one with the Offer of Christ; which
consists in three Things.

1. Commandment to receive Christ as present and ready to be given to it; as
when we offer any Thing to one another, it is by commanding them to take it,
John 4.23. And this binds Conscience to believe, as you will Answer for the
Contempt of this rich Grace, at the great Day of Account.

2. Persuasion and Entreaty to come and receive what we offer, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
For in such an Offer wherein the Person is unwilling to receive and we are
exceeding desirous to give, we then persuade; so does Christ with us.

3. Promise; to offer a Thing without a Promise of having it, if we receive it,
is but a mock-offer; and hence you shall find in Scripture some Promise ever
annexed unto God's Offer, which is the Ground of Faith, Jer. 22.

6. This Call or Offer has three special Qualifications:

1. It is inward as well as outward, for the Lord calls Thousands outwardly who
yet never come, because they want an inward Call to come; an inward whispering
still Voice of God's Spirit: And therefore it is said, He that has heard and
learned (not of Man only, but) of the Father, comes unto me, John 6.45. The
Lord does not stand at the outward Door only and call to open, but the Lord
Jesus comes in, he comes near unto the very Heart of a poor Sinner makes that
understand, Hos. 2.14. and the Lord makes his Grace glorious, and his Mercy
sweet unto the Hearts of his Elect; look (says the Lord Jesus) how I have left
Thousand Thousands in the World, and have had greater Cause so to have left
thee; but behold I am come unto thee, Oh come thou unto me.

2. It is a particular Call; for there is a general Call and Offer of Grace to
every one, Mark 16.15. Now though this be a Means to make it particular, yet the
Spirit of Christ which is wont to apply Generals unto Particulars particularly,
makes the Call particular, that the Soul sees that the Lord in special means
me, singles out me in special to believe; otherwise the Souls of the Elect will
not be much moved with the Call of God, so long as they think the Lord offers
no more Mercy to me than to any Reprobate; and therefore the Spirit of Christ
makes the Call particular, Isai. 43.1. I have called thee by Name: John 10.5.
He calls all his Sheep by Name; not that the Lord calls any by their christen
Name (as we say) as the Lord did extraordinarily call Samuel, Samuel, and Paul,
Paul, but the Meaning is, look as the Lord from before all Worlds writ down
their Names in the Book of Life, and loves them in special; so in Vocation (the
first Opening of Election) the Lord makes his Offer and Call special, and so
special as if it were by Name; for the Soul at this Instant, feels such a
special Stirring of the Spirit upon it, which it feels now, and never felt
before; as also its particular Case so spoken unto, and its particular
Objections so answered, and the Grievousness of its Sin in refusing Grace so
particularly applied, as if God the only Searcher of Hearts only spoke unto it,
and so dares not but think and believe that the Lord means me.

3. It is effectual as well as inward and particular, Luke 24.33. Compel them
to come in, John 10.16. Christ's other Sheep shall hear Christ's Voice, and
those he must bring home; for every inward Call is not effectual. There came a
Man in without his wedding Garment, Matthew. 22.6, 7, 8. whence our Savior said,
Many are called, but few chosen; but this I now speak of, as a Calling out of
Purpose, Romans 8, 28. and therefore never leaves the Soul, until it has real
Possession of Christ, and rests there; this Call falls upon a Sinner humbled,
not hard hearted; and hence the Call is effectual, Matthew. 9.12, 13. 2 Chronicles.
30.10, 11. It is such a Call as was in Creation, Romans 4.17. And hence the Soul
cannot but come, and when it is come it cannot depart, like Peter, Lord, Whither
should we go? And therefore though it has never so many Objections in coming to
Christ, never so much Weakness or Heartlessness to close with Christ, yet the
Lord brings it home, and there keeps it, and now it infinitely blesses God
that ever the Lord gave it an Eye to see, an Heart to come and seek after Jesus
Christ.

2. Thus much of the Nature of this Call, now follows the Necessity of it,
which appears in these three Particulars.

1. No Man should come unless first called; as it is in Calling to an ordinary
Office, so it is in our Calling much more unto special Grace; the Apostle says
Heb. 5.4. that no Man takes this Honor, but he that is called of God; so what
has any Man to do with Christ, to make himself a Son of God, and Heir of Glory
thereby, but he that is called of God? What have we to do to take other Men's
Goods, unless called thereto? What have we to do to take the Riches of Grace
and Peace, if not called thereto? It Is Presumption to take Christ whiles
uncalled, but not when you are called thereunto.

2. Because no Man would come without the Lord's Call: Matthew. 20.6, 7. Why
stand ye here all the Day idle? The Answer was, No Man has hired, or called us
thereto. When there is an outward Call only, yet Men will not come in, Matthew.
23.37. and therefore there must be an effectual Call to bring Men home, Isai.
55.5. and therefore you shall see many, let there be a legal Command, suppose
to sanctify a Sabbath, or to speak the Truth; they have no Objections against
Obedience unto this: But press them to believe, show them God's Call for it,
they have more Fears and Objections rising against this than there be Hairs on
their Head, because the Soul would not close with this.

3. Because no Man could come, unless called: John 6.44. No Man can come unto
me, unless the Father draw him; and how does the Father draw any Man but by
this Call? If the Lord should not come and speak himself, and make his Call the
most joyful Tidings and sweetest Message that ever came to it, it would say, I
have no Heart, I cannot, I am not able, for Romans 11.32. We are shut up under
Unbelief; and therefore the Lord Jesus, Luke 15.5. must bring his Sheep home
upon his Shoulders, else it will lie in the Wilderness of it is own Droopings;
whereas when the Lord effectually speaks, the Soul cannot but come.

3. Lastly, How this Call is a Ground of Faith, and what Ground of Faith.

For Answer hereunto, I do not make this Call considered without the Promise,
the Ground on which Faith rests, (for that is God's free Grace in the Promise)
but the Ground by which it rests, or wherefore it rests upon the Promise. The
Mind sees (1.) The Freeness of Mercy to a poor Sinner in Misery; and this
breeds some Hope the Lord may pity it. (2.) The Fullness and plenteous Riches of
Mercy, and this gives very great Encouragement to the Soul to think: The Lord
(if I come to him) surely will not deny me a Drop, Psalm, 130.7, 8. The Prodigal
comes home because of Bread enough in his Father's House, though he was not
certain he should have any. (3.) The Preciousness and Sweetness of Mercy makes
the Soul long vehemently for it, Psalm. 36.6, 7. and makes it set all other
Things at a low Rate to enjoy it, but when unto all this the Lord sends a
special Commandment, and a special Message on purpose, and calls it to come in,
and accept of it, and take Mercy as its own, and that for no other Reason, but
because it is commanded and called to accept of it; this puts an End to all
Doubts, all Fears, all Discouragements, and the Soul answers as those, Jer.
3.22. Behold we come, thou art the Lord our God. As a Man in great Want of
Bread, one comes and freely offers him Bread to preserve his Life, the Man
takes it; if you ask him, Why do you take it? you are a poor Fellow unworthy of
it, never did one Hour's Work for it: He answers, It Is true, I am unworthy, but
yet because it is offered to me to preserve Life, I gladly take it; the Man
does not promise absolutely to me, that this Bread is mine, and shall feed me;
but he tells me, If I do receive it, it shall certainly be mine to feed me; and
this is the main Ground of his receing it. Just so it is in Faith; ask an
humbled Sinner, Why do you believe? Why do you take Christ as your own? Has
the Lord said absolutely that he is yours? No, says the Soul, but the Lord
freely offers himself to me, who am undone without him, and says, if I do
receive him, he shall be for ever mine, to give Life to me, and therefore I
thankfully accept of him; this is the Ground of Faith. The Scripture sets out
this in a lively Similitude of a great Supper, to which many were invited; what
was the Ground of their coming to it? Behold, all Things are ready if you come
and eat, they are not yours if you do not come; but if you come at my Call and
Invitation, then all Things shall be yours, Luke 14.17. And hence it is that
they that came not, were excluded; they that came were received with Welcome.

I know it is a Question of some Difficulty among some, viz. Whether an absolute
Testimony of actual Favor and Justification be not the first Ground of Faith?
They that make Faith to be an absolute Assurance of God's Favor, must of
Necessity maintain this Assertion, and then these Things will follow.

1. That a Christian must be justified before he believe; for the Cause of
Faith must go before Faith. This Proposition, Thou art justified, reconciled,
is according to this Assertion the Cause of Faith: for no Proposition can
therefore be true, because we are persuaded that it is true, but it must first
be true, before I am persuaded of it; the Wall is not white because my Eyes see
it so, but it must first be white, then I see it so. Now to make actual
Justification before Faith, is cross to the whole Current of Scripture. We
believe that we might be justified, Gal. 2.16. we are not justified that we
might believe. We pass from Death to Life by Faith, John 5.24. We are not in a
State of Life before Faith. When the Lord Jesus saw their Faith, Matthew. 9.2. he
then said, Be of good Comfort, thy Sins are forgiven thee. The Word says, He
that believes not is condemned already, John 3.18. and therefore (unless the
Spirit's Witness be cross to the Word) it does not say to one that believes
not, that he is absolved already. To be justified by Faith, and to be justified
by Christ's Righteousness, is all one in the Scriptures Phrase and Meaning,
Gal. 2.16, 17. And therefore we may as well say that we are justified before
and without Christ, as before and without Faith. And indeed this Doctrine of
being justified by Faith, and by this Means to have Remission of Sins, the
Apostle Peter affirms to be the Doctrine of all the Prophets, Acts 10.43. To
him give all the Prophets Witness, that whosoever believe in him, shall receive
Remission of Sins: Not that they had Remission of Sins before they did believe.
I know not any one Protestant Writer that maintains our Justification before
and without Faith, except learned Chamier; who not knowing how to avoid the
Blow of Bellarmine's horned Argument, that if Faith be an Assurance of our
actual Justification, then we are first justified before we believe; he affirms
we are justified before Faith: And therefore that when the Scripture says, we
are justified by Faith, the Reason of that (says he) is not because our Faith
do efficere justificationem, i. e. is a Cause (meaning instrumental) of our
Justification, but because efficitur in justificatio, i. e. is wrought in a
justified Person: But if that be the Reason of the Phrase, we may affirm our
Justification to be as well by Love, and Sanctification, and holy Obedience, as
by Faith, because these are wro't in a justified Person also.

2. Then no Man's Ministry, nor the Doctrine delivered by the faithful
Ministers of Christ from out of the Scriptures, can be any Ground of Faith, for
before Faith no Minister of Christ can say to any Man in particular, or any Men
in general, that they are already justified, and reconciled, and therefore
believe it; but to deny that Doctrine which is opened out of the Scriptures by
the Ministers of Christ, to be the Ground of Faith, is expressly cross to the
Testimony of Scriptures, and the End of the Ministry, and the Messengers of
Christ, who have the Keys of Office given to them, that what they bind on
Earth, is bound in Heaven; what they loose on Earth, is loosed in Heaven; whose
Sins they remit, they are forgiven, whose Sins they retain, they are retained,
Matthew. 16.16. John 20.23. Most excellent for this Purpose is the Apostle's
Dispute, Romans 10. You need not go up to Heaven, nor down to Hell, to fetch
Christ himself to tell you whether you shall be justified and saved, ver. 6, 7.
for the Word is nigh them, ver. 8. that opens Christ's Heart unto thy Heart:
But what Word might some say is this? Is it not the internal Word of the Spirit
only? The Apostle answers, It is that Word which we preach: Hereby you shall
know whether you shall live or no; but what is that Word Paul preached? Is it
not an absolute Testimony that all your Sins are already pardoned by Christ,
and therefore believe it? No, but if thou believe with thine Heart that God
raised up Christ from the Dead, thou shall be saved, ver. 9, 11, 12. What can
be more full? Yet consider that one Place more, John 17.20. I pray for all them
that shall believe on me, through their Word. What is the Ground or Means of
believing in Christ? It is said here expressly, Their Word: Is it not the Word
of Christ, rather than the Word of the Apostles and of their Successors, in the
Doctrine they delivered, is it their Word? Truly that which they delivered, was
the Word of Christ, and that which is opened from their Doctrine in the
Scriptures is the Word of Christ, yet as they open it, and apply it, so it is
their Word: And this Word is the Ground by which all that Christ prays for, do
believe in Christ; the bare Word I grant cannot persuade without the Spirit,
yet the Spirit will not give Ground to Faith without the Word, but as by it, so
upon it, will build the Souls of all the Elect, who are built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief
Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. How can they believe without a Preacher, Romans 10.14.

3. Then when wicked Men and Reprobates are commanded to believe, (as they are
commanded, Joh. 3.19. Luke 14.17. John 6.38, Heb. 4.2.) they are commanded to
believe a Lie, viz. That their Sins are pardoned, and they actually justified;
for if this Testimony be the Ground of Faith, then when they are commanded to
believe, they are commanded to be persuaded of this Testimony. But the Sins of
wicked Men, especially Reprobates, are not, nor never shall be forgiven; and
therefore this cannot be the Ground of Faith.

4. When the Spirit of Adoption, which witnesses that God is our Father, and
that we are his Sons reconciled to him, goes before Faith; but the Apostle
expressly denies this, Ye are the Children of God by Faith, Gal. 3.20. And
because ye are Sons, he has sent unto you the Spirit of Sons, crying Abba
Father, Gal. 4.6.

5. If such a Testimony should be the first Ground of Faith, then no Man should
believe but he that has such a Testimony antecedent to his Faith; but this is
cross to the Scripture; Isa. 50.10. He that sits in Darkness, and sees no
Light, let him stay himself upon God. When Jonah is cast out of God's Sight to
his own Feeling, yet he is bound to look again unto the Temple.

6. This absolute Testimony is either the Testimony of the Word, or of the
Spirit: Not of the Word, as is proved: If of the Spirit, then let it be
considered Whether that can be the Testimony of the Spirit, which is not
according to the Word, nay contrary to the Word, for the Word to say none are
justified before Faith; for the Spirit to testify some are justified before
Faith. If it be said, that the Spirit does not witness these to any Man before
and without Faith; but yet it is without Respect unto, or showing a Man his
Faith, for those that exclude Sanctification from being any Evi^^nce; they me^n
Faith as well as any other renewed Work of Holiness, and so exclude that also,
then I say, the Testimony of the Spirit (which of it self is exceeding clear)
is an obscure and dark Testimony, because it clears up the Praedicate of this
Proposition, Thou Believer art justified, it witnesses to a Man, Thou art
justified; but clears not up the Subject of it; viz. Thou Believer: It makes a
Man believe a Testimony without understanding the full Meaning of it; for the
Spirit testifying to any Man Thou art justified; his Meaning is, Thou Believer
art justified. And I do beseech the God and Father of all Lights, that his poor
People may be led into the Truth in this Particular; for want of Establishment
here, you little think how many Delusions you may fall into about your
spiritual Condition; I remember that when Satan came to overthrow the Faith of
Christ, in his second Temptation, Matthew. 4.6. he brought a Promise out of the
Scriptures to him, because he saw he held close to them, ver. 4. and by this
Promise sought to lead him into Temptation; how so? Observe the Text, and see
if it was not by hiding Part of the Meaning of the Promise from him, and in
special that very Condition required in the Person to whom the Promise is made;
for he tells him, that if he cast himself down headlong, the Lord has not only
said it, but writ it ^ he shall give his Angels charge over him, to ^eep him
from dashing his Foot against a Stone: Whereas if you consult with the Place
whence it is cited, viz. Psalm. 91.11. the Condition is set down, in all thy
Ways, which he purposely hides from our Savior as much as in him lay. O take
heed therefore of receiving any Testimony from Word or Spirit without the
Meaning of it, without knowing the Person thus and thus qualified, to whom it
belongs; otherwise Satan will hurry you headlong to a World of Delusions; and
you shall find the Word of God appointed to direct you, (through your
Mis-application of it) the Word of Satan, to deceive and damn you: Do not think
that this is building Faith upon Works; but to believe, that they that believe
in Christ are justified, reconciled, and saved, is building Faith upon God's
Promise; yea, and his free Promise too; For, says the Apostle, It is of Faith,
that it might be of Grace, Romans 4.16. It is believing to have the End by the
Means, not the End without the Mean of Faith. It is true, we may see God's
Favor and Love to us in the Cause as well as in the Effects of Sanctification;
but what is that Cause? The meritorious Cause is Christ's Righteousness, and
the instrumental Cause of applying this, is our Faith; so that as we are
justified by Faith, so seeing this, we may say assuredly with Paul, Being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, Romans 5.1. It is true, we cannot see
our Justification by Faith, nor the Work of Faith, without the shining of the
Spirit into our Hearts; but the Question is not, whether the Spirit helps us to
see our justified Estate, but by what Means; by what Proposition in the Word we
come to see it; which we may say is not by any such absolute Testimony: Thou
art justified already, and therefore believe; but if thou believe and come to
Christ, here is then Pardon of Sin, Peace with God, yea, all the Blessings of
Christ ready for thee, which God intends to give and never to take away, if
thou thankfully receive what God freely offers, and as it were lays down at thy
Feet. The Call of Christ therefore is the Ground by which we first believe; and
that you may be confirmed farther herein, do but consider the Glory and
Excellency of this Ground.

1. It is a constant Ground of Faith, for if you come to Christ because you
have Assurance, or because you feel such an such Graces, and heavenly
Impressions of God's Spirit in you, you may then many a Day and Year keep at a
Distance from Christ, and live without Christ; for the Feeling of Graces, and
Assurance of Favor are not constant; but this Call is always sounding in thine
Ears, Oh come, not only because thou feel Holiness in thee, but come,
because poor, hungry, empty, naked, lost, blind, cursed, forsaken, full of Sin;
there is not one Moment of the Day of Grace, but the Lord beseeches thee to
receive this Grace, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3. This is an open Door to Christ at all
Times, an open Harbor to put in at in all Storms, a heartbreaking Word: Oh
thou tossed with Tempests and not comforted, come unto me, and thou shall find
rest to thy Soul. Many ask, How should I come to Christ, seeing that I have no
Promise belonging to me? What have Dogs to do with Children's Bread? Be it so,
yet God's Call, Command, Beseechings to come in, should be Ground unto thee to
come; as a poor Beggar, that has no Promise absolutely given him of Relief,
yet if a rich Man sends to him, and bids him come to the Door and wait, he
thinks he has good Gro^^ and Warrant to come.

2. It is a sure Ground against all Fears, all Doubts of Presumption, all Sense
of Unworthiness and of the Greatness of the Good promised, etc. For the Saints
have many Fears whereby they dare not come, they fear they may presume, they
see themselves most vile, and unworthy of the least Smile; the Benefits are so
exceeding great, to which they are called, that they think it is too good for
them, etc. But, Beloved, when the Soul sees evidently the Lord invites me,
persuades me, commands me, waits for me, strives with me, that I would come in,
and because his Grace is free, therefore requires no more but only to come and
take, come and drink: This forces the Soul to confess, I am sure it is no
Presumption to obey the Call of Christ; and what though I am unworthy, and this
Good is exceeding great and precious, yet if it be the Lord's Grace to call
such a poor Wretch to receive and accept of it, why should I not rather
thankfully receive it, than out of my own Head superstitiously refuse it? But
this I am sure and certain of, the Lord calls me thus to do; if God should
speak from Heaven to you to come unto his Son, it is not so sure a Ground as
the Call of God from out of the Oracle of his Word, in the blessed Gospel of
his dear Son.

3. It is a strong Ground, and of great Power and Efficacy to force the Soul to
come; for you may object, no Man can believe, or should believe, and come of
himself. I say so too; but how would you have the Spirit of Christ enable you
to come? Verily, it is by this Call, and therefore, Jer. 3.22. when the Lord
said, Return ye backsliding Children, they presently answered, Lord we come.
The Dead shall hear this Voice of the Son of God, and live, John 5.25. Thou
said, Seek ye my Face, my Heart answered, Lord, thy Face will I seek. Oh
iron, stony, adamantine Heart, that can hear so sweet a Voice as this Word
Come, and yet not be overcome!

4. This Call honors Grace most, for what more free than for the Lord to say,
Come and take of the Water of Life freely? What more free, than for a rich Man
to enquire of his Debtor only to receive so many Thousands of him to pay his
Debts, and to set him up again? Verily Brethren, as the Lord honors his Grace
by commanding us to come, so we honor it, when through the mighty Power of the
same Call we do come.

Thus much for Explication of this Call; now let me put an End to it in a Word
of Application.

USE. Let this persuade all Sorts of Persons, young and old, one and another,
to whom the Gospel is sent, to come unto Jesus Christ; for those that God calls
should come: But the Lord calls (at least outwardly) all Sorts of Persons; nay
every individual Person to come in: Mark 16.15, 16. Paul told the stout Jailer,
If thou believe thou shall be saved: And look as the Law speaks particularly
to every Man, Thou shall have no other Gods, etc. so does the Gospel also, Romans
10.9. that so every Man might look upon himself as spoken to in particular. And
indeed if there were not such a particular Call, then Men should not Sin by
refusing the Gospel, nor should the Lord be angry for so doing, but their Sin
and Condemnation is great that so do, John 3.19. And the Lord is more wroth for
this Sin than any other, Psalm. 2.12. Luke 14.18. Heb. 3.10, 11, 19. In one
Word, either the Lord would have thee (whoever thou art) to receive Christ, or
to reject, and so despise Christ; and if the Lord would have you reject him, he
would then have you sin, and continue in it, which cannot stand either with the
Honor of God's Holiness, or of his rich Grace; I shall therefore open two
Things,

1. Set down Means to enable you to come. 2. Show you how and in what Manner
you should come.
The Means.

1. Consider, who it is that does call you; is it Man or Ministers think you?
You might never come then; no, it is Jesus Christ himself that calls you by
them: Why do many discouraged Spirits refuse to come? It is because they think
deceitful Men, or charitable Men call them, but the Lord has no Respect unto
them: Oh foolish Conceit! I tell you their Ministry is not an Act of their
Charity, wishing well to the Salvation of all, but it is an Act of Christ's
Love and sovereign Authority, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. So that what they do, it is
in Christ's Stead, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. If Christ was present, he would call thee
to him with more Bowels than any compassionate Minister can: And I assure you,
to receive them, is to receive Christ; to despise them, is to depise Christ,
John 13.20. and therefore Ephesians. 2.14. although the Apostles preached to the
Ephesians, yet it is said, that Christ came and preached to them. If any
Minister preached any other Doctrine of Grace than what Christ has delivered,
let him be accursed: But if they publish his Mind and his Call, look upon them
as if the Lord himself called unto you, lest the Lord accurse you, and all
their Ministry to you; the Lord Jesus did not cast off the Jews for crucifying
of him and shedding his Blood, until the Gospel of Grace published by his
Messengers, came to them, and that was rejected; then Paul waxed bold, and
said, Because you put away the Word from you, we leave you, Acts 13.46.

Oh Beloved, if you did believe Christ called you poor Prodigals (that have run
Riot, and sinned against him as much as you could) home unto him; suppose
Christ was present, would it not draw you in? Suppose he was with thee in the
Chamber, where thou art crying after him, or in the Church, where thou art
waiting for him, and he should appear visibly before thine Eyes, open his
Bosom, and Bowels, and Blood before thee, and calling unto thee to this
Purpose, I do beseech thee and entreat thee by all these Tears I have shed for
thee in the Days of my Flesh, by all those bitter Agonies I have suffered for
thee, by all these tender Bowels which have been rolled together toward thee,
come unto me, embrace me, lay thy wearied Head in this blessed Bosom of mine,
crucify me no longer by thy Sins, tread me not under foot by thy Unbelief any
more; and I will pardon all thy Sins though as red as Crimson, I will heal thy
cursed Nature, I will carry thee in my own Bowels up to Glory with me, where
all Sins and Tears and Sorrows shall be abolished, etc. Who would not come in
to him? Let me see that Man that has a Heart of Adamant that would not melt
and come in at this; Oh my Beloved, this very Call is done as really by Christ
in his Ministers now, though not so visibly and immediately as I now describe,
and therefore take heed how you refuse to hear him that speaks from Heaven,
Heb. 12.25.

Consider whom the Lord calls and that is thee in particular, whoever thou art,
to whom the Gospel of Christ is sent: For if you think Christ calls some only
that are so and so deeply humbled only to come, and not unto you in particular,
you will never come in; but we have proved this, that the Lord calls all in
general, and consequently each Man particular, the Consideration of this may
bring you in; Men fear to commit Murder and Steal, etc. but you fear not
Unbelief; but the Apostle bids you fear that, for the Gospel is preached (says
he) unto you, as well as unto these that fell by Unbelief, Heb. 4.1, 2. Do not
say, he calls me indeed, but it is no more than what he does to Reprobates;
true, in the outward Call it is so; yet upon this Ground you may think the Lord
commands not, calls not you, to sanctify a Sabbath, or to honor God's Name,
because this is as common to Reprobates as unto you; do not say, I am not able
to come, and therefore I am not called; no more are you able to attend the
Rules of the moral Law: Yet you look upon them as appertaining to you, and
because you cannot do them, you entreat the Lord to enable you, and so because
you cannot come, you should look up to the Lord to draw you: And verily many
Times the great Reason why the Lord does not draw you, is, because you do not
deeply consider that he does really affectionately call you: Do not say, I am a
dry Tree, the Lord cannot look upon me, whose Condition is worse than ever I
heard or read of; yet remember the Lord speaks to such, Isai. 65.3, 4, 6, 7.
Look not thou to thy barren and dead Heart, but give Glory unto God, as Abraham
did, Romans 4.19, 20. and receive his Grace with more Thankfulness than any else,
because none ever so miserable as thy self; you young Men hear this, though you
have spent the Flower of your Years in Vanity, Madness, and filthy Lusts, yet
the Lord calls you in to him: You old Men, grown gray headed in Wickedness,
though it be the last Hour of the Day in your Life, yet behold the Lord would
hire you, and calls you to come in, before the forest Wrath of a long provoked
God break out upon you: You that have despised God's Messengers, crucified the
Lord Jesus afresh, embrued your Hands in his Blood, scorned and hated the
Saints, and the Word of God's Grace; hear what Wisdom says, Prove. 1.22, 23.
Return ye Scorners: Oh consider, thou that art ignorant of Christ, that never
sought after Christ many a Year together, that have continually provoked him to
his Face, how the Lord calls you, Isai. 65.1, 2, 3. You, even you, are those
the Lord calls, and will you not come?

3. Consider why the Lord calls thee, is it because he has any Need of you to
honor him? I tell you he could have gone to others that would have given his
Gospel better Welcome than it has had from you; he could have gone to many
Kings and Princes, and out of that golden Metal have made himself Vessels of
Honor, rather than out of such base Mould as thou art made of; he could have
honored himself in thy Ruin, as in many Millions of other Men, and lose
nothing by thee neither, he could have been blessed without you in the Bosom of
his Father; or is it because thou have done any Thing for him? Alas! Thou have
not returned him thy Nut-shells, thou have not had so much as a Form of
Religion, thou have done as much Mischief to him as thou could, Jer. 3.5.
Thou have wearied him with thine Iniquities, and made him serve with thy Sins,
and have sadded his Heart exceedingly by strange Impenitency, Isai. 43.24. The
only Reason that has moved him to call upon thee, has been to pity thee,
seeing thee running to the Fire that never can be quenched, without stop or
stay, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. and because thou art fallen by thine Iniquities, Hos.
14.1. And shall not this bring you home?

4. Consider for what End the Lord calls thee, is it not to come and take
Possession of all the Grace of Christ, Gal. 1.6. nay of all the Glory of
Christ, 1 These. 2.12. nay, to a most near, sweet, and everlasting Fellowship
with Christ himself? 1 Cor. 1.9. And can I say any more? Can you desire any
more than this? If the Lord should say unto any of us, Come into the Garden,
and there watch and pray with me, sorrow and suffer with ^e; who of us would
not account our selves unw^^dly of such Honor? But for the Lord to say, Come
and enter into your Rest, the Land, the Kingdom of Grace and Glory is before
you, go up and possess it. Oh where are our Hearts, if this Call will not draw?
If the Lord should say at the Day of Judgment, when the Heavens and Earth shall
be on a light Fire, and the Lord Jesus set upon the Throne of his Glory,
admired of all his Saints and Angels; Come you blessed and take the Kingdom
prepared for you, Would you not gladly come at that Call? Oh Beloved, the Lord
Jesus now in the Throne of his Glory in Heaven, behold he calls you unto a
better Good than that Kingdom; he calls you to come and take himself, and all
his precious Benefits prepared for you, though in thy self accursed; and would he
have you take Possession of all this? Is it not to the Praise of the Riches of
his Grace? Ephesians. 1. If this be his End, then if thou will not come for thy own
Good, yet for his Sake, his Grace Sake come.

5. How long the Lord has called thee, how often he would have gathered thee; he
has stood long until his Locks are wet with the Dew of the Night, Cant. 5.1,
2. It may be you are afraid, it has been so long, that now Time is past: Oh
no, for whiles the Lord calls by his Word and Spirit, now is the acceptable
Time, 2 Cor. 6.2. I confess there is a Time wherein the Lord will not be found,
but while the Lord is near unto thee by his Ministry, by his Spirit,
convincing, affecting, stirring, knocking at thy Heart, the Time is not yet
past, the Sun is not yet set, so long as those Beams appear, Isai. 55.6. those
Tho'ts which discourage thee from coming to Christ, while the Voice of his Call
is heard, cannot be of Christ but Satan, whose principal Work is to lay such
stumbling blocks in our Way to him.

6. Consider the Greatness of your Sin in not coming to him.

1. This is the condemning Sin; for no Sin should condemn thee, if thou did
come to him, John 3.17, 18, 19. thou should please him, and as it were, make
him amends for all the Wrongs thou have done him, by coming to him, Heb. 11.5,
6, 7.

2. This aggravates all other Sins, If I had not spoke to them, (says Christ)
they had had no Sin, i. e. comparatively, but now they have no Cloak for their
Sin, John 15.22. Can the Sin of Devils be so great as thine, that never had a
Savior sent unto them? Yet thou have one sent and come out of Heaven to thee,
calling to thee from Heaven, and yet thou despisest him.

3. This provokes the Lord to most unappeasable and unquenchable Wrath, Heb.
3.11. I swear in my Wrath they should not enter into my Rest; after Sins
against the Law, the Lord did not swear that Man should die, (for that notes an
unchangeable Purpose) but let Christ be despised, the Lord now swares in his
Wrath against such a one: He that draws back, my Soul shall take no Pleasure in
him, Heb. 10.38. After Sin against the Law, the Lord took Pleasure in
glorifying his Grace upon Man fallen, but if you draw back from the Grace of
Christ in the Gospel, the Lord will take no Pleasure in you.

4. It provokes the sorest and most unsupportable Wrath, Take heed you despise
not him that speaks, for if they did not escape who refused him that spoke on
Earth, much less shall we that despise him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12.25.
Take heed therefore you despise not him that speaks; the Word Despise
signifies in the Original to despise or refuse upon some Color of Reason:
Every Man has some seeming Reason against believing: One thinks Time is past,
another thinks he is excluded by some antecedent Decree of Election, another
thinks he is not humbled, nor holy enough, another makes Excuse, not by
pretending his Alehouse and Whore-house, but his Farm and Merchandise, Mat.
22. another thinks he is well enough without Christ, etc. Oh take heed, for the
Wrath of God most intolerable is your Portion, the lowest Dungeon of Darkness,
is thy Place in Hell for this Sin; Hear ye Despisers and wonder, for I will
work (says the Lord) a Work in your Days, which you shall not believe, though it
be told you, Acts 13.41. I pray you what is this Work? Certainly a Work of
Wrath and Vengeance; but what is it? You will not believe, though you be told of
it, oh you secure Sinners; but what is it that they will not believe? Nay truly
the Lord himself is silent there, and says nothing, as if it were so great and
dreadful, that the glorious Lord himself is not able to express it; and truly
no more am I: Oh therefore be not worse than that Generation of Vipers, that
came in to John, because some had forewarned them to escape the Wrath to come,
Mat. 3. but come unto a Savior, that you may be ever blessed with him.

But you will say, How should we come to him?

Answ. 1. Come to him mourning, and loathing yourselves for your long
Continuance in refusing of him, Jer. 31.9. Ezekiel. 6.9. come mourning for all thy
Sins, but especially for this, that (...) have slighted him and not sought him,
shed his Blood, rent his Bowels; and if thou can not come, yet come to him
and make thy Moan to him of thy Unbelief and Inability to come.

2. Come with Confidence that they that do come he will never cast away, and
that thou being come, he will never cast thee away, John 6.37. Heb. 10.22.

3. Come gladly and willingly, glorifying his Grace, but abasing thy self, Acts
2.39. and 13.47. With Gladness shall they be bro't and enter into the King's
Presence, Psalm. 45.15. Do not receive God's Grace as a common Thing, but
thankfully and with all thy Heart: For the End why God gives Christ to any Man
is the Glory of his Grace; if the Lord attains this End he desires no more, for
why should he, when he has his End?

4. Do not come and taste, but come and drink, John 7.37. You may famish to
Death, and pine away in your Iniquities, and prove Apostates, even to commit
the unpardonable Sin, if you do but taste of him, as those did, Heb. 6.4, 5.
but drink abundantly, O ye Beloved of the Lord, Cant. 5.1. If you cannot
satisfy your Souls by what you feel already received from him, then satiate
your Souls by what you may find in him, Isai. 45.24. take Possession of all the
Grace, Glory, Peace, Promises of the Lord Jesus, and leave not a Hoof behind
thee, and be for ever refreshed and comforted therein.

5. So come to him, as that you keep your Confidence, and keep your Savor of
him and Joy in him, Heb. 3.14. with 6. let the Word that called you be ever
sweet and precious, as David said, Psalm. 119.53. I will never forget thy
Precepts, for by them thou have quickened me. Let the Lord Jesus be ever fresh,
Heb. 3.6. and as an Ointment poured out; take heed that the Blood wherewith you
are sanctified, do not grow a common Thing, and Promises withered Flowers, and
Sermons of Christ and his Grace (unless there be some new Notions about them)
as dead Drink, for this is the great Sin of this Age; the old Truths about the
Grace of Christ, and the Simplicity of the Gospel, is as Water in Men's Shoes,
Ministers must preach Novelties, and make a quintessential Extract out of the
Scriptures, and it may be, press Blood out of them sometimes rather than Milk,
or else their Doctrines are to many as Almanacks out of Date, or as News they
heard seven Years since; and they knew this before. O the Wrath of God upon
this God-glutted, Christ-glutted, Gospel-glutted Age; unless it be among a very
few poor Believers, whose Souls are kept empty, poor, and hungry by some
continual Temptations or Afflictions, and they are indeed glad of any Thing, if
it be any Thing of Christ! Verily I am afraid such a dismal Night is toward of
spiritual Desertions, and of outward, but sore Afflictions of Famine, War,
Blood, Mortality, Deaths of God's precious Servants especially; that the Lord
will fill the Hearts of all Churches, Families, Christians, that shall be saved
in those Times, with such Rendings, Tearings, Shakings, Anguish of Spirit, as
scarce never more in the worst Days of our Forefathers; and that this shall
continue, until the Remnant that escape shall say, Blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord; blessed be the Face and Feet of that Minister, that shall
come unto us in Christ's Name, and tell us, that there is a Savior for
Sinners, and that he calls us for to come.

And thus I have done with this divine Truth, viz. That the Lord Jesus in the
Day of his Power, saves us out of our wretched and sinful Estate, by so much
Conviction, as begets Compunction; so much Compunction, as brings in
Humiliation; so much Humiliation, as makes us to come to Christ by Faith.

CHAP. II That every Sinner thus believing in Christ, is at that Instant
translated into a most blessed and happy Estate, John 5.24. Psalm. 2. ult.
Quest. IF the Question be, What is that happy Condition they are made
Partakers of?

Answ. I answer, This appears in these six Privileges or Benefits principally,

1. Justification, all their Sins are pardoned. 2. Reconciliation, Peace with
God. 3. Adoption, they are made the Sons of God. 4. Sanctification, they are
restored to the Image of God. 5. Audience of all their Prayers to God. 6.
Glorification, in the Kingdom of Heaven, in eternal Communion with God.
SECT. I. First, Justification.
THIS is the first Benefit which immediately follows our Union unto Christ by
Faith, that look as we are no sooner Children of Adam, and Branches of that
Root by natural Generation, but we immediately contract the Guilt of his Sin,
and so original Pollution; so we are no sooner made Branches of the second Adam
by Vocation, and so united unto Christ by Faith, but immediately we have the
Imputation of his Righteousness to our Justification, after which we receive in
order of Nature (not Time) our Sanctification; there is no Truth more necessary
to be known than this, it being the principal Thing contained in the Gospel,
Romans 1.17. The Law showing how a Man may be just and live; but it has not the
least Word how a sinful Man may be just and not die, this is proper to the
Revelation of the Gospel: Let me therefore give you a Taste of the Nature of it.

Our Justification is wrought by a double Act. 1. On God the Father's Part, he
by a gracious Sentence absolves and acquits a Sinner, and accepts of him as
righteous. 2. On God the Son's Part, procuring the passing of this Sentence by
his Satisfaction imputed and applied. The Father being the Person principally
wronged, has chief Power to forgive, yet in Justice he cannot acquit, nor in
Truth account a Man unrighteous as righteous, unless the Son step in and
satisfy; for whose Sake he forgives; as the Apostle expressly says, Ephesians. 4.
ult. So that our Justification is wholly out of our selves, and we are merely
passive in it. Justification is not to make us inwardly just, as the Papist's
Dream; but it is a Law-Term, and is opposed against Condemnation, Romans 8.33.
Now look as Condemnation is the Sentence of the Judge, condemning a Man to die
for his Offenses, or Sin; so Justification is the Sentence of God the Father,
absolving a Man from the Guilt and Punishment of Sin for the Sake of the
Righteousness of Christ: That you may more particularly understand me, take
this Description of it.

JUSTIFICATION is the gracious Sentence of GOD the FATHER, whereby, for the
Satisfaction of CHRIST, apprehended by Faith, and imputed to the Faithful, he
absolves them from the Guilt and Condemnation of all Sin, and accepts them as
perfectly Righteous to eternal Life.

Let me open the Particulars herein briefly in several Queries.

Quest. 1. What it is in general to justify?

Answ. It Is to pass Sentence of Absolution; to pronounce a Sinner righteous;
it is God's Pardon, Remission of Sins; this appears from the Opposition
mentioned it stands in unto Condemnation, as a Judge Pardons a Man when he
says he shall live; or as a Man manifestly forgives another when he gives him
a Promise, or a Bill of Discharge; so that (note this by the Way that) our
Justification is not God's eternal Purpose to forgive, but it is God's Sentence
published, a Sinner is justified intentionally in Election, but not actually
'till this Sentence be past and published; the only Difficulty here is, Where
this Sentence is pronounced; for Answer whereof note, that there is but a
double Court wherein it is passed; 1. Publicly in the Court of Heaven, or in
the Court-Rolls of the Word; (for there is no other Court of Heaven where God
speaks, but this.) 2. Privately, in the Court of Conscience. By the first we
are justified indeed from personal Guilt; by the second we feel our selves
justified by the Removal of Conscience Guilt. The first is expressly mentioned,
Acts 10.43. and Romans 1.17. The second is expressly set down also, Psalm. 32.4.
The first is the Cause and Foundation of the second; the second arises from
the first: Otherwise, Peace of Conscience is a mere Delusion: The first is
sometimes long before the second, Psalm. 88.15. as the Sentence of Condemnation
in the Word is sometimes long before a Man feels that Sentence in his own
Conscience; the second comes in a long Time after in some Christians: The first
is constant and unchangeable; the second very changeable: He that has Peace in
his Conscience to Day, may lose it by to Morrow. So that you are not (in
seeking the Testimony of our Justification) to look for a Sentence from Heaven
immediately pronounced of God, but look for it in the Court of his Word, (the
Court of Heaven) which though we hear not, sometime, yet it rings and fills
Heaven and Earth with the Sound of it, viz. There is no Condemnation to them
that believe: For hereby the Lord mercifully provideth for the Pence of his
People more abundantly. As when a poor Creditor is acquitted, or a Malefactor
pardoned, I beseech you (says he) let me have an Acquittance, a Discharge, a
Pardon under your own Hand, and this quiets him against all Accusers: So it is
here; the Lord gives us an Acquittance in his Word, under his own Hand and
Seal, and so gives us Peace, Heb. 6.18.

2. Who is it that justifies?

Answ. It Is God the Father, Romans 8.34. Father forgive them, says Christ. And
hence Christ is an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.2. All the three Persons
were wronged by Sin; yet the Wrong was chiefly against the Father, because his
Manner of Working appeared chiefly in Creation, from the Righteousness of
which, Man fell by Sin. The Father forgives primarily by sovereign Authority;
the Son of Man Christ Jesus forgives by immediate Dispensation and Commission
from the Father, John 5.22. Matthew. 9.6. the Apostles and their Successors
forgive ministerially, John 21.23. The Father forgives by granting Pardon, the
Son by procuring, the Ministers (where the Spirit also is) by publishing or
applying Pardon: So that this is great Consolation, that God the Father the
Party chiefly incensed, it is he that justifies, it is he that passes this
gracious Sentence, and then who can condemn?

3. Why does the Father thus justify?

Answ. It Is merely his Grace, and out of Grace. And hence I call it his
gracious Sentence, Romans 3.24. justified freely by his Grace. What is his Grace?
The Prophet Isaiah expounds it to be not our Grace, or Works of Grace, (although
wro't by Grace) but his own Names Sake, Isai. 43.25. In some Respect indeed it
is just for God to forgive, viz. in Regard of Christ's Satisfaction, 1 John
1.7. Romans 3.20. The Mercy Seat and the Tables of the Law in the Ark, may well
stand together, but that Christ was sent to satisfy Justice, and that thy Sins
were satisfied for, and not another; thus it is wholly of Grace. If therefore
you think the Lord pardons your Sins because you have been less Sinners than
others; or if you think the Lord will not pardon your Sins, because you are
greater Sinners than any else, you sin exceedingly against the Riches of God's
Grace in this Point.

4. What is the Mean by which the Father does thus justify?

Answ. It Is for the Satisfaction or by the Price of the Redemption of Christ,
Romans 3.24. and 5.10. Ephesians. 1.7. for Mercy would, but Justice could not forgive,
without Satisfaction for the Wrong done. Hence Christ satisfies, that Grace and
Mercy might have their full Scope of forgiving. So that, neither Works before
Conversion, which are but glistering Sins, Romans 1.18. nor Works of Grace in us
after Conversion, can be the Causes of our Justification: For Abraham when he
was justified and sanctified, yet had not whereof to boast, but believed in him
that justified the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. And the Apostle Paul says expressly, We
that believe have believed, that we might be justified, Gal. 2.16. it is
therefore the Price of Christ's Redemption which does procure our
Justification. But understand this aright, for this Price is not applied to
each particular Man as the common Price, redeeming all, (for then every
Believer should be accounted a Savior and Redeemer of all) but as the Price of
those Souls in particular, to whom it is specially intended, and particularly
applied. Christ's Righteousness is sufficient to justify all to whom it is
imputed, but it is no further imputed than to the attaining the End of
Imputation, viz. to justify and save me in particular, not to make me a Head of
the Church or a common Savior: It argues a Man weakly principled, that denies
the Necessity of Christ's Satisfaction to our Justification, because forsooth
every Believer should then be a Redeemer.

By Satisfaction I understand, the whole Obedience of Christ unto the very
Death, which is both active and passive, by which we are justified, Heb. 10.10.
Phil. 2.8. That Righteousness of Christ (wro't in his Satisfaction) is imputed,
which satisfies the Law and divine Justice, Gal. 4.1, to 4. which is both
active and passive: The very Reason why the Law requires perfect Obedience of
us, which we cannot possibly bring before God, is, that we might seek for it in
Christ, that fulfilled all Righteousness: And therefore he is called the End of
the Law for Righteousness, Romans 10.3, 4. And it is strange that any should deny
Justification by Christ's active Obedience, upon this Ground, viz. because that
by the Works of the Law (which satisfy the Law) shall no Sinner be justified;
and yet withal say, that we are justified by that which satisfies the Law.

This Righteousness of Christ is not that of the Godhead, (for then what need
was there for Christ to do or suffer?) but that which was wrought in the
Manhood. And hence it is finite in it self, though infinite in Value in that it
was the Righteousness of such a Person. This Righteousness of God may be
considered two Ways, First, Absolutely, in it self, Secondly, Respectively, as
done for us.

1. Christ's absolute Righteousness is not imputed to us, viz. as he is
Mediator, Head of the Church, having the Spirit without Measure (which is next
to infinite) etc. for though these Things are applied for our Good, yet they are
not imputed as our Righteousness; and therefore the Objection vanishes, which
says we cannot be justified by Christ's Righteousness, because it is of such
infinite Perfection.

2. The respective or dispensative Righteousness which some call justitia fide
jussoria, is that whereby Christ is just for us in fulfilling the Law, in
bearing God's Image, we once had, and have now lost by Sin; and thus we are
truly said to be as righteous as Christ by Imputation, because he kept the Law
for us: And here observe, that the Question is not, whether all that Christ did
and had is imputed to us as our Righteousness, but whether all that he did pro
^^bis, for us, as a Surety in fulfilling the Law, be not for Substance, our
Righteousness; and therefore to think that we are not justified by Christ's
Righteousness, because then we are justified by his working of Miracles,
preaching of Sermons, which Women are not regularly capable of, is but to cast
Blocks before the Blind; so that though Christ does not bestow his personal
Wisdom and Justice upon another, yet what hinders, but that that which Christ
does by his Wisdom and Righteousness for another, the same should stand good
for him for whom it is done? For thus it is in sundry Cases among Men; Christ's
essential Righteousness, infinite Wisdom, Fullness of Spirit without Measure,
etc. is not imputed to us; yet these have conspired together to do that for us,
and suffer that for us, by which we come to be accounted righteous before God:
He shall be called the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. This Righteousness
therefore imputed to us justifies us, Romans 5.18. we are said to be made the
Righteousness of God in him; not the Righteousness of God whereby he is just,
but whereby we are just; opposed to the Righteousness of Man which is called
our own Righteousness, Romans 10.3. and 1.17. Not Righteousness from him (as the
Papist's dream) but Righteousness in him; nor Remission by Christ only, but
Righteousness in Christ; this imputed justifies; as Sin imputed condemns.

5. Who are the Persons the Lord does justify?

Answ. They are Believers; we are justified by Faith, Romans 5. or, for Christ's
Righteousness apprehended by Faith, Phil. 3.9. it is by Faith not as a Work of
Grace, but as by an Instrument appointed of God for this End. Christ did not
die that our Sins should be actually and immediately pardoned, but mediately by
Faith, John 3.16. and 17.20. and the Lord in Wisdom has appointed this as the
only Means of applying Righteousness, because this above all other Graces casts
down all the Righteousness of Man in Point of Justification, and so all Cause
of Boasting, and advances Grace and Mercy only, Romans 3.27. and 4.16. and 4.5.
and 9, 30, 31, 32. The Faithful account themselves ungodly in the Business of
Justification, and thence it is said, that Abraham (though a godly Man in
himself, yet) believed in him that justifies the Ungodly: He only is Righteous
whom God pronounces and says is Righteous. Now Faith above all other Graces
believes the Word; and a Believer says, I believe I am Righteous before God,
not because I feel it so in my self, but because God says I am so in his Son,
so that you are not justified before you believe; nor then only, when you have
performed many holy Duties, but at the first Instant of your closing with
Christ, you are then to see it, and by Faith to admire God's rich Grace for it.

6. What is the Extent of this Sentence?

Answ. The Description says, that Christ's Satisfaction thus applied, the
Father does two Things,

1. He absolves them from all Guilt and Condemnation of Sin, so that in this
Sense, he sees no Iniquity in Jacob, Chastisements they may now have after
Justification, but no Punishments; Crosses not Curses; such as destroy their
Sins, no Punishments to destroy their Souls: Hence those Phrases in Scripture,
Scattering Sins as a Mist, blotting them out, remembering them ^o more, setting
them out as far as the East is from the West: For Christ being made Sin for his
People, and this being imputed, he abolishing all Sin, by one Offering, Heb.
10. Hence all are forgiven; and hence it is that there can be no Suit in Law
against a Sinner, the Law being satisfied, and the Sinner absolved; nay, hence
Sin is condemned, and the Sinner spared, Romans 8.3. as Christ died for us, so he
was acquitted for us, and we in him; we in him in Redemption, we by him in
actual Faith and Application. Whether all Sins, past, present, and to come, are
actually forgiven at the first Instant of believing, I will not, dare not
determine; this is safe to say,

1. That the Sentence of Pardon of all thy Sins is at an Instant, Romans 8.1. but
not the Sense nor Execution of Pardon: Actual Sentence of Pardon, not actual
Application of Pardon, till they be actually committed, Col. 2.13. Heb. 9.12.
and 10.1, 2. Romans 3.25. There is a Pardon of Course (some say) for Sins of
Infirmities, I say there is also a Pardon of Course for Sins of Wilfulness, all
Manner of Sins; but not Sense of Pardon always.

2. He accepts and accounts us perfectly Righteous, Romans 4.3. Faith is
accounted for Righteousness, not the Act of Faith; as the Arminians would, but
the Object of it apprehended by Faith, Romans 5.17. The Lord accounts us as
Righteous through Christ's Righteousness, as if we had kept all the Law, suffered
all the Punishments for the Breach of it; Who can lay any Thing to the Charge
of God's Elect, whom God has justified? says the Apostle, Romans 8. Satan may
answer, Yes I can, for the Law says, The Soul that sins must die: Christ
answers, but I have died for him, and satisfied the utmost Farthing to Justice
in that Point: True, my Satan say, here is Satisfaction for the Offense, but
the Law must be kept also; the Lord Christ answers, I am the End of the Law for
Righteousness, I am perfectly holy and righteous, not for my self, (for I am a
common Person) but for this poor Sinner who in himself is exceedingly and
wholly polluted; and hence the Lord covers Sins, as well as pardons Sins;
clothes us with Christ, as well as remits Sin for Christ's Sake; and as we are
accounted Sinners by Imputation of Adam's legal Unrighteousness, so are we
accounted Righteous by the second Adam's legal Righteousness, and that unto
eternal Life, Romans 5.17, 18. Thus you see the Nature, now the Lord opens your
Eyes to see the Glory of this Privilege; you that never felt the heavy Load of
Sin, the Terrors of a distressed Conscience arising from the Sense of an angry
God, cannot prize this Privilege; but if you have, you cannot but say as he
did, O blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sin is
covered; and again, Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputes no Sin, Psalm.
32.12. The Lord pity us; how many be there in these Times, that know there is
no Justification but by Christ's Righteousness, and yet esteem it not? Let me
therefore give you one Glimpse of the Glory of it in these Particulars,

1. This is the Righteousness by which a Sinner is Righteous: The Law shows you
how a Man may be Righteous, but there is not the least Tittle of the Law, which
shows you how a Sinner may become Righteous, this never could have entered into
the Thoughts of Angels how this could be; it is cross to Sense and Reason, for
a Man accursed and sinful in himself, to be at that very Time blessed and
righteous in another; to say, Lord, Depart from me, for I am a sinful Man, Luke
5.8. is the Voice of natural Conscience awakened, not only concerning God out
of Christ, but even when God appears in Christ as he did then to Peter; but
that the Lord should become our Righteousness, when we think no Sinners like
our selves, no Cases, no Afflictions, no Desertions like ours; who can believe
this? Yet thus it is; the very Scope of the fourth Chapter to the Romans, Romans
4.5. is not to show how a just Man may be made Righteous, but how a Sinner may;
our own Duties, Works, and Reformation, may make us at the best but less
sinful, but this Righteousness makes a Sinner sinless.

2. By this a Sinner is Righteous before the Judgment Seat of God: What Man
that has Awakenings of Conscience, but trembles exceedingly when he considers
the Judgment Seat of God, and of his strict Account there? But by this we can
look upon the Face of the Judge himself with Boldness. It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? Romans 8.32. Can Christ condemn? He is our
Advocate. Can Sin condemn? Why did Christ die and was made Sin then? Can Satan
condemn, if God himself justify us? If the Judge acquits us, what can the
Jailer do? Can the Law condemn? No, the Lord Christ has fulfilled it for us,
to the utmost: Oh the Stings that many have, saying, What shall I do when I die
and go down to the Dust? May not the Lord have something against me at the Day
of Reckoning that I never saw, nor got cancelled? O poor Creatures! Is Christ
now before God without Spot? Has he cleared all Reckonings? Verily as he is
before him, so are you; through that Righteousness which is in him for you.

3. By this you have perfect Righteousness, as perfectly Righteous, as Christ
the Righteous, 1 John 2.1, 2, and 3.7. All yo^^ own Righteousness though it be
the Fruit of the Spirit of Grace, is a blotted, stained Righteousness, very
imperfect and little; but by this the Faith of David, Peter, Paul, was not more
precious than thine is, because thou have the same Righteousness as they had, 2
Pet. 1.2. What sincere Soul but esteems of perfect Holiness more than of Heaven
it self? Oh consider thou have it (in this Sense I now speak of) in the Lord
Jesus.

4. By this you have continual Righteousness. What do thou complain of daily?
Is it not because thou feel new Sins, or the same Sins confessed, and
lamented, and in Part subdued; nay, some to thy feeling wholly subdued; but
they return upon thee again, and the Springs in the Bottom fill thy Soul again,
that thou art weary of thy Self and Life. O but remember, this is not a
Cistern, but a Fountain opened, Zech. 13.1. for thee to wash in; as Sin
abounds, so Grace in this Gift of Righteousness abounds much more; the Lord
has Changes of Garments for thee, Zech. 3.1, to 7. by Means of which, there
shall never enter into the Lord's Heart, one hard Though It toward thee of casting
thee off, or of taking Revenge, upon any new Occasion or Fall into Sin.

5. By this you have eternal Righteousness, that never can be lost: If the Lord
should make thee as perfectly Righteous as once Adam was, or Angels in Heaven
are, and put on thy royal Apparel again, thou wast in danger of losing this,
and of being stripped naked again; but now the Lord has put your Righteousness
into a safer Hand which never shall be lost, Heb. 9.12. Dan. 9.24.

6. By this you please God, and are more amiable before him, than if you had it
in your self; Do not say this is a poor Righteousness, which is thus out of thy
self in another; why do you think Righteousness in your self would be best? Is
it not because hereby you think you shall please God? Suppose thou had it,
yet thy Righteousness should be at the best but Man's Righteousness, but this
is called the Righteousness of God, which cannot but be more pleasing to him,
than that in thy self, 2 Cor. 5.20. What is angelical Righteousness to the
Righteousness of God? It Is but a Glowworm before the (...) The Smell of Esau's
Garments, the Robes of this Righteousness of the Son of God, are of a sweeter
Odor than thine can be or ever shall be, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. It Is said, By Faith,
Abel, Enoch, etc. pleased God: Their Persons were sinful, their own Duties were
weak, yet by Faith in this, they pleased God: Thou think when thou go to
Prayer, if I had no Sin, but perfect Holiness in me, surely God would hear me.
I tell you when you bring this Offering of Christ's Righteousness, the Lord had
rather have that, than all you can do, you bring that which pleases him more,
than if you bro't your own. For ask thy own Conscience, if it be possible for
the Righteousness that is done by thy self to be more pleasing to God, than the
Righteousness of the Son of God, the Lord of Glory himself, done and perfected
for thee.

7. By this you glorify God exceedingly, as Abraham believed, Romans 4. and gave
Glory unto God. In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and
shall Glory, Isai. 45.15.

1. By this you glorify him perfectly in an Instant, for you continue to do all
that the Law requires that Instant you believe. The Apostle propounds the
Question, Romans 3.21. Whether a Christian by Faith does make Void the Law? No,
says the Apostle, But we establish the Law. How is that? Praeus shows three
Ways: One is this, Because that perfect Righteousness which the Law requires of
us, we perform it in Christ by Faith. So that in one Instant thou continuest to
do all that the Law requires, and hence ari^^th the Impossibility of a true
Believer's Apostasy, as from one principal Cause: They that deny Satisfaction
by Christ's doing of the Law, because by our own Works and Doings we cannot be
justified before God, may as well deny Satisfaction by Christ's Sufferings,
because by our Sufferings we cannot be justified; our Obedience to the Law in
Way of Suffering, is as truly the Works of the Law, as our Obedience in Way of
Doing.

2. By this you glorify God's Justice; whatever Justice requires to be done or
suffered, you give it unto God by Faith in Christ.

3. By this you glorify Grace and Mercy, Ephesians. 1.7. for by this Means Mercy may
over-bound toward you, and you may triumph in it as sure and certain to you.
What a blessed Mystery is this! Does it not grieve you that you cannot glorify
God in your Times and Places? Behold the Way, if thou can not do it by
Obedience, thou may by Faith: And thereby make Restitution of all God's Glory
lost and stolen from him by thy Disobedience to him.

8. By this you have Peace in your Consciences; by this, Christ's Blood is
sprinkled upon them, and that cools the burning Torments of them, Romans 5.1. The
Comers unto the levitical Sacrifices and Washings, (Types of this Offering of
Christ) could not thereby be perfected and be without the guilty Conscience of
Sin: None of your Duties can pacify Conscience, but as they carry you hither to
this Righteousness: but the Comers to this have no more Terrors of Conscience
for Sin, I mean they have no just Cause to have any; this Rainbow appearing
over your Heads, is a certain Sign of fair Weather, and that there shall be no
more Deluge of Wrath to overwhelm thee.

9. By this all Miseries are removed; when thy Sins are pardoned, there is
something like Death, and Shame, and Sickness, but they are not; it is said,
Isai. 33. ult. There shall be none sick among you; why so? Because they shall
be forgiven their Iniquities: It Is no Sickness in a Manner, no Sorrow, no
Affliction, if the Venom, Sting, and Curse be taken away by Pardon of Sin; thy
Sickness, Sorrow, Losses, Death it self is better now than Health, Joy,
Abundance, Life; you may here see Death, Hell, Grave, swallowed up in Victory,
and now tread upon the Necks of them, I Cor. 15. You may see Life in Death,
Heaven in the deepest Hell, Glory in Shame: When thou see all thy Sins done
away in the Blood of Christ Jesus. This is the Blessedness of all you poor
Believers and Comers to the Lord Jesus: What should you do but believe it, and
rejoice in it? If the Wicked that apply this Righteousness presumptuously say,
Let us Sin that Grace may abound, and make no other use of Forgiveness, but to
run in Debt, and sin with a License? Why should not you say, on the other side,
Let me believe and own my portion in this Righteousness, that as my Sins have
abounded, so my Love may abound; as my Sins have been exceeding great, so the
Lord may be exceeding sweet; as my Sins continue and increase, so my
Thankfulness, Glory in God, Triumph over Death, Grave, Sins, through Christ,
may also increase; as you see Righteousness in Christ for ever yours, so you
may from thence expect from him such a Righteousness as may make you Righteous
also as he is Righteous. Tremble thou hard-hearted impenitent Wretch, that
did never yet come to Christ, nor feel thy Need of him, or prize his Blood;
this is none of thy Portion, all thy Sins are yet upon thee, and shall one Day
meet thee in the Day of the Lord's fierce Wrath, when he shall appear as an
everlasting Burning before thine Eyes, and thou stand guilty before him as
chaff and stubble.

SECT. II. Secondly, Reconciliation.
THIS is the second Benefit which in Order of Nature follows our Justification,
although sometimes in a large Sense it is taken for the whole Work of
Justification, strictly taken, it follows it, Romans 5.1. Being justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God, i. e. not only Peace from God in our
Consciences, but Peace with God in our Reconcilement to him, and his Favor
toward us: Being justified, we shall be saved from Wrath, i. e. not only the
outward Fruits of Wrath, but Wrath from whence those come; Christ is first King
of Righteousness, then King of Peace, Heb. 7.2. For is not Sin the Cause of
God's Anger? Must not Sin therefore be first removed in our Justification,
before we can have God's Anger allayed in our Reconciliation? So that as in our
Justification the Lord accounts us just, so in our Reconciliation (himself
being at Peace with us) he accounts us Friends; indeed our meritorious
Reconciliation is by Christ's Death; as the King's Son who procures his
Father's Favor toward a Malefactor, who yet lies in cold Irons and knows it
not; and this is before our Justification or Being, Romans 5.9. but actual and
efficacious Reconciliation, whereby we come to the Fruition and Possession of
it, is after our Justification, Romans 3.24, 25. Christ is a Propitiation by
Faith, and here the Malefactor has Tidings of Favor, if he will accept of it,
Ephesians. 2.15, 17. and of this I now speak: God and Man were once Friends, but by
Sin a great Breach is made, the Lord only bearing the Wrongs is justly
provoked, Isai. 65.2, 3. Man that only does the Wrong is notwithstanding at
Enmity with him, and will not be entreated to accept of Favor, much less to
repent of this Wrong, Jer. 8.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. the Lord Jesus therefore heals this
Breach, by being Mediator between both; he takes up the Quarrel, and first
reconciles God to Man, and Man to God, in himself, in Redemption, and after
this reconciles God and Man by himself in (or immediately upon) our
Justification.

This Reconciliation consists in two Things chiefly.

1. In our Peace with God, whereby the Lord lays by all Acts of Hostility
against us, Romans 5.1.

2. In the Love and Favor of God. I do not mean God's Love of Good Will, for
this is in Election, but his Love of Complaisency and Delight, for 'till we are
justified, the Lord behaves himself as an Enemy and Stranger to us who are
polluted before him, but then he begins thus to love us, 1 John 4.10, 16. Col.
1.21, 22. A Gardener may intend to turn a Crab-tree Stock into an Apple Tree,
his Intention does not alter the Nature of it until it be actually ingraffed
upon: So we are by Nature the Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 1.3. The Intention of God
the Father, or his Love of Good Will, does not make us Children of Favor and
Sons of Peace, until the Lord actually call us to and ingrafft us into Christ,
and then as Christ is the Delight of God, so we in him are loved with the same
Love of Delight, Isai. 4.1, 2. Peace with God, and Love of God, are different
Degrees of our Reconciliation: A Prince is at Peace, or cease War, against a
Rebel, yet he may not bring the Rebel before him, into his Bosom of special
Favor, Delight, and Love; but the Lord does both, toward us Enemies,
Strangers, Rebels, Devils, in our Reconciliation with him.

5. Oh consider what a blessed Estate this is to be at Peace with God: It was
the Title of Honor the Lord put upon Abraham, to be the Friend of God, Isa.
41.8. I am not able to express what a Privilege this is, it is better felt than
spoken of; as Moses said, Psalm. 90. Who knows the Greatness of his Wrath; so I
may say, Who knows the Greatness of this Favor and Love?

1. That God should be pacified with thee after Anger, this is exceeding
glorious, Isai. 12.1, 2. What is Man that the Lord should visit him, or look
upon him, though he never had sinned? But to look upon thee, nay to love thee,
after Provocation by Sin, after such Wrath, which like Fire has consumed
Thousand Thousands, and burnt down to the Bottom of Hell, and is now and ever
shall be burning upon them; Oh blessed are they that find this Favor!

2. That the Lord should be pacified wholly and thoro'ly, that there should be
no Anger left for you to feel. The poor afflicted Church might object against
those sweet Promises made here, Isai. 27.1, 2, 3. that she left no Love: You
are mistaken, says the Lord, Fury is not in me, ver. 4. Indeed against Briars
and Thorns, and obstinate Sinners that prick and cut me to the very Heart by
their Impenitency, I have, but none against you: Out of Christ, God is a
consuming Fire, but in Christ he is nothing else but Love, 1 John 4.16. and
though there may be fatherly Frowns, Chastisements, Reproofs, and Rods, though he
may for a Time hide his Face, shut out thy Prayers, defer to fulfill Promises,
etc. yet all these are out of pure Love to thee, and thou shall see it, and
feel it so in thy latter End, Heb. 12.8, 9. Never did David love Jonathan
(whose Love exceeded) as the Lord loves thee from his very Heart, now thou art
in Christ by Faith.

3. That the Lord shall be pacified eternally, never to cast thee off again for
any Sins or Miseries thou fallest into, this is wonderful: Those whom Men love
they forsake, if their Love be abused; or if their Friends be in Affliction,
they then bid them good Night; but the Lord's Love and Favor is everlasting,
Isai. 9.7. The Mountains may depart out of their Places, and the Hills cast
down to Valleys, but the Lord's Kindness never shall, never can; he has hid
his Face a little Moment, Isai. 45.10. whiles thou did live in thy Sin and
Unbelief, but now, with everlasting Mercy will he embrace thee; nay, which is
more, the abounding of thy Sin is now the Occasion of the abounding of his
Grace, Romans 5.20. thy very Wants and Miseries are the very Causes of his Bowels
and tender Mercies, Heb. 4.15, 16. Oh what a Privilege is this? Did the Lord
ever show Mercy and Favor to the Angels that sinned? Did not one Sin cast them
out of Favor utterly? Oh infinite Grace, that so many Thousand Thousands every
Day gushing out of thy Heart against Kindness and Love, nay the greatest
dearest Love of God, should not incense his sorest Displeasure against thee!
The Lord that poured out all his Anger upon his own Son for thee, and for all
thy Sins, cannot now pour out, nay he has not one Drop left, (though he would)
to pour out upon thee for any one Sin.

4. That the Lord should be thus pacified with Enemies; a Man may be easily
pacified with one that offends him a little, but with an Enemy that strikes at
his Life, (as by every Sin you do) this is wonderful, yet this is the Case
here, Romans 5.7, 8.

5. That the Lord shall be pacified, even with Enemies, by such a wonderful Way
as the Blood of Jesus Christ, Romans 5.7, 8. this is such Love, as one would
think the infinite Wisdom of a blessed God could have devised no greater; by
this ( v. 6.) he commended and set out his Love, which though now it grow a stale
and common Thing in our Days, yet this is that which is enough to burst the
Heart with Astonishment and Amazement, to think that the Party offended, (who
therefore had no Cause to seek Peace with us again) should find out such a Way
of Peace as this: Woe to the World that despise this Peace.

6. That being thus pacified, you may come into God's Presence with Boldness at
any Time, and ask what you will: I wonder what he can deny you if he loves you,
Romans 5.2. and which is yet more, that now all Creatures are at Peace with you,
Job. 5.23. is when the Captain of the Army is pacified, none of his Soldiers
must hurt or strike that Man; nay, that hereby all your Enemies should be
forced to do Good to you; Oh Death where is now thy Sting?

I have often wondered, If Christ has born all our Miseries and suffered Death
for us, why then should we feel any Miseries or see Death any more? And I could
never satisfy my own Heart by any Answers given, better than by this, viz. That
if the Lord should abolish the very being of our Miseries, they should indeed
then do us no hurt; but neither could they then do us any good; for if they
were not at all, how could they do us any good? Now the Lord Jesus has made
such a Peace for us, as that our Enemies shall not only not hurt us, but they
shall be forced (himself ordering of them) to do much good unto us; all your
Wants shall but make you Pray the more, all your Sorrows shall but Humble you
the more, all your Temptations shall but Exercise your Graces the more; all
your Spiritual Desertions shall but make you long for Heaven, and to be with
Christ the more: It is now part of your Portion, no^ only to have Paul and
Apallos; and World, not Death it self, ^ Cor. 3.22. to do you good: Oh Lord
what a b^ess^d Estate is this; which, though Thousands living under the Gospel
of peace hear of, yet they regard not; they can strain their Consciencies in a
restless pursuit of the Favor of Men, and in seeking Worldly Peace; yet to
this Day (though born Enemies to God) never spent one Day, it may be not one
Hour, in Mourning after the Lord for Favor from him, nor care not for it,
unless it be upon their own Terms, viz. that God would be at Peace with them,
but they may still remain quietly in their Sins and War against God; and thence
it is, that the Lord will shortly take away Peace from the whole Earth, and
Plague the World with War and Bloodshed: And as it is in Zech. 11.6. Deliver
every Man into the Hand of his Neighbor, and into the Hand of his King, and
they shall smite the Land; even for this very cause, for despising the Peace
and Reconciliation with God, you might and should have accepted in the Gospel
of Peace.

SECT. III Thirdly, Adoption.
THIS is the third Benefit, which in order of Nature follows our
Reconciliation, whereby the Lord accounts us Sons, and gives us the Spirit and
Privilege of Sons: For in order, we must be first beloved before we can be
loved so as to be accounted Sons, 1 John 3.1, 2. For the Lord of unjust to
account us just in our Justification is much; but for the Lord to account us
hereby as Friends, this is more: But to account us Sons also, this is a higher
Degree and a farther Privilege; and hence our Adoption follows our Faith, John
1.12. Gal. 3.26. And if Adoption, then the Spirit of Adoption much less does
not precede Faith. By Christ's active Obedience (our Divines say) we have right
unto Life; by Adoption we have a farther right; the one destroys not the other;
for a Man may have right unto the same Thing upon sundry Grounds: We know there
are two Sorts of Sons: 1. Some by Nature, born of our own Bodies, and thus we
are not Sons of God, but Children of Wrath. 2. Some by Adoption, which are
taken out of another Family, and accounted freely of us as our Sons; and thus
Moses was for a Time the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. And of this Sonship by
Adoption I now speak, the Lord taking us out of the Family of Hell to be his
adopted Sons. Christ is God's Son by eternal Generation, Adam by Creation; all
Believers are Sons by Adoption. Now Adoption is twofold,

1. External, whereby the Lord takes a People by outward Covenant and
Dispensation to be his Sons, and thus all the Jews were God's firstborn, Exodus
4.22. and unto him did belong the Adoption, Romans 9.4, 5. And hence their
Children were accounted Sons, as well as Saints, and holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. Ezekiel.
16.20, 21. but many fall from this Adoption, as the Jews did.

2. Internal, whereby the Lord out of everlasting Love to particular Persons in
special, he takes them out of the Family of Satan, and by internal Love and
special Account reckons them in the Number of Sons; makes them indeed Sons, as
well as calls them so, Isai. 56.5. Isaac by special Promise was accounted for
the Seed, Romans 9.8. and of this we now speak. Now this is double,

1. Adoption begun, 1 John 3.1, 2. now we are the Sons of God. To some of
which, (though Sons indeed) yet the Lord behaves himself toward them for some
Time, and for special Reasons, as unto Servants, exercising them with many
Fears, Gal. 4.1, 2. Some Spirits will not be the better for the Love of their
Father, but worse; and therefore the Lord keeps a hard Hand over them: to
others, the Lord behaves himself with more special Respect, in making them cry
with more Boldness, Abba, Father, Romans 8.15, 16. who will be more easily
overcome, and bent to his Will, by Love.

2. Adoption perfected, when we shall receive all the Privileges of Sons, not
one excepted, Romans 8.23. where we are said to wait for our Adoption, the
Redemption of our Bodies; by the first we are Sons, but not seen nor known
such, 1 John 3.1, 2. By the second, we shall be known before all the World to
be such: We now speak principally of Adoption begun, whereby we are Sons in
God's Account, and by real Reception of the Spirit of Sons: The Manner of this
Adoption is thus,

1. God loves Jesus Christ with an unspeakable Love, as his only Son, and as
our elder Brother.

2. Hence when we are in Christ his Son, he loves us with the same Love, as he
does his own Son.

3. Hence the Lord accounts us Sons, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. God's Love is not now toward
us as to Adam his Son by Creation, viz. immediately diffused upon us; but in
loving his own Son immediately, hence he loves us, and hence adopts us, and
accounts us Children.

Oh that the Lord would open our Eyes to see this Privilege; Behold it, says
John, 1 John 3.1. Stand amazed at it, that Children of Wrath should become the
Sons of the most high God; for a Beggar on the Dunghill, a Vagabond, Runnagate
from God, a Prodigal, a Stranger to God, whom the Lord has no Cause to think
on, to be made a Son of God almighty.

If Sons, then the Lord does prize and esteem you as Sons: If a Man has twenty
Sons, he esteems the poorest, least, sick Child he has, more than all his
Goods and Servants, unless he be an unnatural Father; I tell you that the least
of you, the poorest and most feeble Believer, is accounted of God, and more
esteemed than all his Household Stuff; than Heaven, Earth, and all the Glory in
it, and all the Kings and great Men in the World, Isai. 43.4, 5, 6. not because
thou have done any Thing worthy of this, but only because he accounts thee
freely as his Son.

If Sons, then the Lord surely will take Care for you as for Sons; a godly
Father has a double Care of his Children. First, of their Temporal, Secondly,
and chiefly of their eternal Estate: We are ready to question in Times of Want,
what we shall eat, drink, how we shall live; Oh consider, art thou a Son of
God, and will not he that feeds the Ravens, and clothes the Lillies, Mat. 6.31,
32. provide for thee? Yes verily, he will take Care for thy temporal Good. It
is true, you may be bro't into outward Straits, Wants, Miseries, yet then the
Lord is thereby plotting for thy eternal Good, for hence come all God's
Corrections, Deuteronomy. 8.5. Heb. 12.8. the Lord took all they had from them by
their Enemies in War, and carried them away Captive into a strange Land, yet
Jer. 24.5. this was for their Good; we think the Lord many Times takes no Care
for us, and so make him of a worse Nature than the savage Beasts, or bloody Men
toward their young, but this is certain, he never denies any Thing to us in
outward Things, but it is to further our eternal Bliss with him, to do us Good
in our latter End: What say godly Parents? It is no Matter what becomes of my
Children, when I am dead, if the Lord will but give them himself to be their
Portion; if at last they may see the Lord in Glory: Do not wonder then if the
Lord keeps you short sometimes.

If Sons, then he loves you as Sons, as a Father does his Sons; you think the
Lord loves you not, because you do not always feel his Love, nor know his Love;
is thy Son not thy Child, because while it is young, it knows not the Father
that begat it, or because thou art sometime departed from it, and have it not
always in thine own Arms? Israel says, My God has forsaken me and forgotten
me, Isai. 49.14. and yet no Mother tenders her Child, as the Lord did them; you
think because you have so many Sins and Afflictions one upon another, that the
Lord loves you not: Judge righteously, has thy Child no Father because it is
sick long together, and therefore kept under a spare Diet? No, he knows our
Mould, and that we are but Dust, and freely chooses us to be his Sons, and hence
loves notwithstanding all our Sins, Psalm. 89.32, 33. If he sees Ephraim
bemoaning his Stubbornness, as well as his Sickness and Weakness, Jer. 31.20.
does not the Lord profess, Is he not my only Son?

4. If Sons, then we are Heirs and Coheirs with Christ, says the Apostle,
Romans 8.17. Sons by Nature are not always Heirs, but all Sons by Adoption are:
We are Heirs with Christ, the Lord Christ as our elder Brother managing all our
Estate for us, because unable to do it our selves: We are Heirs, 1. Of the
Kingdom of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.2. Heirs of all this visible World, 1 Cor.
3.22. not that we have the whole World in our own Hand (it would be too
cumbersome to us to manage) but the Lord gives us the Rent of it, the Blessing
and Good of it, though it be possessed by others. 3. We are Heirs of the Promise,
Heb. 11.9. and 6.17. whereby Jehovah himself comes to be our Inheritance and
Portion for ever; and look as Christ was in the World and Heir of all, though
trod under Foot by all, so are we; what can we desire more?

5. If Sons, then we have, and shall ever have the Spirit of Sons, Romans 8.15,
16. And what are we the better for this Spirit? Truly hereby, First, we cry
unto him, we are enabled to pray, who could not pray before, because Guilt
stopped our Mouths. Secondly, we cry Abba Father, and this Spirit witnesses that
we are the Sons of this Father: It is not said that it witnesses to our
Spirits, but it witnesses with our Spirits, i. e. our renewed Conscience,
thus; all Believers called and justified of God are Sons, but I am such a
Believer, therefore I am a Son, now the Spirit bears witness with us in every
Part, both Premises and Conclusion, only it being the clearest and strongest
Witness, it testifies the same Thing our Consciences do, but yet more clearly,
more certainly, more comfortably and sweetly, ravishing the Soul with most
unspeakable Peace and Joy, especially in the Conclusion. I know there is a
Noetick Testimony, but it is lastly resolved into this; I Will not now dispute
it, only this is certain; that this Testimony all the Sons of God have by Means
of their Adoption. They may not indeed sometime hear it; if they do they may
object against it through the Unbelief in Part remaining in them; or if it be
sometimes suspended, what you want in the Witness and Comfort of it, you have
it in the Holiness of it; and therefore the Spirit sealing is called the Holy
Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8. and is not this a great Privilege? Romans
8.14, Thirdly, Hereby you are led and guided, and that continually toward your
last End. For as if Adam had stood, he should have had the Spirit of God, this
very Spirit to have kept him and all his Posterity from falling at any Time
from God, so Christ having stood for us, justified us before God, sends the
immutable constant Assistance of the Spirit in Adoption, which though it does not
always quicken us, nor comfort us, nor assure us, etc. yet it is every Moment
guiding and leading of us unto our utmost End. From hence it is, that the same
Sins which harden others, at (...) humble us, the same Temptations by which
others fall and perish, serve at last to purify us; hence our Decay in Grace
leads us to Growth at last, hence our Fears and Doubts serve to establish at
least, hence our wildrings from God, for a Time, make us esteem more of the
Presence and Ways of God at last; because the Spirit of Adoption is that by
which we are led, and constantly assisted and carried toward our latter End: Oh
mourn thou that art as yet no Son, but a Slave to Satan, and unto thy filthy
Lusts; a Servant at best, working for Wages only, and fear of the Whip, who
shall not always abide in God's House as Sons shall do: Nay it may be have hated
and reviled the Sons of God; Time shall come that you shall wonder at their
Glory who are not known now.

SECT. IV. Fourthly, Sanctification.
THIS is the fourth Benefit which follows in Order of Nature, our
Justification, Reconciliation, and Adoption, for upon our being Sons in
Adoption, we receive the Image of our heavenly Father in Sanctification;
because we are under Grace. Hence it comes to pass that we are freed from the
reigning Power of Sin, Romans 6.14. so that our Sanctification follows our
Justification, and Adoption, goes not before it. In justification, we have the
Love and Righteousness of the Son; in Reconciliation, the Love of the Father;
in Adoption, the Love of a Father and Presence of the Spirit assisting,
witnessing; in Sanctification, the Image of our Father by the same Spirit: And
this I conceive, with Submission, is the Seal of the Spirit, mentioned, Ephesians.
1.13. the Seal sealing, is the Spirit it self; the Seal sealed, consists first
in the Expression of it in Adoption; secondly, in the Impression of it in
Sanctification, and that he only shall pass as current Coin, that has both
these: I know the most full and clear Expression and Testimony of the Spirit is
after all God's Work is finished in Glorification, but the Beginning of it is
here in Adoption, a full Measure of it in Sanctification; God's Seal is ever
set to some Purpose (as Men's Seals to some Bonds, not to Blanks) the Lord's
Promise of actual Justification and Reconciliation, pertains only to Men
sanctified or called: In Adoption therefore we receive the Spirit, which looks
both Ways; testifying either thou sanctified, art justified, or thou called,
art justified and reconciled.

I speak not now of external Sanctification by outward Show and Profession, and
common Illumination and Operation of the Spirit upon Men, from which many fall
away, Heb. 10.29. but of internal and special; the Nature of which, you may
best conceive in these three Degrees,

1. It is the renewing of a Man, Tit. 3.5. So that by it a Man is morally made
a new Man, another Man; all Things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.27. he has new
Thoughts, new Opinions of Things, new Desires, new Prayers, and Praises, new
Dispositions, Regeneration not differing from it.

2. It is a renewing of the whole Man, 1 These. 5.23. For as every Part and
Faculty of Man is corrupt by the first Adam, so they are renewed by the second
Adam; not that we are perfectly renewed in this Life by Christ, as we are
corrupt by Adam, but in Part in every Faculty, Romans 6.19. and from hence
arises our spiritual Combat and Warfare with Sin, yea with all Sin; it is not
because of our Sanctification simply (for if it were perfect, we should War and
Wrestle no more;) but from the Imperfection of it. And this renewal in Part, is
in every Part, even in the whole Man: And as the first Adam propagates Sin
chiefly and radically in the Soul, especially into the Heart of Man; and from
thence it diffuseth it self like Leaven into the whole Lump of our Lives, so
the Lord Jesus chiefly communicates this Renewal into our Hearts, and thence it
sweetens our Lives; and hence it is called the inner Man, Romans 7.22. Ephesians. 3.16.
You see a little Holiness in a Christian; I tell you, if he be of the right
Make, there is a Kind of infinite endless Holiness within him from whence it
springs, as there is a Kind of infinite endless Wickekness in a wicked Man,
from whence his Sin spring: If a Man be outwardly holy, but not within, he is
not sanctified, no more than the painted Sepulchers of the proud Pharisees; if
any Man say his Heart is good, though he makes no Show in his Life, he speaks not
the Truth, if the Apostle may be believed, 1 John 1.6. for Sanctification is
the Renewal of the whole Man, within and without; it is not for a Man to have
his Teeth white, his Tongue tipped, and his Nails pared; no, no, the Lord makes
all new where he comes.

3. It is a Renewal unto the Image of God, or of God in Christ; an unsanctified
Man may be after a Sort renewed in the whole Man, his outward Conversation may
be fair, his Mind may be enlightened, his Heart may taste of the heavenly Gift,
Heb. 6.4, 5. he may have a Form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. he may have strong
Resolutions within him unto Godliness, Deuteronomy. 5.29. And hence with the five
foolish Virgins, may be received into the Fellowship of the Wise, and not
discerned of them neither, till the Gate is shut; but they are never renewed in
their whole Man after the Image of God, i. e. they do not know Things, and
judge of them as God does, they do not Love and Will Holiness and the Means
thereto, as God does; they hate not Sin, as God does; they do not delight in
the whole Law of God, it is not writ in their Hearts, and hence they love it
not as God does: And this is the Cut of the Thread between a sanctified and
unsanctified Spirit; by Sanctification a Man is renewed unto God's Image, once
lost, but here again restored, Ephesians. 4, 24. John 1.16. we receive from Christ
Grace for Grace, as the Seal on the Wax has Tittle for Tittle, to that in the
Seal it self, we are changed into the same Image of Christ by beholding him in
the Glass of the Gospel, by Faith, 2 Cor. 3.18. I delight in the Law of my God
in my inward Man, Romans 7.23. And hence a Christian by the Life of
Sanctification, lives like unto God; at least has a holy Disposition and
Inclination (the Habits of Holiness) so to do, Gal. 2.19. I live unto God, he
calls us from Darkness into his mavelous Light, that we might show forth
his Virtues; and that this is true Sanctification, may thus appear; because our
Sanctification is opposed to our original Corruption, as our Justification to
our original and contracted Guilt of Sin: Now as original Corruption is the
defacing of God's Image by contrary Dispositions to Sinfulness, so our
Sanctification can be nothing else but the Removal of this Pollution, by the
contrary Habits and Dispositions to be like unto God again: Our Sanctification
is to be holy, Lev. 20.7. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. our Holiness has no other
primary Pattern but God's Holiness, so that our Sanctification is not the
Righteousness and Holiness as it is inherent in Christ, for that is the Matter
of our Justification, and therefore Sanctification must be that Holiness which
is derived unto us from Christ, whereby we are made like unto him; and thus
Christ is made Sanctification unto us, 1 Cor. 1.30. There should be no
Difference between Christ our Righteousness and Sanctification, if that
Holiness which is in Christ should be both unto us. Hence also Sanctification
is not the immediate Operation of the Spirit upon us, without created Habits of
Grace abiding in us, as the Spirit that came upon Balaam, and mightily affected
him for a Time, but left him as destitute of any Grace or Change of his Nature
as the Ass he rode on; no, no, it renews you unto the Image of God himself, if
you be truly sanctified. And therefore let all these Dreams of the Familists
(denying all inherent Graces, but only those which are in Christ, to be in the
Saints) let them vanish and perish from under the Sun, and the good Lord reduce
all such who in Simplicity are misled from this blessed Truth of God. I will
not now enter into the Depth concerning the Means of our Sanctification in
Mortification by Christ's Death and Vivication by the Resurrection of Christ:
This may suffice for Explication of the Nature of it.

Only see and for ever prize this Privilege, all you blessed Souls, whom the
Lord has justified; thou have many sad Complaints, what is it to me, if I be
justified in Christ, and be saved at last by Christ, and my Heart remain all
this while unholy and unsubdued unto the Will of Christ; that he should comfort
me, and my holy Heart be always grieving of him; what though the Lord save me from
Misery, but saves me not from my Sin; Oh consider this Benefit. It is true,
thou find a woeful, sinful Nature within thee, cross and contrary unto
Holiness, and leading thee daily in Captivity; yet remember the Lord has given
thee another Nature, a new Nature; there is something else within thee, which
makes thee wrestle against Sin; and shall in Time prevail over all Sin, Mat.
12.20. this is the Lord's Grace sanctifying of thee. Oh be thankful that the
Lord has not left thee wholly corrupt but has begun to glorify himself in
thee, and to bless thee in turning thee from thine Iniquities.

1. By this thou have a most sweet and comfortable evidence of thy
Justification and Favor with God; he that denies this, must (whatever
Distinctions he has) abolish many Places of Scripture, especially the Epistles
of James and John, who had to do with some Spirits, that pretended Faith and
Union to Christ, and Communion with him, and so long as it was thus, this was
Evidence sufficient to them of their justified Estates. What says James? Thou
say thou have Faith, show it me then; prove it: for my Part, says he, I Will
prove by the blessed Fruits and Works which flow from it, as Abraham manifested
his, Jam. 2.18, 22. What said John? You talk (said he) of Fellowship and
Communion with Christ, and yet what Holiness is there in your Hearts and Lives;
if you say you have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, you lie, and do
not the Truth; but if you walk in the Light, then although your Holiness, and
Confession, and daily Repentance for Sin does not wash away Sin, yet the Blood
of Christ does wash us, 1 John 1.6, 7. Again, you say, you know Christ, and the
Love and Good Will of Christ toward you, and that he is the Propitiation for
your Sins: How do you know this? says he: He that says I know him, and keep
not his Commandments, is a Liar, 1 John 2.4. True, might some reply, he that
keeps not the Commands of Christ, has thereby a sure Evidence that he knows
him not, and that he is not united unto him; but is this any Evidence that we
do know him, and that we are united to him, if we do keep his Commandments? Yes
verily, says the Apostle, Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments, ver 3. and again ver. 5. Hereby know we that we are in him: What
can be more plain? What a Vanity is this to say, that this is running upon a
Covenant of Works? Is not Sanctification the writing of the Law in our Hearts,
a special Benefit of the Covenant of Grace, as well as Justification? Heb.
8.10, 12. and can the evidencing then of one Benefit of such a Covenant by
another, be a running upon the Covenant of Works? Is it a Truth contained in
the Covenant of Grace, viz. That he that is justified is also sanctified, and
he that is sanctified is also justified? And is it an Error against Grace to
see this Truth, That he that is sanctified is certainly justified; and that
therefore he that knows himself sanctified, may also know thereby that he is
justified? Tell me how will you know that you are justified? You will say, by
the Testimony of the Spirit; and cannot the same Spirit shine upon your Graces,
and witness that you are sanctified as well? 1 John 4.13, 24. 1 Cor. 2.12. Can
the Spirit make the one clear to you and not the other? Oh Beloved, its a sad
Thing to hear such Questions and such cold Answers also, that Sanctification
possibly may be an Evidence; may be? is it not certain? assuredly, to deny it
is as bad as to affirm that God's own Promises of Favor are not true Evidences
thereof, and consequently, that they are Lies and Untruths; for search the
Scripture, and consider sadly, how many evangelical Promises are made unto
several Graces, i. e. unto such Persons as are invested with them; you may only
take a Taste from Mat. 5. 3, 4. etc. where our Savior (who was no legal
Preacher) pronounces, and consequently evidenceth, Blessedness by eight or
nine Promises, expressly made to such Persons as had inherent Graces of Poverty,
Mourning, Meekness, etc. there mentioned; the Lord Jesus leaving those precious
Legacies of his Promises unto his Children, that are called by those Names of
Mourners, poor in Spirit, pure in Heart, etc. that so every one may take, and
be assured of his Portion manifested particularly therein; that I many Times
wonder how it comes to pass, that this so plain and ancient Principle of
Catechism (for so it was among the Waldeneses many hundred Years since)
grounded on so many pregnant Scriptures, should come to be so much as
questioned (...) our Days; sometimes I think it arises from some wretched
Lusts Men have a Mind to live quietly in; desirous to keep their Peace, and yet
unwilling to forsake their Lusts; and hence they exclude this Witness of Water,
the Witness of Sanctification to testify in the Court of Conscience, whether
they are beloved of God and sincere hearted or no, because this is a full
Witness against them, and tells them to their Faces, that there is no Peace to
the Wicked, Isai. 57. ult. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. and that they have nothing to do to
take God's Name in their Lips, that secretly hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50.16.
In others I think it does not arise from Want of Grace, but because the Spirit
of Grace and Sanctification runs very low in them; it is so little that they can
scarce see it by the Help of Spectacles; or if they do, they doubt continually
of the Truth of it; and hence because it can speak little, and that little very
darkly and obscurely for them; they have no great Mind that it should be bro't
in as any Witness for them. Others I think may have much Grace and Holiness,
yet for a Time cast it by as an Evidence unto them, because they have
Experience how difficult and troublesome it is to find this Evidence; and when
it is found, how troublesome to read it, and keep it fair, and thereby have
constant Peace and Quietness; and hence arise those Speeches, Why do you look
to your Sanctification, a blotted Evidence? You may have it to Day, and lose it
to Morrow, and then where is your Peace? And I do believe the Lord deprives
many of his precious Saints from the Comfort of this Evidence; either because
they look only to this, and not unto Christ and their Justification by Faith,
Romans 5.1. or else because there is some secret Lust or Guile of Spirit, Psalm.
31.1, 2. which the Lord by sore and long Shakings about their Call and
Sanctification, would first winnow out, or because there is a perverse
Frowardness of Spirit, whereby because they feel not that Measure of
Sanctification which they would, do therefore vilify, and so come to deny what
indeed they have; because they feel a Law of Sin in their Members, leading them
away Captive; will not, with Paul, take Notice of the Law of their Minds,
whereby that inner Man delights in the Law of God, and mourns bitterly under
the Body of Death, by which they might see with Paul, that there is no
Condemnation to such, Romans 8.1. To conclude, whatever is the Cause of this
Crookedness of Judgment, I do believe that the general Cause is, want of
Attendance and standing unto the Judgment of the Scriptures in this
Controversy: For if this was stood unto, Men would not produce their own
Experience, viz. that they could never find any Evidence from Sanctification,
but they have met with it in another Way, by the immediate Witness of the
Spirit only; nor would Men cry it down, because Grace being mixed with so much
Corruption, it can hardly be discerned, and so will be always left in doubts,
and that the Heart is deceitful, and many that have evidenced their Estates
hereby, have been deceived: I confess thus the Popish Doctors argue against
Assurance of Faith from the Scriptures without special and extraordinary
Revelation; but what is all this to the Purpose if the Scripture make it an
Evidence? Away then with thy corrupt Experience, shall this be judge, or the
Scriptures rather? What though many judging of themselves by Marks and Signs have
been deceived; yet if the Scripture make it an Evidence, (as we have proved)
then, though Men through their own Weakness or Wickness have been deceived in
misapplying Promises; yet the Scriptures cannot deceive you: What though it be
difficult to discern Christ's Grace in us; yet if the Scriptures will have us
try our Estates by that Rule, which in it self is easy, but to our Blindness
and Weakness, difficult many Times to see; who shall, who dares condemn the
holy Scriptures? Which as they shall judge us at the last Day, should judge us
now. Suppose that diverse Books, and many Ministers sometimes give false Signs
of Grace and God's Favor, yet does the Scripture give any? I shall propose one
Thing to Conscience, as the Conclusion of this Discourse: Suppose thou were now
lying upon thy Deathbed, comforting thy self in thy elected and justified
Estate, suppose the Spirit of God should now grapple with thy Conscience, and
tell thee, if thou art justified, then thou art called and sanctif^ed, 2 These.
2.13, 14. Is it thus with thee? What will thou answer? If thou say thou art
not sanctified, the Word and Spirit will bear Witness then agai^^t thee, and
say, then thou art not elected nor justifi^d; if thou say thou know not,
thou look not to Sanctification, or Fruits of the Spirit, they will then
^^ply, How then can thou say that thou art elected or justified? For it is a
Truth as clear as the Sun, and as immovable as Heaven and Earth, none are
elected and justified, but they are also sanctified, and they that are not
sanctified are not justified, Romans 18.1, 13. And now t^ll me, how can you have
Peace, unless you make your Faces like Flint before the Face of God's eternal
Truth, or heal your Conscience by such a Plaster as will not stick? If
therefore the Lord ever made Sin bitter to thee, let Holiness be sweet; if
Continuance in Sin has been an Evidence into thee of thy Condemnation, Oh let
the Riches of the Grace of Christ in redeeming thee from the lamentable Bondage
and Power of Sin, be an Evidence to thee of thy Salvation: O bless God for any
little Measure of Sanctification; do not scorn or secretly despise this Spirit
of Grace, as many in this degenerate Age begin to do, saying, You look to
Graces, and Fruits, and Marks, and Signs, and a holy Frame of Heart and
Sanctification; what is your Sanctification? Oh let it be the more precious to
thee, mourning that thou have so little, and blessing the God and Father of all
Grace for what little thou have, wearing it as a Bracelet of Gold about thy
Neck, knowing hereby thou art born of God, and that the whole World lies in
Wickedness, and shall perish without this, 1 John 5.18, 19.

2. This is your Glory and Beauty, this is Glorification begun; what greater
Glory than to be like unto God? To be like unto God is to be next to God: And
therefore this is called Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. We are changed into the same Image
from Glory to Glory. Every Degree of Grace is Glory, and the Perfection of
Glory in Heaven consists chiefly in the Perfection of Grace; what is the Work
of some Men at this Day but to cast Reproach upon Sanctification, our Glory?

3. This will give you abundance of sweet Peace, and therefore, Heb. 12.11. it
is called the quiet Fruit of Righteousness; for from whence comes the
sore-Troubles and continual Doubts of God's Favor in many Men's Consciences?
Is it not some Decay or Guile here? Psalm. 32.1, 2. Is it not some Boldness to
Sin; that they walk not in Fear, and therefore not in the Consolation of the
Holy Ghost? Acts 9.31. Is it not their secret Dalliance with some known Sin,
continued in with secret Impenitency? Is it not because they labor with some
strong unmortified Corruption, Pride, or Passions, that they are in daily Pangs
and Throws of Conscience for? Psalm. 32.1, to 4. What was the rejoicing of Paul?
Was it not that in all Sincerity and Simplicity he had his Coversation among
Men, 2 Cor. 1.12. What was Hezekiah's Peace when dying, as he though it? Was it not
this? Lord, remember I have walked before thee uprightly, Isai. 38.2, 3. not
that this was the Ground of their Peace, for that only is free Grace in Christ,
but this is the Means of your Peace, John 14.22, 23. It Is a cursed Peace which
is kept by looking to Christ, yet loving thy Lust.

4. This is that which will make you fit for God's Use, 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. a
filthy unclean Vessel is good for nothing till cleansed; God will not delight
to glorify himself much by an unsanctified Person; what is thy Wife, Children,
Friends, Family, the better for thee, if thy Heart remain unsanctified?

5. A little Holiness is eminently all, springing up to eternal Life; this
little Spring shall never cease running, but it shall fill Heaven it self, and
thy Soul in it with abundance of Glory, John 4.14. and 7.38. You despise it
because it is but little; I tell you this little is eminently all, and contains
as much as shall be pou^ed out by thee so long as God is God: It Is true, thou
say its weak, and often foiled, and gives thee not complete Power and Victory
over all Sin, yet know that this shall (like the House of David) grow stronger
and stronger, and it shall at last prevail, and the Lord will not break thee
though thou art bruised by Sin daily, until Judgment come to Victory; and the
Prince of this World be judged, and thy Soul perfected in the Day of the Lord
Jesus.

SECT. V. Fifthly, Audience of all Prayers.
THIS is the fifth Benefit, which though it be a Fruit of other Benefits, yet I
name it in special, because I desire it may be especially observed; and I place
it after our Sanctification, because of David's Speech; If I regard Iniquity in
my Heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer, Psalm. 66.18. And that of the
Apostle, 1 John 3.22. We believe that whatever we ask we receive, because we
keep his Commandments, and do those Things which are pleasing in his Sight. As
the Lord has Respect to the Prayers of his People, not only in Regard of their
Justification, but in some Sense in Regard of their Sanctification also; a
justified Person, polluted with some personal or common Sins of the Times, may
want that Audience and Acceptance of his Prayers I am now speaking of.

That God will hear all the Petitions of his People, can there be a greater
Privilege than this? Yet this our Savior affirms twice together, because it is
so great a Promise, that we can hardly believe it, John 14.13, 14. Whatsoever
you ask the Father in my Name, that will I do; mark the Scope of the Words, our
Savior had promised, that he that believes in me shall do greater Works than I
have done: New because this might seem strange and impossible, the Lord in
those Verses tells them how, for (says he) Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, that
will I do for you, I will do indeed all that is to be done, but yet, it shall
be by Means of your Prayers; Christ did great Works when he was upon the Earth,
but for him to do whatever a poor sinful Creature shall desire him to do, what
greater Work of Wonder can there be than this? This is our Confidence (says
the Apostle) that whatever we ask according to his Will, he hears us, 1 John
5.15. The greatest Question here will be, What are those Prayers the Lord Jesus
will hear? I confess many Things are excellently spoken this Way, yet I
conceive the Meaning of this great Charter is fully expressed in those Words, In
my Name. If they be Prayers in Christ's Name, they shall be heard, and it
contains these three Things,

1. To pray in Christ's Name, is to pray with Reliance upon the Grace, Favor,
and Worthiness of the Merits of Christ, thus this Phrase is used, Micah 4.5. To
walk in the Name of their God, is in Confidence of the Authority, and
Excellency, and Favor of their Gods, that they will bear them out in it; so to
pray in Christ's Name, is to pray for Christ's sake, thus, Ephesians. 2.18. Through him
(i. e. through his Death and Sanctification rested upon) we have Access with
Confidence unto the Father, Ephesians. 3.12, In whom we have Boldness, and Access
with Confidence, by the Faith of him. There are three Evils that commonly
attend our Prayers, when we see God indeed. 1. Shame and Flight from God, the
Apostle says therefore, that by Faith in Christ we have Access. 2. If we do
accede and draw near to him, there is a secret Fear and Straitness of Spirit to
open all our Minds; therefore says he, we have Boldness, the Word signifies
Liberty of Speech to open all our Minds without Fear, or Discouragement. 3.
After we have thus drawn near, and opened all our Desires and Moans before God,
we have many Doubts, viz. Will the Lord hear such a Sinner, and such weak, and
imperfect and sinful Prayers? And therefore he also affirms, that we have
Confidence and Assurance of being heard; but all this is by Faith in him: For
look as Christ has purchased all Blessings for us by his Death, and hence
makes his Intercession for those Things daily according to our Need: So we are
much more to rest upon, and make that Satisfaction, the Ground of our
Intercession; because Christ's Blood purchased this, therefore, O Lord grant
this.

2. To pray in his Name, is to pray from his Command, and according to his
Will; as when we send another in our Name, we wish him to say thus, Tell him
that I desire such a Thing of him, and that I sent you; so it is here, and thus
the Phrase signifies, John 5.43. I am came in my Father's Name, i. e. by his
Authority and Command, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. To pray in Christ's Name therefore, is
to pray according to the Will of Christ, and from the Will of Christ; when we
take those Words the Lord puts into our Mouths, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3. and desire
those Things only that the Lord commands us to seek, whether absolutely or
conditionally; according to his Will revealed, and with Submission to his Will
concealed, 1 John 5.14. Whatever we ask according to his Will, he hears us,
Psalm. 27.8. Romans 8.26. If you ask any Thing not according to God's Will, you
come in your own Name, he sent you not with any such Message to the Father.

3. To pray in his Name, is to pray for his Ends; for the Sake and Use of
Christ, and Glory of Christ; thus the Phrase is used, Mat. 10.41, 42. To
receive a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, i. e. for this End and Reason,
because he is a Prophet. A Servant comes in his Master's Name to ask something
of another, when he comes, as from his Command; so also for his Master's Use:
So when we pray for Christ's Sake, i. e. for his Ends, not our own; these ever
prevail, Jam. 4.3. You ask, and have not because you ask amiss, to spend it on
your Lusts, John 12.27, 28. Psalm. 145.18. this is to ask in Truth, to act for a
spiritual End; to make it our utmost End, arises from a special, peculiar,
supernatural Presence of the Spirit of Life: and consequently a Spirit of
Prayer which is ever heard. And hence you shall observe the least Groan for
Christ's Ends is ever heard; because it is the Groaning of the Spirit, because
it is an Act of spiritual Life, the Formality of which consists in this, that
it is for God, Gal. 2.19. the Lord cannot deny what we pray for for Christ's
Ends, because then he should crush Christ's Glory: And therefore let a
Christian observe, when he would have any Thing of God that concerns himself,
not to be solicitous so much for the Thing, as to gain Favor and Neerness to
God, and a Heart subject unto God in a humble Contentedness, to be denied as
well as to be heard, and he shall undoubtedly find the Thing it self; a Lust is
properly such a desire (though for lawful Things) wherein a Man must have the
Thing because it pleases him, as when Rachel asked for Children; she must have
them, else she must needs die: Give us Water that we may drink was their
brutish Cry, Exodus 17.1, 2. not that we may live to him that gives it: Holy
Prayers or Desires (opposed unto Lusts) are such Desires of the Soul, left with
God, with Submission to his Will, as may best please him; Now the Lord will
hear the Desires indeed of all that fear him, but not fulfill their Lusts.

These three are the essential Properties of such Prayer as is heard, or if you
will, of that which is properly or spiritually Prayer: Fervency and Assurance,
etc. are excellent Ingredients; but yet the Lord may hear Prayer without them:
It is true, the Lord may sometimes not h^^r us presently, for our praying Time
is our sowing Time, we must not look presently for the Harvest. The Lord hears
the Prayers of the destitute, Psalm. 102.17. the original Word is, of the Shrub,
or naked Place of the Desert, which the Prophet says, Jer. 17.6. Sees no Good
when Good comes, yet such as feel themselves such, the Lord does regard them,
and will have a Time to answer them: And though the Lord may not give us the
Thing we pray for, nor as good a Thing of the same Kind, yet he ever gives us
the End of our Prayers; he that is at Sea and wants stiff Winds to carry him to
his Port, yet has no cause to complain, if the Lord secretly carries him in by
a strong Current of the Sea it self; and it is certain, at the End of all God's
dealing with you, you shall then see how the Lord has not failed to answer you
in any one Particular, Joshua 23.14.

Oh therefore see and be persuaded of this your Privilege, that God will now
hear every Prayer; many make a Question, How may we know when the Lord grants
out any Blessing as an Answer to Prayer? Many things are said to this purpose;
but the Simplicity and Plainness of the Answer lies in this, viz. If it be a
Prayer, God hears it; if it be put up in Christ's Name, it is then a Prayer:
And that you may believe this, and glory in this, consider these Reasons only,
to confirm this truth.

1. From the Promise of Christ as in this place, John 14.13, 14. which was a
Promise in special to to be accomplished when he came to his Kingdom; and
therefore, though it is true, God's Grace is free, and therefore you think the
Lord may as well refuse to hear you, as hear; yet consider that by his Promise,
he has bound himself to hear.

2. From the Fatherly disposition that is in God, John 16.26, 27. and hence he
loves us, and hence cannot but hear us.

3. Because all Prayers put up in Christ's Name, Christ makes Intercession that
they may be heard; Heb. 7.25 He has laid down his Blood, that all our Prayers
might be heard, (as we have proved) and indeed, hence arises the infinite
efficacy of Prayer, because it is built upon that which is Infinitely and
Eternally worthy.

4. Because all Prayers of the Faithful arise from the Spirit of Prayer, Romans
8.26. because as that which is for the Flesh, is of the Flesh; so that which is
for the Spirit or for the sake of Christ; for Spiritual ends, is ever of the
Spirit, John 7.18.

5. Because of the Glory of Christ, that the Father may be glorified in the
Son: Cannot Christ be glorified unless he hears all Prayers? Yes he could, but
yet his Will is to reveal his Glory by this means; so that though thou and thy
Prayers be vile, and therefore deservest no Acceptance, nor Answer, yet
remember that his Glory is dear; it is the glory of Kings to hear some Requests
and Petitions, but they cannot hear nor answer all; it is the glory of Christ
to hear all, because he is able, without the least dishonor to himself thus to
do.

Oh be persuaded of this, how should your Joy then, be full, how should you
then delight to be often with him, how would you then encourage all to come unto
him, how would you then be constrained to do any thing for him, who is ready to
do all for you? but Oh Woe unto our Unbelief, for that which (the Apostle
says, 1 John 5.14.) was ground of his Confidence, viz. that what ever we ask
according to hss Will, he hears us, is no ground to us, and we may say, and
mourn to think, this is our diffidence, that what ever I ask according to
Christ's Will, he hears me not: But Oh recover from such a distrustful Frame,
and from all dead-heartedness in this Duty withal, lest the Lord send
Taskmasters and double our Bricks, and then we groan, and sigh, and cry, and
learn to Pray that way, that will not Pray nor Believe now. If the Lord will
but give us Hearts, assuredly you might not only rule your selves and Families,
but by the Power of Prayer pull down, and raise up Kingdoms, dispose of the
greatest Affairs of the Church, nay of the World, you might hereby work
Wonders, by means of him who Ruling all Things yet is overcome by Prayer, Hos.
12.4, 5.

SECT. VI. Sixthly, Glorification.
THIS is the sixth and last Privilege and Benefit, and you all know is the last
Thing in the Execution of God's eternal Purpose toward all his beloved and
chosen Ones; whom he has predestined, called, justified, them he has also
glorified, Romans 8.30. hereby we are made perfect in Holiness, no more Sin shall
stir in us; perfect also in Happiness; no more Tears, nor Sorrows, nor
Temptations, nor Fears shall ever molest us, Heb. 12.23. Rev. 14.13. And all
this shall be in our immediate Communion with God in Christ, Col. 1.28. John
17.23, 24. we shall be then, says Paul, forever with the Lord: If the Lord
would but open our Eyes, and give us one Glimpse of this, what Manner of
Persons should we be? How should we then live? How willingly then should we
embrace Faggots and Flames, Prisons and Penury? The light Afflictions here,
would not they work for us Glory? Nay, the Apostle uses such a Phrase which I
believe may pose the most curious Orator in the World to express to the Life of
it, an exceeding Weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. What is our Life now but a
continual dying, carrying daily about us that which is more bitter than a
thousand Deaths; what says the Apostle to us, Col. 3.3. You are d^^d, yet when
Christ shall appear, you shall appear with him also in Glory: The general
Security of these Times foretold by Christ (especially when Churches become
Virgins, and People are seeking after Purity of Ordinances) it shall not be in
a Want of Watchfulness against the present Corruptions of the Times, so much as
in a careless Want of Expectation of the Coming of Christ in Glory, not having
our Loins girt, and Lamps burning, nor Readiness to meet the Lord in Glory,
Mat. 25.1, to 5, etc. Oh that I were able therefore to give you a Blush, and a
dark View of this Glory, that might raise up our Hearts to this Work.

1. Consider the Glory of the Place: The Jews did and do Dream still of earthly
Kingdom, at the Coming of their Messiah; the Lord dasheth those Dreams, and
tells them his Kingdom is not of this World, and that he went away to prepare a
Place for them, that where he is, they might be, John 14.2, 3, and be with him
to see his Glory, John 17.23, 24. The Place shall be the third Heaven, called
our Father's House; built by his own Hand with most exquisite Wisdom, fit for
so great a God to appear in his Glory ( John 14.2, 3.) to all his dear
Children; called also a Kingdom, Mat. 25.31. Come, ye Blessed, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, which is the Top of all the worldly Excellency,
called also an Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3. which the holy Apostle infinitely
blesses God for, as being our own and freely given to us, being our Father's
Inheritance divided among his Sons, which is a greater Privilege than to be
born an Heir to all the richest Inheritances on this Earth, or be Lord of all
this visible World: For this Inheritance he tells us, is, 1. Incorruptible,
whereas all this World waxes old as a Garment. 2. It Is undefiled, never yet
polluted with any Sin, no not by the Angels that fell, for they fell in
Paradise, when Guardians to Man, whereas this whole Creation groaneth under the
Burden and Bondage of Corruption, Romans 8.3. This never fades away; it is not
like Flowers, whose Glory and Beauty soon withers, but this shall be most
pleasant, sweet, and ever delightsome; after we have been ten thousand Years in
it, as it was the first Day we entered into it, (for this is the meaning of the
Word, and so it differs from incorruptible) whereas in this World (suppose a
Man should ever enjoy it, yet) there grows a secret Satiety and Fullness upon
our Hearts, as it grows common, and Blessings of greatest Price are not so
sweet, as the first Time we enjoy them; they clog the Stomach, and glut the
Soul; but here our Eyes, Ears, Minds, Hearts, shall be ever ravished with that
admirable Glory which shines brighter than ten thousand Suns, the very Fabric
of it being God's Needle Work, (if I may so say) quilted with Variety of all
Flowers in diverse Colors, by the exactest Art of God himself, as the Apostle
intimates, Heb. 11.10.

2. Consider of the Glory of the Bodies of the Saints in this Place; the Lord
shall change our vile Bodies, which are but as Dirt upon our Wings, and Clogs
at our Feet, as the Apostle expresses it, Phil. 3. ult. Paul was in the third
Heaven, and saw the Glory doubtless of some there, see what he says of them, 1
Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.

1. It shall be an incorruptible Body; it shall never die, nor rot again, no
not in the least Degree tending that way, it shall never grow weary, (as now
it is by hard Labor, and sometimes by holy Duties) nor faint, nor grow wrinkled
and withered. Adam's Body in Innocence, potuit, non mori, we say truly; but
this non potest mori, it cannot die: And hence it is, that there shall be no
more Sickness, Pains, Griefs, Faintings, Fits, etc. when it comes there.

2. It shall be a glorious Body, it shall rise in Honor, says Paul; and what
Glory shall it have? Verily it shall be like unto Christ's glorious Body, Phil.
3. ult. which when Paul saw, Acts 9. did shine brighter than the Sun: And
therefore here shall be no Imperfection of Limbs, Scars, or Maims, natural or
accidental Deformities; but as the third Heaven it self is most lightsome, Genesis
1.1, 2. so their Bodies that inhabit that Place shall exceed the Light and
Glory thereof, these being more compacted, and thence shining out in greater
Luster, that the Eyes of all Beholders shall be infinitely ravished to see such
Clods of Earth, as now we are, advanced to such incomparable Beauty and
Amiableness of heavenly Glory.

3. It shall be a powerful, strong Body; it is sown in Weakness, says Paul; it
shall rise in Power; it shall be able to help forward the divine Operations of
the Soul, which are now clogged by a feeble Body; it shall be able to bear the
Weight of Glory, the Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, which our weak Bodies
cannot long endure here, but we begin to burst and break in Pieces (like
Vessels full of strong Spirits) with the Weight and Working of them; and
therefore the Lord in Mercy keeps us short now of what else we should feel; it
shall be able to sing Hallelujahs, and give Honor, Glory, Power, to the L^^^b
that sits upon the Throne for evermore, without the least Weariness.

4. It shall be a spiritual Body; our Bodies now are acted by animal Spirits,
and being earthy and natural, grows, feeds, eats, drinks, sleeps, and has
natural Affections and Desires after these Things, and is troubled if it wants
them; but then these same Bodies shall live by the indwelling of the Spirit of
God poured out abundantly in us, and upon us, and so acting our Bodies and
swallowing up all such natural Affections and Motions as those be here; as
Moses being with God in the Mount forty Days and Nights, did not need any Meat
or Drink, the Lord and his Glory being all unto him; how much more shall it be
thus then? I do not say we shall be Spirits like the Angels, but our Bodies
shall be spiritual, having no natural Desires after any earthly Blessing, Food,
Raiment, etc. nor troubled with the Want of them: And hence also the Body shall
be able as well to ascend up, as now it is to descend down; as Austin shows by
a Similitude of Lead, which some Artists can beat so small as to make it swim;
we are now earthly, and made to live on the Earth, and hence fall down to the
Center; but we are made then to be above for ever with the Lord, the Lord
proceeding from Imperfection to Perfection, as the Apostle here shows; not
first spiritual, and then natural; but first that which is natural, (in this
Life) and then that which is spiritual.

3. Consider the Glory of the Soul; now we know but in Part, and see but in
Part; now we have J^y at some Times, and then Eclipses befall us on a sudden;
but then the Lord shall be our everlasting Light, Isai. 60.19. then we shall
see God Face to Face, 1 John 3.1, 2. we shall then know and see those Things
that have been hid, not only from the Wicked, but from the deepest Tho'ts of
the Saints themselves in this World, 2 Cor. 12.4. Paul saw some Thing not fit
to be uttered, or that he could not utter; we shall be swallowed up in those
Depths of Grace, Glory, immediate Vision, God shall be all in all.

The Souls shall now enjoy, 1. The Accomplishment of all Promises which we see
not here made good to us, 1 Cor. 15.24. then you shall have Restitution of all
these at Times of Refreshing, wherein your Sins shall be publicly blotted out
from the Presence of the Lord, Acts 3.14. If Joshua said, Josh. 23.14. when the
People's Warfare was ended, See if the Lord has been wanting in one Word to
you; much more will the Lord Jesus say unto you then.

2. Then you shall receive a full Answer to all your Prayers, all that Grace,
Holiness, Power over Sin, Satan, Fellowship with God, Life of Christ, Blessing
of God, which you sought for, and wept for, and suffered for here, you shall
then see all answered.

3. Then you shall find the Comfort of all that you have done for God, Rev.
14.13. your Work in this Sense shall follow you, you shall then infinitely
rejoice that ever you did any Thing for God, that ever you though it of him, spoke
to him and for him, that ever you gave any one Blow to your Pride, Passions,
Lust, natural Concupiscence, etc. you shall then enjoy the Reward of all your
Sufferings, Cares, Sorrows for God's Christ, Fastings, and Days of Mourning,
whether publicly, or secretly for God's People, 2 Cor. 4.17. The same Glory
God has given Christ, the Lord shall at that Time give unto you, John 17.22.
It shall not be with us there as it was with the wicked Israelites, who when
they came into the good Land of Rest, they then forgot the Lord and all his
Works past; no, no, all that which God has done for you in this World, you
shall then look back, and see, and wonder, and love, and bless, and suck the
sweet of, for evermore; it is a fond weak Question to think whether we shall
know one another in Heaven verily you shall remember the Good the Lord did you
here, by what Means the Lord humbled you, by what Ministry the Lord called you,
by what Friends the Lord comforted and refreshed you; and there you shall see
them with you; do you think you shall forget the Lord and his Works in Heaven,
which (it may be) you took little Notice of, and the Lord had little Glory for
here?

4. Consider the Glory of the Company and Fellowship you shall have here; 1.
Angels, Heb. 12.23, 24. they will love you and comfort you, and rejoice with
you, and speak of the great Things the Lord has done for you, as they did on
Earth to the Shepherds, Luke 2.10. Be not afraid, says the Angel; Mat. 28.5. I
know you seek Jesus: So will they say then, be ever comforted, you blessed
Servants of the Lord, for we know you are loved of the Lord Jesus. 2. Saints,
you shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, be
taken into the Bosom of Abraham, into the Bosom of all the Children of Abraham,
and there we shall speak with them of the Lord's Wonders, of his Christ and
Kingdom, Psalm. 145.11. and every Sentence and Word shall be Milk and Honey,
sweeter than thy Life now can be unto thee; we shall know, and love, and honor
one another exceedingly. 3. The Man Christ Jesus: when Mary claspt about him,
John 20.17. Let me alone, said he, touch me not, I am not yet ascended o my
Father. As if he had said, (says Austin) the^ shall be the Place and Time
wherein we shall embrace one another for evermore. Never was Husband and loving
Wife so familiar one with another, as the Lord Jesus will be (not carnally, and
in an earthly Manner) but, in a most heavenly, glorious, yet gracious Manner
with all his Saints; Come, ye Blessed, will he then say to them; we shall then
ever be, not only in the Lord, but with the Lord, says Paul, 1 These. 4. ult.
and 5.10. Just as Moses and Elias in his Transfiguration, that talked with him,
(which was a Glimpse of our future Glory) so shall we then, Luke 12.37. and you
shall then see that Love of his, that blessed Bosom of Love opened fully, which
the Apostle says passes Knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. I need not tell you of our
Fellowship with the Father also, when the Son shall give up the Kingdom to him
that he may be all in all.

5. Consider the Glory of your Work there; which is only to glorify this God.

1. You shall then live like Christ in Glory, Rev. 4.10, 11. we shall speak and
think all with Glory, 1 John 3.1, 2. our Strings shall be then raised up to the
highest Strain of sweet Melody and Glory.

2. You shall then bless him, Ephesians. 1.6. and 4.13. and that with Ravishment; you
shall come then to the full Acknowledgement of the Son of God; you shall see
and say all this is the Work and Grace of Christ, and then shall cry out, Oh
let all Angels, Saints ever bless him for this. What shall I speak any more?
You will say, Is this certain? Can this be so? Yes assuredly, for Christ is
gone to prepare this Place and Glory for you, John 14.2, 3. We have also the
first Fruits of this Glory which we feel sometimes, whereby we see, and taste,
and drink, and long for more of that Joy unspeakable, and Peace that passes
Understanding, that Triumph over the Rage and working Power of remaining
Corruption, that dark Vision of God, and holy Glorying and Boasting in him as
our everlasting Portion, etc. which cannot be Delusions and Dreams, which never
feed, but ever leave the deceived Soul hungry, but are Realities and Things
indeed, which satiate the weary Soul, and fill it up with the very Fullness of
God himself, Ephesians. 3.19. and therefore it is certain, that we shall have the
Harvest that thus taste of the first Fruits, and the whole Sum paid us
faithfully that have already the earnest Penny. The Lord also fits us for this,
as the Apostle disputes, 2 Cor. 5.4.5. What Means the Lord to deny our Requests
in many Things as long as we live? What is his Meaning not to let us see the
Accomplishment of many of his Promises? Is it because he is unfaithful? Or
because he would let us know there is a Day of Refreshing he has reserved for
us, and would have us look for, wherein we shall see it has not been a vain
Thing for us to pray, or him to promise? Why does he afflict us, and keep us
more miserable both by outward Sorrows and inward Miseries than any other
People in the World? Does he not hereby humble us, empty us, wean us from
hence, and make us as it were Vessels big eno' to hold Glory, which we hope for
in another World? But you will say, Can this Glory be thus great? We see it is
certain it shall be so; but shall it be so exceeding great and endless? Yes,
verily, because,

1. The Price is great which is paid for it, Ephesians. 1.14. it is a purchased
Possession, (by the Blood of Christ we enter into the Holy of Holies) a Price
of infinite Value must bring a Kind of infinite Glo^

2. We are by Christ nearer to God than Angels are, whose Glory we see is very
great.

3. Shall not our Glory be to set out the Glory of Christ? 2 These. 1.10. and if
so, then if his Glory be exceeding great, ours must bear a (...) Proportion,
and be very great also.

4. Does not God pick out the poor and vile Things of the World, to be Vessels
of Glory? 1 Cor. 1.27. and is not that an Argument that he intends exceedingly
to glorify himself on such, to raise up a most glorious Building, where he lays
so low a Foundation?

5. Are not we loved with the same Love as he has loved Christ? John 17. ult.
and shall not our Glory abound then exceedingly?

6. Is not the Torment and Shame of the Reprobates to be exceeding great and
grievous? Does not God raise them up to make his Power known? Romans 9.23. What
then shall we think on the contrary of the Glory of the Saints, wherein the
Lord shall set forth '^is Power in glorifying them, as he does the Glory of his
Power in punishing others? And therefore, 2 These. 1.9. the Punishment of the
Wicked is expressed by Separation of them from the glory of the Lord's Power:
because that in the Glory of the Saints, the Lord will (as I may so say) make
them as glorious as by his Power ruled by Wisdom he is able to make 'em.

This is therefore the great Glory of all those whom God has called to the
Fellowship of his dear Son; and which is yet more, blessed be God the Time is
not long, but that we shall feel what now we do but hear of, and see but a
little of, as we use to do of Things afar off: We are here but Strangers, and
have no abiding City, we look for this that has Foundations; and therefore let
Sin press us down, and weary us out with Wrestling with it; let Satan temp* and
cast his Darts at us; let o^^ Drink be our Tears Day and Night, and our Meat
Gall and Wormwood; let us be shut up in choking Prisons, and cast out for dead
in the Streets, nay, upon Langhils, and none to bury us; let us live alone as
Pelicans in the Wilderness, and be driven among wild Beasts into d^s^rts; let
us be scourged, and disgraced, stoned, sawn asunder, and burned; let us Eve in
Sheepskins* and Goat Skins, destitute, afflicted, tormented, (as (...) looks
not for such Days shortly?) yet, O (...), the Time is not long, but when we are
(...) worst, and Death ready to swallow us up; we (...) cry out, Oh Glory,
Glory, Oh welcome Glory! If our Miseries here be long, they shall be light; if
very bitter, they shall be short; however, long or short, they cannot be to us
long, who look for an eternal Weight of Glory. Who would not (that considers of
these Things) despise this World, and set it at his Heels, who has all these
Privileges and Benefits with Christ in his Eye? Who would not abhor a filthy
Lust, to enjoy such a Christ? Who would ever look back upon his Fleshpots, or
Father's House, that has such Welcome made him the first Moment he comes to
the Lord Jesus, in having present Fruition of some of these Benefits, but
present Right unto all; Fruition of some by Feeling, of all by Faith. But Oh
the Wrath of God upon these Times, that either see not this Glory, or if they
do, despise so great Salvation! Christ, and Pardon, and Peace, Adoption, Grace
and Glory is bro't home to our Doors, but their Price is fallen in our Market,
and we think^t better to be without Christ with our Lusts, than to be in Christ
with his Benefits. The Reproach of Christ was dearer to Moses (as great a
Courtier, and as strong a Headpiece as our Times can afford) than all the
Riches and Honors of Egypt, but the Grace, and Peace, and Life, and Glory of
Jesus Christ, is viler to us than the very Onions, and Leeks, and Fleshpots of
Egypt; if you had but naked Christ (our Life) for a Prey in these evil Times,
you had no Cause to complain, but infinitely to rejoice in your Portion; but
when with Christ you shall find all these Benefits and Privileges coming in as
to your Portion, and yet to despise him? Assuredly the Lord will not bear with
this Contempt alway^. Away to the Mountains, and hasten from the ^owns and
Cities of your Habitation, where the Grace of Christ is published, but
universally despised, you blessed called Ones of the Lord Jesus; for the Days
are coming, wherein for this Sin, the Heavens and Earth shall shake, the Sun
shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, and Men's Hearts failing
for Fear of the horrible Plagues which are coming upon the Face of the Earth.
Dream not of fair Weather, expect not better Days, till you hear Men say,
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, who thus blesses his with
all spiritual Blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. I now proceed to the last.

CHAP. III. All those that are translated into this blessed Estate, are bound
to live the Life of Love, in all fruitful and thankful Obedience unto him that
has called them, according to the Rule of the moral Law, Psalm. 40.7, 8.
THE Lord does no sooner call his People to himself, but as soon as ever he
has thus crowned them with these glorious Privileges, and given them any Sense
and Feeling of them, but they immediately cry out, O Lord, what shall I do for
thee? How shall I now live to thee? They know now they are no more their own,
but his, and therefore should now live to him.

If you ask Moses, after all the Love and Kindness the Lord has shown Israel,
what Israel should do for him? You shall see his Answer full, Deuteronomy. 10.12.13.
And now, O Israel, what does the Lord require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, and love him and serve him with all thy Heart, and to keep his
Commandments, which I command thee this Day, for thy Good?

If you ask Paul, (as evangelical a Christian as ever lived) what now we are to
do when we are in Christ? He answers punctually, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. The Love of
Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that Christ dying for those that
were dead, they that live shall not live unto themselves, but unto him that
died for them and rose again.

If we ask Peter the Question, to what End the Lord has called us out of
Darkness into his mavelous Light? He expressly tells you, it is to show forth
the Virtues of him that has so called us, 1 Pet. 2.9.

If we be doubtful whether this be the Lord's Mind, the Lord himself resolves
it by Zechariah, Luke 1.74. and tells us, that it is his Oath, That we being
delivered out of the Hand^ of our Enemies, we should serve him without Fear, in
Holiness (in all the Rules of the first Table) and Righteousness (in all Duties
of the second Table) all the Days of our Life, and that all this should not be
out of a Spirit of Bondage and slavish Fear, but without, Fear, i. e. Fear of
our Enemies, Sin, Death, Wrath, and so consequently out of Love to him that
delivered us; that one would wonder it should ever enter into the Heart of any
christian Man that has tasted the Love of Christ, as to think that there is no
Use of the Law to one in Christ; and that because they are to live the Life of
Love to Christ, that therefore they are not to look to the Law as the Rule of
their Love, expressly cross to the Letter of the Text, John 14.15. If ye love
me, keep my Commandments; which Commandments are not only Faith, and Love to
the Saints, but Love to Enemies, and spiritual Obedience unto the moral Law, in
a far different Manner* and Measure than as the Pharisees instructed the People
in those Days; as you may see. Mat. 5.17. It Is true indeed, Obedience to the
Law is not required of us now as it was of Adam; it was required of him as a
Condition antecedent to Life, but of those that be in Christ it is required
only as a Duty consequent to Life, or as a Rule of Life, that seeing he has
purchased our Lives in Redemption, and actually given us Life in Vocation and
Sanctification, we should now live unto him, in all thankful and fruitful
Obedience according to his Will revealed in the moral Law. It Is a vain Thing to
imagine that our Obedience is to have no other Rule but the Spirit, without any
Attendance to the Law; the Spirit indeed is the efficient Cause of our
Obedience, and hence we are said to be led by the Spirit, Romans 8.14. but it is
not properly the Rule of our Obedience, but the Will of God revealed in his
Word, especially in the Law is the Rule: The Spirit is the Wind that drives us
in our Obedience, the Law is our Compass; according to which it steers our
Course for us: The Spirit and the Law, the Wind and the Compass, can stand well
together, Psalm 143.10. Teach me to do thy Will, O God, (there is David's Rule,
viz. God's Will revealed) thy Spirit is good (there is David's Wind, that
enabled him to steer his Course according to it) the Spirit of Life does free
us from the Law of Sin and Death, but not from the holy, and pure, and good,
and righteous Law of God, Romans 8.1, 2, 3. The Blood of Christ by the Spirit
^leanseth us from dead Works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. not to serve
our own Selves, or Lusts, or Wills, to do what we please: The Law indeed is not
a Rule of that by which we are to obey, viz. of our Faith, yet it is the only
Rule of what we are to obey: We are not to perform Acts of Obedience now as
Adam was to do, viz. by the sole Power of inherent Grace, but we are to live by
Faith, and act by Faith, (for without me you can do nothing, John 15.5.) We are
not united to Christ our Life by Obedience, as Adam was to God by it, but by
Faith: And therefore as all Action (in living Things) comes from Union, so all
our Acts of Obedience are to come from Faith, from the Spirit on Christ's Part,
and from Faith on our Part, which make our Union: Noah built by Faith, Enoch
walked with God by Faith, Joshua and his Soldiers fought by Faith, Abraham
traveled, dwelt in his Tents, lived and died by Faith; they acted according to
the Rule, but all by the Power of Faith. It is a weak Reasoning, to imagine a
Man is not bound to pay his Debts because he is to go unto another for the
Money: Obedience is our Debt we owe to Christ, Luke 17.10. though we are to go to
Christ poor, and weak, and feeble, to enable us to pay: It Is true, Christ has
kept the Law for us, and are we therefore free from it as our Rule; No verily,
Christ kept the Law for Satisfaction to Justice, and so we are not bound to
keep the Law; he kept the Law also for Imitation, to give us a Copy and an
Example of all Holiness and glorifying God in our Obedience; and thus Christ's
Obedience is so far from exempting us from the Law, as that it engages us the
more, having both Rule and Example before us, 1 John. 2.6. He that says he
abides in him ought to walk as he walked, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. It Is true, the
Law is writ in a Believer's Heart, and if he has a Law within, what need he
(say some) look to the Law without? When as our Savior and David argued quite
contrary, Psalm. 40.7, 8. I come, I delight to do thy Will, it being written of
me that I should do it, because thy Law is within my Heart; this argues, that
you are not to attend the Law unwillingly, as Bondmen and Slaves, but
willingly and gladly, because the Law, even the Law of Love is in your Hearts,
1 John 5.3.

The Place Pledged by some for this Liberty from the Law, viz. the Law is not
made for a righteous Man, 1 Timothy 1.9. if well considered, fully dasheth this
Dream in Pieces; for there were diverse Jewish Preachers of Moses's Law, and
they had a World of Scruples and Questions about it, ver. 4. and Paul and
others were accounted of, as Men less zealous, because they did not sound upon
that String so much; away (says Paul) with those contentious Questions; for
the End of the Commandment is not Scruples and Questions, but Charity and Love
( i. e. both to God and Man) out of a pure Heart, and Faith unfeigned, ver. 4.
and says he, The Law is very good, when used lawfully, that is, for this End,
and out of these Principles, ver. 8. it is not talking, but doing, and that out
of Love, which is the End and Scope of the Law; so that note by the Way, you
may as well abolish Love as abolish the Law, Love being the End and Scope of
the Law. But to proceed; The Law is not made (says he) for the Righteous, i.
e. for the Condemnation of the Righteous, i. e. of such as out of a pure Heart,
and Faith unfeigned love God in the first Table, love to show all Duties of
Respect to Man in the second Table; and therefore they of all other Men have no
Cause to abolish the Law, as if it was a Bugbear, or a Thing that could hurt
them, but it is made for the Condemnation of the lawless Anomians, (as the
original Word is) or if you will, Antinomians, (Transgressors of the first
Command) and Disobedient (Transgressors of the second Command) for Ungoldly and
Sinners (Transgressors of the third Command) for Unholy and Profane
Transgressors of the fourth Command) for Murderers of Fathers and Mothers (of
the fifth) for Man-slayers (of the sixth) for Whoremongers and Defilers of
Mankind (of the seventh) for Man-stealers (of the eighth) for Liars (of the
Ninth) and for those that in any Thing walk contrary to sound Doctrine, the
Purity of the Law and Will of God (of the tenth.) So that this Place is far
from favoring any of those that run in this Channel of abolishing the Law as
our Rule; no Beloved, the Love of Christ will constrain you to embrace it as a
most precious Treasure. It is the Observation of some, that in the Preface to
the moral Law, Exodus 20.1, 2. the Lord reveals himself to be the Lord their God
which brought them out of the Land of Egypt; the very Scope of which Words, is
to persuade to a reverend receiving and keeping that good Law: This Law all
Nations are bound to observe, because he is Jehovah the Lord; but to be thy God
in special Covenant, and that redeemed thee from Egypt, and from that which was
tipified by it, this belongs to none but unto them especially, that are already
the People of God; and therefore of all other People in the World, they are
bound to receive it as their Rule: for Obedience does not make us God's People,
or God our God; But he is first our God, (which is only by the Covenant of
Grace) and thence it is, that being ours, and we his, we of all others, are
most bound to obey.

To conclude, they that stick in these Briars, therefore cry down the Law as a
Christian's Rule, because by this Means a Christian shall find no Peace;
because he is continually sinning against this Law; the Law therefore, say
they, will be always troubling of him.

I answer, 1. A corrupt Heart and putrid Conscience can have no Peace by the
Law, Isai. 57.21. There is no Peace to the Wicked, and it is good it should be
so.

2. A watchful Christian may, Psalm. 119.15. Great Peace have they that love thy
Law. Hezekiah had it, when he desired the Lord to remember how he had walked
before him with a perfect Heart, Isai. 58.1, 2, 3. Paul found it, the Testimony
of his Conscience bearing him Witness, was his rejoicing herein, 2 Cor. 1.12.

3. If a Christian, ignorant of maintaining his Peace with God by Faith in his
Justification, notwithstanding all the Errors in his Obedience and
Sanctification; if, I say, he wants his Peace, shall we therefore break the Law
in Pieces? If a secure Christian that walks loosely wants Peace, by the
Accusations of the Law, it is God's Mercy to him to give him no Peace in
himself, while he is at Truce with his Lust.

4. That Peace will end in dismal Sorrow which is got by kicking against the
Law, it is but daubing for a Man to keep his Peace by shutting his Eyes against
the Way of Peace: A Servant may have Peace in his Idleness, by thinking that
his Master requires no Work from him, and by hiding his Talent, yet what will
the Lord say to him when his Day is ended, and he comes to reckon with him at
Sunset? Bring the Law into thy Conscience in Point of Justification, it will
trouble Conscience: For there only Christ's Righteousness, God's Grace, and the
Promise are to be looked on, and our own Obedience and Holiness laid by in the
Dust; but bring it before thee as a Rule of thy Sanctification, and as thy Copy
to write after, and to imitate, and aspire after that Perfection it requires,
it will then trouble thee no more, than it does a Child, who having a fair Copy
set him to write after, and knowing that he is a Son, is not therefore
troubled, because he cannot write as fair as his Copy; he knows if he imitates
it, his Scribbling shall be accepted: However, though his Father may chastise him
with Rods, if he be careless to imitate, yet he will never cast him therefore
off from being his Son. The Truth is this, it argues a most graceless, carnal,
wretched Heart, for a Man to care by God's Rules, because Attendance to them is
his Trouble and Torment, which unto a gracious Heart are Life and Peace and
Sweetness; All the Ways of Wisdom to him, are Ways of Pleasantness, and her
Paths Peace, Prove. 3.17. And it is God's common Curse upon them that love not
the Truth in these Days, that because Sin is not their Sorrow, nor Breach of
Rules their Trouble, that therefore the Observance of the Law, and Attendance
unto Rules shall be their Burden and Trouble, they feel not the Plague in their
own Hearts, and therefore Reproofs plague them, and Commands are a Plague and a
Torment to them: Crooked Feet, and crooked Wills, make Men tread awry in such
corrupt Opinions.

All the called Ones of God are therefore to live this Life of Obedience, and
that out of Love, which I call the Life of Love, Gal. 5.6. for else
Circumcision avails nothing, nor Uncircumcision, no nor Faith itself; unless it
be of this Nature, as that it works by Love: There is much Obedience and
external Conformity to the Law in many Men, hut the principal Difference
between these Formalities, and the Obedience of the Saints, is Love; the
Obedience of the one arises from Self-Love, because it pleases themselves,
and suits with their own Ends; the other from the Love of Christ, because it
pleases him, and suits with his Ends, 1 Cor. 13.4, etc. 1 John 5.3.

Quest. Wherein does and should this Life of Love appear?

Answ. In these five Particulars,

1. In thinking and musing much on Christ and upon his Love, any on what you
shall do for him; he that says he loves another, and yet seldom thinks on him,
or will seldom give him a good Look when he meets him, certainly deceives
himself; the least Degree of ^^^^e, appears in thinking on what we Love:
because the Loving Kindness of God was better than Life unto David, hence he
did remember him upon his Bed, and meditate on him in the very Night, Psalm.
63.3, 6. They that fear the Lord, i. e. with a Son-like Fear, where Love is
chiefly predominant, are such as think upon his Name: Mal. 3.16. We have though it
of thy Loving Kindness, Oh Lord, in thy Temple, Psalm. 48.9. Thou that can
spend Days, Nights, Weeks, Months, Years, and have thy Head all the Time
swarming with vain Tho'ts, and scarce one living Though It of Christ, and his Love,
that did never beat thy Head, nor trouble thy self in musing, Oh what shall I
do for him; nor in condemning thy self because thou do so little, verily
thou have not the least Degree of this Life of Love.

2. In speaking and commending of him: Is it possible that any Man should love
another and not commend him, not speak of him? If thou have but a Hawk or a
Hound that thou love, thou will commend it, and can it stand with Love to
Christ, yet seldom or never to speak of him nor of his Love; never to commend
him unto others, that they may fall in Love with him also? You shall see the
Spouse, Cant. 5.9, 16. when she was asked, what her Beloved was above others?
She sets him out in every Part of him, and concludes with this, He is
altogether lovely. Because thy-Loving-Kindness (says David) is better than
Life, my Lips shall praise thee, and I will bless thee while I live, Psalm.
63.3, 4. Can it stand with this Life of Love, to be always speaking about
worldly Affairs, or News at the best; both Weekday and Sabbath Day, in Bed and
at Board, in good Company and in bad, at Home and Abroad? I tell you it will be
one main Reason why you desire to live, that you may make the Lord Jesus known
to your Children, Friends, Acquaintance, that so in the Ages to come his Name
might ring, and his Memorial might be of sweet Odor, from Generation to
Generation, Psalm. 71.18. If before thy Conversion especially thou have poisoned
other by thy vain and corrupt Speeches; after thy Conversion thou will seek to
season the Hearts of others by a gracious, sweet, and wise Communication of
savory and blessed Speeches; what the Lord has taught thee thou will talk of
it unto others, for the Sake of him whom thou love.

3. In being often in his Company, and growing up thereby into a familiar
Acquaintance with him; can we be long absent from those we love entirely, if we
may come to them? Can we love Christ, and yet be seldom with him, in Word, in
Prayer, in Sacraments, in christian Communion, in Meditation and daily
Examination of our own Hearts, in his Providence of Mercies, Crosses and
Trials? (For Christ is with us here, but those two Ways, in his Ordinances or
Providence, by his Holy Spirit) Lord, says David, I have loved the Habitation
of thy House, and the Place where thine Honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8. The Ground
of which is set down, Verse 3. Thy Loving Kindness is before mine Eyes. My Soul
longs for thee as in a Land where no Water is, that I might see thee, as I
have seen thee in the Sanctuary; the Reason of it was, because thy
Loving Kindness is better than Life, Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3.

4. In doing much for him, and that willingly; did not Jacob love Rachel? How
did he express it? His seven Years Service, in Frost and Snow, in Heat and
Cold, by Day and Night were nothing to him, for her Sake whom he loved. Shall I
serve the Lord (says David) of what cost me nothing? And when he had prepared
many Millions for the Building of the Temple, yet he accounted it a small Thing
for his Sake whom he loved, 1 Chronicles. 29.3. he gave it out of his Poverty, as he
speaks: This is Love to keep his Commandments, and those are not grievous, 1
john 5.3.

5. In suffering and enduring any Evil for his Sake. I confess it is not every
Degree of Love that will carry a Man hither; yet where there is great and
singular Love, for a good Man one may be willing to die, Romans 5.7. assured if
there be any Love to Christ, it will in Time increase to this Measure; it will
think ten thousand Lives too little to lay down for Christ's Sake, that laid
down his precious Life for him: What tell you me, says Paul, of Bonds and
Imprisonments? I am ready not only to be bound, but to die for the Sake of
Christ at Jerusalem; my Life is not dear to me, no more than a Rush at my Foot,
that I may finish my Course with Joy. For thy Sake we are killed all the Day
long, Romans 8.36. I tell you the Love of Christ will make you fall down upon
your Knees, and bless the Lord that he will accept of such a poor Sacrifice as
thy Body is, though it be burnt to Ashes; and thou will bless him again and
again, that whereas he might have left thee in thy Sins to have trodden him and
his Glory and Grace under Foot, as he has done Thousands in the World; yet
that he should call thee to share in this Honor, not only to do, but to suffer
for his Sake.

Now the good Lord persuade all our Hearts unto this fruitful Obedience and
Life of Love. Oh you young Men, you have a fair Time before you to do much for
Christ in; how pleasing will it be to him to see such young Trees hang full of
Fruit! You aged Men have now one Foot in your Grave, and you have forgotten the
Lord Jesus most of your Time, and your Time which now remains is very little,
and then your Lamp is out, your Sun is almost set, and all your Work is yet to
be done for Christ, O therefore awaken now at last before you awake when it is
too late; you rich Men have Abilities, and wherewithal to set forward Christ's
Kingdom in the Towns and Villages where you live; you poor Men may do much by
ardent and instant Prayers Day and Night, for the Advancement of the Lord
Jesus. You Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, remember if you are not good in
your Places, you are not good at all, whatever your Profession be; a good
Woman, but a froward Wife; a good Man, but a hair-brained cursed Husband; a good
Servant, but a very sore Tongue; these cannot stand well together. If you have
any Love to Christ, the Life of Love will make you move best in your proper
Place: Oh therefore love much, and so think much and speak much of, and
converse much with, and do much, and suffer much for the Lord Jesus Christ;
content not your selves with doing small Things for him, that has done and
suffered much for you; if you can do but little, yet set God on Work by being
fervent and frequent in Prayer, not only that Christ may be honored in your
selves, but also in your Families, and in all Churches and Kingdoms of the
World. If you cannot do much, yet maintain alive a Will to do much, which is
accepted as if you did, 2 Cor. 8.17. If thou art a poor Man, and have nothing
to give, yet keep a Heart as liberal as a Prince; if you can do but little your
selves, yet encourage others that they may, thou art not a Preacher called to
convert Souls, yet do thou encourage the Messengers of Christ in their Work, by
thy Prayers, Counsel, Help, and at the last Day the Coversion of Souls shall be
attributed unto thee, as well as unto them; if thou can not do any Good, yet
prevent what Evil thou can in thy Place, to keep off Judgments, at least to
delay them; mourn thou for other Men's Sins, as if they were thine own, and so
the Lord may pity and pardon them, and it may be convert them, who shall do
more good it may be than ever thou can do: Let the Lord Jesus be in thy
Tho'ts the first in the Morning, and the last at Night; do what thou can,
nay, go continually to him to enable thee to do more than thou of thy self
can, and mourn bitterly, and lament daily, what thou have not done, either
through want of Ability or Will; remembering his Love to thee, that he came out of
his Father's Bosom for thee, wept for thee, bled for thee, poured out his Life,
nay, his Soul to Death for thee, is now risen for thee, gone to Heaven for
thee, sits at God's right Hand, and rules all the World for thee, makes
Intercession continually for thee, and at the End of the World will come again
for thee, who have loved him here, that thou might live for ever with him
then.

But is this our Life, in these evil and lukewarm Times? How many be there
that believe in Christ, that they may live as they list? If to drink, and
whore, and scoff, and blaspheme; if to shake a Lock, and follow every fond
Fashion; if to cross and chringe before a Piece of Wood; if to be weary of the
Word, and outwardly zealous for long Prayers; if to seek for Purity of
Ordinances in Churches, and to maintain Impurity in Hearts, in Shops, in
Families; if to set our Hearts upon Farms and Merchandises, and so to be
coveteous; if to set up our own Selves, and Parts, and Gifts, with a secret
Disdain of God's Ministers; if to cry down Learning, and set up Ignorance, if
to set up Christ, and destroy Sanctification and Obedience; if to be a
Sect-Master of some odd Opinions; if to crack the Nut of some superlunary and
monkish Notions, and high-flown Speculations; if to hear much, and do little;
if to have a Name to live, and yet dead at the Heart; if this be to live the
Life of Love, we have many that live this Life; the Lord Jesus wants not Love,
if this be to Love: But Oh woe unto you* if you thus requite the Lord, foolish
People and unwise! The Lord knows we may complain as Paul did, every Man minds
his own Things, and not the Things of Jesus Christ; none in Comparison of that
huge Number that think they are Religious end, if they be baptized, and say
that they believe in Jesus Christ: Verily the Time draws near wherein the Lord
will come for Fruits from his Vineyard, and if he finds it not, assuredly he
will not be beholding to us for Obedience, he can raise his Glory out of other
People; and there carry his Gospel to them who shall bring forth the Fruits of
it; the Lord will shortly lay his Ax unto the Root of our Tree; and if we will
not serve the Lord in this good Land in the Abundance of Peace and Mercy, we
shall serve our Enemies in Hunger, Cold, and Nakedness; if we will not serve
him in Love, we must serve our Enemies in Fear; Do not think that the Lord will
be put off with venerable Names and Titles, Shadows and Pictures; what is most
Men's Profession at this Day but a mere Paint? Which may serve to color them
while they live, but will never comfort them (unless Conscience be asleep) when
they come to die. Oh, take heed of such Formality: I can never think enough of
David's Expression, Psalm 119.161. I have kept thy Commandments, and I love them
exceedingly; should he not have said first, I have loved thy Commandments, and
so have kept them? Doubtless he did so, but he ran here in a holy and most
heavenly Circle, I have kept them, and loved them; and loved them, and kept
them: If we love Christ we also shall live such a Life of Love in our Measure;
and his Commandments will be most dear, when himself is most ^^ecious.

FINIS.

