The Prodigal Son.

A LECTURE, Preached on FRIDAY Afternoon, September 11 th 1741. IN THE
High-Church-Yard OF GLASGOW, Upon LUKE XV.

By the Reverend Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD,

Taken from his own Mouth, and published at the earnest Desire of many of the
Hearers.

Note. The Substance of the following LECTURE was delivered on the Common in
Boston, Sept. 27. 1740.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green, in Queenstreet over
against the Prison. 1742.

The Prodigal Son.
LUKE xv. from the 11th Verse to the End. THE Apostle Paul informs us, that it
is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the World to save poor Sinners. Our dear Redeemer had no other End in
coming from Heaven to us, but to place poor Sinners in Heaven again: He led a
painful persecuted Life, and died an ignominious Death, for our Sake. As this
was the End of his Coming, so it was the End of his Preaching: He was
continually sounding the glad Tidings of Salvation to poor convinced Sinners,
giving all Encouragement from their Misery, and at the same Time denouncing
Wrath against those who trusted in themselves that they were Righteous, and
would not come out of themselves, and lay hold on his Righteousness. For this
Purpose the blessed JESUS put forth many instructing Parables; no less than
three in the Chapter out of which the Words read are taken.

Methinks of all the Parables that JESUS ever put forth, that which I have now
chosen as the Subject of your present Meditation, if it be lawful to compare
spiritual Things with spiritual, excels other Parables as one Star differs from
another in Glory. I think it would be an Impeachment on your Judgment, I should
think I were acting contrary to Charity, especially in your Country, where I
hope you are better acquainted with your Bibles than some others are, than to
think you need to be informed to what Parable the Text belongs: It belongs to
that Soul-comforting, Soul-reviving Parable of the Prodigal Son, wherein the
LORD JESUS CHRIST displays the Compassion of GOD to poor returning Sinners, in
the most lively Colors. I pray GOD by his Holy SPIRIT, may write it upon the
Table of all your Hearts.

I intend, then, at this Time to make some Remarks upon the whole Parable, and
then shall conclude with an Exhortation to you all to come to the dear
REDEEMER. And I pray GOD that Joy may be in Heaven this Afternoon over some of
you, repenting and coming home to GOD.

First then, To make some Remarks on the Parable itself. I begin at the 11th
Verse. And he said, JESUS said, A certain Man had two Sons. By two Sons you are
here to understand two different Characters: The Publicans, who feeling their
Misery were willing to lay hold on CHRIST; and the cavilling carping Pharisees,
who trusting in themselves that they were righteous, despised the Righteousness
of JESUS CHRIST, despised others, crying out with the self-conceited
Hypocrites, Come not near me, for I am holier than you. I shall first touch at
the younger Son.

The younger said to his Father, Father give me the Portion of Goods that
falls to me. We may suppose his Father was a holy pious Man; one that had
taken up Joshua's Resolution; Whatever others might do, as for him and his
House, they would serve the LORD. We may suppose he kept up Family-Religion,
took Care to breed up his Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD:
But his younger Son, like some of our young Gentlemen, could not bear so much
Restraint upon him, by an old doting enthusiastic Father; he could not bear to
have Religion always talked of in the Family; he thought his Father righteous
overmuch; impatient of religious Restraints; he desires to be left to his own
Heart Lusts; and therefore said to his Father, Give me the Portion of Goods
that falls to me. My dear Friends, this is the Temper of all of us by Nature;
we deal thus with our heavenly Father: Though God imposes nothing upon us but
what is really perfective of our Nature; though God bids us abstain from nothing
but what would hurt us; yet we look upon God as a hard rigorous Task-Master. If
we were left to our own Choice, we would desire God to leave us to our selves:
The Language of our Hearts by Nature is, Lord, depart from us, we desire not
the Knowledge of thy Law: The Language of our Hearts is, Father, Leave us to
our selves. But, my dear Friends, you cannot put up a better Petition, if ye
have a Mind to be happy, than this; Lord, however thou deal with us, leave us
not to our own Choice. What this young Man said, we all say.

We may suppose it troubled the Father to have such a wicked Child; however,
hoping that the Prodigal might yet be reclaimed, and mend his Life, the Father
gave him what he desired; and so divided unto him his Living. You see what we
shall do, if God Almighty leave us to our own Hearts Lusts; for we are told in
the 13th Verse, That not many Days after the younger Son gathered all together,
and went into a far Country, and spent his Substance with riotous living. Not
many Days after, it is taken particular Notice of, for he was impatient of
Restraint, every Day was a Year while he was in his Father's House; he would
have went away immediately, but he staid sometime to get a proper Equipage,
suitable to the Quality of the Son of such a Father. Not many Days after he
gathered all together, leaves nothing behind, that he might be out of his
Father's Reach. He took his Journey into a far Country, It Is remarkable, the
way of Sin is down the Hill, when you begin to sin, ye know not where ye will
stop, you will go into a far Country, far from God; he was afraid if he staid
longer at home, he would have his Father checking him, therefore he gets out of
his hearing. This represents the Heart of a Sinner, he finds Convictions now
and then coming upon him, and so would drink and whore, and go on in Sin, on
purpose to stifle his Convictions. He went into a far Country, and see what
follows, he wasted his Substance with riotous living. One would have thought he
would have stopped before his Goods were all wasted: But my dear Friends, there
is such an Infatuation in Sin, there is such a strong Propensity to Sin in our
Heart, that without the almighty Power of God give a stop to our Will, though we
know the End of Sin will be Damnation, yet we will Sin on, though we should be
damned. This was the Case of the young Prodigal. When his Substance was
wasting, one would have thought he would have stopped before all was gone: But
see how God hedged up his Way.

In the 14th Verse we are told When he had spent all, there arose a mighty
Famine in that Land, and he began to be in want. Here God was now bringing a
Restraint in order to bring him home. There was not only a Famine, but an
extraordinary Famine; and then the Prodigal began to be in want. One would have
thought that he should have begun to think of coming home: But we shall never
come to Christ, till we think we must be damned without Christ: Christ is
beholden to none of us for coming to him. The Prodigal was in Want, but we do
not hear of his beginning to think of coming Home. When People have some few
Convictions floating upon the Surface of their Hearts, they begin to see the
Evil of Sin; but their Goodness is like a Morning Cloud that passes away, till
Convictions fasten upon their Soul, and they see themselves lost. The Prodigal
sees himself in Want, but he would not come home, so long as he can shift for
himself: therefore we are told,

In the 15. Ver. He went and joined himself to a Citizen, and he sent him into
the Feilds to feed Swine. Are there any young Prodigals here that are spending
their Patrimony in riotous Living; see what this will bring them to. A Man that
lives within Bounds, he may have none of these dreadful Things to struggle
with, that these poor Souls have, that are carried away Captive by the Devil. I
know it by Experience. Here a young Man finely equipped, with a fine Fortune,
see what he is reduced to; was that proper Company for him? He joined himself
to a Citizen of that Country, and he sent him into the Field to feed Swine: And
here he would have been contented to remain, if he could have been kept from
Hunger.

We are told in the 16. Ver. He would fain have filled his Belly with the Husks
that the Swine did eat, but no Man gave unto him. O what will Prodigality bring
People to. The wise Man says, By Means of a whorish Woman, a Man is brought to
a Piece of Bread. Here, he that was used to variety of Dishes, clothed in
Purple and fine Linen, see him now sitting with the Swine, envying the very
Beasts the Husks on which they were feeding. He only wanted the Husks, he would
be content to be kept from starving, without going home. But no Man gave unto
him, so much as the Husks. This plainly shows, when we are coming to Jesus
Christ, how GOD Almighty will make all Ways of escaping good for nothing, till
we come Home to CHRIST. Now this young Man might think all these Things were
against him; but all these Things were intended for him, to bring him home to
CHRIST. So a poor Sinner that is hedged in on every Side, will think, all is
gone; but God is hedging up his Way. Here the poor Prodigal is sitting with the
Swine: methinks I see him. What must he do? He is brought to an Extremity; and
this was God's Opportunity.

Ver. 17. When he came to himself. This is very remarkable. Pray, was the
Prodigal beside himself? Before, he looked on his Father as a mad Man; as I
believe Thousands now look upon the Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, as Fools,
Enthusiasts, and mad Men. Thus this young Prodigal looked upon his Father. But
the Father was the wise Man, and the Prodigal a Fool. You that now mock and
scoff at the Ministers of the Gospel, and join with your hellish Companions,
you will be made to cry out, We, not they, were Fools; how are they numbered
among the Children of GOD. O may God bring you to your selves. Here the
Prodigal comes to himself. The Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the
Pride of Pride, did overcome him. But when God brings you to Death, when God
disrobes you of all you have, then you will begin to see what a damnable
Condition your Souls are in.

Here says he, How many hired Servants of my Father have Bread enough and to
spare, and I perish with Hunger, He not only wanted Bread, and began to be in
Want; but I perish, if I stay here, with Hunger. You will never come to CHRIST,
till you see your selves perishing without him. I perish with Hunger. Now the
Prodigal begins to consider the dreadful Condition he is in; but if he stops
here, he will not come home: However, he makes Resolutions; and therefore we
are told

In the 18th Ver. after he had considered his wretched State, I will arise and
go to my Father, and say to him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, etc. He saw himself
ready to perish: O that some might give me Husks, that I may be kept from going
home. Well, but he must go home. Well, says he, I will arise, and go to my
Father. It Is remarkable, though he had used his Father so ill, he calls him his
Father: He had often tried his Father; who had often born with him: It broke in
upon his Soul. Who knows but my Father may bear with me yet? I am starving
here. What will he say? Will he plead Merit? No, he will aggravate what he has
done, I will say, Father I have sinned against Heaven and before thee. This is
remarkable: He had sinned against his Neighbor; he had sinned against himself:
but what grieves him most is, that he had sinned against his Father, against
Heaven; for whatever Harm we have done to our Neighbor or our selves, it
ultimately strikes against God himself. It grieves him that he has offended his
Father.

Make me as one of thy hired servants. Some suppose that this last Clause was
the Relict of Self-Righteousness in the young Man's Heart. Thinks he, I will go
home to my Father; I will ask Pardon for my Sin, but I will not be entirely
beholden to him for my Living: I will Work a little for it; I will do something
for my Bread. O but a Soul must be brought low, before it is brought out of
Self. This Self, you cannot tell how secretly it works; how much of Self is in
the best Saints. He was not willing to accept a Pardon as a free Gift: no, says
he, I will Work for it. We would fain have some Hand in our Salvation. Others
suppose it was the Result of Humility in him: Make me as one of thy hired
Servants: Deal with me as thou will; only let me come home unto thee: for a
poor convinced Sinner will say, What shall I do to be saved? He would rather be
a Doorkeeper in the House of God than dwell in Tents of Wickedness. Well, when
the Prodigal's Convictions began to fasten, he said he would arise; and we
shall find that he actually did arise in the 21. Verse.

And he arose and came to his Father. But who can tell how many bitter Throws
this poor Man felt? What Convictions, what Convulsions his Soul underwent,
during his returning home. Sinners, you are going away from God, you are
wandering into a far Country; but you will have many bitter Convictions before
you come again to JESUS CHRIST. He arose* it is said, he was gone into a far
Country; and we may suppose was sometime a coming home. Methinks, I see the
poor Creature quite destitute, quite helpless; without Clothes on his Back,
without Shoes, stinking, filthy all over. Methinks, I see him walking slowly
on: for Sin takes off our Chariot Wheels, and makes us drive heavily. Methinks,
I see the poor Creature in great Perplexity before he came to his Father's
House. Sometimes Unbelief works; it can never be that my Father will forgive
such a Wretch as I am. His old Sins stare him in the Face; his Ingratitude
stares him: My Father has forgiven me often, but he will never forgive me
again. Methinks, I see him stepping back, and weeping. When we look upon God as
our Enemy, that very Look makes us fly from him. We shall never come to God,
till we look upon him as our Friend. But then, thinks he, if I do not go, I
shall certainly perish: But who knows but my Father will receive me. Then,
methinks, I see him step up again; but then Pride of Heart arises; What, shall
I stoop before my Father's Servants? Can I humble my self before my Father's
Gate; it is better to perish here. As many a Sinner when under Convictions, and
has not got a Sense of Pardon, would rather be damned than come to JESUS
CHRIST. But at last, well thinks he, I will go, it is better to do the meanest
thing with Shame; than to perish here: at last he gets up, and has many a weary
Look, many a Fear, many a Lash of a self-condemned Conscience: At last he comes
to the Gate of his Father's House, He arose and came to his Father, fearing and
trembling lest his Father would not look upon him. But see the Heart of God to
poor dejected self-condemned Sinners; see the Love of God to poor repenting
Sinners; we are told, When he was yet a great Way off, his Father saw him and
had Compassion on him, and ran, and fell on his Neck and kissed him. I believe
never was so much Affection expressed in so few Words. When he was yet a great
Way off: Perhaps the Father was praying in the Field, or meditating as Isaac,
that his Prodigal might come home, putting up a Prayer to God, O that Ishmael
might live before thee. And perhaps when he was praying, he turns his Head, and
sees his young Prodigal coming home. The Prodigal does not advance any further;
Unbelief kept him back; I dare not approach him any more: Like a poor Sinner
convinced of Sin, he dares not lay hold on Christ, though God bids him. Here the
Father turning his Head, sees a poor Creature quite disfigured, without Clothes
or Shoes: He wonders who it is: He looks again, and at last says, There are
some Features of my Child. God can see all his Elect, though they are weltring in
their Blood. One would have thought, when he saw him, he would immediately go
to the House, and bid the Dogs bark at him, and command the filthy Wretch to be
gone to his Whores, and where he had spent his Substance in riotous Living. No,
instead of that, when he saw him he had Compassion on him; his Bowels yearned
toward him; his Heart was ready to dissolve within him, like Joseph, when we
are told his Bowels yerned toward his Brethren. Old as he was, he ran, he saw
his Prodigal unwilling to come; O thinks he, I will run and meet him. And when
a poor Sinner is made willing to come, when he is about to come, God will send
his Spirit to fetch him home. He ran to him:One would have thought he would
say, Go wash thy self, and then I will kiss thee: No, the Father ran, and in an
Ecstasy of Love fell on his Neck; he threw himself on his Neck, filthy as it
was; he speaks not one Word, but shows his Love; his Actions speaks for him;
with open Arms he embraced his filthy Son: Welcome, my Child, welcome home!
There is not one Word of Reflection. No, when you come to God, he will blot out
all your Transgressions, he will freely forgive your Sins, and your Iniquities
he will remember no more. Well, one would think the Prodigal should have forgot
his Purpose, My Father has forgiven me, I need say no more. But wherever God
comes in a saving Way to a poor Sinner, he is filled with such a sense of his
Sin, that though God forgive him, he cannot forgive himself.

Here the Prodigal says in the 21st Verse, Father I have sinned against Heaven
and in thy Sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. This shows us
that we must confess Sin, even after we know that our Sins are forgiven: That
is sweet Humility, that results from a Sense of God's Love. I appeal to you
that know CHRIST, if it is not the sweetest Hours with you, after ye have
received Manifestations from God, a breathing of God in your Soul; you feel
your Souls melting, dissolving in Love, and throwing your selves at the Foot of
sovereign Grace, Why me Lord, why me? And the more God pours in upon you, the
more lowly ye are in your own Eyes. O that is a sweet Time, when the Soul is
laid low, and dissolved with a Sense of God's Love. Methinks, I see the
Prodigal amazed that the Father should have thus embraced him. Says he, I have
sinned against Heaven, and in thy Sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son: How is it that thou do kiss me? O what sweet Expressions, what sweet
Fellowship is there between Jesus Christ, and a precious Soul, when Christ is
visiting that Soul with his Love! He would have went on, and said, Make me as
one of thy hired Servants; but the Father would not let him go on with his
Confession, and therefore we are told,

In the 22d. Verse. Then he said to his Servants, in the plural Number, not to
one Servant, but to all of them, to show the haste he was in to help his poor
Son, make haste to welcome my dear Child home. The Father said to his Servants.
-- One would have thought he should have said, Go make this Prodigal be gone,
no, but bring forth the best Robe, and put it on him, and put a Ring on his
Hand and Shoes on his Feet. -- Bring forth the best Robe.The Prodigal was
willing to be like a hired Servant, any Thing would be good enough for him. No,
he must have a Robe, not only a Robe, but the best Robe, the Robe which his
Father wore on high Days, the best Robe in all the House was not too good for
him though such an ungrateful Child. The Father might have told him, see what
thou have lost by thy Prodigality; no, but says he, Fetch the best Robe: and it
must not only be fetched out, but put upon him. Not only so, but he must put a
Ring on his Hand, to distinguish his Quality. It appears he had no Shoes on his
Feet, and the Father cannot bear that, then says he, Fetch out Shoes, and put
them on his Feet,to show how glad he was, and that nothing was too dear for
him, says he, Bring hither the fatted Calf and kill it, and let us eat and be
merry.

But what are you to understand by this best Robe? It is the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness, it is a Robe weaved by the Hand of Christ, a Robe that could not
be purchased without Christ shed his precious Heart-Blood. If you see that you
are naked, that you are undone, poor, miserable, blind, helpless Sinners, God
will put his Robe upon your naked Soul, God will apply Christ's Righteousness
to your Heart, so that you shall be made to say, The Lord is my Righteousness.
Did the Father put a Ring upon this young Man's Hand? So God shall Seal you for
his, by his Spirit, till the Day of Redemption; God shall put his Spirit into
your Heart, and by this shall all Men know that you are God's Children, Sons
and Daughters of the Lord Almighty. Did the Father put Shoes upon this young
Man's Feet? So shall your Feet be shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of
Peace. Did the Father kill the fatted Calf? Did the Prodigal feed upon this
fatted Calf? So shall God feed your Soul with a hidden Life, a divine Life, a
Joy that Strangers intermeddle not with. You shall feel God in your Heart, you
shall feel Christ in your Soul. Did the Servants make merry? were they glad? So
shall God the Father communicate the News of your Conversion to the Angels
above, and there will be Joy in Heaven over your repenting and coming to Jesus
Christ. O methinks I see these blessed Spirits flying round the Congregation,
tuning their Harps, and longing as the Heart pants after the Water Brooks, to
sing an Anthem at your Conversion. Methinks I see them longing to ascend the
heavenly Ladder, and join the heavenly Quire, saying, some precious Souls were
dead, but God has made them alive; they were lost to God, lost to Jesus
Christ; but God has breathed into them the Breath of Life, and they are now
become living Souls. O may God grant that this may be the Angels Song this
Afternoon concerning some of you. I believe God intends to come among you this
Day; I believe Jesus Christ intends to bring some of you home. O that there may
be a whole Congregation coming together. There is enough in Christ for you all.

I must touch a little upon the elder Brother, and return to the younger
Brother, for I do not love his Character.

One would have thought, all should have rejoiced at the Prodigal's coming
home: But what can please a self-righteous Person? God himself cannot please
him. We are told his elder Brother was in the Field, and as he came and drew
nigh to the House, he heard Music and Dancing. Before I go forward, give me
Leave to tell you who (because Music and Dancing is mentioned) may think it
lawful to dance and have Balls. -- But my dear Friends, such Things are as much
contrary to the Gospel of Christ, as Light is to Darkness. And whatever you may
think, if God ever touch your Heart, and make you new Creatures, you will be
sick of these Things; you will no more be present at a Ball or Assembly, than
you will thrust your Head into the Fire. I speak this by Experience. No one
has been a greater Sinner that Way, than that poor Creature that is now
preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ to you. Many a precious Hour and Night
have I spent this Way, and thought it no Harm, as you may do: I went to the
Sacrament, I kept Fasts before the Sacrament; I thought it no Harm to go to
dancing for all that. But my dear Friends, take Warning, it has cost me many a
Tear, many a gloomy Hour to reflect upon the many precious Hours I have spent
this Way, and I am amazed that God did not send me to Hell. Take Warning by me,
it cost me many a bitter Hour, as it will cost you if ever you come to God. You
may put off Convictions now; but when Death takes hold of your Soul, you will
see Things in another Light; you will be amazed to think that you should be
deceiving your own Souls. Take Heed of these Things, they will eat out the
Vitals of Religion, and if these Things be encouraged in Scotland, they will
eat out Religion.

He called one of his Father's Servants, and asked what these Things meant. And
he said unto him, Thy Brother is come, and thy Father has killed the fatted
Calf, because he has received him safe and sound. It Is remarkable what the
Servant said, Thy Father has received him safe and sound. Why, was the
Prodigal safe and sound? He was naked, no Clothes upon his Back, no Shoes upon
his Feet. It is because when we come to God, when he views us in the Holiness
of Jesus Christ, he looks upon us as though we had never sinned at all; we are
safe and sound, having on the Righteousness of Christ. One would have thought
he would have gone in and rejoiced over his Brother. No, he was angry and would
not go in. So the Pharisees were angry with Jesus Christ for conversing with
Sinners. Therefore, we are told, his Father went out, and entreated him. How
does God bear with the Perverseness of self-righteous Sinners! But he
answering, said to his Father, Lo! He introduces what he had to say with a Lo!
for we love to magnify every Thing we do. Lo, these many Years do I serve thee:
We love to make the most of what we do; these many Years; he aggravates every
Thing he did, and lessens every Thing God did. Observe how often he brings in
the little Word, I; neither transgressed I at any Time thy Commandments; and
yet thou never gave me a Kid to make merry with my Friends. See how he finds
Fault with his Father! A self-righteous Person finds Fault with every Thing
that God does. Neither transgressed I at any Time thy Commandments. This shows
the Foolishness of those that boast of their own Righteousness. He was just
doing now like the Pharisee, I thank God, I am no unjust Person. When he was
boasting that he was not unjust, he was committing the most unjust Action in
the World; to judge a poor Publican, was not that unjust? See how he reflects
upon his Father and his Brother, But as soon as this thy Son; he would not own
him to be his Brother; thy Son; I will not call him my Brother; which has
devoured thy Living with Harlots: See how he magnifies it; he casts Reflections
on the young Man who was casting Reflections enough upon himself; but he
magnifies them all. Thou have killed for him, an ungrateful, wicked, wanton
Prodigal, the fatted Calf. But see the Forbearance of God, He said unto him,
Son, all I have is thine; -- for even self-righteous Persons shall have a
Share. Whatever Difference there may be between us and others, there is no
Difference by Nature; we have all sinned and fallen short of the Glory of God.
We should never see a poor Drunkard, but we should say, there is my Picture, if
God leave me to my self. This is therefore thy Brother that is come.

I told you I would return to the younger Brother again. I fear there are too
many of us angry at Ministers for preaching free Grace, and inviting Souls to
Jesus Christ. But my Friends, my Prayer to God is, that this Parable may be
fulfilled in your Heart. I hope God intends to do Good to your Souls this
Afternoon. Are there none of you that feel your selves damned? We are all lost,
estranged from God by Nature, legally dead, and have no more Power to come to
God of our selves, than the Bones you are sitting over have Power to come out
of the Grave. The great Question is, which of you feel your Inability to save
your selves? We have all been Prodigals; God put a Stock into our first Parents
Hand, who spent that; we are all Bankrupts, and shall be undone without the
Lord Jesus Christ. Which of you, or how many of you can say, I will arise and
go to my Father; I will arise and go to my offended God; and I will say to him,
Father I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son. Do you find powerful Convictions fasten upon you? Do you
find your own Blindness and Darkness? Are you bewailing And weeping over the
Miseries of a corrupt Nature? Come then, do not fear. The Devil will strike in,
and will tell you, God will not accept of you, the Day of Grace is over. But
behold how God's Bowels yern over you. God sees you when you are yet a great
Way off: he saw you from Eternity; he had Compassion on you; he sent the Lord
Jesus Christ to work out a Righteousness for you. Be you what you will, be you
who you will, as many of you that fear you are damned; as many as are willing
to accept of Salvation by a crucified Jesus; God is unspeakably more willing to
receive you than you are to receive him. For Jesus Christ's Sake do not stay,
come in your Filth, damned as you are; God will give you Kisses of Love, God
will embrace you in the Arms of his Mercy. This Robe of Christ's Righteousness
that was purchased by the Blood of Jesus (...), by the Death and Obedience of a
bleeding God, (...) be applied to your Souls. You shall have Peace with God,
Joy in the Holy Ghost, you shall feast upon the fatted Calf, the invisible
Realities of another World. Thus shall it be done to all that come to Jesus
Christ. O come to the Waters of Life, drink freely, be you what you will; if
you have Legions of Devils, if you have Millions of Devils in your Heart, come
away; the Blood of Jesus Christ is of Virtue infinitely great, it will wash you
white as Snow. O think on the Love of God. God the Father so loved the World
that he gave his only begotten Son. O then, I pray you be reconciled to God.
Jesus Christ saves the chief of Sinners. The Lord Jesus Christ has had Mercy
upon me. Are you Sinners? so am I. Are you the chief of Sinners? so am I. Are
you backsliding Sinners? so am I, the worst of Sinners: if left to my self I
should have outdone you all; and yet Jesus Christ had Mercy upon me.

O my dear Friends, O my guilty Brethren, come away to Jesus Christ, be
espoused to Jesus Christ. I know what it is to be a Prodigal, I know what it is
to live in Sin, but Sin has left a Damp upon my Soul; and though God has
forgiven me, I can never forgive my self; and I cannot go away without some of
you coming to Jesus Christ* and let me not go and tell God, Lord, I have (...)
them to thee, but they would not come. O (...) Friends, come to Jesus Christ,
were you as black as Hell, you are welcome. Will you crucify the Son of God?
Will you rather perish in your Sins and be damned? Christ is the only Way, the
Truth, and the Life, no Man comes to the Father but by him. O my dear Friends,
methinks I would go, if God should enable me, to Death for preaching the
everlasting Gospel. But I do not care to go to Heaven without some of you:
There is Love enough in Christ's Heart, there is Virtue enough in the Blood of
Christ, there is a Fountain opened for all Uncleanness. Did you once know what
it is to be clothed with the Righteousness of the Son of God, you would be
sick of Sin, and of every Thing but Christ. O then shall I prevail with some of
you to come to him. God has sent a poor Stranger to call you home. You poor
abandoned Prodigals, you are welcome to Jesus Christ* you are welcome to the
Redeemer, if you will (...) him. What do you say? Will you give (...)? Let
there be Joy in Heaven over your repentance? I know you cannot come of
yourselves. Are you willing to come? O then, God shall send his Spirit to bring
you home, and meet you in the Way. O my dear Friends, I believe God is working
upon some of your Hearts; I feel his Power, I hope you feel it* This is an
accepted Time, and a Day of Salvation. May the Lord bring home your Souls! May
Jesus give a Blessing to what is said! Though this be the Foolishness of
preaching, do not cry out against me for preaching Christ, that has forgiven
me all my Sins. I cannot help inviting poor Sinn^^^ to come to Christ. May he
sanctify you by (...), fill you with his Grace, and after Death bring (...) to
his Glory.

FINIS.

