Dr. Sewall's SERMON On the Water of Life.

The Thirsty invited to come, and take the Waters of Life freely.

A SERMON Preached on the Friday Evening-Lecture at the South Meeting House in
BOSTON, March 5. 1741, 2.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D.

Isa. Iv. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that
has no Money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without
Money, and without Price.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL at the Head of Queen Street, near
the Townhouse. 1742.

The THIRSTY invited to take the Waters of LIFE.
Rev. xxii. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that
hears, say, Come. And let him that is athirst, come: And whosoever will, let
him take the Water of Life freely.
SOLOMON observes, that as cold Waters are to a thirsty Soul; so is good News
from a far Country. We have here good News indeed from the highest Heaven, for
the sinful Children of Men who have forsaken GOD the Fountain of living Waters,
for broken Cisterns that can hold no Water; and are now in Danger of perishing
in the Flames of Hell without a Drop of Water, without the least Mitigation of
their Torment. Behold! the Son of GOD has taken our Nature, and purchased the
HOLY SPIRIT in his Graces and Comforts; and inviteth us to come, and take these
Waters freely. This Chapter is the last in the Bible, and closes the whole
Canon of sacred Scripture. Worthy Expositors apprehend that we have here a
further Description of the glorious Joy and consummate Happiness of the
heavenly Paradise, which is abundantly refreshed with a pure River of Water of
Life proceeding out of the Throne of GOD, and of the LAMB! All our Springs are
in GOD, the Fountain of Grace and Glory. In his Presence is Fullness of Joy, and
at his right Hand are Pleasures forevermore. Psalm 16. 11. There is also the
Tree of Life; GOD's People eat freely of the Fruits of it, and live forever.
And there shall be no more Curse. No Tempter shall ever approach that high and
holy Place, no Sin shall ever defile it; and therefore it must be forever free
from all the Fruits of the Curse. There shall be no Night there, and therefore
no Need of a Candle. Nor is there any Need of the Light of the Sun to make and
rule the Day. No! No! that GOD who is Light, and in whom is no Darkness at all,
forever shines in his meridian Brightness. The Father of Lights with whom is
no Shadow of turning makes one permanent and eternal Day in which not the least
Cloud interposeth to hide the Light of his Countenance from his People. But is
it possible that any of us the Children of Apostate Adam, who was thrust out of
the earthly Paradise for his first Transgression, in which we were all
involved; I say is it possible, that we should ever inhabit the heavenly
Paradise? Yes! Yes! the Son of GOD came down from Heaven, and in our Nature was
obedient to Death, yea was laid in the Grave; that he might raise us up to sit
with him in those heavenly Places. And now the Spirit and the Bride say, Come.
Descend, O blessed Spirit of GOD! and raise us above the deadning Influence of
earthly Things; refresh our Souls with these living Waters, and we will run the
Race set before us, till we enter in through the Gates into that City, of which
such glorious Things are spoken in the Word of GOD. But to return, In the
Words, we have a most gracious Invitation given us to come, and take the Waters
of Life freely. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, -- The HOLY SPIRIT of GOD
who indicted the Scriptures, speaks in them; The Holy Ghost faith, To Day if ye
will hear his Voice, Harden not your Hearts. Heb. 3, 7, 8. And the Spirit
exciteth holy Desires in the Church who is the Bride, the Lamb's Wife; and
accordingly the Church and every true Believer, say, Come. They look and long
for CHRIST'S Appearing, and for the further Manifestations of his Favor unto
them. And when GOD's People have tasted that the LORD is gracious, they are
desirous that others should come, and see how good the LORD is. When JESUS had
revealed himself to the Woman of Samaria, and given her the Water of Life; she
went her Way into the City, and said to the Men, Come -- John 4. 28, 9. And let
him that is athirst, Come. -- All such as feel their Want of CHRIST and his
saving Benefits, and have earnest Desires after them, are here invited to come;
which we do by Faith, when we go out of ourselves as to any carnal Dependence
upon our own Righteousness and Strength, and go to GOD by JESUS CHRIST as to
the Fountain of all saving Good. We have then a general Invitation, And whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely. GOD will not impose and
force the Blessings of the Gospel upon any, whether they will or no; but then
all such as thirst after them, and are willing to receive them upon Gospel
Terms, may come and welcome: And none need be discouraged because they have no
Money or valuable Price to lay down to purchase them. No, these are all
purchased by JESUS CHRIST at the Price of his most precious Blood; and they are
offered to us as a free Gift, which we must heartily accept as it is offered.
And if by the Grace of GOD we do this, they became our's. If CHRIST and his
Benefits were set to Sale, we poor perishing Sinners might well despair, and
say our Hope is perished; but now that our LORD offers himself and all saving
Good freely, even the chief of Sinners should be encouraged to hearken to this
most gracious Invitation. By the Water of Life we may understand the spiritual
Blessings purchased by CHRIST, and communicated by his SPIRIT. John 4. 10. If
thou knew the Gift of GOD, and who it is that faith to thee, Give me to
drink; thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living
Water. 7. 38, 39. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of
his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. But this spoke be of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive.

DOCT. All such as thirst after CHRIST, and his saving Benefits; are invited to
come, and take the Waters of Life freely.

I. What are we to understand by the Waters of Life? II. In what Respects may
CHRIST and his Benefits be compared to Waters of Life? III. Who are they that
thirst? IV. Show that such are invited to come, and take these Waters of Life
freely.

I. What we are to understand by the Waters of Life? A. The saving Benefits
which JESUS CHRIST has purchased for his People, which he reveals and offers
in the Gospel, and communicates by his Spirit.

I. The saving Benefits which JESUS CHRIST has purchased for his People.

The blessed GOD is in Scripture represented to us under this Similitude, the
Fountain of living Waters; and he is in CHRIST JESUS a Fountain opened for the
full Supply of such sinful miserable Creatures as we are. The Son of GOD having
taken our Nature, and been obedient unto Death, has purchased Grace and Glory,
and every good Thing for his People. And accordingly as Mediator he has a
Fullness of all spiritual Blessings to bestow on his People. Col. 1. 19. For it
pleased the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell. And he received that
he mignt give. John 1. 16. And of his Fullness have all we received and Grace
for Grace. GOD blesses his People with all spiritual Blessings in him. And we
have accordingly the Blessings of the Messiah's Kingdom shadowed forth to us
under those Similitudes. Isa. 32. 2. A Man shall be as Rivers of Water in a dry
Place. Zech. 13. 1. In that Day there shall be a Fountain opened to the House
of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin, and for Uncleanness.
This prophetical Promise looks forward to the Gospel-Day. And by the Fountain
opened we may un lerstand JESUS CHRIST, in the Merits of his Death, and
Communications of his Spirit and Grace, revealed under the Gospel Dispensation.
The Son of GOD came by Water and by Blood that he might wash his People from
the Guilt and Pollution of Sin, and purify to himself, a peculiar People, and
zealous of good Works. Ephesians. 5. 25 -- 27. CHRIST also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it: that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water
by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing; but that it should be holy and without
Blemish. Whatever are our spiritual Wants, in CHRIST there is a full Supply for
us. Are you sensible of your Ignorance and Folly? CHRIST is of GOD made to his
People wisdom. Are you sensible of your Guilt, and need of a perfect
Righteousness for your Justification before GOD? CHRIST is of GOD made to his
People Righteousness. Are you sensible of the dreadful Pollution of Sin, and do
you feel your need of that Holiness without which none shall see the Lord?
CHRIST is of GOD, made to his People sanctification. Are you sensible that you
were sold under Sin, and do you groan after Deliverance from this worse than
Egyptian Bondage? CHRIST is of GOD made to his People Redemption. I Cor. 1. 30.

2. It intends those Blessings which are revealed, and offered in the Gospel.

The Gospel of CHRIST, and the Ordinances therein appointed, are as the
Conduit-Pipes through which GOD is pleased to convey the Blessings purchased by
CHRIST, unto his chosen People. The Word, Sacraments and Prayer are the
ordinary Means of Grace: And it is in the diligent Use of these that GOD's
People must wait upon him for spiritual Blessings. Agreably, when it is said,
Come to the Waters. Isai. 55. 1. One sense given of the Place is, "Come to the
holy Ordinances." And when GOD is graciously present in and with his
Ordinances, his People are satisfied with the Fatness of his House, and made to
drink of the River of his Pleasures. Ps. 36. 8. They draw Water out of the
Wells of Salvation with Joy. But if GOD deny his gracious presence and
Blessing, these outward Means are as Wells without Water, and as Clouds without
Rain, which can afford no spiritual Refreshment to our Souls.

3. By these Waters we may understand the communications of the Spirit of
Christ to his People.

By the Spirit, who is also a divine Person, our Lord JESUS communicates to
his People the saving Benefits which he has purchased for them. Tit. 3. 5, 6.
Not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his Mercy
he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost;
Which he shed on us abundantly, through JESUS CHRIST our Savior. And we
accordingly find that the Gift of the Holy Ghost was the great and
comprehensive Blessing which our Lord JESUS promised to his Disciples, when he
was about to leave this World, and go to the Father. John 16.7. Nevertheless, I
tell you the Truth; it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him
unto you. And this glorious Person who is one with the Father and the Son in
the essential Perfections of the divine Nature, is said to be sent and given
with Respect to the free Communication of his Gifts and Graces and Comforts.
And in this Respect, is he fitly compared to Water in the sacred Writings. Isa.
44. 3. I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry
Ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine
Offspring. John 7. 37 -- 39. In the last Day, that great Day of the Feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly
shall flow Rivers of living Water. But this spoke he of the Spirit. And very
fitly may these gracious Influences be compared to Water, living Water; For by
the Holy Spirit GOD cleanses the Souls of his People from the moral
Defilements of Sin, refreshes and reviveth the thirsty, and makes his People
fruitful in spiritual Knowledge, Righteousaess and Holiness. When the Spirit is
poured on GOD's People from on High, the Wilderness becomes a fruitful Field.
But this brings me to the second Thing.

II. In what Respects may the saving Benefits of CHRIST communicated by the
Spirit, be compared to Water of Life?

A. 1. Upon the Account of the absolute Need we stand in of them, for our Souls.

Our outward Man cannot subsist and hold together in vital Union, without Water;
no more can our inward Man, our Souls live in a spiritual Sense, without these
Waters of Life. The beginning, Increase and Perfect on of the spiritual Life
entirely depend on these divine Influences. Unless it pleased GOD to visit the
Earth, and water it; we could not have Food for Man, or Beast; but must perish
with Famine. And without an Interest in CHRIST, and his saving Benefits, we
must pine away, and perish forever in our Sins. This is the one Thing needful.

2. These Blessings may be compared to Water for the great Value, and extensive
Usefulness of them.

This Particular is nearly related to the former; however, I shall labor to
consider it with some Variety.

It is worthy our thankful Observation, that our bountiful GOD has given us
those Things which are most useful to Mankind in the greatest Abundance, and so
made them cheap to us, though most valuable in themselves; as the Light and Heat
of the Sun, the Rain of Heaven, and living Springs of Water from the Earth.
Water is of great Use, and extensive Benefit to us. Our Drink is Water either
pure from the Spring, or differently prepared by Nature, or Art. And of how
great Use to keep us clean and sweet in this dirty World? And if I might be
allowed something further to enlarge the Metaphor beyond what is especially
pointed to in the Text, of how great Use is Water for Trade and Commerce?
Surely we depend much upon it under GOD, for the Supports and Comforts of Life.
But if we consider the Usefulness of this Element after the most extensive
Manner, it affords us but a defective Representation of the great Usefulness of
CHRIST, and his saving Benefits, which comprehend in them a full Supply for all
our Spiritual Wants; every Thing we need for the Healing, the Nourishing and
Refreshment of our precious Souls; And all of inestimable Value,
notwithstanding ignorant and profane Sinners make so small Account of these
Things, I need not declare to you how pleasant cool Waters are to the thirsty.
Such as have been parched under the painful Sense of GOD's fiery Indignation
due for Sin, and then enabled to take the Waters of Life freely, will
acknowledge the great Delight and Satisfaction they have received from them.

3. These Blessings may be compared to Water of Life, for their healing,
cleansing Virtue.

There are medicinal Waters, Baths that have an healing Virtue. And such are
the Waters of the Fountain of Life which is opened in CHRIST JESUS, and flow
down to his People in the gracious Influences of his Spirit. The Faculties of
our Souls are weakened and depraved by Sin. We are in a spiritual Sense full of
Wounds, and Bruises, and putrisying Sores. See Isa. 1. 5, 6. The Eyes are
blinded, the Ears are dull of hearing, the Heart is hard, the Passions are
distempered with a feverish Heat of carnal Concupiscence, and the Head is
seized as with a deadly Lethargy, which renders us stupid and senseless with
Respect to spiritual Things. In a Word, The Disease is mortal, and unless a
Remedy be provided and applied, the second Death will follow. But now these
Waters of Life are of sovereign Virtue to heal these Maladies, and all that
receive them shall be made whole. There was a Pool at Jerusalem called
Bethesda, in the Use of which GOD was pleased miraculously to heal the Diseases
of his People. John 5. JESUS whose divine Power seemed to be represented by the
Waters of this Pool, saw the impotent Man lying by it, and said to him, Rise,
take up thy Bed and walk. ver. 8. We are here a Number of impotent diseased
Creatures, as it were lying at the Pool, while we are attending the Ordinances
of God's House. May the Power of CHRIST be present to heal us! May these Waters
of Life which flow from this Almighty Savior be applied to us to recover us
from our spiritual Blindness of Mind, and Hardness of Heart! you that complain
of your spiritual Maladies; come to these Waters; wash in this Jordan, and your
Souls shall be cleansed and healed. Thus in Ezekiel's Visiion of the holy
Waters, it is said, that where these Waters shall come, they shall be healed.
Ezekiel. 47. 9.

4. These spiritual Blessings may be compared to Water of Life, as they restore
spiritual Life to such as were dead in Trespasses and Sins.

Sinners are in Scripture compared to sick Men, as the Strength and Beauty of
their Souls are impaired by their spiritual Maladies, and yet there is Hope of
Recovery by CHRIST, the Lord our Healer; And they are compared to dead Men as
they are wholly deprived of spiritual Life, have no true holy Love to GOD or
other Graces in them; and are under the Curse of the Law. And accordingly the
Virtue of these living and Life-giving Waters exceeds all the Powers of Nature.
There are Waters in the Kingdom of Nature which have a Virtue to heal some
bodily Maladies by the Blessing of GOD's common Providence upholding and
drawing forth the Virtues in them; but none that can restore Life when the
vital Union between Soul and Body is dissolved. This Work is wholly
supernatural; and so is the spiritual Resurrection of Souls, when GOD quickens
them that are dead in Sin. Well then may these divine Influences be called
Waters of Life, as they communicate Life to Souis spiritually dead. Thus it is
said of those holy Waters which rose and increased till they became a River
which could not be passed over. Ezekiel. 47. 9. Every Thing shall live whither the
River comes. When our Lord JESUS pours out his Spirit, Men are born of
Water, and of the Spirit. John 3. 5. When the Spirit is thus given like Water,
there is a new Life communicated by which true Converts resemble the blessed
GOD, and live to him; They now receive a Power of spiritual Perceptions
Operations and Enjoyments, which they had not before. Now they may say in some
Measure with the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but CHRIST lives
in me; and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the
Son of GOD, who loved me and gave himself for me.. O GOD, thou GOD of
Salvation, to whom belong the Issues from Death! Pour out thy Spirit and
Blessing upon us, and we shall live to show forth thy Praise.

5. These spiritual Blessings may be compared to Water of Life, as they
continue, and spring up into everlasting Life.

Waters sed by living Springs continue, and flow from Age to Age; while Waters
from a sudden Rain are soon dried up, and fail. Agreeably Job complains of his
Friends, chap. 6. 15 -- 17. My Brethren have dealt deceitfully as a Brook, and
as the Stream of Brooks they pass away; Which are blackish by Reason of the
Ice, and wherein the Snow is bid; What Time they wax warm, they vanish; when it
is hot, they are consumed out of their Place. Such are our Creature Comforts,
they soon become as broken Cisterns which can hold no Water. But now with GOD
is the Spring of Life, and the living Waters which flow from him are pure, and
they never wholly fail. John 4. 14. But whosoever drinks of the Water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life. When our Lord
says, that such shall never thirst, it cannot intend that such shall have no
further Desires after the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit. No, it is a
Property of Grace to desire to grow and increase in spiritual Blessings; But
then it may intend that such as receive this Gift of GOD, shall never more be
wholly deprived of it. He may thirst for GOD more and more, and GOD will give
the Desires of his Heart. He may complain that GOD is withdrawn, but shall
never have just Reason to say that GOD has wholly forsaken him. No, GOD will
never leave him 'till he has raised him to his glorious Presence in Heaven,
where is Fullness of Joys, and Pleasures evermore. He shall never thirst after
the Things of this World, as he did before. Such as have tasted how good and
gracious the Lord is, will rather say as Jer. 18. 14. Will a Man leave the snow
of Lebanon which comes from the Rock of the Field? or shall the cold flowing
Waters that come from another Place, be for saken? No surely, GOD's Children
prefer these pure and living Waters to all the Delights of this Earth which are
foul and muddy, and soon pass away. When the Spirit of GOD is given to dwell in
the Hearts of his People, he is in them as a Well of Water, or living Spring
that can never be drawn dry. The Spirit of GOD abides in his People forever to
maintain and increase the Life of Grace until it shall be perfected in Glory.

III. What is implied in thirsting? Who are they that thirst?

Before I answer particularly to this Enquiry, I would say; we all know
something of what natural Thirst means, when we feel a Desire of Drink, of some
natural Moisture, by Reason of Drought. Now this has been accounted one of the
most peremptory Demands of Nature, and such as soon becomes intolerable if
wholly denied. Accordingly, We may be said to thirst in a spiritual Sense, when
under a painful Sense of our spiritual Wants and Miseries, we earnestly desire
and long after JESUS CHRIST and his saving Benefits; his Righteousness, and the
Graces and Comforts of his Spirit.

I. It supposes a painful Sense and Feeling of our spiritual Wants and
Miseries.

When we have been a considerable Time without Drink, especially when hot and
weary, we feel the painful Sense of it. And thus such as thirst in a spiritual
Sense have an afflicting Sense of their great Wants, in being without CHRIST,
destitute of the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit, and exposed to the Wrath
and Curse of GOD. Indeed the Souls of Men since the Fall are so blinded and
depraved by Sin, that they do not feel their Need of an Interest in CHRIST, and
his saving Benefits; although they are pining away in their Iniquities. Give them
sensual Satisfactions and earthly Pleasures, and they are ready to imagine that
all is well, and that they have need of nothing. As the rich Fool was ready to
bless himself. Luke 12. 19. Soul thou have much Goods laid up for many Years;
take thine Ease, eat, drink, and be merry. Thus the secure Sinner feeds of
Ashes, while a deceived Heart turns him aside, that he cant deliver his Soul,
nor say, is there not a Lie in my right Hand? But when the Spirit of GOD
convinced Men of their Sin and Misery, and shows them their imminent Danger of
perishing for ever; when he binds their Sins upon their Consciences, and makes
them feel something of the Heat of GOD's Anger; then they find that this World
with all its Enjoyments, is a dry and thirsty Land wherein is no Water, no true
Satisfaction for their Souls. Now they complain with the Psalmist, Psalm. 32.4.
Day and Night thy Hand was heavy upon me; My Moisture is turned into the
Drought of summer. Now they labor, and are heavy laden under the Burden of
their Sins; and are convinced that they must languish and die forever, unless
it please GOD to give them CHRIST, and his saving Benefits. They find that in
departing from GOD, they have forsaken their own Mercies for lying Vanities,
the Fountain of living Waters for broken Cisterns that can hold no Water. The
Description given of them that were pained with Thirst in a proper Sense,
agrees well with the Condition of these Sinners. Psalm 107. 5. Thirsty, their
Soul fainted in them. They find that the Threatenings of GOD's fiery Law are
pointed at them, while out of CHRIST, and their Conferences are set on Fire as
it were with terrible Apprehensions of GOD's Wrath which burns to the lowest
Hell. Their own Righteousnesses appear as filthy Rags, altogether insufficient
to cover and defend them. And their outward Performance of religious Duties
cannot give them Relief. They are ready to cry out with the Psalmist 38. 3, 4.
There is no Soundness in my Flesh, because of thine Anger, neither is there any
Rest in my Bones, because of my Sin. For mine Iniquities are gone over my Head:
as an heavy Burden they are too heavy for me. They are perplexed finding
themselves in a miserable Case, in a Wilderness where there is no Water. Their
sorrowful Case is well described Isai. 41. 17. The Poor and Needy seek Water,
and there is none, and their Tongue fails for Thirst. Now they are made
sensible that unless the Almighty GOD open a Fountain to them, and supply their
Wants, they must perish under them.

2. This Thirst implies, that we earnestly desire and long after JESUS CHRIST,
and his saving Benefits.

We have King David's Thirst expressed in longing Desires. 2 Samuel 23. 15. And
David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me Drink of the Water of the
Well of Beth-lehem, which is by the Gate. Agreeably, when Men thirst after
CHRIST, his Righteousness and Grace, they have longing Desires after these
spiritual Blessings; yea such as can not be satisfied with any Thing short of
CHRIST, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Thirst is such a Demand of Nature as
nothing can satisfy but that which is suited to quench it. If you should offer
to one tormented with it, Thousands of Silver and Gold, this could not make him
easy; He must perish with intolerable Pain, unless you give him Drink. And
what Good then could the whole World do him? And thus such as thirst after
CHRIST, are so sensible of their Need of him that nothing can give Rest to
their weary Souls but an Interest in him, and his saving Benefits. Now they are
ready to say, What shall it profit us to gain the World, and lose our Souls?
And what shall we give in Exchange for our Soul? Now they long after CHRIST as
the only and All-sufficient Savior, and are ready to say, Give us CHRIST, or
we die, we are lost and undone forever. Now the Favor of GOD in CHRIST is in
their Esteem better than Life, and they say, Whom have we in Heaven but thee?
There Is none upon Earth we desire besides thee. Our Flesh and Heart are ready
to fail. O save us, or we perish! We have the strong Desires of one pursued by
threatening Evils expressed in this Manner. Psalm 42. 1, 2. As the Heart pants
after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O GOD. My Soul thirsts
for GOD, for the living GOD; when shall I come and appear before GOD? The Heart
or Deer is naturally hot and thirsty, especially when pursued. In like Manner,
when GOD's People find themselves pursued by deadly Enemies, and have been
wearied in seeking Relief from Creatures, and then are convinced that there is
Rest for their weary Souls in CHRIST alone; they long after him, and the
Influences of his Spirit. Now the Lord JESUS is precious to them as he saves
from Sin, and the Wrath to come; as he gives Pardon and Peace, Grace and
Comfort. And they pant after the living Waters he bestows; yea, these Desires
are active, and powerfully incline the Thirsty to seek JESUS early, and the
Favor of GOD in him. Thus when David thirsted for GOD, he says, Early will I
seek thee. Nor can such be satisfied till they obtain an Interest in CHRIST,
and his saving Benefits.

3. The Thirsty are satisfied when CHRIST draws nigh to them, and
communicates the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit to their Souls.

Cool Waters are not so pleasant to the Thirsty, as CHRIST and his Grace are to
such as labor and are heavy laden under the Sense of Sin. When the Son of GOD
reveals himself to such as their only Savior, they find Rest and Refreshment
in him, as in one every Way able to supply their spiritual Wants, and fill
their empty Souls with Good. Now they begin to feel the Truth and strong
Consolation of those Words, John 6. 34. And he said unto them, I am the Bread
of Life; be that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me,
shall never thirst. Indeed they desire the Favor of GOD in CHRIST more and
more; but then they resolve they will go no whither else for the Waters of
Life; In him they happily find a Fountain opened that can never be drawn dry.
And the Language of their Souls is, ever give us this Water, give thy Spirit
more abundantly. When the royal Psalmist had said to GOD, my Flesh longs for
thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water is; He well expresses the
Satisfaction he should take in the Communications of GOD's Favor, Psalm 63. 3.
Because thy loving Kindness is better than Life; my Lips shall praise thee. And
V. 5. My Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness; and my Mouth shall
praise thee with joyful Lips. How refreshing are Pardon and Grace to such as
were ready to sink under the heavy Burden of Sin! O how cheerfully do they
submit to CHRIST's Yoke finding it easy, and his Burden light, compared with
that intolerable Load which before lay upon them. I trust I may appeal to the
Experience of Numbers here present, and inquire whether you have not found more
true Satisfaction in looking to JESUS CHRIST in the Exercise of Faith and godly
Sorrow for Sin, than ever you did in gratifying your foolish and hurtful Lusts,
Mat. 5. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after Righteousness; for
they shall be filled. CHRIST, his Righteousness and Grace fill and satisfy the
Soul. When Men pant after the Things of this World as their chosen Portion and
Happiness, they are deluded as with Dreams and Shadows. That Description
agrees well to their Case, Isa. 29.8. It shall be even as when a hungry Man
dreameth, and behold he eats; but he awaketh, and behold his Soul is empty;
Or as when a thirsty Man dreameth, and behold he drinks; but he awaketh, and
behold he is faint, and his Soul has Appetite. But when thirsty Souls drink of
the Water of Life, they obtain some fore-tastes of the Joys of Heaven, Psalm
36. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thy House; and
thou shall make them drink of the River of thy Pleasure;.

IV. We proceed in the last Place to show that such as thirst are invited to
come and take the Water of Life freely.

How full and general is the Invitation! Here is Come three Times over. The
Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And such as hear and believe the Word of GOD,
are exhorted to say, Come. To every one that thirsts, it is said, Come. And
then all that are willing, are invited to take the Water of Life freely. And
although some Expositors understand the first Come, of CHRIST's coming; yet I
cannot see why all may not unite to encourage thirsty Souls to go to CHRIST for
the Water of Life. When the Son of GOD was upon Earth in his human Nature, He
stood and cried, saying If any Man thirst let him come unto me, and drink. Joh.
7.37. And now that he is ascended into Heaven, he continues to invite Sinners
in the most Condescending Manner, to come to him; and promises Rev. 21. 6. I
will give unto him that is athirst of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely.
When the thirsty are invited to come, it may then intend that they are invited
to go to CHRIST, and so to receive the Water of Life. Accordingly we may under
this Head of Discourse inquire 1. What is implied in coming or going to CHRIST?
2. Show that all who are athirst, are invited to go to him, and take the Water
of Life freely.

1. What is implied in coming, or going to CHRIST? Or what is the coming to
Christ here pressed upon us?

A. It is a spiritual Motion of the Soul by which the Believer, for saking
other Things, repairs unto JESUS CHRIST to trust in him alone for Salvation,
upon the Command and Promise of GOD's Word.

It is a spiritual Motion of the Soul.

It is in the Exercise of Faith that we go to JESUS CHRIST. Thus our Savior
himself explains the Metaphor. John 6. 35. He that comes to me shall never
burger; and he that believes on me, sball never thirst.

Again, In going to CHRIST, must for sake other Thing; as vain and unable to
save us.

Men are very prone to place carnal Confidence in their earthly Enjoyments, in
themselves, in their outward religious Privileges, Duties, and Reformations.
But in order to our going to CHRIST, we must be convinced that a vain shall we
hope for Salvation from these Things; and accordingly we must be sensible that
these are but Refuges of Lies, if placed in the Room of CHRIST; And therefore
while we wait upon GOD in the Use of the Means of Grace, we must take heed we
do not stop here; but must fly to CHRIST as the only City of Refuge, when the
Law, and our own Consciences condemn us, We must go to JESUS, sensible that
there is none other Name under Heaven among Men whereby we must be saved. Acts
4.12.

Again, We must trust in JESUS CHRIST alone, and have our whole Dependence on
him for Salvation

We must say as Peter in the Name of the Twelve, Joh. 6. 68. Lord, to whom
shall we go? thou bast the Words of eternal Life. Convinced of our Guilt, and
utter Impotency to every Thing spiritually good, we must go out to CHRIST, to
trust in him for Righteousness and Strength. Such as obey this Gospel-Call,
trust in the Name of the LORD, and stay upon him as the LORD their
Righteousness. Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a Man is not justified by the Works of
the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus
Christ; that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works
of the Law; for by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified. And they
also depend on JESUS as their Head of Influence, from whom they must receive
Grace to work out their own Salvation. While at this Work, they look to their
Savior, to work in them to will and to do.

And lastly, We must go to CHRIST upon the Command and promise of GOD's Word.

Sensible of our spiritual Poverty and Wretchedness, we must take our
Encouragement, not from any pretended Worthiness of our own; but from GOD, his
infinite Perfections, his most gracious Call and Invitation, his Command and
Promise. 1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ. He that comes to CHRIST, goes in Obedience to
GOD's Authority; He says, though I am unworthy to obtain Salvation by JESUS
CHRIST, yet surely GOD is worthy to be obeyed; and it is he that commands Men
to arise, and go to CHRIST. He also takes Encouragement from the Promises of
that GOD who cannot lie. He receives the Record which GOD has given of his
Son, that in him there is eternal Life, and that whosoever believes in him
shall be saved. And as he realiseth CHRIST's Ability to save, so he relieth
upon his Word as faithful and true, John 6. 37. Him that comes to me, I will
in no wise cast out. And thus he that Comes to CHRIST, receives him as
offered in the Gospel.

2. Such as thirst are invited thus to come, and take the Water of Life freely.

The Invitation extends to all that do not wilfully except themselves. All that
live within the Sound of the Gospel, and who are sensible of their spiritual
Wants, are invited. He every one that thirsts, come to the Waters. All such
as are under legal Convictions and Terrors, are invited to go weary and heavy
laden to CHRIST. Surely then when Men are beaten off from all their carnal
Confidences, and made willing to go out to CHRIST as wretched and miserable in
themselves, to receive these living Waters as the free Gift of GOD. I say,
surely these shall not be sent empty away. No, GOD will rather work Miracles of
Grace, than these should perish with Thirst, Is a 41. 17, 18. When the Poor and
Needy seek Water, and there is none, and their Tongue fails for Thirst, I the
Lord will hear them, I the GOD of Israel will not for sake them. I will open
Rivers in high Places, and Fountains in the midst of the Valleys; I will make
the Wilderness a Pool of Water, and the dry Land Springs of Water. All such as
are heartily willing to receive CHRIST, whole CHRIST, will be made welcome, Whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely. My Hearers! GOD is in
earnest, be you so too. I declare to you in the Name of the Lord, that you
shall all have your own Choice. One hearty Consent of Soul secureth a Title to
CHRIST, and his saving Benefits, John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son, has
everlasting Life. If any of you perish in your Sin, it must be because you will
not come to Christ, that you may have Life, John 5. 40. Thousands and ten
Thousands have obeyed GOD's Voice, and not an Instance can be given of so much
as one single Person that has been rejected. Let us then with one Heart and
Voice lift up a Cry to the GOD of all Grace, Lord, make us willing in the Day
of thy Power!

APPLICATION.
Use 1. Behold, and admire the Fullness and Riches of the Grace of GOD in Jesus
Christ.

The Father of Glory has given his only begotten Son to die for us. The Son of
GOD has in our Nature been obedient to Death, that he might open the Fountain
of Grace and Mercy for the full Supply of all our Wants. And now the Spirit and
the Bride say, Come -- O the Riches of the Grace of GOD in CHRIST! All the
spiritual and eternal Blessings of the Gospel are freely offered, freely given.
Let us not then despise the Riches of GOD's Goodness, nor turn his Grace into
Wantonness; but let us be drawn by this Grace, as with the Cords of a Man, and
the Bands of Love.

2. Let us inquire whether we thirst after Christ, and his saving Benefits?

Such, we have heard, are invited to come, and assured they shall be welcome.
Let us then examine whether we have had a painful Sense of our spiritual Wants
and Miseries? Have we felt the Burden of our Sins, and been convinced, that we
must perish forever unless GOD relieve us? Have we accordingly longed after
CHRIST, and his Righteousness and Grace, as the Blessings which alone can
satisfy our thirsty Souls? Are we bro't off from trusting to our own Duties and
Privileges? And can we now say that nothing short of an Interest in CHRIST
shall satisfy us? Do we thus continue following the Lord, resolving by his
Grace that we will never go from him to seek our Happiness in Creatures? But
that if he casts us off, we will go mourning all our Days. If this be the Case,
GOD will sooner or later satisfy the longing Soul. Our Savior pronounces such
blessed, and they shall be blessed. Matthew. 5. 6.

3. Let what has been said encourage such as have a painful Sense of their
spiritual Wants, to go to Christ that they may be filled. Do not sit down
discouraged; but arise, and go to CHRIST. Behold! he calls, and most graciously
invites you to come. If any Man thrist, let him come to me, and drink. It is
true, you cannot go in your own Strength, Joh. 6. 44. No Man can come to me,
except the Father which has sent me, draw him. But GOD can by his Spirit
persuade and enable you, more easily than you can speak a Word. Look up to the
Lord then in earnest Prayer, and say as Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run after
thee; the King has brought me into his Chambers we will be glad and rejoice in
thee, we will remember thy Love more than Wine; the Upright love thee. You may
depend upon it, GOD your Savior is sincere in this Invitation. The Son of GOD
in our Nature, fulfilled all Righteousness, and endured the Curse, that he
might bless his People with all spiritual Blessings. When our Lord suffered
upon the Cross, he said, I thirst. And surely he will not refuse to satisfy the
longing Desires of his People that go to him. Let not then the Sense of your
Wants and Unworthiness hinder you; for CHRIST has purchased these Blessings
for such as you, and inviteth you to come and take them freely. Did he die to
purchase them for needy perishing Sinners, and will he reject such when they
come to him for them? Far be such a Though It from us. What you have to do is in a
believing humble Manner to receive what is freely offered you. And here I may
further say, that the more pressing and urgent your Necessities are, the more
Haste you should make to CHRIST; and the deeper Sense you have of these Wants,
the greater Encouragement have you that you shall be made welcome; for thus
runs the Promise, Psalm 81. 10. Open thy Mouth wide, and I will fill it. The
Fountain is still open, and full as ever. The Merits and Righteousness of
CHRIST have lost nothing of their Virtue, by being communicated to such vast
Numbers; and the Influences of the blessed Spirit of GOD are as powerful to
cleanse and refresh your Souls, as ever they were. And I may add, that the
present remarkable Day of Grace, in which GOD is giving spiritual Blessings
with a liberal Hand, may well encourage you to go to GOD as to a Fountain
opened in CHRIST for the Supply of all your Wants. O be persuaded then to
hearken and consider, to hear and obey the Calls of the Gospel, that your Souls
may live! O let it not be said that while many others thankfully accept the
Invitations of the Gospel, that you reject them. How shall you escape, if you
neglect so great Salvation? Certainly you will not be able to escape the
Damnation of Hell; yea, you must receive a double Damnation, as you are under
the Curse of the Law, and will then be found Despisers of the Grace of the
Gospel.

4. Let those of us who are invited to sit down at the Lord's Table the next
Sabbath, look to it that we go to that holy Feast with earnest Desires after
Christ, and the Blessings which flow from his Death.

In this Ordinance we have a Feast on that Sacrifice which CHRIST offered once
for all, and are invited to eat and drink his Flesh and Blood after a spiritual
Manner, which are Meat and Drink indeed. But then, we must open our Hearts to
the Lord Jesus, then he will come in to us, and will sup with us, and we with
him. Lift up your Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting Doors,
and the King of Glory shall come in. Psalm. 24. 7. Let every Heart be
consecrated as a living Temple unto him, then this King of Glory will be both
our Companion, and our Feast. He will say to us, as Cant. 5. 1. Eat, O Friends,
drink, yea, drink abundantly, O Beloved. And by Communion with the Father and
the Son in this holy Ordinance, we shall be prepared for that glorious Place
and State of which we read, Rev. 7. 15 -- 17. Therefore are they before the
Throne of GOD, and serve him Day and Night in his Temple; and he that sits
on the Throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any Heat. For the Lamb which
is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto
Fountains of living Waters; and GOD shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes.

FINIS.

