Mr. EELLS'S Election SERMON, May 25th 1743.

Religion is the Life of GOD's People:

A SERMON Preached at Boston, In the Presence of His EXCELLENCY William
Shirley, Esquire; Governor and Commander in chief in and over His Majesty's
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England; And the Honorable His
Majesty's COUNCIL, And the Honorable House of Representatives, Of the Province
aforesaid, May 25 th 1743.

Being the Day for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL.

By Nathanael Eells, V. D. M. And Pastor of the second Church in Situate.

1 Kings xviii. 21. -- How long halt ye between two Opinions? Josh. xxiv. 15.
-- As for me and my House we will serve the Lord. BOSTON: Printed by S.
Kneeland and T. Green, Printers to the Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES.
1743.

In the House of Representatives, Jovis 26 Die Maij, A. D. 1743.
VOTED, That Mr. Clap, Mr. Cotton, and Col. Warren, be directed to give the
Thanks of the House to the Revd. Nathanael Eells of Situate, for his Sermon
preached Yesterday before the General Court, being the Anniversary for the
Election of Counselors, and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

T. Cushing, Speaker.

AN Election SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXII. 47. -- It is your Life. --
AS it was the sovereign Pleasure of the eternal God, to make of one Blood all
Nations of Men for to dwell on all the Face of the Earth, Act. 17. 26.
so it was his Pleasure to choose the Nation of the Jews from among all other
Nations to be a special People unto himself, above all the People that were
upon the Face of the Earth. Deuteronomy. 7. 6.


And having chosen them to be his peculiar People, he declared unto them his
Covenant, which he commanded them to perform even ten Commandments, which he
wrote on two Tables of Stone, Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
and delivered unto Moses to transfer unto them.

This Moses he raised up from among them, to be their Prophet and King under
him, and an eminent Instrument in his Hand of their Redemption and Deliverance
out of their Egyptian Bondage; and he condescended to speak to him Face to
Face, as a Man speaks to his Friend. Exodus 23. 11.


And Moses having received the Law from the Mouth and Hand of God, together
with many Promises to allure, and Threatenings to awaken the People to
Obedience, read it in their Audience; and they upon hearing it, promised
Obedience to it. Exodus 24. 7.


And he not shuning to declare unto them all the Counsel of God, approved
himself faithful to God, and to his People, therefore God gave this Testimony
concerning him; My Servant Moses is faithful in all my House, Numb. 12. 7.

In this Chapter we have a divine Song which Moses by the Help of God's Spirit
composed for the Use and Benefit of the People of God who were then upon the
Stage, and those that should arise after them; wherein he sets forth the
Mercy of God to allure them, and his Vengeance to awaken them to obey all his
Commandments, Ver. 1. to 45.

And having made an End of speaking all the Words of this Song, (and almost all
he had to say unto them in the Name of the Lord, for the Time of his Departure
was now at Hand.) He in Ver. 46. exhorted them,

1. To set their Hearts unto all the Words which he had testified among them.
He had shown them the Way of the Lord; the Religion they should choose,
profess, practice and propagate in the World; and he would have them set their
Hearts to it. Set your Hearts unto all the Words which I testify among you this
Day. Let these Words reach and affect your Hearts, and engage them to the
Duties of Religion, so that you may cheerfully and faithfully perform them.

2. To teach their Children the Religion he had taught them, and to charge them
to observe it. Ye shall teach your Children to observe to do all the Words of
this Law, 'Twas not enough that they were religious themselves, but they should
do what they could to make their Children so; that thereby Religion might be
handed down to the latest Posterity.

And in this Verse of which my Text is a Part, he labored to fasten these
Words of Exhortation upon the People, with such Arguments as these; viz.

1. That which he had exhorted them unto was not a vain Thing for them to
observe; For it is not a vain Thing for you. They might be ready to think (as
some do now) that Religion is a vain Thing; that there is no Profit in it, and
that they might prosper without it, as well as other Nations; but he would have
them know and consider that it was no unprofitable Business, but of great
Importance, and worthy of their most serious Care and Concern. For,

2. It was their Life; because it is your Life, i.e. it is as necessary as your
Life; as precious and profitable, and rather to be chosen than your Life. O
that Men were fully possessed of this, that Religion is their Life, even the
Life of their Souls! Henry in Loco.


3. It was the Way to preserve and prolong their natural and temporal Life in
this World; through this Thing ye shall prolong your Days in the Land whether
ye go over Jorden to possess it, i.e. by this Means, namely, the Practice of
Religion according to God's Law, you shall prolong your Days in this World.

Thus Moses the Man of God labored to excite and stir up the People of God to
study the Principles and perform the Duties of the holy Religion he had taught
them, and to put their Children upon these Things.

It is your Life.

From the Words I shall observe to you, this

DOCT. That Religion is the Life of God's People.

In speaking to this I shall endeavor, (1) To show you what Religion is in
general. (2) What that Religion is, which is the Life of God's People. And, (3)
Why it is called their Life.


I. I am to show, What Religion is in general; or what we are to understand by
it.

And here I shall say,

The Word Religion is derived from the Latin Word Religo, which signifies to
fasten or bind hard, and it is used for that Profession of Piety which a Man
binds himself to observe, in the Practice of which he hops and expects to
be saved. Salvation is that which all Men hope for who have any Sense of a
future State of Weal and Woe; of Happiness and Misery; and every Man hops to
be saved in the Religion he professes. And therefore when a Man has drank in
any Religion, let it be never so false and vain, he is hardly brought off from
it. Thus it was with the Athenians when the Apostle Paul preached Christ and
the Resurrection unto them. Act. 17. Ver. 16, 17, etc.

II. I am to show; What that Religion is, which is the Life of God's People.

And here I shall say,

1. It is not every Religion that is professed in the World, in the Practice of
which Men hope to be saved. And therefore mind; it is not the Religion of the
Heathen or Pagan Nations; nor the Religion of the Mahomitans; neither is it the
Religion of the Jews.

It is not the Religion of the Heathen or Pagan Nations Their Religion, (as the
Rev. Dr. Beveridge observes, in his excellent Thoughts on Religion) Is full of
the most notorious Idolatry and Superstition; for some there are among them
that pay religious Worship to the Sun, and some adore the Moon; and some the
Stars* some there are that worship the Earth, and Mountains and Trees; others
that worship Serpents and other living Creatures; some bow down to Images in
the Fashion of Men, Women, and other Shapes: and some that pay Homage and
Adoration to the Devil.

This Religion though it be so vain, yet it has spread (...), and (...)
profes^ed by the greatest Part of the World.

It prevails in several Parts of Asia, As in Tartary, China, and India.
and in Africa (...) is of great Extent, Especially in Guinea, Nubia, Ethiopia
Inferior, and in the Affrican Islands, particularly Madagascar.
and in some Parts of America (...) the professed Religion of the Natives.

Some by dividing the inhabited World into thirty Part^ (...) that nineteen of
them are possessed by Hea^^^^^* Gordon's Geography. p. 425.
Again;

(...) Religion of the Mahometans. Their Religion (...) over a great Part of
the World, though it is (...) extensive as the other. It is called the Mohammedan
Religion from one Mohomet an Arabian, who by the Assistance of one Sergius a
Nestorian Monk, compiled (...) Book in the Arabian Tongue, and called it
Alcoran, which he made the Rule of his Followers Life and Man^^^s, pretending
that it was sent from Heaven to him (...) the Hand of the Angel Gabriel Dr.
Beveridge's Thoughts on Religion.


This Book though it promises no greater Happiness (...) sensible Pleasures to
the obedient in the coming World, yet it has gained great Credit in this
World; for it is the established Religion in some Parts of Turkey in Europe,
Particularly in Greece, and in Little Tartary, the Inhabitants are for the most
Part of the Mohammedan Profession; and in the Da^u^i^n Provinces Mahomitanism is
professed by many.
and in several Parts of Asia it is the professed Religion of many People, As
in Tartary, China, and India, and other Places.
And in Africa it is the most prevailing Religion, Particularly in Egypt,
Barbary, Bil^ulg^red, Zaara, and the Negro Land etc.
So that next to the pagan Religion it is of the greatest Extent.

Again,

It is not the Religion which the Jews now profess. They were once the only
Covenant People of God, and their Religion was the only true Religion in the
World: The Principles of it are contained in the Book of the Law, called the
old Testament; to which our Gospel is annexed. And this Book they say, (and we
concur with them in it) was written by holy Men of God, immediately inspired by
the Holy Ghost, and therefore is not of human Invention, but of divine
Institution.

But in as much as they rejected the Messiah, (our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ) who was prophesied of, and promised to them in the Book of the Law, and
who came to them according to Promise, and offered himself to them to be their
Savior and Redeemer, and would not accept of him, ( Joh. 1. 11.) but by wicked
Hands crucified and slew him; ( Acts 2. 23.) They are now broken off from God's
Covenant, ( Romans 11. 20.) and rejected from being a People and Kingdom by
themselves, (though they were once a Nation and Kingdom of great Renown in the
World) and are become a Proverb of Reproach, and a Byword among all Nations
whither they are driven; and their Religion is now become vain, and will not
save them.

So that it is not every Religion which is professed in the World, in the
Practice of which some hope to be saved, that is the Life of the People of God.

Therefore I shall say; --

2. It is the true Christian Religion, and that only which is the Life of God's
People.

I say, the true Christian Religion, because all the Religion that goes under
the Name of Christian is not true; and all that call themselves Christians
don't profess the true Christian Religion. Many gross Errors and Heresies, and
pernicious Principles and Opinions are broached and taught by Men who call
themselves Christians. The Church of Rome abounds with such; and among
Protestants there are too many; therefore I say, it is the true Christian
Religion, and no other, which is the Life of God's People. The true Christian
Religion has the Lord Jesus Christ for it is Author and Object; and therefore
derives it is Name from him, and it is contained in the Scriptures of the old
and new Testament, called the holy Bible; wherein we are shown who Jesus Christ
is, viz. that he is the eternal and only begotten Son of God; the Brightness of
his Father's Glory; and the express Image of his Person, and only Savior of
the World: And wherein, we have the History of his Birth and Education; of his
Doctrine and Miracles; of his Sufferings and Death; of his Resurrection from
the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven; where he ever lives to make Intercession
with God the Father on the Behalf of them that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25.

This Religion is the only safe Religion; and that in the Practice of which
Salvation is to be hoped for upon good and sufficient Grounds; and it has
comparatively but few Vouchers; i. e. but few that profess it, and stand firmly
by it.

The Christian Religion, if we consider it, in its largest Latitude, (for that
which is true, and that which is false) spreads over but a small Part of the
Globe. Some that have divided the inhabited World into thirty Parts, have found
but five of the thirty to go under the Name of Christian. And if all that call
themselves Christians, but yet don't profess the true Christian Religion, were
set by themselves, how few would be left?

And having said that the true Christian Religion is the only Religion which is
the Life of God's People; it may seem proper that I give you some
distinguishing Marks and Characters of this Religion, (though all that might be
said of it cannot be now expected) whereby it may be discerned and known from
that Religion which is not true Christian.

And here I shall say --

1. The true Christian Religion teaches us to own and acknowledge, the one
only living and true God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be the
Object of religious Worship, and no other. Not Baal, not an Idol, nor any
graven Image. As God said to the Children of Israel (his ancient Covenant
People) so he says to us, Exodus 20. 3, 4, 5. Thou shall have no other Gods
before me. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any Likeness of
any Thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is
in the Waters under the Earth: Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor
serve them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God.

The Heathen, whose Religion is false and vain, have many vain Objects of
religious Worship; their Idols are Silver and Gold, the Works of Men's Hands,
Psalm. 135. 15. But the true Christian Religion has no other Object of
religious Worship than the one only living and true God; who is one in Essence,
and three in Relations; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19.

And as the true Christian Religion has the one only living and true God for
the Object of religious Worship, and no other, so it teaches Men to turn from
their Idols which are Vanities, unto the living God, who made Heaven and Earth,
and the Sea, and all Things that are therein, ( Act. 14. v. 15.) and to worship
him, and him only with religious Worship, Rev. 22. 8, 9.

When the Devil impudently tempted our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to deny
the God that is above, and to fall down and worship him, he rejected the
Temptation with the greatest Abhorrence and Detestation, saying as in Mat. 4.
10. Get thee hence Satan, for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve: i. e. in a religious Manner, and with
religious Worship.

2. The true Christian Religion teaches us to make the holy Word of God our
Rule and Standard in all religious Affairs, and nothing else. Not the Laws of
Heathens, not the Laws of Mahometans, nor the Laws of Christian Men. And every
true Christian will look upon himself to be bound by it, for therein (and in no
other Book) we are shown what is Good, and what it is that God requires of us;
how he is to be feared, loved, and served by us; and all that we should know,
believe, and do; that we may enjoy his Favor here, and be happy with him
forever, is therein recorded and revealed to us, Micah 6. 8. Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13.
Heb. 13. 16.

There we are told that we must repent of our Sins, and believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and do good Works, Acts 17. 30. 1 John 3. 23.
and that if we do these Things we shall be saved; but if we neglect them, we
shall be damned. Luke 13. 3. Mar. 16. 16. and Romans 2. 7, 8.
We should therefore search the Scriptures, and adhere to them, Joh. 5. 39.
Isai. 34. 16.

When our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ sent forth his Disciples to spread and
propagate the true Christian Religion, he did not leave them to their Liberty
to teach what they would, and to give what Laws they pleased to the Church, but
he charged them to teach the People to observe all those Things which he had
commanded them, and nothing else, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

And when they substituted others in their Room, they charged them to keep to
the Word, to preach that and nothing else, 2 Timothy 4. 2. For when Men turn from
that they run wild in Religion, and bring Disorder and Confusion into the
Church.

The Word of God is pure and perfect, true and righteous altogether, Psalm. 19.
7, 8, 9. It is holy, just, and good, Romans 7. 12. and therefore the more sure
Word of Prophecy, whereunto every one should take heed, 2 Pet. 1. 19. It is
more sure than any Voice from Heaven, Vision or Revelation, that any may
pretend to; and if this be laid aside, we have no certain Rule for Religion,
and must needs walk in Darkness.

Men are mutable and fallable, subject to Change and to err: they are of one
Mind to Day and another Tomorrow; and if Religion were to be under their
Direction it would be as mutable and fallable as they, and change as they do;
and there would be no certainty in it: therefore they are not fit to make Rules
for the Religion of Christ.

Under the Dispensation of the Law many wicked Kings overthrew the true and
pure Religion of God, and substituted a false Religion in the room of it. And
the Scribes and Pharisees transgressed the Commandments of God by their own
Traditions, on which Account our Savior found Fault with them, and told them
that their Worship was vain, Mat. 15. 3, 6, 9. And since the Promulgation of
the Gospel, the true Christian Religion has been overthrown in many Places by
the Commandments of Men, and a false Religion substituted in the Place of it;
and it will be always so if the Word of God be laid aside.

3. The true Christian Religion teaches us to have respect to all God's
Commandments and Ordinances; and will not allow us to be partial in the Law,
nor to turn aside to the right Hand or to the left. Deuteronomy. 5. 32. 33. Ye shall
observe to do as the Lord your God has commanded you; you shall not turn aside
to the right Hand or to the left. You shall walk in all the Ways which the Lord
your God has commanded you etc.

4. The true Christian Religion teaches us to have a special and singular
Regard to the Glory of God in all our religious Duties and moral Actions. True
Christians are created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2. 10. and will be
zealous of them. Tit. 2 14. and as they have Opportunity and Ability perform
them, Gal. 6. 9, 10. Not with any sinful View that they may have Praise of Men,
but principally and chiefly, and above all Things, that God may be glorified by
them, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

5. The true Christian Religion teaches us to make our humble and fervent
Addresses to the God and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for the
bestowment of his Holy Spirit upon us; (which he has graciously promised, and
for which he will be inquired of by us, to bestow it on us, Ezekiel. 36. 27, and
37.) whereby we may be quickened out of our spiritual Death, regenerated and
sanctified, and made fit to be Partakers of that Inheritance of the Saints in
Light: and without which all our Pretenses to the true Christian Religion will
prove empty and vain. For if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of his, Romans 8. 9.

6. The true Christian Religion teaches us not to rely on any Works of
Righteousness and Piety which we do, for the Justification of our Persons
before God, and Salvation of our Souls; but to acknowledge when we have done
all those Things which are required of us, that we are unprofitable Servants,
Luke 17. 10. That our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, and that we are as an
unclean Thing before God, Isai. 64. 6. And by Faith to rely humbly and entirely
on the Righteousness and Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (who is
the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.) for the Pardon of our Sins, and
Salvation of our Souls, Tit.3. 5, 6, 7.

And having hinted to you these distinguishing Marks of the true Christian
Religion; I shall now pass to the third and last Thing which I proposed under
the Doctrine.

III. I am to show you; Why Religion, i. e. the true Christian Religion, is
called the Life of God's People.

And here I shall say; (1) Because it is their temporal Life: (2) Their
political Life: (3) Their spiritual Life: And (4) The Way to their Enjoyment of
eternal Life in the World to come.

1. The true Christian Religion may be called the Life of God's People, because
it is their temporal Life; that is, the Way and Means to preserve and prolong
it* When Moses exhorted the People of God to set their Hearts to all the Words
which he testified among them, and observe to do them, he told them that it was
not a vain Thing for them, because it was their Life; and then he added,
Through this Thing ye shall prolong your Days in the Land whither ye go over
Jordan to possess it. By which he shows us, that to be truly religious is a
singular Means to preserve and prolong our temporal Life in this World. Such
Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, 1 Timothy 4. 8. God has said
to the Wicked, they shall not live out half their Days, Psalm. 55. 23. But to
the truly religious he has said; with long Life will I satisfy him; and show
him my Salvation, Psalm. 91. 16. They have Life in the Promise of God, (and that
is wha^ the Wicked have not) and while they live they experience the
Faithfulness of God in performing his Promise to them.

2. The true Christian Religion may be called the Life of God's People, because
it is their political or civil Life; or their Life as a civil Government
(whether Kingdom or Province) and they cannot well, nor long subsist without it.
It is this that exalts a Nation; that makes it honorable in the Eyes of God,
and famous and renowned among other Nations, Prove. 14. 34. And it is this that
is the Defense of a Nation, Kingdom, or Province. As it is said of Wisdom,
Eccl. 7. 12. It is a Defense; so it may be said of the true Christian Religion,
it is a Defense; for while it is preserved in its Power and Purity among the
People of God, God is with them to protect and preserve them. See 2 Chronicles. 15.
2. -- Hear ye me, ^^sa, and all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is with you while
ye be with him. And on this Account they may sing with the Church, as in Psalm.
46. 1, 2. God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble,
therefore will not we fear etc.

It went well with the Nation of the Jews so long as they adhered to the true
Religion, and they were famous and renowned in the Eyes of the Nations round
about them: But when they declined, then they become contemptible in the Eyes
of other Nations, and were sorely punished and broken by the just Judgment of
God upon them; as you may see in the History of their Kingdom.

3. The true Christian Religion may be called the Life of God's People, because
it is their spiritual Life; or the Life of their precious and immortal Souls:
without this their Souls are dead, even while their Bodies are alive, and will
die eternally.

As the Body without the Spirit is dead, so the Soul without true Religion is
dead also; that is, spiritually dead; dead in Trespasses and Sins; as the
Apostle told the Ephesians they were before they embraced the true Christian
Religion, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins:
i. e. You who were void and destitute of the true Christian Religion, and so of
a Principle of spiritual Life; has he quickened. The Word quickened imports a
restoring of spiritual Life, by the infusion of a vital Principle (in the Work
of Regeneration) whereby Men are enabled to walk with God in newness of Life;
to fear him and love him, and serve him, and delight in a careful Observation
of all his Commandments and Ordinances, which indeed is the most pleasant and
comfortable Life that we can live in this World; for while we live such a Life,
we may say with the Apostle, as in Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in Heaven
etc.

4. The true Christian Religion may be called the Life of God's People, because
it is the Way to their enjoyment of eternal Life and Happiness in the World to
come. Our Savior said, Joh. 17. 3. This is Life eternal, that they might know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: i. e. this
Knowledge is the Way to eternal Life, and without it Men will mistake the Way,
and miss of it. The Knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, is an essential Part
of the true Christian Religion, and the Way to be happy for ever; for such
Godliness has the Promise of the Life which is to come; not from any
Meritoriousness in it, but from the free Grace of God, which has annexed to it
the Promise of eternal Life, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

Thus I have shown you, on what Account the true Christian Religion, may be
called the Life of God's People.

And now I shall proceed to make some Improvement of this Doctrine in a few
Words.

USE I. This Doctrine shows us that such as make a Profession of Religion,
should examine the Religion they profess, and see whether it be the true
Christian Religion.

There are many Religions in the World (as you have heard) and yet but one true
Religion that will lead a Man to Heaven; so that though some of all Nations shall
be saved, yet not some of all Religions; and therefore every Man should examine
his Religion, and not take it up upon Trust as some do, saying they believe as
the Church believes, and can give no other Account of their Religion.

The Apostle Paul directs us to prove all Things, and to hold fast that which
is good, 1 These 5. 21. that is, to try all Doctrines and Opinions in Religion
which are delivered by any for Truths. And we are not to believe every Thing we
hear 'till we have made trial of it. 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every
Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God, because many false Prophets
are gone out into the World.

Q. What are we to try the Spirits by; or the Doctrines which Men teach for
Truths?

A. By the Word of God, which is the Standard of Truth. Gal. 4. 30. What says
the Scripture? Isai. 8. 20, To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because they have no Light in them. The Word of
God is a sure Rule, a safe Rule, and a sufficient Rule, whereunto we do well
that we take heed; (2 Pet. 1. 19.) And to this every Man should bring his
Creed, and try every Article of his Faith, and hold fast that which is good;
for then is his Religion true when it agrees with the Rule of Truth, which is
the Word of God. The Bereans were commended for their Care to try the Apostles
Doctrine by the Scriptures of Truth, Acts 17. 11.

USE. II. This Doctrine shows us that the true Christian Religion should be
dear to us as our natural Life, yea, and more too, because it is our spiritual
Life, or the Life of our Souls, and the Way to eternal Life.

The Life of our Body is more precious to us than all our worldly Enjoyments:
Skin for Skin; yea, all that a Man has will he give for his Life, Job 3. 4.
But the true Religion which is the Life of our Soul, should be more precious to
us than the Life of our Body, and we should choose rather to part with our
natural Life, than with our holy Religion, for if we lose this we lose our
Souls.

Profane History gives us many Examples of this Nature, and in the holy Word of
God we read of many who chose to suffer the Loss of their Possessions, yea, and
of their Lives to, rather than part with their holy Religion. Heb. 11. 35, 36,
37.

The Disciples of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ forsook all they had for
him, Mat. 19. 27. And Stephen, a Man full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost
suffered Death for his Sake, Acts 7. 59. And the Apostle Paul willingly
suffered the Loss of all Things, rather than he would forsake Christ, Phil. 3.
8. And if we would be his Disciples, we must when he calls us to it forsake all
to follow him, Luke 14. 33.

There is no worldly Thing that we should be so much concerned for as the
Religion of Christ. Though there are some, who ( Gallio like) care not for the
Religion of Christ, and others who speak and write against it, and persecute
the Professors of it, and do all that they can to beat it down and destroy it;
yet it should be dearer to us than our Lives* And above all Things we should be
concerned to promote and preserve it in the World, and to hand it down to
Posterity, that the Generations to come may profess and practice it, and have
the Benefit and Comfort of it.

USE III. This Doctrine shows us the Vanity and Madness of such as slight and
despise, and set Light by the true Christian Religion, and go about to
establish a Religion of their own Invention.

This is the Way and Manner of some Men; they don't see through the Religion
which God has instituted and revealed in his Word, therefore they despise it,
and set up a Religion of their own Invention, and will not submit to any other
than that which is the Product of their own (depraved) Reason and Understanding.

God never designed humane Reason to be the Rule of his Religion, but his own
Word and Law; and that Man that has no other Rule for his Religion than his
own natural Reason and Understanding, is no better of it than the Heathen, and
stands no fairer for Heaven than they do.

Humane Reason is good in its Place, and when under proper Regulation useful in
Religion; but it can never contrive a Religion that will lead a Man to Heaven.

Who will not acknowledge that Adam, when he had fallen from God's Favor and
Fellowship, had as much humane Reason as any of his Posterity? And did he know
how to restore himself into his Favor and Fellowship again? No verily; he had
no Notion of this: therefore instead of contriving a Religion to save himself
by* he endeavored to hide himself from the Presence of the Lord among the
Trees of the Garden; Genesis 3. 8. And they act as ignorantly who think to
contrive a Religion of their own whereby they may be saved; and set Light by
the Religion which God has revealed; in the Belief and Practice of which alone
we may on good Ground expect Salvation.

USE IV. This Doctrine should put us upon a serious Reflection on the State of
our holy Religion at this Day; and excite us to consider whether it be in a
reviving or dying Condition.

That there has been a few Years past, a remarkable Revival of the true
Christian Religion in some Towns in this Country, is very evident and manifest
to the Teachers of it, and many others: and it well becomes us to give God the
Praise and Glory of his Grace in reviving his Work as he has done in one Place
and another.

And while we are thankful for this, we have Cause to lament before him that
there are such different Opinions with respect to the State of Religion, both
among Ministers and People.

Some call it a Time of great Reformation at this Day; others; a Time of great
Delusion and Giddiness; and little Reformation.

Some rejoice that the Work of God is carried on gloriously: others tremble,
fearing lest Satan be let loose, and suffered to delude many, both Ministers
and People.

Some say that the itenerant Preachers, who have been traveling into many
Towns in the Country of late, have been the happy Instruments of rousing many
out of their carnal Security and of reforming their Lives. Others say they are
wandering Stars, and that some of them impart no Light; that their traveling
from Place to Place has been the Occasion of much Confusion and Disorder in
the Worship of God, and such Censoriousness in some Places, as is inconsistent
with the true Christian Religion; and by Means of them some Churches, where
there was Peace and Holiness flourishing, have been sorely rent and broken with
Divisions.

Some say that illiterate Men (such it may be, as never learnt the Assembly's
Catechism, nor can give any tolerable Account of the Doctrine of our
Justification before God, which is as Luther well observes, Articulas stantis
vel cadentis Ecclesiae,) who pretend to an immediate, and inward Call from the
Spirit of God to exhort others, and to invite them to come unto Christ; have
the Power of God, and that the Holy Spirit works by them for the Conviction,
Conversion, and Comfort of many.

Others say that such Men are unqualified and uncalled, and undertake this Work
out of the Pride of their own Hearts, and to gratify their own Lust. -- That
the Ministry of the Word is a sacred Office, not to be invaded by private Men,
whether learned or unlearned, under the Pretense of an inward and immediate
Call to it: That none are to meddle in it, but such as are qualified for it,
and externally and regularly called to it Heb. 5. 4. Romans 10. 15.
; That these Men run before they are sent, as the false Prophets did of old;
Jer. 23. 21.
And as the Apostle Peter tells us, some shall do in Gospel Times; 2 Pet. 2. 1.
And by Means of such Men the sacred Scriptures are most injuriously wrested,
the Peace and Order of the Churches disturbed; and a great many Errors and
Mistakes introduced. Satan has filled the Church and World with Errors and
Troubles this Way; says an excellent Divine, namely Mr. Flavel. Again,

Some have a fond Regard to Voices, Visions, and Revelations, and countenance
and encourage them, as if the Mind and Will of God were to be known by them*
There were some such in the beginning of the Reformation by Luther and Calvin,
and these Men were so entangled with certain enthusiastical Snares, that they
thought it the highest Impiety to renounce them.

Others have no Regard at all to Voices, Visions and Revelations, and show them
no Countenance; but say, that God who at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners,
spoke in Times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last Days
spoken to us by his Son, ( Heb. 1. 1, 2.) whom we should hear, ( Mat. 17. 5)
and that we are to look for no Revelations but what he has made to us in his
Word: Indeed we need no more. As for Voices, Visions, Revelations, and
Impulses, many have been deceived by them; but as for what Christ has revealed
it deceives none; but is sufficient to make Men wise unto Salvation through
Faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

Luther upon Occasion said, the Scripture is so full that as for Visions and
Revelations nec curo, nec desidero, I neither regard nor desire them. And when
he himself had a Vision of Christ, (after a Day of Fasting and Prayer) he cried
out, Avoid Satan, I know no Image of Christ but the Scriptures. Again,

Some say that Exclamations and Faintings on the Account of extraordinary
Sorrow for Sin, or Joy in the Holy Ghost, in public Assemblies, or more
private Meeting for the Worship of God, is a Sign of the gracious Presence of
God, and of the Effusion of his Holy Spirit upon them.

Others say it is Breach of that Order and Decency which the Spirit of God has
directed us to observe in our religious Assemblies for his Worship, 1 Cor. 14.
40.

Some say that Divisions and Seperations in the Churches, have a great Tendency
to promote true Religion in them at this Day.

Others say, that we have no such Direction in the holy Scriptures; and that it
is a Sign of the dying State of Religion; that the Scriptures caution Christian
Churches against Divisions and Seperations among themselves; and exhort them
all to speak the same Thing, and to be perfectly joined together in the same
Mind, and in the same Judgment; and to endeavor to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace, 1 Cor. 1. 10. and Ephesians. 4. 3.

Thus we are divided and broken, when we should be all united, and in one Mind,
being Members of one Body in Christ, ( Romans 12. 5.) and Professors of one and
the same true Christian Religion.

And there being such Division among us, what shall we say with Respect to the
State of our holy Religion at this Day? May we conclude that it is reviving, or
dying?

I am persuaded that it is to be acknowledged, with the greatest Thankfulness
to Almighty God, that in some Places there are evident Tokens of the Effusion
of his Holy Spirit for the revival of Religion among us at this Day.

And we should esteem it so, there, where the Word of God is more remarkably
quick and powerful in the public Ministry of it than usual in our public
Assemblies; where there is a wonderful shaking among the dry Bones, and many
that have been for a long Time dead in Trespasses and Sins, appear to be made
alive to God; where sleepy Sinners are awakened; stubborn Sinners subdued;
proud Sinners humbled; carnal Wretches made spiritual; covetous Worldlings made
liberal; Drunkards made temperate; and unclean Persons made chaste: Where
profane Swearers, by the dreadful Name of God, now fear his glorious and
fearful Name: Where those that lived unmindful of Heaven, now seek the Things
which are above, and set their Affections upon them: Where those that lived
prayerless Lives, now call upon God; and those that despised his Word now
tremble at it: Where many that had no Sight nor Sense of their Sins, and of the
wretched and miserable State they are in by Nature, are now pricked in their
Heart, and cry out saying, What must we do to be saved? Where, many that turned
their Backs upon the Table of the Lord, and said (practically at least) the
Table of the Lord is contemptible, do now hunger and thirst for Communion with
Christ there; and where, Additions are made to the Church daily; and true
Christian Charity, Peace, and Unity, with Holiness, does flourish; there
Religion is reviving; and that it is so in some Places, is to be acknowledged
to the Praise and Glory of God.

But alas, how is it in some other Places? It is to be spoken with Lamentation,
that Religion is in a languishing and dying Condition, and reduced to a low
Ebb, in some Places. It is so in such Places, where the People are settled on
their Lees, are at Ease in Zion, and unconcerned for the Salvation of their
Souls; where they that have been filthy are filthy still; that have been unjust
are unjust still; they that have been prayerless, are prayerless still; and
they that have lived in the Neglect of the holy Duties of Religion, and in the
Practice of scandalous Immoralities, are unhumbled and unreformed to this Day:
where there are none that stir up themselves to take hold on God, and the Ways
of Zion mourn, because none comes to the solemn Feasts; and where there are
such lamentable Seperations, Confusions, and Censoriousness, as plainly show
that God is departing from them: In such Places, Religion is in a dying
Condition. And is not this the Case in some of our Towns?

USE V. This Doctrine should excite and stir up all such as make a Profession
of the true Christian Religion, to take heed and beware lest Satan deceive
them, and so at last they should prove counterfeit Christians. 2 Cor. 2. 11.
Lest Satan should get an Advantage of us.

There is Danger of this, and every one should be jealous of himself, and fear
lest he should be deceived. The Pharisee was deceived, ( Luke 18. 11.) and the
Laodiceans were deceived, Rev. 3. 17. And it is common for Men to be deceived
with respect to the State and Condition of their Souls.

Some that pretend much to Religion, and the Spirit of God, do many Times give
sufficient Reason to fear a counterfeit Work: And indeed it is no wonder if
many should prove counterfeit Christians, and reprobate Silver, in such a Time
as this, when Religion is so much talked of, and professed in one Place and
another.

The best Things on Earth may be counterfeited; as Silver and Gold, and
precious Jewels; and so may the best Things of the Spirit of God, as Faith,
Repentance, and Holiness. We are not to take every Thing for Gold that looks
like it, nor every Thing for the Work of God's Spirit that has a Show of it.
They are not always the best that would appear to be so.

Satan who transforms himself into an Angel of Light, (2 Cor. 11. 14.) is
doubtless now at Work, and uses his hellish Policy to counterfeit the Works of
God's Spirit in many, and how near he may mimick them is hard to determine: He
may do much this Way to the Delusion of many Souls, if God permits him.

We may not think the Time is now come wherein he is bound, and shall hurt no
more; or that he now sleeps, when his Kingdom shakes in many Places, and
seems to be coming down apace; but we should fear lest he get an Advantage of
us, and pray earnestly that he may be bruised under our Feet; and lament those
Things which have a Show of his Foot, and give us Reason to fear that he is
suffered to delude some unwary Persons to the everlasting Ruin of their
precious Souls.

I shall now pass to the sixth and last Use.

USE. VI. This Doctrine shows us, that we should all do what we can, in the
several Places and Stations God has set us in, for the Preservation and
Promotion of that Religion which is our Life.

There is much to be done for it, and something may be done by every one that
makes a Profession of it. Therefore I shall address Persons of every Order and
Degree, to put forth their helping Hand for the Promotion of our holy Religion.
And here,

I. Let me address civil Magistrates; or such as God has promoted to the Seats
of civil Government, to do what they can to promote the Religion of Christ.

Honored Patriots! Let it not seem a small Thing to you, that you have the
true Christian Religion to protect and defend, but esteem it as a very great
Honor conferred upon you, and Trust reposed in you by him, by whom Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice; by whom Princes rule, and Nobles, even all
the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8. 15, 16.
and labor to approve your selves faithful to him, and to his Religion.

Tho the Religion of Christ may subsist without the Assistance of civil
Magistrates, (as it has done, yea, and even then when civil Magistrates
opposed it, and labored to beat it down and destroy it,) yet such Men have
been very helpful to promote it. And as they have Power and Authority, so they
should improve it for that End.

There are several Ways in and by which civil Magistrates may very much promote
the Religion of Christ. Give me leave to mention a few.

They may do it --

By their earnest and fervent Prayers to almighty God, through Jesus Christ, for
the Preservation of it, in its Life, Power, and Purity.

By their holy and religious Examples; and wise Counsels in such difficult and
perplexing Cases as the Ministers of it may be concerned in, and ask their
Counsel about. And

By enacting and executing such Laws as have a tendency thereunto. Thus they
may promote the Religion of Christ.

Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has clothed them with Power to enact and
execute Laws for the Preservation of his Religion. Here mind --

1. Civil Magistrates may enact Laws for the promoting and preserving the true
Christian Religion.

They may not make Laws against it, to beat it down and destroy it, for they
have received no such Power from Christ, by whom they rule and govern Men: They
as well as others are under that Tie, 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against
the Truth, but for the Truth. They may not hinder the free Course of Religion,
nor make Laws for the Rule of it; for this, Christ who is the Head of the
Church, and Author of Religion, has done already, and exhibited them in his
Word.

But they may add a civil Sanction and Strength of Law, for the strengthening
and aiding the Exercise of Religion, and securing those divine Rights and
Privileges which Christ has given to his Church, and to oblige Men to submit
to the Laws of Christ, so far at least as to make no Disturbance in the Church,
and by doing so they may promote the Religion of Christ.

Dr. Rivet says; The civil Magistrate is neither to administer the Word, nor
Sacraments, nor Church Discipline etc. but he is to take Care that all these
Things be done by those whom God has called thereunto. Rivet on the Decalogue,
p. 2^^.


And we find that the wise and pious Magistrates of old, took special Care to
preserve the Life of their holy Religion, by preserving to the Church those
Rights and Privileges which God had given to it. And when impious Kings had
taken them from the Church, they restored them to her again: Thus did Hezekiah
and Josiah, who were Kings of Judah: 2 Kin.. 18. 3. and Chap. 2^. 2*
and so they were nursing Fathers to the Church of God, and did that which was
right in the Sight of the Lord, 2 C^^^n. 29. (...)


Civil Magistrates may promote Colleges and Schools of Learning, and provide
learned and well qualified Teachers for them. They may take Care also that
Churches be provided with able, orthodox, and godly Ministers, and that their
Maintenance be honorable and sufficient: Thus did that pious and excellent
King Hezekiah. See 2 Chronicles. 31. 4. He commanded the People that dwelt in
Jerusalem to give the Portion of the Priests and of the Levites, that they
might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

In the 25th Article of the Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland; it
is said,

To Kings, Princes, Rulers and Magistrates, we affirm that principally and
chiefly the Purgation and Conservation of Religion appertains, so that not only
they are appointed for civil Policy, but also for Maintenance of the true
Religion, and for the Suppression of all Superstition whatsoever. And

Calvin, Zanchius, and Polanus, hold that the Christian Magistrate, his Office
as concerning Religion, is diligently to take Care that in his Dominion or
Kingdom, Religion from the pure Word of God, expounded by the Word of God
itself, and understood according to the Principles of Faith, (which others call
the analogy of Faith) be either instituted, or (being instituted) kept pure; or
being corrupted, be restored, and reformed: That false Doctrines, Abuses,
Idols, and Superstitions be taken away, to the Glory of God, and to his own and
his Subjects Salvation. Gillespie's Aaron's Rod. p. 259.


2. Civil Magistrates may execute such Laws as have a Tendency to promote and
preserve the Religion of Christ among the People of God; and inflict those
Punishments on Offenders which the Law appoints. For they are by the
Appointment of God to execute Wrath upon them that do Evil. Romans 13. 4. He is
the Minister of God, a Revenger, (or Officer) to execute Wrath, (or Punishment)
upon him that does Evil.

The civil Magistrate is Custos et vindex utriusque Tabulae, and ought to
preserve the first and second Table of God's moral Law (which is binding to all
Nations) from being trampled upon by Men of profligate and debauched Lives, and
to punish such as openly dishonor God, by transgressing either of them; and by
doing so they may very much promote the Religion of Christ, which is greatly
endangered by the vicious Practices of ungodly Men.

And having spoken these Things to civil Magistrates in general, I shall now be
more particular. --

May it please your Excellency;

Your Excellency has observed that the Design and Drift of this Discourse has
been to promote and preserve the Life of that Religion which is the political
as well as temporal and spiritual Life of a Christian People.

And now in your great Clemency and Goodness, you will accept an Address from the
Desk, by the Hand of One who is sensible of his Unfitness (on any Account) to
address a Gentleman of your superior Learning, Wisdom, Honor and Skill, not
only in civil, but also in religious Matters.

All that I shall ask of your Excellency is your Favor for that Religion, the
Life of which has been pleaded for: And this I trust you will upon all proper
Occasions discover; it being the Religion of our most gracious Sovereign King
GEORGE the Second; whose Life, we hope, is precious in the Sight of God, (and
who to the general Satisfaction of the People of this Province has appointed
you their Governor;) the Religion of Great Britain; your own Religion; and the
Religion of the People of your Charge; yea, and of all true Protestants in the
World.

Your benign and kind Acceptance of the Address presented by the Body of the
Clergy of this Province, when they were met the last Year, and the Assurance
you then gave them of your Favor and Protection: And also your wise and mild
Conduct since you have been in the Chair, in the Management of our civil
Affairs; the very worthy Deeds that have been done by you for this Province, to
the great Joy and Ease of the People; your Care that they may live quiet and
peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty: (and many other Things that might
be mentioned with Thankfulness) emboldeneth us to expect that you will always
endeavor to preserve the Life of our holy Religion, which is as dear to us as
our Lives.

And now let me turn my self to the honorable Gentlemen of the Council:

May it please your Honors;
Seeing you make a visible Profession of the true Christian Religion, and have
the Character of religious Men; I doubt not but that you will appear on the
Side of Religion; be concerned for it; and do what you can to preserve and
promote it, in the honorable Station God has set you in. You Will be advising
and assisting every Way, and upon all Occasions; and encouraging every Thing
that may serve to promote, and preserve that Religion which is the Life of this
People, your own Life, and the Life of your Posterity.


And now to the honorable House of Representatives, who have called me, (tho
unworthy) to this Service, I shall take the Liberty to say;

Gentlemen;
You are met together this Day, (through the kind Hand of God upon you) by Virtue
of the Authority given in our Royal Charter, to choose Counselors for this
Province, and to do those Things which the Good and Safety of this Privince
calls for.

You cannot but know that it is your Duty to lay aside all by and sinister Ends
and Views in your Elections, and to choose out of all the People, able Men,
such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating Coveteousness. Exodus 18. 21.
Your Election of such Men will be for your Honor, and the Comfort of this
People.

You are also to look into the State of this Province, and to have a tender
Regard not only to our civil but also to our religious Interest, and to do what
you can to promote them both. -- And as by your Conference one with another,
you get the Knowledge of our civil State; so you may of the State of Religion,
(which you should lay to Heart, and exemplify in your Lives:) And then you may
consider what ^s to be done for Religion; and whether you are not called of God
to put forth your Power to protect and promote it: And particularly, to guard
and defend the Characters of the good and faithful Ministers of it, against the
unchristian Treatment many of them meet with at this Day.

Having thus addressed the honorable Magistracy; I shall now turn my self to
the Reverend Ministers of our holy Religion.


II. Let me address you; my Reverend Fathers and Brethren, who are Ministers of
the true Christian Religion; Reverend and Beloved; Let us esteem it, not as a
small Thing that the God of Israel, has separated us from the Congregation of
Israel, to bring us near unto himself, to do the Service of the Tabernacle of
the Lord, and to stand before the Congregation, to preach the Religion of
Christ, and to minister unto them in holy Things; Numb. 16. 9.
But let us account it a great Honor conferred upon us by Jesus Christ, (the
Head and Savior of the Church) and see to it that we honor him in this
honorable Service, by doing all we can to preserve and promote his Religion,
and to hand it down to Posterity.

To this End, let us study to show our selves approved unto God, Workmen that
need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. 2 Timothy 2. 15.
And let us be at Peace among our selves; Love as Brethren, and have fervent
Charity one for another; and if it be possible speak the same Mind, and be
perfectly joined together in the same Time, and in the same Judgment; for if
the Shepherds are divided, the Sheep will be scattered.

Let us keep up our Association Meetings, and frequently meet together to
strengthen one another's Hands, and to encourage one another's Hearts in the
Work of God, and to strive together in our holy, humble, and fervent Prayers to
Almighty God, through Jesus Christ, for the Life of our holy Religion, which is in
Danger of dying from among us; and say as in Hab. 3. 2. O Lord, revive thy
Work. And as in Psalm. 90. 16. Let thy Work appear unto thy Servants, and thy
Glory unto their Children.

Our Lord Jesus Christ charged the Angel of the Church of Sardis to be
watchful, and strengthen the Things which remained, that were ready to die,
Rev. 3. 2. And the same Charge lies upon all the Angels of his Churches at
this Day, i. e. the Pastors and Teachers of them; and they must be watchful and
do what they can to strengthen the Religion of Christ.

My Brethren, There never was a Time since the Churches of Christ were planted
in America, wherein Watchfulness and Patience, Prudence and Courage were more
necessary for the Ministers of them than now.

There is, (doubtless) a good Work of God going on in the Country, his Spirit
is evidently poured out upon many in one Place and another, which calls for our
most grateful and thankful Acknowledgement unto him.

And there is, (doubtless) an evil Work of Satan going on in the Country, even
there where the good Work of God is going on; (as it was in the Church of
Corinth when the Spirit of God was remarkably poured out upon many: and as it
was in Pargamos where Christ had a Church, Rev. 2. 22.) which calls for our
Humiliation. But for me to say so, may be grievous to the Minds of some, who
would have all the Noise and Stir, the strange Agitations and Motions,
Screaming and Fainting, and Disorders, that are grievous and offensive to many
godly Persons, attributed to the pouring out of God's Spirit upon his People,
and will not allow of any Delusion in such Things.

But this (I trust) is not the general Opinion of either Ministers or People.
The most are for distinguishing the genuine and proper Works of God's Spirit,
from the counterfeit and delusive Works of Satan: And if this Method were
complied with and wisely managed by all, Peace and Holiness, with good Order,
might be preserved and promoted where it is, and restored where it is wanting.

What a sad Condition is Religion running into in some of our Towns (by Means
of Satan, and the Lusts of Men,) where Censoriousness, and the Train of Evils
which attend that unchristian Spirit, (as Divisions, Seperations, Disorders and
Confusions) lamentably prevail?

And many would have it so; therefore they refuse to be healed, when healing
Methods are prescribed. -- How often have we such melancholy Accounts from one
Place and another?

The Time is now come when many of the true and faithful, pious and laborious
Ministers of our holy Religion, (though they should be esteemed very highly in
Love for their Works sake, 1 These. 5. 13.
yet are insulted by some as Korah and his Companions insulted Moses and Aaron,
saying, Ye take too much upon you, Numb. 16. 3.

Some ignorant and mean, vile and base Men, will now proclaim themselves
converted, tho they cannot give any Scripture Proof of it, nor do they show it
in their Conversation. And if we labor to show them their Mistake, and tell
them what is lacking; they will presently pronounce us carnal, unconverted, and
Opposers of God's Work. And this they are encouraged to do, by the Example of
some Persons of an ecclesiastical Character, who have thus reproached (contrary
to the 5th and 9th Commandment) some of our most learned and pious Fathers and
Brethren in the Ministry, who have truly preached Christ, and shown unto Men
the Way of Salvation by him; and by their humble, holy, peaceable, and
blameless Lives, have shown themselves to be the true Followers of Christ.

Under such a Trial, let that Word of Christ comfort us, Mat. 5. 11, 12.
Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you etc.

And let us go on in the Way of our Duty in full Assurance of Faith, having our
Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure
Water, ( Heb. 10.22.) And while a Spirit of Giddiness possesses the Minds of
some, so that they are tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine by the Slight of Men, and cunning Craftiness whereby they lie in wait
to deceive, ( Ephesians. 4. 14.) Let us be steadfast unmovable, always abounding in
the Work of the Lord, for as much as we know that our Labor is not in vain in
the Lord, (1 Cor. 15. 55.) And holding fast the Profession of our Faith,
without wavering, let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love and good
Works, ( Heb. 10. 23, 24.) And then Religion may flourish and prosper in our
Churches.

III. Let me address the Reverend and Learned President of our College, and
Professor of Divinity, and the worthy Tutors, who are assisting in the
Government and Instruction of the Students there.

Learned Gentlemen!
The College, we trust, is a Nursery of Religion and Piety, as well as of good
humane Literature; and to you is committed the Care of our Sons, not only for
their Instruction in the liberal Arts and Sciences, but also in the Principles
of the true Christian Religion; and it is expected that while they are under
your Care and Instruction, there be a good Foundation laid, by building upon
which they may be useful Instruments in their Generation of promoting and
preserving the Life of our holy Religion: And by doing what you can for this
End, you may be greatly profitable to the Religion of Christ.

Our College has been very much the Glory of New England for more than a
Century of Years, and is so at this Day; many eminent and excellent Men for
Learning, Wisdom, Piety and Prudence, have sprang from thence; Men that have
been of great Use and Service both in the Church and State; several of our
excellent Governors, Particularly, Stoughton, Dudley, and Belcher, in this
Province; Saltonstall and Law in Connecticut; and Wentworth in New Hampshire.
have been educated there; and many of our Magistrates and Ministers; who in
their Day and Generation were happy Instruments in the Hand of God of promoting
the Religion of Christ in these Churches, and among this People: And blessed be
God, our Eyes behold many such at this Day.

The Lord grant that the College may never become a Seminary for degenerate
Plants, who will with their foolish Hands pull down those Houses which their
pious Fathers have been building for the Name of the Lord in this Wilderness;
as the Reverend and Learned Dr. I. Mather (who for many Years presided there to
the great Comfort and Satisfaction of many under his Care) feared in his Day.
See his Ichabod. p. 75.


The Welfare and Prosperity of these Churches, under God, does very much depend
upon the good Government and Education of our Sons at the College: if they come
forth well instructed, and established in the true Christian Religion, they may
be happy Instruments of promoting it in their Day and Generation; but if they
come forth poisoned with corrupt Principles, they will be likely to poison and
ruin these Churches.

I shall now pass to the last Address which I have to offer on the Behalf of
our holy Religion.


IV. Let me address all Gentlemen, and Persons in a private Capacity; and
particularly Heads of Families who make a Profession of the true Christian
Religion, to do what they can to promote and preserve the Life of it.

Men and Brethren, You may do much for Religion in the Places God has set you
in: And indeed, all that Magistrates and Ministers can do, will not avail much,
unless you put to your helping Hand.

Religion will most certainly die from among us, unless Heads of Families keep
it alive in their Houses: Well then, stir up your selves, you who are Heads of
Families to this your Duty and Interest. And to this End:

Set up and keep up the Worship of God in your Families; and make your Houses,
Houses of Prayer, and resolve with Joshua, that as for you and your Houses you
will serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. When Heads of Families cast off Fear, and
restrain Prayer before God, and have no Hearts to bless their Houses in the
Name of the Lord, they are no true Friends to Religion; and though they may not
be open and professed Enemies to it, yet by bringing up Children and Servants
in the Neglect of this Duty, they are bringing up a Generation that will,
unless sovereign Grace prevent, bid Defiance to Religion. Again,

Instruct your Children and Servants in the Principles and Duties of Religion;
teach them the good Knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, and charge them to
keep the Way of the Lord; thus did Abraham, (Genesis 18. ver. 19.) and David, (1 Chronicles. 28. 9.) and so should you. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Prove. 27. 6. Ephesians. 6. 4. and 9.
Again,

Set good Examples before your Children and Servants, Examples of Sobriety,
Temperance, Meekness, Patience, Humility, Justice, Righteousness, Charity,
Faith, and Purity of Life; that you may be able to say to them, with a good
Conscience, as Gideon said to his Soldiers, Look on me and do likewise, Judge.
7. 17.

Again,

Have a watchful Eye over them, and labor to restrain and keep them back from
bad Company and Courses, as much as you can. Eli's Neglect to restrain his Sons
from their wicked Practices, was a great Hurt to Religion, 1 Samuel 2. 17. and at
length proved the Ruin of his House. See 1 Samuel 3. 13, 14.

These Things Heads of Families should do to preserve and promote the Life of
our holy Religion.

And we should all, as we have Opportunity and Ability, freely, cheerfully, and
abundantly contribute of our Substance for the promoting and preserving the
Religion of Christ, not only in the Places where we live, but also in other
Places, where we know our Help is wanted.

It was the Custom and Practice of the primitive Christians to do what they
could to promote the true Christian Religion in one Place and another by their
public Contributions; the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia contributed freely
and abundantly for that End. Romans 15. 26. and 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And we have some modern Examples of this Nature; many of our Christian
Brethren and Friends in Great Britain, have contributed abundantly for the
Propagation of our holy Religion in remote Places, where the People have been
either not able, or not willing to promote it, among themselves: -- And there
are many in this Country and Province that have fared the better for their
Christian Liberality. And their Zeal should provoke us to the like Works of
Piety toward God, and Charity toward the Souls of Men. 2 Cor. 9. 2.

And who indeed that has experienced the Power and Efficacy of God's Word upon
his own Heart for his Illumination, Conviction, Conversion and Comfort, will
not endeavor, this Way, when it is in the Power of his Hand, that others may
experience the same?

I should think it a sad Epitaph should this be wrote upon my Grave, said a
certain Person. Here lies a Man that would not serve his Generation by
propagating as much Acquaintance with Religion to Posterity as he could. Or,
Here lies a Man that had a Life of many Years in the World, but he went through
it, and yet no Man knew God the better for him, and no one got more
Acquaintance with God through his Means.

We are not made for our selves alone, but we are made to help in making the
World better; and if the Age we live in is not the better for us, it will be
the worse.

Our Estates, if justly gotten, come of God, he is the Owner of them, more so
than we are, and when we bestow any Thing for the Propagation of Religion, we
may say as King David did, when he, and his Princes, and People offered
willingly and abundantly for the Service of the House of God; All Things come
of thee, and of thine own have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. And when we thus
give to the Lord we honor him with our Substance, and take the most proper Way
to increase what we have. See Prove. 3. 9. 10. and Chap. 11. 25.

Thus I have with great Plainess appeared as an Advocate for that Religion
which is our Life.

And now I shall conclude with three Arguments to excite us all to do what we
can in the Places and Stations God has set us in, to preserve and promote the
Life of our holy Religion. As,

1. Con. That the only true Religion has been lost from many Places and People
that once enjoyed it, through their Neglect of it.

God has always preserved the true Religion in the World, and he will not
suffer the Gates of Hell, so to prevail against it, as to destroy it out of the
World so long as Time shall endure, Mat. 16. 18. But yet it has not been
always preserved in one Place, and among one People, but it has been moving
from Place to Place; and from one Family, Nation, and Kingdom, to another.

God first gave Life to the true Religion in Adam's Family; then in Noah's;
then in Abraham's; and then in Isaac's; then in Jacob's; and then in the Nation
of the Jews; and then among the Gentiles.

No People have had it among them from the beginning of the World to this Day;
but it has been moving, and lost from many Places and People, as is evident
from History both sacred and profane.

It has been lost from the Nation of the Jews for many hundred Years past. If
we look into the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, we may there
find that the Jews had once the only true Religion in the World; but now it is
lost from them. Our Lord Jesus Christ threatened them with the Loss of it, when
he said as in Mat. 21. 43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation bringing forth the Fruits thereof. And as he threatened so it
came to pass, and they have now no true Religion among them: Through Unbelief they
were broken off from God's Covenant, Romans 11. 20. and being broken off God has
said to them, Loammi, i. e. Ye are not my People, and I will not be your God;
as in Hos. 1. 9. Again,

It has been lost from many Places of the Gentiles. When the Jews were broken
off from God's Covenant, then the believing Gentiles were graffed in, Romans 11.
11. and the true Religion was with them; and has been preserved among them
unto this Day; but it has not continued in any one Place from that Time to
this; no; but it has been moving from Place to Place.

Those Places in which it flourished in the Days of the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ, are now destitute of it: The seven Churches which were in the
most famous Cities of Asia, viz. Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thiatira, Sardis,
Philadelphia, and Laodicea, of which we read, Rev. 1. 11. in which our Lord
Jesus Christ walked, are all now extinct; and the People that dwell there walk
in Darkness; in the Darkness of Ignorance, Superstition, and Heresy; and in
some Places they have quite lost the Christian Name.

And as the true Christian Religion has long since been lost from Asia, so it
has also from Africa, where there were once some Thousands of Christian
Churches, and many famous Ministers; as Tertullian, Cyprian and Austin; whose
Writings are still in Use in the Christian Church.

And as the true Christian Religion has been lost out of Asia and Africa, so
it is in a great Measure lost out of Europe. In Bavaria, in Austria, in
Moravia, in the Kingdom of Poland and Transylvania, there have been famous
Christian Churches, but now they are corrupted with Popery, and Socinianism. As
the learned and excellent Dr. Increase Mather observes. See his Ichabod. p. 61,
62.


There was once in Rome the true Christian Religion; a holy Church, a People
beloved of God, called to be Saints, whose Faith was spoken of throughout the
whole World, as we read, Romans 1. 7. But what is the true Christian Religion
reduced to in that great City? And what is that Church come to? May she not be
called the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, Rev. 17. 5.

2. Con. That the true Christian Religion may be lost from the People of God in
this Land, and will be so, if there be no Care taken to preserve it.

It is now something more than six Score Years since the true Christian
Religion was brought into this Land, (which was then a Wilderness) by our pious
Ancestors; and through the wonderful Patience and Goodness of God it is now
handed down to the third and fourth Generation; but we don't know that it shall
be continued for Generations to come; Gray Hairs are here and there upon it;
many Symptoms of its languishing and dying State and Condition may be seen by
every one that has any Skill in Religion.

Are not the Divisions and groundless Seperations which are in many of our
Churches in this Land, evident Tokens of the sickly State of Religion?

And does not the springing up, and prevailing of Doctrines contrary to the
true Christian Religion in one Place and another, threaten the Death of our
holy Religion, particularly Deism, Arianism, Arminianism and Antinomianism? Tho
the three former do not appear so barefaced among us as the latter, yet they
have too many Vouchers in some Places where the true Religion is professed. As
for the Antinomian Heresies, they seem to be spreading apace, and it is high
Time to guard against them, lest these Churches should be infested and sorely
distressed with their Errors, as they were in their early Days. A short Account
of which the Reverend and Learned Dr. Cotton Mather has given us in his
Magnalia, which is worthy of our Observation at this Day. Book 7th. p. 14, 15,
16. The Church of God had not long been in this Wilderness before the Dragon
cast forth several Floods to devour it; but not the least of those Floods was
one of Antinomian and Familistical Heresies, with which the Country began
betimes to be infested. -- And the Stir which they made about those Opinions,
grew so general that they quickly affected all the public Affairs of the
Country. --

There did then arise in the Land a Distinction between such as were under a
Covenant of Works, and such as were under a Covenant of Grace; wherein the
bigger Part of the Country in the Management of that Inquiry; By what Evidence
must a Man proceed in taking to himself the Comforts of his Justification? laid
upon our Sanctification the first and main Stress of our comfortable Evidence.

But the Opinionists were for another Sort of Evidence as their chief; namely,
The Spirit of God by a powerful Application of a Promise, begetting in us and
revealing to us a powerful Assurance of our being justified.

Now the Truth might easily have united both of the Persuasions, yet they that
were of the latter Way carried the Matter on to a very perilous Door, opened
not only for new enthusiastical Revelations, but also for a Neglect of such
Qualifications in all Godliness and Honesty, as must be found in all that would
be prospered, and not rejected in their Confidences. Yea, they employed their
Distinctions about a Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace, at so
extravagant a Rate as threatened a Subversion of all the peaceable Order in the
Colonies.

They drove at this; That the most virtuous Man upon Earth might not be
admitted into the Churches without professing, that renouncing of
Sanctification, as an Evidence of his good State, he waited for immediate
Revelations to assure him of it. And such as were already in Church Communion,
unless they became fond of the New-Lights, in this Thing pretended unto, were
presently branded as favoring a Covenant of Works.

The Contention spread it self into Families, and all private and smaller
Societies, who were to be accounted under a Covenant of Works, and so Enemies
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and who were not? which was determined among the
busy Sectaries by a Person's accommodating himself unto their fine-spun
Speculations. Illic ipsum esse fuit promereri.

The Disturbance proceeded from thence into all the general Affairs of the
Public: The Expedition against the Pequot Indians was most shamefully
discouraged because the Army was too much under a Covenant of Works; and the
Magistrates began to be contemned as being of a legal Spirit, and having
therewithal a Tang of Antichrist in them; nor could the ordering of Town Lots,
or Town Rates, or any Meeting whatsoever escape the Confusions of this
Controversy.

It Is incredible what Alienations of Mind, and what a very Calenture the Devil
raised in the Country upon this odd Occasion.

But it may not be amiss to describe a little more particularly the Methods
whereof the Devil therein served his Interests. The Sectaries acquainted
themselves with as many as possibly they could, and carried on their
Acquaintance with all the Courtesies and Kindnesses that they could contrive to
ingratiate themselves in the Hearts of others, especially of New-Comers into
the Place; they herewithal appeared wondrous holy, humble, self-denying and
spiritual, and full of the most charming Expressions imaginable. Free Grace,
Gospel Truths, Glorious Light, and holding forth of Christ, was all their Tone:
And meeting with Christians that had any Doubts in their Minds about their own
future Happiness, they would insinuato into them that they had never taken a
right Course for Comfort, by going to evidence their good Estate by their
Sanctification; but that there was a more evangelical Way to Peace, by which
they themselves were got above all their Fears for ever.

They began usually to seduce Women into their Notions, and by those Women,
like their first Mother, they soon hooked in the Husband also. Having wrought
themselves any where into a good Esteem, they s^t themselves with a manifold
Subtilty to undermine the Esteem of the Ministers, and intimate that their
Teachers themselves, never having been taught of God, had mis-taught, and
misled the People. -- Whence it came to pass that some who had followed those
Ministers three thousand Miles through ten thousand Deaths, yet now took up such
Prejudices, not only against their Doctrines, but against their Persons also,
that they did never care to hear them, or see them any more.

They administered their Poisons in smaller Doses and not without Preparations,
wherein if any made any Boggle, they would presently retreat, and say, Nay,
don't mistake me, for I mean the same that you do, we differ only in Words. And
they would besure still father their Whimsies upon such Persons as were held in
most Veneration throughout the Country; but if they were brought Face to Face,
they would still wind out with some cunning Evasions. Thus they went on 'till
they had got some noted Persons in all Order to patronise them.

And then it is impossible to describe the Censures, the Contempts, the
Affronts cast upon the best Men in the Land, as Men ignorant of Christ; and the
terrible Disorder and Contention that ensued in all Societies.

The Ministry of the Country, awakned by these Noises about the Temple, had
several Meetings, that they might set Matters to Rights, all which were
ineffectual, until the General Court called a Synod of all the Churches in the
Country to meet at Cambridge in the Year 1637.

The Synod being assembled, with the Rev. Thomas Hooker and Mr. Peter Buckley,
chosen its Moderators at Cambridge, (then called by the Name of New-Town) on
August 30th. 1637. there were produced about eighty-two erroneous Opinions and
Expressions which had been uttered in the Country by several Men, at several
Times.

The Authors of these Errors were neither mentioned nor inquired; but the
Errors themselves were considered, confuted, and condemned from the plain Word
of God. For indeed the Design of the Synod, was not Jus Dare, but only Jus
Di^^re, and to exercise only a Power dicisive of Doctrines, not judicial on
Persons, leaving it unto particular Churches to pass their Censures on the
Persons who should hold the Doctrines by the Determination of the Synod found
subversive to the Fundamentals of Religion. And soon followed an happy
Conclusion of the whole Matter.




Again, what does Men's flying from Ministers and Ordinances discover? Does not
this show want of Love to Christ and his Ordinances? If Ministers show
themselves to be unconverted, (as some say they are) let them be convicted; and
if they are obstinate, let them be deposed; and let not Churches break into
Pieces, because some fondly think, and boldly say, their Ministers are not good
Men.

Again, Does not the censorious and uncharitable Spirit which so much prevails
in many who make high Pretenses to Religion, evidently show that they are void
and destitute of that true Christian Charity, which if a Man has not he is
nothing? 1 Cor. 13.2.

Again, Does not an hankering Mind after Visions, and Revelations, and
unlearned Teachers, show a sickly and distempered State of Soul?

And does not the abounding of Mockers and Scoffers at the true Religion, and
those that appear zealous for the promoting it; and that secure, careless, and
unconcerned Frame of Spirit which appears in many living under the Ministry of
God's Word, plainly show that our holy Religion is dying from among us?

I cannot but look on these Things as sad Symptoms, and if they prevail, the
true Christian Religion will languish and die from among us; and we shall be a
dead People; spiritually dead, as the Church of Sardis was, Rev. 3. 1.

3. Con. That if the true Christian Religion should be lost from among us, a
Flood of Calamities will break in upon us, and we shall be a miserable People.

Our holy Religion is our Beauty, Glory, Strength and Safety; and when this is
lost from among us, our Beauty and Glory, Strength and Safety will be lost with
it. While we preserve and promote our holy Religion, God will be with us, to
protect and preserve us; but if we loose this, then God will be gone, as to his
gracious Presence with us, and Woe will be to us, for his Judgments will pursue
and overtake us. Hos.9.12. Woe to them when I depart from them.

Look into those Places from whence the true Christian Religion has been lost,
and see how it is with the People there; and as you find it in those Places, so
you may expect it will be in this Land when the Religion of Christ shall be
lost from us.

True and credible History gives us a sad and melancholy Account of the
Circumstances of many Places from whence the true Religion has been lost.

As for the Land of Canaan, which was once the Glory of all Lands, it has now
lost its Glory, and is become a barren Soil, inhabited by Turks and Heathen, a
People whose Religion is empty and vain.

And as for Jerusalem which was called the holy City, when the true Religion
flourished in it; it is now a miserable Town, in which are no Inhabitants
beside Infidels and Idolaters; and on Mount Zion, in that very Place where
Solomon's Temple stood, there is now a Mosque, or Turkish Church for Mahomitan
Worship. Dr. I. Mather's Ichabod. p. 57.


And what a miserable Place is the lesser Asia, where were seven famous
Churches, beside many of less Note. In the sixty-sixth Year after Christ,
Laodicea was destroyed by an Earthquake; and about the Year one Hundred eighty
two, the City of Smyrna came to Ruin by an Earthquake. Clark's Mirror, p. 488.


And as for Ephesus, and the other Cities that remain, they are given over to
strong Delusions, and to the Belief of doctrinal Lies.

And as it is with those Places from whence the true Religion has been lost,
so it may be with New England, when our holy Religion shall die from among us.

Therefore let us all stir up our selves in the Places and Stations God has
set us in, to do what we can to preserve and promote the Life of our holy
Religion, which is indeed our Life.

And to this End let us consider, how we have left our first Love; remember
from whence we are fallen, and repent, and do our first Works; for if this be
not done, Christ will come unto us quickly, and will remove our Candlestick out
of his Place; and then we shall be a miserable People. But if this be done by
us, he will walk in the midst of these golden Candlesticks, and they shall not
be moved: He will help us, and that right early.

AMEN.

