THE NATURE and NECESSITY OF REGENERATION, Considered in a SERMON FROM JOHN
III. 3.

Preached at Newark, in New Jersey, Jan. 19 1742, 3. at the Meeting of the
Presbytery there.

To which is added, Some REMARKS on a Discourse of Dr. Waterland's, entitled,
Regeneration stated and explained, according to Scripture and Antiquity.

By JONATHAN DICKINSON, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth-Town,
New Jersey.

Rev. i. 2. Behold I come quickly, hold fast that which thou have, that no Man
take thy Crown.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by JAMES PARKER, at the New-Printing-Office: 1743.

To the READER,
THERE needs no Apology for the Publication of the following Sermons; the vast
Importance of the Subject, renders a Discourse of this Kind always seasonable;
though perhaps it may be thought by some, that no Apology can be sufficient, for
the ensuing Remarks upon an Author of so great Name and Character, as Dr.
Waterland. But as I have endeavored to approve myself unto God, in that
Undertaking; I can patiently bear any of those Invectives that may be expected,
from the Gentlemen of contrary Sentiments. -- I am as fully persuaded, that the
Cause I am defending is the Cause of God, as I am that the Scriptures are the
Word of God. If I believe the one, I must believe the other, if it be possible
to understand the Meaning of the most plain, familiar, and express Words that
can be spoken, -- The Souls of Men are therefore nearly concerned in this
Matter; and the Ministers of the Gospel loudly called upon, vigorously to exert
themselves, that they may prevent, if possible, the Defection that is already
begun in several Parts of the Land, upon Account of this great Article of
Christianity. If this be not a sufficient Reason for this Undertaking, I have
none to give.

I don't intend by these Remarks, merely a Refutation of Dr. Waterland's Book,
but of his Principles, also by whomsoever espoused. I have therefore been
larger upon some Points, than would have been necessary in Answer to that
Discourse; and either wholly passed over, or but briefly touched upon, some
other very erroneous Principles, that do not so immediately enter into the
Merits of the Cause. -- What I aim at, is, to furnish the Reader with Armor
from the Word of God, not only against the dangerous Doctrines contained in
that Discourse; but also against any other Attack of the like Kind, from any
other Quarter. And I hope he may be sufficiently secured, by duly attending to
what is said, in the following Sermon and Remarks.

I have thought myself called, to make these Animadversions upon Dr.
Waterland's Discourse in particular, partly because it is industriously handed
about in several Parts of the Country, to make Proselites; and partly because
the Subject is the most concisely and plausibly handled in that Discourse, of
any that I have met with.

I expect to be censured, for expressing so much Confidence and Assurance in
the Case before us, in Opposition to Men of so great Name, on the other Side of
the Question; as if I was arrogating Infallibility to myself: But I have this
to say in my Defense, Though I am far from supposing myself infallible; yet I
don't think it a just Reason to run into Sceptiscism; and to doubt of the
Certainty of some of the plainest and most important Truths in the Word of God;
because I am fallible and liable to mistake. -- I am not willing to make a
Compliment of such an essential Article of practical Godliness, upon which our
Eternity immediately depends, to any Persons of what Name or Character soever;
or to appear wavering or uncertain about it, that I may avoid this Censure; and
bespeak the Character of a modest Writer.

Besides, I must either entertain this Confidence and Assurance, or suppose at
least a Possibility of Truth, in some of the greatest Absurdities in the World.
-- I must either be confident that I am right, or else suppose a Possibility.
--

1. That all the Texts of Scripture which I have cited, both from the old and
new Testament, with others of the like Kind, which speak of being sprinkled,
washed, or cleansed with Water, do all immediately refer to Water Baptism; or
else, --

2. I must suppose, that these Words in Joh. iii. 5; and Tit. iii. 5. must be
understood of Water Baptism; though no other Scriptures exactly parallel to them
are so to be understood; and though I cannot imagine any Reason from the Words
themselves; or from the Nature of Things, why it should be so.

3. I must suppose it possible, that every baptized Person, has all the
Properties and Characters ascribed to the New Birth, in Scriptures, or else. --

4. I must suppose, that some Persons are truly regenerate in their Baptism;
and will never want any (...) Regeneration, who have not the Characters given
of the New (...) Scripture; nor ever will have without a Reformation
^^^^ovation. This I think is plainly taught by Dr. Waterland (p. 3^.) And this
if I mistake not, is plainly to teach, that a Man may be regenerate and not
regenerate at the same Time.

These Things I must suppose; or else

5. I must suppose, that the Scriptures speak of two different Kinds of
Regeneration, as Qualifications for the Kingdom of God; the one baptismal,
which may be without Holiness; the other a Change of Heart, necessarily
productive of a holy Life. That is in other Words, that Holiness of Heart and
Life is the necessary Fruit of Regeneration; and yet is not necessarily found
in all that are truly Regenerate.

These and other such like Absurdities, mentioned in the following Discourse, I
must suppose; or else I must retain my Confidence, that I am not liable to
mistake in the present Case. -- There is no other Choice before me. -- I have
therefore chosen the safest and surest Side of the Question, which I hope
through the Grace of God to stand to; and according to my poor Ability to
defend, as long as I can hold a Pen in my Hand.

The Subject has naturally led me to use the same Manner of Reasoning, more
than once, upon different Occasions, in the ensuing Remarks; and I had rather
be censured for using needless Repetition; than to fail of giving my Reader
Conviction, of the dreadful Danger of the Doctrine which I oppose.

I have no Favor to ask of the Reader, on Account of any Unaccuracies in the
Manner of Performance, or the Style. -- If this Attempt be blessed of God, to
convince poor unregenerate Sinners, of the infinite Mischief that will follow a
Mistake in this great Concern; and to put them upon proper Solicitude, to lay
such a Foundation of Hope; that they may finally enter into the Kingdom of God;
my End is obtained. -- And whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear, I hope for Acceptance from Him, whose Interest I have consulted; and
endeavored to promote.

THE NATURE and NECESSITY OF REGENERATION.
JOH. III. 3. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, Verily I say unto thee,
except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.


THESE Words were occasioned by a Visit made to our blessed Savior, by
Nicodemus a Ruler among the Jews, who being convinced by the miraculous Works
which Christ had wrought, that he was divinely inspired, was probably now
enquiring of him the Way of Salvation. This Answer seems therefore to be given,
to obviate all his false Apprehensions and vain Hopes of Acceptance with God,
by any outward Privileges or Performances; and to show him, that there must be
a great Change wrought in the Heart of every one, that would be a Partaker of
the future Glory. Such a Change as is of the Nature of a new Creation; and may
be aptly compared to being born again. Our Lord assures him by a repeated
Asseveration, (thereby to awaken his most serious Attention) that this Change
is so absolutely necessary, that without it, no Man shall ever see the Kingdom
of God. -- This Doctrine was taught Nicodemus, not as a Concern peculiar to
himself, but as what equally referred to all Men, without Distinction. It
therefore as much affects us as it did him, and is of the greatest Importance
to us all, since no less than our eternal Welfare depends upon it. Let us then
consider

1. What we are to understand by the Kingdom of God, which no unregenerate Man
can ever see.

2. What we are to understand by being born again, without which we cannot see
the Kingdom of God.

3. Whence this Change which our Savior here speaks of, is called a new Birth.
And

4. Whence it is so, that the unregenerate cannot see the Kingdom of God.

1. I am first then to consider, what we are to understand by the Kingdom of
God, which an unregenerate Man cannot see.

I must here observe, that there is a twofold Interpretation of these Words,
(the Kingdom of God) according to the different Sense, in which they are
elsewhere used in Scripture.

1. Some understand them to signify the Kingdom of Grace; or that spiritual
Kingdom, which our Lord was erecting here in the World. In that Sense, we are
to consider them as being of the same Tendency, as if our blessed Savior had
said to Nicodemus, You come to me as to a Teacher sent from God; and seem
willing to become one of my Disciples and Followers; and to be a Member of my
spiritual Kingdom. But I assure you this cannot be, while you remain in your
present State. None can be acknowledged as real Members of that spiritual and
heavenly Kingdom which God is now setting up, who have not experienced so great
a Change of Heart, as may be aptly called a new Birth.

The Words being thus understood, plainly show, that we cannot be Christians
indeed, we cannot be vital Members of Christ's mystical Body; nor Partakers of
the saving Benefits of his Redemption, whilst unregenerate. But,

2. I choose to understand the Words of the Kingdom of Glory. And in that View,
they are to be considered, as if our blessed Lord had said to Nicodemus, You
seem desirous to know how you may secure a Title to the heavenly Glory; and it
is therefore necessary immediately to inform you, that it is not your high
Birth nor external Privileges, it is not your Conformity to the ceremonial Law;
nor your acknowledging me to be a Teacher sent from God, that will entitle you
to that Glory and Happiness: But I would have you receive it as a most certain
and important Truth, that no Man can ever be Partaker of that glorious
Inheritance, except he first experience so great a Change of Heart and Life, as
will be like coming into a new World; and may be fitly compared to his being
born again. In this Sense the following Scriptures are necessarily to be
understood. Mark ix. 47. It is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom of God
with one Eye, than having two Eyes, to be cast into Hell Fire. Luke xiii. 28.
There shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God; and you yourselves thrust out. So
likewise verse 29.. with Acts xiv. 20. and many other Places.

This Interpretation of these Words appears most agreeable, because Nicodemus
(how ignorant soever of the new Birth) seems to have understood what our Lord
meant by the Kingdom of God; and to be affected with the Danger of coming short
of it. Whereas, if our blessed Savior had spoken to him of his spiritual
Kingdom in this World, he could not have understood him; but would have been at
as great a Loss to have found out his Meaning in this, as in the other Part of
his Discourse. In this Sense therefore Nicodemus did understand the Words; and
in this Sense, our blessed Lord designed that he should understand 'em. For in
the other Sense, he could have known Nothing at all of their Meaning. --
Besides, it was probably his Concern for an Interest in the Kingdom of Glory,
(and not of the Kingdom of Grace, which he knew so little about) that prompted
Nicodemus to this Conference with our blessed Savior. To this Concern, if not
to some previous Question about the Way of Salvation, our Lord accommodates his
Answer; and shows him the necessary Qualification for that eternal Salvation,
he was solicitous about.

But the Consequence is the same, whether we fix upon the one, or the other of
these Interpretations. For they who cannot be Members of the Kingdom of Grace,
can never be Partakers of the Kingdom of Glory. We must be qualified for that
State; or utterly unqualified for this. -- This awakening Lesson is therefore
taught us by both these Explications, that without Regeneration there can be no
Salvation: We must become new Creatures, or perish eternally: An awful Thought!
O that it were duly considered and laid to Heart, by a stupid Generation of
Men, who live at Ease and Security in a State of Nature, and consequently in a
State of Wrath and Perdition! This is a Thought that must have its Influence
upon them, either now while they have a Day of Grace, or hereafter, when they
experience the Truth of these Words, by their Exclusion from the Kingdom of
God. I proceed to consider

II. What we are to understand by being BORN AGAIN, without which we cannot see
the Kingdom of God.

To illustrate this Point, I shall first give a general Description of this
important Change, and then particularly consider the several Branches of that
Description.

Regeneration is a new spiritual and supernatural Principle, wrought by the
Spirit of God in all the Faculties of the Soul, enclining and enabling unto the
Exercise of a Life of Faith in Christ; and new Obedience to God. To be more
particular.

1. I consider Regeneration as being a new Principle. And thus the Scripture
considers it. It is accordingly called the Seed of GOD, (1 John iii. 9) the new
Man (Col. iii. 10. the divine Nature; (2 Pet. i. 4) and the incorruptible Seed
(1 Pet. i. 23) All which Expressions plainly signify a new Principle of Action.
-- Our original Apostasy, has brought such an universal Depravation upon all
the Faculties of the Soul, that the whole Head is sick; and the whole Heart
faint, the whole Nature Guilt and Defilement, all the Affections and Passions
alienated from the Life of God; and the carnal Mind Enmity unto him. What
therefore but corrupt Streams, can flow from such a poisoned Fountain? How can
they that are in the Flesh, ever please God? How can they that are dead in
Trespasses and Sins, perform any vital Actions? Can the Fig Tree, my Brethren,
bear Olive Berries, or the Vine Figs? So can no Fountain yield both salt Water
and fresh. Either make the Tree good; that the Fruit may be good; or the Tree
will be corrupt, and his Fruit corrupt. There is a natural Necessity, that all
the Actions of an unregenerate Person, should partake of the Quality of those
carnal sinful Dispositions and Affections, from whence they flow. And there is
the same Necessity, that we be renewed in the Spirit of our Minds; and obtain a
new Source and Spring of Action; or as our Lord expresses it, a new Treasure
of the Heart, in Order to our living acceptably to God here, or enjoying him
hereafter. -- There can be no Kind or Degree of moral Behavior, no external
Acts of Obedience, no Appearances of Piety and Devotion accepted of God, while
our Hearts are estranged from him. The Lord looks on the Heart. And what is
the Heart of an unregenerate Man? The Scriptures tell us it is deceitful above
all Things; and desperately wicked. Jer. xvii. 1. Whence its of last Necessity,
that a new Heart be given us; and a new Spirit put within us, in order to our
walking in GOD'S Statutes; and keeping his Judgments to do them (Ezekiel. xxxvi.
26, 27) Its of Necessity, that we are created anew in Christ Jesus unto Good
Works, if we would walk in them (Ephesians. ii. 10) It is of Necessity, that God puts
his Law in our Minds; and writes them in our Hearts, in Order to his being our
GOD; and we his People (Heb: viii. 10) -- Let no Man my Brethren, deceive you
with vain Words. You must not only have a new external Conversation; but a new
vital Principle, if you would be the Children of God indeed. You must be
quickened, who are dead in Trespasses and Sins. You must hear the Voice of the
Son of GOD and live; and partake of that Life, which is the Light of Men. You
must put off the old Man; and put on the new Man, which after GOD, is created
in Knowledge and true Holiness; or else you are never like to see the Kingdom
of GOD.

2. I describe Regeneration to be a spiritual and supernatural Principle. And
thus likewise does the Scripture describe it. That which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit (Joh. iii. 6) Of his own Will begat he us (Jam. i. 18) This Change is
wrought by the exceeding Greatness of his Power; and according to the Working
of his mighty Power (Ephesians. i. 19) -- I know that there are some, that call
themselves Christians, who pretend that this Change is the Effect of moral
Suasion only: And that it is only through the Prevalence of outward Means upon
their Minds, that Men are excited to become new Creatures, by the Improvement
of their natural Abilities, in the Exercise of moral Virtues; and religious
Duties. That (according to them) the whole Work of Regeneration and progressive
Sanctification, is but the Improvement of those Powers, which are given in
common to all, that enjoy the Ordinances of the Gospel. Though they will in Words
acknowledge our Want of divine Assistance, in Order to this Change, they seem
to allow no more of the peculiar and immediate Influences of the blessed
Spirit, in this great Concern, than in the common and ordinary Occasions of
Life, How loath are poor proud Worms, to give God the Glory, of his glorious
free Grace and divine Operations! How willing to think well of themselves; and
therefore to slight and reproach all those Experiences of the divine Power upon
the Soul, which they themselves are unacquainted with! -- But how does the
Scriptures, how does most clear and evident Experience represent this Case to
us? -- Are we not by Nature spiritually dead? (Ephesians. ii. 1) Can a dead Man by
the Force of any Persuasion, be prevailed upon, to reassume his Life and vital
Actions? Are we not naturally without Strength? (Romans v. 6) And can the Force
of Persuasion prevail with an enfeebled Cripple, or an enervated Paralitick, to
arise and walk? Are we not naturally blind? (2 Cor. iv. 4) And can the Power of
Persuasion, enable a blind Man to open his Eyes and see? Are not our Minds
naturally, not only Enemies; but Enmity itself unto GOD? (Romans viii. 7) And can
mere Persuasion change all the Powers, Faculties, and Dispositions of the Mind
from Enmity to Friendship, from Hatred to Love; and from an habitual Opposition
to Godliness, unto a Delight in the Ways of God? Are we not naturally polluted
and guilty Creatures? (Romans iii. 12) And can any Methods of mere Persuasion,
bring a clean Thing out of an unclean; or bring a guilty Rebel into an Estate
of Innocence, or into Peace and Favor with God? How vain are such Pretenses!
How inconsistent and absurd must they appear to any Man, who believes the
Doctrine of original Sin, as it is taught us by the Scriptures and our own
Experience! -- By this View of the Case, we may plainly see, that there must be
a supernatural and divine Energy exerted, in this new Creation. We must be made
willing in the Day of Christ's Power (Psalm. cx. 3) God must work in us both to
will and to do, of his own good Pleasure, (Phil. ii. 13) It is a great and
wonderful Change, that Regeneration makes, too great for all the Men upon
Earth, or Angels in Heaven to effect; and is therefore ascribed to the same
mighty Power, which was wrought in Christ, when he was raised from the Dead
(Ephesians. i. 20) -- This Truth is not only confirmed to us by the Word of God; but
by our continued Observation and Experience. Don't we daily see the
Unsuccesfulness of all Attempts to persuade Men to turn and live? Don't we
daily see what becomes of all the good Purposes and Resolutions, which Men take
up in their own Strength; and wear off again as soon as the Din of Conscience
is out of their Ears? And don't we see how effectual the Work proves, when God
himself undertakes it? How sudden and unexpected it often is in its Beginning;
and how permanent in its blessed Effects and Fruits? How then does it concern
us all, to maintain a deep Impression of our own Impotence, to lie at the Foot
of God's sovereign Grace, to ascribe the whole Glory of this great Work to his
mere good Pleasure and almighty Power; and to experience this supernatural
Change in our own Hearts; For it will certainly be found in the Conclusion,
that none but those who are born again, by the special Influences of
supernatural omnipotent Grace, shall ever see the Kingdom of GOD.

3. I have considered this new Birth, to be a Principle wrought in us, by the
immediate Influences of God's holy Spirit. And thus likewise it is considered
by the Word of God. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. So is every one
that is born of the Spirit. Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD (Joh. iii. 5, 6, 8) It is the Spirit that
gives Life (2 Cor. iii. 6) We are changed into the divine Image, by the Spirit
of the LORD (2 Cor. iii. 18) -- It is true, this Work is sometimes ascribed
unto the Father. No Man can come unto me, except it (the Power) were given unto
him of my Father (Joh. vi. 6 5) And it is sometimes ascribed unto the Son. Thy
People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power (Psalm. cx: 3) And it is
necessarily true, that each Person in the God head, is the Author of every Work
of God; because each Person is the same divine Nature; and therefore the same
undivided Principle of Operation. But the Order of Operation among the distinct
Persons of the Trinity, follows the Order of their Subsistence. The Foundation
or Fountain of all Grace to Mankind, is the Love of God the Father* The
meritorious or procuring Cause of all Grace, is Jesus Christ our Savior; and
the Application of all special Grace to (...) Souls, is by the Holy Ghost. --
So that when this Work of Regeneration is ascribed to the Father, we must
rememb that he quickneth us by his Spirit. (Romans viii. 7) When it is ascribed
unto the Son, we must also consider, that he works this glorious Change, by
sending the Comforter to convince of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment
(Joh. xvi. 7, 8) And that the whole Work of our Sanctification, whether initial
in our Regeneration, or progressive in the Consequences and Fruits of it, is by
the Holy Ghost. Being sanctified by the Holy Ghost (Romans xv. 16)

If it be enquired, in what Manner the Holy Spirit operates, in procuring this
Change? I answer, The Manner of his Operations, are like his glorious Nature,
infinitely above us. These Things of God knows no Man; but the Spirit of GOD.
But if this be considered, with Respect to the Influence that his Operations
have upon our Minds, the Change is wrought by Illumination. He shines into our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD, in the Face of
Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. iv. 6. The new Man is renewed in Knowledge, after the
Image of him that created him. Col. iii. 10. It is with open Face, beholding as
in a Glass the Glory of the LORD: that we are changed into the same Image. 2
Cor. iii. 18. -- The Spirit of GOD dissipates the Darkness and Stupidity of the
Mind, and gives such a lively reallizing and sensible View of divine Things, as
proves a Principle of spiritual Life and Operation; and actuates all the Powers
and Faculties of the Soul, unto a Conformity to God; as I have more
particularly considered elsewhere. The Operations therefore of the blessed
Spirit, in our new Creation, are in their Effects upon our Souls, always
sensible and discernible; and always felt by all that have them; though it be
with many, the greatest Difficulty to distinguish their Quality; and to know
whether they are, or are not of a saving Efficacy.

This then is of vast Concernment to every one of us, that we do experience the
Operations of the blessed Spirit upon our Hearts: That we have such a feeling
Impression of our Guilt, Misery and Impotence, as makes us reject all
Confidence in the Flesh: That we have such a sensible View of the Excellency
and Sufficiency of Jesus Christ, as inclines us to receive him upon his own
Terms; such a View of the glorious Perfections of the divine Nature, as prompts
us to love God above all; and to trust our Souls in his merciful Hands; such a
Discovery of the Beauty of Holiness, as inclines us to be Holy in all Manner of
Conversation and Godliness; and such a lively Apprehension of the eternal
World, as makes us look not to the Things which are seen and temporal; but to
the Things which are unseen and eternal. -- However Men may deceive themselves
with their Reformations and moral Seize, if they have not the Spirit of
Christ, they are none of his. -- But of this more particularly under the next
Head.

4. I have described Regeneration, as being a new Principle, in all the Powers
and Faculties of the Soul. Thus also is the new Creature described in the
Scriptures. Old Things are passed away; behold all Things are become new. (2
Cor. v. 17) -- If this were considered with Respect to each of the intellectual
Powers, it will be found that they are all become new, when this Change is
wrought in the Soul.

Thus with Respect to the Understanding, it is not only enlarged by
Regeneration; but renewed. Whence we read 1 John v. 20. The Son of GOD is come;
and has given us an Understanding, that we may know him. Implying, that we had
no Understanding whereby we could know him before. So likewise we are told,
that the Eyes of our Understanding are enlightened, that we may know what is
the Hope of his Calling (Ephesians. i. 18) Without this Illumination, the natural Man
cannot receive the Things of the Spirit of GOD; for they are Foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them; because they are spiritually discerned (1 Cor.
ii. 14) There is therefore a new and divine Light shining into the Soul, in
Regeneration, enabling us to see Things in another Manner, than we ever did or
could do before; and giving us a more sensible Apprehension of God, of Jesus
Christ, and of the Concerns of the eternal World, than we could before attain
to. As I have already observed.

In Consequence of this, the Will is also renewed. And the Person that before
saw no Form nor Comeliness in Christ, that he should desire him; and therefore
would not come to him that he might have Life, has by Regeneration, such a
Discovery of his own Necessities and Christ's Excellencies, as bows his Will to
the Obedience of Christ, to a hearty Compliance with the Gospel Offer. -- The
Person who before was obstinately bent upon the Gratification of his Lusts and
Idols, who loved Strangers; and after them would go, has by his new Birth, such
a Discovery of the Evil of Sin, as makes him renounce his Lusts and Idols with
Abhorrence; and groan after Deliverance from their remaining Power and Tyranny.
The Person who before, would venture Soul and Body, Time and Eternity, rather
than maintain a Life of Religion, and a close Walk with God; has by this
wonderful Change, such a Discovery of the Pleasantness and Peace, that are to
be found in the Ways of Wisdom, that he prefers a Life of Piety and Communion
with God, to all the Profits of the World; and Pleasures of Sense. Thus are we
made willing in the Day of Christ's Power.

I must add, the Affections also are renewed, when this Change is wrought in
the Soul. They who are risen with Christ, have their Affections set upon the
Things that are above, where Christ Jesus sits at the right Hand of GOD (Col.
iii. 1, 2)

They have new Desires. Though they were before for fulfiling the Desires of the
Flesh, they are now above all Things desirous of the Favor of God, of an
Interest in his Son, the Graces of his Spirit; and a continued Progress in
Faith and Holiness, until made meet for the final Gratification of all their
Desires, in the Emjoyment of God for ever. It is the Language of a regenerate
Soul in Psalm. lxxiii. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee; and there is none
upon Earth, that I desire besides thee.

They have new Delights. Though they before delighted in their Lusts and
Pleasures, Mirth and Vanity, they now delight in the Law of the Lord, after the
inward Man (Romans vii. 22)

They have new Joys. Their temporal Acquisitions are no more the principal
Matter of their Rejoicing; but they rejoice in GOD'S Salvation; and in the Hope
of his Glory. This is the Subject of their chiefest Joy, when they find
themselves in a truly joyful Frame. They rejoice in Christ Jesus, without
Confidence in the Flesh (Phil. iii. 3)

They have new Hopes. They have renounced their former vain Confidences; and
can no longer build their Hopes upon the sandy Foundation of their own
Righteousness, religious Seize, Purposes or Promises; but they now hope,
not from what they do or suffer for Christ; but from what he has done and
suffered for them, not from their Promises to him; but from his Promises to
them. Christ Jesus is their Hope. (1 Timothy i. 1) Christ in them is their Hope of
Glory (Col. i. 27)

Their Appetites are renewed, that the covetous Miser is no longer like the
Horse-leach, crying, Give, Give, no longer eagerly seeking great Things for
himself; but laboring to content himself with the Disposals of Providence, he
is seeking those Things which are above, where Christ sits on the right Hand
of GOD (Col. iii. 1) And thus the Epicure is brought to refrain his inordinate
Pursuit of sensual Pleasure, the Drunkard to abhor his Cups; and the unclean
Person his lascivious Lusts. For they that are Christ's, have crucified the
Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts, Gal. v. 24:

Their Passions are likewise renewed. That they no longer indulge the Fruits of
the Flesh, which are Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath and Strife; but live
in the Exercise of the Fruits of the Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-Suffering, Goodness and Meekness (Gal. v. 20. 21)

The Bent and Biass of their Thoughts, and their habitual Course of Meditation,
is changed and become new. They are no longer carnally minded, which is Death;
but spiritually minded, which is Life and Peace (Romans viii: 6) -- So great a
Change does Regeneration always make, in the whole Soul! These blessed Fruits
of this new vital Principle, are all of them experienced, in a greater or
lesser Degree, by every one that is born of God. Let no Man therefore delude
his Soul with airy Dreams of a safe State, until he has had some Experience of
this Change, in every particular Instance. -- What a Pity it is, that any of
you should feed upon Ashes, entertain a deluded Hope; and at last be found with
a Lie in your right Hands! -- What a Pity, that you who have now such glorious
Advantages in your Hands, should at last be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. I have described Regeneration, as a new Principle, inclining and enabling
the Soul to the Exercise of Faith in Christ. And thus likewise do the
Scriptures consider it. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of GOD. He that believes on the Son of GOD, has the Witness in himself (1 John v. 1. 10) But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name, which were born not of
Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man; but of GOD (Joh.
i. 12, 13) -- Faith in Christ is the first Motion, or vital Act of the new
Creature, the first Grace which is exercised in the renewed Soul, Though
Regeneration be considered, as being in order of Nature previous to Faith; yet
in order of Time, they are always together. The same Time that the Eyes of the
Soul are opened, they look to Jesus, as the Author of our eternal Salvation.
The same Time that this new Creature is formed, it lives; and acts Faith in the
Son of God. Whence we are said to be created in Christ (Ephesians. ii. 10) i. e. to
be immediately united to him by Faith, at our new Creation. Upon this Account,
the new Birth and Faith in Christ are spoken of in Scripture, as mutually
implying each other. -- The divine Light which shines into the Soul in
Regeneration not only gives a feeling Apprehension of our own lost and
perishing Condition: But such a View of Christ's Readiness to save; and his
abundant Fullness to supply all our Wants, as constrains us to consent to the
Gospel Offer; and encourages us to trust all our Interests in his Hands. This
Discovery, brings the Soul to a hearty Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, a
cheerful Consent to the Terms of the Gospel; and a steady Reliance upon Christ,
as the only Foundation of our Hope. -- It brings the Soul to receive him in all
his Offices, as our Prophet to teach and guide us by his Council, as our Priest
to atone for our Offenses; and to be our Righteousness before God, as our King
to sanctify our Souls; and to rule and reign in our Hearts. -- It brings the
Soul to receive him, notwithstanding any Difficulties that may attend the
christian Life; and to submit, not only to wear his Yoke; but to take up his
Cross and follow him. -- This receiving of Christ unites us to him, as the
Branch is united to the Vine. Whence by a vital Union to this Stock, we receive
future Supplies of Life and Nourishment from him; and are enabled to live in
the Exercise of all the Graces of the Spirit of God; and to glorify our
heavenly Father, by bringing forth much Fruit, By these new Supplies received
from Christ, the Believer walks by Faith; and not by Sight (2 Cor. v. 7) And
the Life which he now lives in the Flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of GOD
(Gal. ii. 20.)

Thus it appears to be of last Consequence to every one, to have this Witness
in himself, that he is born of God. For without Faith it is impossible to
please GOD. (Heb. xi. 5) He that believes not shall be damned (Mark xvi. 16) --
With what solemn Care and Solicitude should we then see to it, that we build
our eternal Hope upon no other Foundation than the Lord Jesus Christ, that we
fly for Refuge to this Hope set before us, that we heartily comply with the
Offer he makes of himself and his saving Benefits; and are found in him, not
having on our own Righteousness which is of the Law; but that which is through
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith. It will be
amazing beyond all Apprehension, to be found among Unbelievers in the Day of
Christ; and with them to be shut out of the Kingdom of God.

6. I consider Regeneration as a Principle of new Obedience to God. And thus
likewise does the Scriptures consider it. He that has this Hope in him,
purifieth himself as he is pure (1 John iii. 3) Whosoever is born of GOD, does
not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him; and he cannot Sin, because he is
born of GOD (verse 9) -- It is a false and groundless Calumny, to represent
this Doctrine under Consideration, or the Professors of it, as opening a Door
to Licentiousness, or encouraging Men to Sin, that Grace may abound. The Case
is quite otherwise. And this Principle of which I speak, is a continued Source
of vital Piety, a living Fountain of Holiness both in Heart and Life. He that
is born of GOD, hates every false Way, maintains a strict Watch over his
Affections, Appetites, Passions, Words and Actions, cuts off his right Hand and
Foot; and plucks out his right Eye, when they offend him, maintains no Reserve
of secret and darling Lusts; but abhors and rejects them all, and groans under
the Burden of his remaining Corruptions, with such Language as that (Romans vii.
24) O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death.

He that is truly regenerate, watches at Christ's Gates; and waits at the Posts
of his Doors. He conscienciously endeavors to be found in a sincere and
acceptable Performance of every known Duty; and to walk in all the Commandments
and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. For he has inclined his Heart to keep
GOD'S Statutes always, even unto the End (Psalm. cxix. 112)

He that is born of God, is of a kind, charitable, forgiving and beneficial
Spirit toward his Neighbor; and has a peculiar Love of Complacency to all of
whatever Denomination, that appear to be the Children of God. By this we know,
that we are passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. He that
loves not his Brother, abides in Death (1 John iii. 14)

He that is born again, is a Man of strictest Justice and Honesty, in all his
Dealings, and will by no Temptation, be led into the Practice of Violence, or
known Fraud and Deceit toward his Neighbor; knowing that GOD is the Avenger
of all such (1 Thessalonians. iv. 6)

He that is born again, endeavors to fill up every Relation, with Duty; and to
demean himself in each Station he sustains, whether sacred, civil, or domestic;
and in each Circumstance of Life, whether superior, inferior, or equal, as
becomes the excellent Religion he professes; and the Vocation by which he is
called -- In a Word, he herein exercises himself, to have always a Conscience
void of Offense toward GOD; and toward Man (Acts xxiv. 16) -- It is true,
there will a great deal of sinful Imperfection accompany his highest
Seize; but this is his Grief and Burden. This is what he neither does,
nor can approve and indulge.

These my Brethren, are the Characters of every Child of God; and they who have
them them not, whatever Pretenses they may make to Religion, whatever Progress
they may make in Shows of Devotion, whatever internal Experiences they may
pretend to, are yet in a State of Death; and Heirs of eternal Destruction and
Misery. For whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of GOD; nor he that loves
not his Brother 1 John iii. 10. -- From whence it appears with the strongest
Evidence, that without these Marks of the regenerate State, you cannot see the
Kingdom of GOD.

I now proceed to consider,

III. Whence it is, that the Change under Consideration is called a new Birth;
or a being born again. To illustrate this, I shall briefly take Notice of a few
Particulars wherein the Propriety of this Mode of speaking will evidently
appear.

1. It may be called a new Birth, because it brings a Person into a new State
of Existence. As the Birth of an Infant brings it into a new World; and into a
State in every Respect altogether new. So in the Case before us, Regeneration
is the Renewal of the whole Soul; and therefore brings a Man in all spiritual
Respects, into a new Kind or State of Being. On this Account, it is called in
Scripture the new Creature; or the new Man. Not that we are to suppose, there
is hereby given us any other Powers or Faculties of the Soul, than we had
before; but that those Powers which we had before, are made spiritually new. It
is not a natural; but a moral and spiritual new Birth. He that was before in a
State of Guilt, has now by Regeneration, his Heart sprinkled from an evil
Conscience. He that was before under the damning Sentence of the Law, shall now
no more enter into Condemnation. He that was before a Child of Wrath, is now at
Peace with God; and made nigh by the Blood of Christ. He that was before
altogether Pollution and Defilement, is now washed and sanctified, in the Name
of our Lord Jesus; and by the Spirit of our God. And in Fine. He that before
was of his Father the Devil, is now a Child of God; and belongs to his Household
and Family. O blessed Change! Blessed are they of the Lord, who are the
Subjects of it! This is coming into a new World indeed; and may well be called
being born again.

2. It may be called a new Birth, as it brings a Person into a new Capacity for
spiritual Action. As the Birth of a Child gives it the Power to exercise the
proper Functions of Life; and enables it to breathe, to cry, to eat and drink,
to move; and successively in their Time and Order, to perform the several
Operations for which it was made: So this new Birth (as I have already
observed) gives us a Capacity to exercise the several Graces; and to perform in
a spiritual Manner, the several Duties of the christian Life: Whilst unrenewed,
we are no more capable of the Exercise of Grace, than the Child unborn is of
natural Operations. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing (Joh. xv. 5) But
when regenerate and united to Christ, we can act from a new Principle, from new
Motives, in a new Manner; and to a new End; and are enabled to walk in Newness
of Life (Romans vi. 4) Whence we are said to be created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works (Ephesians. ii. 10) Our Works before could not please God ( Heb. xi. 6) But now
they are accepted in the Beloved (Ephesians. i. 6) Thus then we are born again, as we
are brought through Sanctification of the Spirit, unto Obedience (as 1 Pet. i. 2)

3. It is called a new Birth, as it makes us Heirs of an eternal Inheritance:
As the King's eldest Son, is born an Heir to his Crown. So as soon as we are
Children, we are Heirs: Heirs of God; and joint Heirs with Christ (Romans viii
^7) Thus are we said to be begotten (or as it is in the Original, to be born)
again, to an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away (1
Pet. i. 3) -- O how great is the Dignity, how glorious the Privilege and Hope,
of all that have experienced this Change! Beloved now we are the Sons of God;
and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is (1 John iii. 2)

4. This Change may be called a new Birth, with Respect to its instantaneous
Production: As it is true in every Moment of Time, that a Child either is, or
is not born. So it is equally true, in every Moment of a Man's Life, that he is
either in a regenerate; or in an unregenerate State. Whatever Opposition this
may meet with in the World, there can be no Demonstration in Euclid more
evident, than this Truth. It is impossible but that every Man in the World,
must always, every Moment of his Life, be either converted or unconverted, a
Believer or an Unbeliever, a Child or God, or a Child of the Devil. There is no
Medium. And one of these is certainly at this Instant, the State and Condition
of every one of my Hearers. Ye are not in the Flesh; but in the Spirit, if so
be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. But if ye have not the Spirit of
Christ, ye are none of his (Romans viii. 9)

5. It may be called the new Birth, with Respect to our being altogether
passive in its Production. As the Infant has no Hand at all, no Manner of
Agency or Efficiency, in his own Birth. So in the present Case, though we have a
great deal to do, that we may be found in the Way, in which we may hope to have
this Change wrought in us: Yet the Charge itself is God's own immediate
Efficiency, the Display of his almighty Power, in which we can have no active
Concurrence. As in the Creation of the World, the Creature could have no Hand
in giving Being to itself. So in Regeneration, we can have no Hand in making
ourselves new Creatures. This demands our most serious Attention; and should
have such an Influence upon our Minds, as will bring us to the Foot of God's
Sovereign Grace. For let poor Potsherds of the Earth, contend as much as they
will with their Maker, they will yet find it true, that it is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs; but in God that shows Mercy (Romans ix. 16)

I am now

IV. To give the Reasons why it is so, that the Unregenerate cannot see the
Kingdom of God. And I shall briefly observe, that it is so in an especial
Manner, for these two Reasons following.

1. Because these can have no Righteousness to justify them in the Sight of
God. They have no Faith in Christ; and are therefore condemned already (Joh.
iii. 18) And how can they atone for their innumerable Sins; and expiate the
mountainous Load of Guilt that lies upon their Souls? How can they procure the
Favor of God; and get into an Estate of Reconciliation and Friendship with
him? How can they purchase a Title to the eternal Inheritance? There is Sin
enough cleaves to their best Duties, to increase their Debt to divine Justice;
and to widen the Breach between God and them. All they can do, is therefore
very far from Purchasing the Favor of God; or giving them a Claim to his
Salvation. There is Nothing can answer the Demands of Justice, but the perfect
Righteousness of Jesus Christ; and this they have no Interest in. They have not
received the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith; and therefore can have no Power to
become the Sons of God. They consequently remain (and while unregenerate they
must remain) in a State of Enmity to God. And will God admit his Enemies into
his Kingdom? No! such as these are to expect that terrible Sentence, from the
Mouth of their Judge (Luke xix: 27) Those mine Enemies, that would not I should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

2. Because they are utterly unqualified for that glorious Kingdom. That Is a
Kingdom, where no unclean Thing shall enter. What has a Swine from a miry Sty,
to do in a Prince's Palace, or a more filthy and polluted Soul in the Palace of
the King of Kings? -- God is a holy God, Heaven is a holy Place, the Saints and
Angels forever exercised there in the most holy Employments. There is therefore
no Room for unrenewed and unsanctified Souls. -- Besides, the Unregenerate are
altogether incapable of the Blessedness of the heavenly World. There is Nothing
there to gratify their carnal Desires: Nothing, but what is so contrary to the
Dispositions of their Souls, that it would render 'em miserable if it were
attainable. We must therefore all of us be renewed, and become holy in Heart
and Life, If we would ever be admitted to the Perfection of Holiness, in the
Kingdom of God. For the Decree will quickly bring forth. He that is unjust, let
him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still (Rev. xxii.
11)

I now proceed to make some practical Reflections, upon what has been said. And

1. This administers Matter of Conviction and of most awakening Concern, to
much the greatest Part of the professing World, in that it is visibly and
undoubtedly true, that there are but few of the numerous Professors of
Christianity, that have ever entered into this straight Gate which leads to the
Kingdom of God. There are but few among those who enjoy the greatest
Privileges, and entertain enlarged Hopes of Salvation, that have been born
again, and thereby made meet for an Inheritance with the Saints in Light. As
this is true of the gospelized World in general, so may it be presumed to be
also true, with Respect to those who are now here before the Lord. And can such
of you my Brethren, enjoy Peace and Security, who are yet in such a State and
Condition, as to be under the Guilt of Sin the Wrath of God, the Tyranny of
Satan, and the Empire of Death and Hell! -- I have shown you the Nature and
Necessity of the new Birth. I have proved the Whole to you from that Standard
of all Truth the Word of God. I have not been pleading for a Sect or Party. I
have not handled the Word of GOD deceitfully; but have endeavored the
Manifestation of the Truth to every Man's Conscience, in the Sight of GOD. And
now I can with Confidence testify to you, that the new Birth which I have
described, is the true Grace of GOD, in which you must stand -- The Doctrine I
know is exceeding repugnant to Men's carnal Minds; and therefore meets with
greatest Opposition. But it is the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, a
Doctrine which he will vindicate, when you and I must stand before his
Tribunal. Well then dear Souls! Consider what Prospect you have of the heavenly
Inheritance. You hope to be saved. But have you experienced the new Birth, as
it has been described to you? I summon your Consciences in the Name and Fear of
God, to give an impartial Answer to this Demand. You have heard the several
Properties and Characters of this saving Change. Now then look into your own
Hearts, and see if you can find them there. If not, how dreadful is your State,
how exceeding great is the Danger of your being shut out of the Kingdom of
Heaven forever! And can you still sleep upon the Top of the Mast of a Ship! Can
you still cry Peace Peace, when sudden Destruction is ready to come upon you,
as Travail upon a Woman with Child, whence you cannot escape! Be astonished O
ye Heavens, at the Security and Stupidity of such a Generation as this! What
meanest thou O Sleeper, arise call upon the Lord, if so be that God will think
upon thee, that thou perish not! Awake thou that sleep; and arise from the
Dead, that Christ may give thee Light. (Ephesians. v: 14)

2. This shows us the dreadful Mischief of being misguided by a deceitful
Ministry; and thereby obtaining Hopes of Heaven, without this saving Change,
which is (by the Verdict of our Lord himself) of last Necessity to all, that
would ever attain to that blessed Inheritance. The last perilous Times are
come, wherein many false Prophets are gone out into the World. -- What
Opposition does the faithful Preaching of this most important Doctrine meet
with, even from those who by the most sacred Bonds, are set for the Defense of
it. What Danger appears before us from our formal Laodiceans, who would quiet
Men's Consciences with a mere Form of Godliness, without the Power. And some of
these would even put poor sleepy Sinners into a vain Dream of their having
already received a baptismal Regeneration; and thence encourage their Hopes of
a safe State, merely from their Morality, or (as it is expressed by a late
Author) from their being upon the improving Hand, in gaining Ground of their
Vices and Passions: And thus, the Necessity of the converting and the renewing
Influences of the blessed Spirit; and of a vital Union to Christ by Faith,
begins to be left out of our Creed; and Sinners are flattered with an
Imagination of Safety, without experiencing either the one or the other. But
with Respect to such Teachers as these, I must warn you in the Apostle's
Language (2 Timothy iii. 5) From such turn away.

Beware of any Preachers or Books, that ascribe any Sufficiency to yourselves;
or that would lessen your Apprehensions of your lost, undone, guilty,
perishing, impotent, and helpless State by Nature. -- For you are by Nature
Children of Wrath (Ephesians. ii. 3) You are all under Sin (Romans ii. 9) and all
without Strength (Romans v. 6) And you must humble yourselves under a deep Sense
of this, if you would be exalted (Luke xviii. 14)

Beware of any Teachers that would lessen your Apprehensions of the Freeness
and Sovereignty of the divine Grace. For God is absolutely Sovereign, in the
Donation of his own Favors; And if he bestows special Grace upon any, it is
even because it so seemed good in his Sight (Mat. xi. 26) And you must come to
a feeling Sense that you lie at Mercy, before you have this great Change
wrought in you.

Beware of those Teachers, that speak against, and especially those that
ridicule and banter experimental Religion. For the Change I am treating of, is
a sensible Change (as I have observed before) and the Operations of the Spirit
of God are sensible Operations. And you must therefore never content yourselves
(lest you delude your Souls with a vain Hope) until you have sensible
Discoveries of Christ's Sufficiency; and of your hearty Compliance with the
Gospel Offer, until you experience the Fruits of the blessed Spirit in your
Heart and Life; and until your Experience begets Hope (Romans v. 4) and you
thereby know that he abides in you, by the Spirit which he has given you (1 John iii. 24) -- It is from Compassion to your precious Souls, that I give you
Warning of these Things; and testify to you, that (let Men say what they will)
your eternal Interests are immediately concerned. And this you must be
convinced of first or last.

You may perhaps object, that you are prejudiced against these Doctrines, by
some Pretenders to 'em, who seem to place their Religion in certain Degrees of
Heat and Flame, in imaginary Impulses, Raptures, and Ecstasies, who seem to
think highly of themselves; and to despise others; and who are in the Practice
of such a censorious Judging of others, as is directly repugnant to the Rules
of the Gospel.

I wish there were no Grounds for this Complaint. It must be acknowledged and
lamented, that there has been too much of this Kind among us, that has given an
Occasion to the Adversaries of special Grace to triumph. It seems very much
owing to this, that instead of the joyful Tidings which we have lately had, of
many enquiring the Way to Zion, with their Faces thitherwards; our, Souls are
now exceedingly filled with the Scorning of those that are at Ease; and with
the Contempt of the Proud. -- But is this a reasonable Objection against the
Doctrines you have heard? Will you reject the Doctrines, because Men have
abused them? Because some influenced by a warm Imagination, have run into one
Extreme, will you run into the other, to your eternal Perdition? -- I beseech
you Brethren, that you ben't soon shaken in Mind or troubled, by any Attempts
of the little Foxes that spoil the Vines. Let no Man beguile you of your
Reward, neither by frustrating the Grace of GOD, as if Righteousness came by
the Law; and so Christ is dead in vain: Nor by intruding into those Things
which they have not seen, being vainly puffed up in their fleshly Mind.

3. Here is Matter of Comfort and Encouragement to those, who have experienced
this great Change; and have by the Power of divine Grace, been renewed in the
Spirit of their Minds. These are the Persons who shall see the Kingdom of GOD.
What Reason have they therefore, to live to the Praise of the Glory of his
Grace, whereby they are accepted in the Beloved. You know my dear Brethren,
that there has a great Change passed upon your Souls; and you cannot but
acknowledge, that you have had same Experience of all those Characters of a
regenerate State, which you have heard the Description of; though perhaps you may
yet meet with Difficulties in your Way, that make you doubt your State, and
walk in Darkness.

You may be surprised with a Review, of the Greatness and Aggravations of your
past Sins. But have you not sincerely mourned for 'em all; and renounced them
without Reserve? Cannot you truly say, that they are the Matter of your greatest
Abhorrence; and that you would not commit them again for all the World? Don't
you long and groan after a Deliverance from Sin? -- Do then that Honor to the
Redeemer's Blood, as to depend upon it for Cleansing from all your Sins. Do
that Honor to God's infinite Grace, as to depend upon it, that where your Sins
have abounded, his Grace shall abound much more (1 John i. 7) Romans v. 20)

You may be afraid, whether you have saving Interest in Christ. But have you
not felt your lost perishing Condition? Have you not earnestly desired an
Interest in Christ? Have you not seen, that there is Safety in him and no where
else? Have you not rejected every other Confidence; and endeavored to commit
your Souls to him? Trust then with Cheerfulness and Courage, to his gracious
Promise, that he will in no Wise cast you out. Clear up your Doubts, by a
present Consent to the Gospel Offer; and a steady Dependence upon him for
Salvation. For his Grace is sufficient for you 2 Cor. xii. 9)

You may be surprised with your remaining dissallowed Corruptions and
Imperfections. But are not these your greatest Burden, what you watch, strive
and pray against? Let them then humble, but not discourage you: For you have an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous (1 John ii. 1)

You way be greatly discouraged with the Deadness, Formality and Destraction,
that you sometimes find in your Duties. Put don't you also sometimes find the
Comforts of Communion with God, earnestly desire and endeavor it, when you
cannot obtain it; and groan under the Burden of your Formality and Hypocrisy,
when you cannot help them: Remember then, that your Duties as well as your
Souls, are washed, in precious Blood; and being offered upon the golden Altar,
they will come up as Incense before GOD (Rev. viii. 3, 4)

Be animated by all your Difficulties, to greater Diligence, in making your
Calling and Election sure. Give Glory to God for the Graces of his Spirit.
which you have experienced. Let your Experience keep up your Hope; and consider
it as the Pledge and Earnest of your future Inheritance.

4. I conclude with a Word of Exhortation to every one, to make it their great
Care and Business, not to fail of the Grace of God, lest to their unspeakable
Confusion, they at last fall short of his Kingdom and Glory. -- What Arguments
can I use to press this momentous Concern upon you? You have heard that you
must experience this Change, or inevitably perish. And can you be fearless and
careless under such a dreadful Prospect? Can you be contented to be shut out of
the Kingdom of Heaven at last? Can you be contented to have all the Means of
Grace you enjoy; and all your Opportunities to make your Peace with God, prove
an Addition to your Guilt and future Misery? Can you be contented to see your
Neighbors and Acquaintance, who have lived under the same Advantages and Means
of Grace with you, sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
GOD; and you yourselves shut out? Can you be contented to have the nearest and
dearest godly Friends you have in the World, glorify God's Justice in your
eternal Ruin, while you are weltring in the unquenchable Flames; Can you be
contented to lose the blessed Society of the glorious God, of the Lord Jesus
Christ, of the holy Angels; and of glorified Saints, for the execrable Company
of the Devil and his Angels? -- Consider these Things, ye, that forget GOD,
least he tear you in Pieces, when there will be none to deliver. -- Well! my
poor unregenerate Friends, what Conclusion will you come to? Must I after all I
can say, find you at the left Hand of Christ at last? -- I would fain hope,
that I may prevail with some of you to come to a present Resolution, to fly for
Refuge to the Hope set before you.

Let me then entreat you, to realize your Misery and Danger. Set apart some
Time every Day to meditate upon the vast Number and Aggravations of your Sins,
the dreadful Weight of your Guilt, the terrible Wrath of an angry God, which
hangs over your Heads; and the amazing Eternity which you are hastening into.
Meditate these Things, till they excite in you a serious, earnest, and lasting
Enquiry after an Escape from the Wrath to come: For indeed poor Souls, it is a
fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God (Heb, x. 31)

Let me entreat you to give up your false Hope. You hope to be saved; but how
many are there that either know no Reason of their Hope, or else build their
Expectations upon the sandy Foundation of their own Righteousness. But why will
you hold fast that Hope, which must end in eternal Despair, if it be a little
longer entertained: -- There is no Hope will stand by you, but what is built
upon the Merits of Jesus Christ; and the infinite Riches of God's free Grace
and Love. And you have no Claim to this Hope, without an Interest in Christ by
Faith, and Access to the Grace of God through him. For it is Christ in you, that
is your Hope of Glory. Col* i. 27. And you must through the Spirit, wait for the
Hope of Righteousness by Faith. Gal. v. 5.

Let me nevertheless entreat you to strive in earnest, in the Use of all Means;
and not to give Way to desponding and despairing Apprehensions of your Case.
There is yet Hope in Israel concerning this Thing. I am not advising you to
give up all Hope of Salvation, when directing you to renounce your false Hope;
but only to quit your Expectations of Salvation in your present State; and from
your own Seize. Despair would be the greatest Dishonor to God; and Ruin
to your own Souls, that you can be chargeable with. Take Encouragement
therefore, to exercise the most earnest, active and vigorous Application, to
the Throne of Grace, in all the appointed Means of Life. For he that ploweth,
may plow in Hope. You have as much Encouragement to hope for Mercy in such a
Way of Duty, as any unconverted Man in the World ever had. None of these ever
had any other Refuge to fly to, but the free Grace of God in Christ; and that
Door stands open for you also. Strive therefore to enter in. For God has not
said to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain (Isa. xlv. 19)

Let me entreat you to be earnest with God, for the special Influences of his
blessed Spirit Cry earnestly and constantly to God, that he would fulfill the
good Pleasure of his Goodness in your Souls. You cannot procure a saving Change
in yourselves; and it is in vain to attempt it in your own Strength. Be
therefore importunate with God, that he will quicken you by his Spirit dwelling
in you (as Romans viii. 11)

To conclude. Look to it, that you don't take up your Rest, short of a sensible
Experience of the divine Life in your Souls. Don't content yourselves, till you
feel the Actings of Faith in Jesus Christ, a hatred of Sin, a Love to God and
Godliness, a Life of spiritual Mindedness; and the Comforts of Communion and
Fellowship with God: Don't rest till you have lively Views of the eternal
World; and an active Engagement of Soul in the Pursuit of it. Don't rest until
you get more and more Victory over your Corruptions; and more and more Delight
and Enlargement in your spiritual Course. Thus laying aside every Weight, and
the Sin which does so easily be beset you, run with Patience the Race that is
set before you, looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of your Faith. --
To him be Glory and Dominion for ever. Amen.

REMARKS On a Discourse of Dr. Waterland's, entitled, Regeneration stated and
explained, according to Scripture and Antiquity.
HAVING in the proceeding Sermon, something distinctly considered the Nature
and Necessity of Regeneration, there will be no Occasion to take particular
Notice of all that is exceptionable in Dr. Waterland's Discourse upon that
Subject. I shall therefore endeavor no more, than briefly to show in the
General, that the Foundation upon which he builds his Hypothesis is false and
deceitful; that his Doctrines are erroneous and dangerous, and his Arguments
weak and inconclusive. For this is sufficient to rescue those from the
perilous Delusion, who have a just Value for their immortal Souls, without
making any special Remarks, upon many particular Errors, strongly asserted,
without any other Evidence, than the great Name and Character of the Author.

The Discourse I am considering, is the Substance of two Sermons, preached from
Tit. iii. 5. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done; but according to
his Mercy he saved us, by the Washing of Regeneration, and the Renewing of the
Holy Ghost.

The Dr. interprets the Washing (or Laver) of Regeneration in this Text, of
Water Baptism, as (he tells us) the Ancients always did; and the Rules of true
Criticism require (page 2) and understands this latter Part of the Text, to be
nearly parallel to those Words of our Lord, except a Man be born of Water and
the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. (p. 4)

In considering this Case, I shall first give my Reasons, why I cannot
understand either of these Texts of a baptismal Regeneration, and then proceed
to show, that if they are to be understood as referring to Water Baptism, they
will prove no Foundation for the Doctrines, Dr. Waterland pretends to build
upon them.

To begin with that in Tit. iii. 5. Why may not the Washing of Regeneration, be
here understood of the first Conversion of a Sinner, whereby he is (as it were
in a Laver) cleansed from the former Pollution and Defilement of his Sins; and
the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, be understood of a progressive Sanctification;
or else the latter Clause be considered as exegetical of the former, showing
us, that the Washing of Regeneration, is by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost? The
Dr. tells us that the Rules of true Criticism require, that it should be
otherwise understood. But certain it is, that the Rules of true Criticism do
not require that numerous Places of Scripture, both in the old Testament and
the New, parallel to the Words before us, should be understood in the Sense he
pleads for: But on the Contrary make it necessary, that they must be understood
in the View which I now propose. To exemplify this. That Text in Ezekiel. xxxvi.
25, 26, 27. must necessarily be understood, according to my Interpretation of
the Words under Consideration; and cannot by any rational and modest
Construction, be forced into the Dr's Scheme. Then will I sprinkle clean Water
upon you; and make you clean from all your Filthiness; and from all your Idols
will I cleanse you. A new Heart also will I give you; and a new Spirit will I
put within you. And I will take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh; and I
will give you an Heart of Flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you; and cause
you to walk in my Statutes; and keep my Judgments and do them. -- In these
Words it is plainly visible, that by sprinkling with clean Water, must be
understood the first Change made by Conversion and Regeneration; that Change by
which a new Heart is given, and a new Spirit put within the happy Recipients of
it; and the stony Heart taken out of their Flesh; and a Heart of Flesh given
them. This then, is the Washing of Regeneration. And is not God's putting his
Spirit within them; and causing them to walk in his Statutes, and keep his
Judgments and do them, a progressive Work of Sanctification; or the Renewing of
the Holy Ghost? -- I cannot see any Appearance of Reason, why those Words in
Tit. iii. 5. may not be interpreted, as these so apparently parallel to 'em,
must be interpreted. -- If indeed this were the only Place in Scripture, were
Washing with Water; and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, were to be understood
in the Sense I plead for, the Case were more disputable; but a distinct View of
this Matter will plainly show us, that the like Phraseology has this constant
and invariable Meaning, throughout the Bible. Thus for Instance in Isa. xliv.
3. I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground.
I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thing Offspring. Isa.
lii. 15. So shall he sprinkle many Nations. Psalm. li. 7.10. Wash me, and I
shall be whiter than the Snow. Create in me a clean Heart O God, and renew a
right Spirit within me. Joh. xiii. 8. If I wash thee not, thou have no Part
with me. 1 Cor. vi. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Heb. x.
22. Having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed
with pure Water. Many other Texts to the same Purpose, might be cited; but it
is needless to enlarge.

If it be enquired, why this Metaphor of sprinkling or washing with Water is so
constantly used, to represent our Regeneration, or that new Principle, whereby
we are brought to the Exercise of Faith in Christ, and to a Life of Holiness. I
answer, there is such a lively Resemblance, between the Washing away of
external Defilement with Water, and the Purifying our Hearts from internal
Pollution, by Faith in the Blood of Christ, as renders this Way of speaking
most pertinent, plain and familiar. And accordingly, the Apostle in the ninth
Chapter to the Hebrews, particularly shows us, that all the legal Purifications
among the Jews, were Types and Prefigurations of the Blood of Christ, by which
(when received by Faith) our Consciences are purged from dead Works to serve
the living God.

Another Reason why I cannot understand the Dr's Text, in the Sense which he
pleads for, is because Regeneration or the new Birth, is so very often spoken
of in Scripture, without any Referrence to Water Baptism; and consequently
ought in like Manner to be understood, in the Words before us. Thus Joh. i. 13.
Which were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of
Man, but of God. Gal. iv. 29. But as then, he that was born after the Flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. 1 Pet. 1.23.
Being born again, not of corrptible Seed; but of incorruptible, by the Word of
God, which lives and abides forever. 1 John iii. 9. Whosoever is born of God,
does not commit Sin. For his Seed remains in him; and he cannot Sin, because
he is born of God. 1 John v. 4, 18. For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes
the World. -- We know that whosoever is born of God, sins not. In all which
Texts, where the new Birth is expressly mentioned, there is not the least
Appearance of any Reference to Water Baptism. And this will further appear to
be the Case, if we take Notice of several Passages of Scripture, where the same
Thing is spoken of in different Terms. For Instance, to be begotten of God,
gives us the very same Idea with Regeneration, or the new Birth; and is not
only used in the very same Sense, but is the very same Word in the Original,
wherever it occurs. 1 John v. 18. We know, that whosoever is born of God,
sins not; but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked
One touches him not. 1 Pet. 1.3. Has begotten us again, to a lively Hope.
Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us, with the Word of Truth. 1 John v. 1.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God: And every one
that loves (...) that begat, loves him that is begotten of him. -- It must
also (...) allowed, that those Texts of Scripture which speak of our being
created anew, or becoming new Creatures, or new Men, must signify, the very
same Thing, with being born again, or born of God, since both the one and the
other, are Metaphors used to the same Purpose, with a Design to represent our
being brought into a new State, as then (in a spiritual Sense) beginning to
exit, or to have Life. And if all such Passages of Scripture (...) distinctly
considered, not one of them will be found to have (...) Reference to Baptism.
To exemplify this. We read ^ Cor. v. 17. If any Man be in Christ he is a new
Creature; old Things are passed away, behold all Things are become new. Gal.
vi. 15, For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any Thing; nor
Uncircumcision: but the new Creature. Ephesians. i. 10. For we are his Workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus, unto good Works. Col. iii. 10. And have put on the
new-Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that created him.

Now upon this View of the Case, what Manner of Reason can be assigned, why the
Washing of Regeneration, must signify Baptism? Must it be so, because the Word
Washing or Laver, must be literally understood and necessarily carries the Idea
of Water in it? We find, by many Instances of the like Use of the same Way of
Speaking in Scripture, that this Conclusion can by no Means be justified. This
Expression therefore, must not be taken in a literal, but in a metaphorical and
spiritual Sense. -- Must it be so, because the Nature of the Thing does suppose
and require this Interpretation? This Supposal also, appears to have no
Foundation, as has been fully and clearly exemplified -- If therefore it be a
good Rule, to interpret Scripture by Scripture; if we are ordinarily to find
out the Meaning of a particular Text of Scripture, by the constant and
invariable Use of the same Manner of Diction, in other Parts of the Bible; this
Notion of a baptismal Regeneration, has no Foundation at all in the Word of God.

If we should proceed to compare the Characters of the new Birth, in those
Scripture Passages which I have cited, with Dr. Waterland's Account of it, we
shall find still further Evidence, of his Misinterpretation of the Text in
Question. For Instance.

To be born of God, in the Scripture Account of it, implies that vital
Principle, whereby we are enabled to believe in Jesus Christ. Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. 1 John v. 1. but in Dr.
Waterland's Account of it. A Man may be regenerat^^^, who receives Baptism
(like Simon Magus suppose) in Hypocrisy or Impenitency; when Pardon and Grace,
and all Gospel Privileges, are conditionally made-over to them, though not
actually applied, by Reason of their Disqualifications. (from p. 27 to p. 30)
-- That is in plain Terms, he may be regenerated, without any actual
Application of any of the saving Graces of the Spirit of God. And on the other
Hand. Faith in Jesus Christ, is (according to him) so far from being an
Evidence of Regeneration, that a Man may have Faith in Christ, before he is
born of God. Preventing Grace (says he) must go before, to work in the Man
Faith and Repentance, which are Qualifications previous to Baptism. These he
calls the first and lowest Degrees of Renovation. (p. 13) He again tells us,
that an Adult, coming to Baptism fitly prepared by Faith and Repentance; and
afterward persevering to the End, -- He is not yet (before Baptism) buried
with Christ into Death, nor planted in the Likeness of his Resurrection; nor
indeed clothed with the baptismal Garment; and therefore in strictness, he is
not a Member of Christ, nor a Child of God. (p. 20. 22)

In the scripture Account of Regeneration, whosoever is born of God, does not
commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot Sin, because he is
born of God. He keeps himself, and that wicked One touches him not. 1 John
iii, 9, 18. But in the Dr's Account, a Man that is regenerated, may be so far
from having the Seed of God REMAIN in him, and from keeping himself that the
wicked One shall not touch him, that he may Revolt from God, either for a Time,
or for ever (p. 12.)

In the scripture Account of Regeneration, it is wrought in the Soul by the
Word of God, as the ordinary Means, by which we are brought into the new Life.
Of his own Will begat he us, by the Word of Truth. Jam 1.18. Being born again,
not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God. 1 Pet. i.
23. But in the Dr's Account of it, the Holy Spirit, in and by the Use of Water
Baptism, causes the new Birth (p. 3)

Moreover from the scripture Account of this Change, the happy Partaker of it,
lives a Life of Holiness and new Obedience. He sins not, He overcomes the
World. He lives in the Love of God and his Brethren. Old Things are passed
away, and all Things are become new. He is created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, which God has before ordained, that he should walk in them, as appears
from the Texts before cited. But on the Contrary, the Dr. supposes, that the
Regenerate may finally fall from Grace (p. 18 in the Margin) And that such as
have been savingly regenerated may fall away by Desertion and Disobedience; and
that a Person once savingly regenerated, may afterward lose all the salutary
Use of it (p. 26) And that those may be regenerated who receive Baptism (like
Simon Magus suppose) in Hopocrisy and Impenitency (p. 27)

The Reader is now to judge, which of these two Representations of the Case is
right, and to choose which of them he will believe. Whether the Scripture
Account, which declares all Believers in Christ to be born of God, or the Dr's
Account of this Matter, who supposes a Man may be born of God without Faith in
Christ; and that a Man may have Faith and Repentance, before he is born again;
the Scripture Account, which represents Regeneration as an abiding Principle,
or the Dr's, which supposes the regenerate may revolt from God, either for a
Time, or for ever. He may choose, whether he will believe the Scripture
Representation, that the Word of God is the ordinary Means of Regeneration, or
the Dr's Supposal, that this is wrought by Baptism only: the Scripture
Representation, that the Regenerate are a holy People, or the Dr's Supposal,
that they may be Apostates, Hypocrites, and Impenitent. He must judge whether
this be not sufficient Evidence, that the Dr. knew not what he said, nor
whereof he affirmed, that he has laid his Foundation upon the Sand, and that
his Superstructure must necessarily sink with it.

Upon the Whole then, we may safely conclude, that the Washing of Regeneration
in the Dr's Text, does not, cannot signify Baptism; because wherever the like
Methods of speaking are found in Scripture, they necessarily have a quite
different Meaning, because Regeneration is so often mentioned in Scripture,
without the least Reference to Water Baptism; and because the Characters which
the Scripture gives; and those which the Dr. gives of the new Birth, are
directly opposite and inconsistent.

Since I wrote this, I happened occasionally to meet with Dr. Doddridge's
excellent Sermons on Regeneration, and finding there a Paragraph most opposite
to the present Purpose, I could not forbear transcribing it. Now I have shown
you (says he) from a Variety of Scriptures, under the former Heads, that every
one whom the sacred Oracles represent as born of God, receives Christ,
overcomes the World, and sins not. But it is too plain, that these
Characters do not agree to every one that is baptized, and consequently it
evidently follows, that every one that is baptized is not of Course born of God
or regenerate; and therefore that Baptism is not scripture Regeneration. I
think no mathematical Demonstration plainer or more certain, that this
Conclusion. And therefore, whatever great and ancient Names may be urged, on
the other Side of the Question. I shall rest the Matter here, without leading
you into the Niceties of a Controversy, so easily decided.

I now proceed to consider, whether our blessed Lord speaks of a baptismal
Regeneration, in Joh. 3.5. -- And here it must be premised, that all the
Reasons already assigned, why the other Text cannot be understood in this
Sense, are equally conclusive in the present Case. All the Scriptures which I
have cited, do as directly serve to illustrate the Meaning of this, as of the
other Text. And all the Scripture Characters of the new Birth, are as
applicable here, as they be there. To be born of Water, and of the Spirit, is
the same Thing, with the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy
Ghost; and as I have made it appear, that the latter does not signify a
baptismal Regeneration; it thence also appears, that the former can have no
such Signification. I shall however consider some further Reasons, why being
born of Water and the Spirit, cannot be understood in the Sense the Dr.
contends for.

1. If being born with Water in this Text signifies Baptism, then there are
none in any Case whatsoever, who dye unbaptized, that shall ever obtain
Salvation. The Exclusion of all who are not born of Water, and of the Spirit,
is peremptory, and without any Limitation. Our Lord strongly asserts, that
these cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, And now will any of the Dr's
Admirers venture to teach, that all Infants who dye in the Womb, at the Birth,
or at any Time before there be Opportunity to obtain the Ordinance of Baptism
for them, will be eternally shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven? Will they
venture to teach that such Adults, as are truly penitent for their Sins, and
true Believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, shall eternally perish, for being
providentially deprived of the Opportunity of being baptized? Will they venture
to teach, that every unbaptized Person whatsoever, under whatever Disadvantages
of Education, in whatever Place of Abode Providence has fixed his Habitation,
how impossible soever it may be for him to obtain this Ordinance, shall not,
notwithstanding the Sincerity of his Repentance toward God, and Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ; and notwithstanding his holy and heavenly Conversation, and
hearty desire of Baptism, be eternally shut out of the Presence of God -- And
yet this cruel and uncharitable Doctrine, is the necessary Consequence of their
Interpretation of this Text. But blessed be God, these are not the Doctrines of
our Lord Jesus Christ. He teaches us indeed, that he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. Mark xvi. 16. But the negative Part of that
Proposition is limited to the Unbeliever only. He that believes not, shall be
damned. Though he makes no Promise of Salvation to the Despiser, or wilful
Neglecter of this Ordinance, yet he does not denounce Damnation, to all who are
necessarily deprived of this precious Privilege. -- And accordingly the Apostle
Peter instructs us, that it is not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, by
the Water of Baptism that saves, 1 Pet. iii. 21. It cannot therefore be the
Want of this, without Contempt or Neglect, that will damn us. -- From these
Considerations, we may then safely and certainly conclude, that the Text does
not speak of a baptismal Regeneration; the Consequence of such an
Interpretation being too frightful and unmerciful, to be allowed or supposed.

2. Another Reason against assigning this Meaning to the Words before us, is
our Savior's upbraiding Nicodemus for his Ignorance of these Things. Art thou
a Master in Israel, and know not these Things? (verse 10) -- What Things
does our Savior Mean. -- Does he upbraid him for not knowing the Necessity of
his Compliance with the Gospel Ordinance of Baptism; and his being regenerated
by the Spirit, in the Use of that Ordinance? How should a Master in Israel know
these Things, which he had never read or heard of before? -- This therefore
cannot be our Lord's Meaning. But if we allow the Construction of these Words,
which I am pleading for, the Reproof will appear most natural and reasonable.
It was indeed a Shame, for a Master in Israel, to be ignorant of that Birth of
Water and of the Spirit, which is so often spoken of by the Prophets. It was a
Shame for Nicodemus to be ignorant of the Necessity of being sprinkled with
clean Water, and made clean, of having God's Spirit put within him, that he
might walk in God's Statutes; and keep his Judgments and do them.

Dr. Waterland, seems to have been apprehensive of this Obection, and in Order
to obviate it, tells us, that the Name or the Notion, probably was not
altogether new in our Lord's Time. For the Jews had be'n used to admit Converts
from Heathenism into the Jewish Church, by a Baptism of their own; and they
called Admission or Reception of such Converts, by the Name of Regeneration or
New Birth, as it was something like bringing them into a new World. P. 5.

He does not indeed tell us what it is, that he sounds this Conjecture of his
upon, that we also might judge, whether the Name or the Notion was probably not
altogether new in our Lord's Time. But admit that this was not only probably
but certainly Fact, (...) is it to the Purpose? For how could a Master in
Israel know, that because Heathens were washed with Water, when admitted as
Converts from Heathenism into the Jewish Church, that therefore a Jew must be
baptized, in order to his entering into the Kingdom of Heaven? How could he know
that our blessed Lord would improve the Notion (as Dr. Waterland says he did)
by the Addition of the Spirit; and enlarge the Use of the Rite, by ordering,
that every one, every Convert to Christianity, every Candidate for Heaven,
should be baptized? (p. 7) It is plain, that his being a Master in Israel,
would acquaint him with none of these Things; and therefore that this could not
be our Lord's Meaning, if we allow any Propriety in this his Reproof of
Nicodemus.

3. Another Reason why this Text cannot be understood, as signifying a
baptismal Regeneration, is our Lord's Interpretation of his Meaning, in the
sixth Verse of this Context. That which is born of the Flesh it Flesh, that
which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Whereby he plainly shows us, that it was
a spiritual Birth he spoke of; and they were spiritual Persons who had obtained
it. Now could Dr. Waterland pretend, that all who were baptized, and so
(according to his Construction of the debated Text) were born of Water and of
the Spirit, were truly spiritual Persons? No! he could not but acknowledge, that
there are some of these, (like Simon Magus) in a State of Hypocrify and
Impenitency. And it is visibly and lamentably true, that the far greatest Part
of the Baptized, who (according to him are all born of Water and of the Spirit,
have no Claim at all to the Character of spiritual Persons.

These Things put together, make it appear to me equal to Demonstration, that
our Lord Jesus Christ had no Reference to Baptism, in these Words under
Consideration. We may not suppose, that he positively pronounced all such
incapable of the Kingdom of God, who are by his holy Providence, denied the
Opportunity of enjoying Baptism. -- We are certain, that he would not upbraid
Nicodemus, for his Ignorance of what it is impossible he should have been
acquainted with. -- We are certain, that all baptized Persons are not truly
Spiritual; and yet our Lord assures us, that the Birth he speaks of, has that
transforming Efficacy upon those that experience it, as to make 'em all such.
-- These Texts are therefore safe in our Hands, notwithstanding all Endeavors
to wrest them from us. And these two which I have now considered, are the only
Texts in the Bible, which can with any Appearance of Plausibility, be urged in
Favor of the Dr.'s Hypothesis. How many there be, that do in the strongest
Terms contradict this Scheme has been already considered.

But after all, should we allow that both these Texts have a Reference to
Baptism. Should we allow, that being born of Water and the Washing of
Regeneration are to be understood of Baptism. These Texts will prove no
Foundation for the Doctrines which Dr Waterland and the episcopal Clergy among
us (who seem generally to be of his Way of thinking) pretend to build upon them.

Be it then supposed, that the Ordinance of Baptism is here referred to, in
both these Texts, it can in neither of 'em imply any more, than the Pledge,
Sign, Seal, or Token of our Regeneration. It cannot imply, that Regeneration
itself always accompanies this Ordinance; and that all who are baptized, are
born again. If we allow this Sense of the Words, we thereby suppose, that to be
born of Water, is to receive Baptism as a Pledge or Sign of our being cleansed
from our Pollution, by the divine Influences of the Spirit of God, and of our
thereby becoming new Creatures, and as it were born a new. And thus Baptism may
be called the Laver of Regeneration, as it is a Pledge and Sign of our being
cleansed by Regeneration, as it were in a Laver. In both Cases, the Sign must
be (by this Interpretation of the Words) put for the Thing signified, as being
a lively Emblem and Representation thereof. -- This is a Way of speaking
commonly, and frequently used in Scripture, Thus we read of the Covenant of
Circumcision. Acts vii. 8. i. e. that Covenant, whereof Circumcision was a Sign
and Seal. Thus likewise we read of Christ our Passover. 1 Cor. v. 7. i. e
Christ the Substance and Antitype, signified and represented by the Passover.
Thus we also read of the Circumcision of the Heart in the Spirit. i. e. that
Renovation of Heart by the Spirit, whereof Circumcision was the Sign and Seal.
In like Manner our Lord Jesus Christ is called the Lamb of God, our Sacrifice,
etc to show us, that all the legal Oblations referred to, and terminated in
him. And if the Texts before us have any Relation at all to Baptism, they must
be understood in this Sense and no other, for the following Reasons,

1. Because there is no necessary Connection between Baptism, and our being
born of the Spirit. -- Simon Magus was rightly and duly baptized, and yet had
no Part or Lot is that Matter; but was in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bonds of
Iniquity. Acts viii 21.23. I have already shown, that the Characters of the new
Birth, belong to but very few of the baptized World. All Discourse therefore of
a spiritual Birth, with Relation to these who live and dye in a carnal State,
is but a Medly of Inconsistency and Contradiction. -- Should we suppose with
Dr. Waterland (p. 28, 22) that the Holy Spirit has some Way or other a Hand in
every true and valid Baptism; that the Holy Spirit is in some Sort offered to
all that receive Christian Baptism; that the holy Spirit consecrates and
sanctifies he Waters of Baptism, giving them an outward and relative Holiness;
and that the Unworthy are by their Baptism put into an external christian
State. What is all this to their being born of the Spirit? What is this to
those Characters of the new Birth, that have been particularly recited from the
sacred Oracles. Baptism cannot therefore be the new Birth; because it is a Fact
too notorious to be disputed, that the most of those who are baptized, were
never born of the Spirit at all, never had any of the Characters of a
regenerate State; and consequently this Ordinance can be no more, than the
Sign, Pledge, or Seal of Regeneration.

2. Regeneration is an Act of God's Sovereign Grace: the Product of his mere
good Pleasure and Almighty Power. Whatever Means he is pleased to make Use of,
in bringing about this blessed Change; yet the Change itself, is by his own
immediate Agency, without the Help of any other concurring Cause in its
Production. The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the Sound
thereof; but can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is every
one that is born of the Spirit. Joh. iii 8. We are born, not of the Will of
Man, but of God. Joh. i. 13. Of his own Will begat he us. Jam. i. 18. We are
God's Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. Ephesians. ii. 10. No Man
then can have more Agency in the new Birth, than in the Generation of the Wind,
the Execution of the divine Will, or the Creation of a new World. This Dr.
Waterland acknowleges. No Man (says he) regenerates himself at all, that is, he
has no Part in the regenerating Act (which is entirely God's) whatever he may
have in the Receptive. And if in this Sense only it be said, that he be purely
passive, it is good and sound Doctrine. (p. 17) I therefore insist upon it,
that this good and sound Doctrine, does utterly subvert his whole Scheme. If
Man can have no Hand in the regenerating Act, but that is entirely God's, and
Man can have a Hand in Baptism, it is then certain, that Baptism is not the
regenerating Act, nor can in any Sense be called Regeneration; but as it is an
outward Sign, Seal, of Token of it. I see no possibility of an Answer to this,
but either by retracting the Dr's Concession now cited, and endeavoring to
prove directly contrary to the above cited Scriptures, that Regeneration is not
an Act of God's Prerogative and Sovereignty; and that Man may concur and have a
Hand in it, Or else by endeavoring to prove, that Man does not concur, and has
no Hand at all in the Administration of Baptism; but this also is God's
peculiar Prerogative, and a Work of his immediate Power. Here then the Matter
must rest.

It will not at all help the Case, to say with Dr. Waterland, that the Unworthy
are by their Baptism, put into a christian State, otherwise they would be mere
Pagans still (p. 29) If this be granted, what follows? What necessary
Connection is there between a visible and external christian State, and
Regeneration? None at all, as I have particularly shown before. And I now
enquire, how they are brought into the christian State? Are they God's
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works? Are they born, not of the
Will of Man but of God? No! they are yet unrenewed. They are yet in Hypocrisy
and Impenitency. They have had no more than a Change of their external
Relation. A Change that depends upon the Will of Man, and how then can they be
properly said to be born again. How can their Baptism be any more than an
external Sign, or Seal of that spiritual Change, which they have had no
Experience of.

What is the regenerating Act, according to the Dr. with respect to God
Almighty, but Admission or Adoption into Sonship or spiritual Citizenship? (p.
11) And what is this Adoption or Sonship with respect to a great Part of those
that partake of it; but the Consecration of the Waters of Baptism, to an
outward and relative Holiness, and a Consecration of the Persons also, i^ (...)
outward and relative Sense, whether good or bad, by a sacred Dedication of them
to the Worship and Service of the (...) Trinity; by which they are brought into
an external Christian State (p. 28, 29) This is all the Regeneration that the
(...) himself supposes, with respect to a great Part of the baptized World. And
all this does (upon his Scheme) depend upon the Will of Man. For it is what
always accompanies every true and valid Baptism, though administered to the
Hypocrite, impenitent and unworthy, as appears from his 28, 29, and 30 Pages.
And consequently, this regenerating Act, is always as much at the Choice of
every Man good or bad, as it is at his Choice, whether he will, or will not be
baptized.

In a Word, the regenerating Act (upon this Hypothesis) is nothing but Baptism
itself. For it enters into the Definition of Baptism, that the Water have an
outward relative Holiness; and that the baptized Person be brought into an
external Christian State. The outward Consecration of the Water, and the
Administration of the Ordinance in the Name of the sacred Trinity, necessarily
imply both these Things. The whole Question therefore is, whether Man do, or do
not concur in the Ordinance of Baptism. -- The holy Spirit (he tells us) has a
Hand in every valid Baptism. What Hand? None at all in the Case before us, but
to make the Ordinance valid. There is no real Change wrought in such an
impenitent Hypocrite. No relative Change, but what he may choose or refuse at
Pleasure.

I cannot forbear taking Notice upon this Occasion, of a manifest Blunder and
Contradiction in the Dr's Scheme. Regeneration (he tells us) is the Work of the
Spirit in the Use of Water, that is the Work of the Spirit singly; for Water
does nothing, is no Agent at all (p. 16) It is a Change from the State natural,
into the State spiritual, a Translation from the Curse of Adam, into the Grace
of Christ (p. 11) And again, the Holy Spirit translates them (Infants) out of a
State of Nature to which a Curse belongs, into a State of Grace, Favor and
Blessing, this is their Regeneration (p. 24) And yet those Adults may be
regenerated, who have never had any Work of the Spirit upon their Hearts, never
been translated into the Grace of Christ; but are yet in Hypocrisy and
Impenitency (p. 27) And those Infants may be regenerated, where Renovation has
no Place at all for the Time being (p. 13) and consequently, they are not
translated at all into a State of Grace, Favor and Blessing. -- He again tells
us, that in the Case of Adults, Regeneration and Renovation must go together,
otherwise, the Regeneration is not a salutary nor a complete Regeneration. (p.
19) And yet (as I have so often observed) he allows, and endeavors to prove,
that such Adults as have been baptized, are born of Water and of the Spirit,
though they have no Renovation at all, but are in a State of Hypocrisy and
Impenitency. -- His Admirers would have done well to have reconciled these
Contradictions, before they had been so active in propagating his dangerous
Doctrines.

3. I will add this further Evidence to the Point before us, that the Apostle
assures us, that neither Circumcision avails any Thing, nor Uncircumcision;
but the new Creature. Gal. vi. 15. By which it appears, that notwithstanding
the Enjoyment of any Ordinances, the new Creature or the new Birth may by
wanting, and our Privileges, avail us nothing at all. The same Thing is
confirmed by the Apostle Peter, with Respect to Baptism in particular, 1 Pet.
iii. 21. The like Figure whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us, (not
the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

That is, as one of the greatest Divines that our Nation has ever bred, Dr.
Owen Pneumatalogia. p. 180.
has paraphrased these Words. The outward Administration of this Ordinance
considered materially, reaches no further but to the Washing away the Filth of
the Flesh, but more is signified thereby. There is denoted in it, the
Restipulation of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Christ
from the Dead; or a Conscience purged from dead Works, to serve the living God.
Heb. ix. 14. And quickened by Virtue of his Resurrection, to holy Obedience, see
Romans vi. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. By these Texts it is evident, that Baptism is not the
new Creature; and that it saves us, only as it is a Pledge and Sign of a
renewed Conscience, and of our being quickened by Virtue of Christ's
Resurrection, unto Newness of Life. Or in other Words, it is not properly in
any Respect Regeneration itself, but the outward Sign, Pledge, or Token of it.
Which was the Thing to be proved.

By what has been said, I think it is clearly manifest, that if these Texts
under Consideration, are even allowed to have a Referrence unto Baptism, this
cannot be supposed in any other Sense, than (...) Baptism is an outward Sign,
Seal, Pledge or Token of Regeneration; and not properly in any Respect the new
Birth itself. For how can that strictly speaking be the new Birth, or any Part
of it, which is enjoyed by Multitudes, who have no one scripture Character of
the regenerate State? How can a Person be said to be born not of the Will of
Man but of God, to be God's Workmanship, created anew in Christ Jesus; and to
be born of God's mere good Will and Pleasure by this Ordinance which depends
upon the Will and Pleasure of Man? How can Baptism in Strictness and Propriety
of Speech, be the new Creature, when we may enjoy all Ordinances without being
new Creatures? How can Baptism in itself avail to our Regeneration, when no
Ordinance will avail any Thing without Regeneration or the new Creature? How
can the Washing away the Filth of the Flesh, be Regeneration, without what is
signified thereby, a renewed Conscience, and a Conformity to the Resurrection
of Christ, in a Renovation of our Lives? I must needs say, they are bold
enough, who dare venture their Eternity upon the Dr's Scheme, after such
Evidence as this against it.

Thus I have given my Reasons against the Dr's Interpretation of these
Scriptures; and must now attend to what he has to say in Favor of it.

His principal Argument for this Construction of the Words, is this, One Thing
is certain, that the Ancients took in Baptism into their Notion of
Regeneration. A learned Writer has proved at large, that both the Greek and
Latin Fathers, not only used that Word for Baptism; but so appropriated it also
to Baptism, as to exclude any other Conversion or Repentance not considered
with Baptism, from being signified by that Name (p. 8)

To which I answer, that though I don't pretend to vie with the Dr. in the
Knowledge of Antiquity; yet I cannot but presume, from what little Acquaintance
I have with the Doctrines of the Ancients, that they generally understood these
Texts to signify Regeneration, in no other Sense than I have now last explained
them. And what strengthens my Presumption is, that some of his own Quotations
plainly carry this Sense with them, and particularly that from St. Augustine,
whom he has cited in Confirmation of his Doctrine, Aqua igitur, exhibens
forinsecus Sacramentum Gratiae, et Spiritus operans intrinsecus Beneficium
Gratiae, solvens Vinculum Culpae, reconcilians Bonum Naturae, regenerant
Hominem in uno Christo, ex uno Adamo generatum.
expressy shows us his Sense of this Matter, that the Water (of Baptism)
externally shows forth the Sacrament of Grace; and the Spirit internally
operates the Benefit of it. -- The Fathers some of them did indeed (as was
their usual Method of speaking) use very strong and hyperbolical Expressions
upon this Subject, which would almost lead one into the Apprehension, that they
held even the Popish Opinion of the Necessity of the Sacraments, and of their
conferring Grace ex Opere operato, by their own proper Virtue. But then when we
find them on set Purpose, declaring their Sentiments of this Matter, denying
the absolute Necessity of Baptism to Salvation; and calling Baptism Obsignatio
Fidei, and Sigillum Fidei, the Sign and Seal of Faith, one would hope to have
found a Key to these rhetorical Flourishes. Vide Willot's Synoptis Baptismi.
From p. 556 forward.


But it signifies but very little, what was the Opinion of the Fathers in this
Case. We have the Bible as well as they, and as good Advantages to understand
the Meaning of it, as they had. And it is as well known by all that are any
Thing acquainted with Antiquity, that they held many such ridiculous Opinions,
as would now expose a Man to the Contempt and Scorn of the World, if he should
make a Profession of them. To exemplify this, in an Instance something parallel
to the Case before us. Some of them explained that Text Joh. vi. 53. Except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Mun, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you,
to be understood of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and thence argued the
Necessity of Infants partaking of that Ordinance, in Order to their Salvation;
and they accordingly fed them with the consecrated Elements. Sine Christi Carne
et Sanguine, (says St. Augustine See Cont. 2 Epist. Prelog. Lib. 4.
) nec parvuli vitam habere possunt, in semetipsis. Without the Flesh and Blood
of Christ, neither can Infants have Life in themselves. And thence it was the
Custom of those Times, to give that Sacrament unto Infants, as the same Father
tells us. Parvulis adhuc et infirmis, stillantur quaedam de Sacramentis. c. 4.
in Psalm. 64.
Some Part of the Sacrament is instilled or dropped into the Mouths of young and
tender Children -- I would now ask the Dr's Admirers, whether this Argument
from the Fathers is good and conclusive? If not, why is it urged? If it be, why
don't they administer the Lord's Supper to Infants? Why are the Fathers pressed
into their Service, when they think they will serve their Turn; and rejected
when they differ in Sentiments from them?

Another Argument the Dr. uses to support his Interpretation of these
Scriptures, is this, That there is no Instance, no Example in Scripture, of any
Exhortation made to Christians, to be born anew, but to be reformed only, or
renewed in the inward Man (p, 32)

To this I answer. That one good Reason why there is no more Exhortations found
in the New Testament unto professed Christians, to obtain a regenerate State,
or to be born again, is because they to whom the Books in the New Testament
were immediately directed, were considered by the inspired Writers as being
generally Christians indeed, who had already experienced, and therefore could
not now want a first Conversion unto God. And its observable, that the Apostles
in their Epistles to the Churches, addressed them as being truly Regenerate;
and accordingly, they directed their Epistles to the beloved of God, called to
be Saints. Romans i. 7. To them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
Saints. 1 Cor. i. 2. To all the Saints which are in all Achaia. 2 Cor. i. 1. To
the Saints which are at Ephesus. Ephesians. i. 1. To the Saints in Christ Jesus,
which are at Phllippi. Phil. i. 1. To the Saints and faithful Brethren in
Christ, which are at Colosse. Col. i. 2. To the Church of the Theslalonians,
which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. i. 1. To the
Elect, according to the Foreknowledge of God. 1 Pet. i. 2. To them that have
obtained the like precious Faith with us. 1 Pet. i. 1. etc. It is remarkable,
that the Apostle Paul in his Introduction to every one of his Epistles to
particular Churches, salutes them as Saints, his Epistle to the Galatians only
excepted. Of these Galatians, he was was afraid, lest he had bestowed upon 'em
Labor in vain. Gal. iv. 11. He stood in Doubt of them, verse 20. For these
therefore he travailed in Birth again, till Christ were formed in them. Verse
19. or until they were born again, which is the Fruit of travailing in Birth,
and the plain Meaning of having Christ formed in them. Here then is a clear
Instance of the Necessity of Regeneration in professed Christians, whatever Dr.
Waterland alleges to the Contrary. I grant indeed with him, that this is not
favorable to the Notion of a second Regeneration. (p. 33) But it is favorable
to the Notion of the Necessity of a first Regeneration, even in nominal
Christians; and shows the Apostles Concern for such, that they might now be
born again, since he was afraid his former Travail in Birth for them, had
proved in vain.

And I must further observe, that though the Apostles in their Epistles to the
Churches, considered them as Christians, yet they frequently put them in Mind
of the Importance of their being so indeed, as well as in Profession; and to
that End, represented to 'em the Necessity of the new Birth, either in express
Terms, or in Words that fully ^^ply'd it. Thus Ephesians. iv. 24. Put on the new Man,
which after God, is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. v. 14.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead. 2 Cor. v. 17. If any Man be
in Christ he is a new Creature. Gal. vi. 15. In Christ Jesus, neither
Circumcision avails any Thing, nor Uncircumcision; but the new Creature. In
all which Texts, the new Man, a Resurrection from the Dead, or the new Creature
(expressions every Way synonimous to the new Birth as I have shown above) are
proposed, as necessary to our eternal Safety. And the same Necessity of the new
Birth, to professed Christians, is apparent from sundry Texts of Scripture
before cited. For it is by this, that such get a Victory over their Sins. 1 John iii. 9. By this, that they are brought to believe in Jesus Christ, 1 John
v. 1. to live in the Love of God and their Neighbor, 1 John iv. 7. to overcome
the World, 1 John, v. 4. To conquer the Temptations of Satan, 1 John v. 18. and
in a Word, by this they have a lively Hope of future Glory, 1 Pet. i. 3. By all
which we may see, that the Dr's Observation is founded upon a manifest Mistake,
is false in Fact, and would have been impertinent, if never so true. -- To
conclude this Head. Does not our blessed Lord himself, in as strong Terms as
can be spoken assure us, that except a Man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God? Joh. iii. 3. But he spoke this to Nicodemus, and Nicodemus was
a Jew, (p. 14) What then? Was it spoken to Nicodemus only? Are not the Words an
indefinite and unlimited Proposition, which equally respects the whole Race of
Mankind, without any Restriction, Exception, or Limitation? Certainly there is
none will find himself exempted, when it comes to the great decisive Trial, by
whatever Imaginations he may at present delude himself.

It may be expected, that I should say something to the Distinctions the Dr.
makes betweeen Regeneration and Renovation. But its sufficient in general to
observe, that if the Notion of a baptismal Regeneration, be a mere Figment,
without any scripture Foundation at all. (as I think I have clearly proved)
Then (...) Distinctions which he makes, with Relation to a baptismal
Regeneration, are but Distinctions about a Nonentity; and therefore merely
fictitious Impertinencies.

To this I shall only add, that though it were right to suppose that the
Renovation in his Text, implies a progressive Work of Sanctification, as well
as to suppose this to be different from the new Birth, or first saving Change,
it will no Ways follow, that Regeneration is not also a saving Renovation; but
even this Supposal makes it necessarily appear to be so. We are renewed by
being born again; and from this new Principle, (put into Exercise by the Spirit
of God* flows a continued Renovation or Sanctification. The new Man is after
God, created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. iv. 24. And thence it is,
that he that is born of God sins not, and cannot Sin; but purifieth himself
as God is pure; because this Seed of God remains in him.

I shall pass over the many exceptionable Passages in this Discourse, leaving
the Reader to determine the Fate of the Superstructure, by the Foundation upon
which it is built, which I hope he has by this Time, a pretty full and clear
View of. And so I shall proceed to some brief Remarks upon some Part of the
Improvement he makes of the Doctrine, which has been considered.

He begins with this Reflection, that it is very improper Language at least, to
call upon those that have been once regenerated in their Infancy, who have had
their new Birth already at the Font, to be now regenerated, or to bid them
expect a new Birth. (p. 31, 32) But is it so very improper Language, to call
upon those to be now regenerated, who have neither been regenerated in their
Infancy, nor in any succeeding Part of their Lives, who have indeed enjoyed the
Sign and Seal of Regeneration at their Baptism, but are Strangers to the Thing
signified; and are yet dead in Trespasses and Sins? -- That this is the sad
Case of much the greatest Part of professing Christians, is but too visible,
from the whole Tenor of their Lives and Conversations. And must we leave them
to go on securely in the Paths of Destruction and Death? Must we not call upon
'em to awake out of their Sleep, and arise from the Dead, that Christ may give
them Light? Must we in a scornful Manner be told, that such Application might
properly be directed to Jews, Turks, or Pagans, or such nominal Christians as
have cast off their Water Baptism (p. 31) How much does it concern the
Ministers of the Gospel, the more earnestly and constantly to use Line upon
Line, and Precept upon Precept, to inculcate this most important Point upon
their People, when such Attempts are made to lull them asleep, in a dangerous
and fatal Security. And how much does it concern our People in general, to hold
fast the faithful Word, as they have been taught; and to be no more Children
tossed to and fro, with every Wind of Doctrine, to the Loss of their precious
and immortal Souls

The Dr. proceeds in the next Place to observe, how very mischievous it is many
Ways (to call upon professed Christians to be regenerated) and therefore that
it cannot be looked upon as a mere verbal Business, or an innocent Misnomer. To
which it is sufficient Answer, that this is the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, as I think I have fully proved; and therefore whatever
mischievous Consequences Men may pretend to draw from it, the Mischief does not
flow from the Doctrine itself, but from the Abuse of it.

Among some other Instances of the mischievous Consequences, which he imagines
from this Doctrine, he mentions and chiefly insists upon this, that many -- may
be apt to go in Quest of what they call Impulses or inward Feelings of the
Spirit, which commonly are nothing more than warm Fancies, towering
Imaginations, and self-flattering Presumptions. (p. 36)

If by Feelings of the Spirit, he means, feeling or sensibly discerning the
Operations of our Minds, excited by the Influences of the Spirit, this is so
far from being a warm Fancy, or towering Imagination, that it is necessarily
experienced by every true Christian. It is impossible from the Nature of Things
to be otherwise. Can a Man possibly be under Conviction of Sin, under the
Exercise of Repentance for Sin, of Faith in Christ, of Love to God, or of
spiritual Mindedness, and not be sensible of these Operations of his own Mind?
And does not the Scripture expressly ascribe all these gracious Exercises of the
Mind, to the Influences of the Spirit of God? So that all the Graces of the
Spirit of God, wrought in the Heart of an Adult Person, are always sensibly
felt, though the Quality of 'em are not always distinctly known. And I must add,
that no one that has a true Love, either to his God or his own Soul, will be
banter'd out of the Necessity of experimental Piety, by opprobrious Invectives
and reproachful Characters; but will beware that no Man spoil him, through
Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ.

But if by Impulses and Feelings of the Spirit, be intended, Raptures,
Ecstasies, Visions, and enthusiastic Inspirations. I leave all Pretenders to
these Things, to the Dr's Discipline, and only add a Paragraph or two out of
Dr. Owen, upon this Head, Pneumatalogia. p. 186, 188.
The Work of the Holy Spirit (says he) in Regeneration, does not consist in
enthusiastic Raptures, Ecstasies, Voices, or any Thing of the like Kind. It may
be some such Things have been by some deluded Persons, apprehended, or
pretended to; but the Countenancing any such Imaginations, is falsely and
industriously charged on them, who maintain the powerful and effectual Work of
the Holy Spirit, in our Regeneration. And again, Such Apprehensions for the
most Part, are either Conceptions of distempered Minds and discomposed Fancies,
or delusions of Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of Light, which the
Doctrine of Regeneration ought not to be accountable for.

That Dr. Waterland may do his Business effectually, he next proceeds to enter
a Caveat against the Marks and Tokens of Regeneration. Those (says he) that
first began to talk in this Way (and who have long been dead) might be pious
and well-meaning Men, but they were not very happy in the Use of their Terms,
or in the Choice of their Marks (p. 42) These Marks he tells us, may be
prudently thrown aside, as human Invention. -- But who were these pious
well-meaning Men, whose Ignorance the Dr. complains of, but the most Eminent of
the reformed Clergy, in the early and purest Times of the Reformation? Happy
had it been for the Church of England, if all her succeeding Clergy had as well
understood, and as faithfully taught, the Marks of a regenerate State, as many
of those excellent Men did, which he thus complains of. -- Into what a sad and
languishing State is practical Godliness reduced in that Church, where such
Doctrines as this pass current, and the Marks of Conversion are considered, as
having a Tendency to perplex some, and to deceive others; and therefore
prudently to be thrown aside, as Things of human Invention. (p 43) -- What! are
these of human Invention? How then does the Dr. bring in our blessed Lord and
the Apostle Paul, as giving the Marks of a converted State. p. 43, 44 And why
does the Dr. himself run into the Practice of these Things of human Invention,
by giving Marks of a renewed Heart and Mind? What Marks (says he) should a Man
pitch upon to satisfy himself in that Case, but a good Conscience? Or what
Marks to satisfy others, but a good Life? And again, if we sincerely endeavor
to do the best we can, and are daily gaining Ground of our Vices and our
Passions, and finding ourselves after the strictest Examination, to be upon the
improving Hand, then may we comfortably believe, that our Regeneration abides
salutary and entire, and that we are in a State of Salvation (p. 44) -- Why (I
say) did the Dr. practice these Things of human Invention? The Reason probably
was, that he thought himself secure, from perplexing some, or deceiving others,
by such Marks as these. And indeed there is no Reason to fear his giving any
Perplexity to the Consciences of secure Sinners, by such an Opiate. But oh that
there was as little Reason to fear his deceiving Multitudes of poor
unregenerate Creatures, to their eternal Ruin! -- Here is a Mark, by which a
Man may conclude himself in a State of Salvation, without having ever been
weary and heavy laden with his Sins; though it is such whom Christ invites to
come to him for Rest. Mat. xi. 28. without feeling himself sick, though it is
such to whom Christ is the Physician. Mat. ix. 12. without any Repentance for
his Sins, though they who do not repent shall surely perish. Luke xiii. 3.
without any true Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, though he that believes not
shall be damned, Mark. xvi. 16. without any Humility, or Sense of their
Unworthiness and Impotence, though God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to
the Humble Jam. iv. 6. without any spiritual Mindedness, though that be necessary
to Life and Peace. Romans viii. 6. without a Victory over the World, though they
that love the World and the Things of the World, cannot have the Love of the
Father in them, 1 John ii 15. without any Love to the Brethren, or the Children
of God, though by this we are to know that we are passed from Death to Life. 1 John iii. 14. without a careful Attendance upon the Duties and Ordinances of
Religion, though we are directed thus to seek, if we would find, and knock if we
would have the Door opened. Mat. vii. 7, 8. without having old Things pass away
and every Thing become new, though all that are in Christ Jesus, are thus new
Creatures. 2 Cor. v. 17. And in a Word, without having Christ in him, which
every one must have, except he be a Reprobate. 2 Cor. xiii. 5. All that is
proposed, is to be daily gaining Ground of our Vices and of our Passions, and
in this to be upon the improving Hand. -- If this be a sufficient Mark of
Safety, why may not all the moral Heathen be in a State of Salvation, as well
as such Pretenders to Christianity? They have in this the Better of them, that
they are unbaptized, whereas these by their empty Profession, daily break through
all the Bonds of their baptismal Covenant, and thereby greatly aggravate their
Guilt and Misery. -- It infinitely concerns all the Professors of Christianity
to see to it, that they have better Evidences of a saving Conversion to God
than this comes to, otherwise however they are daubed with untemper'd Mortar at
present; they will not stand the Trial of the Great Day: It will in that Day be
found what they have got by it, who are deserting our Communion, through
Prejudices conceived against the Doctrines of special Grace, and the Necessity
of Regeneration, in Order to their future Safety; and have joined themselves to
another, where they seem to hope, they shall find a wider Gate, and a broader
Way to eternal Life. Pity it is, that such as these, cannot foresee the
Consequence of their dangerous Mistake, before its too late. In Order to this,
let them seriously reflect upon the following Corollaries from what has been
said.

Coroll. 1. It appears from the foregoing Discourse, that the Regeneration
described in Scripture, and the Regeneration described by some of our episcopal
Clergy, are two distinct Things, which differ specifically, and are directly
repugnant in their Nature and Properties. -- This is not a distant and for
fetched Consequence, but what naturally and necessarily flows from the Premises,
and may be received with as full Assurance as we can have in any Case
whatsoever. I know men may wrangle perpetually, and by the Power of Words, make
the most desperate Case look something plausible. But I know also, that as
Contradictions can never be reconciled, so it is impossible in the present
Case, to make the Regeneration described by some of our episcopal Clergy, to be
the same with that described in Scripture, without making it appear on both
Parts true, that all who are born of God, are true Believers; and some that are
born of God, may neither have Faith nor Repentance; that all who are born of
God, do not sin, and cannot sin; and some who are born of God may be in
Impenitency and Hypocrisy; that all who are born of God may have his Seed
remaining in them that they cannot sin; and some that are born of God, may not
have his Seed remain in them, but may finally fall from Grace, with sundry more
Inconsistences, before considered particularly. This then is no longer a Matter
of Speculation, but of utmost Certainty, that they mean one Thing and the
Scripture another, by Regeneration; and that these are as much two Things, and
as truly distinct and different, as any two Things in the World.

Coroll. 2. From hence it further appears, that we cannot see the Kingdom of
God, in Consequence of these Principles, espoused by some of our episcopal
Clergy. How harsh soever the Consequence may be supposed, it is nevertheless
infallibly certain.

Our Lord assures us, that without Regeneration, we cannot see the Kingdom of
God.

What these Gentlemen call Regeneration, is not the new Birth which our blessed
Savior means, and which the Scripture describes: And therefore not the new
Birth, by which we must be prepared for the Kingdom of God, and without which
we can never enter into it. As I have fully proved.

Their Principles teach, that there is no other Regeneration necessary, than
what they describe as above.

The Scripture teaches us, that the Properties and Characters of that
Regeneration, which is absolutely necessary, in Order to our entering into the
Kingdom of God, are essentially distinct and different from the Properties and
Characters of that Regeneration which they describe; whence it necessarily
follows, that we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God in Consequence of their
Principles.

By this it appears of what Consequence it is, to be set right in this Matter.
-- I would not be here misunderstood, as though I determine all such incapable
of the Kingdom of God, who hold the Doctrine which I oppose. No! I doubt not,
but some of these may have experienced in their Hearts, what they oppose in
their Heads; and be practically acquainted, with what they are in Speculation
prejudiced against. But these must get to Heaven, in a Way very distant from
their Principles; under the dreadful Disadvantage of a powerful Biass to
incline them the wrong Way.

Coroll. 3. It thence also further appears, how much safer it is for our
People, to hold fast the Form of sound Words which they have heard, in this
important Point, than to venture upon a Change, to these Schemes of our
episcopal Clergy -- It must be observed, that I am not now speaking of the
Discipline or Ceremonies of the Church of England, whatever Objections may lie
against them; but of this great Article of our Faith and Hope, which is thus
subverted by some of their Clergy. -- Were it possible they should be in the
Right, our Profession is nevertheless safe. We are baptized in Obedience to our
Lord's Command, as well as they, and have therefore as fair a Claim to
baptismal Regeneration as they can have; and are besides seeking for
Regeneration distinct from Baptism, to qualify us for the Kingdom of God, Here
then can be no Danger, if we act up to our Principles; and experience what we
judge necessary to our Salvation. But then, if our Sentiments are right, (which
I hope by this Time I have a Claim to suppose) what will become of them, who
have no other, and who seek no other than a baptismal Regeneration, to qualify
them for the Kingdom of God.

Thus I have made some brief Remarks, upon what I esteemed of the most
dangerous Tendency, in Dr. Waterland's Discourse of Regeneration, hoping that
by the divine Blessing, it may be of some Usefulness, for reclaiming some, who
have been too soon led away from their Stedfastness; for establishing others,
in the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and for impressing upon the Minds of
our People in general, the last Necessity of their experiencing a greater
Change, than the most of them have yet experienced, if they would ever enter
into the Kingdom of God.

THE END.

