AN Enquiry into Enthusiasm

AN ENQUIRY INTO ENTHUSIASM, Being an Account what it is, the ORIGINAL,
PROGRESS, and EFFECTS of it.

By Benjamin Doolittle, A. M. Pastor of the Church of Christ in Northfield.

Jer. xxiii. 21, 26. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran. I have not
spoken to them, yet they prophesied.

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for J. EDWARDS in Cornhill. 1743.

An Enquiry into ENTHUSIASM.
THE Corruption and Depravity of humane Nature is a Thing so plainly discovered
and so frequently acknowleged, that it is needless to endeavor to prove it.

And though Man be evidently such a Stranger to GOD and such an Enemy to him, yet
there is evidently such a strong Inclination in the Hearts of Men to something
that is called RELIGION, as makes it Matter of Admiration to all wise and
considering Persons.

Indeed true Religion is so heavenly and divine a Thing, and bears such a
Resemblance of the true GOD, that it may seem very strange indeed, that there
should be any Inclination in the Hearts of Men to it. And yet in all Ages of
the World, among all Nations, there is plainly so strong an Inclination and
Readiness to fall in with something, that bears the Name of Religion, that it
is truly wonderful to behold.

For there is nothing that so suddenly prevails, and like a mighty Torrent
bears down all before it, as this strong Inclination does: so that if any come
to Men under Pretense of large Communications from the divine BEING, and
pretend to make them Sharers in it, this suddenly takes with them, and like
Wildfire diffuses itself every where.

And therefore there must undeniably be some strong Inclination in humane
Nature that Way, or there could not be such a sudden Alteration made among Men,
as there often is. I know indeed, that it is always pretended to proceed from
the Power and Efficacy of the divine SPIRIT, which makes such a wonderful and
sudden Alteration. But every one must and and will acknowledge, that it does
not always proceed from this Cause: for I cannot think any will be so
distracted as to impute the sudden Progress of the Persian Magi, and the almost
innumerable Heathen Religions, or the sudden Alterations made in the Religion
of the Jewish Nation to the Worship of Baal, or Jereboam's Golden Calves, and
the sudden Alterations made by Mahomet in Religion, and all the great and
surprising Alterations that Antichrist has made in the Christian Religion; I
say, I think none will attribute all these to the powerful Efficacy of the HOLY
SPIRIT: For there are so many horrible Contradictions, and abominable Things
advanced by many, that it is impossible to be all divine. So that whatever is
pretended, it must most certainly sometimes proceed from some other Cause.

There must then be something in-laid in the present Frame and Constitution of
humane Nature, that like Tinder, must be ready to catch every Spark of this
Fire that is struck into it: For if there be not, it will be impossible to
account for such strange Appearances as have often happened in the World.

When I have considered these strange Appearances in the World in former Ages,
at several distant Periods of Time, and many of them so contrary to one
another; and yet as great, quick, powerful, one as the other, I could not but
think that though they were so contrary one to the other, yet they must all
proceed from one and the same Principle in humane Nature: Because they all seem
to operate in the same Manner and produce much the same Effects among Men, and
therefore I think, it may not be amiss to enquire into this Principle, what
it is called; the original from whence it proceeds, the Method of its Rise and
Progress, when it makes a great Appearance in the World, and the proper and
genuine Fruits and Effects of it among Men.

1. Then we may enquire, what this is, which has such wonderful Effects. And
this I apprehend has generally gone under the Name of ENTHUSIASM, a Greek Word
that in Latin is rendered Numine Afflatus: i. e. a Strong Fancy, Imagination or
Conceit of having large Communications from, or Participations of the Deity.

It is therefore a powerful Impression or Impulse made upon the Imagination, of
having some great and wonderful Communications from God, so as to be made in a
very high Degree Partaker of that which is heavenly and divine; and therefore
this exalts them in their own Thoughts, as being highly favored of God, or the
peculiar Favorites of Heaven; and therefore they look down upon others as
poor, miserable Wretches that are going down to Hell.

And this high Conceit of themselves strongly warms their Imaginations, and
makes them full of Life and Fire: And therefore they look upon others as dead
Souls, that partake not of this warm imaginary Fire. And this makes them
evermore despise REASON as an evil and dangerous Guide in Matters of Religion,
and substitute seeing and feeling in the Room of it, they see such heavenly and
divine Things clearly, and feel them strong in their Souls, and therefore
despise all Reason and Argument as a mean, dull and beggarly Thing.

They see and feel (they say) and therefore believe and are sure.

They have a quick and sudden Way of coming at heavenly and divine Things; and
this fills them with the highest Extacies of Joy and Comfort: These they see,
and feel and think they cannot be mistaken in; and therefore care not for all
hat can be said against them: And therefore will not enquire any further.

Thus I have given a brief Account of what I take to be ENTHUSIASM, which all
Mankind have such a Fondness for, and are so ready to fall in with; that were
it not for the powerful Interposition of the DIVINE BEING, they would all be
overwhelmed with it. For nothing is more agreeable to corrupted humane Nature,
and nothing more mischievous to it than this.

2. We shall enquire into the Original of it, or from whence this does proceed?

Certainly this was not the original Constitution of humane Nature. For humane
Nature did once most surely partake of the divine; and had frequent and great
Communications from the Deity: And this was not a mere imaginary Thing, but
true and real. How then, and when came this wonderful Principle, Inclination,
or Tendency of humane Nature, to be so firmly in-laid or interwoven into the
very Frame and Constitution of humane Nature, that now nothing seems more
natural to it than this, even a strong Inclination to something they call
Religion.

Many wise and learned Men have written of ENTHUSIASM, and discoursed well
concerning it; but none I ever met with have ever given an Account of the
Original of it: And therefore seem to be at a Loss, why it should so suddenly
prevail and bear down all before it, as it is evident that many Times it has
done. Witness that of the Magi in Persia, that of Jeroboam among the ten
Tribes, and that of Baal among the same Tribes soon after, so also that of
Mahomet, and that of the Church of Rome or Antichrist.

Now I think, we need not be at a Loss, why it has done thus, (...) we consider
the Original of it: And I think the Original of this sufficiently discovered to
us Genesis 3.1, to 7. Here we have an Account of the first Temptation, that was
ever offered to human Nature, to sin; and with which our first Parents
complied, sinned and fell. If therefore we may judge that Man's original Sin
was proportionable, or in any Measure agreeable to the Temptation that was
offered, we must conclude that ENTHUSIASM was Man's first, or Original Sin. Ye
shall be as Gods, (said the Temptes) that he might prevail upon our first
Parents to eat the forbidden Fruit. i. e. Ye shall partake of a much larger
Portion of the DEITY, or spiritual and divine Knowledge and Wisdom, than ever
yet ye have done. And why did they eat of it? Was it not most certainly for the
very End and Design proposed in the Temptation? even that they might be as
Gods. For nothing else could prevail upon innocent Nature to transgress a plain
positive and known Prohibition but this, that they might partake more of
Divinity than as yet they had done. So that they might easily think, that it
was no Harm at all to be more like God than now they were. It must be supposed
that Man was at first made in the Likeness of God as we read, Genesis 1.27. And
from hence had a true and strong Tendency toward God, as his proper Center;
and must therefore desire to be as much like him as possibly he could be. Satan
that now desired to deform him, could not possibly think of a more likely
Course to effect his Design, than to come in upon this Inclination and blind
it, by proposing a more ready and speedy Way of arriving to a greater Degree of
this; by discovering something to him, that which might have this sudden and
quick Operation, without the slow and ordinary Method of God's appointing and
establishing. The Policy and Subtilty of Satan no less appears in hiding the
Mischief of breaking a plain Prohibition: God knows (says he) that in the Day
ye eat thereof ye shall not die, but be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil.

No Question the Apostle refers to this very Time, 2 Cor. 11.14. when he says
that Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light: Though he is here
said to speak to the Woman in the Shape of a Serpent, yet even in that Shape he
comes as an Angel of Light, as though he came upon a special Errand to our
first Mother Eve to discover to her the hidden Virtue of this Fruit, which they
knew not before. And this he informs her had the Power to assimilate them in a
greater Measure to the Divine Being. And thus his Plot is deep laid; he comes
as an Angel of Light with a special Message from God to her, to make her more
like God himself than ever yet she had been.

Now, what could innocent Nature have to fear? Here comes an Angel of Light to
discover to her how she might become more like GOD himself than now she was;
and this agreeing with the original Desire and Tendency of her Nature, must
appear eligible if nothing stood in the Way to make it appear otherwise; and
for this there was nothing but GOD'S revealed positive Prohibition, and certain
she was she did not yet know all that was to be known, and might not she think
that the Meaning of this Interdiction was no more than that they should not eat
of it, until a further Discovery was made about it? And since she had the
Knowledge of this Interdiction only by Tradition from her Husband (for she was
not made when this Interdiction was given him) might she not as well believe an
Angel of Light as him, when as that Angel of Light discovers that which should
make her more like GOD, which she had such a strong Desire to: And therefore
finding (...) to her natural Desire, to (...) wise, and (...) more like (...)
himself, (...) and (...).

Thus she follows the Desire of being more like GOD in Knowledge and Wisdom
than she was; and eats in Opposition to a plain positive Command of GOD: she
steps over that Order which GOD had set for her to walk according to; and
regards not the Revelation that GOD had already made, and follows a new one,
that she know not, who it came from, or whether he that brought it was sent of
GOD or no.

Her Imagination had a strong Impression made upon it, that the Discovery was
Divine; and her Passions were warmed with great Expectations and Desires of
partaking more of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD than ever yet she had done.

And upon eating (no Question) her Imagination was filled with great and
wonderful Discoveries by this Means made to her, and therefore out of Love to
her Husband urges him to do the like.

For having found the Benefit of it, she is distressed for her Husband, that he
might share also in the same: And therefore she gives him of this same
wonderful Fruit, and very probably relates to him, what an angelick Discovery
she had concerning it, and her own Experiences upon eating it, and by the same
persuades him to take and eat. And thus both became tinctured with the same
enthusiastic Spirit, they are puffed up with it, until God opens their Eyes, i.
e. Awakens their Consciences, to see what they had done, and then they soon see
their Mistake, when it was too late to prevent it; for then they see themselves
naked, i. e. Stripped of those Rays of Glory and Honor, which were their
Clothing before.

Thus our first Parent's Sin, which was finished or completed, by eating the
forbidden Fruit, did bear an exact Proportion to the Temptation offered. It
began in Pride and Desire to know more and be greater than God had allowed them
to know or be; and was finished or completed, by acting in plain Contradiction
to a known revealed Prohibition of GOD.

Thus ENTHUSIASM was Man's first, or original Sin; and it evermore keeps the
same Pace, even to this Day. For to this Day it fills the Imagination and
Fancy, no with real Discoveries of spiritual and divine Things; but with a
Fancy or Conceit, of being made like God; and being more acquainted with the
Secrets of the most High than others not like them are, or than GOD has allowed
them to know or be. And it is finished even to this Day, by violating the plain
Revelations GOD has made to Men, and the Order he has established among them.
For it always pretends a more intimate Acquaintance with Heaven, than to be
tied up to such Things as these. Thus they break the plain Commands of God and
the Order he has established, under Pretense of knowing immediately from God,
what Order he would have. I cannot see but that Man's original Sin which is
imputed to, and has infected the whole Race of Mankind, was properly
ENTHUSIASM. For the Account we have of it carries all the Marks of ENTHUSIASM
upon it. It Is therefore no Wonder that all Mankind are so fond of it, and so
ready to fall in with it. For this is now so strongly riveted in the very
Constitution of human Nature, that whatever is proper to draw it forth into
Act, makes Men run wild after it, as the Apostle intimates, 2 Cor. 4.4. For
this has so disordered and as it were intoxicated all the Powers and Faculties
of human Nature, that nothing makes such a sudden Progress among them, as this
is will not to do. No Sin does ever so suddenly prevail as this; for this is as it
were the Seed and Source of all the Rest, for a Flood of Iniquity is will not to
follow a strong Fit of ENTHUSIASM.

Object. But here some may say, If this be so natural to Mankind, as to be
inlaid in the Frame and Constitution of the whole, and be as it were the Source
of all other Sins, what is the Reason that so many both of good and bad Men
appear against it?

Answ. To this I answer, that some are more inclined to one Sin, and some to
another, from the very Frame and Constitution of their Bodies. But this I take
not to be the chief or main Reason why it is so, but this, viz. That God
interposes to prevent the Flood of Ruin that the Prevalency of ENTHUSIASM would
bring upon all Mankind, and that he might preserve a Number that shall
faithfully bear Testimony for him against all such as will follow this Sin, and
render them without Excuse at last, because both good and bad Men bore
Testimony against it: Thus God has done in all Ages of the World, not only
among his own People, as we may read in the sacred Oracles, but also among the
Heathen, and in later Times among the Mahometans and Papists, which are the two
great ENTHUSIASMS now extant in the World at this Day; or at least, they may be
called the two greatest, and which there is the greatest Strife to reduce all
Men to. But God has all along preserved a Number that have faithfully born
Testimony against them as a Thing very plainly opposite to the plain Revelation
that God has made of himself to Sinners, and the Order he has established among
them.

How the ENTHUSIASM which infected our first Parents, and disordered all their
Powers and Faculties of Body and Soul, should be conveyed and transmitted to
their Posterity, even to the latest Generation, is an Enquiry too great and
difficult (it may be) to be answered, while this our State of Darkness and
Ignorance remains. For though we may be undeniable Arguments prove that it is
so, yet the Manner and Method how may be beyond our Depth to fathom. But thus
much I think we may safely venture to say, That God has established it so to
be, as a Fruit of the Curse annexed to their eating the forbidden Fruit. And
surely GOD has Power to make his Causes take Place, when and where and as long
as he pleases. And his Justice herein is sufficiently vindicated by the public
and representative Station in which our first Parents stood; though we are
never so much at a Loss how he makes them take Effect, and therefore we must
consider that this is included in that Sentence of Death, that GOD passed upon
Mankind in our first Parents, upon their eating the forbidden Fruit.

Thus I think I have given a true and genuine Account of the Origin or Source
of ENTHUSIASM; how it first of all infected the humane Race; and it may serve
to take off the Wonderment that is made at its so great and sudden Prevalency
among Mankind many Times: Because there is so strong and Inclination in humane
Nature that Way, that it may not seem strange that it should so suddenly blaze
out, when proper Means are used for this End. And it might be a greater Wonder
if it should not, when Pains are taken to put it into a Flame.

3. It will now be proper to enquire into the Method of its Beginning to rise
into such a Flame; and its sudden Prevalency among Men.

This indeed though more easily discovered than the Original of it, as being
more near our own Observation, yet has no small Difficulties attending it. For
though it pretends to be all Light and Fire, seeing and feeling, yet it is
always covered with Darkness: And the more it burns in the dark, the more
violent and impetuous it grows; and the quicker and greater Progress it makes.
And as Satan at first hid himself under the Appearance of angelick Light, when
he brought ENTHUSIASM into (...), so do his Ministers now, 2 Cor. 11.14. For
ENTHUSIASM evermore covers it self, with a Cloak of spiritual and divine Light;
and by this it dazzles the Eyes and darkens the Minds of all such as fondly
gaze on such an angelick Appearance: And thus Multitudes of unwary Souls, are
captivated by it, that have such a strong Inclination in them that Way. For
they want nothing but a fit Occasion, to draw it forth into Act.

But though there be so much Difficulty in this Enquiry, we shall essay to give
an Account of it; though it is never more displeased than to be discovered, for
this angers such Persons most of all, because it hurts their Design.

1. Then, we shall enquire into the Method of its first beginning to rise and
kindle into a Flame.

That Satan knows the Tempers, Inclinations and Dispositions, of a People, and
what most prevails among them, at such or such a Time, I think, none will deny
me: Nor that he knows the most fit Time to urge his Temptations with Success,
and the most proper Instruments to be made Use of, to compass his Ends. All
this I think will readily be granted. And I cannot think any will deny, that
Satan has the most malicious Enmity against the true, pure and holy Religion of
the true God, and would do all he can to overthrow it: For this appeared in his
malicious Endeavors, to overthrow Religion in Paradise

Now if these Things be granted, it will not be so difficult to discover the
Method he takes to blow up ENTHUSIASM into a Flame. For Satan narrowly observes
the Frame and Temper of a People about Religion, and what Turn they are most of
all inclinable to: And when he sees his most proper Time to urge this
Temptation with Success, he chooses out proper Instruments for it; whose
Imaginations are (...), and lively, and easily impressed, and whose Fan^^es and
Affections are easily warmed and moved: Men that have an high Conceit of
themselves, and a very low Opinions of others; Men that can at any Time
suddenly warm, yea heat themselves with their own Fancies and Imaginations; Men
that are of a free and volable Speech, and well versed in the Art of
Dissimulation and Flattery, and capable by Words and Gestures to speak and act
over their own Imaginations and Fancies, in a very lively Manner: Such Men as
these at such a Time Satan chooses, and spirits them up to the undertaking;
either with the Hopes of Gain, or with the Prospect of great Honors and
Applause among Men, and to be looked upon as the chief Persons that have great
and bright Communications from God: And so to have Power to dictate to others
what they please. And such Men as these have a Genius to choose such Doctrines
and Managements that to such a People are most taking. And when they once
begin, and find the Fire to catch here and there, it encourages them to go on,
and help to blow one another into a Flame. Thus it is wont to begin. But it
evermore endeavors at first slily to insinuate, that their Rulers, civil or
sacred, are corrupt, and not to be regarded, which is very taking with a
discontented and murmuring People, that stand ready to believe the worst of
their Rulers. They also endeavor in a sly Manner to insinuate, that the
written Word of God is but a dead Letter; and that they have by the Spirit been
taught the true Sense and Meaning of it, (i. e. where a People have the written
Word.) At first indeed they do this as covertly as they can, that they may not
be discovered in their Design, and as the Fire prevails then more openly. And
they persuade Persons that none but carnal and unregenerate Persons will say a
Word against them. And as Numbers are added to them, they proclaim aloud, and
boast of what Wonders they have done, and what Multitudes are made Partakers of
the wonderful Power and Operation of the SPIRIT; they are become even as Gods;
they can discern between Good and Evil, and see into Men's very Souls, and know
what they are. Thus it begins: But then

2. The Method of its Progress and Prevalence begins to be more open. They
begin very often to declaim boldly against Rulers, especially ecclesiastical
ones, as carnal unregenerate and wicked Men; and many of them will openly begin
to declare the Word of God is useless, or of but little Service, and their
seeing and feeling is the chief Thing to be set by, and they have no Need to
compare this with the Word of God, for this is what they see (they say); and
now they have Visions, and Trances, Impulses, Revelations; and some are ready
to set up for a Spirit of Prophecy. Now they despise the Laws of Men; and
pretend Conscience to break them. Such Things indeed they durst not do, while
their Numbers were few and small, but when they are multiplied, they despise
Government, and speak evil of Dignities, and fill their Mouths with great
swelling Words of Vanity. They are filled (they say) with the Spirit, and with
heavenly and divine Things, and have a Multitude of sweet Feelings: And now
they see others going down to Destruction; and they are distressed for others,
but not at all for themselves. For they will scarce ever put up so much as one
Petition for the Pardon of their own Sins: For they think they have no Need;
they are already almost Gods, they partake so much of the DIVINE SPIRIT.

These and much more of the like Nature are such plain Facts, often to be seen
in the Rise and Growth of ENTHUSIASM, in all Ages of the World, that none but
such as are besotted with it ever will deny. And therefore I need no stay to
prove them. For I need only appeal to the History of the several Ages of the
World, wherein ENTHUSIASM has risen and prevailed; for these do sufficiently
confirm the Truth of all these Facts.

4. We may enquire what are the true, proper and genuine Fruits and Effects of
it? There is such an endless Variety of these, and full of such amazing
Contradictions, that a reasonable Man would be almost ready to think it
impossible for them all to proceed from one and the same Principle.

Yet such a prolifick Principle of Error may well bring forth innumerable, as
well as amazing Contradictions, since Reason and Judgment is not allowed with
such to hold the Reins of Government, but Fancy, Imagination and Impulse, must
guide and govern all.

And should a Man essay to give a Detail of all the natural Fruits and Effects
of this Principle, in all its wild Excursions, he would scarce know where to
begin, or where to end.

We shall therefore only mention some few of them; out of which innumerable
others do arise, and make such strange, and almost unaccountable Appearances in
the World. And they are such as these,

1. A great Contempt of all Reason, and Argument, or Enquiry; and comparing of
Things, to make a right Judgment. This lays the Foundation for all Manner of
wild, senseless and extravagant Things, to be though it right, pursued, and
practiced.

Man's Power of Reasoning, and perceiving the Agreement, or Disagreement of
Things, and of comparing one Thing with another, was originally given him, to
settle his Judgment right; and to prepare him for a wise Conduct and Behavior.
And though Sin has rendered it very lame and weak, yet it is not wholly lost,
and possibly God may have preserved so much of it as there is left, for this
very Purpose and Design, that he may be capable of being treated with agreeable
to his original Nature. For God condescends now to reason with him. Isa. 1.18.
And that by this Means he may restore the Divine Image in him.

But however that be, it is plain that there is still this Power remaining,
though very dark and weak. And we cannot but see if we read Divine Revelations,
that the Design of them are not wholly to extinguish this Candle of the Lord,
as it is called, Prove. 20.27. but to strengthen it, that it may burn more
bright, and clear than it did before; and furnish it with those Discoveries,
which, in its lame, and languishing Condition, it was utterly incapable of
making.

But ENTHUSIASM instead of assisting, and strengthening this noble Power,
labors to put it wholly out; and to set up a strong Impulse upon the Fancy or
Imagination instead of it.

For it persuades Men to think, that this is clearer and better than Reason;
and that it affords more Light, and quicker Dispatch in forming the Judgment,
than Reason could possibly do.

They therefore condemn all Reason as a carnal Thing, and yet set up their
imaginary seeing and feeling instead of it.

Whereas seeing and feeling, taken in a strict Sense, and without any Figure,
are nothing but carnal, and sensual Things. For what is seeing, and feeling but
something that relates to our bodily Senses. And if it be said that this is
meant of the seeing, and feeling of the Soul: I would ask them, How they can
distinguish this from that which arises from the Body? Is it not because the
Impression is strong, sudden and violent? But is it not often so with those of
the Body? What then makes the Difference? Is it imagined to be from a Spirit?
But how do they know it is so? The strong Imagination that it is from a Spirit,
cannot make it certain to them or others that it is so. But if it be from a
Spirit, How do they know that it is from a good Spirit? Have not evil Spirits
often Times Power to make such Impressions? It they have not, how came the
false Prophets of old, and the soothsaying Damsel mentioned in Acts 16.16. etc.
to have such Impression? How came they to see and feel such Things as most
certainly they did, as 'twas with A-hab's Prophets, 1 Kings 22.6, 11, 12, 21,
22, 23, 30. Lam. 2.14. and Jer. 23.15, 21. If this be answered, that it is
known by the Things impressed, because it is contrary to the Interest of
Satan's Kingdom. To this I answer, How do they know it is so? And therefore
further ask, May we not say that all revealed Truths contained in the Word of
GOD are contrary to Satan's Kingdom? How then came Satan by the Power of urging
the Holy Scriptures to tempt our Savior withal. Matthew. 4.6. Why may not Satan
urge one Truth in such a Manner as to overthrow another more important one; and
not in the least hurt his own Kingdom? Why may he not persuade Persons to leave
one Way of Sinning to fasten them more strongly in another, and not in the
least hurt his own Kingdom? What Damage will it be to Satan's Kingdom, to
fright Men from Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Lying, Stealing, vain
Company-keeping, etc And fasten such Persons in a firm Belief that his Impulses
and Impressions are Revelations from GOD, and Impressions of the Holy Spirit?
And withal puff them up with spiritual Pride, and Self-Conceit, and not hurt
his own Interest.

I cannot see how, in the least, Satan's Kingdom will be destroyed by such a
Method; but rather established by it, because this is harder to discern, and
more difficult to escape out of the Snare. This then is the Fruit and Effect of
Enthusiasm, to despise Reason as a carnal and sensual Thing, and substitute
something still more carnal and sensual in the Room of it.

And thus they put themselves out of the Power of distinguishing what is right
from what is wrong. For this cannot be done but by Man's Reasoning and
perceptive Power, by which he compares Things to form his Judgment. And by
disregarding this, they expose themselves to be cheated in the most important
Case. And what wild extravagant Things, (...) heated Fancy and Imagination
produce; that (...) kept in by the Bit and Bridle of true Reason and
Understanding? For this will work Wonders upon the Body as well as Mind,
because it shares so much of the bodily Senses and Passions.

It is no Ways strange, if this be once let loose from the Restraints of true
Reason, that it should produce Convulsions, Swoonings, Screamings, and all such
Things, which are the natural Effects of a warm, and wild Imagination, frighted
by Noise, and great swelling Words. For it is natural to have such Effects upon
the Body as well as Trances, Visions, Joys, and Extacies in the Mind.

2. But then another natural Effect of prevailing ENTHUSIASM, is Faith without
a good Foundation.

This indeed enters into the very Nature of Enthusiasm. For as it contemns and
slights all Reason, and gains its Ascendant over all that are willing to quit
the Conduct of it; so it makes them believe very strongly without any good
Foundation. Faith is evermore (when true) the yielding up our Assent and
Consent to any Thing truly testified to us by God himself; and therefore when
Faith is true and genuine, it is always an hearty Submission to the divine
Authority, and an acquiescing freely in those Revelations, or Difcoveries, God
makes to us, where our natural Faculties, or Powers had not Ability to discover
them: Or in all the Obligations which both Reason and divine Revelation have
truly made known to us. And this Principle truly fixed in the Soul, prepares us
to act in due Proportion, to what God has testified to us. And the Reason why
we are thus obliged to submit and act, is because God is the Revealer with whom
it is impossible to lie, deceive, or be deceived. And it is impossible for the
Mind thus to acquiesce, and act without thus relying solely and entirely on the
divine Authority, and there is always good Reason that it should do so,
wherever any Thing is revealed by God.

But here the great Question is, How do we know that such, or such a Thing has
the Stamp of divine Authority upon it? If it has, there the Mind may rest
safely. But how may this be known, for if this be not known, the Mind must
rest, upon a very uncertain Foundation, if it does rest at all. But here in
this important Case, ENTHUSIASM ever more fails of Proof, and clear Evidence.
For it first disgards Reason its old Friend, and throws it by as a useless
Thing in Matters of Religion, and therefore cannot now expect that it should
afford its Help at a dead Lift. Indeed in the most important Point they bid
Defiance to it, even to prove that the Revelation is from God: and therefore do
not build their Faith upon a good Foundation.

Object. But it may be some will here object; can there be no immediate
Communications from GOD to the Soul that can be perceived to be from GOD by its
own Light, or by Intuition only without the Help of any Deduction of Reason?
Was it not so with the Prophets of old? Did not they by intuitice Evidence, see
it to be from God, so as not to be deceived, nor need the Help of Reason to
prevent it?

Answ. To this I may reply, that though I cannot tell all the Evidence they had
that their Revelations were from the true God only; yet I conceive God never
left himself without a clear Witness in this Regard, nor exposed them to the
Impossibility of distinguishing Truth from Falsehood, and Realities from
Delusions, and that therefore in his first Discoveries made to them, he always
gave them some clear rational Evidence, that it was the true GOD that spoke to
them; and did not leave them at Uncertainty in this Point, without a sufficient
Mark to make the distinction. He might so far strengthen their Reason and
Understanding as to perceive the clear and undeniable Agreement of his Manner
of revealing himself with the divine Perfections, and by this satisfy them the
Revelation was from the true GOD: And then as to after Revelations, they might
by the Help of Reason discover whether the Manner of their Communication did
agree with the former, and by this be sufficiently satisfied, that they were
from God. For we can have no just Reason to think, that GOD, in communicating
himself to a rational Creature, will not give a rational Evidence, that the
Communication is certainly from him. For we plainly see that when he sent his
Prophets upon any special Message to his People, he always gave them some
authentic Seal to evidence their Commission, when they were sent to
communicate any new Revelation; though not always when they were sent to
inculcate former Revelations, that were already confirmed by undeniable
Miracles.

And it is plain and evident they never bid Defiance to Reason, as Enthusiasts
are wont to do. For they show us that God challenges his People to reason the
Case with him, even concerning the Matter of the Revelation of future Things.
Isa. 41.21, 22, 23.

But Enthusiasts show the greatest Ill Nature against Reason, and labor to
persuade Persons to believe them upon their bare Word; and therefore have no
good Foundation for their Faith to stand upon: For they lay as good a
Foundation for the Faith of others as they build their own upon; which is
really none at all. But if you allow them to step over this Point of proving by
Reason, that what they have is from God; then they are as glad as any to call
in formerly despised Reason to support even their worst Extravagances many
Times. But where Reason is most of all needed, and where it might do them the
most Service, there they condemn and defy it. Therefore you will always find an
Enthusiast, most impatient of Contradiction in this Point, that the Work he
admires and carries on is from God. Allow him but this Point without Proof, and
rational Evidence, and he will be pretty easy with you, though you condemn many
Things in him. For he has gained his main Point. And he knows that this once
gained, all the rest must follow by natural Consequence, whether you will or
no. But if you hold him fast here, and be for Proof, he will only give you
railing Accusation. For he has no rational Foundation at all, for his Faith to
stand on, and therefore denies its being disputed. You must believe as he says
and that is enough: For he is always a Papist in this Point as well as many
others.

And therefore an Enthusiast will have nothing to do with Reason in Matters of
Faith, for Fear it should deceive him. And therefore can have no good
Foundation for his Faith to stand on.

And thus they thrust themselves into the boundless Labyrinth of Deceit and
Delusion, for Fear of being deceived by their old, most kind, intimate, and
tender Friend Reason; which offers its kind Assistance to prevent their being
deceived; but they refuse it. And indeed without it they cannot take one Step
right, nor one Moment keep from being deluded and deceived.

Thus did our first Mother Eve, who first of all took in the Poison of
Enthusiasm, which has infected all her Seed ever since. She neglected to
consult Reason about the Revelation brought her by the Serpent. For had she
called in Reason to take Counsel withal, this might have prevented her being
deceived; and thus her Progeny are prone to do ever since. Had she said to the
Serpent, Who sent you upon this Discovery? What authentic Seal, have you of
Commission? How do I know you have any Commission from God, to make this
Discovery, I have God's plain Word for it, that I may not eat of this Fruit;
and must I believe you upon your bare Word for it? Bring an authentic Seal of
your Commission from God, or I have no Reason to regard you. I rely upon God
forbidding me, and I dare not meddle with it, until I am sure I have the same
Word to give me Liberty; and then I know I may eat of it, as freely as any
other Fruit of the Garden; but 'till then I must and will forbear.

Had she thus summoned her Reason to take Counsel within this Matter of Faith,
it might have prevented her Ruin; but here she failed. She believed the Serpent
without asking Counsel of her Reason. And by this Means she infected her self,
and all her Posterity, with the same enthusiastic Credulity, to any Thing that
pretends to be divine; and to make them Partakers of that which is called
spiritual and divine.

Though it be the proper Province of Faith, to receive divine Revelation of
spiritual and divine Things; yet it is the proper Province of Reason, and in
which Faith has nothing to do, to determine whether the Revelation be from God.
For until this be first known and determined by the Reason and Understanding,
Faith has nothing at all to do, nor can it begin upon any Foundation that will
stand, because it is impossible without this to have any good Foundation. For
if the Revelation or Discovery be not divine, there can be no Reason to
receive, and acquiesce in it as such. Therefore this must first of all be
determined by the Understanding and Reason: And then Faith's Province begins
and not before. For if it might being before, it might receive a Lie for Truth;
for an heavenly and divine Revelation, as our first Mother Eve did, to the
undoing herself and all her Posterity.

I would gladly know of any Man, How it is possible to know that any Discovery,
or Revelation is from God, without the Evidence and Determination of Reason and
Understanding; I must confess I cannot see how it is any Ways possible for us
to know it, to say that it may be so, without showing how, can satisfy none but
a deluded Enthusiast.

I can conceive how Fancy can imagine it to be divine, and be powerfully heated
and moved by it, but this is very far from knowing it; though it is usually a
Thousand Times more sudden, and violent, and more suddenly produces visible
Effects, as it did in our first Mother Eve. But when all is done, this does not
prove it to be divine. For if Reason does not add its Testimony, that it is
divine it can be no more than a deluded Imagination.

This therefore is the Effect of this enthusiastic Fire, that the Mind assents
to, or believes, its own warm Imaginations, for heavenly and divine
Discoveries, and takes no Proofs of it, from the Labors and Dictates of
Reason: And therefore this lays the Foundation, for the worst of Errors and
Delusions. For upon this Foundation nothing can be kept out, from being
received for an heavenly and divine Discovery. For I cannot see how it is
possible to prevent it in such Case, but only by the immediate Interposition of
God himself, to restore such Persons to the right Use of their Reason, and
Understanding again, though they have despised, and abused it. Though God may
very justly in Judgment, leave such Persons to themselves, and the Power of
Satan's Impressions, and Impulses, who have a Fondness to follow, and fall in
with such Things, and no Question he often does so, when he permits Satan to
advance Enthusiasm among a People to try their Stedfastness in the Faith and
Order of the Gospel.

Thus I have showed that Enthusiasm makes Men believe without a good
Foundation, and their Behavior and Conduct is proportionable to their Faith.

3. Another natural and genuine Effect of Enthusiasm, is a blind following of
whatever Impression or Impulse is made upon their Fancy, or Imagination, under
the Notion of being spiritual.

This Impulse or Impression made there, always seems to such Persons, to be
some heavenly and divine Discovery: Some Communication from, and Participation
of the Holy Spirit. Something that lets them into the Secrets of Heaven; and
discovers to them either Truth or Duty.

And this is so strong, quick and powerful in many, that it hurries them on
with Violence according to it; and they verily think it is all heavenly and
divine; and therefore without making any Doubt, Scruple or Enquiry further into
the Matter, by consulting their Reason and the Oracles of God, they blindly
follow wherever this leads them. For to send such to the Oracles of God to know
whether they are right, they think as absurd, as to send a Man to the Sun at
bright Noonday to know whether it be the Sun that he sees; for they think it is
what is contained in the Oracles of God that they see, and from this Fountain
proceeds those strange and unaccountable Things, which are often to be seen
among Enthusiasts; which do so often confound the Thoughts, even of wise Men
about them. For sometimes the Impressions seems violently to carry them to that
which is good, and a fair Face of Religion, at other Times so confused, and so
contrary to it, that even wise Men know not what to make of them: and are
greatly stumbled about them; but it all proceeds from this Principle of
Enthusiasm that is in them, according to the working of Satan, by such Signs
and lying Wonders as the Apostle has it. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. For the Man of Sin,
has always come in, and gained his Power over a People, by such Signs and lying
Wonders, as are produced by the powerful Impulses of Enthusiasm; and therefore
when a People see Multitudes of such Signs and lying Wonders among them they
may expect that the Man of Sin is but just behind them.

For the same Spirit that introduced Enthusiasm, into our first Mother Eve in
Paradise, moves, and actuates them, and fills them with such powerful Impulses,
many Times to Things in themselves good and carrying a Face, as though they
were for the Advancement of Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, as he did
when he deluded Eve: But all this is done the better to hide the Poison: For
the great Enthusiasm of the Man of Sin was and is brought in and propagated by
this Means, and therefore it is called the Mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. If
Satan works his Wonders in an open bare faced Manner, and proclaimed openly
it was to bring them to worship the Devil, it would be no Mystery at all. But
his Signs must be lying, deceitful Wonders, and with the greatest Pretense for
the Glory and Honor of God, and Good of Souls, or his working would be no
Mystery at all. And therefore the Followers of Antichrist, or Man of Sin are
called Mystery, Babylon: Rev. 17.5 -- And they can by no Means keep up the
Mystery of their Iniquity, but by Means of the powerful working of Satan, by
the Signs and lying Wonders of Enthusiasm, produced by his strong Impressions,
or Impulses made upon enthusiastic Persons.

Enthusiasm is such a Proteus, that Satan can put it into all Manner of Shapes,
to serve his Design of deluding poor blind ignorant Mortals, and yet always
make it appear with a most zealous and religious Face.

And as long as Satan can hold the Souls of Men fast, in believing such
Impulses, and powerful Impressions upon their Minds, to be heavenly and divine
Discoveries, and keep them on acting according to them, and puff them up with
spiritual Pride and Self-Conceit, as partaking of spiritual and divine Things
above others, he cares not, for he keeps his Palace in Peace.

And what have been all the Signs, and lying Wonders, whereby Satan has
brought in, and upheld the Man of Sin, but such enthusiastic Impressions, and
Impulses, and the Effects of them. By this Means be has, as it were, made Fire
to come down from Heaven in the Sight or Apprehension of Men. Rev. 13.13. i. e,
he has filled their Imaginations and Fancies with dreadful Apprehensions of
Fire coming down from God to consume them, and by this has fastened his
Delusions in their Souls. The whole History of that Mystery of Iniquity, gives
us Account of no other Fire, coming down from Heaven to fright them into his
Delusions. And they look upon it truly miraculous, that he should thus all on a
sudden Fright such great Numbers of Persons with such dreadful Apprehensions
and conclude, therefore that it must be from God. And the sudden and powerful
Light with which he impresses their Souls, presently after, is looked upon no
less miraculous than the former, and therefore must (they think) proceed from
God.

And a Soul thus filled, and impressed verily believes it is all spiritual and
divine: And goes on believing, and blindly following such Impressions, and
Impulses without any Doubt, Scruple, or Enquiry. It Is but to feel such
Impressions, or sweet Feelings (as they call them) and they follow it
immediately.

To make any Doubt, Scruple or Enquiry, in such a plain Case they think would
be a great Dishonor to the Spirit of God; and a great Means to quench it. And
they find by Experience that it does so; for such a Spirit that makes the
Impression, and that so strongly influences them, cannot bear any Enquiries to
be made into his Impressions lest he should be discovered. For the sacred
Scriptures, and true Reason are his mortal Enemies; and to ask Counsel of these
two together quenches that Spirit, because they are Counselors sent from
Heaven, to discover the Blackness and Darkness of his Designs: And no Wonder
then that such a Spirit retires whenever these are called in to be consulted
with, rather than be discovered what he is.

If it were the Spirit of God that made the Impression, he would never retire
out of such Company: For the Spirit of God always strongly moves Men to call in
such Company, and to consult them on all Occasions, and never to stir one Step
forward without them. There are others indeed, though great Friends to
Enthusiasm, and feel it pretty strongly working in their Souls, yet arrive not
to this Pitch; and are ready to start and be affrighted at any strong Impulse
made upon their Minds: and fall immediately to enquiring and examining all by
Scripture and true Reason.

These therefore the Tempter must use gently, or they will prove his worst
Enemies in this Design. And therefore he is sparing of making any such strong
Impulses, or Impressions there, with Violence. These therefore he moves in a
more gentle, soft and easy Manner. These he persuades to think, that there are
only some few wild almost distracted Persons that have such strong Impulses.
Yet such Persons are no less led away, by the Power of Enthusiasm than the
other, though in a safer and easier Way.

But these Impulses or violent strong Impressions, made upon their Fancies or
Imaginations; have so many wonderful Effects both upon the Body and Mind that
it is almost incredible, especially to such as never saw or heard them, viz.
such as dreadful Frights extatick Joys, violent and strange Motions of the
Body, and the Voice, fainting Fits, Convulsions, and the like.

All which if you trace the History of Enthusiasm from the Beginning of the
World down to our Day, both among the Heathen, and the People of God, have in a
greater or lesser Degree, always attended Enthusiasm, and where any Thing of
this Nature is to be seen among those who are under the powerful Operation of
the Spirit of God; they are all owing to a greater or lesser Degree of
Enthusiasm by which Satan would overthrow the good Effects of the Spirit's
Operation.

4. Another Effect of Enthusiasm is great and sudden Joy without and good
Foundation.

The Joys and Comforts attending Enthusiasm are for the most Part if not always
sudden, and violent at their first Appearance; and for the most Part so by Fits
afterward. Whereas that which arises from the Influence of the Spirit of God,
is usually more gradual; intermixed for the most Part with holy Fear, and
Jealousy over themselves, and always proceeds upon Foundations of Reason and
Understanding, and never without the most bright and clear Exercise of Reason,
Understanding and Judgment.

But the Joys and Comforts attending Enthusiasm are sudden, great, and violent,
even so as many Times to overpower the Body in a great Degree, and in a Manner
wholly to destroy the Exercise of Reason. And therefore an Enthusiast can
seldom give a better Account of it, than that they see and feel great Light and
Comfort in their Souls, which ravishes them with Joy. They see such spiritual
and heavenly Sights, that they feel the most wonderful Joy spreading along
their Souls; and they think they are sure all this is from the Spirit of God.
They cannot give a rational Account what this Light was, nor how it came into
their Minds, nor upon what rational Foundation it stands. But only can say they
had great Light let into their Souls; they saw God and Christ, and this has
filled them with inexpressible Joy.

They cannot distinguish this Light from imaginary seeing and feeling.

They cannot trace the Beginnings of it from a rational free Act of their Souls
accepting, and embracing Christ according to the Offers made in the Gospel: But
it all begins upon this great Light impressed upon their Imaginations, and
therefore has no good Foundation to stand upon. For ask them what this Light
was, and they cannot tell you in any rational Manner.

For what true Light in the Soul is, they are utter Strangers to. For this can
be no more than the clear Evidence of the Truth and Goodness of the Gospel, as
a Revelation from God. A clear Understanding and Conviction of this from solid
Reasons, is true Light in the Soul; and when the Spirit of God gives this it
fully persuades the Soul to accept the Offers made therein, and to live and act
according thereunto. And thus they become true and real Christians and
evangelically conformed to the blessed Jesus. And a solid rational Joy,
Comfort, and Satisfaction is by the Spirit of God raised in the Soul hereupon.

5. Another genuine Fruit and Effect of Enthusiasm is a great Contempt of all
but themselves or those that are like them.

They value not high nor low rich nor poor, or any Person whatever, but such as
entertain, or are favorable to their Enthusiasm.

This, and this alone can make them think well of any Person. As to all others,
though never so wise, and good, and though they have given the brightest
Evidence of their true Piety, by an holy, wise heavenly and unblemished
Conversation; yet all this passes for nothing at all with an Enthusiast.

He rather deems this a Sign of their Hypocrisy, than of their true Piety, if
they give not into his Enthusiasm. He can readily and freely pass Sentence of
Condemnation upon all such, and send them to Hell: And as freely sentence such
to Heaven as live in Drunkenness, Whoredom, Lying, Cheating, Deceiving, Envy,
Contention and Strise, if they are but warm Enthusiasts.

They can hardly be neighbourly or peaceable, with any that are not Enthusiasts
like themselves, or such as savor it.

This with them is the only Mark, and distinguishing Character of a true Child
of God. If they see any with this Mark, which they discover by their Looks, and
Words (for the most Part) they at once pronounce such an one a true Child of
God, and Heir of Heaven; without knowing any Thing more about them; yea thought
such have a thousand plain Marks of Satan's Image upon them. And they are as
severe in their Reflections upon all others that have not this Mark, as they
are (...) kind to such as have. For they at once send them to Hell, though they
have never so many true Scripture Marks of the Children of God; if they dislike
their Enthusiasm.

They despise them; and can bear no Reasonings from them to convince them of
their Errors and Mistakes. They look upon themselves to have engrossed all
that is spiritual and divine, and that all others that have never seen this
great imaginary Light, nor felt the Heat of this strong imaginary Fire; are all
Reprobates, and Opposers of God's Work, and deserve no better Sentence than
Damnation. And therefore show a supercilious Contempt of them.

This indeed is not the Case of all of them, for some are much more moderate,
and reasonable than others are. But yet this is the true Temper of the Spirit
of Enthusiasm; though it appears most when blown up into a great Flame. But I
shall mention but one more.

6. And that is a fiery Spirit of Persecution, against all that differ from
them, as far as they have Power.

Indeed when Enthusiasm first begins to show it self; it pretends to all
Meekness, Patience, Quietness and Love.

They would not do any Thing for all the World, to hurt another for his Opinion
and Judgment. If he be wrong they would do not more than pity, instruct, and
pray for him. And thus Enthusiasm would be thought, to be the true Gospel
Spirit.

But as soon as great Numbers are added, it soon puts on another Face;
especially, when there is Hopes of their being the strongest Party. Then they
begin to transgress Order and Regularity in Church and State, and pretend
Conscience for so doing: And that nothing is Order but their own Francies and
Imaginations. They begin then to be loud and boisterous, and threaten what they
will do; and begin boldly to trample upon Authority, in Church and State, and
are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, Jude 8. And if any the least
Restraint be put, or attempted to be put upon them; they cry and bawl out
Persecution, as loud as they can roar, and all because they may not run to the
wildest Excess. But if Matters go on still, so as that they gain the Ascendant
and have the Power; they immediately show the most dreadful hot fiery Spirit of
Persecution.

All must buckle to their Dagon Imaginations, or they must be dealt with the
most severely. Then the greatest Hardships shall be imposed, and called
Moderation, whereas a Thousands Times less laid upon them before, would have
made them roar out Persecution, so loud that the World almost might have heard
them.

It ever has been so with Enthusiasm: Witness the Enthusiasm of Jeroboam among
the ten Tribes; and the Enthusiasm of Mahomet in Turkey; and above all that of
the Pope or Antichrist, which has prevailed about a Thousand Years. What a
violent hot persecuting Spirit does it show toward all that differ from it;
wherever it can gain the Power, i. e. upon all such as they call Opposers.

This Spirit ever did and ever will attend Enthusiasm, wherever it gains the
Power over others. For nothing better can be expected from that Spirit which
judges and passes Sentence upon Men, and sends them to Hell, that despises
Reason, and sets up Faith without it. Nothing better can be expected from that
Spirit that shows so much Enmity to all others that differ from them. As to
call them Dogs, Devils and sentences them to Hell: Such want nothing but Power,
and they would execute their Sentence speedily to the full. This is most
certainly the true Spirit of Enthusiasm, though Multitudes are ready to follow it
with Eagerness.

Thus I have endeavored to trace Enthusiasm from its Origin to the End of it
as to this World. And from what has been said concerning it, we may see that
the Nature of it is, to make Persons compass themselves about with Sparks of
their own kindling, and to walk in the Light of his own Fire, as the Prophet
speaks, Isai. 50.11. Whose Words show that Enthusiasm prevailed in his Day.
When a People grow corrupt in their Practices, they soon come to that Pass, as
not to be willing to bear sound Doctrine; and then by the just Judgment of God
upon them, they are ready to be filled with Enthusiasm, and then heap to
themselves Teachers having itching Ears. 2 Timothy 4.3. And then they do at least
vertually say to the Prophets, prophesy to us smooth Things, Isai. 30.10. They
love such Teachers, as bring them such Doctrines, as suddenly pass them for
godly Men, and slatter, and sooth their Pride and Self-Conceit, and thereby sew
Pillows under their ArmHoles, and daub them with untempered Mortar. Jer. 5.31.
Micah 2.11. Ezekiel. 13.18, etc. And there is nothing so effectual as Enthusiasm
to do this, and therefore nothing that a corrupt People are so soon carried
away with as this, because it always pretends to the most quick, and easy Way
to make sure of Heaven.

And although it fills the Soul with great Darkness, as our Savior speaks of
it, Matthew. 6.23. Yet how great a Degree of it may consist with true Faith in
Christ, and true Humility of Mind, and true Love to God, is not very easy to
determine. But this I am fully persuaded of, that as it is acknowledged by all
but hot Enthusiasts that there remains still some of the Old Man in the best of
Saints, i. e. some sinful corrupt Inclinations and Desires while in this Life;
so am I satisfied that godly Men, (some more than others) are many Times filled
with considerable Degrees of Enthusiasm: And for a Man to determine precisely,
what Degree of it is inconsistent with true Piety, I think is very difficult;
and how far the kind Author of our Beings, who knows our Darkness, Infirmities,
and Mistakes, may pardon and overlook them, in and through Christ, where he
sees an honest, sincere, and upright Heart, I think is too much Boldness to
determine.

Yet am I not in the least the better pleased with it because of this, but look
upon it, as the Remainders of Original Sin in the Godly. And therefore look
upon my self bound to pity and pray for such as are overtaken with it, and with
the same Spirit of Meekness, and Christian Tenderness to restore such, as I am
those that are overtaken in any other Sin.

FINIS.
The following BOOKS are to be sold by J. Edwards in Cornhill, Boston, viz.
The Real Christian, or a Treatise of Effectual Calling: Wherein the Work of
God in drawing the Soul to Christ, being opened according to the Scriptures,
some Things required by our late Divines as necessary to a right Preparation
for Christ and true closing with Christ, which have caused and do still cause
much Trouble to some serious Christians, are with due Respects to those worthy
Men brot to the Balance of the Sanctuary, there weighed, and accordingly
judged. By Giles Firmin.

The Almost Christian discovered: Or the False Professor tried and Cast. Being
the Substance of seven Sermons. The Sixteenth Edition. By Matthew Mead.

The Psalms of David, imitated in the Language of the New Testament, and
applied to the Christian State and Worship, 15th Edition. By I. Watts, D. D.

The Doctrine of Predestination unto Life explained and vindicated, in four
Sermons; preached to the Church of Christ meeting in Brattle-street, and
published at their general Desire: with some additional Passages and
Quotations. By William Cooper.

Two Discourses: The first of preaching Christ: The second of experimental
preaching. By the late Rev. Mr. John Jennings. With a Preface by the Rev. Dr.
Watts. To which is added, a Letter concerning the most useful Way of Preaching:
By the late Rev. and Celebrated Dr. Augustus Hermanus Frank; Professor of
Divinity in the University of Hall in Saxony; Pastor of a Church and Director
of the charitable Contributions there. The fourth Edition.

BOOKS sold by J. Edwards in Cornhill, Boston.
An Introduction to the English Tongue, being a Spelling-Book in two Parts. The
first consisting of Tables of Words from one to seven Syllables, disposed in a
natural and easy Order for Children to learn to spell by. The second being
Observations on the Sounds of Letters, Consonants, Vowels and Dipthongs:
Directions for the true dividing of Syllables, the Use of Capital Letters,
Stops, Marks, and various other useful Tables, for the Use of those who have
attained to a riper Judgment. The Third Edition. By N. Bailey.

The Benefits of a good, and the Mischiefs of an evil Conscience; being
fourteen Sermons: By Benjamin Wadsworth.

A plain Discourse on vain Thoughts, which are great Hindrances of Men's being
saved. By Nehemiah Walter.

Fair Warnings to a careless World; or the serious Practice of Religion;
recommended by the Admonitions of dying Men, and the Sentiments of all People
in their most serious Hours: And other Testimonies of an extraordinary Nature.
By Josiah Woodward, D. D.

The spiritual Warfare: or some Sermons concerning the Nature of Mortification;
together with the right Exercise and spiritual Advantages thereof; whereunto
are added other two Sermons concerning the Mystery of Contentment under
afflicting Rods and Dispensations. By Andrew Gray.

The Triumph of Mercy in the Chariot of Praise. A Treatise of preventing secret
and unexpected Mercies; with some mixed Reflections. By the late Reverend Mr.
Samuel Lee.


