NINE SERMONS UPON THE Following SUBJECTS; VIZ.

I. The LORD our Righteousness. II. The Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the
Serpent. III. Persecution every Christian's LOT. IV. Abraham's offering up his
Son Isaac. V. Readiness Conversion. VI. The Pharisee and Publican. VII. Christ,
the Believer's Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. VIII. The
Holy Spirit* convincing the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.
IX. The Conver^^^^ (...) Zaccheus.
By George Whitefield, (...) Late of Pembroke-College, Oxford.

The Second Edition*

BOSTON: Prin^^^ and Sold by S^. Kneeland and T. Green, in Queen street. 1743.

THE PREFACE.
THE following SERMONS, I think I may say were given me by the Lord Jesus
Christ; and according to my present Light are agreeable to the Form of sound
Words delivered to as in the lively Oracles of God. They (...) the Sum and
Substance, I will not (...) Word for Word of what was delivered (...) from the
Pulpit* for, as I had Occasion in America, Scotland, and England, to (...) upon
the same Subject^. I was (...), according to the Freedom and ^istance given me
from above, to (...), or make Excursions, agreeable (...) the People's
Circumstances amongst whom I was preaching the Kingdom of God. I had no Leisure
or Freedom to commit any of them to Writing, but during my last Voyage from
America to England; nor do I expect to find Leisure to write down any more
fresh Discourses, till it shall please God that I embark again. May the Spirit
of God, who delights out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings to perfect
Praise, bless them to every Reader, and put into their Hearts to pray for (...)
poor, unworthy Servant in Jesus (...).

George Whitefield.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. The Lord our Righteousness. Jeremiah xxiii. 6. The Lord our
Righteousness. Page 1. SERMON II. The Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the
Serpent. Genesis iii. 15 and I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and
between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise
his Heel. (...). SERMON III. Persecution every Christian's Lot. 2 Timothy iii.
12, Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution.
Page 58. SERMON IV. Abraham's offering up his Son Isaac. Genesis xxii 12. And he
said, lay not thin^ Hand upon the Lad, neither do thou any Thing unto him; for
now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not with held thy Son, thine
only Son from me. Page 81 SERMON V. Readiness Conversion. Acts ix. 22. But Saul
increased the more in Strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at
Damascus, proving that this is very Christ. Page 103. SERMON VI. Christ, the
Believer's Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Cor. i. 30.
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, Wisdom*
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Page 130. SERMON VII. The
Pharisee and Publican. Luke xviii. 14. I tell you this Man went down to his
House justified rather than (...) other. For every one that exalts himself
shall be abased, and he that (...) self shall be exalted. Page 154 SERMON VIII.
The Holy Spirit convincing the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and Judgment.
John xvi. 8. And when he is come, he will convince the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment. Page 174. SERMON IX. The Conversion of
Zaccheus. Luke xix. 9, 10. And Jesus said unto him, This Day is Salvation come
to this House, forasmuch as he also is the Son of Abraham. For the Son of Man
is come to seek and to save that which was lost. Page 198.
Just Published, And to be Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green
SOME Thoughts concerning the present Revival of Religion in NEW ENGLAND, and
the Way in which it ought to be acknowlegded and promoted, humbly offered to
the Public, in a TREATISE on that Subject.

In Five PARTS;
PART I. Showing that the Work that has of late been going on in this Land, is
a glorious Work of GOD. PART II. Showing the Obligations that all are under, to
acknowledge, rejoice (...) and promote this Work, and the great Danger of the
contrary. PART III. Showing in many Instances, wherein the Subjects, or zealous
Promoters, of this Work have been injuriously blame^. PART IV. Showing what
Things are to be corrected or avoided, in promoting this Work, or in our
Behavior under it. PART V. Showing positively what ought to be done to promote
this Work.
By JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST at (...).

SERMON. I.
The Lord our Righteousness.
JER. xxiii. 6. -- The LORD our Righteousness.
WHOEVER is acquainted with the Nature of Mankind in general, or the Propensity
of his own Heart in particular, must acknowledge, that Self-righteousness is
the last Idol that is rooted out of the Heart. -- Being once born under a
Covenant of Works, it is natural for us all to have recourse to a Co^^venant of
Works for our everlasting Salvation* And we have contracted such a devilish
Pri^^ by ^ur Fall from (...), that w^^ would, (...) yet in, (...) least, glory
in being (...) Cause (...) Salvation. We ^ry out again (...) and that very
justly; but (...) at least I am sure we are (...) Nature* and therefore no
wonder (...) Natural Men embrace that Scheme. Its (...) we disclaim the
Doctrine of Merit, are ashamed directly to say we deserve any Good at the Hands
of God; therefore, as the Apostle excellently well observes, we go about, we
fetch (...) Circuit, to establish a Righteousness of our own, and, like the
Pharisees of old, will not wholly submit to that Righteousness, which is of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This is the sorest, though (...)! the most common Evil that was ever yet seen
under the Sun. An Evil, that in any Age, especially in these Dregs of Time
wherein we live, cannot (...) be inveighed against. -- For, as it is with the
People, so it is with the Priests; and it is to be feared, even in those Places
where once the Truth, as it is in Jesus, was eminently preached, many Ministers
are so sadly degenerated from their pious Ancestors, that the Doctrine of
Grace, especially the personal, all-sufficient Righteousness of Jesus, is but
too seldom, too slightly mentioned. Hence the Love of many waxes cold; and I
have often thoug^, was it possible, that this single Consideration would be
sufficient to raise our venerable Forefathers again from their Graves.

The Righteousness of Jesus Christ is one of those great Mysteries the Angels
desire to look (...), and seems to be (...) of the (...) Lessons that (...)
taught Men after (...) Fall. For what were the Coats that God made to put on
our first Parents, but Tpyes of the Application of the Mer^^ or Righteousness
of Jesus Christ to Believers Hearts? We are told* that (...) were made of Skins
of Beasts, and as Beasts were not then Food for Men, we may fairly infer, that
those Beasts were slain in Sacrifice, in Commemoration of the great Sacrifice
Jesus Christ hereafter to be offered. And the Skins of those Beasts thus slain
being put on Adam and Eve, they were hereby taught how their Nakedness was to
be covered with the Righteousness of the Lamb of God.

This is it which is meant, when we are told Abraham believed on the Lord, and
it was counted to him for Righteousness. In short, this is it of which both the
Law and all the Prophets have spoken, especially Jeremiah in the Words of the
Text -- The Lord our Righteousness. -- I propose through Divine Grace I. To
consider who we are to understand by the Word Lord. II. How the Lord is Man's
Righteousness. III. I Will consider some chief Objections that are generally
urged against this Doctrine. IV. I shall show some very ill Consequences* that
flow naturally from denying this (...). V. Shall conclude with an (...), all to
come to Christ by Faith, that they may be enabled to say with the Prophet in
the Text, The Lord our Righteousness.


I am to consider who we are to (...) Word Lord -- The Lord our (...).

(...) if any Arians or (...) are drawn by (...) to hear what the (...) has to
say, let them be ashamed of ^enying the Divinity of that Lord that has bought
poor Sinners by his (...) Blood. -- For the Person mentioned in the Text under
the Character of the Lord, is Jesus Christ. -- Behold, ( ver. 5.) the Days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, a King
shall reign and prosper, shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth. -- In
(...) Day^ ( ver. 6.) Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and
this is his Name whereby he shall be called, "The Lord our Righteousness." --
By the righteous Branch, all agree that we are to understand Jesus Christ. --
He it is that is called the Lord in our Text. If so, if there were no other
Text in the Bible to prove the Divinity of Christ, that is sufficient. For if
the Word Lord may properly belong to Jesus Christ, He (...) be God. For as you
have it in the Margins of your Bibles, the Word Lord is in the Original
Jehovah, which is the Essential Title of God himself. Come then, ye Arians,
kiss the Son of God, low down before him, and honor him, even as you honor
the Father. Learn of the Angels those Morning Stars, and worship him as (...)
God. -- For otherwise you are as much Idolaters, as those that worship the
Virgin Mary. And as for you* Socinians, who say Christ was a ^^er Man, and yet
profess that he was (...) Savior, according to your own Principles you are
accursed. For, if Christ be a (...) Man, then he is only an Arm of Flesh. --
And it is written, Cursed (...); he that trusts on an Arm of Flesh.

-- But I would hope there are no such Monsters here. At least, that after
these Considerations, they would be ashamed of broaching such monstrous
Absurdities any more. -- For it is plain, that by the Word Lord, we are to
understand the Lord Jesus Christ, who here takes to himself the Title of
Jehovah, and therefore must be very God of very God, or, as the Apostle
devoutly expresses it, God blessed for ever more.

How the Lord is to be Man's Righteousness comes next to be considered.

And that is, in one Word, by Imputation. -- For it pleased God, after he had
made all Thing; by the Word of his Power, to create Man after his own Image.
And so infinite was the Condescension of the high and lofty One, who inhabiteth
Eternity, that though He might have insisted on the everlasting Obedience of him
and his Posterity, yet' He was pleased to oblige Himself, by a Covenant or
Agreement made with his own Creatures, upon Condition of an unsinning
Obedience, to give them Immortality and eternal Life. -- For when it is said,
the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die," we may fairly infer, so
long as (...) continued obedient, and did not eat thereof* he should surely
live. -- The 3d of Genesis gives us a ^ail, but mournful Account, how our first
Parents broke this Covenant, and thereby (...) Need of a ^etter Righteousness
than (...) in order to procure their future (...) God. -- For what must they
do? They were as ^^ch under a Covenant of Works, as ever. And, though after their
Disobedience they were without Strength, yet they were obliged not only to do,
but continue to do all Things, and that too in the most perfect Manner which
the Lord had required of them. -- And not only so, but to make Satisfaction to
God's infinitely offended Justice, for the (...) they had already been guilty
of. -- Here then opens the amazing Scene of Divine Philanthropy -- I mean God's
Love to Man -- For behold, what Man could not do, Jesus Christ, the Son of his
Father's Love, undertakes to do for him. And that God might be just in
justifying the Ungodly, though He was in the Form of God, and therefore thought
it no Robbery to be equal with God, yet he took upon him the Form of a Servant,
even human Nature. -- In that Nature He obeyed, and thereby fulfilled the whole
moral Law in our stead -- And also died a painful Death upon the Cross, and
thereby became a Curse for, or instead of, those whom the Father had given him.
-- As God, He satisfied at the same Time that He obeyed, and suffered as Man;
and being God and Man, in (...) Person, wrought out a full, perfect and
sufficient Righteousness for all to whom it was to be imputed.

Here then we see the Meaning of the Word Righteousness. It implies the active,
as well as passive Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ, We generally, when
talking of the Merits of Christ* only mention the latter, viz. -- His Death,
where* the former, viz. his Life and active Obedience is equally necessary.
Christ is not such a Savior as becomes us, unless we join both together. --
Christ not only died, but lived; not only suffered, but obeyed, for or instead
of poor Sinners. And both these jointly make up that complete Righteousness
which is to be imputed to us, as the Disobedience of our first Parents was made
ours by Imputation. In this Sense, and no other, are we to understand that
Parallel which St. Paul draws in the 5th of the Romans, between the first and
second Adam. This is what he elsewhere terms our being made the Righteousness
of God in Him. This is the Sense wherein the Prophet would have us to
understand the Words of the Text; therefore Chap. xxx. ver. 16. She, i. e. the
Church it self shall be called (having this Righteousness imputed to her) the
Lord our Righteousness. -- A Passage, I think, worthy the profoundest
Meditation of all the Sons and Daughters of Abraham.

Many are the Objections which the proud* Hearts of fallen Men are continually
urging against this wholesome, this divine, this soul-saving Doctrine. -- I
come now, in the third Place, to answer some few of those which I think the
m^st considerable.

And first, they say, because they would appear Friends to Morality, that the
Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness is destructive of good Morality and ^eads
to Licentiousness (...) ^octrine of an (...) are the Persons, that generally
the Ground. (...) Are they Men full of But surely the really concerned for Good
Works? th^^ (...) never (...) few Exceptions there may be, if (...) Discours^
all, it is notorious they are generally Men of corrupt Minds, reprobate
concerning the Faith. The best Title I can give them is, that of profane
Moralists, or Moralists falsely so called. For I appeal to the Experience of
the present, as well as past Ages, if Iniquity did and does not most abound
where the Doctrine of Christ's whole personal Righteousness is most ^^ied down,
and most seldom mentioned, -- Arminian being Antichristian Principles, always
did, and always will lead to Antichristian Practices. And never was there a
Reformation brought about in the Church, but by the Preaching the Doctrine of
an imputed Righteousness. -- This, as that Man of God Luther calls it, is
Articulus Stantis aut Cadentis Ecclesiae, the Article by which the Church
stands or falls. -- And though the Preachers of this Doctrine are generally
branded by those on the other Side with the opprobious Names of Antinomia^s*
Deceivers, and what not? yet, I believe, if the Truth of the Doctrine on both
Sides was to be judged of by the Lives of the Preachers and Professors of it,
their's on our Side the Question* would have the Advantage every way.

It Is true, this, as well as every other Doctrine of Grace, may be abused. And
perhaps the ^nchristian Walk of some, who have talked of Christ's imputed
Righteousness, Justification by Faith, and the like, and yet (...) the Merits
of puted to their own Souls, has give viz. -- His of the Lord thus Cause to
blasphe^ his Life and is a very unsafe, as well as a very* (...) Christ is
arguing. -- The only Question shou^ unless we or no this Doctrine of an imputed
Righteousness does in itself cut off the Occasion of good Works, or lead to
Licentiousness? No, in no wise. It ex^^^des Works indeed from being any Cause
of our Justification in the Sight of God. -- But it requires good Works as a
Proof of our having this Righteousness imputed to us, and as a declarative
Evidence of our Justification in the Sight of M^n. And then how can the
Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness, be a Doctrine leading to Licentiousness?

Its all (...)* -- St. Paul introduces an Infi^^^ making this Objection in his
Epistle to the Romans. -- And none but Infidels, that never felt the Power of
Christ's Resurrection upon their Souls, will urge it ever again -- And
therefore, notwithstanding this Objection, with the Prophet in the Text we may
boldly say, the Lord is our Righteousness.

But Satan, (and no wonder that his Servants imitate him) often transforms
himself in an Angel of Light. And therefore (such perverse' Things, (...) ill
Infidelity and Arminianism, make Men speak) in order to dress their Objections
in the best Colors. Some urge, that our Savior preached no such Doctrine --
that in his Sermon upon the Mount, He mentions only Morality; and consequently
the Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness falls wholly the Ground.

But surely the Men, who urge this Objection, (...) never read, or never
understood our Lord's (...) Discourse, wherein the Doctrine of an imputed
Righteousness* (...) plainly taught, that (...) that (...) that see, may read.

Indeed our Lord does recommend Morality and good Works ((...) all faithful
Ministers will do) and clears the moral ^aw from many corrupt (...) put upon it
by the l^tter-learned Pharisee^. (...) But then, before He comes to (...), it is
remarkable, He talks of inward Piety, such as Poverty of Spirit, Meekness,
(...) Mourning* Purity of Heart -- especially hung^^ing and (...) after
Righteousness; and (...) recommends good Works, as an Evidence of our having
his Righteousness imputed to us, and these Graces and Divine Tempers wrought in
our Hearts. -- Let your Light, (that is, the Divine Light I before have been
mentioning) shine before Men, in a holy Life, that they, seeing your good
Works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. -- And then immediately
adds, Think not that I am come to destroy the moral Law -- I came not to
destroy* to take away the Force of it as a Rule of Life, but to fulfill, to obey
it in its whole Latitude, and give the complete Sense of it. -- And then he
goes on to show, how exceeding broad the moral Law is. So that our Lord,
instead of disanulling of an imputed Righteousness in his Sermon upon the
Mount, not only confirms it, but also answers the foregoing Objection urged
against it, by (...) good Works a Proof and Evidence of its being imputed to
our Souls. -- He therefore that h^s Ears to hear, let him hear what the Prophet
say in the Words of the Text -- "The Lord o^ Righteousness."

But as Satan not only quoted (...)* ^ut also backed one Temptation with it,
after (...), when he attacked Christ* Person in the Wilderness; so his Children
generally take the same Method in treating his Doctrine. And therefore they
urge another Objection against the Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness, from
the Example of the young Man in the Gospel.

We may state it thus: -- The Evangelist St. Mark, say they, Chap. x. mentions
a young Man that came to Christ, running and asking him, what he should do to
inherit eternal Life? Christ, say they, referred him to the Commandments, to
know what he must do to inherit eternal Life. It is plain therefore, Works were
to be partly at (...), the Cause of (...) Justification; and consequently the
Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness in unscriptu^^* -- This is the Objection
in its full Strength* and little Strength in all its Fullness* -- For, was I to
prove the Necessity of an imputed Righteousness, I scarce know how I could
bring a better Instance to make it good.

Let us take a more intimate View of this young Man, and our Lord's Behavior
toward him. Mark x. 17. the Evangelist tells us, that when Christ was gone
forth into the Way, there came one running (it should seem it (...) some
Nobleman, a Rarity indeed, to see such a One running to Christ*) and (...) only
so, but he kneeled to him though perhaps many of his Rank scarce know the Time
when they kneeled to Christ) and asking him, say^^^* Good Master, what shall I
do, that I (...) inherit eternal Life* -- Then Jesus, to (...) whither or not
he believed him to be what (...) really was, truly properly God, said unto him,
Why c^llest thou me Good? There is (...) good but one, that is God. -- And that
he might directly answer his Question; says he, Thou know the Commandments:
Do not commit Adultery, Do not bear false Witness, Defraud not, Honor thy
Father and thy (...) This, I say, was a direct Answer to his Question; namely,
that eternal Life was not to be attained by his Doings. -- For our Lord, by
referring him to the Commandments, did not, (as the Objecte^s insinuate) in the
least hint, that his Morality would recommend him to the Favor and Mercy of
God. -- But he intended thereby to make the Law his Schoolmaster to bring him
to himself; that the young Man, seeing how he had broken every one of these
Commandments, might thereby be convinced of the Insufficiency of his own, and
consequently the absolute Necessity of looking out for a better Righteousness,
whereon he might depend for eternal Life.

This was what our Lord designed. -- The young Man being Self-righteous, and
willing to justify himself, said, All these have I observed from my Youth. But
had he known himself, he would have confessed, All these have I broke (...)
Youth. -- For supposing he had not actually committed Adultery, Had he never
lusted (...) a Woman in his Heart? What? if he had (...) really killed another;
Had he never been (...) without a Cause, or spoken unadvisedly with his Lips?
If so, by breaking one of the least Commandments in the least Degree, he became
liable to the Curse of God: For Cursed is he (says the Law) that continues
not to do all Things that are written in this Book. -- And therefore, as I
observed before, our Lord was so far from speaking against, that he treated the
young Man in that Manner, on purpose to convince him of the Necessity of an
imputed Righteousness.

But perhaps they will reply, it is said, Jesus beholding him loved him. And
what then? This he might do with a human Love, and at the same Time this young
Man have no Interest in his Blood. -- Thus Christ is said to wonder -- to weep
over Jerusalem, and say -- Oh that thou had KNOWN, etc. But such like
Passages are to be referred only to his human Nature. And there is a great deal
of Difference between the Love wherewith Christ loved this young Man, and that
wherewith he loved Mary, Lazarus, and their Sister Martha. -- To illustrate
this by a Comparison. -- A Minister of the Lord Jesus Christ, seeing many
amiable Dispositions, such as a Readiness to hear the Word, a decent Behavior
at public Worship, a Life outwardly spotless in many, cannot but so far love
them. But then ^^ere is much Difference betwixt that Love which (...) Minister
feels for such, and that Divine Love, that Union and Sympathy of Soul, (...)
feels for those that he is satisfied are really born again of God. -- Apply
this to our Lord's Case, as a (...) Illustration of it. -- Consider what has
been said upon the young Man's Case in general, and then, if before you were
fond of this Objection, instead of triumphing, with him you will go sorrowful
away. -- Our Savior's Reply to him more and more convinces us of the Truth of
the Prophet's Assertion in the Text, viz. that the Lord is our Righteousness.

But there is a fourth and grand Objection yet behind, and that is taken from
the 25th Chapter of St. Matthew, where our Lord is described, as rewarding
People with eternal Life, because they fed the hungry, clothed the naked, and
such like. -- Their Works therefore were a Cause of their Justification;
consequently, the Doctrine of imputed Righteousness is not agreeable to
Scripture.

This I confess is the most plausible Objection that is brought against the
Doctrine insisted on from the Text. And in order that we may answer it in as
clear and brief a Manner as may be, we confess, with the Article of the Church
of England, that albeit good Works do not justify us, yet they will follow
after Justification, as Fruits of it; and though they can claim no Reward in
themselves, yet forasmuch as they spring from Faith in Christ, and a renewed
Soul, they shall receive a Reward of Grace, though no^ of Debt; and consequent
(...) the mere we abound in such good Works, the greater will be our Reward
when Jesus Christ shall come to Judgment.

Take these Considerations along with us, and they will help us much to answer
the Objection now before us. -- For thus St. Matthew. -- Then shall the King
say to them on his Right Hand, Come ye blessed Children of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. -- For I was an
hungry, and ye gave me Meat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me Drink. I was a
Stranger, and ye took me in. Naked, and ye clothed me. I was sick, and ye
visited me. I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. I will therefore reward you,
because you have done these Things ^ut of Love to me, and hereby have evidenced
yourselves to be my true Disciples. -- And that the People did not depend on
th^se good Actions for their Justification, in the Sight of God, is evident.
For when saw we thee a hungry, say they, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave
thee Drink? When saw we thee a Stranger, and took thee in? Or naked* and
clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in Prison, and came unto thee? --
Language and Questions quite improper for Persons relying on their own
Righteousness for Acceptance and Acquittance in the Sight of God.

But then they reply against this. -- In the latter Part of the Chapter, say
they, it is plain that Jesus Christ rejects and damns the others for not doing
these Things. And therefore, if he damns those for not doing, he saves those
for doing; and consequently the Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness is good
for nothing.

But that is no Consequence at all -- For God ^ay justly damn any Man for
omitting the ^east Duty of the moral Law, and yet in himself is not obliged to
give any one any Reward, supposing he has done all that ^e can. We are
unprofitable Servants, we have done not near so much as it was our Duty to do,
must be the Language of the (...) holy Souls living; and therefore from, or in
our selves, cannot be justified in the Sight of God. -- This was the Frame of
the devout Souls just now referred to. -- Sensible of this, they were so far
from depending on their Works for Justification in the Sight of God, that they
were filled, as it were, with a holy Blushing, to think our Lord should
condescend to mention, much more to reward them for their poor Works of Faith
and Labors of Love. I am persuaded their Hearts would rise with a holy
Indignation against those, who urge this Passage as an Objection against the
Assertion of the Prophet in the Words of the Text, that the "Lord is our
Righteousness." --

Thus I think we have fairly answered these grand Objections, which are
generally urged against the Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness. -- Was I to
s^ep here, I think I might say, we are made more than Conquerors, through him
that loved us. -- But there is a Way of arguing which I have always admired,
because I have thought always very convincing, viz. by showing the Absurdities
that will follow from denying any particular Proposition in Dispute.

This is the next Thing that was propose^ (...) And never did greater or more
Absur^^ flow from the denying any Doctrine, than (...) flow from denying the
Doctrine of (...) imputed Righteousness.

And first, if we deny this Doctrine, we turn the Truth, I mean the Word of
God, as much as we can, into a Lie, and utterly subvert all those Places of
Scripture, which say, that we are saved by Grace; that it is not of Works, le^t
any Man should boast. -- That Salvation is God's free Gift -- and that he that
glories, must glory only in the Lord. -- For, if the whole personal
Righteousness of Jesus Christ be not the sole Cause of my Acceptance with God,
if any Work done by or foreseen in me, was in the least to be joined with it,
or looked upon by God as an inducing, impulsive Cause of acquitting my Soul
from Guilt, then I have somewhat whereof I may glory in my self. Now Boasting
is excluded in the great Work of our Redemption. But that cannot be, if we are
Enemies to the Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness. -- It would be endless to
enumerate how many Texts of Scripture must be false, if this Doctrine be not
true. -- Let it suffice to affirm in the general, that if we deny an imputed
Righteousness, we may as well deny a Divine Revelation all at once. -- For it
is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End of the Book of God. -- We
must either disbelieve that, or believe what the Prophet has spoken in the
(...), that this Lord is our Righteousness.

But farther. -- I observed at the Beginning of this Discourse, that we are all
Arminians and Papists by Nature; -- for, as one observes, Arminianism is the
back way to Popery. And here I venture further to affirm, that if we deny the
Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness, whatever ever we may style ourselves, we
are really Papists in our Hearts, and deserve no other Title from Men.

Sirs, What think you? -- Suppose I was to come and tell you, that you must
intercede with Saints, for them to intercede with God for you, -- would you not
then say, I was justly reputed a Popish Missionary by some, and deservedly
thrust out of the Synagogues by others? -- I suppose you would. And why?
Because you would say, the Intercession of Jesus Christ was sufficient of
itself, without the Intercession of Saints; and that it was blasphemous to join
theirs with hi^, as though it was not sufficient.

Suppose I went a little more round about, and told you, that the Death of
Christ was not sufficient, without our Death being added to it; that you must
die as well as Christ, join your Death with his, and then it would be
sufficient. -- Might you not then, with a holy Indignation, throw Dust in the
Air, and justly call me a setter forth of strange Doctrines? And now then, if
it be not only absurd, but blasphemous, to join the Intercession of Saints,
with the Intercession of Christ, as though his Intercession was not sufficient,
or our Death with the Death of Christ, as though his Death was not sufficient;
judge ye, if it be not equally absurd, equally blasphemous, to join our
Obedience, either wholly or in part, with the Obedience of Christ, as if that
was not sufficient. And if so, what Absurdities will follow the denying that
the Lord, both as to his active and passive Obedience, is our Righteousness?

One more Absurdity I shall mention, that will follow from the denying this
Doctrine, and I have done.

I remember a Story of a certain Prelate, who, after many Arguments in vain,
urged to convince the Earl of Rochester of the invisible Realities of another
World, took his Leave of his Lordship with some such Words as these: -- W^^l,
my Lord, says he, if there be no Hell, I am safe; -- but, if there should be
such a Thing, my Lord, as Hell, what will become of you? I apply this to those
that oppose the Doctrine now insisted on. If there be no such Thing as the
Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness, those that hold it, and bring forth Fruit
unto Holiness, are safe. But if there be such a Thing, (as there certainly is)
what will become of you that deny it? It is no difficult Matter to determine.
-- Your Portion must be in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for ever and ever,
since you will rely upon your Works, by your Works you shall be judged. -- They
shall be weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary. -- They will be found
wanting. -- By your Works therefore shall you be condemned; and you, being out
of Christ, shall find God to your poor, wretched* Souls, a consuming Fire. --

The great STODDARD of Northampton in New England, has therefore well entitled
a Book which he wrote (and which I would take this Opportunity to recommend)
The Safety of Appearing in the Righteousness of Christ. (...) For why should I
lean upon a broken Reed, (...) I can have the Rock of Age^ to stand (...) never
can be moved?

And now, before I come to a more particular Application, give me Leave, in the
Apostles Language, triumphantly to cry out, Where is the S^ribe? Where the
Disputer? Where is the reasoning Infidel of this Generation? Can any Thing
appear more reasonable, even according to your own Way of arguing, than the
Doctrine here laid down? Have you not felt a convincing Power go along with the
Word? Why then will you not believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, that so he may
become the Lord your Righteousness.

But it is Time for me to come a little closer to your Consciences.

Brethren, though some may be offended at this Doctrine, and may account it
Foolishness; yet, to many of you, I doubt not but it is precious, it being
agreeable to the Form of sound Words, which from your Infancy has been
delivered to you: And coming from a Quarter, you would least have expected it,
may be received with more Pleasure and Satisfaction. But give me Leave to ask
you one Question, Can you say, the Lord our Righteousness? -- I say, the Lord
our Righteousness. For entertaining this Doctrine in your Heads, without
receiving the Lord Jesus Christ savingly by a lively Faith into your Hearts,
will but increase your Damnation. -- As I have often told you, so I tell you
again, an unapplied Christ, is no Christ at all. -- Can you then, with
believing Thomas, cry out, My Lord and my God? Is Christ your Sanctification,
as well as your outward Righteousness? For the Word Righteousness in the Text,
not only implies Christ's (...) Righteousness imputed to us, but also (...) of
Heart wrought in us. -- These two God has joined together. -- He never did, He
never (...), He never will put them asunder. -- If you (...) justified by the
BLOOD, you are also sanctif^^d by the Spirit of our Lord. Can you then in this
Sense say, the Lord our Righteousness? Were you ever made to abhor yourselves
for your a^^ual and original Sins, and to loath your own Righteousness, (or, as
the Prophet beautifully expresses it, your Righteousnesses) as fil^^y Rags?
Were you ever made to see and admire the All Sufficiency of Christ's
Righteousness, and excited by the Spirit of God to hunger and thirst after it?
Could you ever say, my Soul is a thirst for Christ, yea, even for the
Righteousness of Christ? Oh, when shall I come to appear before the Presence of
my God in the Righteousness of Christ! Oh, nothing but Christ! nothing but
Christ! Give me Christ, O God, and I am (...)! My Soul shall praise thee for
ever. Was this, I say, ever the Language of your Hearts? -- And after these
inward Conflicts, were you ever enabled to reach out the Arm of Faith, and
embrace the blessed Jesus in your Souls, so that you could say, My Beloved is
mine, and I am his? If so, fear not, whoever you are -- Hail, (...) Hail, you
happy Souls! The Lord the Lord Christ, the everlasting God, is your
Righteousness. -- Christ has justified you, who is he that (...) you? Christ
has died for you, nay rather is risen again, and ever lives to make
Intercession for you. -- Being now justified by his Grace* you have Peace with
God, and shall, (...) long, be with Jesus in Glory, reaping everlasting and
unspeakable Redemption, both in Body and Soul. -- For there is no Condemnation
to those that are (...) in Christ Jesus. Whether Paul (...) Apollos, or Life or
Death, all is yours, if you are Christ's, for Christ is God's! -- Oh, my
Brethren, my Heart is enlarged toward you* -- Oh, think of the Love of Christ
in dying for you^* -- If the Lord be your Righteousness, let the Righteousness
of your Lord be continually in your Mouth. Talk of, Oh talk of, and recommend
the Righteousness of Christ, when you lie down, and when you rise up, at your
going out and coming in! -- Think of the Greatness of the Gift, as well as of
the Giver! -- Show to all the World in whom you have believed! -- Let all by
your Fruits know, that the Lord is your Righteousness, and that you are waiting
for your Lord from Heaven! -- Oh, study to be holy, even as He who has called
you, and washed you in his own Blood, is holy! -- Let not the Righteousness of
the Lord be evil spoken of through you. -- Let not Jesus be wounded in the House
of his Friends; but grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ Day by Day. -- Oh, think of his dying Love! Let that Love
constrain you to Obedience! Having much forgiven, love much. Be always asking,
What (...) I do, to express my Gratitude to the Lord, for giving me his
Righteousness? Let that Self-abasing, God-exalting Question be alway^ in your
Mou^^s. Oh, be always lisping out, Why (...) Lord? Why me? Why am I taken, and
others left? Why is the Lord my Righteousness? Why is He become my Salvation^
who have so often deserved Damnation at his Hands?

Oh, my Friends, I trust I feel somewhat of a Sense of God's distinguishing
Love upon my Heart! therefore I must divert a little from congratulating you to
invite poor christless Sinners to come to him, and accept of his Righteousness,
that they may have Life. --

Alas, my Heart alm^^t bleeds! What a Multitude of precious Souls are now
before me! How shortly must all be ushered into Eternity! -- And yet, O cutting
Thought! was God now to require all your Souls, how few comparatively speaking,
could really say, the Lord our Righteousness.

And think you, O Sinners, that you will be able to stand in the Day of
Judgment, if Christ be not your Righteousness! No, that alone is the
Wedding Garment in which you must appear. -- Oh, Christless Sinners, I am
distressed for you! -- The Desires of my Soul are enlarged. -- Oh, that this
may be an accepted Time! Oh, that the Lord may be your Righteousness! -- (...)
would you flee, if Death should (...) naked? -- Indeed there is no hiding
yourselves (...) his Presence. -- The pitiful Fig Leaves of you^ (...)
Righteousness will not cover your Nakedness, when God shall call you to stand
before him. -- Adam found them ineffectual, and so will you* -- Oh, think of
Death! -- Oh, think of Judgment (...) Yet a little while, and Time shall be no
more; and then what will become of you, if the Lord be not your Righteousness?
Think you, that Christ will spare you? -- No, he that formed you, will have no
Mercy on you. If you are out of Christ, if Christ be not your Righteousness,
Christ himself shall pronounce you damned. -- And can you bear to think of
being damned by Christ? Can you bear to hear the Lord Jesus say to you, Depart
from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels?
Can you live, think you, in everlasting Burnings? Is your Flesh Brass, and your
Bones Iron? What if they are, Hellfire, that Fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, will heat them through and through! -- And can you bear to depart
from Christ? Oh, that heart-piercing Thought! -- Ask those holy Souls, who are
at any Time bewailing an absent God, who walk in Darkness, and see no Light,
though but a few Days or Hours; ask them, what it is to lose a Sight and Presence
of Christ? -- See how they seek him sorrowing, and go mourning after him all
the Day long! And if it is so dreadful to lose the sensible Presence of Christ,
only for a Day, what must it be to be banished from him to all Eternity? -- But
thus it must be, if Christ be not your Righteousness. -- For God's Justice must
be satisfied; and unless Christ's Righteousness is imputed and applied -- you
here, you must be satisfying the divine Justice in Hell Torments eternally
hereafter: -- Nay* as I said before, Christ himself, the God of Love shall
condemn you to that Place of Torment. -- And Oh, how cutting is that Thought!
-- Me thinks I see poor, trembling, christless Wretches, standing before the
Bar of God, crying out, Lord, if we must be damned, let force Angel, or some
Archangel, pronounce the damnatory Sentence. -- But all in vain. -- Christ
himself shall pronounce the irrevocable Sentence. -- Knowing therefore the
Terrors of the Lord, let me persuade you to close with Christ, and never rest
till you can say, the Lord our Righteousness. -- Who knows, but the Lord may
have Mercy on, nay, abundantly pardon you? -- Beg of God to give you Faith; --
and if the Lord gives you that, you will by it receive Christ, with his
Righteousness, and his All. You need not fear the Greatness or Number of your
Sins. -- For are you Sinners? so am I. Are you the Chief of Sinners? so am I.
Are you backsliding Sinners? so am I. And yet the Lord (for ever adored be his
rich, free, and sovereign Grace) the Lord is my Righteousness* -- Come then, O
Young Men, who (as I acted on^^ myself) are playing the Prodigal, and wandering
away afar off from your heavenly Father's House* Come home, Come home, and
leave your Swines Trough. -- Feed no longer on the Husks of sensual Delights.
-- For Christ's sake, arise and come home! -- Your heavenly Father now calls
you. -- See yonder the best Robe, even the Righteousness of his dear Son,
awaits you. -- See it, view it again and again. -- Consider at how dear a Rate
it was purchased, even by the Blood of God. -- Consider what great Need you
have of it. -- You are lost, undone, damned for ever, without it! -- Come then,
poor, guilty Prodigals, come home. -- Indeed I will not, like the elder
Brother, be angry -- No, I will rejoice with the Angels in Heaven And Oh, that
God would now ^ow the Heaven and come down! Descend, O Son of God, descend; and
as thou have shown in me such Mercy, O let thy blessed Spirit apply thy
Righteousness to some young Prodigals now before thee, and clothe their naked
Souls with thy best Robe.

But I must speak a Word to you, young Maidens, as well as young Men. -- I see
many of you adorned; as to your Bodies: -- But are not your Souls naked? Which
of you can say, the Lord is my Righteousness? Which of you was ever solicitous
to be dressed in this Robe of invaluable Price, and without which, you are no
better than whited Sepulchers in the Sight of God? -- Let not then so many of
you; Young Maidens, any longer forget your only ornament. -- Oh, seek for the
Lord to be your Righteousness, or otherwise Burning will soon be upon you,
instead of Beauty!

And what shall I say to you of a middle Age, you busy Merchants, you cumber'd
Martha's, who, with all your Gettings, have not yet gotten the Lord to be your
Righteousness? Alas! what Profit will there be of all your Labuor under the
Sun, if you do not secure this Pearl of invaluable Price? This one Thing, so
absolutely needful, that it only can stand you in stead, when all other Things
shall be taken from you. Labor therefore no longer so anxiously for the Meat
which perishes, but henceforward seek for the Lord to be your Righteousness,
-- A Righteousness that will entitle you to Life everlasting. -- I see also
many (...) Heads here, and perhaps the most of them cannot say, the Lord is my
Righteousness. -- O grey-headed Sinners, I could weep over you^ -- your gray
Hairs, which ought to be your Crown, and in which perhaps you glory, is now
you^* S^ame. -- You know not, that the Lord is your Righteousness. -- Oh, haste
then, haste ye, aged Sinners, and seek an Interest in redeeming Love! -- Alas,
you have one Foot already in the Grave -- Your Glass is just run out -- Your
Sun is just going down, and it will set and leave you in an eternal Darkness,
unless the Lord be your Righteousness! -- Flee then, Oh flee for your Lives! Be
not afraid. -- All Things are possible with God. If you come, though it be at the
eleventh Hour, Christ Jesus will in no wise cast you out. Oh, seek then for the
Lord to be your Righteousness, and beseech him to let you know how it is that a
Man may be born again when he is old! -- But I must not forget the Lambs of the
Flock -- To feed (...) was one of my Lord's last Commands. -- I know he will be
angry with me, if I do not tell the^^* that the Lord may be their
Righteousness; and that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. -- Come then, ye
little Children, come to Christ; the Lord Christ shall be your Righteousness*
-- Do not think, that you are too young to be (...) -- Perhaps many of you may
be nine or ten Years old, and yet cannot say, the Lord is our Righteousness;
which many have said, though younger than you -- Come then, while you are young
-- Perhaps you may not live to be old -- Do not stay for u^her* People -- If
your Fathers and Mothers will not come to Christ, do you come without them. --
L^^ Children -- lead them, and show them how the Lord may be their
Righteousness. -- Our Lord Jesus loved little Children -- You are his Lambs --
He bids me feed you. -- I pray God make you willing betime, to take the Lord
for your Righteousness.

Here then I could conclude -- but I must not forget the poor Negroes -- No, I
must not. Jesus Christ has died for them, as well as others. -- Nor do I
mention you last, because I despise your Souls, but because I would have what I
have to say, make the deeper Impression upon your Hearts. -- Oh that you would
seek the Lord to be your Righteousness! -- Who knows but he may be found of you
-- For in Jesus Christ there is neither Male or Female, Bond or Free, even you
may be the Children of God, if you believe in Jesus. -- Did you never read of
the Eunuch belonging to the Queen of Cand^ce! -- A Negro like yourselves. -- He
believed. -- The Lord was his Righteousness. He was baptized. Do you also
believe, and you shall be saved. -- Christ Jesus is the same now, as He was
Yesterday, and will wash you in his own Blood. -- Go home then, turn the Words
of the Text into a Prayer, and entreat the Lord to be your Righteousness. --
Even so, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, into all our Souls! Amen, Lord Jesus,
Amen and Amen!

SERMON II.
The Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent.
GENESIS iii. 15. And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between
thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his
Heel.
WHEN I read to you these Words, I may address you in the Language of the Holy
Angels to the Shepherds, (...) were watching their Flocks by Night. (...) "hold
I bring you glad Tidings of great Joy (...) -- For this is the first Promise
that was (...) of a Savior to the apostate Ra^e of (...) -- We generally look
for Christ only in the New Testament; but Christianity, i^ the (...) is very
near as old as the Creation. -- It is wonderful to observe, how gradually God
revealed his Son to Mankind. He began with the Promise in the Text, and this
the Elect lived upon till the Time of Abraham. -- To him God made further
Discoveries of his eternal Counsel concerning Man's Redemption -- Afterward,
at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, God spoke to the Fathers by the
Prophets, till at length the LORD JESUS himself was manifest in the Flesh, and
came and tabernacled amongst us.

This first Promise must certainly be but dark to our first Parents, in
comparison of that great Light which we enjoy. -- And yet, dark as it was, we
may assure our selves they built upon it their Hopes of everlasting Salvation,
and by that Faith were saved.

How they came to stand in need of this Promise, and what is the Extent and
Meaning of it, I intend, God willing, to make the subject Matter of your
present Meditation.

The Fall of Man is written in too legible Characters not to be understood --
Those that deny it, by their denying, prove it. -- The very Heathens confessed
and bewailed it -- They could see the Streams of Corruption running through the
whole Race of Mankind, but could not trace them to the Fountainhead. -- Before
God gave a Revelation of his Son Man was a Riddle to himself -- And Moses
unfolds more* in this one Chapter (out of which the Text (...) taken) than all
Mankind could have been capable of finding out of themselves, though they had
studied to all Eternity.

In the foregoing Chapter, he had given us a full Account, how God spoke the
World into Being; and especially how he formed Man of the Dust of the Earth and
breathed into him the Breath of Life, so that he became a living Soul. -- A
Council of the Trinity was called concerning the Formation of this lovely
Creature. -- The Result of that Council was, Let us make Man in our Image after
our Likeness. -- "So God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God
created he him." -- Moses remarkably repeats the Words, that we might take
particular. Notice of our divine Original. -- Never was so much expressed in so
few Words. -- None but a Man inspired could have done so. But it is remarkable,
that though Moses mentions our being made in the Image of God, yet he mentions
(...) but twice, and that, as it were, in a transient Manner, as though he would
have said, Man was made in Honor, God made him upright* in the Image of God
Male and Female created he them. But Man so soon fell, and became like the
Beasts that perish, nay, like the Devil himself, that it is scarce worth
mentioning.

How soon Man fell after he was created, i^ not told us, and therefore, to fix
any Time, is to be wise above what is written. -- And, I think* they who
suppose that Man fell the (...) Day in which he was made, have no sufficient
Ground for their Opinion. -- The many Things which are crowded together in the
former (...), the Formation of Adam's (...) his giving Names to the Beasts, and
his being put into the Garden which God had planted, I think require a longer
Space of Time than a Day to be transacted in. -- However, all agree in this,
"Man stood not long." How long, or how short a while, I will not take upon me
to determine. -- It more concerns us to inquire, how he came to fall from his
Stedfastness, and what was the Rise and Progress of the Temptation which
prevailed over him. -- The Account given us in this Chapter concerning it, is
very full, and it may do us much Service, under God, to make some Remarks upon
it.

Now the Serpent, says the sacred Historian, was more subtle than any Beast of
the Field which the LORD GOD had made, and he said unto the Woman, yea, has
GOD said, ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden.

Though this was a real Serpent, yet he that spoke was no other than the Devil;
from hence, perhaps, called the old Serpent, because he took Possession of the
Serpent when he came to beguile our first Parents -- The Devil envied the
Happiness of Man, who was made, as some think, to supply the Place of the
fallen Angels -- God made Man upright, and with full Power to stand if he would
-- He was just, therefore, in suffering him to be tempted -- If he fell, he had
no one to blame except himself -- But how must Satan effect his Fall? -- He
cannot do it by his Power, he attempts it therefore by Policy -- He taken
Possession of a Serpent, which was more (...) all the Beasts of the Field,
which the Lord God had made; so that Men that are full of Subtilty, but have no
Piety, are only Machines for the Devil to work upon, just as he pleases.

"And he said unto the Woman." -- Here is an Instance of his Subtilty -- He
says unto the Woman, the weaker Vessel, and when she was alone from her
Husband, and therefore was more liable to be overcome -- Yea, has God said, ye
shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? These Words are certainly spoken in
Answer to something which the Devil either saw or heard -- In all Probability,
the Woman was now near the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. (For we shall
find her, by and by, plucking an Apple from it) perhaps she might be looking
at, and wondering what there was in that Tree more than the others, that she
and her Husband should be forbidden to taste of it -- Satan seeing this, and
coveting to draw her into a Parley with him, (for if the Devil can persuade us
not to resist, but to commune with him, he has gained a great Point) he says,
Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every Tree in the Garden? -- The first
Thing he does, is to persuade her, if possible, to entertain hard Thoughts of
God -- This is his general Way of dealing with God's Children -- Yea, says he,
has God said, ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? What! has God
planted a Garden, and placed you in the (...) of it only to teaze and perplex
you? Has he planted a Garden, and yet forbid you making Use of any of the
Fruits of it at all? It was impossible for him to ask a more insnaring
Question, in order to gain his End: For Eve, was here seemingly obliged to
answer, and vindicate God's Goodness. And, therefore, --

Ver. 2. The Woman said unto the Serpent, We may eat of the Fruit of the Trees
of the Garden: (Ver. 3.) of the Fruit of the Tree which is in the midst of the
Garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it* lest
ye die.

The former Part of the Answer was good, We may eat of the Fruit of the Trees
of the Garden, God has not forbid us eating of every Tree of the Garden. No, we
may eat of the Fruit of the Trees in the Garden, (and, it should seem even of
the Tree of Life, which was as a Sacrament to Man in a State of Innocence)
there is only one Tree in the Midst of the Garden, of which God has said, Ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. -- Here she begins
to warp, and Sin begins to conceive in her Heart. -- Already she has contracted
some of the Serpent's Poison, by talking with him, which she ought not to have
done at all. For she might easily suppose, that it could be no good Being, that
could put such a Question unto her, and insinuate such dishonorable Thoughts
of. God -- She should therefore have fled from him, and not stood to have
parley'd with him at all -- Immediately the ill Effects of it appear, -- she
begins to soften the Divine Threatening, -- God had said, the Day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die; or, dying thou shall die. -- But Eve says, ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it lest ye die. -- We may be
assured we are fallen into, and begin to fall by Temptation, when we begin to
think God will not be as good as his Word, in respect to the Execution of his
Threatenings denounced against Sin. -- Satan knew this, and therefore artfully

Said unto the Woman ( ver. 4.) Ye shall not surely die, in an insinuating
Manner, Ye shall not surely die, -- surely, God will not be so cruel as to damn
you only for eating an Apple, -- it cannot be. -- Alas! how many does Satan
lead Captive at his Will, by flattering them, that they shall not surely die^;
-- that Hell Torments will not be eternal, -- that God is all Mercy; -- that he
therefore will not punish a few Years Sin with an Eternity of Misery. -- But
Eve found God as good as his Word, and so will all they that go on in Sin,
under a false Hope that they shall not surely die.

We may also understand the Words spoken, positively, and this is agreeable to
what follows, -- You shall not surely die, -- (...) a Delusion, a mere Bugbear,
to keep you in a servile Subjection.

For ( Ver. 4.) " God does know, that in the Day-ye eat thereof, then shall
your Eyes be opened, and ye shall be as God's, (...) Good and Evil."

What Child of God can expect to escape (...)* when God himself was thus
slandered even in Paradise? Surely the Understanding of Eve must have been, in
some Measure, blinded, or she would not have suffered the Tempter to speak such
perverse Things. -- In what odious Colors is God here represented! God does
know, that in the Day ye eat thereof, ye shall be a^ God's, (equal with God.)
So that the grand Temptation, was, that they should be hereafter under no
Control, equal, if not superior to God, that made them, knowing Good and Evil.
-- Eve could not tell what Satan meant by this; but, to be sure, she understood
it of some great Privilege which they were to enjoy. -- And thus Satan now
points out a Way, which seems right to Sinners, but does not tell them the End
of that Way is Death.

To give Strength and Force to this Temptation, in all Probability, Satan, or
the Serpent, at this Time, plucked an Apple from the Tree, and eat it before
Eve, -- by which Eve might be induced to think, that the Sagacity and Power of
Speech, which the Serpent had above the other Beasts, must be owing, in a great
Measure, to his eating that Fruit; and, therefore, if he received so much
Improvement, she might also expect a like Benefit from it. All this, I think,
is clear; -- for, otherwise, I do not see with what Propriety it could be said,
When (...) the Woman saw that it was good for (...) How could she know it was
good for Food, (...) less she had seen the Serpent feed upon it?

Satan now begins to get Ground a pace, Lust had conceived in her Heart;
shortly will bring forth Sin, -- Sin being conceived brings forth Death. --
Ver. 6. And when the Woman saw that the Tree was good for Food, and that it was
pleasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the Fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her Husband, and he did eat.

Our Senses are the landing Ports of our spiritual Enemies. -- How needful is
that Resolution of holy Job, I have made a Covenant with mine Eyes. When Eve
began to gaze on the forbidden Fruit with her Eyes, she soon began to long
after it with her Heart. -- When she saw that it was good for Food, and
pleasant to the Eyes, (here was the Lust of the Flesh, and Lust of the Eye)
but, above all, a Tree to be desired to make one wise, wiser than God would
have her be, nay, as wise as God himself; she took of the Fruit thereof, and
gave also unto her Husband with her, and he did eat -- As soon as (...) she
sinned her self, she turned Tempter to her Husband. -- Its dreadful, when
those, who should be Help-meets for each other in the great Work of their
Salvation, are only Promoters of each others Damnation -- But thus it is. If we
ourselves are good, we shall excite others to Goodness; if we do Evil, we shall
entice others to do Evil also. -- There is a close Connection be^^^^ doing and
teaching. -- How needful then (...) for all to take Heed that we do not sin any
Way ourselves, lest we should became Factors or the Devil, and ensnare,
perhaps, our nearest and dearest Relatives? "She gave also unto her Husband
with her, and he did eat."

Alas! what a Complication of Crimes was there in this one single Act of Sin!
-- Here (...) an utter Disbelief of God's Threatening -- The utmost Ingratitude
to their Maker, who had (...) lately planted this Garden and placed them in it,
with such a glorious and comprehensive Charter -- Here Is the utmost Neglect of
the^^ Posterity, who they knew were to stand or (...) with them -- Here was the
utmost Pride of Heart -- They wanted to be equal with God -- Here Is the utmost
Contempt put upon his Threatening and his Law -- The Devil is credited and
obeyed Before him, and all this only to satisfy their sensual Appetite. Never
was a Crime of such a complicated Nature, committed by any here below --
Nothing but the Devil's Apostasy and Rebellion could equal it.

And what are the Consequences of their Disobedience? -- Are their Eyes opened?
-- Yes, their Eyes are opened -- But, alas! it is only to see their own
Nakedness. For, we are told ( Ver. 7.) that the Eyes of them both were opened,
and they knew that they were naked. -- Naked of God, naked of every Thing that
was holy and good -- and destitute of the Divine Image, which they before
enjoyed -- They might ^^ghtly, now be termed Ichab^d; for the Glory of the Lord
departed from them -- Oh! how ^ow did these Sons of the Morning then fall* out
o^ God into themselves; from being Partakers (...) the Divine Nature, into the
Nature of the Devil and the Beast -- Well, therefore, might they know that they
were naked, not only in Body but in Soul. --

And how do they behave now they are naked? -- Do they ^^y to God for Pardon
(...) -- Do they seek to him for a Robe to cover their Nakedness? -- No. They
were now dead to God, earthly, sensual, devilish -- And, therefore, in stead of
applying to God for Mercy, they sewed, or platted Fig Leaves together, and made
themselves (...), or Things to gird about them. This (...) a lively
Representation of all natural Men -- We see that we are naked -- We, in some
Measure, confess it, but, instead of looking up to God for Succor, we patch up
a Righteousness of our own (as our first Parents platted Fig Leaves together)
hoping to cover our Nakedness by that. -- But our Righteousness will not stand
the Severity of God's Judgment: It will do us no more Service than the
Fig Leaves did Adam and Eve -- that is, none at all.

For ( Ver. 8.) They heard the Voice of the Lord God walking in the Trees of
the Garden* in the Cool of the Day; and Adam and his Wife (notwithstanding
their Fig Leaves) hid themselves from the Presence of the Lord God, among the
Trees of the Garden.

They heard the Voice of the Lord God, or the (...) of the Lord God, even the
Lord-Jesus (...), who is the Word that was with God, and Word that was God. --
They heard him walk-in the Trees of the Garden, in the Cool of Day* -- A
Season, perhaps, when Adam and Eve used to go, in an especial Manner, (...)
offer up an Evening Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving -- The Cool of the
Day. Perhaps, the Sin was committed early in the Morning, or at Noon. -- But
God would not come upon them immediately -- He staid till the Cool of the Day.
For, if we would effectually repro^^ others, we should not do it when they are
warmed with Passion, but wait till the Cool (...) the Day. --

But what an Alteration is here! -- Instead^^ rejoicing at the Voice of their
Beloved -- instead of meeting him with open Arms, and enlarge* Hearts, as
before, they now hide themselves (...) the Trees of the Garden -- Alas, what a
foolish Attempt was this? -- Surely, they must be naked, otherwise, how could
they think of hiding themselves from God? -- Whither could they flee from his
Presence? -- But, by their F^ll, they had contracted an Enmity against God.
They now hated, and were afraid to conve^^ with God their Maker. -- And is not
this (...) Case by Nature? Assuredly it is. We labor to cover our Nakedness,
with the Fig Leaves o^ our own Righteousness -- We hide our selves from God as
long as we can, and will not come, and never should come, did not the Father
prevent, draw, and sweetly constrain us, by his Grace, as he here prevented
Adam.

Ver. 9. And the Lord God called unto Adam and said unto him, Adam, where art
thou?

"The Lord God called unto Adam"* (for otherwise Adam would never have called
unto the Lord God) and said, Adam, where ar^ thou? -- How is it, that thou
(...) not to pay thy Devotions as usual? -- Christians, remember the Lord keeps
an Account when you fail coming to Worship -- Whenever therefore, you are
tempted to withold your Attendance, each of you fancy you heard the Lord God
calling unto you, and saying, O Man, O Woman, where art thou? -- It may be
understand in another and better Sense -- Adam, where art thou? -- What a
Condition is thy poor Soul in? -- This is the first Thing the Lord asks, and
convinces a Sinner of, when he prevents, and calls him effectually by his Grace
-- (...) also calls him by Name: For unless God speaks to us in particular, and
we know where we are, how poor, how miserable, how blind, how naked, we shall
never value the Redemption wrought out for us by the Death and Obedience of the
dear Lord Jesus -- Adam* where art thou?

Ver. 1^. And he said, I heard thy Voice in the Garden, and I was afraid. --
See what Cowards Sin makes us -- If we knew no Sin, we should know no Fear
Because I was naked, and I hid myself -- Ver. 11. And he said, Who told thee
that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the Tree, whereof I (thy Ma^^r and
Lawgiver) commanded th^s, tha^ thou should not eat? --

God knew very well that Adam was naked, and that he had eaten of the forbidden
Fruit. -- But God would know it from Adam's own Mouth. -- Thus God knows all
our Necessities before we ask, but yet insists upon our asking for his Grace,
and confessing our Sins. -- (...), by such Acts, we acknowledge our Dependence
upon God, take Shame to our selves, and thereby give Glory to his great Name.

Ver. 12. And the Man said, the Woman which thou (...) to be with me, ^he gave
me of the Tree, and I did eat.

Never was Nature more lively (...). See what Pride Adam contracted by the Fall
How unwilling he is to lay the Bl^me (...) on, or take Shame to himself. --
This Answer* full^^ Insolence toward God, Enmity against (...) Wife, and
Disingenuity in respect to himself. For herein he tacitly reflects upon God --
(...) Woman that THOU gave to be with me^ A^ much as to say, if THOU had
not given me THAT WOMAN, I had not eaten the forbidden Fruit. -- Thus when Men
sin, they ^ay the (...) upon their Passions; then blame and reflect upon God
for giving them those Passion. -- Their Language is -- The Appetites that THOU
gave us, they deceived us, and therefore we (...) against thee. -- But, as
God, notwithstanding, punished Adam for hearkening to the Voice of his Wi^e, so
he will punish th^se who hearken to (...) Dictate^ of their corrupt
In^^^^ations -- For God compels no Man to sin. Adam might have withstood the
Solicitations o^ his Wife, if he would. And so, if we look up to God we should
find Grace to help in the Time of Need -- The Devil and our own Hearts tempt,
but they cannot force us to consent, without the Concurrence of our own Wills.
So that our Damnation is of ourselves, as it will evidently appear at the great
Day, notwithstanding all Men's present impudent Replies against God -- As Adam
speaks insolently in respect to God, so he speaks with Enmity against his Wife
-- The Woman, or this Woman, she gave me -- He lays all the Fault upon her, and
speaks of her with much Contempt -- He does not say, my Wife, my dear Wife, but
this Woman. -- For Sin disunites the most united Hearts. It is the Bane of holy
Fellowship -- Those who have been Companions in Sin here, if they die without
Repentance, will both hate etcondemn one another hereafter -- All damned Souls
are Accusers of their Brethren -- Thus it is, in some Degree, on this Side the
Grave -- The Woman whom THOU gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and
I did eat. -- What a disingenuous Speech was here! -- He makes use* of no less
than fifteen Words to excuse himself, and but one or two (in the Original) to
confess his Fault, if it may be called a Confession at all -- The Woman which
thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree -- Here are fifteen Words --
and I did eat -- With what Reluctance do these last Words come out? How soon
are they uttered? "And I did (...)." But thus it is with an unhumbled,
unregenerate Heart. -- It will be laying the Fault upon the dearest Friend in
the World, nay, upon God himself, rather than take Shame to itself -- This
Pride we are all subject to by the Fall, and, till our Hearts are broken, and
made contrite by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be always
charging God foolishly. -- Against THEE, and THEE only, have I sinned, that
thou might be justified in thy Saying, and clear when thou art judged, is
the Language of none but those, who, like David, are willing to confess their
Faults, and are truly sorry for their Sins. -- This was not the Case of Adam --
His Heart was not broken; and therefore he lays the Fault of his Disobedience
upon his Wife and God, and not upon himself -- The Woman which THOU gave to
be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. --

Ver. 13. And the Lord God said, what is this that thou have done?" -- What a
wonderful Concern does God express in this Expostulation! -- What a Deluge of
M^^ry have thou bro't upon thyself, thy Husband, and thy Posterity? What is
this that thou have done? Disobeyed thy God, obeyed the Devil, and ruined they
Husband, for whom I made thee to be an Help-meet! -- What is this that thou
have done? -- God would here awaken her to a Sense of her Crime and Danger, and
therefore, as it were, thunders in her Ears. For the Law must be preached to
self-righteous Sinners. -- We must take Care of healing before we see Sinners
wounded, le^t we should say, Peace, Peace; where there is* no Peace -- Secure
Sinners must hear the Thunderings of Mount Sinai, before (...) bring them to
Mount Si^n. -- They who never preach up the Law, it is to be feared, are
unskilful in delivering the glad Tidings of the Gospel. Every Minister should
be a Boane^ges, a Son of Thunder, as well as a Barnabas, a Son of Consolation.
There was an Earthquake and a Whirlwind, before the small still Voice came to
Elijah. -- We must first show People they are condemned, and then show them how
they must be saved. But how and when to preach the Law, and when to apply the
Promises of the Gospel, Wisdom is profitable to direct -- And the Lord God said
unto the Woman, what is this that thou have done? --

And the Woman said, the Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. She does not make
use of so many Words to excuse herself, as her Husband; but her Heart is as
unhumbled as his -- What is this, says God, that thou have done? God here
charges her with doing it. -- She dares not deny the Fact, or say, I have not
done it* but she takes all the Blame off herself, and lay^ it upon the Serpent
-- The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat. -- She does not say, Lord, I was to
blame for talking with the Serpent^* Lord, I did wrong, in not hasting to my
Husband, when he put the first Question to me -- Lord, I plead guilty, I only
am to blame -- Oh, let not my poor Husband suffer for my Wickedness! -- This
would have been the Language of her Heart, had she now been a true Penitent.
But both were now ^like proud -- Therefore neither will lay (...) upon (...) --
The Serpent beguiled me, and I did ^at -- The Woman which thou gave (...) me,
she gave me of the Tree, and I (...) ^at.

I have been the more particular in remarking this Part of their Behavior,
because it tends so much to the magnifying of Free Grace, and plainly shows us
Salvation comes only from the Lord -- Let us take a short View of the
miserable Circumstances our first Parents were now in. They were legally and
spiritually dead -- Children of Wrath, and Heirs of Hell -- They had eaten the
Fruit, of which God had commanded them, that they should not eat -- And when
arraigned before God, notwithstanding their Crime was so complicated, they
could not be brought to confess it -- What Reason can be given, why Sentence of
Death should not be pronounced against the Prisoners at the Bar? -- All must
own they are worthy to die. Nay, how can God, consistently with his Justice,
possibly forgive them* -- He had threatened, that the Day wherein they eat of
the forbidden Fruit, they should surely die -- And, if he did not execute this
Threatening, the Devil might then slander (...) Almighty indeed. And yet Mercy
cries, (...) these Sinners, spare the Work of thine own Hands. -- Behold then
Wisdom contrives a Scheme how God may be just, and yet be merciful; be faithful
to his Threatening, punish the Offense, and at the same Time spare the (...) An
amazing Scene of divine Love here open to our View, which had been from (...)
in the Heart of God -- Notwithstanding Adam and Eve were thus unhumbled (...)
did not so much as put up one single Petition for Pardon, God immediately
passes Sentence upon the Serpent, and reveals to them a Savior. --

Ver. 14. And the Lord God said unto the Serpent. Because thou have done this,
thou art accursed above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the Field; upon
thy Belly shall thou g^, and Dust shall thou eat all the Days of thy Life, i.
e. he should be in Subjection, and his Power should always be limited and
restrained -- His Enemies shall lick the Dust, says the Psalmist (...) (Ver.
15.) And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and
her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. --

Before I proceed to the Explanation of this Verse, I cannot but take Notice of
one great Mistake, which the Author of the Whole Duty of Man is guilty of, in
making this Verse contain a Covenant between God and Adam, as though God
personally treated with Adam, as before the Fall. For, talking of the second
Covenant, in his Preface concerning caring for the Soul, says he, This second
Covenant was made with Adam, and us in him, presently after the Fall, and is
briefly contained in these Words -- Genesis iii. 15. where God declares the Seed
of the Woman shall break the Serpent's Head; and this was made up, as the first
was, of some Mercies to be afforded by God, and some Duties to be performed by
(...). -- This is exceeding false Divinity -- For (...) Words are not spoken to
Adam -- They are directed only to the Serpent -- Adam and Eve stood by as
Criminals, and God could not treat with them, because they had broken his
Covenant. And it is so far from being a Covenant, wherein some Mercies are to
be afforded by God, and some Duties to be performed by us, that here is not a
Word looking that Way -- It Is only a Declaration of a free Gift of Salvation
through Jesus Christ our Lord -- God the Father, and God the Son, had entered
into a Covenant concerning the Salvation of the Elect from all Eternity;
wherein God the Father promised, that if the Son would offer his Soul a
Sacrifice for Sin, he should see his Seed -- Now this is an open Revelation of
this secret Covenant, and therefore God speaks in the most positive Terms, It
shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. -- The first Adam God
had treated with before -- He proved false -- God therefore, to secure the
second Covenant from being broken, puts it into the Hands of the second Adam,
the Lord from Heaven -- Adam after the Fall, stood no longer as our
Representative -- He and Eve were only private Persons, as we are, and were
only to lay hold on the Declaration of Mercy contained in this Promise by
Faith, (as they really did) and by that they were saved. -- I do not say, but
we are to believe and obey, if we are everlastingly saved -- Faith and
Obedience are Conditions, if we on mean that they in order go before our
Salvation but I deny that these are proposed by God (...) Adam, or that God
treats with him on this Promise, as he did before the Fall under the Covenant
of Works. For, how could that be, when Adam and Eve were now Prisoners at the
Bar, without Strength to perform any Conditions at all. -- The Truth is this --
God, as a Reward of Christ's Sufferings, promised to give the Elect Faith and
Repentance, in order to bring them to eternal Life -- And both these, and every
Thing else necessary for their everlasting Happiness, are infallibly secured to
them in this Promise, a^ Mr. BOSTON, an excellent Scots Divine, sweetly and
clearly shows, in a Book ^^tituled, "A View of the Covenant of Grace." --

This is, by no Means, an unnecessary Distinction -- It Is a Matter of great
Importance -- For want of knowing this, People have been so long misled -- They
have been taught that they must ^o so and so, as though they were under a
Covenant of Works, and then for DOING this, they should be saved. -- This is
plainly the whole D^^t of the Book wrongly entitled, The Whole Duty of Man --
Whereas, on the contrary, People should be taught, that the Lord Jesus was the
second Adam, with whom the Father entered into Covenant for fallen Man -- That
they can now do nothing of or for themselves, and should therefore come to God,
beseeching him to give them Faith, by which they shall be enabled to ^ay hold
on the Righteousness of Christ and that Faith they will show forth by their
Works, out of Love and Gratitude to the ever blessed Je^^^ their most glorious
Redeemer, for what he has done for their Souls -- This is a consistent
scriptural Scheme. Without holding this, we must run into one of these two bad
Extreme* (...) mean Antinomianism on the one Hand, or A^^^^mianism on the other
-- From both which may the Good Lord deliver us! --

But to proceed: By the Seed of the Woman, we are here to understand the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, who, though very God of very God* was for us Men and our Salvation,
to have Body prepared for him by the Holy Ghost, and to be born of a pure
Virgin, and by his Obedience and Death make an Atonement for Man's
Transgression, and bring in an everlasting Righteousness, work in them a new
Nature, and thereby bruise the Serpent's Head, i. e. destroy his Power and
Dominion over them -- By the Serpent's Seed, we are to understand the Devil and
all his Children, who should be permitted by God to tempt and sift his
Children. But blessed be God, he can reach no further than our Heel. --

It Is not to be doubted but Adam and Eve understood this Promise in this Sense;
for (...) plain; in the latter Part of the Chapter, Sacrifices were instituted
-- For, from whence should th^se Skins come, but from Beasts slain for
Sacrifice, of which God made them Coats? -- We find also Abel, as well as Cain,
offering Sacrifice in the next Chapter: And the Apostle tells us (...) did it
by Faith, no doubt in this Promise -- (...) Eve, when Cain was born, said, I
have gotten a Man from the LORD, or, (as Mr. HENR^ observes, it may be
rendered) I have gotten a Man -- THE LORD -- the promised Messiah. -- Some
further suppose, that Eve was the first Believer, and therefore they translate
it thus, the Seed (not of THE, but) of THIS Woman, (...) the Grace of God so
much the (...) that she, who was first in the Transgression, should be the
first Partaker of Redemption. -- Adam believed also, and was saved -- For, unto
Adam and his Wife, did the LORD GOD make Coats of Skins, and clothed THEM,
which was a remarkable Type of their being clothed with the Righteousness of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

This Promise was literally fulfilled in the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ --
Satan bruised his Heel, when he tempted him for forty Days together in the
Wilderness -- He bruised his Heel, when he raised up strong Persecution against
him, during the Time of his public Ministry -- He, in an especial Manner,
bruised his Heel, when our Lord complained, that his Soul was exceeding
sorrowful, even unto Death (...) and he sweat great Drops of Blood falling upon
the Ground, when praying in the Garden -- He bruised his Heel, when he put it
into the Heart of Judas to betray him: -- And he bruised him yet most of all,
when his Emissaries nailed him to an accursed Tree, and our Lord cried out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken one? -- Ye^; in all this, the blessed
Jesus, the Seed of the Woman, bruised his accursed Head -- For, in that he was
tempted, he was able to succor those that are tempted. By his Stripes we are
(...)* The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him. (...) dying. ^e destroyed
him (...) had the Power* (...) that (...) the D^v^^* (...) He thereby (...) and
(...)* and made (...) Show of (...) openly, triumph^ over them upon the Cro^^*
--

This Promise has been, (...)* and will ^e (...) in the Elect of God (...) as
well before as after the (...) in the Flesh -- For they may be called the (...)
of the Woman. Mar^el not, th^^ (...) that (...) live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer Persu^^^^* In this Promise there is an eternal Enmity put between the
Seed of the Woman, and the (...) of the Serpent. So that those that are born
after the Flesh, cannot but persecute those that a^ born after the Spirit. --
This Enmity showed itself soon after this Promise was revealed* in Cain's
bruising the Heel of Abel. It continued in the Church through all Ages before
Christ came in the Flesh, as the History of the (...), and the 11th Chapter of
the Hebrews plainly show -- It raged exceedingly after our Lord's Ascension,
witness the Acts of the Apostles, and the History of the primitive Christians
-- It now rages, and wi^^ continue to rage, and show itself, in a greater or
less Degree, to the End of Time. But let not this dismay us! For, in all this,
the Seed of the Woman is more than Conqueror, and bruises the Serpent's Head --
Thus the Israelites, the more they were oppressed, the more they increased --
Thus it was with the Apostles -- Thus it was with their immediate Followers. So
that Tertullian compares the Church in his Time to a mowed ^ield, the more
frequently it is cut, the more it grows. -- The Blood of the Martyrs was always
the Seed of the Church. And I have often sat down with Wonder and Delight, and
admired how God has made the very Schemes, which his Enemies contrived in order
to hinder, the most effectual Means to propagate his Gospel -- The Devil h^s
had so little Success in Persecution, that if I did not know, that he and his
Children, according to this Verse, could not but persecute, I should think he
would count it his Strength to sit still. What did he get by persecuting the
Martyrs in* Queen Mary's Time? -- Was not the Grace of God exceedingly
glorified in their Support (...) What did he g^t by persecuting the good old
Puritants? Did it not prove the Peopleing o^ New England? -- Or, to come nearer
to our own Times, What has he got by putting (...) out of the Synagogues? Has
not the Word of God, since that, mightily prevailed? -- (...) dear Hearers, you
must excuse me for enlarging on this Head. God fills my Soul generally when I
come to this Topic. I can say (...)* Luther, If it were not for Persecution
should not understand the Scripture* (...) Satan should be yet suffered to
bruise (...) further, and his Servants should thrust (...) Prison* I doubt not,
but ^ven that (...) ^^tend to the more effectual Bruising of his (...)* I
remember a Saying of the then Lord Chancellor to the pious Bradford. Thou (...)
done more Hurt, said he, by thy Exhortations in private in Prison, than thou
did in preaching before thou wast put in, or Words to this Effect. The
Promise of the Text is my daily Support. I will put Enmity between thy Seed and
her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. --

Further: This Promise is also fulfilled, not only in the Church in general,
but in every individual Believer in particular -- In every Believer there are
two Seeds, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent -- The Flesh
lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh. -- It is with the
Believer, when quickened with Grace in his Heart, as it was with (...), when she
had conceived Esau and Jacob (...) her Womb! She felt a Struggling, and began
to be uneasy. -- If it be so, says she, why am I (...)? -- Thus Grace and
Nature struggle, (if (...) may so speak) in the Womb of a Believer's Heart --
But, as it was there said, the Elder shall (...) the Younger; so it is here --
Grace in (...) and shall get the better of Nature -- The (...) of the Woman
shall bruise the Serpent's (...). Many of you perhaps, that have believed in
Christ, may find some particular Corruption yet strong, so strong, that you are
sometimes ready to cry out with David, I shall fail (...) the Hand of Saul --
But, fear not, the Promise in the Text insures the P^rl^ve (...) and Victory of
Believers over Sin, Satan Death and Hell. -- What if indwelling Corruption does
yet remain, and the Seed of the Ser^^^^ (...) your Heel, in vexing and (...)
(...) righteous Souls? Fear not, though ^aint, yet ^^rsue You shall yet bruise
the Serpent's Head. Christ has died for you, and yet a little while, and he
will send Death to destroy the very Being of Sin in you. -- Which brings me

To show the most extensive Manner in which the Promise of the Text shall be
fulfilled, viz. at the final Judgment, when the Lord Jesus shall present the
Elect to his Father without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing, glorified both
in Body and Soul. --

Then shall the Seed of the Woman give the last and fatal Blow, in bruising the
Serpent's Head -- Satan, the Accuser of the Brethren, and all his accursed
Seed, shall then be cast out; and never suffered to disturb the Seed of the
Woman any more -- Then shall the Righteous shine in the Kingdom of their
Father, and fit with Christ on Thrones, in Majesty on High.

Let us therefore not be weary of Well-doing for we shall reap an eternal
Harvest of Comfort, if we faint not. -- Dare, dare, my dear Brethren in Christ,
to follow the Captain of your Salvation, who was made perfect through
Sufferings. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise (...) Serpent's Head -- Fear not
Men -- Be not too (...) cast down at the Deceitfulness of your Heart^ Fear not
Devils -- You shall get the Victory (...) over them -- The Lord Jesus has
engaged to make you more than Conqueror over all -- Plead with your Savior,
plead -- Plead the Promise ^n in the Text -- Wrestle, wrestle with God in (...)
-- If it has been given you to believe, ^ear not, if it should also be given
you to suffer. Be not any wise terrified by your Adversaries -- The King of the
Church has them all in a Chain -- Be kind to them; pray for them; but fear them
not. The Lord will yet bring back his Ark, though at present driven into the
Wilderness, and Satan like Lightning shall fall from Heaven.

Are there any Enemies of God here? The Promise of the Text encourages me to
bid you Defiance -- The Seed of the Woman, the ever-blessed Jesus shall bruise
the Serpent's Head -- What signifies all your Malice -- You are only raging
Waves of the Sea, foaming out your (...) Shame -- For you, without Repentance,
(...) the Blackness of Darkness for ever -- The Lord Jesus sits in Heaven
ruling over all, and causing all Things to work for his Childrens Good -- He
laughs you to scorn -- He has you in the utmost Derision, and therefore so
will I -- Who a^e you that persecute the Children of the ever-blessed God? --
Though a poor Stripling, the Lord Jesus, the Seed of the Woman, will enable (...)
to bruise your Heads.

My Brethren in Christ, I think I do not speak (...) in my own Strength, but in
the Strength of (...) Redeemer -- I know in whom I have be^^ered -- I am
persuaded he will keep that safe which I have committed unto him -- He is
faithful who has promised, that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpent's Head -- May we all experience a daily Completion of this Promise,
both in the Church and in our Hearts, till we come to the Church of the
Firstborn, the Spirits of just Men made (...) in the Presence and actual
Fruition of the great God, our heavenly Father.

To whom with the Son and the Holy Ghost, (...) Honor, Power, Might, Majesty
and Dominion, now and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON III.
Persecution every Christian'^ LOT.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 12. Yea, and all that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, shall
suffer PERSECUTION
WHEN our LORD JESUS was pleased to take upon him the Form of a Servant, and
went about preaching the King^^^ of God, he took all Opportunities in public
-- more especially in private, to caution his (...) against seeking great
Things for themselves; and also to forewarn them of the many (...)* Afflictions
and Persecutions, which (...) ^^pect to endure and go through for (...) Sake.
-- The great St. Paul there (...) the Author of this Epistle, in (...) as in
(...) other Things, following the Steps of his (...) Master, takes particular
Care, among other apostolical Admonitions, to warn ^oung, Timothy of the
Difficulties he must expect to meet with in the Course of his Ministry -- This
^now also, says he, ver. 1. of this Chapter, that in the last Days perilous
Times shall come. F^r Men shall be Lovers of their ownselves, Covetous, Proud,
Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy, without natural
Affection, Truc^Breakers, false Accusers, Incontinent, Fierce, Despisers of
those that are good, Traitors, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasure more than
Lovers of God; having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof: from
such turn away. For of this sort are they which creep into Houses, and lead
Captive silly Women laden with Sins, led away with diverse Lusts, eve^ learning,
and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth* N^^* as JANN^S and
JAMBRES (two of the Egyptian Magicians) withstood MOSES, (by working
Sham-Miracles) so do these also resist the Truth; and notwithstanding they keep
up the Form of Religion, are Men of corrupt Minds, reprobate^ concerning the
Faith -- But, in order to keep (...) from sinking under their Opposition, (...)
him, that though God, for wise Ends, permitted these false Teachers, as he did
the Magicians, to oppose for some Time, yet they should (...) proceed no
further. For their (...) made manifest unto all Men, as (...) MAGICIANS, also
was, when they (...) ^and before MOSES, because of the (...). For (...) Bo^^
was upon the Magicians, as well as (...) all the Egyptians. -- And then, to
(...) TIMOTHY yet the more, he propounds to him his own Example -- But thou
have (...) known my Doctrine, Manner of Life, (...) Faith, Long-suffering,
Charity, Patience, P^^cutions, (...), which came unto me at ^^och, at Iconium*
(...) what Pers^^^^ I endured; but out of them all the LORD del^^^ me. -- And
th^n, lest TIMOTHY might (...) that this was only the particular Case of (...)
Yea, say^ ^e, in the Words of the Text, all that will live godly in CHRIST
JESUS, suffer Persecution.

The Words, without considering them they stand with relation to the Context,
(...) a necessary and important Truth, viz. that Persecution is the common Lot
of every godly M^^ -- This is a hard Saying, How few can (...) -- I trust God,
in the following Discourse, w^ enable me to make it good, by showing I. What it
is to live godly in CHRIST (...)* II. The different Kinds of Persecution (...)
which they, who live godly, are exposed. -- III. Why it is, that godly Men must
expect to suffer Persecution?


Lastly, We shall apply the whole.

And first, Let us consider what it is to li^^ godly in CHRIST JESUS. -- This
supposes (...) are made the Righteousness of God in CHRIST that we are born
again, and are made one (...) CHRIST by a living Faith, and a vital (...) even
as JESUS CHRIST and the FATH^^ (...) ONE. -- Unless we are thus convert (...)
transformed by the renewing of our Min^^^ (...) cannot properly be said to be
in CHRIST, much less to live godly in Him. -- To be in CHRIST merely by
Baptism, and an outward Profession, i^ not to be in HIM in the strict Sense of
the Word -- No: They that are in CHRIST are New Creatures, old Things are
passed away, and all Things are become new in their Hearts. -- Their Life is
hid with CHRIST in God. -- Their Souls daily feed on the invisible Realities of
another World -- To live godly in CHRIST, is to make the Divine Will, and not
our own, the sole Principle of all our Thoughts, Words and Actions; so that,
whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we do all to the Glory of God. --
Those who live godly in CHRIST, may not so much be said to live, as CHRIST, to
live in them -- He is their ALPHA and OMEGA, their First and Last, their
Beginning and End -- They are led by his Spirit, as a Child is led by the Hand
of its Father, and are willing to follow the Lamb (...) thersoever he leads
them -- They hear, know, and obey his Voice -- Their Affections are (...) on
Things above -- Their Hopes are full of Immortality -- Their Citizenship is in
Heaven -- Being born again of God, they habitually live to, and daily walk with
God -- They are pare in Heart, and in short, from a Principle of FAITH in
CHRIST, holy in all Manner of Conversation and Godliness.

This it is to live godly in CHRIST JESUS* And hence we may easily learn, why
so few suffer Persecution? Because so f^w live godly in CHRIST JESUS -- You may
live formally in CHRIST, you may attend on outward Duties, you may live morally
in CHRIST, i. e. you may do (as they term it) no one any Harm, and avoid
Persecution. But they that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, must suffer
Persecution.

What is the Meaning of the Word PERSECUTION, and how many Kinds there are of
it, I come now to consider.

The Word PERSECUTION is derived from a Greek Word signifying to pursue, and
generally implies pursuing a Person for the Sake of his Goodness, or God's
Good Will to him. The first Kind of it is that of the Heart -- We have an early
Example of this in that wicked One Cain, who, because the Lord had Respect to
Abel and his Offering, and not to him and his Offering, was very wroth, his
Countenance fell, and at length he cruelly slew his envied Brother. -- Thus the
Pharisees hated and persecuted our Lord long before they laid hold on him: And
our Lord mentions being inwardly hated of Men, as one Kind of PERSECUTION his
Disciples were to undergo^^ This Heart -- Enmity (if I may so term it) is the
Root of all other Kinds of PERSECUTION* and i^, in some Degree or other, to be
found in the Soul of every unregenerated Man* and Numbers are guilty of this
Persecution who never have it in their Power to (...) any other Way. Nay,
Numbers (...) ^e carrie^ out actually to put in Practice all other Degree of
Persecution, was not the Name of Persecution become odious among Mankind, and
did they not hereby run the Hazard of losing their Reputation. Alas! how many
at the Great Day, whom we know not now will be convicted and condemned, that
all their Life long harbored a secret evil Will against ZION! -- They may now
^kreen it before Men; but God sees the Enmity of their Hearts, and will judge
them as Persecutors at the great and terrible Day of Judgment!

A second Degree of Persecution, is that of the Tongue -- for out of the
Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks -- Many, I supp^^e, think it no Harm
to shoot out Arrows, even bitter Words, against the Disciples of the Lord --
They scatter their Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death, saying, Are we not in Sport?
-- But however they may esteem it, in God's Account Evil speaking is a high
Degree of Persecution. Thus Ishmael's m^cking Isaa^ in the Old, is termed
persecuting him in the New Testament -- Blessed are ye^* says our Lord, When
Men shall revel you and persecute you, and shall say all Manner of (...)
against you falsely for my Names Sake. -- From whence we may gather, that
Reviling, and speaking all Manner of Evil falsely for CHRIST'S Sake, is a high
Degree of Persecution. -- For a good Name, says the wise Man, (...) better that
(...) Ointment, and, to many, is dearer tha^ (...) itself -- It Is a great
Breach of the sixth Commandment to slander any one, but to speak (...) of and
slander the Disciples of CHRIST, (...) because they are his Disciples, must be
(...) provoking in the Sight of God, and such who are guilty of it (without
Repentance) will find that JESUS CHRIST will call them to an Account, and
punish them for all their ungodly and hard Speeches in a Lake of Fire and
Brimstone -- This shall be their Portion to drink.

The third and last Kind of Persecution, is that which expresses itself in
Actions -- As when wicked Men separate the Children of God from their Company.
Blessed are ye, says our Lord, when they shall separate you from their Company
-- or expose them to Church Censures. They shall put you out of their
Synagogues. -- Or in threatening and prohibiting them from making an open
Profession of his Religion or Worship, or Ministers from preaching his Word, as
the High Priests threatened the Apostles, and forbad them any more to speak in
the Name of JESUS. And PAUL breathed out Threatenings and Slaughters against the
Disciples of the Lord -- Or when they call them into Courts. You shall be
called before Governors, says our Lord. -- Or when they fine, ^mprison, or
punish them, by Confiscation of Goods, cruel Scourging, and, lastly, Death
itself.

It would be impossible to enumerate in what various Shapes Persecution has
appeared. -- It Is a many-headed Monster, insatiable as Hell, cruel as the
Grave, and, what is worse, it generally appears under the Cloak of Religion. --
But, cruel, insatiable, and horrid as it is, they that live godly in CHRIST
JESUS, must expect to suffer and encounter with in all its Forms.

This is what we are to make good under our (...) general Head.

And first, This appears from the whole T^n^r of our Lord's Doctrine -- We will
begin with his Divine Sermon on the Mount -- Blessed, says he, are they which
are persecuted for Righteousness Sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. So
that, if our Lord spoke Truth, we are not so blessed, as to have an Interest in
the Kingdom of Heaven, unless we are or have been persecuted for Righteousness
Sake -- Nay, our Lord (it is remarkable) employs three Verses in this Beatitude,
and only one in each of the others; not only to show, that it was a Thing which
Men (as Men) are unwilling to believe, but also the necessary Consequence of it
upon our being Christians. -- This is likewise evident from all those Passages,
wherein our Lord informs us, that he came upon the Earth not to send Peace but
a Sword, and that the Father-in-law should be against the Mother-in-law, and
that a Man's Foes should be those of his own Household. Passages, which though
confined by false Prophets (...); the first, I am persuaded will be verified by
(...) Experience of all true Christians in this (...) every Age of the Church.
-- It would be (...) to recount all the Places, wherein our lord forewarns his
Disciples, that they should be called before Rulers, thrust out of Synagogues,
nay, that the Time would come, wherein Men should think they did God Service to
kill them. -- For this Reason he so frequently declared, that unless a Man
forsake all that he had, and even hated Life itself, he could not be his
Disciple^* And therefore it is worthy our Observation* that in that remarkable
Passage, wherein (...) Lord makes such an extensive Promise to th^se who ^^ft
all for him, cautiously inserts PERSECUTION. And JESUS answered and said,
Ver^^y I say unto you, there is no Man that has le^t House, or Brethren, or
Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my (...) and
the Gospel's, but he shall receive an Hundredfold now in this Tim^, Houses and
Brethren, and Sisters and Mothers, and Children and La^^^, with Persecutions
(the Word is in the (...) Number, including all Kinds of Persecution) and in
the World to come eternal Life. -- He that has Ears to hear, let him hear what
CHRIST says in all these Passages, and then confess, th^^ all who will live
godly in CHRIST JESUS, (...) suffer PERSECUTION.

As this is proved from our Lord's Doctrine; so it is no less evident from his
Life. F^ll^w him from the Manger to the Cross, and see whether any Persecution
was like that which the (...) of God, the Lord of Glory, underwent (...) here
on Earth -- How was he hated by wicked Men? -- How often would that Hatred have
excited them to take hold of him, had it not been for Fear of the People? --
How was he reviled, counted and called a Blasphemer, a Wine-Bibber, a
Samaritan, nay, a Devil, and, in one Word, had all Manner of Evil spoken
against him falsely? -- What Contradiction of Sinners did he endure against
himself? -- How did Men seperat^ from his Company, and were ashamed to walk
with him openly? Insomuch that he once said to his own Disciples, Will you also
go away? -- Again -- How was he stoned, thrust out of the Synagogues, arraigned
as a Deceiver of the People, a seditious and pestilent Fellow, an Enemy to
Caesar, and as such scourged, blindfolded, spit upon, and at length condemned
and nailed to an accursed Tree? -- Thus was the Master persecuted -- Thus did
the Lord suffer -- And the Servant is not above his Master, nor the Disciple
above his Lord -- If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you,
says the blessed JESUS. And again, Every Man that is perfect, that is, a true
Christian, must be as his Master, i. e. suffer as he did. For in all these
Things our Lord has led us an Example, that we should follow his Steps: And
therefore, God forbid that any, who would live godly in CHRIST JESUS, should
henceforward expect to escape suffering Persecution.

But further: Not only our Lord's Example, but the Example of all the Saints
that ever lived* evidently demonstrates the Truth of the Apostles Assertion in
the Text. How soon was Abel made a Martyr for his Religion? -- How was Isaac
mocked by the Son of the Bondwoman? -- And what a large Catalogue of suffering
Old Testament Saints have we recorded in the 11th Chapter of the Hebrews? --
Read the Acts of the Apostles, and see how the first Christians were threatened,
sto^ed, imprisoned, scourged, and persecuted even unto Death. -- Examine
Church History in After-Ages, and you wi^^ (...) the Murder of the Innocents by
Herod, (...) but an Earnest of the innocent Blood which should be shed for the
Name of JESUS -- Examine the Experience of Saints now living on Earth, and if
it were possible to consult the Spirits of just Men made perfect, I am
persuaded each would concur with the Apostle in asserting, that all who will
live godly in CHRIST JESUS, shall suffer PERSECUTION.

For how can it be otherwise in the very Nature of Things? -- Ever since the
Fall there has been an irreconcilable Enmity put between the Seed of the Woman
and the Seed of the Serpent. Wicked Men hate God, and therefore cannot but hate
those who are like him. They hate to be reformed, and therefore must hate and
persecute those, who, by a contrary Behavior, testify of them, that their
Deeds are Evil -- Besides, Pride of Heart leads Men to persecute the Servants
of Jesus Christ. -- If they commend them, they are afraid of being asked, --
Why do not you follow them?" -- And therefore because they dare not imitate,
though they may sometimes be even forced to approve their Way, yet Pride and Envy
make them turn Persecutors. -- Hence it is, that as it was formerly, so it is
now, and so will it be to the End of Time -- He that is born after the FLESH,
the natural Man, does and will persecute him that is born after the SPIRIT, the
regenerate Man* Because Christians are not of the World, but Christ has chosen
them out of the World, therefore the World ^^ll hate them -- (...) ^^^ected
against this Doctrine, that we now live in a Christian World, and therefore
must not expect such Persecution as formerly; I answer, All are not Christians
that are called so; and till the Heart is changed, the Enmity against God which
is the Root of all Persecution) remains; and consequently Christians, falsely
so called, will persecute as well as others. -- I observed therefore, in the
Beginning of this Discourse, that St. Paul mentions those that had a Form of
Religion, as persons of whom Timothy had Need be chiefly aware -- For, as our
Lord and his Apostles were mostly persecuted by their Countrymen the Jews, so
we must expect the like Usage from the Formalists of our own Nation, the
Pharisees, who seem to be religious. -- For the most horrid and barbarous
Persecutions have been carried on by those who have called themselves
Christians (...) witness the Days of Queen Mary, and the Fines, Banishments,
and Imprisonments of the Children of God in the last Century, and the bitter,
irreconcilable Hatred that appear in Thousands who call themselves Christians,
even in the present Days wherein we live.

Persons, who argue against Persecution now, are not sufficiently sensible of
the bitter Enmity of the Heart of every unregenerate Man against God. For my
own Part, I am so far from wondering that Christians are persecuted, that I
wonder our Streets do not run with the Blood of the Saints -- Was Men's Power
equal to their Wills, such a horrid Spectacle would soon appear.

Persecution is necessery in respect to the Godly themselves -- If we have not
all Manner of Evil spoken of us, how can we know whether we love Contempt, and
seek only that Honor which comes from above? -- If we have not Persecutors,
how can our Passive Graces be kept in Exercise? -- How can many Christian
Precepts be put into Practice? -- How can we love, pray for, and do good to
those who despitefully use us? -- How can we overcome Evil with Good? -- In
short, how can we know we love God better than Life itself? -- St. Paul was
sensible of all this, and therefore so positively and peremptorily asserts,
that all that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS must suffer PERSECUTION.

Not that I affirm, All are persecuted in a like Degree. No: This would be
contrary both to Scripture and Experience. But though all Christians are not
really called to suffer every Kind of Persecution, yet all Christians are
liable thereto: And notwithstanding some may live in more peaceful Times of the
Church than other, yet all Christians, in all Ages, will find by their own
Experience, that, whether they act in a private or public Capacity, they must,
in some Degree or other, suffer Persecution.

Here then I would make a Pause, and, by Way of Application, exhort all Persons
first to stand awhile and examine themselves. -- ^or, by what has be^^ said,
you may gather one Mark, whereby you may judge, whether you are Christians or
not? -- Were you ever persecuted for Righteousness Sake? If not, you never yet
lived godly in Christ our Lord -- Whatever you may say to the contrary, the
inspired Apostle, in the Words of the Text (the Truth of which, I think, I have
sufficiently proved) positively asserts, that all that will godly in HIM, must
suffer Persecution -- Not that all that are persecuted are real Christians --
For many sometimes suffer, and are persecuted, on other Accounts than for
Righteousness Sake -- The great Question therefore is, Whether you were ever
persecuted for living godly? -- You may boast (as perhaps you may think) of
your great Prudence and Sagacity (and indeed these are excellent Things) and
glory because you have not run such Lengths, and made yourselves so singular,
and liable to such Contempt, as some others have. -- But alas! This is not a
Mark of your being of a Christian, but of a Laodi^ean Spirit, neither hot nor
cold, and fit only to be spewed out of the Mouth of God -- That which you call
Prudence, is only Cowardice, dreadful Hypocrisy, Pride of Heart, which makes
you dread Contempt, and afraid to give up your Reputation for God -- You are
ashamed of Christ and his Gospel, and in all Probability, was he to appear a
second Time upon Earth, in Words, as well as Works, you would deny him -- Awake
therefore, all ye that live only formally in Christ Jesus, and no longer seek
that Honor which comes of Man. -- I do not desire you to court, but I entreat
you to live godly, and fear not Contempt for the Sake of Jesus Christ -- Beg of
God to give you his Holy Spirit, that you may see through and discover the
latent Hypocrisy of your Hearts, and no longer deceive your own Souls. --
Remember, you cannot reconcile two irreconcilable Difference* God and Mammon,
the Friendship of this World, with the Favor of God. -- Know you not who has
told you, that the Friendship of this World is Enmity with God? -- If therefore
you are in Friendship with the World, notwithstanding all your specious
Pretenses to Piety, you are at Enmity with God. -- You are only Heart
Hypocrites, and, What is the Hope of the Hypocrite* when God shall take away
his Soul? -- Let (...) Words of the Text found an Alarm in your Ears -- Oh! let
them sink deep into your Hearts Yea, and all that will live godly in CHRIST
JESUS shall suffer PERSECUTION.

Secondly, From the Words of the Text I would take Occasion to speak to those,
who are about to list themselves under the Banner of CHRIST'S Cross. -- What
say you? -- Are you resolved to live godly in CHRIST JESUS, notwithstanding the
Consequence will be, that you must suffer PERSECUTION? -- You are beginning to
build, but have you taken our Lord's Advice, to sit down first and count the
Cost? -- Have you well weighed with your selves that weighty Declaration -- He
that love^^ Father or Mother more than ME, is not wor^^ ME -- And again, Unless
a Man forsake (...) he has, he cannot be my Disciple? Per^^^ some of you have
great Possessions; Will (...) you go away sorrowful, if Christ should require
you to sell all that you have? -- Others of you again may be Kinsmen, or some
Way related, or under Obligations to the Highpriests, or other great
Personages, who may be persecuting the Church of Christ -- What say you? Will
you, with Moses, rather choose to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than
enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season? -- Perhaps you may say, "My Friends
will not oppose me." -- That is more than you know. -- In all Probability your
chief Enemies will be those of your own Household -- If therefore they should
oppose you, Are you willing naked to follow a naked Christ? and to wander about
in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, in Dens and Caves of the Earth, being afflicted,
destitute, tormented, rather than not be Christ's Disciples? -- You are now all
following with Zeal, as Ruth and Orpah did Naomi, and may weep under the Word;
but are not your Tears Crocodile's Tears? And when Difficulties come, Will you
not go back from following your Lord, as Orpah departed from following Naomi?
-- Have you really the Root of Grace in your Hearts? Or, Are you only
Stony-ground Hearers? -- You receive the Word with Joy; but, when Persecution
arises because of the Word, will you not be immediately offended? -- Be not
angry with me for putting these Questions to you. I am jealous over you, but it
is with a godly Jealousy. For, alas! how many have put their Hand^ to the Plow,
and afterward have shamefully looked back? -- I only deal with you, as our
Lord did with the Person that said, LORD, I will follow thee whithersoever thou will -- The Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son
of Man, says he, has not where to lay his Head. -- What say you? Are you
willing to endure Hardness, and thereby approve your selves good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ? -- You now come on Foot out of the Towns and Villages to hear the
Word, and receive me as a Messenger of God -- But will you not by and by cry
out, Away with him, Away with him, it is not fit such a Fellow should live upon
the Earth? -- Perhaps some of you, like Hazael, may say, Are we Dogs, that we
shall do this? But, alas! I have met with many unhappy Souls, who have drawn
back unto Perdition, and have afterward accounted me their Enemy, for dealing
faithfully with them, though once, if it were possible, they would have plucked
out their own Eyes, and have given them unto me. -- Sit down therefore, I
beseech you, and seriously count the Cost, and ask yourselves again and again,
whether you count all Things but. Dung and Dross, and are willing to suffer the
Loss of all Things, so that you may win Christ, and ^e found in Him. For you
may assure yourselves, the Apostle has not spoken in vain -- All that will
live godly in CHRIST JESUS, shall suffer PERSECUTION.

Thirdly, The Text speaks to you that are patiently suffering for the Truth's
Sake -- Rejoice, and be exceeding glad -- Great shall be your Reward in Heaven
-- For to you it is given, not only to believe, but also to suffer, and perhaps
remarkably too, for the Sake of Jesus* This is a Mark of your Disciple may, an
Evidence that you do live godly in CHRIST JESUS -- Fear not, therefore, neither
be dismayed. Oh, be not weary and ^aint in your M^^^s! -- Jesus, your Lord,
your Life, comes, and his Reward is with him -- Though all Men forsake you, yet
will not he? No: The Spirit of Christ and of Glory shall rest upon you. In
Patience therefore possess your Souls -- Sanctify the Lord God in your Hearts.
Be in nothing terrified by your Adversaries -- On their Part Christ is evil
spoken of: On your Part he is glorified -- Be not ashamed of your Glory, since
others can glory in their Shame -- Think it not strange concerning the fiery
Trial, wherewith you are or may be tried. -- The Devil rages, knowing that he
has but a short Time to reign. He or his Emissaries have no more Power, than
what is given them from above -- God sets them their Bounds. which they cannot
pass, and the very Hairs of your Head are all numbered. -- Fear not, no one
shall set upon you to hurt you, without your heavenly Father's Knowledge. -- Do
your earthly Friends and Parents forsake you? Are you cast out of the
Synagogues? The Lord shall reveal himself to you, as to the Man that was born
blind -- Jesus Christ shall take you up -- If they carry you to Prison, and
load you with Chains, so that the Iron enter into your Souls, even there shall
Christ send an Angel from Heaven to strengthen you, and enable you, with Paul
(...), to sing Praises at Midnight. -- Are (...) threatened to be thrown into a
Den of Lion (...) cast into a burning fiery Furnace, because you will not bow
down and worship the Beast? -- Fear not; the God, whom you serve, is able to
deliver you -- Or, if he should suffer the Flames to devour your Bodies, they
should only serve, as so many fiery Chariots, to carry your Souls to God. --
Thus it was with the Martyrs of old, so that one when he was burning cried out,
Come, you Papists, if you want a Miracle, Here, behold one This Bed of Flames
is to me a Bed of Down. -- Thus it was with almost all that suffered in former
Times: For Jesus, notwithstanding he withdrew his own Divinity from himself,
yet has always lifted up the Light of his Countenance upon the Souls of
suffering Saints. -- Fear not therefore these that can kill the Body, and after
that have no more that they can do; but fear him only, who is able to destroy
both Body and Soul in Hell. Dare, dare, to (...) godly in CHRIST JESUS, though
you suffer all Manner of PERSECUTION.

But are there any true Ministers of Jesus Christ (...)? -- You Will not be
offended if I tell you, that the Words of the Text are, in an especial Manner,
applicable to you -- St. Paul wrote them to Timothy, and we, of all Men, that
live godly. CHRIST JESUS, must expect to suffer the severest Persecution --
Satan will (...) ^^vour to (...) our Heels, let who escape -- And it has been
the general Way of God's Providence, in Times of Persecution, to permit the
Shepherds first to be smitten, before the Sheep are scattered -- Let us not
therefore show, that we are only Hirelings, who care not for the Sheep, but,
like the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, let us readily lay down our Lives
for the Sheep -- Whilst others are boasting of their great Preferments, let us
rather glory in our great Afflictions and Persecutions for the Sake of Christ
-- St. Paul now rejoices tha^ he suffered Afflictions and Persecutions at
Iconiu^ and Lystra -- Out of all the Lord delivered him* -- Out of all the Lord
will deliver us, and cause us hereafter to sit down with him on Thrones, when
he comes to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

I could proceed, but I am conscious in this Part of my Discourse; I ought more
particularly to speak to myself, knowing that Satan has desired to have me,
that he may sift me as Wheat. I know I must (How can it be avoided?) suffer
great Things for Christ's Name Sake -- Without a Spirit of Prophecy, we may
easily discern the Sighs of the Times. Persecution is even at the Doors -- The
Tabernacle of the Lord is already driven into the Wilderness -- The Ark of the
Lord is fallen into the unhallowed Hands of uncircumcised Philistians. They
have long since put us out of their Synagogues, and Highpriests have been
calling on Civil Magistrates to exert their Authority against the Disciples of
the Lord. -- Men in Power have been breathing out Threatenings -- We may easily
guess what will follow, Imprisonment and Slaughter -- The Storm has been
gathering some Time -- It must break shortly. Perhaps it may fall on me first.

Brethren therefore, whether in the Ministry or not, I beseech you, pray for
me, that I may never suffer justly, as an Evil-Doer, but only for Righteousness
Sake -- Oh! Pray that I may not deny my Lord in any wise, but that I may
joyfully follow him, both to Prison and to Death if he is pleased to call me to
seal his Truths with my Blood -- Be not ashamed of Christ, or of his Gospel,
though I should become a Prisoner of the Lord -- Though I am bound, the Word of God
will not be bound -- No, an open, an effectual Door is opened for preaching the
everlasting Gospel, and Men or Devils shall never be able to prevail against it
-- Only pray, that whether it be in Life or Death, Christ may be glorified in
me. -- Then I shall rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

And now, to whom shall I address myself next? -- To those, who persecute their
Neighbors for living godly in CHRIST JESUS. But, what shall I say to your Howl
and weep for the Miseries that shall come upon you -- For a little while the
Lord permits you to ride over the Heads of his People; but by and by, Death
will arrest you, Judgment will find you, and Jesus Christ shall put a Question
to you, which will strike you dumb. "Why persecuted you (...)" -- You may plead
your Laws and your Canons, and pretend what you do is out of a Zeal for God,
but God shall discover the cursed Hypocrisy and serpentine Enmity of your
Hearts, and give you over to the Tormentors -- It Is well, if in this Life, God
does not set some Mark upon you -- He pleaded the Cause of Naboth, when
innocently condemned for blaspheming against God and the King -- And our Lord
sent forth his Armies, and destroyed the City of those who killed the Prophets,
and stoned them that were sent unto them -- If you have a Mind therefore to
fill up the Measure of your Iniquities, go on, persecute and despise the
Disciples of the Lord. But know, that for all these Things, God shall bring you
into Judgment. Nay, those you how persecute, shall be in part your Judges, and
sit on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, whilst you are dragged by
infernal Spirits into a Lake that burreth with Fire and Brimstone, and the
Smoke of your Torment shall be ascending up for ever and ever -- Lay down
therefore, ye Rebels, your Arms against the most High God, and no longer
persecute those who live godly in CHRIST JESUS -- The Lord will plead, the Lord
will avenge their Cause. You may be permitted to bruise their Heels, yet in the
End they shall bruise your accursed Heads. -- I speak not this, as though I were
afraid of you -- For I know in whom I have believed. Only out of pure Love I
warn you, and because I know not but Jesus Christ may make some of you Vessels
of Mercy, and snatch you, even you Persecutors, as Firebrarnds out of the Fire
-- Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, even Persecutors, the
worst of Sinners -- His Righteousness is sufficient for them -- His Spirit able
to purify and change their Hearts -- He once converted Saul -- May the same God
magnify his Power, in converting all those who are causing the godly in CHRIST
JESUS, as much as in them lies, to suffer PERSECUTION. The Lord be with you all
-- Amen.

SERMON IV.
Abraham's offering up his Son Isaac.
GENESIS xxii, ^2. And he said, lay not thine Hand upon the Lad, neither do
thou any thing unto him for now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have
not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me.
THE great St. Paul, in one of his Epistles informs us, that whatsoever was
written aforetime was written for our Learning, that we through Patience and
Comfort of the Holy Scripture might have Hope -- And as without Faith it is
impossible to please God, or be accepted in Jesus, the Son of his Love, we may
be assured, that whatever Instances of a more than common Faith are recorded in
the Book of God, they were more immediately designed by the Holy Spirit for the
Learning and Imitation of us, upon who^^ the Ends of the World are come. -- For
this Reason, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, in the 11th Chapter,
mentions such a noble Catalogue of Old Testament Saints and Martyrs, who
subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, stopped the Mouth, of Lions, etc. and
are gone before us to inherit the Promises. A sufficient Confutation, I think,
of their Error, who lightly esteem the Old Testament Saints, and would not have
them mentioned to Christians, as Persons whose Faith and Patience we are called
upon more immediately to follow -- If this was true, the Apostle would never
have produced such a Cloud of Witnesses out of the Old Testament, to excite the
Christians of the first, and consequently purest Age of the Church, to continue
steadfast and unmovable in the Profession of their Faith. -- Amidst this
Catalogue of Saints, methinks the Patriarch Abraham shines the brightest, and
differs from the others, as one Star differs from another Star in Glory --
For he shone with such distinguished Luster, that he was called the Friend of
God, the Father of the Faithful, and those who believe on Christ, are said to
be Sons and Daughters of, and to be blessed with faithful Abraham -- Many
Trials of his Faith did God send this great and good Man, after he had
commanded him to get out from his Country, and from his Kindred, unto a Land
which he should show him -- But his last was the most severe of all -- I mean
that of offering up his only Son -- This, by the Divine Assistance, I propose
to make the Subject of your present Meditation, and, by Way of Conclusion, to
draw some practical Inferences from the Observations that God shall enable me
to draw from this instructive Story.

The sacred Penman begins the Narrative thus. Ver. 1. And it came to pass,
after these Things, God did tempt Abraham -- After these Things, that is, after
he had underwent many severe Trials before, after he was old, full of Days, and
might flatter himself perhaps that the Troubles and Toils of Life were now
finished -- After these Things, God did tempt Abraham -- Christians, you know
not what Trials you may meet with before you die. -- Notwithstanding you may
have suffered, and been tried much already, yet, it may be, a greater Measure
is still behind, which you are to fill up -- Be not high-minded, but fear --
Our last Trials, in all Probability, will be the greatest. And we can never say
our Warfare is accomplished, or our Trials finished, till we bow down our
Heads, and give up the Ghost -- And it came to pass, after these Things, that
God did tempt Abraham.

"God did tempt Abraham" -- But can the Scripture contradict itself? Does not
St. James tell us, that God tempts no Man? And God does tempt no Man to Evil,
or on Purpose to draw him into Sin. For when a Man is thus tempted, he is drawn
away of his own Heart's Lust, and enticed -- But in another Sense God may be
said to tempt -- I mean to try his Servants, and in this Sense we are to
understand that Passage of St. Matthew, where we are told, that Jesus was led
up by the Spirit (the good Spirit) into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the
Devil -- And our Lord, in that excellent Form (...) Prayer which he has been
pleased to prescribe us, does not require us to pray, that we may not
absolutely be led into Temptation, but delivered from the Evil of it -- Whereby
we may plainly infer, that God sees it fit sometimes to lead us into
Temptation, that is, to bring us into such Circumstances, as will try our
Faith, and other Christian Graces -- In this Sense we are to understand the
Expression before us -- God did tempt or try Abraham.

How God was pleased to reveal his Will at this Time to his faithful Servant,
whether by the Shechinah, or Divine Appearance, or by a small still Voice, as
he spoke to Elijah, or by a Whisper, like that of the Spirit to Philip, when he
commanded him to go join himself to the Eunuch's Chariot, we are not told, nor
is it material to enquire -- It Is enough that we are informed, God said unto
him Abraham, and that Abraham knew it was the Voice of God -- For he said,
Behold here I am -- Oh! what a holy Familiarity (if I may so speak) is there
between God, and those holy Souls that are united to him by Faith in Christ
Jesus! God, says Abraham, and Abraham said (it should seem without the least
Surprise) Behold, here I am -- Being reconciled to God by the (...) and
Obedience of Christ, which he rejoiced in, and saw by Faith afar off -- He did
not, like guilty Adam, seek the Trees of the Garden to hide himself from, but
takes Pleasure in conversing with God, and talks with him, as a Man talks
with his Friend -- Oh! that christless Sinners knew what it is to have
Fellowship with the Father and the Son! They would envy the Happiness of
Saints, and count it all Joy to be termed Enthusiasts, and Fools for Christ's
Sake.

But what does God say to Abraham? Ver. 2. Take now thy Son, thine only Son
Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the Land of M^riah, and offer him
there for a Burnt-offering upon one of the Mountains which I shall tell thee of.

Every Word deserves our particular Observation -- Whatever he was to do, he
must do it (...), immediately, without conferring with Flesh and Blood -- But
what must he do? Take now thy Son -- Had God said, take now a Firstling, or
choicest Lamb or Beast of thy Flock, and offer it up for a Burnt-offering, it
would not have appeared so ghastly; but for God to say, Take now thy Son, and
offer him up for a Burnt-offering, one would have imagined was enough to
stagger the strongest Faith -- But this is not all -- It must not only be a
Son, but thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love -- If it must be a (...) and
not a Beast, that must be offered, why (...) Ishmael do, the Son of the
Bond-Wo^^^ No, it must be his only Son, the Heir of all Things, his Isaac, by
Interpretation (...)* the Son of his old Age, in whom his Soul delighted, whom
thou love, says God, in whose Life his own was wrapped up -- And this Son,
this only Son, this Isaac, the Son of his Love, must be taken now, even now,
without Delay, and be offered up by his own Father, for a Burnt-offering, upon
one of the Mountains of the which God would tell him.

Well might the Apostle, speaking of (...) Man of God, say, that against Hope
he believed in Hope, and being strong in Faith, gave Glory to God -- For, had
he not been blessed with Faith, which Man never before had, he must have
refused to comply with this severe Command -- For how many Arguments might
Nature suggest ^o prove, that such a Command could never come from God? or to
excuse himself from obeying it. What! might the good Man have said, butcher my
own Child! it is contrary to the very Law of Nature -- Much more to butcher my
dear Son Isaac -- in whose Seed God himself has assured me, that all the
Families of the Earth shall be blessed -- But supposing I could give up (...)
Affections, and he willing to part with (...), though I love (...) so dearly*
yet, (...) I (...)* him, what will become of God' (...) -- Besides, I am now
like a City built upon a Hill -- I shine as a Light on the World, in the midst
of a crooked and perverse (...) says ration -- How then shall I cause God's
(...) seem to be blasphemed, how shall I become a By -- word among the Heathen,
if they (...) tha^^* I have committed a Cri^^ (...) But, above all, what will
Sarah my Wife say? How can I ever return to her again, after I have imbrued my
Hands in my dear Child's Blood? -- Oh! that God would pardon me in this Thing,
or take my Life in the Place of my Son's! Thus, I say, Abraham might have
argued, and that too seemingly with great Reason, against complying with the
divine Command. But as before by Faith he considered not the Deadness of
Sarah's Womb, when she was past Age, but believed on him, who said, Sarah thy
Wife shall bear thee a Son indeed; so now being convinced that the same God
spoke to and commanded him to offer up that Son, and knowing that God was able
to raise him from the Dead, without Delay he obeys the heavenly Call.

Oh! that Unbelievers would learn of faithful Abraham, and believe whatever is
revealed from God, though they cannot fully comprehend it. Abraham knew God
commanded him to offer up his Son, and therefore believed, notwithstanding
carnal Reasoning might suggest many Objections -- We have sufficient Testimony,
that God has spoken to us by his Son, Why should we not also believe, though many
Things in the New Testament are above our Reason? For where Reason ends, Faith
begins -- And however Infidels may style themselves Reasoners, of all Men they
are the most unreasonable -- For, is it not contrary to all Reason, to measure
an infinite by a finite Understanding, or think to find out the Mysteries of
Godliness to Perfection?

But to return to the Patriarch Abraham -- We observed before what plausible
Objections he might have made -- But he answered not a single Word -- No --
without replying against his Maker -- We are told, Ver. 3. that Abraham rose up
early in the Morning, and saddled his Ass, and took two of his young Men with
him, and Isaac his Son, and clave the Wood for the Burnt-offering, and rose up
and went unto the Place of which God had told him.

From this Verse we may gather, that God spoke to Abraham in a Dream, or Vision
of the Night -- For it is said, he rose up early -- Perhaps it was near the
fourth Watch of the Night, just before Break of Day, when God said, ^^ke now
thy Son -- And Abraham rises up early to do so -- As I doubt not but he used to
rise early to offer up his Morning Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving -- It
is often remarked of People in the Old Testament, that they rose early in the
Morning, and particularly of our Lord in the New, that he rose a great while
before Day to pray -- The Morning be friends Devotion, and it People cannot use
so much Self-denial, as to rise early to pray, I know not how they will be able
to die at a Stake (if called to it) for Jesus Christ.

The Humility, as well as Piety of ^he Patriarch, is observable -- He saddled
his own As^^^^ great Men should be humble;) and to show his Sincerity, though he
took two of his young Men with him, and Isaac his Son, yet he keeps his Design
as a Secret from them all -- Nay, he does not so much as tell Sarah his Wife.
For he knew not but she might be a Snare unto him in this Affair; and, as
Rebekkah afterward, on another Occasion, advised Jacob to flee, so she also
might persuade Isaac to hide himself Or the young Men, had they known of it,
might have forced him away, as in After-Ages the Soldiers rescued Jonathan out
of the Hands of Saul -- But Abraham fought no such Evasion, and therefore like
an Israelite indeed, in whom there was no Guile, he himself resolutely clave
the Wood for the Burnt-offering, rose up and went unto the Place of which God
had told him -- In the second Verse God commanded him to offer up his Son upon
one of the Mountains which he would tell him of -- He commanded him to offer
his Son up, but would not then directly tell him the Place where -- This was to
keep (...) dependant and watching unto Prayer -- For there is nothing like being
kept waiting upon God, and if we do, assuredly God will reveal himself unto us
yet further in his own Time -- Let us practice what we know, follow Providence
so far as we can see already, and what we know not, what we see not as yet, let
us only be found in the Way of Duty, and the Lord will reveal even that unto us
-- Abraham here knew not directly where he was to offer up his Son -- But he
rises up and sets forward, and behold now God shows him, and he went to (...)
Place of which God had told him -- Let us go and do likewise.

Ver. 4. Then on the third Day Abraham lifted up his Eyes, and saw the Place
afar off.

So that the Place of which God had told him, was no less than three Days
Journey distant from the Place where God first appeared to him, and commanded
him to take his Son* Was not this to try his Faith, and to let him see that
what he did, was not merely from a sudden Pang of Devotion, but a Matter of
Choice and Deliberation? But who can tell what the aged Patriarch felt during
these three Days? Strong (...) he was in Faith, I am persuaded his Bowels often
yearned over his dear Son Isaac -- Methink^ I see the good old Man walking with
this dear Child in his Hand, and now and then looking upon him, loving him, and
then turning aside to weep. And perhaps sometimes he stays a ^^ittle behind to
pour out his Heart before God, for he had no Mortal to tell his Case to -- Then
methinks I see him join his Son and Servants again, and talking to them of the
Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, as they walked by the Way -- At
length, on the third Day, (...) lift up his Eyes, and saw the Place afar off --
And to show that he was yet sincerely resolved to do whatsoever the Lord
required of him, he even now will not discover his Design to his Servants out
said, Ver. 5. to his young Men (as we should say to our worldly Thoughts when
about to ^ead the Courts of the Lord's House) Abide (...) with the Ass (...)
and I and the Lad will go up yonder and worship, and come again to you -- This
was a sufficient Reason for their staying behind, and it being their Master's
Custom to go frequently to worship, they could have no Suspicion of what he was
going about -- And by Abraham's saying, that he and the Lad would come again, I
am apt to think he believed God would raise him from the Dead, if so be he
permitted him to offer his Child up (...) a Burnt-offering -- However that be,
he (...) yet resolved to obey God to the uttermost, and therefore,

Ver. 6. Abraham took the Wood of the Burnt-offering, and laid it upon Isaac
his Son, and he took the Fire in his Hand, and a Knife, and they went both of
them together -- Little did Isaac think that he was to be offered upon that
very Wood which he was carrying upon his Shoulders, and therefore, Ver 7. Isaac
innocently, and with a holy Freedom (for good Men should not keep their
Children at too great (...) Distance) spoke unto Abraham his (...) and said, My
Father; and he (with equal (...) and holy Condescension) said, Here am I, my
(...) -- And to show how careful Abraham had been ^as all Christian Parents
ought to be) to instruct ^is Isaac how to sacrifice to God, like a Youth
trained up in the Ways wherein he should go, Isaac said, Behold the Fire and
the Wood; but where is the Lamb for a Burnt-offering? -- How beautiful is early
Piety! How amiable to hear young People ask Questions about sacrificing to God
in an acceptable Way! Isaac knew very well that a Lamb was wanting, and that a
Lamb was necessary for a proper Sacrifice -- Behold the Fire and the Wood, but
where is the Lamb for a Burnt-offering? -- Young Men and Maidens learn of him.

Hitherto it is plain Isaac kn^w nothing of (...) Father's Design -- But I
believe, by what his Father said in Answer to his Question, that now was the
Time Abraham revealed it unto him.

Ver. 8. " And Abraham sa^^* My Son, God will provide himself a Lamb for a
Burnt-offering" -- Some think Abraham by Faith saw the Lord Jesus afar off, and
here spoke prophetically of that Lamb of God already slain in Decree, and
hereafter to be actually offered up for Sinners -- This was a Lamb of God's
providing himself indeed (we dared not have thought of it) to satisfy his own
Justice, and to render him (...) in justifying the Ungodly -- What is all our
Fire and Wood, the best Preparation and Per^^^mances we can make or present,
unless God (...) himself this Lamb for a Burnt-offering^ -- He could not away
with them -- The Words will well bear this Interpretation. But whatever Abraham
might intend, I cannot but think he here made an Application, and acquainted
his Son of God's dealing with his Soul, and at length, with (...) ears in his
Eyes, and the utmost Affection in his Heart, cried out, Thou art to be the
Lamb, my Son -- God has commanded me to provide thee for a Burnt-offering, and
to offer thee upon the Mountain which we are now ascending -- And as it appears
from a subsequent Verse, Isaac, convinced that it was the Divine Will, made no
Resistance (...) all -- For it is said, they went both of them to^^^^; and
again, Ver. 9. When we are told, that Abraham bound Isaac, we do not hear of
(...) complaining, or endeavoring to escape, (...) he might have done, being
(as some (...) thirty Years of Age, and it is plain, (...) carrying Wood enough
for a Burnt-(...) -- But he was Partaker of the like pre^^^^ Faith with his
(...) Father, and therefore (...) willing to be offered, as Abraham is to offer
him -- And so they went both of them together.

Ver. (...). At length they came to the Five of (...) God had told Abraham --
He built an Altar there, and laid the Wood in Order, and bound (...) his Son,
and laid him on the Altar upon the Wood.

And here let us pause awhile, and by Faith take a View of the Place where the
Father has (...) him -- I doubt not but the blessed Angels (...) round the
Altar and sang, Glory be to God in the Highest, for giving such Faith to M^n --
Come all ye tenderhearted Parents, (...) what it is to look over a dying Child
(...) that you saw the Altar here erected before you, and th^^ Wood laid in
Order, and the beloved Isaac (...) upon it -- Fancy that (...) saw the aged
Parent standing by weeping -- (For why may we not suppose that Abraham wept,
since Jesus himself wept at the Grave of ^^z^^us?) -- Oh! what pious, endearing
Expressions passed now alternately between the Father and the Son! -- Josephus
has a pathetick Speech made by each, whether genuine I know not -- But methinks
I see the Tears trickle down the Patriarch Abraham's Cheeks, and out of the
Abundance of the Heart, he cries, Adieu, Adieu, my Son -- The Lord gave thee to
me, and the Lord calls thee away -- Blessed be the Name of the Lord -- Adieu my
Isaac, my only Son, whom I love as my own Soul, Adieu, Adieu. Methinks I see
Isaac at the same Time meekly resigning himself into his heavenly Father's
Hands, and praying to the most High to strengthen his earthly Parent to strike
the Stroke* -- But why do I attempt to describe what either Son or Father felt?
It is impossible -- We may indeed form some faint Idea of, but shall never
fully comprehend it, till we come and sit down with the^ in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and hear them tell the pleasing Story over again -- Hasten, O Lord,
that blessed Time! -- O let thy Kingdom come!

And now, Ver. 10. the fatal Blow is going to be given. And Abraham stretched
forth his Hand, and took the Knife to slay his Son -- But do you not think he
intended to turn away his Head, when he gave the Blow? Nay, why may we not
suppose he sometimes drew his Hand in after it was stretched out, willing to
take another last Farewell of his beloved Isaa^ and desirous to defer it a
little, though resolved last to strike home -- Be that as it will -- His (...) is
now stretched out, the Knife is (...) Ha^ and he is about to put it to his dea^
(...) Throat.

But sing, O Heavens; and rejoice, O Earth! Man's Extremity is God's
Opportunity -- For behold, just as the Knife, in all Probability, was near his
Throat. -- Ver. 11. The Angel of the Lord, (or rather, the Lord of Angels,
Jesus Christ, the Angel of the everlasting Covenant) called unto him, probably
in a very audible Manner, from Heaven (his Dewlling Place) and said, Abraham,
Abraham -- (The Word is doubled to engage his Attention, and perhaps the
Suddenness of the Call made him draw back his Hand, just as he was going to
strike his Son) And Abraham said Here am I --

And he said, (Ver. 12.) Lay not thine Hand upon the Lad, neither do thou any
Thing unto him -- For now know I that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me.

Here then it was that Abraham received his Son Isaac from the Dead in a Figure
-- He was in effect offered upon the Altar, and God looked upon him as offered
and given unto him -- Now it was that Abraham's Faith being tried, was found
more precious than Gold purified (...) Times in the Fire -- Now as a Reward of
Grace* though not of Debt, for this signal Act of Obedience, by an Oath, God
confirms the Promise he made to him long before, that in his (...) ^^^tions of
the Earth should be blessed, was to be (...) 8.

(...) (this (...) Comfort may we suppose the Isaac* was offend his Son went
down from the Mount, and returned unto the young Men, Ver. 19. With what Joy
may we imagine he went home, and related all that had passed to Sarah! -- And
above all, with what Triumph is he exulting now in the Paradise of God, and
adoring rich, free, distinguishing, electing, everlasting Love, which alone
made him to differ from the rest of Mankind, and tender him worthy of that
Title which he will have given him so ^long as the Sun and the Moon endures --
"The Father of the Faithful."

But let us now draw our Eyes from the Creature, and do what Abraham, if he was
present, would direct to -- I mean, fix them on the Creator, God blessed for
evermore.

I see your Hearts affected, I see your Eyes weep -- (And indeed, who can
refrain weeping at the Relation of such a Story?) -- But, behold! I show you a
Mystery, hid under the Sacrifice of* Abraham's only Son, which, unless your
Hearts are hardened, must cause you to weep Tears of Love, and that plentifully
too -- I would willingly hope you even prevent me here, and are ready to say,
It is the Love of God, in giving Jesus Christ to die for our Sins -- Yes, that
is it -- And yet perhaps you find your Hearts, at the mentioning of this, not
so much affected -- Let this convince you* that we are all fallen Creatures,
and that we do no^ love God o^ Christ, as we ought to (...) if you admire
Abraham offering (...) how much more ought you to (...) and adore the Love of
God, (...) World, as to give his only begotten Son Christ Jesus our Lord, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting Life? -- May
we not well cry out, Now kn^w we, O Lord, that thou have loved us, since thou
have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from us? -- Abraham was God's
Creature, and God (...) Abraham's Friend, and therefore under the highest
Obligation to surrender up his Isaac* But Oh, stupendous Love^ Whilst we were
his Enemies, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, that
he might become a Curse for us -- Oh! the Freeness, as well as the Infiniteness
of the Love of God our Father* -- It Is unsearchable -- I am lost in
contemplating it -- It is past finding out -- Think, O Believers, think of the
Love of God, in giving Jesus Christ to be a Propitiation for our Sins -- And
when you hear how Abraham built an Altar, and laid the Wood in Order, and bound
Isaac his Son, and laid him upon the Altar upon the Wood -- Think how your
heavenly Father ^ound Jesus Christ his only Son, and offered him upon the Altar
of his Justice, and laid upon him the Iniquities of us all -- When you read of
Abraham's stretching forth his Hand to slay his Son -- Think, O think, how God
actually suffered his Son to be slain, that we might live for evermore -- Do
you read of Isaac carrying (...) Wood upon his Shoulders, upon which he was to
be offered? Let this lead you to Mount (...) (this very Mount of Moriah where
Isaac was offered, as some think) and take a View of the Antitype Jesus Christ,
that Son of God's Love, bearing and ready to sink under the Weight of that
Cross, on which he was to hang for us -- Do you admire Isaac so fre^ly
consenting to die, though a Creature, and therefore obliged to go when God
called? -- Oh! do not forget to admire infinitely more (...) Lord Jesus, that
promised Seed, who (...) said, Lo I come (though under no Obligation so to do) to
do thy Will, to obey and die for Men, O God -- Did you weep just now, when I
bid you fancy you saw the Altar, and the Wood laid in Order, and Isaac laid
bound on the Altar? -- Look up by Faith, behold the blessed Jesus, our
all-glorious Emanuel, not bound, but nailed on an accursed Tree -- See how he
hangs crowned with Thorns* and had in Derision of all that are round about him
-- See how the Thorns pierce him, and how the Blood in purple Streams trickle
down hi^ sacred Temples! -- Hark how the God of Nature groans! -- See how he
b^ws his Head, and at length gives up the Ghost! -- Isaac* is saved, but Jesus,
the God of Isaac, dies -- A Ram is offered up in Isaac's Room, but Jesus has no
Substitute -- Jesus must bleed, Jesus must die, God the Father provided this
Lamb for himself from all Eternity. He must be offered up in Time* or Man must
be damned for evermore* And now, where are your Tears? Shall I say refrain your
Voice from weeping? No, (...) let me exhort you to look to him whom you have
pierced, and mourn* as a Woman (...) for her Firstborn -- For we have (...)
Betrayers, we have been the (...) of the Lord of Glory -- And shall we not
bewail those Sins, which brought the blessed Jesus to the accursed Tree* --
Having so much done, (...) much suffered for us, so much forgiven, shall we not
love much? Oh! let (...) love him with all our Hearts, and Mind^, and Strength,
and glorify him in our (...) and Bodies, for they are his* (...) me to a ^^cond
Inference I shall draw from the foregoing Discourse.

From hence we may learn the Nature of a true, justifying Faith -- Whoever
understands and preaches the Truth, as it is in Jesus, must acknowledge, that
Salvation is God's free Gift^ and that we are saved not by any, or all the
Works of Righteousness which we have done or can do -- No, we can neither
wholly or in Part justify ourselves in the Sight of God -- The Lord Jesus
Christ is our Righteousness, and if we are accepted with God, it must be only
in and through the personal Righteousness, the active and passive Obedience of
Jesus Christ, his beloved Son -- This Righteousness must be imputed or counted
over to us, and applied by Faith to our Hearts, or else we can in no wise be
justified in God's Sight -- And that very Moment a Sinner is enabled to lay
hold on Christ's Righteousness by Faith, he is freely justified from all his
Sins, and shall never enter into Condemnation, notwithstanding he was a
Firebrand of Hell before (...) it was that Abraham was justified before (...)
any good Work -- He was enabled to (...) the Lord Christ -- It was accounted to
him for Righteousness, that is, Christ's Righteousness was made ^ver to him*
and so accou^^ his -- Thi^, this, is Gospel, this is the only (...) of finding
Acceptance with God -- Good We have nothing to do with our Justification in
Sight -- We are justified by Faith alone, as so the Article of our Church --
Agreeable to whi^^ St. Paul says, By Grace ye are (...), (...) Faith; and than
not of yourselves* it is the (...) of God -- Notwithstanding Good Works (...)
their proper Place. They justify our Faith, (...) not our Persons -- They
f^llow it, and evide^^^ our Justification in the Sight of Men -- Henc^ it is
that St. James asks, was not Abraham justified by Works? (alluding no doubt to
the Sto^^ on which we have been discoursing) that is did he not prove he was in
a justified State, because his Faith was pro^^ctive of good Work^* -- This
declarative Justification in the Sight (...) Men, is what is directly to be
understood in the Words of the Text -- Now kn^w I, says Go^ that thou fear
me, since thou have not with (...) Son, thine only Son from me -- Not but tha^
God knew it before; but this is spoken in Condescension to our weak Capacities,
and plain^y sh^ws, that his offering up his Son was accepte^ (...) God, as an
Evidence of the Sincerity (...) ^is Faith, and for this was le^t on Record
(...) future Age^ -- Hence then you may learn, (...) ther^ you are blessed
with, and are (...) Daughters of faithful Abraham -- (...) believe -- You talk
of Free Grace and (...)^ication -- You do well -- The Devils (...) and tremble
-- But has your Faith, which you pretend to, influenced your Hearts, renewed
your Souls, and like Abraham's worked by Love? Are your Affections* like his,
set on Things above? Are you heavenly-minded, and like him confess yourselves
Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth? In short, has your Faith enabled you to
overcome the World, and strengthened you to give up your Isaacs, your Laughter,
your most beloved Lusts, Friends, Pleasures and Profits for God? -- If so, take
the Comfort of it, for justly may you say -- We know assuredly, that we do fear
and love God, or rather are loved of him -- But if you are only talking
Co^^nters, and have only a Faith of the Head, and never felt the Power of it in
your Hearts, however you may bolster yourselves up, and say, We have Abraham
for our Father, or Christ is our Savior, unless you get a Faith of the Heart,
a (...) working (...), you shall never sit with Abraham, Isaac, (...), or Jesus
Christ in the Kingdom of (...)

But I must draw one more Inference, and with that I shall conclude.

Learn, O Saints! from what has been said, to (...) loose to all your worldly
(...), and stand ready prepared to part with every Thing, when God shall
require it at your Hand -- Some of you perhaps may have Friends, which are to
you as your own Souls, and others may have Children, in whose Lives your own
Lives are bound up -- All I believe have their Isaacs -- Their particular
Delights of some Kind or other -- Labor, for Christ's Sake, labor, ye Sons
and Daughters of Abraham, to resign them daily in Affection to God, that when
he shall require you really to sacrifice them, you may not confer with Flesh
and Blood, no more than the blessed Patriarch now before us -- And as for you
that have been in any Measure tried like unto him, let his Example encourage
and comfort you -- Remember Abraham your Father was tried so before you --
Think, Oh think! of the Happiness he now enjoys, and how he is incessantly
thanking God for tempting and trying him when here belov^^ -- Look up often by
the Eye of Faith, and see him sitting with his dearly beloved Isaac in the
World of Spirits -- Remember it will be but a little while, and you shall ^it
with them also, and tell one another what God has done for your Souls -- There
I hope to sit with you, and hear this Story of his offering up his Son from his
own Mouth, and to praise the Lamb that sitt^th upon the Throne, for what he
has done for all our Souls, for ever and ever.

SERMON V.
Readiness Conversion.
Acts ix, 2^. But SAUL increased the more in Strength and confounded the Jews
which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ
IT is an undoubted Truth, however it may seem a Parado^ to natural Men, that
Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus shall (...) Persecution -- And
therefore it is very remarkable, that our blessed Lord, in his glorious Sermon
on the Mount, after he had been pronouncing those blessed, who were poor in
Spirit, meek, (...) in Heart, and such like, immediately adds (and spends no
l^ss than three Verses in this Beatitude) Blessed are they which are persecuted
for Righteousness Sake -- For no one ever was, or ever will be endowed with the
forementioned Graces in any Degree, but he will at the same Time be persecuted
for it (...) like Measure -- The^^ is an irreconcilable ^^^mity between the
Seed of the Woman, and (...) Seed of the Serpent -- And if we are not of (...)
World, but show by our Fruits, that we are (...) the Number of those which
Jesus Christ (...) out of the World, for that very (...) the World will hate us
-- As this is true (...) every particular Christian, so it is true of (...)
Christian Church in general -- For some (...) past we have h^ard but little of
a public Per^^cution. Why? Because little of the Power of Godliness has
prevailed amongst all Denominations whatsoever -- The strong Man armed has had
full Possession of most Profess^rs Heart^* and therefore he has let them rest
in a fal^e Peace -- But we may assure ourselves, when Jesus Christ (...) to
gather in hi^ (...) in my remarkable Manner, and opens an effectual Door for
preaching the everlasting Gospel, Persecution will flame out* and Satan and his
Emissaries will do their utmost (though all in vain) to (...) the Work of God --
Thus it was in the first Ages, thus it is in our Days, and thus it will be,
till Time shall be no more.

Christians, and Christian Churche^ must then expect Enemies -- Our chief
Concern should be to learn how to behave toward them in a Christian Manner --
For, unless we take good (...) to ourselves, we shall imbitter our (...) and
act (...) the Followers of the Lord, (...) was reviled, (...) not again, whe^^.
(...) suffered, threatened (...), and as a Lamb before (...) is (...) so opened
(...) -- But what Motive shall we make use of to bring (...) to this blessed
Lamb-like Temper? Next to the immediate Operations of the Holy Spirit upon our
Hearts, I know of no Consideration more conducive to teach (...) Long suffering
toward out most bitter Persecutors, th^n (...) That, for all as we know to the
contrary, some of those very Persons, who are now persecuting, may be chosen
from all Eternity by God, and hereafter called in Time to edify and build up
the Church of Christ.

The Persecutor Saul mentioned in the Word of the Text (and whose Conversion,
God wi^ling, I propose to treat on in the following Discourse) is a noble
Instance of this Kind.

I say a Persecutor, and that a bloody One (...) For see how he is introduced
in the first Verse of this Chapter -- And Saul yet brea^^ing (...) Threatenings
and Slaughters against the Disciples of our Lord, went (...) the High Priest,
(Ver. (...).) and desired of him Letters to Damascus to the Synagogues, that
(...) any of THIS WAY* whether they were Men or Women, he might (...) them
bound to Jerusalem.

And Saul yet (...) -- This implies (...) he had been a Persecutor before -- To
(...) that, we need only look back to the 7th (...) when we shall find him so
very (...) Stephen's Death, that the Witnesses said (...) their Clothes at a
young Man's (...) whose Name was Saul -- He seems, though young, to be in some
Authority. Perhaps for his Zeal against the Christians, he was preferred in the
Church, and was allowed to sit in the great Council or Sani^^drim -- For we are
told, Chap. 8. Ver. 1. That Saul was consenting unto his Death; and again, at
Ver. 3. he is brought in as excelling all in his Opposition; for thus speaks
the Evangelist -- As for Saul, he made Havoc of the Church, entering into
every House, and haling Men and Women, committed them to Prison -- One would
have imagined, that this should have satisfied, at least abated the Fury of
this young Zealot -- No. Being exceedingly mad against them, as (...) himself
informs Agrippa, and having made Havoc of all in Jerusalem, he now is resolved
to persecute the Disciples of the Lord, even to strange Cities -- And therefore
yet breathing out Threatenings -- Breathing out -- The Words are very
emphatical, and expresive of his bitter Enmity. -- It was as natural to him now
to threaten the Christians, as it was for him to breathe -- He could scarce
speak, but it was some Threatenings against them -- Nay, he not only breathed
out Threatenings, but Slaughters also (for those who threaten, would also
slaughter, if it were in their Power*) And against whom does he breathe (...)
th^se Threatenings? Against the Disciples (...) Lord -- Insatiable therefore as
Hell, find (...) could not confute (...) stop the Christians by Force of
Argument, he is resolved (...) by Force and Arms; and therefore were (...)
High Priest (for there never was a (...) yet, without a High Priest at the
(...) and desired of him Letters, issued out of his spiritual Court, to the
Synagogues or Ecclesi^^tical Courts at Damascus, giving him Authority, that if
he found any of THIS WAY, whether they were Men or Women, he might bring them
bound unto Jerusalem; I suppose to be arraigned and condemned in the
High-Priest's Court there. Observe how he speaks of the Christians -- St. Luke,
who wrote the Acts, calls them Disciples of the LORD, and Saul styles them Men
and Women of THIS WAY -- I doubt not but he represented them as a Company of
upstart Enthusiasts, that had lately gotten into a (...) METHOD or Way of
Living -- That would not be content with the Temple Service, but they must be*
righteous overmuch, and have their private Meetings or Conventicles, and break
Bread, as they called it, from House to House, to the great Disturbance of the
established Clergy, and to the utter Subversion of all Order and Decency -- I
don't hear that the High Priest makes any Objection -- No, he was as willing to
grant Letters, as Saul was to ask them, and wonderfully pleased within himself
to (...) had such an active Zealot to employ (...) the Christians.

Well then, a judicial Process is immediately issued out, with the
High-Priest's (...) it -- And now methinks I see the young (...) ^^nely
equipped, and pleasing (...) Thoughts, how triumphantly he should (...) with
the Men and Women of THIS (...) dragging after him to Jerusalem.

What a Condition may we imagine the poor Disciples at Damascus were in at this
Time* -- No doubt they had heard of Readiness in pr^s^ning and making Havoc of
the Saints at Jerusalem, and we may well suppose were apprised of (...) Design
against them -- I am persuaded this was a growing, because a trying Time with
these dear People -- Oh! how did they wrestle with God in Prayer, beseeching
him either to deliver them from, or give them Grace sufficient to enable them
to bear up under the Fury of their Persecutors? The High Priest no doubt, with
the rest of his Reverend Brethren, flattered themselves, that they should now
put an effectual Stop to this growing Heresy, and waited with Impatience for
Readiness Return.

But He that sitt^th in Heaven laughs them to scorn, the Lord has them in
Derision. And therefore, Ver. 3. As SAUL journeyed, and came even near unto
Damascus, perhaps to the very Gates, (our Lord permitting this to try the Faith
of his Disciples, and more conspicuously to baffle the Designs of his Enemies)
suddenly (at Midday, (...) ^e acquaints Agrippa) (...) shined round about him
a Light from Heaven -- A Light brighter than the Sun -- And he fell (...) the
Earth (and why not into Hell?) And (...) Voice saying unto him SAUL, SAUL,
(...) persecutest thou ME? The Word is ^^^bled, Saul, Saul, like that of our
Lord (...) Martha; Martha, Martha, or the (...) O Earth, Earth, Earth! Perhaps
these Words came like Thunder to his Soul -- That they were spoken audibly we
are assured from Ver. 7 (...) Companions heard the Voice -- Our Lord now
arrests the persecuting Zealot, calls him by Name, Saul, Saul, for the Word
never does us good, till we find it spoken to us in particular -- Why
persecutest thou ME? Put the Emphasis upon the Word Why, what Evil have I done?
Put it upon the Word, persecutest, why persecutest? I suppose Saul thought he
was not persecuting, no, he was only putting the Laws of the Ecclesiastical
Court into Execution. But Jesus, whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire* saw through
the Hypocrisy of his Heart, that notwithstanding his specious Pretenses, all
this proceeded from a persecuting Spirit, and secret Enmity of Heart against
God, and therefore says, Why persecutest thou ME? Put the Emphasis upon the
Word ME, Why persecutest thou ME? Alas! Saul was not persecuting Christ^, was
he? He was only taking Care to prevent Innovations in the Church, and bringing
a Company of Enthusiasts to Justice, who otherwise would overturn the
established Constitution -- But Jesus says, Why persecutest thou ME? For what
is done to Christ's Disciples, he takes (...) done to himself, whether it be
Good, or whether it be Evil -- He (...) touches Christ's Disciples, touches the
Apple of his Eye -- And they that persecute the Followers of our Lord* should
persecute our Lord himself was he again (...) come and tabernacle amongst us.

I do not find that Saul gives any Reason why he did persecute. No, he was
struck dumb -- As every Persecutor will be, when Jesus Christ puts this same
Question to them at the terrible Day of Judgment. But being pricked at the
Heart, no doubt with a Sense not only of thi^, but all his other Offenses
against the great God* he said, Ver. 5. Who art thou Lord? See how soon God can
change the Heart and Voice (...) his most bitter Enemies -- Not many Days (...)
Saul was not only blaspheming Christ him^^^^ but, as much as in him lay,
compelling (...) to blaspheme also -- But now he, who before (...) an Impostor,
is now called Lord -- Who (...) Lord? -- This admirably points out the (...)
how God's Spirit works upon the Hear^ (...) first powerfully convinces of Sin,
and of (...) damnable State, and then puts us upon (...) after Jesus Christ --
Saul being struck (...) the Ground, or rather pricked to the Heart, cries ou^
after Jesus -- Who art thou Lord? A^ many of you that were never so far made
sensible of your damnable State, as to be made feelingly to seek after Jesus
Christ, were never ye^ truly convicted by, much less converted to God. May the
Lord, who struck Saul, effectually now strike all my christless Hearers, and
set then* upon enquiring after Jesus as their ALL in ALL! -- Saul said, Who art
thou Lord? (...) the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecute(...) Never did
any one inquire truly after (...) Christ, but Christ made a saving Discover
(...) himself to his Soul -- It should seem (...) appeared to him in Person,
for (...) wards says, the Lord who appeared (...) May which thou cam^^^, or
that may only imply (...) meeting him in the Way -- It is (...) ^^ch Matter --
It is plain Christ here speaks (...) him, and says, I am Jesus whom thou
perse^^^^ -- It is remarkable, how our Lord takes (...) the Name of Jesus --
For it is a Name (...) when he delights -- I am Jesus, a Savior of (...)
People, both from the Guilt and Power of th^^r Sin^* -- But a Jesus whom thou
persecutest -- This seem^ to be spoken to convince Saul more and more of his
Sin, and I doubt (...) but every Word was sharper than a two edged Sword, and
came like so many Daggers to his Heart -- Oh, how did these Words affect him
(...) a Jesus! a Savior! and yet I am persecuting him! This strikes him with
Horror -- But then the Word Jesus, though ^e was a Persecutor, might give him
some Hope -- However, our dear Lord, to convince Saul that he was to be saved
by Grace, and that (...) was not afraid of his Power and Enmity, tells him --
"It is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks" -- As much as to say, though he
was persecuting, yet he could not overthrow the Church of Christ -- For he
would sit as King upon his holy Hill of Zion -- The Malice of Men or Devils
should never be able to prevail against him.

And he, Ver. 6. Trembling and astonished* said, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? Those who think Saul had before a Discovery (...) Jesus made to his
Heart, think that this Question is the Result of his Faith, and that he now
desires to know, what he shall do out of Gratitude for what the Lord had done
for his Soul -- In th^^ this Sense it may be understood -- See my Sermon on,
What think ye of Christ?
And I have made use of it as an Instance to prove, that Faith will work by
Love -- But perhaps it may be more agreeable to the Context, if we suppose,
that Saul had only some distant Discovery of Christ made to him, and not a full
Assurance of Faith -- For we are told, he trembling and astonished, trembling
at the Thoughts of his persecuting a Jesus, and astonished at his own Vileness,
and the infinite Condescension of this Jesus, cries out, Lord, what will thou
have me do? -- For Persons under Soul-Trouble, and ^ore Conviction, would be
glad to do any Thing, (...) comply on any Terms, to get Peace with God --
Arise, says our Lord, and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou
shall do.

And here then will we leave Saul awhile, and see what is become of his
Companions -- But what shall we say? God is a sovereign Agent -- His sacred
Spirit blows when and where it lists -- He will have Mercy upon whom he
will have Mercy. Saul is taken, but, as far as we know to the contrary, his
Fellow-Travellers are le^t to perish in their Sins -- For we are told, Ver. 7.
That the Men which journyed with him stood indeed speechless, and hearing a
confused Voice -- I say a confused Voice, for so the Word signifies, and must
be so interpreted, in order to recon^^le it with Chap. xxii. Ver. 9. where
Saul, giving an Account of these Men, tells Agrippa -- They (...) not the Voice
of him that (...) to me -- They heard a Voice, a confused No^^e, but not the
(...) Voice of him that spoke to Saul, and therefore remained unconverted --
For what (...) all Ordinances, all even the most (...) Dispensations of
Providence, without (...) to the Soul in them* -- (...) it is now (...) the
Word preached -- Many, like (...) Companions, are sometimes so struck with the
Outgoings of God appearing in the Sanctuary, that they even stand speechless.
-- They hear the Preacher's Voice, but not the Voice of the Son of God, who
perhaps at the same Time is speaking effectually to many other Hear^ -- This I
have known often -- And what shall we say to these Things! Oh the Depth of the
Sovereignty of God! Its past finding out -- Lord, I desire to adore what I
cannot (...) -- (...) so, Father, for so it seems good (...) Sight.

But to return to Saul -- The LORD, Ver. 6. (...) him (...) and go into the
City -- And we are (...) Ver. 8. that SAUL (...) from the Earth; and when his
(...), ^he was so overpowered with the (...) of the Light that (...) upon them
(...) no Man, but they led him by the (...) him into Damascus. That very (...)
which was to be the Place of his executing or imprisoning the Disciples of the
Lord. And (...) ( Ver. 9.) three Days without Sight, and neither (...) eat or
drink. -- But who can tell what Horrors of Conscience, what Convulsions of
Soul, what (...) and pungent Convictions of Sin he under went during these
three long Days -- It was this took away his Appetite (For who can eat or drink
when under a Sense of the Wrath of God for Sin?) and being to be greatly
employed hereafter, (...) must be greatly humbled now -- And therefore the Lord
leaves him three Days groaning under the Spirit of Bondage, and buffeted no
doubt with the fiery Darts of the Devil, that being tempted like unto his
Brethren, he might be able hereafter to succor those that were tempted. -- Had
Saul applied to any of the blind Guides of the Jewish Church under these
Circumstances, they would have said he was mad or going besides himself, as
many carnal Teachers and blind Pharisees now deal with, and so more and more
distress poor Souls laboring under awakening Convictions of their damnable
State -- But God often at our first Awakenings visits us with sore Trials,
especially those who are like Soul to shine in the Church, and to be used as
Instruments in bringing many Sons to Glory -- Those who are to be highly
exalted, must first be deeply humbled. -- And this I speak for the Comfort of
such who may be now groaning under the Spirit of Bondage, and perhaps like
Saul, can neither eat nor drink, for I have generally observed, that those who
have had the deepest Convictions, have afterward been ^avoured with the most
precious Communications* and enjoyed (...) of the divine Pres^nce in their
Souls -- This was afterward remarkably exemplified in Saul, who was now three
Days without Sight, and neither did eat nor drink.

But will the Lord leave his poor Servant in this Distress? No, his Jesus (though
Saul persecuted him) promised (and he will perform) that it should be told him
what he must do -- And there was (Ver. 10.) a certain Disciple at Damascus,
named Ananias, and unto him said the Lord in a Vision, Ananias -- And he said,
Behold I am here, Lord. -- Oh what a holy Familiarity is there between Jesus
Christ and regenerate Souls -- Ananias had been used to such Love-Visits, and
therefore knew the Voice of his Beloved -- The Lord says Ananias. Ananias says,
Behold I am here, Lord -- Thus it is that Christ now, as well as formerly,
often talks with his Children at sundry Times and after diverse Manners, as a
Man talks with his Friend -- But what has the Lord to say to Ananias?

Ver. 11. And the Lord said unto him, Arise and go into the Street which is
called STRAIGHT, and inquire in the House of Judas, for one called Saul of
Tar^is ((...) here for your Comfort, O Children of the most high God, what
Notice Jesus Christ takes of the Street and the House where his own dear
Servants lodge) for Behold, he prays -- But why is this ushered in with the
Word Behold! What, was it such a Wonder, to hear that Saul was praying! Why
Saul was a Phari^^e, and therefore, no doubt, fasted and made long Prayers --
And since we are told that he profited above many of his Equals, I doubt not
but he was taken notice of for his Gift in Prayer. And yet it seemed before
these three Days Saul never prayed in his Life -- And why? Because, before
these three Days, he never felt himself a condemned Creature -- He was alive in
his own Opinion, because without a Knowledge of the spiritual Meaning of the
Law, he felt not a want of, and therefore before now, cried not after a Jesus,
and consequently, though he might have said or made a Prayer (as many Pharisees
do now adays) he never prayed a Prayer. -- But now, Behold! he prays indeed
-- And this was urged as one Reason why he was converted. -- None of God's
Children, as one observes, come into the World still-born -- Prayer is the very
Breath of the new Creature, and therefore if we are Prayerless we are
Christless -- If we never had the Spirit of Supplication, it is a sad Sign that
we never had the Spirit of Grace in our Souls; and you may be assured you never
did pray, unless you have felt your selves damnable Sinners, and the Want of
Jesus to be your Savior. -- May the Lord, whom I serve in the Gospel of his
dear Son, prick you all to the Heart, and may it be said of you all as it was
of Saul, Behold, they pray!

The Lord goes on to encourage Ananias to go to Saul -- For, says he Ver. 12.
he has seen in a Vision a Man named Ananias, coming in, and putting his Hand
on him, that he might have his Sight. -- So that though Christ converted Saul
immediately by himself, yet he will carry on the Work thus begun by a Minister
-- Happy they who under Soul-Troubles have such experienced Guides, and as well
acquainted with Jesus Christ as Ananias was -- You that have such, Oh! make
much of and be thankful for them -- And you that have them not, trust in God --
He will carry on his own Work without them.

Doubtless, Ananias was a good Man; but shall I commend him for his Answer to
our Lord? I commend him not -- For says he, Ver. 13. Lord, I have heard by many
of this Man, how much Evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem: And here,
Ver. 14. he has Authority from the Chief Priests to bind all that call upon
thy Name. -- I fear this Answer proceeded from some Relics of
Self-Righteousness, as well as Infidelity, that lay undiscovered in the Heart
of Ananias. -- Arise, says our Lord, and go into the Street which is called
Straight, and inquire in the House of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus; for
behold, be prays! -- One would think this was sufficient to satisfy him --
But says Ananias, Lord, I have heard by many of this Man -- (he seems to speak
of him with much Contempt; for even good Men are apt to think too
contemptuously of those who are yet in their Sins) how much Evil he has done
to thy Saints in Jerusalem: And here he has Authority from the Chief Pries^s*
to bind all that call upon thy Name -- And what then Ananias? Is any Thing too
hard for the Lord* Who made thee to differ? May not he who converted thee,
convert him also? Surely Ananias here forgets himself, or perhaps fears, left
this Man who had Authority from the Chief Priests, to bind all that call upon
Christ's Name, should bind him also, if he went unto him -- But the Lord
silences all Objections with a Go thy Way. Ver. 15. For he is a chosen Vessel
unto me, to ^ear my Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of
Israel -- For I will show him (Ver. 16) how great Things he must suffer for my
Name's Sake -- Here God stops his Mouth immediately, by asserting his
Sovereignty, and preaching to him the Doctrine of Election -- And the frequent
Conversion of notorious Sinners to God, to me is one great Proof, amongst a
thousand others, of that precious, but too much exploded, and ^adly
misrepresented Doctrine of God's electing Love -- From whence is it that such
are taken, whilst thousands not near so vile die senseless and stupid? All the
Answer that can be given is, They are chosen Vessels -- Go thy Way, says God,
for he is a chosen Vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and the Children of Israel -- For I will show him how great Things he
must suffer for my Name's Sake -- Observe, what a close Connection there is
between Doing and Suffering for Christ -- If any of my Brethren in the Ministry
are present, let them hear what Preferment we must expect, if we are called out
to work remarkably for God -- Not great Prebendaries or Bishoprics, but great
Sufferings for our Lord's Name Sake -- These are the Fruits of our Labor; and
he that will not contentedly suffer great Things for preaching Christ, is not
worthy of him -- Suffering will be found to be the best Preferment, when we are
called to give an Account of our Ministry at the Great Day.

I do not hear Ananias quarrelling with God concerning the Doctrine of
Election. No: (Oh that all good Men would in this learn of him!) He went his
Way, (Ver. 17.) and entered into the House; and put his Hands on him, and said,
Brother Saul -- Just now 'twas this Man* Now it is Brother Saul -- For it is no
Matter what a Man has been, if he be now a Christian -- The same should be our
Brother, our Sister and Mother. God blots out every Convert's Trangressions, as
with a thick Cloud, and so should we -- The more vile a Man has been, the more
should we love him when believing on Christ, because Christ will be more
glorified on his Behalf -- I doubt not but Ananias was wonderfully delighted to
hear that so remarkable (...) Persecutor was brought home to God -- I am
persuaded he felt his Soul immediately united to him by Love, and therefore
addresses him not with, Thou Persecutor, Thou Murderer, that came to Butcher
me and my Friends, but Brother Saul -- It Is remarkable that the primitive
Christians much used the Word Brother and Brethren -- I know it is a Term now
much in Reproach, but those who despise it, I believe would be glad to be of
our Brotherhood, when they see us sitting at the Right Hand of the Majesty on
High^^^* Brother Saul -- The Lord (even Jesus that appeared unto thee in the
Way as thou came) has sent me, that thou might receive thy Sight, and be
filled with the Holy Ghost -- At this Time me may suppose, he laid his Hands
upon him. See the Consequences.

Ver. 18. Immediately there sell from his (...) as it had been Scales, and he
received Sight forth with, not only bodily but spiritual Sight -- He immerged
as it were into a new World -- He saw and felt too, Things unutterable -- He
felt a Union of his Soul with God -- He received the Spirit of Adoption -- He
could now, with a full Assurance of Faith, cry Abba, Father -- Now was he
filled with the Holy Ghost -- Now was he filled with the Love of God shed
abroa^ in his Heart -- Now were the Days of his Mourning ended -- Now was
Christ formed in his Soul -- Now he could give Men and Devils the Challenge,
knowing that Christ had justified him* -- Now he saw the Excellencies of
Christ* and esteemed him the fairest among ten Thousand. You only know how to
sympathize with the Apostle in his Joy, who, after a long Night of Bondage,
have been set free by the Spirit, and have received Joy in the Holy Ghost --
May all that are now mourning, as Saul was, be comforted (...) like Manner!

The Scales then are now removed from the Eyes of Readiness Mind, Ananias has done
that for him under God, he must now do another Office, viz. baptize him, and so
receive him into the visible Church of Christ -- A good Proof (...) of the
Necessity of Baptism where it may be had -- For I find here, as well as
elsewhere, that Baptism is administered even to those who had received the Holy
Ghost. -- Saul was convinced of this, and therefore ar^^e and was baptized --
And now it is Time for him to recruit the outward Man, which by three Days
Abstinence and spiritual Conflicts, had been much impaired -- We are therefore
told, ( Ver. 19.) when he had received Meat he was strengthened.

But Oh, with what Comfort did the Apostle (...) eat his Food* -- I am sure it
was with Singlenes^* I am persuaded also with Gladness of Heart -- And why? He
kn^w that he was reconciled to God -- And for my own Part, did I not know how
blind and flinty our Hearts are by Nature, I should wonder how any one could
eat even his common Food with any Satisfaction, who has not some well-grounded
Hope of (...) being reconciled to God -- Our Lord intimates thus much to (...)
-- For in his glorious Prayer, after he has taught us to pray for our daily
Bread, immediately adds that Petition, Forgive (...) our Trespasses -- As though
our daily Bread would do us no Service, unless we were sensible of having the
Forgiveness of our Sins.

To proceed: Saul has now received Meat, and is strengthened. And whither will
he go now? To see the Brethren -- Then was Saul certain Days with the Disciples
that were at Damascus -- For i^ we know, and love Christ* (...) shall also
love, and desire to ^e acquainted with the Brethren of Christ -- We may
generally know a Man by his Company. And though all are not Saints that associate
with Saints (for ^^ares will be always springing up amongst the Wheat till the
Time of Harvest (...) we (...) keep Company, but are shy and ashamed of the
despised Children of God, it is a certain (...) we have not yet experimentally
learnt Jesus, or received him into our Hearts -- My dear Friend -- Be not
deceived -- If we are Friends to the Bridegroom, we shall be Friends to the
Children of the Bridegroom -- Soul, as soon as he (...) filled with the Holy
Ghost, was certain Day with the Disciples that were at Damascus.

But who can tell what Joy these Disciples felt when Saul came amongst them! I
suppose holy Ananias introduced him -- Methinks I see the once presecuting
Zealot, when they came to salute him with a holy Kiss, throwing himself upon
each of their Necks, weep^^g over them with Floods of Tears, and saying, O my
Brother, O my Sister, Can you forgive me* Can you give such a Wretch as I the
Right Hand of Fellowship, who intended to drag you behind me bound unto
Jerusalem (...) Th^s I say we may suppose Saul addressed himself to his n^w
Fellow-Disciples, and I doubt not but they were as ready to forgive and forget
as Ananias was, and saluted him with the (...) learin^* Title of Brother Saul
-- Lovely was this Meeting, so lovely, that it seemed Saul continued certain
Days with them, to communicate Experiences, and to learn the Way of God more
per^ectly, to pray for a Blessing on his (...) Ministry, and to praise Christ
Jesus for what he had done for their Souls -- Saul perhaps had ^at certain
Years at the Feet of Gam^li^l, but undoubtedly learnt more there certain Days,
than (...) had learnt before in all his Life -- It pleases (...) to think how
th^^ great Scholar is transformed (...) the renewing of his Mind, what a mighty
Change was here* -- That so great a Man as Saul was, both as to his Station in
Life, and internal Qualifications, and such a bitter Enemy (...) the
Christians; for him I say, to go and be (...) Days with the People of THIS mad
WAY, and to sit quietly, and be taught of unle^^ned and ^^literate Men, as many
of these Disciples we may be sure were* What a substantial Proof was this of
the Reality of his Conversion?

What a Hurry and Confusion may we suppos^ the Chief Priests were in! Now I
warrant they were ready to cry out, What is ^e also deceived? As for the common
People, who knew not the Law, and are accursed, for them to be carried away, is
no such Wonder -- But for a Man bred up at the F^et of (...), for such a
Scholar, such an Enemy to their Cause as Saul, for him to be led away with a
Company f^^^ly, deceived Men and Women, surely it is impossible* We cannot
believe it*But Saul soon convinces them of the Rea^^^y of his becoming a Fool
for Christ's Sake -- For str^ightway ( Ver. 20.) instead of going to deliver
the Letters from the High Priests, as they expected, in order to bring the
Disciples that were at Damascus bound to Jerusalem, He preached Christ in the
Synagogues, that he is the Son of God -- This was another Proof of his being
converted -- He not only conversed with Christians in private, but he preached
Christ publicly in the Synagogues Especially he insisted on the Divinity of
our Lord, proving, notwithstanding his Humiliation, that he was really the Son
of God.

But why did Saul preach Christ thus? Because he had felt the Power of Christ
upon his own Soul -- And here is the Reason why Christ is so seldom preached,
and his Divinity so slightly insisted on in our Synagogues, it is because the
Generality of those that pretend to preach him, never felt a saving Work of
Conversion upon their own Souls -- How can they preach, unless they are first
taught of, and then sent by God? Saul did not preach Christ before he knew him,
no more should any one else. -- An unconverted Minister, though he could speak
with the Tongues of Men and Angels, will be but as a sounding Brass and
tinkling Cymbal to those whose Senses are exercised to discern spiritual Things
-- Ministers that are unconverted, may talk and declaim of Christ, and prove
from Books that he is the Son of God, but they cannot preach with the
Demonstration of the Spirit and with Power, unless they preach from Experience,
and have had a Proof of his Divinity, by a Work of Grace wrought upon their own
Souls -- God forgive those, who lay Hands on an unconverted Man, knowing that
he is such -- I would not do it for a thousand Worlds -- Lord Jesus keep thy
own faithful Servants pure, and let them not be then Partakers of other Men's
Sins.

Such an Instance as Readiness Conversion was, we may be assured must make a great
deal of Noise, and therefore no Wonder we are told, Ver. 21. But all that heard
him were amazed, and said, Is not this ^e that destroyed them which called on
his Name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that Intent, that he might bring
them bound to the Chief Priests?

And thus it will be with all that appear publicly for Jesus Christ; and it is
as impossible for a true Christian to be hid, as a City built upon a Hill --
Brethren, if you are faithful to, you must be reproached, and have Remarks made
on you for Christ; especially if you have been remarkably wicked before your
Conversion. What, (will your Friends say) is not this he, or she, who a little
while ago would run to as great Excess of Riot and Vanity as the worst of us
all? What has turned your Brain? Or if you have been close, false, formal
Hypocrites as Saul was, they will wonder that you should be so deceived, as to
think you were not in a safe State before -- As, no doubt, Numbers were
surprised to hear Saul, who was touching the Law blameless, affirm that he wa^
in a damnable Condition, (as in all Probability he did) a few Days ago.

Brethren, you must expect to meet with many such Difficulties as these -- the
Scourge of the Tongue is generally the first Cross we are called to bear for
the Sake of Christ -- Let not therefore this move you -- It did not intimidate,
no^, it rather encouraged Saul.

But SAUL, says the Text, increased the more in Strength, and confounded the
Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ. -- Opposition
never yet did, nor ever will hurt a sincere Convert -- Nothing like Opposition
to make the Man of God perfect -- None but a Hireling, who cares not for the
Sheep, will be affrighted at the Approach or Barking of Wolves -- Christ's
Ministers are as bold as Lions -- It is not for such Men as they to flee.

And therefore (that I may draw toward a Conclusion) let the Ministers and
Disciples of Christ, learn from Saul, not to fear Men or their Revilings, but,
like him, increase in Strength, the more wicked Men endeavor to weaken their
Hands. -- We cannot be Christians without being opposed -- No -- Disciples in
general must suffer -- Ministers in particular must suffer great Things -- But
let not this move any of us from our Stedfastness in the Gospel -- He that
stood by and strengthened Saul, will also stand by and strengthen us. He is a
God, mighty to save all that put their Trust in him -- If we look up with an
Eye of Faith, we, as well as the first Martyr St. Stephen, may see Jesus
standing at the right Hand of God, ready to assist and protect us -- Though the
Lord's Seat is in Heaven, yet he has Respect to his Saints in an especial
Manner when suffering here on Earth -- Then the Spirit of Christ and of Glory
rests upon, their Souls. And, if I may speak my own Experience, I never enjoy
more rich Communications from God, than when despised and rejected of Men for
the Sake of Jesus Christ. However little they may design it, my Enemies are my
greatest Friends -- What I most fear is a Calm; but the Enmity which is in the
Hearts of natural Men against Christ, will not suffer them to be quiet long --
No. As I hope the Work of God will increase, so the Rage of Men and Devils will
increase also -- Let us put on therefore the whole Armor of God -- Oh! let us
not fear the Face of Men -- Let us fear him only, who can destroy both Body and
Soul in Hell -- I say unto you, let us fear him alone -- You see how soon God
can stop the Fury of his Enemies -- You have just now heard of a proud,
powerful Zealot stopped in his full Career struck down to the Earth with a Light
from Heaven, converted by the Almighty Power of efficacious Grace, and
thereupon zealously promoting, nay resolutely suffering for the Faith which
once with Threatenings and Slaughters he endeavored to destroy -- Let this
teach us to pity and pray for our Lord's most inveterate Enemies -- Who knows,
but in Answer thereunto, our Lord may give them Repentance unto Life? Most
think, that Christ had Respect to Stephen's Prayer, when he converted Saul --
Perhaps for this Reason God suffers his Adversaries to go on, that his Goodness
and Power may shine more bright in their Conversion -- But let no^ the
Persecutors of Christ take Encouragement from this to continue in their
Opposition -- Remember, though Saul was converted, yet the High Priest and (...)
Companions were left dead in Trespasses and Sins. And if this should be your
Case, you will of all Men be most miserable -- For Persecutors have the lowest
Place in Hell. (...) Saul was struck to the Earth by a Light from Heaven, how
will you be able to stand before Jesus Christ, when he comes in terrible
Majesty to take Vengeance on all those who have persecuted his Gospel? -- Then
the Question, Why persecutest thou me? will cut you through and through -- The
secret Enmity of your Heart shall then be detected before Men and Angels, and
you shall be doomed to dwell in the Blackness of Darkness for evermore -- Kiss
the Son therefore, lest he be angry -- For even you may yet find Mercy, if you
believe on the Son of God -- Though you persecute him, yet he will be your Jesus
-- I cannot despair of any of you, when I find a Saul among the Disciples at
Damascus -- What though your Sins are as Scarlet, the Blood of Christ shall wash
them as white as Snow -- Having much to be forgiven, despair not, only
beelieve, and like Saul, of whom I have now been speaking, love much -- He
counted himself the chiefest Sinner of all, and therefore labored more
abundantly than all. Who is there among you fearing the Lord? Whose Hearts has
the Lord now opened to hearken to the Voice of his poor unworthy Servant? --
Surely the Lord will not let me preach in vain -- Who is the happy Soul that is
this Day to be washed in the Blood of the Lamb? Will no poor Sinner take
Encouragement from Saul to come to Jesus Christ? You are all thronging ^^^nd
about, but which of you will touch the Lord Jesus* What a Comfort will it be to
Saul, and and to your own Souls, when you meet him in Heaven, to tell him, that
hea^ing of his, was a Means, under God, of your Conversion. Doubtless, it was
written for the Encouragement of all poor returning Sinners -- He himself tells
us so, for in me, says he, God showed all Long-suffering, that I might be an
Example (...) them that should hereafter believe -- Was Saul here himself he
would tell you so -- Indeed he would; but being dead, by this Account of his
Conversion, he yet speaks -- Oh, that God may speak by it to your Hearts! Oh,
that the Arrows of God might this Day stick fast in your Souls, and you were
made to cry out -- Who art thou Lord? Are there any such among you? Methinks I
feel something of what this Saul fel^ when he said, (...) vail in Birth again
for you, till Christ be formed again in your Hearts -- O come, come away to
Jesus, on whom Saul believed, and then I care not if the High Priests issue out
never so many Writs of Indictments, or injuriously drag me to a Prison. -- The
Thoughts of being instrumental in saving you, will make me sing Praises even at
Midnight -- And I know you will be my Joy and Crown of rejoicing, when I am
delivered from this earthly Prison, and meet you in the Kingdom of God
hereafter.

Now to God, etc.

SERMON VI.
CHRIST, the Believer's Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.
1 COR. i. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption
OF all the Verses in the Book of God, this which I have now read to you is, I
believe, one of the most comprehensive -- What glad Tidings does it bring to
Believers! What precious Privileges are they herein invested with! How are they
her^ led to the Fountain of them all, I mean the Love, the everlasting Love of
God the Father -- Of whom are you in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Without referring you at present to the (...) text, I shall from these Words,

(...) Point out to you the Fountain from (...) all th^se Blessing (...), which
the (...) partake of in Jesus Christ -- Who of (...) is made unto to --

Secondly, I shall consider what those Blessings (...) viz. Wisdom,
Righteousness, ^anctification, and Redemption.

And, First, I would point out to you, the Fountain from which all those
Blessings flow, which the Elect of God partake of in Jesus -- Who of God is
made unto us, i. e. God the Father, for ^e it is that is spoken of here -- Not
as though Jesus Christ was not God as well as he -- But God the Father is the
Fountain of the Deity, and if we consider Jesus Christ acting as Mediator, God
(...) Father is greater than He -- There was an ^ternal Contract between the
Father and the Son -- I have ma^e, says God, a Covenant with (...) Chosen, and
I have sworn unto David my Ser^^nt, which David was a Type of Christ, with whom
the Father made a Covenant, that if (...) would obey and suffer, and make
himself a Sacrifi^^ for Sin, he should see his Seed, he should (...) his Day^,
and the Pleasure of the Lord should (...) in his Hands -- This Compact our Lord
Jesus to in that glorious Prayer recorded in the 17th Chapter of St. John; and
therefore ^he prays for, or rather demands with a full (...) that were given to
him by the Father -- (...) he, I will that they also whom th^^ (...) me, ^e
with me where I am -- For (...) Reason the Apostle breaks out into prais^^^
(...) even the Father of our Lord Jesus (...) F^r he loved (...) with an
everlasting I (...) expresses it, (...) the (...) of the World -- And
therefore, to show (...) to what (...) were beholden for their (...) our Lord,
in the 25th of St. Matthew, (...) sent (...), Come ye blessed (...) the King
(...) prepared (...) from the (...) of the (...) -- And (...) Reply (...)
M^ther of Ze^edee's Children, (...) says, (...) is not mine to give, but it
shall be (...) them, for whom it is prepared of the Father (...) The Apostle
therefore, when here speaking (...) the Christian^ Privileges, le^t they should
sa^^^fice to their own Drag, or t^ink their Salva^^^^ w^^ owing to their own
Faithfulness, or I^provement of their own Free Will, reminds (...) to look back
on the everlasting Love of God the Father -- Who of God is made unto us, etc.

Would to God this Point of Doctrine (...) more and People were more (...) of
Redemption between the Father (...) the Son, we should then not have so much
disputing against the Doctrine of Election, or hea^ (...) condemned ^even by
good Men) as a Doctrine of Devils -- For my own Part, I cannon see how true
Humbleness of Mind can be attained without a Knowledge of it -- And tho^ I will
not say, that every one who denies Election is a ^ad Man, yet I will say, with
(...) Sweet Singer, Mr. Trail, it is a very bad (...) Such a one, whoever he
be, I think (...) know (...) -- For if we deny Electio^^ (...) must say* what
we will) partly at least, (...) ourselves for suffering Christ to redeem and
save us -- But our Redemption is so ordered, that no Flesh should glory in the
Divine Presence -- And hence it is that the Pride of Man opposes this Doctrine,
because according to this Doctrine, and no other, he that glories, must glory
only in the Lord -- But what shall I say? Election is a Mystery that shines
with such resplendent Brightness, that, to make use of the Words of one, who
has drank deeply of Electing Love, it dazzles the weak Eyes even of some of
God's dear Children -- However, though they know it not, all the Blessings they
receive, all the Privileges they do or will enjoy, through Jesus Christ* flow
from the everlasting Love of God the Father -- But of him are you in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption.

What these Blessings are, which are hope through Christ made over to the
Elect, I come in the next Place to consider.

And, First, Christ is made to them Wisdom* But wherein does true Wisdom
consist? (...) Was I to ask some of you, perhaps you would say, in indulging
the Lust of the Flesh, and (...) to your Souls, Eat, Drink, and be me^^y -- But
^his i^ only the Wisdom of Brutes -- They have as good a Gu^t and Relish for
(...) P^easures* the great^^t Epicure on the (...) -- Others* (...) tell me
true Wisdom consi^^ed in adding (...) House, and Field to Field, and (...) and
(...) their own Names -- But this (...) Wisdom -- For Riches often take
themselves Wings, and fly away, like an Eagle toward Heaven -- Even Wisdom
itself assures us, that a Man's Life does not consist in the Abundance of the
Things which he possesses -- Vanity, Vanity, all these Things are Vanity -- For
if Riches leave not the Owner, the Owners must soon leave them -- For rich Men
must also die, and leave their Riches for others. Their Riches cannot procure
them a Redemption from the Grave, whither we are all hastening apace -- But
perhaps you despise Riches and Pleasure, and therefore place Wisdom in the
Knowledge of Books -- But it is possible for you to tell the Numbers of the
Stars, and call them all by their Names, and yet ^e mere Fools -- Learned Men
are not always wise -- Nay, our common Learning, so much cried up, (...) Men
only so many accomplished Fools -- To keep you therefore no longer in Suspense,
and withal to humble you, I will send you to an Heathen to School, to learn
what true Wisdom is -- "Know thyself," was a Saying of one of the wise Men of
Greece -- This is certainly true Wisdom, and this is that Wisdom spoken of in
the Text, and which Jesus Christ is made to all Elect Sinners -- They are made
to know themselves; so as not to think more highly of themselves than they
ought to think -- Before they were Darkness, now they are Light in the Lord,
and in that Light they see their own Darkness -- They now bewail that (...) by
Nature, dead in (...) Sons and Heirs of Hell, (...) Wrath -- They now see that
all (...) (...) are but as filthy Rags, that there is no Health in their Souls,
that they are poor and miserable, blind and naked, and that there is no Name
given under Heaven, whereby they can (...) save^, but that of Jesus Christ --
They see the Necessity of closing with a Savior, and the Wisdom of God in
appointing him to be a Savior -- They are also made willing to accept of
Salvation upon our Lord's own Terms, and to receive him as their All in All --
Thus Christ is made to them Wisdom.

Secondly, Righteousness -- Who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness
-- i. e. Christ (...) whole personal Righteousness is made over to* and
accounted theirs -- Being enabled to lay hold on Christ by Faith, God the
Father blots out their Transgressions, as with a thick Cloud, their Sins, their
Iniquities, he remembers no more -- They are made the Righteousness of God in
Christ Jesus, who is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes -- In one Sense, now God ^ees no Sin in them -- The whole Covenant of
Works is fulfilled (...) them -- They are actually justified, acquir^^^ and
looked upon (...) Righteous in the Sight of God -- They are perfectly accepted
in the Beloved -- They are complete in him -- The flaming Sword of God's Wrath,
which before moved every Way, is now removed, and fr^e* Access given to the
Tree of Life -- They are enabled now to reach out the Arm of Faith, and pluck
and live for evermore -- Hence it is that the Apostle, under a Sense of this*
blessed Privilege, breaks out into this triumphant ^^^guage -- It is Christ
that justified, who (...) condemns me? Does Sin condemn? Christ^ Righteousness
delivers Believers from the (...) of it -- Christ is their Jesus, their
Savior. (...) is become a Pr^^pitiation for their Sins -- (...) therefore
shall lay any thing to the Charge (...) God's Elect? Does the Law condemn? --
By having Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, they are dead to the Law, as
a Covenant (...) Works. Christ has fulfilled it for them, and in their Stead --
Does Death threaten them? They need not ^ear -- The Sting of Death is Sin, the
Strength of Sin is the Law; but God (...) given them Victory, by imputing to
them the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus.

And what a Privilege is here! Well might the Angels at the Birth of Christ say
to the humble Shepherds, "Behold I bring you glad (...) Trdings of great Joy."
For unto you that believe in Christ, a Savior is born. And well may they
rejoice at the Conversion of poor Sinners (...) the Lord is their Righteousness
-- (...) Peace with God, through Faith in (...) Blood, and shall never enter
into Condemnation -- Oh, Believer^^ (for this Discourse (...) in a special
Manner for you) Li^t (...) your Heads -- Rejoice in the Lord always, (...) I
say rejoice -- Christ is made to you of (...) ^ighteousness* What then should
you (...) are made the Righteousness of God (...) may be called The Lord our
Righteousness -- (...) what then should you be (...)? What shall separate you
henceforward from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? No, I am persuaded
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things
present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate you from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, who of God is made unto you Righteousness --

This is a glorious Privilege -- But this is only the Beginning of the
Happiness of Believers -- Christ is not only made to them Righteousness but
Sanctification. -- By Sanctification, I do (...) mean a bare hypocritical
Attendance on outwar^^ Ordinances (though rightly-inform'd Christians will think
it their Duty and Privilege, constantly (...) attend on all outward
Ordinances,) Nor do* mean by Sanctification, a bare outward Reformation, and a
few transient Convictions, or a little legal Sorrow. -- For all this an
unsanctif^^^ Man may have -- But by Sanctification, I (...) a total Renovation
of the whole Man. -- By (...) Righteousness of Christ, Believers become (...)
gally, by Sanctification, they are made (...) alive -- By one they are entitled
to (...) made meet for Glory. -- They (...) therefore throughout, in Spirit,
(...)

Their Understandings, which (...) become Light in the Lords (...) contrary to,
now become (...) of God -- Their Affections are (...) Things above -- Their
Memory (...) with divine Things -- Their natural Consciences are now
enlightened -- Their Members, which were before Instruments of Uncleanness, of
Iniquity, unto Iniquity, are now Instruments of Righteousness and true
Holiness. -- In short, they are new Creatures -- Old Things are passed away,
all Things are become new in their Hearts -- Sin has now no longer Dominion
over them. -- They are freed from the Power, though not the In-dwelling and Being
of it -- They are holy both in Heart and Life, even in all Manner of
Conversation -- They are made Partakers of a Divine Nature -- And from Jesus
Christ they receive Grace for Grace; and every Grace that is in Christ, is
copied and transcribed into their Souls -- They are transformed into his
Likeness -- He is formed within them -- They dwell in him, and he in them They
are led by, and bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit -- They know that Christ
is their Emanuel, God with and in them -- They are living Temples of the Holy
Ghost -- And ^^erefore being a holy Habitation unto the Lord, the whole Trinity
dwells and walks in them. Even here, they sit together with Christ in heavenly
Places, and are vitally united to him their H^^d, by a living Faith -- Their
Redeemer, their Maker is their Husband -- They are Flesh of his (...) of his
Bone -- They talk, they walk (...) him, as a Man talks and walks with (...)
Friend. -- In short, they are one with Christ (...) as Jesus Christ and the
Father are (...)

Thus is Christ made to Believers Sanctifica^^^^, And Oh, what a Privilege is
this (...) To be changed from Beasts into Saints, from a devilish (...) a
divine Nature -- To be thus translated from (...) Kingdom of Satan, into the
Kingdom of (...) dear Son! -- To put off the old Man which is corrupt, and thus
to put on the New Man, which is created after God in Righteousness and true
Holiness -- Oh, what an unspeakable Blessing is this! I almost stand amazed at
the Contemplation of it -- Well might the Apostle exhort Believers to rejoice
in the Lord. Indeed they have Reason always to rejoice, yea, to rejoice in
their Beds -- For the Kingdom of God is in them. They are changed from Glory to
Glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord -- Well may this be a Mystery to the
natural, for it is a Mystery even to the spiritual Man himself -- A Mystery
which he cannot fathom. -- Does it not often dazzle your Eyes, O ye Children of
God, to look at your own Brightness, when the Candle of the Lord shines out,
and your Redeemer lifts up the Light of his blessed Countenance upon your
Souls? -- Are not you astonished, when you feel the Love of God shed abroad in
your Hearts abundantly by the Holy Ghost and God holds out the Golden Scepter
of his Mercy, and bids you ask what you will, and (...) shall be given you? --
Does not that Peace (...) God, which keeps and rules (...) Hearts, surpas^ the
utmost Limits of your understandings? (...) And is not the Joy you feel
unspeakable? Is (...) not full of Glory? I am persuaded it is, and (...) your
secret Communion, when the Lord (...) in upon your Souls, you are as it were
swallow up in, or* to use the Apostle's Phrase, filled with all the Fullness of
God -- Are not you ready to cry out with Solomon, And will the Lord (...) thus
with Men! How is it that we should (...) thy Sons and Daughters, O Lord
Almighty!

If you are Children of God, and know what it is to have Fellowship with the
Father and the Son -- If you walk by Faith, and not by Sight -- I am assured
this is frequently the Language of your Hearts.

But look forward, and see an unbounded Prospect of eternal Happiness lying
before thee, O Believer* What thou have already received, are only the first
Fruits, like the Cluster of Grapes, brought out of the Land of Canaan -- Only
an Earnest and Pledge of yet infinitely better Things to come -- The Harvest is
yet (...) Thy Grace is hereafter to be swallowed up (...) Glory -- Thy great
Joshua, thy great High Priest, shall administer an abundant Entrance unto thee,
into the Land of Promise, that Rest which awaits the Children of God -- For
Christ is not only made to Believers, Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Sanctification, but also Redemption.

(...) before we enter upon the Explanation and Contemplation of this
Privilege, from what has been said, we may, First* Learn the great Mistake of
Archbishop Til^otson, and Writers of his Stamp, who notwithstanding they talk
of Sanctification and ^^ward Holiness (as indeed sometimes they do, though in a
very loose and so per^^cial Manner) yet they generally make (...) whereas they
should consider it as (...) (...) of our Justification. -- Of whom are ye
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, Wis^^^, Righteousness, and then
Sanctification -- For (...) Righteousness, (...) that which Christ has (...)
Stead without us, is the sole Cause of our Acceptance in the Sight of God, and
of (...) Holiness wrought in ^s -- To this, and not (...) the Light within, or
any thing wrought with^^, should poor Sinners seek for Justification in the
Sight of God -- For the Sake of Christ's Righteousness alone, and not any Thing
wro^t (...) us, does God look favorably upon us -- Our Sanctification at best
in this Life is not complete. Though we are delivered from the Power, we are not
freed from the In-being of Sin. -- But not only the Dominion, but the In-being
of Sin* forbidden by the perfect Law of God -- (...) is not said, Thou shall
not give Way to (...)* thou shall not ^^st -- So that whilst the Principle of
Lust remains in the least Degree in our Hearts, though we are otherwise never so
holy, yet we cannot, or Account of that, hope for Acceptance with God -- We
must first therefore look for a Righteousness without us, even the
Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ -- For this Reason the Apostle mentions
it, and puts it before Sanctification (...) the Words of the Text. And
whosoever teach^^^ (...) Doctrine, (...) not preach the Truth (...) Secondly*
From hence also the (...) and formed Hypocrites may be (...) who talk of Christ
without, but know nothing (...) of a Work of Sanctification (...) within them
-- Whatever they may preten^^ since Christ is not in them, the Lord is not the
Righteousness, and they have no well-ground Hope of Glory -- For tho*
Sanctification (...) the Cause, yet it (...) the Effect of our Acceptance with
God -- Who of God is made unto us Righteousness and Sanctification. -- He
therefore that really in Christ, is a new Creature -- It Is not ^^ing back to a
Covenant of Works, to look (...) our Hearts, and seeing that they are changed
(...) renewed, from thence form a comfortable (...) well-grounded Assurance of
the Safety of (...) States -- No, this is what we are directed to (...)
Scripture. -- By our bringing ^orth the Fruit^, we are to judge whether or no
we ever did truly partake of the Spirit of God -- We know, says St. John, that
we are passed from Death unto Life because we love the Brethren -- And however
we may talk of Christ's Righteousness, and exclaim against legal Preachers;
yet, if we are not (...) in Heart and Life, if we are not sanctified and
renewed by the Spirit in our Minds, we are Self deceivers, we are only formal
Hypocrites -- For we must not put a^^nder what God has joined together -- We
must keep the Medium between the two Extremes -- Nor in^^^t so much on the one
Hand upon Christ without, as to exclude Christ (...) Evidence of our being his,
and as a Prepa^^tion for future Happiness; (...) on the other Hand, so depend
on inherent Righteousness or Holiness wrought in us, as to exclude the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ without us.

But let us go on, and take a View of the (...) Link* or rather the End of the
Believe^^^ (...) Chain of Privileges -- But we must look (...) hi^h; for the
Top of it, like J^cob's Lad^^^, reaches Heaven, where all Believers will (...)
drawn up, and placed at the Right Hand of God -- Who of God is made unto us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

This is a Golden Chain indeed! -- And, what (...) best of all, not one Link
can ever be broken ^^^der from another. And was there no other (...) in the
Book of God, this single one suffi^^^ntly proves the final Perseverance of true
Be^^ (...) -- For never did God yet justify a Man, wh^m he did not sanctify;
nor sanctify one, whom he did not compl^a^ly redeem and glorify -- No, as for
God, his Way, his Work is (...) -- He always carried on and finished the Work
he begun -- Thus it was in the first, so it (...) the new C^eation -- When God
says, Le^ (...) be Light, there is Light, that shines more and more unto the
perfect Day, when Believers enter into their eternal Rest, as God entered into
his -- Those whom God has justified, he has in effect glorified -- For as a
Man's Worth^ness was not the Cause of God's giving him Christ's Righteousness,
so neither shall his Unworthiness be a C^ase of his taking it away -- God's
Gifts and Callings are without Repentance

And I cannot think they are clear in the No^^^ of Christ's Righteousness, who
deny the final ^^^severance of the Saints -- I fear they under^^^nd
Justification in that low Sense, which I understood it in a few Years ago, as
implyi^^ (...) than Remission of Sins -- But it not (...) signifies Remission
of Sins past, but also a (...) Right to all good Things to come -- If God (...)
given us his only Son, how shall he not with (...) freely give us all Things?
Therefore the Apostle, after he says, who of God is made unto (...)
Righteousness, does not say, perhaps he may be made to us Sanctification and
Redemption. But he is made -- For there is an eternal indissoluble Connection
between these blessed Privileges. -- As the Obedience of Christ is imputed to
Believers, so his Perseverance in that Obedience i^ to be imputed to them also
-- And it argue great Ignorance of the Covenant of Grace and Redemption to
object against it --

But to return --

By the Word Redemption, we are to understand, not only a complete Delivery
from all Evil, but also a full Enjoyment of all Good both in Body and S^ul -- I
say both in Body and Soul -- For the Lord is for the Body -- The Bodies of the
Saints in this Life are Temples of the Holy Ghost -- God makes a Covenant with
the Dust of Believers -- After Death, though Worms destroy them, yet even in
their Flesh shall they hereafter see God -- I fear indeed there are some
Sad^^^^^s in our Days, or at least Heretics, who say either that there is no
Resurrection of the Body, or that the Resurrection is past already namely in
our Regeneration -- Hence it is, (...) our Lord's Coming in the Flesh, at the
Day (...) Judgment, is denied, and consequently we (...) throw aside the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper For w^y should we remember the Lord's Death till
he comes to Judgment, when he is already ^^me to judge our Hearts, and will not
come a second Time? -- But all this is only the Reason^^g of unlearned,
unstable Men, who certainly ^^ow not what they say, nor whereof they affirm --
That we must follow our Lord in the Regeneration, and be Partakers of a New
Birth, that Christ must come into our Hearts, we freely confess, and we hope,
when speaking of those Things, we speak no more than what we know and feel --
But then it is plain, that Jesus Christ will come hereafter to Judgment, and
that he ascended into Heaven with the Body which he had (...) on Earth -- For
says he, after his Resurrection, handle, me, and see, a Spirit has not Flesh
and Bones, as you see me have. And it is plain, that Christ's Resurrection was
an Earnest of ours -- For says the Apostle, Christ is risen from the Dead, and
become the first Fruits of them that ^^pt -- And as in Adam all die, and are
subject to Mortality, so all that are in Christ, the second Adam, who
represented Believers, as thou f^ederal Head, shall certainly be made alive,
that is, rise again with their Bodies at the last Day.

Here then, O Believers! is one, though the lowest Degree of that Redemption,
which you are to be Partakers of hereafter -- I mean the Redemption of your
Bodies -- For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, this Mortal must put
(...) Immortality -- Your Bodies as well as Souls were given to Jesus Christ by
the Father -- They have been Companions in Watching, and Fasting* and Praying
-- Your Bodies therefore, as well as Souls, shall Jesus Christ raise up at the
last Day -- Fear not therefore, O Believers, to look into the Grave -- For to
you it is no other than a consecrated Dormitory, where your Bodies shall sleep
quietly till the Morning of the Resurrection -- When the Voice of the Archangel
shall sound, and the Trump of God give the general Alarm, Arise ye Dead, and
come to Judgment, Earth, Air, Fire, Water, shall give up your scattered Atoms,
and both in Body and Soul shall you be ever with the Lord -- I doubt not but
many of you are groaning under crazy Carcasses, and complain often that the
mortal Body weight down the immortal Soul -- At least this is my Case -- But
let us have a little Patience, and we shall be delivered from our earthly
Prisons -- 'Ere it be long these Tabernacles of Clay shall be dissolved, and we
shall be clothed with our House, which is from Heaven -- Hereafter our Bodies
shall be spiritualized, and shall be so far from hindering our Souls through
Weakness, that they shall become strong -- So strong, as to bear up under an
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory -- Others again may have deformed Bodies,
emaciated with Sickness, and worn out with Labor and Age -- But wait a little,
till your blessed Change by Death comes -- Then your Bodies shall be renewed
and made glorious, like unto Christ's glorious Body; of which we may form some
faint Idea, from the Account given us of our Lord's Transfiguration on the
Mount, when it is said. His Raiment became ^^igh and gli^tering, and his Face
brighter than ^^e Sun -- Well then may a Believer break out ^^to the Apostle's
triumphant Language, -- O ^^ath, where is thy Sting! -- O Grave, where is t^y
Victory!

But what is the Redemption of the Body, in Comparison of the Redemption of the
better Part, our Souls? -- I must therefore say to you Believers, as the Angel
said to John -- Come up higher; and let us take as clear a View as we can at
such a Distance, of the Redemption Christ has purchased for, and will shortly
put you in actual Possession of -- Already you are justified, already you are
sanctified, and thereby freed from the Guilt and Dominion of Sin -- But, as I
observed before, the Being and In-dwelling of Sin yet remains in you -- God
sees it proper to leave some Amalekites in the Land, to keep his Israel in
Action -- The most perfect Christian, I am persuaded, must agree according to
one of our Articles, that the Corruption of Nature remains even in the
Regenerate; that the Flesh lusts always against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh So that Believers cannot Things for God with that Perfection
they desire -- This grieves their righteous Souls Day by Day -- And with the
holy Apostle makes them to cry out, Who shall deliver us from the Body of this
Death! I thank God, our Lord Jesus Christ, but not completely before the Day of
our Dissolution. Then will the very Being of Sin be destroyed, and an eternal
Stop put to (...), indwelling Corruption. And is not this a great Redemption I
am sure Believers esteem it so -- For there is nothing grieves the Heart of a
(...) of God so much, as the Remains of indwelling Sin -- Again, Believers are
often in He^^iness through manifold Temptations -- God (...) that it is needful
and good for them so to be. And though they may be highly favored, and wr^pt up
in Communion with God, even to the third Heavens, yet a Messenger of Satan is
often sent to buffet them, l^st they should be puffed up with the Abundance of
Revelations -- But ^e not weary, Be not faint in your Minds -- The Time of your
complete Redemption draw^th nigh -- In Heaven the wicked One shall cease from
troubling you, and your weary Souls shall enjoy an everlasting Rest -- His
fiery Darts cannot reach those blissful Reg^^us -- Satan will never come any
more to appear with, disturb, or accuse the Sons of God, when once the Lord
Jesus Christ shuts the Door -- Your righteous Souls are now grieved, Day by
Day, at the ungodly Conversation of the Wicked -- Ta^es now grow up among the
Wheat -- Wolves come in Sheeps Clothing -- But the Redemption spoken of in the
Text will free your Souls from all Anxiety on these Accounts -- Hereafter you
shall enjoy a perfect Communion of Saints -- Nothing that is unholy or
unsanctified shall enter into the Holy of Holies, which is prepared for you
above -- This, and all Manner of Evil whatsoever, you shall be delivered from
when your Redemption is hereafter made complete in Heaven -- Not only so, but
you shall enter into the full Enjoyment of all Good -- It Is true* all Saints
will not have the same Degree of Happiness, but all will be as happy as their
Hearts can hold -- Believers, you shall judge Evil, and familiarly converse
with good Ang^^s -- You shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the
Spirits of just Men made perfect -- And to sum up all your Happiness, in one
Word, you shall see God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost -- And by seeing (...),
be more and more like him, and pass from Glory to Glory, even to all Eternity.

But I must stop -- The Glories of the upper World crowd in so fast upon my
Soul, that I am l^st in the Contemplation of them. -- Brethren, the Redemption
spoken of is unutterable; we cannot here find it out -- Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, nor has it entered into the Hearts of the most holy Men living, to
conceive how great it is. Was I to entertain you whole Ages with an Account of
it, when you come to Heaven, you m^st say with Sheba, Not Half, no, not one
Thousandth Part was told us. All we can do here, is to go upon Mount Pisgah,
and by (...) Eye of Faith, take a distant View of the promised Land -- We may
see it, as Abraham did Christ, afar off and rejoice in it, but here we only
know in part -- Blessed be God, there is a Time coming, when we shall know God,
even as we are known, and God be all in all. Lord Jesus* accomplish the Number
of thine Elect! Lord (...) thy Kingdom.

And now, where are the Scoffers of these last Days, who count the Lives of
Christians Madness, and their End to be without Honor? Unhappy Men! you know
not what you do. Were your Eyes open, and had you Senses to discern (...)
Things, you would not speak all Manner of Evil against the Children of God, but
you would esteem them as the excellent Ones of the Earth, and envy their
Happiness: Your Souls would hunger and thirst after it -- You also would become
Fools for Christ's Sake -- You boast of Wisdom; so did the Philosophers of
Corinth* But your Wisdom is the Foolishness of Folly in the Sight of God. What
will your Wisdom avail you, if it does not make you wise unto Salvation? Can
you, with all your Wisdom, propose a more consistent Scheme to build your Hopes
of Salvation on, than what has been now laid down before you? -- Can you, with
all the Strength of natural Reason, find out a better Way of Acceptance with
God, than by the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ? Is it right to think
your own Works can in any Measure deserve or procure it? If not, Why will you
not believe in him? Why will you not submit to his Righteousness? Can you deny
that you are fallen Creatures? Do not you find that you are full of Disorders,
and that these Disorders make you unhappy? Do not you find that you cannot
change your own Hearts? Have you not resolved many and many a Time, and have
not your Corruptions yet Dominion over you? Are you not Bondslaves to your
(...), and led Captive by the Devil at his Will? Wh^ th^n will you not come to
Christ for (...)? Do you not desire to die the (...) Righteous, and (...) your
(...) like theirs? I am persuaded (...) Thoughts of being annihil^^ed, much
less of being miserable for ever. Whatever you may pretend, if you speak Truth,
you must confess, that Conscience ^reaks in upon you in your more s^ber
Intervals whether you will or not, and even constrains (...) to believe that
Hell is no painted Fire -- And why then will you not come to Christ? He alone
can procure you everlasting Redemption -- Haste, haste away to him, poor
beguiled Sinners -- You lack Wisdom -- Ask it of Christ, who knows but he may
give it you? He is able* For He is the Wisdom of the Father -- He is that
Wisdom which was from Everlasting. You have no Righteousness, away to Christ --
He is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes -- You
are unholy -- Fly to the Lord Jesus -- He is full of Grace and Truth, and of
his Fullness all may receive that believe in him -- You are afraid to die -- Let
this drive you to Christ, He has the Keys of Death and Hell -- In him is
plenteous Redemption -- He alone can open the Door which leads to everlasting
Life -- Let not therefore the deceived Reasoner boast any longer of his
pretended Reason -- Whatever you may (...), it is the most unreasonable Thing
in the World, not to believe on Jesus Christ, whom God has sent -- Why, why
will you die? Why will you not come unto him, that you may have Life? Ho, every
one that thirsts* come unto the Waters of Life and drink freely -- Come buy
without Money and without Price -- Were these blessed Privileges in the Text to
be purchased by Money, you might say, we are poor and cannot buy -- Or were
they to be conferred only on Sinners of such a Rank or Degree, then you might
say, how can such Sinners as we expect to be so highly favored? But they are
to be freely given of God to the worst of Sinners -- To us, says the Apostle --
To me a Persecutor, to you Corinthians, who were Unclean, Drunkards, covetous
Persons, Idolaters -- Therefore each poor Sinner may say then, Why not unto me?
Has Christ but one Blessing? What if he has ble^ed Millions, by turning them
from their Iniquities, yet he still continues the same -- He lives for ever to
make Intercession, and therefore will bless you, even you also* though Esau like,
you have been profane, and hitherto despised your heavenly Father's
Birthright -- Even now, if you believe, Christ will be made to you of God,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

But I must turn again to Believers, for whose Instruction, as I observed
before, this Discourse was particularly intended -- You see Brethren, Partakers
of the heavenly Calling, what great Blessings are treasured up for you in Jesus
Christ your Head, and what you are entitled to by believing on his Name -- Take
heed therefore, that ye walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye (...) called
-- Think often how highly you are (...), and remember you have not chosen
(...), but Christ has chosen you. Put on (as (...) of God) H^mbleness of Mind,
and (...), but Oh, let it be only ^n the Lord -- For (...) have nothing but
what you have received or (...)* By Nature ye were as foolish, as legal, (...),
and in ^s damnable a Condition as (...) -- Be pitiful therefore, be courteous,
and Sanctification is a progressive Work, beware (...) thinking you have
already attained. -- Let him (...) is holy, be holy still* knowing that he who
(...) m^st pure in Heart, shall hereafter enjoy the clearest Vision of God --
Let indwelling Sin be your daily Burden, and not only bewail and lament, but
see that you subdue it daily by the Power of Divine Grace, and look up to Jesus
continually to be the Finisher, as well as Author of your Faith -- Build not on
your own Faithfulness, but on God's Unchangeableness -- Take Heed of thinking
you stand by the Power of your own Free Will -- The everlasting Love of God the
Father must be your only Hope and Consolation -- Let this support you under all
Trials -- Remember that God's Gifts and Callings are without Repentance -- That
Christ having once loved you, will have you to the End -- Let this constrain
^^u to Obedience, and make you long and look for that blessed Time, when he
shall not only be your Wisdom, and Righteousness* and Sanctification, but also
complete and everlasting Redemption.

Glory be to God in the Highest.

SERMON VII.
The Pharisee and Publican.
LUKE xviii. 14. I tell you this Man went down to his House justified rather
than the other. For every one that exalts himself shall be ab^sed, and he
that humbles himself shall be exalted.
THOUGH there be some who dare wholly deny the Lord Jesus, and disbelieve the
Revelation he has been pleased to give us, and thereby bring upon themselves
swift Destruction, yet I would charitably hope there are but few, if any such
among you, to whom I am now to preach the Kingdom of God -- Was I do ask you,
How you expect to be justified in the Sight (...) an offended God? I suppose
you would answer, only for the Sake of (...) Lord Jesus Christ -- But was I to
come more home to your Consciences, I fear most would make the Lord Jesus but
in part their Savior, and go about, as it were, to establish a Righteousness
of their own -- I believe this is not a thinking (...) to the Rules of
Christian Charity -- For we are all self-righteous by Nature -- It is as
natural for us to turn back to a Covenant of Works, as for the Sparks to fly
upwards -- We have had so many legal, and so few Free Grace Preachers for these
many Years, that most Professors now seem to be settled upon their Lees, (...)
rather deserve the Title o^ Pharisees than Christians.

Thus it was with the Generality of the People during the Time of our Lord's
public Ministrations. And therefore, in almost all his Discourses, he preached
the Gospel to poor Sinners, and denounced terrible Woes against proud,
S^lf-Justicia^es -- The Parable, to which the Words of the Text belong, looks
both these Ways -- For the Evangelist informs us, ( Ver. 9.) that our Lord
spoke it unto certain that trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and
despised others -- And a notable Parable it is -- A Parable worthy your most
serious Attention -- He that has Ears to hear, let him hear what Jesus Christ
speaks to all visible Professors in it.

Ver. 10. Two Men, says our Lord, w^n up to the Temple to pray, (and never two
Men of more opposite Characters) the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican
-- The Pharisees were the strictest Sect among the Jews -- (...) was of the
strictest Sect of the Pharisees, say* St. Paul -- They prayed often, not only
so* but they made long Prayers, and that they might appear extraordinary
devout, they would (...) the Corners of the Street, where two (...) that People
going or coming, both Way, (...) see them -- They made broad, as our Lord (...)
forms us, the Borders of their (...), i. e. they had Pieces of Parchment sown
to their (...) Robes (which we are told they (...)) on (...) some Parts of the
Scripture were written, (...) People might from thence infer, that they were
Lovers of the Law of God. They were very punctual and (...) in outward
Purifications, (...) that they washed at their going out and coming in -- They
held the Washing of Pots, (...) Vessels, and Tables, and many other such like
Things they did -- They were very zealous for the Tradition of the Fathers, and
for the Observation of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, notwithstanding
they frequently made void the Law of God by their Traditions -- And they were
so exceeding exact in the outward Observation of the Sabbath, that they
condemned our Lord for a little Clay with his Spittle, and called him a Sinner,
and said, he was not of God, because he had given Sight to a Man born blind, on
the Sabbath Day -- For these Reasons they were had in high Veneration among the
People, who were sadly misled by these blind Guides -- They had therefore the
uppermost Places in the Synagogues, and Greetings in the (...) Places (which
they loved dearly) and were called of Men, Rabbi, Rabbi -- In short, they had
such a Reputaton for Piety, that it became a Proverb (...) the Jews, that if
there were but two Men (...) the one of them m^st be a Pharisee.

(...) the Publicans, it (...) not so with them -- (...) they were sometimes
Jews, or at least (...) of the Gate -- (For we find one here (...) up to the
Temple) -- But for the Gene^^^^ty I am apt to think they were (...) -- (...)
they were Gatherers of the Roman Taxes, and (...) to amass much Wealth (as
appears by the Confession of Zaccheus, one of the chief of 'em) (...) wronging
Men by false Accusation. They were so universally infamous, that our Lord
himself tells his Disciples, the excommunicated Man should be to them as a
Heathen Man, or a Publican -- And the Pharisees thought it a sufficient
impeachment of our Lord's Character, that he was a Friend to Publicans and
Sinners, and went to sit down with them at Meat.

But however they disagreed in other Things, they agreed in this, viz. that
Public Worship is a Duty incumbent upon all. For they both came up to the
Temple -- The very Heathens were Observers of Temple-Worship. We have very
early Notice of Men's sacrificing to, and calling upon the Name of the Lord in
the Old Testament. And I find it no where contradicted in the New -- Our Lord
and his Apostles went up to the Temple, and we are commanded by (...) Apostle,
not to forsake the assembling our selves (...), as the Manner of too many is in
our ^ays; and such too, as would have us think (...) of them, though they seldom
or never tread ^e Courts of the Lord's House -- But though our Devotions begin in
our Closets, they must not end there -- And if People never show their
Devotions abroad, I must suspect they have little (...) none at Home -- "Two
Men went up to the Temple." And what went they thither for (...) Not ((...)
Multitudes among us do) to make the (...) God a House (...) or turn it into a
Den of Thieves, much less to (...) the Preacher, or disturb the Congregation.
No, they came to the Temple, says our Lord, to pray. For thither should the
Tribes of God's spiritual Israel go up to talk with, and pour out their Hearts
before the mighty God of Jacob.

"Two Men went up to the Temple to pray" -- I ^ear one of them forgot his
Errand -- I have often been at a Less what to call the Pharisee's Address -- It
certainly does not deserve the Name of a Prayer -- He may rather be said to
come to the Temple to boast, than to pray -- For I do not and one Word of
Confession of his original Guilt. -- Not one single Petition for Pardon of his
past actual Sins, or for Grace to help and assist him for the Time to come --
He only brings in God as it were a Reckoning of his Performance and does that,
which no Flesh can justly do, I mean glory in his Presence.

Ver. 11. The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with himself -- God I thank thee
that I am (...) other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulter^ (...) or even as
this Publican.

Our Lord first takes Notice of his Posture The Pharisee stood, etc. He is not
to be condemned for that -- For standing, as well as kneel -- (...), is a
proper Posture (...) Prayer. When you (...) praying, (...) -- Though sometimes
our Lord kneeled, (...) on his Face upon the Ground -- His Apostles also
kneeled, as we (...) in the Acts -- Which has made me wonder (...) some, (...)
so (...) to standin^ in Family, as well as public Prayer, that they will not
kneel, notwithstanding (...) kneel that are around them. I fear there (...)
something of the Pharisee in this Conduct -- Kneeling and standing are
indifferent, if the Knee of the Soul be bent, and the Heart upright toward
God. We should study not to be particular in indifferent Things, lest we offend
weak Mind* -- What the Pharisee is remarked for, is his standing by himself --
For the Words may be rendered, he stood by himself upon some eminent Place, at
the upper Part of the Temple, near the Holy of Holies, that the Congregation
might see what a devout Man he was -- Or it may be understood as we read it --
He prayed by himself, or of himself, out of his own Heart -- He did not pray by
Form -- It was an Extempore Prayer -- For there are many Pharisees that pray
and preach too Extempore -- I do not see why these may not be acquired, as well
as other Arts and Sciences -- A Man, with a good Elocution, ready Turn of
Thought* and good Memory, may repeat his own or other Men's Sermons, and by the
Help of a Wilkins or Hea^^, may pray seemingly excellently well, and yet not
have the least Grain of true Grace in his Heart -- And I speak this not to cry
down Extempore Prayer, or to discourage those dear Souls (...) pray by the
Spirit -- I only would (...) give a Word of Repro^f to th^se (...) Prayer, that
(...) that use Forms, (...) only as others (...) wrong -- Not (...) one that
prays Extempore is a spiritual, nor (...) one that prays with a Form, a formal
M^n -- Let us not judge one (...) -- Let not him that use a Form, judge him
that prays Extempore, on that Acc^^nt* and let not him that prays Extempore,
despise him that uses a F^rm The Pharisee stood and prayed th^s by him (...)
Which may signify also praying inwardly in (...) Heart -- For there i^ a Way
(and that an excellent One too) of praying when we cannot speak -- Thus H^^^ah
prayed when she spoke not out aloud, only her Lips m^ved -- Thus God says to
Moses, Why cried then, when it is plain, he did not speak a Word. This is what
the Apostle means by the Spirit making Inter^^ssion for Believers, with
Groani^^s which cannot (...). For there are Times when the Soul is too big to
speak -- When God fill it as it were and (...) shadows it with his Presence, so
that it can only fall down, worship, adore, and lie in the Dust before the Lord
-- Again, there is a Time when the Soul is benumbed, barren, and dry, and the
Believer has not a Word to say to his dear heavenly Father* and then the Heart
only can speak. And I mention this for the Encouragement of weak Christians,
who think they never are accepted, but when they have a Flow of Words, and
fancy they do not please God at the Bottom, for no other Reason, but because
they do not please themselves -- Such would do well to consider, that God knows
the Language of the Heart and the Mind of the Spirit, and that we make Use of
Words, not to inform God, but to affect ourselves -- Whenever therefore any of
you find yourselves in such a Frame, be not discouraged -- Offer yourselves up
in Silence before God, as Clay in the Hands of the Potter, for him ^o write and
stamp his own divine Image upon your Souls -- But I believe the Pharisee knew
nothing of this Way of Prayer -- He was self-righteous, a Stranger to the
divine Life, and therefore either of the form. Explanations may be best put
upon these Words -- He stood, and prayed thus with himself -- God I thank thee
that I am not ^as other Men are, Ext^rtioner, Unjust, Adulterer, or even as
this Publican -- Here is some Appearance of Devotion, but it is only in
Appearance -- To thank God that we are not Ex^^rtieners, Unjust, Adulterers,
and as wicked in our Practices as other Men are, is certainly me^^ right, and
our bounden Duty. For whatever Degrees of Goodness there may be in us, more
than in others, it is owing to God's restraining, preventing, and assisting
Grace -- We are all equally conceived and born in Sin -- All equally fallen
short of the Glory of God, and (...) to all the Curses and Maledictions of the
Law, (...) that he that glories, must glory only in the Lord -- For none of us
have any thing which we did not receive; and whatever we have received, we did
not in the least merit it, or could we lay the least Claim to it on any Account
whatever -- We are wholly indebted to Free Grace for all -- Had the Pharisee
thought thus* when he said, "God I thank thee that I am not as other Men are,"
it would have been an excellent Introduction to his Prayer -- But he was a
Free-willer, as well as self-righteous (for he that is one, must be the other)
and thought by his own Power and Strength, he had kept himself from these Vices
-- And yet I do not (...) what Reason he had to trust in himself that he was
righteous, merely because he was not an Extortioner, Unjust, Adulterer -- For
all this while he might be, as he certainly was, (as is also every
self-righteous Person) as proud as the Devil -- But he not only boasts, but
lies before God (as all Self-justicaries will be found Liars here or
hereafter.) He thanks God that he was not Unjust -- But is it not an Act of the
highest Injustice to rob God of his Prerogative? Is it not an Act of Injustice
to judge our Neighbor? And yet of both these Crimes this self-righteous
Vaunter is guilty -- Even as this Publican -- He seems to speak with the utmost
Disdain -- This Publican, perhaps he pointed at the poor Man, that others might
treat him with the like Contempt -- Thou proud, confident Boaster* What had
thou to do with that poor Publican? Supposing other Publicans were Unjust, and
Extortioners, did it therefore follow that he must be so? Or if he had been
such a Sinner, How know thou but he has repented of those Sins^ (...) coming
up to the Temple to pray, (...) one (...) Sign of a Reformation at least --
Thou art therefore inexcusable, O Pharisee, who thus judge the Publican --
For thou that judge him to be unjust* art in the very Act of judging, unjust
thyself -- Thy Sacrifice (...) only the Sacrifice of a Fool.

We have seen the^ what the Pharisee's negative Goodness comes to; I think
nothing at all -- Let us see how far his positive Goodness extends -- For if we
are truly religious, we shall not only eschew Evil, but also do Good -- I fast,
says he, twice in the Week -- I give Tithes of all that I possess.

The Pharisee is not here condemned for h^^ Fasting, for Fasting is a Christian
Duty -- When you fast, says our Lord, thereby taking it for granted that his
Disciples would fast -- And when the bridegroom shall be taken away, th^n shall
they fast in those Days. In fasting often, says the Apostle, and all that would
not be Cast^ways, will take Care, as their Privilege, without legal Constraint,
to keep their Bodies under, and bring them into Subjection: The Pharisee is
only condemned for making a Righteousness of his Fasting, and thinking that God
would ac^^pt him, or that he was any better than his Neighbors merely on
Account of his Fasting. This i^ what he is blamed for. The Pharisee (...) not
to be commended for fasting twice in (...) Week -- I wish Christians would
imitate him (...) in this. But to depend on Fasting in the (...) Justification
in the Sight of God, was really abominable. I give Tithes of all that I
possess. He might as well have said, I pay Tithes -- But Self-righteous People
(whatever they may say to the contrary) think they give something to God -- I
give Tithes of all that I possess -- I make Conscience of giving Tithes, not
only of all that the Law requires, but of my Mint, Annice, and Cummin, of all
Things whatsoever that I possess -- This was well. To pay Tithes when required
by the Laws of the Land, is certainly our Duty -- But to boast of such Things,
or of Fasting, is Pharisaical and Devilish. And now then let us sum up all the
Righteousness of this boasting Pharisee, and see what little Reason he had to
trust in himself that he was righteou^, or to despise others. He is not Unjust,
(but we have only his ba^e Word for that, I think I have proved to the
contrary.) He i^ no Adulterer, no Extortioner, he fasts twice in the Week, and
gives Tithes of all that he possesses. -- And all this he might do, and a great
deal more, and yet be a Child of the Devil. For here is no Mention made of his
loving the Lord his God with all his Heart, which was the first and great
Commandment of the Law. -- Here Is not a single Syllable of inward Religion --
And he was not a true Jew, who was only one outwardly. And it is only an outside
Piety at the best -- Inwardly he is full of Pride, Self-Justification,
Free Will, and great Uncharitableness.

Were not the Pharisees, do you think, highly offended at this Character? For
they might easily know it was spoken against them* And though perhaps some of you
may be offended at me, yet out of Love I must tell you, I fear this Parable is
spoken against many of you. -- For are there not many of you, who go up to the
Temple to pray, with no better Spirit than this Pharisee did? And because you
fast, it may be in the Lent, or every Friday, and because you do Nobody any
Harm, receive the Sacrament, pay Tithes, give an Alms now and then, think that
you are safe, and trust in yourselves that you are righteous, and inwardly
despise those, who do not come up to you in these outward Duties? This I am
persuaded is the Case of many of you, though alas! it is a desperate one, as I
shall endeavor to show at the Close of this Discourse.

Let us now take a View of the Publican. Ver. 13. And the Publican standing
afar off, would not lift up so much as his Eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his
Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

The Publican standing afar off -- Perhaps in the outward Court of the Temple,
conscious to himself that he was not worthy to approach the Holy of Holies --
So conscious, and so weighed down with a Sense of his own Unworthiness, that he
would not so much as lift up his Eyes unto Heaven, which he knew was God's
Throne -- Poor Heart! what did he feel at this Time! None but Returning
Publicans, like himself, can (...) -- Methinks I see him standing afar off,
per^^ve, oppressed, and even overwhelmed with Sorrow -- Sometimes he attempts
to look up -- But then, thinks he, the Heavens are unclean in God's Sight, and
the very Angels are charged with Folly, how then shall such a Wretch (...) dare
to lift up my guilty Head! -- And to show that his Heart was full of holy
Self-Resentment, and that he sorrowed after a godly Sort, he smote upon his
Breast, the Word in the Original implies, that he struck hard upon his Breast:
For he will lay the Blame upon none but his own wicked Heart. He will not, like
unhumbled Adam, tacitly lay the Fault of his Vileness upon God, and say, the
Passions which thou gave me, they deceived me, and I sinned -- He is too
penitent thus to reproach his Maker -- He smites upon his Breast, his
treacherous, ungreatful, desperately wicked Breast -- A Breast now ready to
burst, and at length, out of the Abundance of his Heart, I doubt not, with many
Tears, he a^last cries out, God be merciful to me a Sinner -- Not God be
merciful to yonder proud Pharisee -- He found enough in himself to vent his
Resentment against, without looking abroad upon others -- Not God be merciful
to me a Saint -- For he knew all his Righteousnesses were but filthy Rags --
Not God be merciful to such or such a one, but God be merciful to me, even to
me a Sinner -- A Sinner by Birth -- A Sinner in Thought, Word, and Deed -- A
Sinner as to my Person -- A Sinner as to all my Performances -- A Sinner in
whom is no Health, in whom dwells no good Thing -- A Sinner poor, miserable,
blind and naked, from the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the Feet, f^ll of
Wounds, and Bruises, and ^trifying Sores -- A self-accused, self-condemned
Sinner -- What think you? Would this Publican been offended if any Minister had
told (...) that he deserved to be damned? Would he (...) been angry, if any one
had told him, that (...) Nature he was half a Devil and half a Beast?

He would have confessed a thousand Hells have been his due, and that he was an
earthly, (...), devilish Sinner -- He felt now what a ^^eadful Thing it was to
depart from the living (...) -- He felt that he was inexcusable every Way --
that he could in no wise, upon Account ^any Thing in himself, he justified in
the Sight (...) God -- And therefore lays himself at the Feet (...) sovereign
Mercy, "God be merciful to me a (...) Sinner" -- Here Is no Confidence in the
Flesh, (...) Plea fetched from Fasting, paying Tithes, or (...) Performance of
any other Duty -- Here Is no ^^asting, that he was not an Extortioner, Unjust,
or an Adulterer -- Perhaps he had been guilty of all these Crimes, at least he
knew he should have (...) guilty of all these had he been left to follow the
Devices and Desires of his own Heart; and therefore, with a broken and contrite
Spirit, he cries out, "God be merciful to me a Sinner."

This Man came up to the Temple to pray, and he prayed indeed -- And a broken
and contrite Heart God will not despise. I tell you, says our Lord -- I who lay
in the Bosom of the Father from all Eternity -- I who am God, and therefore
know all Things -- I who can neither deceive, nor be deceived, whose Judgment
is according to Right -- I tell you, whatever you may think of it, or think of
me for telling you so, this Man, this Publican, this despised, sinful, but
brokenhearted Man, went down to his House justified (acquitted, and looked
upon as Righteous in the Sight of God) rather than the other.

Let Pharisees take Heed that they do not pervert this Text -- For when it is
said, this Man went down to his House justified rather than the other -- Our
Lord does not mean that both were justified, and that the Publican had rather
more Justification than the Pharisee -- But it implies, either that the
Publican was actually justified, (...) the Pharisee was not; or, that the
Publican (...) in a better Way for Justification, or in a better Frame to
receive it, than the Pharisee -- According to our Lord's Saying -- The
Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before you -- That the
Pharisee was not justified is certain -- For God resists the Proud, and that
the Publican was at this Time actually justified (and perhaps went home with a
Sense of it in his Heart) we have great Reason to infer from the latter Part of
the Text -- For every one that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

The Parable therefore now speaks to all that hear me this Day -- For that our
Lord intended it for our Learning is evident, from his making such a general
Application -- For every one, says he, that exalts himself shall be abased,
and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

The Parable of the Publican and Pharisee is but as it were a Glass wherein we
may see the different Disposition of all Mankind. For all Mankind may be
divided into two general Classes* -- Either they trust wholly in themselves, or
in Part, that they are righteous, and then they are Pharisees; or they have no
Confidence in the Flesh, are self-condemned Sinners, and then they come under
the Character of the Publican just now discoursed of -- And we may add also,
that the different Reception these M^n met with, points out to us in lively
Colors, the different Treatment the self-justiciary and self-condemned
Criminal will meet with at the terrible Day of Judgment. Every one that exalts
himself shall be abased, but he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

Every one, without Exception, Young or Old, High or Low, Rich or Poor (for God
is no Respecter of Persons) every one, whosoever he be, that exalts himself,
and not Free Grace, every one that trusts in himself that he is righteous,
that rests in his Duties, or thinks to join them with the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ for Justification in the Sight of God, though he be no Adulterer, no
Extortioner, though he be not outwardly Unjust, nay, though he fast twice in the
Week, and gives Tithes of all that he possesses, yet shall he be abased in the
Sight of all good M^n that know him here, and before Men and Angels, and God
himself, when Jesus Christ comes to appear in Judgment hereafter? How low? None
but the Almighty God can tell -- He shall be abased to live with Devils, and
make his Abode in the lowest Hell for evermore.

Hear this, all ye Self-Justiciaries, tremble and behold your Doom! -- A
dreadful Doom, more dreadful than Words can express, or Thought conceive -- If
you refuse to humble yourselves, after hearing this Parable, I call Heaven and
Earth to witness against you this Day, that God shall visit you with all his
Storms, and pour all the Vials of his Wrath upon your rebelli^us Heads -- You
exalted yourselves here, and God shall abase you hereafter -- You are as proud
as the Devil, and with Devils shall you dwell to all Eternity -- Be not
deceived -- God is not mocked -- He sees your Hearts -- He knows all Things --
And, notwithstanding you may come ^p to the Temple to pray, your Prayers are
turned into Sin, and you go down to your Houses unjustified, if you are
Self-Justiciaries. And do you know what it is to be unjustified? Why, if you
are unjustified, the Wrath of God abides upon you. You are in your Blood --
All the Curses of the Law belong to you. Cursed are you when you go out --
Cursed are you when you come in -- Cursed are your Thoughts, cursed are your
Words, cursed are your Deeds (...) Every thing you do, say, or think, from
Morning to Night, is only one continued Series of Sin. However highly you may
be esteemed in the Sight of Men -- However you may be honored with the
uppermost Seats in the Synagogues in the Church militant, you will have no
Place in the Church (...) Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty Hand of
God -- Pull down every self-righteous Thought, and every proud Imagination,
that now exalts itself against the perfect, personal, imputed Righteousness
of the dear Lord Jesus -- For he, and he alone that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

He that humbles himself, whatever he be. If instead of Fasting twice in the
Week, he has got drunk twice in the Week -- If instead of giving Tithes of all
that he possesses, has cheated the Minister of his Tithes, and King of his
Taxes; notwithstanding he be Unjust, Extortioner, Adulterer, nay,
notwithstanding the Sins of all Mankind be centered and united in him* yet if
through Grace, like the Publican, he i^ enabled to humble himself, he shall be
exalted -- Not in a temporal Manner -- For Christians must rather expect to be
abased, and to have their Names cast out as Evil, and to lay down their Lives
for Christ Jesus in this World. But he shall be exalted in a spiritual Sense --
He shall be freely justified from all his Sins by the Blood of Jesus -- He
shall have Peace with God, a Peace which passes all Understanding -- Not only
Peace, but Joy in Believing -- He shall be translated from the Kingdom of
Satan, to the Kingdom of God's dear Son -- He shall dwell in Christ, and Christ
in him. He shall be one with Christ, and Christ one with him. He shall drink of
divine Pleasures, as out of a River. He shall be sanctified throughout in
Spirit, Soul and Body* ^n one* Word, he shall be filled with all the Fullness of
God -- Thus shall the Man that humbles himself be exalted here -- But oh, how
high shall he be exalted hereafter! As high as the highest Heavens, even to the
Right Hand of God -- There (...) shall sit happy both in Soul and Body, and
judge Angels, high out of the Reach of all Sin and Trouble, eternally secure
from all Danger of falling O Sinners, did you but know how highly God intends
to exalt those who humble themselves, and believe in Jesus, surely you would
humble yourselves, at least beg of God to humble you -- For it is he that must
strike the Rock of your Hearts, and cause Floods of contrite Tears to flow out
there from. And Oh, that God would give this Sermon such a Commission, as he
once gave the Rod of Moses! I would strike you through and through with the Rod
of his Word, (...)* each of you was brought to cry out with the poor Publican,
God be merciful to me a Sinner -- What Pleasant Language would this be in the
^ars of the Lord of Sabbath! Are there no poor Sinners among you? What are you
all Pharisees? Surely you cannot bear the Thoughts of returning home
unjustified, can you? What if a (...) of the Apoplexy should seize you, and
your Souls be hurried away before the awful Judge of Quick and Dead? What will
you do without Christ's Righteousness? If you go out of the World unjustified,
you must remain so for ever. Oh, that you would humble yourselves, then would
the Lord exalt you -- It may be, that whilst I am speaking, the Lord might
justify you freely by his Grace -- I observed, that perhaps the Publican had a
Sense of his Justification (...) he went from the Temple, and know that (...)
was sealed in Heaven -- And who (...) but you may be thus exalted before you
(...) if you humble yourselves? Oh, (...) Peace, (...), and Joy, would you th^n
feel (...) your Hearts* You would have a Heaven upon E^^th -- Oh, that I could
(...) any of you (...) (as I once heard a poor Sinner under my Preaching cry
out) He is come, He is come! How would you then, like him, (...) a precious
Christ, a free-hearted Christ* How would you magnify him for being such a
Friend to Publicans and Sinners? Greater Love can no Man show, than to lay down
his Life for a Friend* But Christ laid down his Life for his Enemies -- Even
for you, if you are enabled to humble yourselves, as the Publican did --
Sinners* I know not how to leave off talking with you -- I would fill my Mouth
with Arguments -- I would plead with you -- Come, let us reason together --
Though your Sins ^e as Scarlet, yet, if you humble yourselves, they shall be as
white as Snow -- One Act of true (...) in Christ justifies you for ever and
ever* He h^^ not promised you what he cannot perform -- He (...) able to exalt
you -- For God has exalted, and given him a Name above every Name, that a^ the
Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow -- Nay* God (...) him to be not only a
Prince, but a Savior (...) May he be a Savior to you* and then I (...) have
Reason to rejoice in the Day of (...), that (...) preached in vain (...)
labored in (...).

SERMON VIII.
The Holy Spirit convincing the World of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment.
JOHN xvi. 8. And when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment.
THESE Words contain Part of a gracious Promise which the blessed Jesus was
pleased to make to his weeping and sorrowful Disciples -- The Time was now
drawing near, in which the Son of Man was first to ^e lifted upon the Cross,
and afterward to Heaven* Kind* Oh wondrous kind! had this merciful High Priest
been to his Disciples during the Time of his tabernacling amongst them -- He
^ad Compassion on their Infirmities, answered for them when assaulted by their
Enemies, and set them ^ight when out of the Way, either in Principle (...)
Practice -- He neither called or used them as (...) them (...) Happened the
(...) understand (...) the hidden (...) of the Kingdom (...) God, when he (...)
others in Parabl^* Nay he became the (...) all, and (...) condescended to wash
their Feet -- The Thoughts of parting with so dear and loving a Ma^^^r as this,
especially for a long (...)* must needs affect them much -- When (...) he
intended to be a^sent from them only for a Night, we are told, he was (...) to
^^^train them to leave him -- No wonder then, (...) when he now informed them,
he must entirely go away, and that the Pharisees in his Absence should put them
out of them (...) and ex^^mmu^^cate (...) yea, that the Time should come, that
whose (...) ki^^ed them, should think (...) did God Set (...) (A Prophecy (...)
would (...) in an (...) Manner designed (...) the suffering Ministers of this
Generation) No wonder, I say, considering all this* that we are told, Ver. 6.
That Sorrow had filled (...) Hearts (...) Because I have ^hed (...) these Times
unto (...) and, Sorrow (...) ^ath filled your Hear^^ (...) Heart were so full
of Concern, that they were (...) -- In order therefore to reconcile them (...)
Dispensation, our dear and compa^^^nate Redeemer shows them the Necessity he
lay under to leave them -- Nevertheless, (...) he, I tell you the Truth; it is
expedient for you that I go away: As though he had said -- Think not, my dear
Disciples, that I leave you out of Anger -- No, it is for your Sakes, for your
Profit, that I go away (...) For if I go not away, i^ I die not upon the (...)
for your Sins, and rise again for your Justification, and ascend into Heaven to
make Intercess^^^ and plead my Merits before my Father's Throne, the Comforter,
the Holy Ghost, will not, cannot come unto you. But if I depart, I Will send him
unto you -- And that they might know wha^ he was to do, When he is come* says
our Lord, he will reprove the World of Sin, and of Righteousness, and of
Judgment.

The Person then referred to in the Words of the Text, is plainly the
Comforter, the Holy Ghost, and the Promise was first made to our Lord's
Apostles -- But though it was primarily made (...) them, and was literally and
remarkably (...) at the Day of Penticost, when the Holy Ghost came down, as a
mighty rushing Wind and also when three thousand were pricked to the Heart by
Peter's Preaching, yet as the Apostles were the Representatives of the whole
Body of Believers, we must infer, that this Pro^^^^ must be looked upon as
spoken to us, and to (...) Children, and to as many as the Lord our (...) call

M^ Design from these Words at present, is to show the (...) in which the Holy
Ghost (...) works upon the Hearts of those, who, (...) Vessels of Mercy, and
(...) Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of God's dear Son.

^^ay generally -- For as God (...) a (...) sacred Spirit ^loweth not only on
(...), but when and how it lists* Therefore, (...) it ^^om me to ^e fine
(...) Almighty to (...) Way of acting, or say, (...) ^^gree o^ Conviction --
No* there is a holy ^^riety in God's Methods of calling home his (...) -- But
this we may affirm assuredly, that wherever there is a Work of true Conviction
and Conversion wro't upon a Sinner's Heart, the Holy Ghost, whether by a
greater or less Degree of inward Soul-Trouble, does that which our Lord Jesus
tells the Disciples in the Words of the Text, that he should do when he came.

If any of you here ridicule inward Religion* or think there is no such Thing as
our feeling or receiving the Holy Ghost, I fear my Preaching will be quite
Foolishness to you, and that you will understand me no more, than if I spoke to
you (...) an unknown Tongue -- But as the Promise in the Text is made to the
World, and as I know it will be (...) till Time shall be no (...), I shall
proceed to explain the general Way, whereby the Holy Ghost works upon every
converted Sinner's Heart* and I hope that the Lord, (...) whilst I am speaking,
may be pleased to fulfill it in many of your Hearts -- And when he is come, he
will reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

The Word which we translate reprove, ought to be rendered convin^^, and in the
Original it implies a Conviction by way of Argumentation* and coming with a
Power upon the Mind equal to a Demonstration -- A great many Scoffers o^ these
last Days, will ask such as they term Prete^ders to the Spirit, how they feel
the Spirit, and how they know the Spirit? They might as well ask, how they
know, and how they feel the Sun when it shines upon the Body? For with equal
Power and Demonstration does the Spirit of God work upon and convince the Soul.

And First, It convinces of Sin -- And generally of some enormous Sin, the
worst perhaps the convicted Person ever was guilty of -- Thus when our Lord was
conversing with the Woman of Samaria, he convinced her first of her Adultery,
Woman, says he, Go call thy Husband -- The Woman answered, and said, I have
(...) Husband -- Jesus said unto her, Thou have we^^ said, I have no Husband:
For thou have had five Husbands, and he whom thou now have, (...) not thy
Husband: In this said thou truly. -- With this there went such a powerful
Conviction of all her other actual Sins, that soon after she left her
Water-pot, and went her Way into the City, and ^aith to the Men, Come, and see
a Man that told me all Things that ever I did: Is not this the Christ? Thus our
Lord also dealt with the Persecutor Saul -- He convinced him first of the
horrid Sin of Persecution -- Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou N^^? Such a Sense
of all his other Sins, in all Probability, at the same Time revived in his
Mind, that immediately he died; that is* died to all his false Confidences, and
was thrown into such an Agony of Soul, that he continued three Days, and
neither did eat or drink. -- This is ^ne Method the Spirit of God generally
takes in ^^aling with Sinners -- He first convinces them (...) some heinous
actual Sin, and at the same time ^rings all their other Sins into Remembrance,
and as it were sets them in Battle Array before them: When he is come, he will
reprove the World (...) Sin.

And was it ever thus with you, my dear ^earers? (For I must question you as I
go along, because I intend, by the divine Help, to preach not only to your
Heads, but your Hearts) -- Did the Spirit of God ever bring all your Sins thus*
to Remembrance, and make you cry out to God, Thou writest bitter Things against
me? Did your actual Sins ever appear before you, as though drawn (...) a Map? If
not, you have great Reason (unless you were sanctified from the Womb) to
suspect that you are not convicted, much more not converted, and that the
Promise of the Text was never yet fulfilled in your Hearts.

Further: When the Comforter comes into a Sinner's Heart, though it generally
convinces the Sinner of his actual Sin first, yet it leads him to see and
bewail his original Sin, the Fountain from which all these polluted Streams
flow.

Though every Thing in Earth, Air, and Water, every Thing both without and
within, concur to prove the Truth of that Assertion in the Scripture, viz. that
in Adam we all have died; not most are so hardened, through the Deceitfulness
(...) Sin, that notwithstanding they may give an (...) sent to the Truth of
that Proposition in their Heads, yet they never felt it really in their Heart
-- Nay, some in Words professedly deny it, th^^ their Works, too, too plainly
prove them to be degenerate Sons of a degenerate Father -- But when the
Comforter, the Spirit of God arrests a Sinner, and convinces him of Sin, all
carnal Reasoning against original Corruption, every proud and high Imagination,
which exalts itself against that Doctrine, is immediately thrown down -- And
is made to cry out, Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? He now
finds that Concupiscence is Sin -- And does not so much bewail his actual Sins,
as the inward Perverseness of his Heart, which he now finds not only to be an
Enemy to, but also direct Enmity against God.

And did the Comforter, my dear Friends, ever come with such a convincing Power
as this into your Hearts? Were you ever made to see and feel, that in your
Flesh dwells no good Thing* -- That you are conceived and born in Sin -- That
you are by Nature Children of Wrath -- That God would be just if he damned you,
though you never committed an actual Sin in your Lives? So often as you have been
at Church and Sacrament, did you ever feelingly confess, that there was no
Health in you -- That the Remembrance of your original and actual Sins was
grievous unto you, and the Burden of them intolerable? If not, you have been
only offering God vai^^ Oblations -- You never yet prayed in your Lives -- The
Comfort never yet came effectually into your Souls -- Consequently you are not
in the Faith properly so called -- No, you are at present (...) a State of
Death and Damnation.

Thirdly, The Comforter, when he comes effectually to work upon a Sinner, not
only convinces him of the Sin of his Nature, the Sin of his Life, but also the
Sin of his Duties.

We all naturally are Legalists, thinking to be justified by the Works of the
Law -- When somewhat awakened by the Terrors of the Lord, we immediately, like
the Pharisees of old, go about to establish our own Righteousness, and think we
shall find Acceptance with God, if we seek it with Tears -- Finding ourselves
damned by Nature, and our actual Sins, we the^ think to recommend ourselves to
God by our Duties, and hope by our Doings of one Kind or another, to inherit
eternal Life -- But whenever the Comforter comes into the Heart, it convinces
the Soul of these false Rests, and makes the Sinner, to see that all his
Righteousnesses are but as filthy Rags -- And that his best Works are but so
many splendid Sins -- And that for the most pompous Services, he deserves no
better a Doom than that of the unprofitable Servant, viz. to be thrown into
outer Darkness, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth.

And was this Degree of Conviction ever wrought in any of your Souls? Did the
Comforter ever come into your Hearts, so as to make you sick of your Duties, as
well as your Sins? Were you ever, with the Great Apostle of the Gentiles, made
to abhor your own Righteousness, which is by the Law, and acknowledge that you
deserve to be damned, though you should give all your Goods to feed the Poor?
Were you made to feel that your very Repentance needed to be repented of, and
that every Thing in yourselves is but D^ng and Dross? -- And that all the
Arguments you can retch for Mercy must be out of the Heart, and pure unmerited
Love o^ God? Were you ever made to lie at the Fee^ of sovereign Grace, and to
say, Lord, if thou will, thou may save me, if not, thou may justly damn
me -- I have nothing to plead, I can in no wise justify my self in thy Sight --
My best Performances I see will condemn me. -- And all I have to depend upon is
thy free Grace -- What say you? Was this eve^, or is this now, the habitual
Language of your Hearts? You have been frequently at the Temple. But did you
ever approach it in the Temple^ of the poor Publican; and after you have done
all, acknowledge that you have done nothing -- And upon a feeling experimental
Sense of your own Unworthiness* and Sinfulness, every way smite upon your
Breasts, and say, God be (...), to us Sinners* If you never were thus (...),
the Comforter never yet effectually (...) into your Souls -- You are out of
Christ, and if God should require your Souls in that Condition, he would be no
better to you than a con^^ming Fire.

But there is a (...) Sin, which the Comfor^^^, when he comes, convinces the
Soul of, and (...) alone (it is very remarkable) but Lord (...) was the only
Sin worth (...) it is the Root of all (...) It is the reigning, (...) Sin of
the World -- And what (...) that Sin may be? -- It is (...) that Root of all
other Evils, (...) the Sin of (...) -- Of Sin, says our (...). Ver. (...)
because they believed not on me.

But (...), the Christian World, and (...) that hear me this Day, want (...)
Ghost (...) convince you of Unbelief? (...) any Infidels here? Yes, (Oh! that
(...) not too great Reason to think so) I fear m^st are such -- Not indeed such
Infidels as pro^e^^edly deny the Lord that bought us (though (...) fear too many
even of such Monsters are in every Country;) but I mean such Unbelievers that
have no more Faith in Christ than the Devils themselves -- Perhaps you may
think you believe, (...) you repeat the Creed, or subscribe to a Confession of
Faith -- Because you go to Church (...) Meeting, receive the Sacrament, and are
taken (...) full Communion -- These are blessed Privileges, but all this may
be done, without our (...) true Believers -- And I know not how to detect your
false hypocritical Faith better, than (...) putting to you this Question --
Suppose I was to ask you, "How long have you ^^lieved?" -- Would not most of
you say, As (...) we can remember, we never did ^^believe -- Then this is a
certain Sign that you have no true Faith at all -- No, not so much as a Grain
of M^stard Seed -- For if you believe now, (unless you were sanctified in your
Infancy) you must know that there was a Time, in which you did not believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ -- And the Holy Ghost, if ever you received it, convinced
you of this -- Eternal Truth has declared, when he is come, ^e will convince
the World of Sin, because they believe not on me.

None of us believe by Nature -- But after the Holy Ghost has convinced us of
the Sin of our Natures, and the Sin of our Lives, and Duties, in order to
convince us of our utter Inability to save ourselves, and that we must be
beholden to God, as for every thing else, so for Faith (without which, it is
impossible to please, or be saved ^y Christ.) He convinces us also, that we
have no Faith -- Do thou believe on the Son of God? is the grand Question
which the Holy Ghost now puts to the Soul -- At the same Time he works with
such Power and Demonstration, that the Soul sees, and is obliged to confess
that it has no Faith.

This is a Thing little thought of by most that call themselves Believers --
They dream they are Christians, because they live in a Christian Country -- If
they were born Turks, they would believe on Mahomet -- For what is that which
Men commonly call Faith, but an outward Consent to the established Religion?
But do not you thus deceive your own selves -- For true Faith is quite another
Thing -- Ask your selves therefore, whether or not the Holy Ghost ever
powerfully convinced you of the Sin of Unbelief? You are perhaps so devout (as
you may imagine) as to get a Catalogue of Sins, which you look over, and
confess in a formal Manner, as often as you go to the Holy Sacrament -- But
amongst all your Sins, did you ever once confess and bewail that damning Sin of
Unbelief? -- Were you ever made to cry out, Lord, give me Faith -- Lord, give
me to believe on thee, Oh, that I had Faith* -- Oh, that I could believe! If
you never were thus distressed -- At least, if you never saw and felt, that you
had no Faith, it is a certain Sign that the Holy Ghost the Comforter, never
came into, and worked, savingly upon your Souls.

But is it not odd, that the Holy Ghost should, be called a Comforter, when it
is plain, by they Experience of all God's Children, (...) of Conviction is
usually attended with (...) Conflicts, and a great deal of Soul*(...)? -- I
answer, the Holy Ghost may well (...) termed a Comforter, even in (...) Work --
Because it is the only Way to, and ends in (...) Comfort -- Blessed are they
that are th^^ convicted by him, for they shall be comforted Nay, not only so,
but there is present Comfort* (...) in the midst of these Convictions -- The
(...) rejoice in the Sight of its own Misery -- Blesses God (...) bringing
(...) Darkness into Light, and looks forward with (...) Comfortable Prospect of
fu^^re Deliverance^, (...) knowing, that though Sorrow ^ay endure for a Night,
Joy will come in the Morning.

Thus it is that the Holy Ghost convinces the Soul of Sin -- And if so, holy
wretchedly (...) -- they mistaken, that blind the Light of the Spirit with the
Light of Conscience, as all such do, who say, that Christ lights every Man
that comes into the World, and that Light, if improved, will bring us to Jesus
Christ. -- If such Doctrine be true, the Promise in the Text was needless --
Our Lord's Apostles had already that Light -- The World hereafter to be
convinced had that Light -- And if that was sufficient to bring them to Christ,
why was it expedient that Christ should go away to Heaven, to send down the
Holy Ghost to do this for them -- Alas! all have not this Spirit -- It is the
special Gift of God, and without this special Gift, we can never come to Christ.

The (...) of Conscience will accuse or convince us of any common Sin -- But
the Light of natural Conscience never did, never will, and never can convince
of Unbelief -- If it could, how comes it to pass, that not one of the Heathens,
who improved the Light of Nature in such an eminent Degree, was ever convinced
of Unbelief? No, natural Conscience cannot effect this -- It is the peculiar
Property of the Holy Ghost the Comforter -- When he is come, he will reprove
(or convince) the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and Judgment.

We have heard how he convince of Sin -- We come now to show, what is the
Righteousness which the Comforter convinces the World of.

By the Word Righteousness, in some Places of Scripture, we are to understand
that common Justice which we ought to practice between Man and Man -- As when
Paul is said to reason of Temperance and Righteousness before a trembling Felix
-- But here (as in a Multitude of other Places in holy Writ) we are to
understand by the Word Righteousness, the active and passive Obedience of the
dear Lord Jesus -- Even that perfect, personal, all-sufficient Righteousness,
which he has wrought out for that World which the Spirit is to convince -- Of
Righteousness, says our Lord, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more
-- This is one Argument that the Holy Spirit makes use of to prove Christ's
Righteousness -- Because he is gone to the Father, and we see him no more --
For, had he not wrought out a sufficient Righteousness, the Father would have
sent him back, as not having done what he undertook, and we should have seen
him again.

Oh, the Righteousness of Christ! It so comforts my Soul, that I must be
excused if I mention it in all my Discourses -- I would not, if I could help
it, have one Sermon without it -- Whatever Infidels may object, or Arminians
^ophistically argue against an imputed Righteousness -- Yet whoever know
themselves and God, must acknowledge, that Jesus Christ is the End of the Law
for Righteousness, and perfect Justification, in the Sight of God, to every one
that believes. And that we are to be made the Righteousness of God in him --
This, (...) only a poor Sinner can lay hold of, because Anchor of his Hope --
Whatever (...) that is, of Salvation Men may ^ay, (...) hold on Christ's see no
other Foundation whereon to build my Hopes of Salvation, but on the Rock of
Christ's personal Righteousness imputed to (...) Soul.

Many I believe have a rational Conviction of, and agree with me in this -- But
rational Convictions, if rested in, avail but little -- It must be a spiritual,
experimental Conviction of the Truth which is saving -- And therefore our Lord
says -- When the Holy Ghost comes, in the Day of his Power, it convinces of
this Righteousness, viz. of the Reality, and Compleatness, and Sufficiency of
it, to save a poor Sinner.

In the foregoing Part of this Discourse, we showed how the Holy Ghost
convinces the Sinner of the Sin of his Nature, Life, Duties, an^ of the Sin of
Unbelief -- And what then must the poor Creature do? He must, he must
inevitably despair, if there be no Hope but ^n himself -- When therefore the
Spirit has haunted the Sinner out of all his false Rests and Hiding-Places,
taken off the pitiful Fig Leaves of his own Work^ and driven him out of the
Trees of the Garden (his outward Reformations) and placed him naked before the
Bar of a sovereign, holy, just, and Sin-avenging God; then, then it is, when
the Soul, having the Sentence of Death within itself because of Unbelief, has a
sweet Display (...) Christ's Righteousness made to it by the Holy Spirit of God
-- (...) is that he begins (...) We (...) to act in the Quality of a Comforter,
(...) the Soul so powerfully of the (...) All Sufficiency of Christ's (...)

By the Word* Soul (...) immediately set a (...) Scripture, we are (...) and
thirsting after it -- Now the (...) begins to see* that though he have destroyed
himself, yet in Christ is his Help -- That though he has no Righteousness of his
own to recommend him, there is a Fullness of Grace, a Fullness of Truth, a
Fullness of Righteousness in the dear Lord Jesus, which, if once imputed to him,
would make him happy for ever and ever.

None, none can tell, (...) those happy Souls who have experienced it* with
what Demonstration of the Spirit this Conviction comes -- Oh, how amiable, as
well as all-sufficient, does the blessed Jesus now appear! With what new Eyes
does the Soul now see the Lord its Righteousness! Brethren, it is unutterable
-- If you were never thus convinced of Christ's Righteousness in your own
Souls, though you may believe at doctrinally, it will avail yo^^ nothing -- The
Comforter never came savingly into your Souls -- And then you are comfortless
indeed.

But what will this Righteousness avail, if the Soul has it not in Possession?
-- The next Thing therefore the Comforter, when he comes, convinces the Soul
of, is Judgment.

By the Word Judgment, I understand that well-grounded Peace, that settled
Judgment, which the Soul forms of itself, when it is enabled by the Spirit of
God, to lay hold on Christ's Righteousness, which I believe it always does,
when convinced in the Manner beforementioned -- Of Judgment, says our Lord,
because the Prince of this World is judged; that is, the Soul, being enabled to
lay hold on Christ's perfect Righteousness (...) a lively Faith, (...)
Conviction wrought in it by the Holy Spirit, that the (...) this World is now
judged -- The S^^l, being now justified by Faith, it has Peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and can triumphantly say, It is Christ that
justifies me, (...) now that condemns me? The strong Man armed is now cast out*
My Soul is now in a true Peace -- The Prince of this World will come and
accuse, but he ha^ now no Share in me -- The Blessed Spirit which I have
received, and whereby I (...) enabled to apply Christ's Righteousness to my
poor Soul, powerfully convinces me of (...) Why should I fear? Or o^ what shall
I (...), since God's Spirit witnesses with my Spirit, that I am a Child of God?
The Lord (...) up on High -- He has ^ed Captivity Captive -- He has received
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, that best of Gifts for Men, and that Comforter is
come into my Heart -- He is faithful that has promised -- I, even I, am
powerfully, rationally, spiritually convi^^^d of Sin, Righteousness and
Judgment -- By this I know the Prince of this World is judged.

Thus, (...), may we suppose the Soul to triumph, in which the Promise of the
Text is happily fulfilled -- And though at the Beginning of this (...) said m^st
had never experienced any thing of this, and that therefore this Preaching must
be Foolishness to most, yet I doubt not but there are some few happy Souls,
who, through Grace, have been enabled to follow me Step by Step -- And
notwithstanding the Holy Ghost might at directly work in the same Order a^ I
have ^escribed, and perhaps they cannot exactly say (...) Time when, yet they
have a well-grounded confidence that the Work is done, and that they we really
been convinced of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, in some Way, or at some Time
(...) another.

And now, what shall I say to you? O thank God, thank the Lord Jesus, thank the
ever-^lessed Trinity, for this unspeakable Gift -- For you would never have
been thus highly favored, (...) not he, who first spoke Darkness into Light,
^^ved you with an everlasting Love, and enlightened you by his Holy Spirit, and
that too, not*

Account of any good Thing foreseen in you, but for his own Name's Sake.

Be humble therefore, O Believers, be humble -- Look to the Rock from whence
you have been ^^ewn -- Extol Free Grace -- Admire Electing Love, which alone
has made you to differ from the rest of your Brethren -- Has God bro't you into
Light? Walk as becom^^h Children of Light -- Provoke not the Holy Spirit to
depart from you -- For though he has sealed you to the Day of Redemption, and
you know that the Prince of this World is judged; yet if you backslide, grow
lukewarm, or forget your first Love, the (...) will visit your Offenses with
the Rod of Affliction, and your Sin with spiritual Scourges -- Be not therefore
high-minded, but fear -- Rejoice, but let it be with Trembling -- As the Elect
of God, put on not only Humbleness of Mind, but Bowels of Compassion, and pray,
Oh pray, for your unconverted Brethren! -- Help me, help me now, O Children of
God, and hold up ^^y Hands, as Aaron and Hur once held up the Hands of Moses --
Pray, whilst I am Preaching, that the Lord may enable me to say, This Day is
the Promise in the Text fulfilled in some poor Sinners Hearts -- Cry mightily
to God, and with the Cords of a holy Violence, pull down Blessings on your
Neighbors Heads -- Christ yet lives and reigns in Heaven -- The Residue of the
Spirit is yet in his Hand, and a plentiful Effusion of it is promised in the
latter Days of the Church -- And Oh that the Holy Ghost, the blessed Comforter,
would now come down, and convince those that are Christless amongst you, of
Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment! Oh that you were once made willing to
be convinced! -- But perhaps you had rather be filled with Wine, than with the
Spirit, and are daily chasing that Holy Guest from your Souls -- What shall I
say for you to God? Father forgive them, for they know not what they do? What
shall I say from God to you? -- Why? that God was in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself -- Therefore I beseech you, as in Christ's Stead, be ye
reconciled to God -- Do not go away contradicting and blaspheming -- I know
Satan would have you be gone -- Many of you may be uneasy, and are ready to cry
^ut* What a Weariness is this! But I will not let you go -- I have wrestled
with God for my Hearers in private, and I must wrestle with you (...) public
-- Though of myself I can do no (...), and you can no more by your own Power
(...) to, and believe on Christ, than Lazaru^ (...) come forth from the Grave,
yet who (...) but God may beget some of you again (...) Hope by this
Foolishness of Preaching, (...) that you may be some of that World, which the
Comforter is to convince of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment? -- Poor,
Christless (...) do you know what a Condition you are (...) Why you are lying
in the wicked One, the (...) -- He is in you -- He rules in you, he walks (...)
in you, unless you dwell in Christ, (...) the Comforter is come into your
Hearts -- (...) contentedly lie in that wicked (...) the Devil? What Wages will
he give (...) Eternal Death -- Oh that you would (...) to Christ! -- The Free
Gift of God through (...) is eternal Life -- He will accept of you even (...)* if
you will believe in him -- The Comforter ^ay yet come into your Hearts, even
yours -- All that are now his living Temples, were once ^^ing in the wicked
One, as well as you -- This blessed Gift, this Holy Ghost, the blessed Jesus
received even for the Rebellious -- Oh that he would show me that he has
received it for some of you! -- I see many of you affected -- But are your
Passions only a little wrought upon, or are your Souls really touched with a
lively Sense of the Heinousness of your Sins, your Want of Faith, or the
Preciousness of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ? If so, I hope the Lord has
been gracious, and the Comforter is coming into your Hearts. O do not stifle
these Convictions! -- Do not go away, and strait way forget what Manner of
Doctrine you have heard, and thereby show, that these are only common Workings
of a few transient Convictions, floating upon the Surface of your Hearts -- Beg
of God that you may be sincere (for he alone can make you so) and that you may
indeed desire that the Promise of the Text may be fulfilled in your Souls --
Who knows but the Lord may be gracious? Remember you have no Plea but sovereign
Mercy -- But for your Encouragement also, remember it is the World, such as you
are, to whom the Comforter is to come, and whom he is to convince -- Wait
therefore at Wisdom's Gates -- The bare Probability of having a Door of Mercy
opened, is enough to keep you (...) -- Christ Jesus came into the World to ^a^e
Sinner, the Chief of them -- You know not but he came to save you -- Do not go
and quarrel with God's Decrees, and say, if I am a Reprobate, I shall be
damned; if I am elected, I shall be saved, and therefore I Will do nothing --
What have you to do with God's Decrees? Secret Things belong to him -- It is
your Business to add all Diligence to make your Calling and Election s^re -- I^
there are but few that find the Way that leads to Life, do you strive to be
some of them -- You know not but you may be in the Number of those few, and
that your striving may be the Means which God intends to bless, to give you an
Entrance in -- If you do not act thus, you are unsincere -- And if you do, who
knows but you may find Mercy? For though, after you have done all that you can,
God may justly cut you off, yet never was a single Person damned that did all
that he could -- Though therefore your Hands are withered, stretch them out --
Though you are impotent, ^^ck and lame, come lie at the Pool -- Who knows, but by
and by the Lord Jesus may have Compassion on you, and send the Comforter to
convince you of Sin, Righteousness, and of Judgment? He is a God full of
Compassion and Long-suffering, otherwise you and I had been long since lifting
up our Eyes in Torments -- But still he is patient with us -- Yet, O Christless
Sinners, you are alive, and who knows but God intends to bring you to
Repentance? Could my Prayers or Tears effect it, you should have Vollies of the
one, and Floods of the other -- My Heart is now touched with a Sense of your
Condition -- May our merciful High Priest now send down the Comforter, and make
you sensible of it also! -- Oh the Love of Christ! (...) constrains me yet to
beseech you to come to him -- Oh what do you reject, if you reject Christ, the
Lord of Glory! -- Oh, Sinners, give the dear Redeemer a Lodging in your Souls
-- Do not be Bethlemites -- Sons and Daughters give Christ your Hearts, your
whole Hearts -- Indeed he is worthy -- He made you, and not you yourselves --
You are not your own -- Oh give Christ then your Bodies and Souls, which are
his! -- Is it not enough to melt you down, to think that the high and lofty
One, that inhabiteth Eternity, should (...) condescend to invite you by his
Minister? How soon can he frown you to Hell? And how know you, but he may (...)
Instant, if you do not hear his Voice? -- Did any yet harden their Hearts
against Christ, and prosper? Come then, do not send me sorrowful away! Do not
let me have Reason to cry out, O my Leanness, my Leanness! -- Do not let me go
weeping into my Closet, and say, Lord, they will not believe my Report -- Lord,
I have called them, and they will not answer, I am unto them as a very pleasant
Song, and as one that plays upon a pleasant Instrument; but their Hearts are
running after the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life
-- Would you be willing that I should give such an Account of you, or make such
a Prayer before God? And yet I must not only do so here, but appear in Judgment
against you hereafter, unless you will come to Christ -- Once more therefore I
entreat you to come -- What Objections have you to make? -- Behold (...) stand
here in the Name of God, to answer all that you can offer -- But I know no one
can come, unless the Father draw him -- I will therefore address me to my God,
and intercede with him to send the Comforter into your Hearts.

O blessed Jesus, who art a God whose Compassions fail not, and in whom all the
Promises are Yea and Amen; thou that fittest between the Cherubims, show
thyself amongst* us -- Oh let us now see thy Outgoings! -- Oh let us now taste
that thou art gracious, and reveal thy Almighty Arm! -- Get thyself the Victory
in these poor Sinners Hearts -- Let not the Word spoken, prove like Water spilt
upon the Ground -- Send down, send down, O great High Priest, the Holy Spirit
to convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment -- So will we
give Thanks and Praise to thee for ever -- Even to thee O Father, thee O Son,
and thee O blessed Spirit; to whom, as three Persons but one God, be ascribed
by Angels and Archangels, by Cherubims and Seraphims, and all the heavenly
Host, all possible Power, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now and for evermore.
Amen, Amen, Amen.

SERMON IX.
The Conversion of ZACCHEUS.
LUKE XIX 9, 10. And Jesus said unto him, This Day is Salvation come to this
House; forasmuch as he also is the Son of Abraham. For the Son of Man is come
to seek and to save that which was lost.
SAlvation every where through the whole Scripture, is said to be the Free Gift
of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Not only Free, because God is a sovereign
Agent, and therefore may withold it from, or confer it on whom he pleases; but
Free, because there is nothing to be found in Man, that can (...) Way induce
God to be merciful unto him. The Righteousness o^ Jesus Christ is the sole
Cause of our finding Favor in God's Sight -- Thus Righteousness apprehended by
Faith (which is also the Gift of God) makes it our own -- And this Faith, if
true, will work by Love.

These are Parts of those Glad Tidings which are published in the Gospel, and
of the Certainty of them, next to the express Word of God, the Experience of
all such as have been saved, is the best, and, as I take it, the most undoubted
Proof -- That God might teach us every Way, he has been pleased to leave upon
Record many Instances of the Power of his Grace exerted in the Salvation of
several particular Persons, that we, hearing how he dealt with them, might from
thence infer the Manner we must expect to be dealt with ourselves, and learn in
what Way we must look for Salvation, if we truly desire to be made Partakers of
the heavenly Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

The Conversion of the Person referred to in the Text, I think will be of no
small Service to us in this Matter, if rightly improved -- I would hope most of
you know who the Person is, to whom the Lord Jesus speaks -- It is the Publican
Zaccheus, to whose House the blessed Jesus said Salvation came, and whom he
pronounces a Son of Abraham.

It is my Design (God helping) to make some Remarks upon his Conversion
recorded at large in the Verses foregoing, and th^n to infor^ the latter Part
of the Text, as an Encouragement to poor, undone Sinners to come to Jesus
Christ -- (...) the Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lo^t.

St. Luke introduces the Account of this Man's Conversion thus -- Ver. 1. And
Jesus entered and passed through Jericho -- The Holy Jesus made it his Business
to go about doing Good -- As the Sun in the Firmament is continually spreading
his benign, quickening, and chearing Influences over the natural, so the Son of
Righteousness arose with healing under his Wings, and was daily and hourly
diffusing his gracious Influences over the moral World -- The Chapter
foregoing, acquaints us of a notable Miracle wrought by the Holy Jesus on a
poor blind Bartimeus -- And in this a greater presents itself to our
Consideration -- The Evangelist would have us take particular Notice of it --
For he introduces it with the Word Behold -- And behold, says he, Ver. 2 there
was a Man named Zaccheus, which was the Chief among the Publicans, and he was
rich.

Well might the Evangelist usher in the Relation of this Man^ Conversion with
the Word ^ehold! For, according to human Judgment, how many unsurmountable
Obstacles lay in the Way of it! Surely no one will say there was any Fitness in
Zaccheus for Salvation -- For we are told that he was a Publican, and therefore
in all Probability a notorious Sinner -- The Publicans were Gatherers of the
Roman Taxes -- They were infamous for their abominable Extortion -- Their v^ry
Name therefore became so very odious, that we find the Pharisees often
reproached our Lord, as very wicked, because he was a Friend unto, and sat down
to Meat with them -- Zaccheus then being a Publican, was no doubt a Sinner, and
being Chief among the Publicans, consequently was Chief among Sinners -- Nay,
(...) was rich. And one inspired Apostle has told us, that not many mighty, not
many noble, are called -- Another ^aith, God has chosen the Poor of this World,
rich in Faith -- And he that was the Maker and the Redeemer of the Apostles
assures us, that it is ^asier for a Camel, or Cable-Rope, to go through the Eye
of a Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God -- Let not
therefore the Rich glory in the Multitude of their Riches.

But rich as he was, we are told, Ver. 3. (...) "he sought to see Jesus" -- And
that was a Wonder indeed! -- The common People heard our Lord gladly, and the
Poor received the Gospel -- The Multitude, the (...), the Mob, the People that
knew not the Law, as the proud Highpriests called them, used to follow him on
Foot cut into the Country, and sometimes stayed with him three Days together to
hear him preach -- But did the Rich believe or attend on him? No -- Our Lord
preached up the Doctrine of (...) -- He preached too searching for them, (...)
therefore they counted him their Enemy, ^^^ecuted and spoke all Manner of Evil
against (...) falsely. Let not the Ministers of Christ (...), if they meet with
the like Treatment (...) the rich Men of this wicked and adulterous Generation
-- I should think it no Scandal ((...) it true) to hear it affirmed, that none
but the poor attended my Ministry -- Their Souls are as precious to our Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Souls of the greatest Men -- They were the Poor that
attended him in the Days of his Flesh -- These are they whom he has chosen to
be rich in Faith, and to be the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven -- Were the
rich in this World's Goods generally to speak well of me, wo^ be unto me -- I
should think it a dreadful Sign that I was only a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing,
that I spoke Peace, Peace, when there was no Peace, and prophesied smoother
Things than the Gospel would allow of. Hear ye this, O ye Rich -- Let who will
dare to do it, God forbid that I should despise the Poor. In doing so, I should
reproach my Maker -- No, the Poor are dear to my Soul -- I rejoice to see them
fly to the Doctrine of Christ, like the Doves to your Windows. I only pray that
the Poor, who attend, may be evangelized, and turned into the Spirit of the
Gospel -- If so, Blessed are ye -- For yours is the Kingdom of Heaven.

But we must return to Zaccheus -- He sought to see Jesus. That is good News --
I could heartily wish I could say, it was out of a good Principle -- But
without speaking con^^^ry to that Charity, which hopes and believes all Things
for the best, we may say, that the same Principle drew him after Christ, which
now draws Multitudes (to speak plainly, it may be Multitudes of you) to hear a
particular Preacher, that is, Curiosity. For we are told, that he came not to
hear his Doctrine, but to view his Person, (...) use the Words of the
Evangelist, to see (...) -- Our Lord's Fame was now (...) through all
Jerusalem, and all the Country (...) about -- Some said he was a (...) M^n --
(...), nay but he deceives the People -- And (...) Curiosity drew out this
rich Publican (...) to see who this Person was of whom he (...) heard such
various Accounts -- But it seems (...) not conveniently get a Sight of him for
(...) Pr^ss, and because he was little of Stature. (...) how many are kept from
seeing Christ in Glory by reason of the Press -- I mean, how many (...) ashamed
of being singularly Good, and there^^re ^^llow a Multitude to do Evil, because
they (...) a Press or Throng of polite Acquaintance. And for Fear of being set
at naught by those with whom they used to ^it at Meat, they deny the Lord of
Glory, and are ashamed to confess, (...) before Men -- This ba^e, this servile
Fear of M^n, is the Bane of true Christianity -- It brings a dreadful Snare
upon the Soul, and is the Ruin of ten Thousands -- For I am fully persuaded,
Number, are rationally convicted of Gospel Tr^t^* but not being able to brook
Contempt, they will not prosecute their Conviction, no^ reduce them into
Practice -- Happy those, who in this Respect, at least like Zaccheus, are
resolved to overc^me all Impediments that ^e in their Way to a Sight of Christ
-- For finding he could not see Christ because of the Press, and the Littleness
of his natural Stature, he did not smi^e upon his Breast, and depart, saying,
It is in vain to seek after a Sight of him my longer, I can never attain unto
it -- No, finding he could not see Christ, if he continued in the midst of, he
( Ver. 4.) Ran before, the Multitude, and climbed up into a Sycamore-Tree to
see him: For he was to pass that Way.

There Is no seeing Christ in Glory, unless we run before the Multitude, and are
willing to be in the Number of those despised few, who take the Kingdom of God
by Violence -- That broad Way, in which so many go, can never be that strait
and narrow Way which leads to Life -- Our Lord's Flock was, and always will be,
comparatively a little One -- And unless we dare to run before the Multitude in
a holy Singularity, and can rejoice in being accounted Fools for Christ's Sake,
we shall never see Jesus with Comfort, when he appears in Glory -- From
mentioning the Sycamore-Tree, and considering the Difficulty with which
Zaccheus must climb it, we may further learn, that those who would see Christ,
must undergo other Difficulties and Hardships besides Contempt. Zaccheus,
without doubt, went through both -- Did not many, think you, laugh at him as he
ran along, and in the Language of Michal, Readiness Daughter, cry out, How
glorious did the rich Zaccheus look to Day, when forgetting the Greatness of
his Station, he ran before a pitiful, giddy Mob, and climbed up a
Sycamore-Tree, to see an Enthusiastic Preacher! -- But Zaccheus cares not for
all that -- His Curiosity was strong -- If he could but see who Jesus was, he
did not value what Scoffers said of him -- And thus much more will it be with
all those who have an effectual Desire to see Jesus in Heaven -- They will go
on from Strength to Strength, break through every Difficulty lying in their
Way, and care not what Men or Devils say of, or do unto them -- May the Lord
make us all thus minded for his dear Son's Sake!

At length, after taking much Pains, and going (as we may well suppose) through
much Contempt, Zaccheus has climbed the Tree; and there he sits, as he thinks,
hid in the Leaves of it, and watching when he should see Jesus pass by -- "For
he was to pass by that Way."

But sing, O Heavens, and rejoice, O Earth! Praise, magnify, and adore
sovereign, electing, free, preventing Love, Jesus the everlasting God, the
Prince of Peace, who saw Nathanael under the Fig Tree, and Zaccheus from
Eternity, now sees him in the Sycamore-Tree, and calls him in Time.

Ver. 5. And when Jesus came to the Place, he looked up, and saw him, and said
unto him, Zaccheus, make haste and come down; for this Day I must abid^ at thy
House -- Amazing Love! Well might St. Luke usher in the Account with the Word
Behold! It is worthy our highest Admiration. When Zaccheus thought of no such
Thing, nay, thought that Christ Jesus did not know him, Behold Christ does,
what we never hear he did before or after, I mean, invite himself to the House
of Zaccheus -- Saying, Zaccheus, make haste add come down; for this (...) I
must abide at thy House -- Not pray let (...), but I must abide this Day at thy
House. He also calls him by Name, as though he was well acquainted with him --
And indeed well he might. For his Name was written in the Book of Life. He was
one of those whom the Father had given him from all Eternity. Therefore he must
abide at his House that Day -- For whom he did predestinate, them he also
called.

Here then, as through a Glass, we may see the Doctrine of free Grace evidently
exemplified before us -- Here was no Fitness in Zaccheus -- He was a Publican,
chief among the Publicans, not only so, but rich, and came hither to see Christ
only out of Curiosity. But sovereign Grace triumphs over all -- And if we do
God Justice, and are effectually wrought upon, we must acknowledge there was no
more Fitness in us, than in Zaccheus -- And had not Christ prevented us by his
Call, we had remained dead in Trespasses and Sins, and alienated from the
divine Life, even as others. Jesus looked up, and saw him, and said unto him,
Zaccheus, make haste and come down; for this Day I must abide at thy House.

With what different Emotions of Heart may we suppose Zaccheus received this
Invitation? Think you not that he was surprised to hear Jesus Christ call him
by Name, and not only so, but invite himself to his House? Surely thinks
Zaccheus, I dream. It cannot be -- How should ^e know me? I never saw him
before -- Besides, I shall undergo much Contempt, if I receive him under my
Roof -- Thus, I say, we may suppose Zaccheus thought within himself. But what
says the Scripture? I will make a willing People in the Day of my Power --
With this outward Call, there went an efficacious Power from God, which sweetly
overruled his natural Will; and therefore, Ver. 6. "He made haste, and came
down, and received him joyfully" -- Not only into his House, but also into his
Heart.

Thus it is the great God brings home his Children. He calls them by Name, by
his Word or Providence -- He speaks to them by his Spirit -- Hereby they are
enabled to open their Hearts, and are made willing to receive the King of Glory
in -- For Zaccheus's sake let us not entirely condemn People that come under
the Word, out of no better Principle than Curiosity. Who knows but God may call
them? It is good to be where the Lord is passing by -- May all that are now
present, out of this Principle, hear the Voice of the Son of God speaking to
their Souls, and so hear that they may live! Not that Men ought therefore to
take Encouragement to come out of Curiosity -- For perhaps a thousand more, at
other Times, came to see Christ out of Curiosity, as well as well as Zaccheus,
which were not effectually called by hi^ Grace -- I only mention this for the
Encouragement of my own Soul, and the Consolation of God's Children, who are
too apt to be angry with those who do not attend on the Word out of Love to God
-- But let them alone -- Brethren pray for them -- How do you know but Jesus
Christ may speak to their Hearts? A few Word from Christ, applied (...) --
Zaccheus, (...) -- And (...) and came down, (...).

I have observed, in Holy Scripture, how particularly it (...) remarked, that
Persons rejoiced upon believing in Christ -- Thus the converted (...) went on
(...) Way rejoicing -- Thus the (...) rejoiced with his whole House -- Thus
Zaccheus received Christ joyfully -- And well may those rejoice that receive
Jesus Christ. For with him they receive Righteousness, Sanctification, and
eternal Redemption -- Many have brought up an ill Report upon our good Land,
(...) ^ain persuade People that Religion will make them melancholy mad -- So
far from it, that Joy is one Ingredient of the Kingdom of God in the Heart of a
Believer -- The Kingdom (...) God is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost -- To rejoice in the Lord, is a Gospel Duty. Rejoice in the Lord always,
and (...) I say rejoice -- And who can be so joyful, as th^se who know that
their Pardon is sealed before they go hence, and are no more seen? The godly
may, but I cannot see how any ungodly Man can rejoice -- They cannot be truly
cheerful. What if wicked Men may sometimes have (...) amongst them? It is only
the Laughter (...) -- In the midst of it, (...) At the best, it is but like the
Crackling of Thorns under a Pot -- It makes a Blaze, but soon goes out -- But
as for the Godly, it is not to with them -- Their Joy is solid and lasting --
As it is a Joy that a Stranger intermedd^th not with; so it is a Joy that (...)
Man takes from them -- It is a Joy in God, a (...) unspeakable and full of
Glory.

It should seem that Zaccheus was under (...) Distress but a (...) Perhaps
(...) G^thery, in his Book entitled, The (...) thing a saving Inter (...) not
above a Quart^^ (...) Hour -- I add perhaps not so long -- For, (...) one
observes, sometimes the Lord Jesus (...) to deliver speedily -- God (...) a
sovereign A (...), and works upon (...) Children in their (...) Calling,
according to the Counsel of (...) Will -- It is with the (...) is natural Birth
A^^ Women have not the (...) Pangs -- A Christians have not the (...) Degree of
Conviction. But all agree (...) that they (...) have Jesus Christ formed in the
(...) that have not so many (...) with the greater (...) herea^^e^ (...) But
(...) We (...) We know not what Zaccheus (...) I know (...) ^ow believed in
Christ, and was justified (...) a^quitted, and looked upon as righted (...)
God's Sight, tho'^ Publican, chief among the Publicans, not many Moments
before. And thus it is with all that, like Zaccheus, receive Jesus Christ by
Faith into their Hearts. The very Moment they find (...) in him, they are
freely justified from all Things from which they could not be justified by the
Law of Moses -- For by Grace are we saved, through Faith, and that not of
ourselves, it is the Gift of God.

Say not any of you within yourselves, this is a licentious, Antinomian
Doctrine -- For the Faith, if true, will work by Love, and be productive of the
Fruits of Holiness -- See an Insta^^^ in this Convert Zaccheus -- No sooner had
he received Jesus Christ by Faith into his Heart, but he evidences it by his
Works -- For, Ver. 8. we w^ are told, Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the
Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my Goods I give unto the Poor; and if I have
ta^en any thing from any Man by false Accusation I restore him Fourfold.

Having believed on Jesus in his Heart, he now makes Confession of him with his
Mouth to Salvation -- Zaccheus stood forth -- He was not ashamed, but stood
forth before his Brother Publicans -- For true Faith casts out all servile,
sinful Fear of Man -- "And said, Behold, Lord" -- It is remarkable how readily
People in Scripture have owned the Divinity of Christ immediately upon their
Conversion -- Thus the Woman at Jacob's Well -- "Is not this the Christ?" Thus
the Man born blind -- "Lord I believe, and worshipped him." Thus Zaccheus,
"Behold, Lord." An incontestable Proof this to me, that those who deny our
Lord's Divinity, never effectually felt his Power -- If they had, they would
not speak so lightly of him -- They would scorn to deny his eternal Power and
Godhead -- Zaccheus stood forth, and said, Behold, Lord, the half of my Goods,
I give to the Poor, and if I have taken any thing from any Man by false
Accusation, I (...) him Fourfold. -- Oh noble Fruits of a true living Faith in
the Lord Jesus! -- Every Word calls for our Notice -- Not some small, not the
tenth Part, but the half -- Of what? My Goods -- Things that were valuable My
Goods -- His own not another -- I give, not I will give when I die, when I can
keep them no longer; but I give now, even now. Zaccheus would be his own
Executor. For whilst we have Time we should do good -- But to whom would he
give half of his Goods? Not to the Rich, not to those who were already clothed
in Purple and fine Linen, of whom he might be recompensed again; but to the
Poor, the Maimed, the Halt, the Blind, from which he could expect no Recompense
till the Resurrection of the Dead -- I give to the Poor -- But knowing that he
must be just, before he could be charitable, and conscious to himself, that in
his public Administrations he had wronged many Persons, he adds, And if I have
taken any thing from any Man by false Accusation, I restore him Fourfold --
Hear ye this, all ye that make no Conscience of cheating the King of his Taxes,
or of buying or rolling Run Goods -- If ever God gives you true Faith, you will
never rest, till, like Zaccheus, you have made Restitution to the utmost of
your Power -- I suppose before his Conversion, he thought it no Harm^ to cheat
thus, no more than you may do now, and pleased himself frequently to be sure,
that he got so rich by doing so -- But now he is grieved for it at his Heart --
He confesses his Injustice before Men, and promises to make ample Restitution
-- Go ye cheating Publicans, learn of Zaccheus -- Go away and do likewise. If
you do not make Restitution here, the Lord Jesus shall make you confess it
before Men and Angels, and condemn you for it when he comes in the Glory of his
Father to Judgment hereafter.

After all this, with good Reason might our Lord say unto him -- This Day is
Salvation come to this House -- For so much as he also is the Son of Abraham --
Not so much by a natural, as by a spiritual Birth. He was made Partaker of like
precious Faith with Abraham -- Like Abraham he believed on the Lord, and it was
accounted to him for Righteousness -- His Faith, like Abraham's, worked by
Love, and I doubt not, but he has been long since sitting in Abraham's Harbor.

And now are you not ashamed of yourselves, who speak against the Doctrines of
Grace, especially that Doctrine of being justified by Faith alone, as though it
leaded to Licentiousness? What can be more unjust than such a Charge? Is not
the Instance of Zaccheus a sufficient Proof to the contrary? Have I strained it
to serve my own Turn? God forbid -- To the best of my Knowledge I have spoken
the Truth in Sincerity and the Truth as it is in Jesus -- I do affirm that we
are saved by Grace, and that we are justified by Faith alone -- But I do also
affirm, that Faith must be evidenced by Good Works, where there (...) an
Opportunity of performing them.

What therefore has been said of Zaccheus, may serve as a Rule, whereby all may
judge whether they have Faith or not -- You say you have Faith -- But how do
you prove it? Did you ever hear the Lord Jesus call you by Name? Were you ever
made to obey that Call? Did you ever, like Zaccheus, receive Jesus Christ
joyfully into your Hearts? Are you influenced by the Faith you say you have, to
stand up and contess the Lord Jesus before Men? Were you ever made willing to
own, and humble your selves for your past Offenses? Does your Faith work by
Love, so that you conscientiously lay up, according as God as prospered you,
for the Support of the Poor? Do you give Alms of all Things that you possess?
And have you made due Restitution to those you have wronged? If so, happy are
ye -- Salvation is come to your Souls -- You are Sons, you are Daughters of,
you shall shortly be everlastingly blessed with, faithful Abraham. But if you
are not thus minded, do not deceive your own Souls -- Though you may talk of
Justification by Faith like Angels, it will do you no Good -- It will only
increase your Damnation -- You hold the Truth, but it is in Unrighteousness.
Your Faith, being without Works, is dead -- You have the Devil, not Abraham,
for your Father -- Unless you get a Faith of the Heart, a Faith working by
Love, with Devils and damned Spirits shall you dwell for evermore.

But it is Time now to enforce the latter Part of the Text -- "For the Son of
Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost" -- These Words are spoken
by our Savior in Answer to some self-righteous Pharisees, who, instead of
rejoicing with the Angels in Heaven at the Conversion of such a Sinner,
murmured, saying, that he was gone to be a Guest with a Man that was a Sinner
-- To vindicate his Conduct, he tells them, that this was an Act agreeable to
the Design of his Coming -- For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost -- He might have said the Son of God -- But Oh the wonderful
Condescension of our Redeemer! He delights to style himself the Son of Man --
He came, says he, not only to save, but to seek and to save that which was lost
-- He came to Jericho to seek and save Zaccheus. For otherwise Zaccheus would
never have been saved by him -- But from whence came he? Even from Heaven, his
Dewlling Place, to this lower Earth, this Vale of Tears, to seek and save that
which was lost -- All that feel themselves lost, and are willing, like
Zaccheus, to receive him into their Hearts -- To save them -- With how great a
Salvation! Even from the Guilt, and also Power of their Sins -- To make them
Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with himself, and Partakers of that Glory, which
he enjoyed with the Father before the World began -- Thus will the Son of Man
save that which is lost -- He was made the Son of Man on purpose that he might
save them -- He had no other End but this in leaving his Father's Throne, in
obeying the moral Law, and hanging upon the Cross -- All that was done and
suffered only to satisfy, and procure a Righteousness for poor, lost, undone
Sinners, and that too without Respect of Persons -- "That which was lost" --
All of every Nation and Language, that feel, bewail, and are truly desirous of
being delivered from their lost State, the Son of Man came down to seek and to
save -- For he is a God mighty, not only so, but willing to save to the
uttermost all those that come to God through him -- He will in no wise cast them
out -- For he is the same to Day, as he was Yesterday. He comes now to Sinners,
as well as formerly, and I hope has sent me out this Day to seek, and under
him, to bring home some of you, the lost Sheep of the House of Israel -- What
say you? Shall I go home rejoicing? Saying, that many like Sheep have went
astray, but they have now believed on Jesus Christ, and so returned home to the
great Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls. If the Lord would be pleased thus to
prosper me in my Work, I care not how many Legalists and self-righteous
Pharisees murmur against me, for offering Salvation to the worst of Sinners --
For I know the Son of Man came to seek and (...) save them, and the Lord Jesus
will now be a Guest to the worst Publican, the vilest Sinner that is amongst
you, if he does but believe on him -- Make haste then, O Sinners, make haste,
and come by Faith to Christ -- Then, this Day, even this Hour, nay, this
Moment, if you believe^ Jesus Christ shall come, and make his eternal Abode in
your Hearts -- Which of you is ma^e willing to receive the King of Glory? Which
of you obeys the Call, a^ Zaccheus did? Alas! why do you stand still? How know
you whither Jesus Christ may ever call you again? Come then, poor guilty
Sinners -- Come away, poor lost, undone Publicans -- Make haste, I say, and
come away to Jesus Christ -- The Lord condescends to invite himself to come
under the filth* Roofs of the Houses of your Souls -- Do not be afraid of
entertaining him -- He will fill you with all Peace and Joy in Believing -- Do
not be ashamed to run before the Multitude, and to have all Manner of Evil
spoke against you falsely for his sake -- One Sight of Christ will make amends
for all -- Zaccheus was laughed at, and all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer Persecution? But what of that? Zaccheus (...) now crowned in
Glory, as you also shall shortly be, if you believe on, and are reproached for
Christ's sake. Do not therefore put me off with frivolous Excuses -- There Is no
Excuse can be given for your not coming to Christ -- You are lost, undone,
without him; and if he is not glorified in your Salvation, he will be glorified
in your Destruction -- If he does not come, and make his Abode in your Hearts,
you must take up an eternal Abode with the Devil and his Angels -- Oh that the
Lord would be pleased to pass by some of you at this Time! Oh that he may call
you by his Spirit; and make you a willing People in this Day of his Power! For
I know my Calling will not do, unless He, by his efficacious not, Grace,
compel you to come in -- Oh that you once felt what it is to receive Jesus
Christ into your Hearts! You would soon, like Zaccheus, give him every Thing --
You do not love Christ, because you do not know him -- You do not come to him,
because you do not feel your Want of him -- You are whole, and not
brokenhearted -- You are not sick, at least not sensible of your Sickness, and
therefore no wonder you do not apply to Jesus Christ, that Great, that Almighty
Physician -- You do not feel your selves lost, and therefore do not seek to be
found in Christ -- Oh that God would wound you with the Sword of his Spirit! Oh
that he would cause his Arrows of Conviction to (...) in your Heart, (...) Oh
that he would dart a R^v of divine Light into your Souls* For if you do not
feel your selves (...) Christ you are of all Men most miserable -- Your Souls
are dea^, you are not only an Image (...), but in some Degree Hell it self --
You carry Hell about with you, and you know (...) no -- Oh that I could see
some of you sensible of (...) and hear you cry out, Lord, break this hard Heart
-- Lord, deliver me from the Body of this Death -- Draw me, Lord, make me
willing to come after thee -- I am lost -- Lord, save me, or I perish -- W^^
this your Case, How (...) would the Lord stretch forth by Almighty Hand, and
say, Be of good Cheer, (...) I, be not afraid -- What a wonderful Ca^^^ (...)
your troubled Souls! Your (...) would (...) be with the Father and the Son --
Your Life would be hid with Christ in God -- Some of you I hope have
experienced this, and can say, I was lost, but I am found; I was dead, but am
alive again -- The Son of Man came and sought me in the Day of his Power, and
saved my sinful Soul -- And do you repent that you came to Christ? Has he not
been a good Master? Is not his Presence sweet to your Souls? Has he not been
faithful to his Promise? And have you not found that even in doing and
suffering for him there is an exceeding present great Reward? I am persuaded
you will answer, Yes -- Oh then, ye Saints, recommend and talk of the Love of
Christ to others, and tell them, Oh tell them, what great Things the Lord has
done for you! -- This may encourage others to come unto him -- And who knows,
but the Lord may make you Fishers of Men? The Story of Zaccheus was left on
Record for this Purpose -- No truly convicted Soul, after such an Instance of
divine Grace has been laid before him, need despair of Mercy -- What if you are
Publicans? Was not Zaccheus a Publican? What if you are chief among the
Publicans? Was not Zaccheus so likewise? What if you are rich? Was not Zaccheus
rich also? And yet Almighty Grace made him more than Conqueror over all these
Hindrances -- All Things are possible to Jesus Christ; Nothing is too hard for
Him -- He is the Lord Almighty -- Our Mountains of Sins must all fall before
this great Zerubbabel -- On him God the Father has laid the Iniquities of all
that shall believe on him, and in his own Body he bare them on the Tree --
There, there by Faith, O Mou^ners in Sion, may you see your Savior hanging
with Arms stretched out, and hear him, as it were, thus speaking to your Souls
-- Behold how I have loved you! -- Behold my Hand^ and my Feet! -- Look, look
into my wo^^ded Side, and (...) a Heart flaming with Love (...) stronger than
Death -- Come into my Arms, O Sinners, come wash your (...) in my Heart's Blood
-- See here (...) for all Sin and all (...) how the (...) you -- Come, (...)
and (...) your selves in (...) -- For I am (...) -- I am (...) may (...) more
-- (...) the Serpent in the (...) on a Tree -- See (...) you -- The (...) upon
me. I am thus (...) on him now -- For though he is dead, he (...) speak^eth all
this in the Scripture, nay, in (...) says all this in the Words of the Text --
The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that (...) was lost -- Do not
therefore any longer (...) the Lord of Glory -- Bring those Rebels, your Sins,
which will not have him to reign over them -- Bring them out to him -- Though you
cannot (...) them yourselves, yet he will slay them for you -- The Power of his
Death and Resurrection is (...) great now as formerly -- Make haste therefore,
ma^e haste, O ye Publicans and Sinners, and give the dear Lord Jesus your
Hearts, your whole Hearts -- If you refuse to hearken to (...) Call of the
Lord, remember your Damnation will be (...) I am free from the Blood (...) you
all -- You (...) acquit my Master and me at the terrible Day (...) Judgment --
Oh that you may know the Thing that (...) to your everlasting Peace, be (...)
they are eternally hid from your Eves! Let (...) that have the Lord Jesus
Christ in (...) say Amen.


