Business and Diversion inoffensive to GOD, and necessary for the Comfort and
Support of human Society.

A DISCOURSE uttered in Part AT Ammauskeeg-Falls, IN THE Fishing-Season. 1739

Deep in the Vale old Moniack rolls his Tides,
Romantic Prospects crown his reverend Sides;
Now through wild Grotts, and pandent Woods he strays,
And ravished at the Sight, his Course delays.
Silent and calm -- now with impetuous Shock
Pours his swift Torrent down the steepy Rock;
The tumbling Waves through airy Channels flow,
And loudly roaring, smoke and foam below.
I. W. BOSTON, Printed for S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queen Street. MDCCXLIII.

To the Honorable Theodore Atkinson, Esquire AND OTHER The Worthy Patrons of the
Fishing AT AMMAUSKEEG.
Gentlemen,
IT IS not to signify to others that I pretend to an Intimacy with you, or that
I ever had a Share in those pleasant Diversions, which you have innocently
indulged your selves in, at the Place where I have taken an annual Tour for
some Years past. Yet I doubt not but you will Patronize my Intention, which is to
fence against Bigottry and Superstition. All Excess I disclaim, but pretend to
be a Favourer of Religion, and of Labor as an Ingredient, and of Recreation as
a necessary Attendant.

I believe the Gentleman who moved me to preach there in some odd
Circumstances, and those at whose Desire and Charge this Discourse is Printed,
(asking their Pardon if my Suggestion appear to them ungrounded) were moved
more from the uncommonness of the Thing, than any Thing singular in it. I have
put off the Importunity for near these three Years; but least it should be,
that I fear, it is being seen by the World, I submit it to Sight and Censure.

So little as I know you, Gentlemen, I heartily present it to you; though all the
Reason that I intend to offer is, we have fished upon the same Banks: And though
I know this will be no Bait, I am fond of being esteemed, in the Affair of
Fishing,

Gentlemen, your most Obedient and very humble Servant, Fluviatulis Piscator.

Business and Diversion inoffensive to GOD
JOHN XXI. iii Simon Peter says unto them, I go a Fishing.


IT IS an odd and vicious Conceit of the Superstitious, who in Popish Countries
are called the Religious; that a solitary Sequestration from the social Affairs
and Duties of Life, afford a mighty Advantage to Religion: For this is contrary
to the Design of the Creator in the Make and Constitution of Man; opposite to
the Providence and Precepts of God, and the Examples of holy Men recorded in
sacred History. The Instance in our Text shows that Business, For their stated
Business, was to preach the Gospel; though Fishing had been their Employment.
or I think Diversion in proper Portions of Time, and other suitable
Circumstances, are not hurtful, but very friendly to Religion.

The Apostles were constituted Fishers of Men, to allure and draw Souls to
Christ, from a Pit of Sin and Misery, to an Ocean of Piety and Pleasure. -- An
high and really religious Employment! And our Lord gave them a Vacancy, with
Restriction, but tarry ye at Jerusalem. They had been commissioned long before,
[ Matthew. x. 17 and Luke ix.] but before they were to enter upon their
Enterprise, in which he should be corporally absent, they must have a Leisure
refreshing Season. To what should they in Reason have devoted this
Intermission, but Fasting and Mourning, for now the Bridegroom was not always
with them? Why, Obedience is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken, than the
Fat of Rams, 1 Samuel xv. 22. He who best knew the Nature of Man, before he was
to send Men upon extraordinary Business, would give them Leisure; nor was this
Space confined wholly to Devotion. Some of it, we find, was spent in Business
or Diversion. Certainly these Saints were as sincerely and piously affected to
God, as the superstitious Biggots to Popery can, with any Show of Modesty,
pretend to be; yet they divert themselves in so suitable a Season, and our Lord
not only appoints the Leisure, but supports them in it by giving them a lucky
Draught of Fishes. This sacred Story leads me to think, I. In the general, that
the common Enterprises of Life are not inconsistent with Piety toward God: But
that infinite Holiness may be pleased with them. And in particular, that II.
Fishing is innocent as Business or Diversion.


Some may think it strange that I give myself the Trouble to illustrate these
Things, which, to them appear level to the lowest Capacity.

But all Men are not of the same Cast or Constitution. A Proposition which is
easy and evident to one, may be as doubtful and difficult to another; and its
no uncommon Case, for Men who have no higher End in their Employments, and have
been unseasonable, unguarded and irregular in their Diversions, and have no
higher End than Self, if they are convinced of their Idolatry and Carnality, to
exclaim against the World! Then when they most of all need to be diligent in
some good Employment, Diligence is termed Worldly-mindedness; seasonably and
temperately to recreate themselves, is carnal Pleasure. These Difficulties
require no great Depth of Though It, nor a Multitude of Words for their Solution.

We may, in an easy and natural Manner, consider that Religion is all of a
Piece, and one Duty does not destroy another. That Business and Diversion, in
their proper Place and Time, determined from a good Principle, and performed
piously and prudently; are so far from being offensive, that they are a
necessary Branch of our holy Religion.

Let us then in the general consider, Whether the common Enterprises of human
Life, be consistent with practical Piety.

Here we must tell what we mean, by the common Enterprises of Life. And we
renounce all unjust and dishonest Methods of obtaining the Riches, Honors, and
Pleasures of the World: And all unlawful Games, and those which are lawful,
when they are unsuitably and irregularly managed.

We consider Business or Diversions, as human Understandings. By Business, we
mean our stated Exercises, or that which we ought to employ most of our Time
in, and most of our Thoughts about. Diversion is the turning aside from
Business, in some proper Period, to refresh ourselves, and fit us for a more
cheerful and lively Discharge of Duty. Now, if it should be made evident, that
these are Parts of our Duty to God, I suppose they must be consistent with real
Religion. And this will appear, if we consider, That God is an active Being,
and proposes himself as our Pattern. It Is not only contrary to Scripture, and
deep thinking, but common Sense, to suppose the great Creator and Governor of
all Worlds, idle and unactive. Every one conceives something of his Operation,
as the Over-ruler of human Affairs, or Author of all Things. And if God be
Agent, he expects those to be such who are capable of acting: And as he is
perfect, and must act in a most excellent Manner, according to his own Nature,
he must expect and require his Creatures to act according to the Power with
which he has endowed them. And as he has endowed Man with a Capacity of knowing
something of him, he must design his imitating of him in his Measure and
Degree. In this the Image of God in Man consists. And we are to imitate him in
Labor and Rest, as well as in other Respects This will be clear to you, if you
recollect the Fourth Commandment Six Days shall thou Labor, for in six -- the
Lord made -- and rested on the seventh, etc.

Indeed, no Man was made for Time, but Time for him: And as God uses Eternity
for his own Glory, according to his infinite Wisdom and Power; so he expects
Man should spend his Time, according to his Capacity --

Man's Capacity is the Measure of his Duty, and the Nature of Man requires Rest
and Labor, and a prudent Interchange and Succession of each. We were not
obliged to do, in our Original, those Things which our Species were not capable
of performing: But the Limitation of Nature was a Bound by the Deity, So far
shall thou come, and no farther. The Stretch of a human Mind, and the Strength
of Man's Body, is limited by the supreme Disposer of all Things. And the same
Being, in limiting our Capacity, makes out our Duty, by our Make and Frame, and
casual Circumstances in the Course of his divine Providence, he shows a wise
Man what he ought to do, and what to avoid, and how he should direct, guide,
and govern himself or others. No mere Man ever could, nor will any Man that has
the Government of himself, pretend to keep up an uninterrupted Series of
Idleness and Indolence, of Labor or Devotion; for Experience must soon
convince them that Man's Nature is formed for Variety: He is a changeable
Creature, and is supported by Change. So Man at first was put into the Garden
of Pleasure, not only to serve his Maker, in his Devotions, and delight himself
by his Sensations, but to dress it and to keep it: For in his primitive Make he
needed those Changes.

And we need them much more in our lapsed State: As all the Works of God, in
Nature and Revelation, manifestly declare. Let those who would form to their
Imagination, a beautiful Description of the Original of the World, read Dr.
Burnet: But I must confine myself to Scripture, and the common Current of our
Experience, in the present State of Things; and as to that original State of
the World, you will excuse me (...) I say little about it, because we have
little to do with it. But if we gaze upon Nature, in it is present Situation, we
shall find, that every Thing calls for a prudent Alloy of Labor and Diversion:
[Tho' I must rejoin, because I would not be wanting in Caution, by Labor, I
would be understood to mean, our Actions in our particular Callings; and by our
Diversions, our turning aside from them, whether in the prescribed scriptural
or rational Acknowledgements of the Deity, or our innocent unbending the Bow in
those lawful Amusements, which are more commonly called Diversions. The Reason
of my thus speaking is on the Account of the divine Division. Six Days shall
thou Labor. But on the Seventh --. God who best knew our Capacities, has
delineated our Business [or that which we are Statedly to employ most of our
Time in, for that I call, must call so] God confirms the Division both by
Precept and Example: And if we throw off Supperstition and allow our selves to
think freely we shall be confirmed that Business is Part of our Religion.]

To return then,

Let us consider the Universe in its present State and Situation.

All the heavenly Bodies keep their Course, [but their Orbits are more or less
Excentric] The rising SUN calls Man forth to his Business. The Sun withdraws,
and lengthning Shades for, warn us of the rising Damp, and unhealthy Vapor;
and bid us retire for Rest and Shelter. Yet if something uncommon, call us
longer abroad, the Moon and Stars will lend a little of their barrowed Light;
but amphibious Creatures, Birds and Beasts of Prey, often check our Improvidence
or Negligence. The Sun gives us our longest Days when the Earth requires most
of our Labor, and when she refuses Produce, he shortens our Hours of Business.

So the vast Collection of Waters sometimes heaves in its briny Billow, swells
every Bay, and rushes with Joy though every Channel; as from an Engine played by
the Almighty Arm; then sinks into her deep Caverns, leaves Room for the Return
of the rapid Rivers; with vast Additions from inland Oceans.

The Winds also take their turns for Labor and Rest. The laborious East sends
gently in the vast Magazines of floating Wealth, to the favorite Sons of
Fortune; while he is gathering up the scattering Clouds, which he shoves in
upon the craving Land, and genreously pours down a more universal Blessing: and
retires, when the brisk West opens a Glene, scatters the broken Cloud, and
sweeps up the redundant Moisture ****.

So the Earth here raises a rocky Mountain with a frowning Front; and levels
there a pleasant Plain; here sinks a rushy Fea, there raises a fertile Field:
Here the struggling Streams rush down a rapid River, there the easy Waters lie
still and move not --. But what in Nature does not? Every Thing calls for
Labor, and Labor requires Rest.

These uncultivated Lands call for hard Labor, but some other Circumstances
admit of Diversion; for this the half tamed Deer graze your Plains, and the
rough Bear infest domestic Folds. The ingenious Dr. Woodward has shown what
Convulsions there were at the Time of the Deluge, and how Sterile the Earth is
made by that awful Event; and this to make us Labor, because our sinful
Propensity required it Speaking of the old World, he says that after the Fall
of Man, "These exuberant Productions of the Earth became a continual Decay and
Snare to him, they only excited and fomented his Lusts, and ministered Fuel to
his Vices and Luxury, and the Earth requiring little or no Tillage, there was
little Occasion for Labor, so that almost the whole Time lay upon his Hand,
and gave him Liesure to contrive; and full Swing to pursue his Follies; and the
Pravity of humane Nature was -- The Pravity of humane Nature is not, I fear,
less yet then it was then -- And to remove the Temptation and Cause of the Sin,
he brought this Change, by mingling and confounding its first constituent
Principles -- That by this Means a great Part of their Time might be taken up,
etc. See his natural History, Ed. 1st. Page 89, to 114.




But we are social Creatures; and the Cord of Society is strengthened by
Industry. In this defective State, great Diligence is necessary in Education,
in Purging out Prejudices, Infusing Principles and Maxims of Wisdom; and
acquiring Habits of just Reasoning, and prudent Determining in every
Occurrence. It Is needful that some should make a Business of Teaching; and the
Labor of others must Support such in their Labor.

Government is necessary to good Order; to secure our Lives, Property and
Peace: And those who are by divine Providence, set in Authority over us, should
be esteemed and honored; that they may be so, they should be set above
Contempt, by a generous Support from the Society whom they serve: which it
never can do unless Industrious.

Seeing we are to consider GOD, not only as Creator of Man, but as the Founder
of Society, and it must follow that a social Homage is his Due; and this Homage
must be paid in the best, the most regular and rational manner: It appears by
the Light of Nature, and Suffrage of all Nations, that there should be some
Persons stated and appointed to lead Societies in their Devotions; to keep the
Knowledge of God, and our Duty to him, clear from all Confusions and unworthy
Conceptions, and to excite religious Sentiments etc. This requires the Labor
and Study of such Persons, and the Labor of others to support them. So that
unless we would have Ignorance and Irreligion, and all Manner of Miseries and
Mischiefs infest Mankind, we must labor; and as God is the Author of the
Species, and Founder of our State, this Industry should be practiced with a
View to his Glory, as Part of our holy Religion.

This Thought includes Piety, Justice, and Charity. We must be diligent in some
lawful Calling, because God requires it, as mere Reason shows, so does the
Scriptures.

Those who will take no Method for their own Support, rob Society, or murder
themselves: If a Man provide not for himself, he either starves or pillages his
Neighbor: I can call it nothing less than Robbery, if he could, by any lawful
Business, have supported himself; for he is as really a Villain, who, without
my knowing it, picks my Pocket, as he who sternly says, Stand and Deliver! And
whatever I am obliged by Authority to pay toward the Support of Religion,
Government, or the Poor, more than I should or ought to have done, if my
Neighbor had been industrious, they really rob me of; for I have so much less
of Estate through their Negligence. -- The Equity of that Precept is clear, He
that will not work, neither let him eat. And it is as evidently just, he that
will not labor to support Government, forfeits it is Protection and Favor.

The Man who will not labor, often thinks himself forced to lie long in his
Neighbor's Debt; which is a great Piece of Injustice to his Neighbor and to
Society: Seeing if his industrious Neighbor had his Money in his Hand, he
would have turned it to the Increase of his Estate, and Emolument of the
Community. It Is through Idleness that Men have little to dispose of, and are
tempted to ask such exorbitant Prices for their Wares. There has been long and
tedious Disputes about a Medium of Trade, and a sad Complaint of the constant
Falling of Money: While the Prices of the Produce of the Country are under no
Regulation by Law: Every one almost will make it a Rule, to sell as dear as he
can: And if they ask an Angel this Year, for that which might have been
purchased with a Crown last, an Angel is worth no more now than a Crown was
then; and Money must continue falling. It Is worthy the Though It of considerate
Men, whether a Want of Laborers be not at the Bottom of all this. If Men don't
labor, they vainly complain of hard Times, and Sarcity of Money; for they have
nothing to procure it.


The Original of Communities, are Families. In these are weak and feeble
Members, who need Labor for their Support: And that Man is not only unjust,
but barbarous and cruel, who neglects them. He that provideth not for his own,
especially for those of his own House, has denied the Faith, and is worse than
an Infidel.

We ought to labor from a Principle of Charity, That we may have to give to
him that needs. Ephesians. iv. 28.
-- The Poor ye have with you always. Matthew, xxvi. 11.
If the Poor perish through your Want, when you might have had it to give; it is
as much through your Neglect, as if you had it, and refused to help and relieve
them.

Indeed the most kind and prudent Way of relieving to Poor, is by setting them
to work, if they are able. For her by you give them Courage, cause them to be
prudent and frugal; and prevent much Sin. It does not put them to so much Pain,
to ask for that for which they have labored: And what they earn hardly, they
will not be so likely to spend idly. While they have Employ, they may be kept
from making Mischief among Neighbors, from wandering about from House to House
as Busy-Bodies. In the best regulated Communities, they keep all employed,
young and old, strong and weak; those who are strong to more onerous Service,
and the more feeble to that which is less burdensome, etc. See Sir Will.
TEMPLE of Holland, and BUSBFG; Juci. Epist. RICHELIEU's Pol. Will. Chap. IX.
Sect. vi.


If ye shall fulfill the royal Law, according to the Scriptures -- thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye shall do well. If a Brother or a Sister be
naked, or destitute of daily Food, and one of you say to them, Depart in Peace,
be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding you give them not of those Things
that are needful to the Body, What does it? But can common Christians feed
their Neighbors with any thing better than fair Words unless they be diligent
in their Business.

Quest. These are evident, you may say, but how do they reach the Rich?

The Rich are of the same Nature with the Poor, and stand in as near Relation
to God and Society as they: And in these Respects, have as much need of
Business. Though Men have ever so much Wealth, they should consider that Idleness
and Inactivity rusts and depraves the Mind, and renders it unfit for the
Service of God or Men. It either distempers the Brain with Melancholy, or
fills the Body with ill Humors, and the Mind with vicious Inclinations; and
either of them give Satan great Advantage against us. Besides -- we are to
consider Wealth as a Talent given us by God to improve, therefore the more any
Man has, the more he has to turn to Advantage, which must proportionably
increase Care and enlarge the Sphere of Action. He that sinks his Estate through
Indolence robs the Public, for he cant do so much for the Commonwealth. And if
he only keeps the Principal, and endeavors to make no Interest, he is an
unprofitable Servant to God who intrusts him, and to the Society who protects,
him.

If we are to be Followers of God as dear Children; Reflection.
if God is an Agent; if we are to imitate him in laboring six Parts in seven
of our Time; if the human Constitution in its Original requires Change of
Labor and Rest; if this is the State of all Nature; if Piety to God, and
Justice and Charity to Men require Labor; and Business cannot be performed to
Advantage without some seasonable prudent and regular Diversion: How wild and
superstitious are those who would drive Persons into Monastries and Nunneries,
under the Notion of their spending their whole Time in Devotion? And how much
better is it for Persons who are deeply in Debt, or dependent on Charity for
their daily Support, to run about under the Notion of dealing with their
Neigbours in some pretended Case of Conscience, prating about Things which they
understand not; than study to be quiet and do their own Business!

Extraordinary Religion is the most exact Transcript of the communicable
Attributes of God; and the nearest Imitation of the divine Being, as far as the
Dictates and Limits of our Nature, and the Rules of his holy Word. -- They who
are wise above what is written, will soon discover their Folly: For when
Superstition has overwhelmed a Man's Brain, like a Child with the Rickets, his
Head grows too big for his Body, and the distempered Creature soon dwindles
away to nothing. For Men in vain plead for such Devotion as robs Society, such
as defrauds Mankind. -- He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how
shall he love God whom he has not seen.

Weak Persons are apt to say, Can we do too much for God? Can we spend too much
Time in Religion? No, you cannot. But you may disobey God, when you think you
obey him: You may do what he forbids, when you think you do what he requires.
You may be idolatrous, when you think you are mighty devout. Why, your
Ancestors though it this might be; Why else did they reject the exorbitant Number
of popish Fast and Festivals, etc.? In one Century you seem to have forgot your
Errand to America. And what do you think of those Israelites, who sacrificed
their Children, etc.? Do you think that they could do too much for God? Could
they do any more than to give the Firstborn of their Bodies for the Sin of
their Souls? Who could blame them, if none can do too much [in the common
Sense]? If a Man were to murder his Father or Mother, his Wife or Children, or
himself, under the Notion of being extraordinary religious, and should say, who
can do too much for God, would you not think the poor Creature were delirious?
Why, He that loves not his Brother is a Murderer! Many make a great Talk of
Matters of Faith, or rather of Opinion, and will go prating from Place to
Place, I wish there were not too much Reason for Complaint in this Regard, at
this Day. I have been often surprised, not only at the profane Railing against
Lectures, but at the Absurdity and Folly of many, who had hardly a Morsel of
Meat to put into their Mouths, and their Children near famishing, and all their
Business ruining, on Account of their violent and furious rambling here and
there on the Notion of some religious Errand; as if God would call them to a
Fraud and Barbarity, which, the Apostle tells us, is worse than Infidelity, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and take little or no Care of their Families; they are mighty religious, but
if it were possible they would not pay a Farthing for the Support of the
Government, (by which our Lives are preserved) or of Religion, or for the
Education of their Children. They like Holidays extremely, and might be glad if
every Day were such; but can, with a good Conscience, lie in Debt from Year to
Year. It Is an easy Matter to pray, and read, and hear, and talk devoutly; but
to work is hard, it is tedious to the poor Carcass, a Weariness to the Flesh!
It Is an easy Matter to run down your industrious Neighbor as a worldly Man,
but have you paid him that which you owed him? Is not he fore'd, in great Part,
to support your Family?

I wish Men would know what Religion is in the Whole, and not set the several
Parts of it at Variance, and make one Branch militate with another. Let us love
God with all our Hearts, and at the same Time remember that we are to love our
Neighbor as ourselves.

Let us meditate on and long after Heaven; but know at the same Time, that our
Way thither is through the Earth: That the Soul is infinitely the superior Part,
but if we murder the Body, the Soul must eternally be damned. Let us be
frequent at Church, yet not forget that we have something to do at Home. Let Us
be serious and steady in our Devotions, and likewise diligently follow our
Business. In short, Let every Command have its proper Weight with us, every
Duty it is Proportion of our Time and Tho'ts.

Business and Diversion, in the general, may be allowed as innocent and
necessary. But some Enterprises which wear that Name may be serupled. We may
therefore enquire in particular,

II. Whether Fishing is lawful as Business or Diversion.

Not only those called Religious, among the Turks and Persians, and the
Benjans, etc. have scrupled eating of Flesh or Fish, but some among ourselves,
fear whether we ought to take away the Lives of Creatures for our own Support;
and are positive that we should not for Diversion. Many have a great Aversion
to those whose Trade it is to take away the Lives of the lower Species of
Creatures. A Butcher is (in their Apprehension) a mere Monster, and a
Fisherman, a filthy Wretch.

It Is an ancient Observation, that a merciful Man is merciful to his Beast. The
righteous Man regards the Life of his Beast, Prove. xii. 10. Where any have long
used any Creature, the Though It of it is Service, and some sort of Regard
contracted to it thereby, is not easily conquered. But a noble generous Soul
hates Barbarity to foreign as well as domestic Creatures. It Is not certain
[says my Lord BEACON] that the worthier any Soul is, the larger is it is
Compassion. For contracted degenerate Minds imagine that those Things belong
not to them: But the Mind that looks upon itself as a nobler Portion of the
Universe, is kindly affected toward inferior Creatures --.

He that takes Pleasure in the Pains and dying Agonies of any lower Species of
Creatures, is either a stupid sordid Soul, or a Murderer in Heart. -- He that
delights to see a Brute die, would soon take as great Pleasure in the Death
of a Man.

But here, in Fishing, we are so far from delighting to see our Fellow Creature
die, that we hardly think whether they live -- We have no more of a murderous
Though It in taking them, than in cutting up a Mess a Herbage. We are taking
something, which God, the Creator and Proprietor of all, has given us to use
for Food, as freely as the green Herb. Genesis ix. 2, 3.

He allows the eating them, therefore the mere catching them is no Barbarity.
Besides God seems to have carved out the Globe on purpose for a universal
Supply: In Seas, near Shores, are Banks and Beds made for them; -- to furnish
the Lands adjacent -- and Lands which lie remote, are more divided into Lakes
and Ponds, Brooks and Rivers; and he has implanted in several Sorts of Fish, a
strong Instinct [or Inclination] to swim up these Rivers a vast Distance from
the Sea. And is it not remarkable, that Rivers most encumbered with Falls, are
ever more full of Fish than others. Why are they directed here? Why retarded by
these difficult Passages? But to supply the Inlands? Does forming and disposing
of these Things argue nothing?

Since the Flood the Earth is more barren, and Vegetables afford not a
sufficient Support for Mankind. -- So that if the Lives of all these are of
less Consequence, nay, are freely given by him whose they are, they may be
taken and used as Food: If they may be taken, any may make a Business of taking
them for the Supply of others.

But if this be innocent as Business, some may still scruple it as Diversion.

And why not all Diversion with as good Reason? The grave and judicious Mr.
Perkins says, See his Works, Vol. 2. p. 140.
We are allowed to use the Creatures of God, not only for our Necessity, but
for meet and convenient Delight. This is a confessed Truth. And therefore to
them who shall condemn fit and convenient Recreation (as some of the ancient
Fathers have done, by Name Chrysostom and Ambrose) it may be said, be not too
righteous, be not too wise, Eccl. vii. 16. But if we consider, that the End of
Business and Diversion are the same, we shall clearly conceive the Truth. The
End of both are the Refreshment and Support of Man in the Service of God. If I
may eat them for Refreshment, I may as well catch them, if this recreate and
refresh me. It Is as lawful to delight the Eye, as the Palate. All Pleasure
arises from the Suitableness and Agreableness between the perceptive Faculties,
and the Object; that affect them: And our bountiful Maker, as he has given the
animal Life many perceptive Faculties, the Senses of Seeing, Hearing, Tasting,
etc. so he has provided suitably Objects for all these Faculties, and does
allow us to gratify ourselves therewith.

When the Body has been long wearied with Labor, or the Mind weakened with
Devotion, it is requisite to give them Ease; then the use of innocent and
moderate Pleasures and Recreations is both useful and necessary, to Soul and
Body; it enlivens Nature, recruits our Spirits, and renders us more able to set
about serious Business and Employment. For to intermix no Gratifications, nor
Diversions with our more serious Affairs, makes the Mind unactive, dull and
useless. Cito rumpes arcum si tensum habucris.
At si laxaris, cum voles, cris utilis,
Sic lusus Animo debet aliquando dari,
Ad cogitandum melior, ut redeat tibi.
-- Study and ease
Together mixed; Sweet Recreation,
And Innocence, which most does please, with Meditation.



The Pharisees were of this Temper and frequently censure and condemn CHRIST
for his Recreations, both for the Matter and Manner. The Son of Man came eating
and drinking, and they say, behold a Man gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a Friend
of Publicans and Sinners. Math. 11.19. Luke 7.34, etc. and Chap. 15.2. But all
Extremes are bad, one leads to another; those who in this Case Strain at a
Gnat, in another will generally Swallow a Camel.
It proceeds either from Pride, ill Nature of Hypocrisy, when People censure
and are offended at the Liberties which others use in thus relaxing their
Minds. Sloth and Idleness, we have already inveighed against, and condemned;
but those who give seasonable Hours for their Devotions and know how to
dispatch the proper Business of Life well and sasonably enough, and still aim
chiefly at the Glory of God, need be under no Apprehensions of the divine Wrath
and Displeasure on the Score of their Diversions. For this is good and comely,
Eccl. v. 18. And indeed, the Comforts and Enjoyments of this Life, which we
receive from the bountiful Hand of God, is a great Subject of our Praise and
Thanksgiving to God, -- that the Lines are fallen to us in pleasant Places, --
our Heads anointed, our Cup running over. The Steams lead us up to the Fountain
and Springhead. Our Diversion, if rightly used, not only fits us for, but
leads us to Devotion; and the Creature brings us to Christ. Thus in the
Context, the Disciples go a fishing, and Christ manisests himself to them. --
Not only countenances them, by succeeding their Design; but excites and draws
out their Affections to him, so much that Simon could not wait 'till the Vessel
came to Shore, but leapt into the Lake, and swam swist ashore, to greet and
converse with his dearest Lord.

-- That I may not be tedious, I will only lead in your Reflections a Word or
two.

Religion is the highest Reason, and Christianity perfectly suited to Man in
his present State. And as the venerable Judge Hale says, Contemplations, last
Part, p. 254.
Religion is best in its Simplicity and Purity, but difficult to be retained
so, without Superstitions and Accessions; and those do commonly in Time stifle
and cheak the Simplicity of Religion, unless much Care and Circumspection be
used: The Contemporations are so many and so cumbersome, that Religion loses
its Nature, or is strangled by them: Just like a Man that has some excellent
simple Cordial or Spirit, and puts Musk in it to make it smell sweet, and Honey
to make it taste pleasant, and it may be Cantharides to make it look glorious.
Indeed by the Infusions he has given it a very fine Taste, Smell, and Color,
but yet he has so clogged it, and sophisticated it with Superaddition, that it
may be he has altered the Nature, and destroyed the Virtue os it. Some so
muffle up Christianity, and make it look so melancholy, sickly and sour, that
inconsiderate People are apt to dread it Command, as they would the Tyranny of
Sallee-Men. But

What prodigious Injustice is hereby done to the most sacred and excellent
Cause in the World?

Such zealous, weak, mistaken Men cannot easily be persuaded of the
Dissimilitude there is between their Opinion and Practice, and the Doctrine and
Behavior or Christ and his Aposiles. It were worthy of their diligent
Application, to make a critical Attempt of running the Parralel. And they would
certainly find their own Lives awkward and disjointed; and their Notions, in
this Part, maimed and defective, and bloated and swelled in that. They would
find likewise, that they have given themselves and others a great deal of
unnecessary Fatigue and Perplexity: Wearying themselves and tormenting others,
by making those Things Duties, which God never required, and forbidding those
Things which God never prohibited: Perplexing themselves and all around them
with infinite Doubts and Fears, without any Foundation: Leading Men into the
most loosing Labyrinths, for which there can be no Clue found, by in the Traces
of their own mazed Brain.

Therefore, How needful is it that we be well acquainted with the Scriptures,
informed in the Religion of Jesus, conformed to the Example of Christ and his
Apostles? There we shall see the Nature and Design of Christianity. -- To bring
Glory to God in the highest, -- Peace and Good will to Men. That God's Glory
and his Good -- his Duty and Interest -- Piety and Pleasure, can never be
sundered.

He will find, that in order to an Action's being termed really religious, the
Principle from which, and the End for which it is done, is much more to be
considered, than whether it commonly fall under the Denomination of Devotion,
Business, or Diversion; for they are all at one Time or other our Duty: And the
doing our Duty from a good Principle and for a right End, must be termed
religious acting. Eating and Drinking are natural and sensible Actions, but
when we cat and drink to the Glory of God, they are to be considered as
religious, 1 Cor. x. 31. and that not only when Men eat and drink the meanest
for Quality, and the least for Quantity that can support them in the Service of
God and Society but when they have a rich and plentiful Collation: A (...) Cana
of Galilee, they had a Plenty of rich Wines (...) provided by Christ himself,
who made one of the Company (...) this cheerful Entertainment. This was at a
Wedding, which is not every Day. No Man should make Sports his Business, nor
Pastimes his Employment no more than Cordials his Drink, or Sauces his Meat.
This destroys the very Notion of Diversion. Says Mr. Lock, Some Men may be said
never to divert themselves, they cannot turn aside from Business, for they never
do any. To every Thing there is a Season, Eccl. iii. 1, -- 4.

Should we not always in every Enterprise wish for the Presence and Blessing of
Christ? Methinks those who love and adore the blessed Jesus should desire to
see him every where, and in every Thing! who calls for our Devotion and allows
our Diversion! who procured Peace and Pleasure for wretched sinful Men! Don't
Low a grateful (...) of the Grace and Favor of my Benefactor, in the
Enjoyment of every Blessing? This gives a Gust to every Enjoyment, our tasting
the Sweetness of Christ in them. -- We consider him as Mediator of the Covenant
of Grace, and when we see every Thing conveyed from God to us by him, then we
have a real Relish for them --. There is no suitable solid Satisfaction in any
temporal Good, but as the Gift of God through Christ. This every good Man, in a
good Frame finds and feels --. Business and Diversions, Cities and Palaces,
with their various Ornaments; Fields and Groves; Spring, Summer, and Autumn,
with all their flowery Beauties and tasteful Blessings, are some of the Delights
of the Sons of Men. Books and Learning, and polite Company, and refined
Science, are the more elegant Joys of ingenious Spirits: These are enticing
Gratifications of the Senses or the Mind of Man; they are all innocent in
themselves, they may be sanctified to divine Purposes, and afford double
Satisfaction if God be among them: But if God be absent, if he hide his Face or
frown upon the Soul, not Palaces, nor Groves, nor Fields, nor Business, nor
Diversion, nor all the flowery or tasteful Blessings of Spring or Summer, nor
the more refined Joys of Books and Learning, and elegant Company; not all the
rich Provision of Nature and Art, can entertain or refresh, can satisfy or
please the Sold of a Christian -- when smitten with the Love of God.

To conclude, Let us ever remember that we and all we have, is God's, and that
we are accountable to him for our Improvement of all, and depend on Christ for
our Acceptance with him in all.

AMEN
YE happy Fields, unknown to Noise and Strife,
The kind Rewarders of industrious Life;
Ye shady Woods where once I used to rove,
To think for Men, and praise the GOD above;
Ye murmuring Streams that in Meanders roll,
The sweet Composers of the pensive Soul,
Farewell. -- The City calls me from your Bowers;
Farewell amusing Tho'ts and peaceful Hours.

