A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Paper Money, IN WHICH Its Principles are laid open; And
A METHOD, plain and easy, for introducing and continuing a Plenty, without
lessening the present value of it, Is Demonstrated. Humbly offered to the
Consideration of THE HONORABLE REPRESENTATIVES of the Freemen of the Province
of PENNSYLVANIA.

Numb. I.

Discite, o miseri; and causas cognoscite rerum,
Quid sumus, and quidnam victuri gignimur: ordo
Quis datus; --
Quis modus argento: quid fas optare: quid asper
Utile nummus babet: patriae, charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat: quem te Deus esse
Jussit, and humana qua part lo^atus es in re.
Pers. PHILADELPHIA: Printed For the Author, by W. BRADFORD:

THE PREFACE.
IT is generally confessed, even by the most eminent European writers on
commerce, that their money is a subject of a curious and very intricate nature;
which, without any such acknowledgment, the various and clashing opinions they
have advanced concerning it is a sufficient proof of.

The principles of paper-money may seem much harder to discover, were we to
form a judgment of the difficulty from the numerous absurdities published for
and against it. If their bulk be not increased by this little piece, the author
will not think his time misspent; though the matter contained in it has (...) more
months to study than it will the reader minutes to peruse and, peradventure, to
comprehend.

There is not in the whole discourse any one assertion, thought necessary to be
proved, that is not supported, or endeavored to be supported by a plain
argument. This is offered in extenuation of the faults in the method and style;
which, if not (...) gross as to obscure the sense, a good humored reader may
be inclined to over-lock, after he is informed that, through want of time (how it
happened is not material) the following thoughts were hastily extracted from a
great variety of reflections, thrown together on paper occasionally, and at
different times, as they occurred to the mind of the writer in the course of
his inquiry into the nature of this abstruse subject.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING PAPER MONEY, etc.
THE rarity of silver and its beautiful color were sufficient before it became
a medium of Trade, to procure it a price, even supposing it destitute of
natural value; though such a kind of worth is merely fantastical, like that of
diamonds, which is also derived from fancy.

Silver is still a commodity, as every thing bought and sold is; but then it is
also money, which gives it a rank above other wares exchanged by it.

That commodity for which the rest in the country are generally bought and
sold, is the currency or money of the country.

The nummary denominations, and by which accounts are kept, throughout Europe,
do all stand for certain quantities of silver, and none of 'em for gold:
Therefore as all contracts, in that part of the world are made for the first,
and not any for the second, though they may be discharged by it, according to its
varying rate; the former is the currency of Europe, and the latter is nothing
more than a commodity.

In Virginia and Maryland, tobacco being that for which all other commodities
are generally exchanged, is the currency of these Provinces, as rice is, for a
like reason, in South Carolina; yet they are not so by the sanction of law: It
is therefore probable that silver, being much better qualified than either of
'em for a medium of commerce, rose up to that dignity by its own proper force;
for the impression that the several pieces, into which it is divided, receive
at the mint, is of no other use than to ascertain their respective quantites
and fineness, in order to save the trouble of weighing and trying 'em on every
occasion.

But bits of paper, however denominated, could never become a currency without
the compulsive aid of the legislature; for, if all had been left at liberty to
refuse them, their nummary denominations could never have persuaded any body to
give any thing for 'em.

In the year 1722 the government of Pennsylvania began to coin paper-money. The
sum of 15,000 l. was then struck in bills of one shilling to twenty, which was
lent out on land-security at five per cent. Those bill the legislature declared
equal to as much silver-money of America as their respective denominations
signified. Had the law stopped here their value could not have rose above waste
paper. But as they were also made according to their declared rates, a legal
tender in discharge of the silver-contracts then subsisting, they naturally
became money:

For debtors were willingly led to sell their goods for 'em at the nominal
value assigned by the legislature, knowing they could pass 'em on the same
footing to their creditors; whose interest it also became to support the credit
of the new coin, while they had any debts remaining unpaid in the old. Other
traders, as may well be supposed, were at first fearful to contract for this
new species of money; but finding it kept up its value, or (when they fancied
it did not) that the advanced price on their goods balanced the imaginary
loss, they were as eager to bargain for it as they were before for silver.

Were it not for the confusion which an alteration in the nummary
denominations, that people have have been accustomed to count by, would produce
in trade, those paper bills might as well have been called and distinguished by
livres, sols and deniers, or by any other terms of value, as by pounds,
shillings and pence. The power with which they were respectively endued were
also arbitrary; for the law could as easily have made one of them marked five
shillings pass for five pounds, silver money of America, as it did for five
shillings of that coin. But the retaining of names, and the annexing to them
different ideas from what they usually convey, amounts to an actual alteration
of the names: It was therefore as necessary that the bills should, at their
first emission, be endued with such powers as generally accompanied their
respective denominations, as to give them the denominations by which the people
generally counted.

To fix the idea of paper-money it may be proper to show wherein it differs
from paper-credit. When credit is given for money, there is always a promise
expressed or implied for the payment of it; if expressed, it is generally on
paper; and from these circumstances the latter kind of engagements where they
are transferable by law or custom, is called a paper-credit. But the
paper-bills of Pennsylvania, as they do not promise money for any thing else,
cannot be comprehended under the notion of paper-credit. They are actually
money, and may as properly be termed paper-money from the material of which
they are made, as silver-coin is so denominated from the metal. All assignable
notes promising paper-coin are paper-credit on the same reason that notes
promising silver-coin are so.

Forasmuch as the law, by which the Maryland- bills were issued, insures to the
possessors, at certain periods, the quantity of silver expressed by them, they
could only be regarded as paper-credit at their first emission: But as they
pass at a much higher rate than the (...) of discount allow, they are at
present to be considered as a mixture of paper-money and paper-credit. This
last supplies the place of cash, and according to the extent of it, is of more
or less advantage to a country where silver is the established medium of
commerce; that being a currency which costs extremely dear. But where
paper-money is used, if there be a sufficiency, the cost of which is
comparatively nothing, a paper-credit can be of little, if any service at all.

We return to the law whereby paper-bills were first introduced into
Pennsylvania, and observe that it gradually lost its efficacy, as the
silver-contracts subsisting at the time of passing it were paid off. The power
of the bills would have sunk in the same degree, were not the people obliged,
through the want of silver, to use them as their medium of commerce. Now
forasmuch as they contract for 'em every day as they did before for silver,
their worth is on as good a foundation as it was at their first emission; for
the present debtors are under as strong a necessity of purchasing 'em to
disengage their promises for that coin, as the former debtors were to discharge
their contracts for silver-coin; and therefore their worth cannot fall while
trade continues to furnish 'em with an employment equal to what it now does, as
it always will unless their quantity be rashly increased, or a better currency
be introduced in their room, which seems morally impossible: For even with
respect to an independent government, which, by prudently prohibiting some and
laying high duties on other kinds of foreign commodities, may generally have
such a quantity of silver as the trade of the country requires, for it may
sometimes have too much as well as too little; silver is nevertheless a
currency, not to insist on the great cost of it, much inferior to paper-money
on several other important accounts; as will be demonstrated in the sequel.
Pennsylvania must, except in a few trifling instances, pay silver for all the
goods imported from England, and cannot impose the least duty on any of them.
To attempt then to introduce that metal into the Province, as a medium of
commerce, which in a dependent government, as Pennsylvania is, will ever be a
currency extremely precarious; and NEGLECT to improve and extend the power of
the paper-money, whose advantages have been experienced during a period of more
than twenty years; would be a proceeding which I should confess my self at an
utter loss to account for.

Quidquid id est timeo Danaos and dona fere^tes. Virg. The principles on which
the value of the currency of Pennsylvania is supported, undeniably evince,
that, were the duty for purchasing the silver promised to the possessors of the
Maryland-bills, to be discontinued, their present value could not be lessened:
For the people of that Province would be then under the same obligation of
purchasing 'em to discharge their contracts as they are at present; and would
as willingly bargain for 'em afterward as the people of Pennsylvania do now
for the bills current amongst them.

I would add farther, that if the silver-contracts at present subsisting among
the former, were to be made payable in paper-bills, according to their varying
worth in silver, which the course of exchange discovers, the employment and
consequently the value of 'em would be increased (but I do not insinuate it
ought to be above what it is) much more than it would by making them a legal
tender at a certain fixed rate in discharge of silver-contracts; for that is an
expedient which, after the bills have obtained a currency, cannot be introduced
nor continued without danger; forasmuch as it has a direct tendency to force
merchants into the truck-trade; which, in their own defense, they must all run
into, when they see the currency poured upon 'em without bounds. In such a case
none will fell their goods for it on credit, unless at a prodigious advance;
and on the other side it will have but little employment in discharging
silver-contracts, for no new ones of that kind will be made; so that under
these circumstances the wonder is not why it should in some colonies have sunk
so much in value, but rather how it could preserve any value at all.

The proprietary quit-rents in Pennsylvania, reserved since the use of
paper-money, are made payable by the patents in silver, or the value in
paper-coin, according to the course of exchange. Those reserved before
paper-money was introduced, which are said to be small compared with the
others, the law regulates the payment of during a certain term of Years, at the
rate of eighteen pence for one shilling sterling. But to this the Honorable
Proprietaries themselves assented in consideration of the sum of 1200l as
appears by the public proceedings.

The value of the paper-money of Pennsylvania notwithstanding the obvious
manner of accounting for it, is attributed by many to the land-security on
which it is lent; and, in support of this notion, the following argument,
whoever first broached it, has been printed; which I shall particularly examine
(...) as it has been generally adopted, it cannot with defency be condemned in
the (...). It runs thus. As those who take bills out of the banks in Europe put
in money for security, so here we engage our land. And as bills issued upon
money-security are money, so bills issued upon land-security are, in effect,
coined (...). Now the Banks of Europe do actually borrow the money lodged with
them, and therefore give their notes as a security for the repayment* But the
paper-money-bank of Pennsylvania, to which the argument is applied, does not
borrow but lend money, and therefore takes security from the borrowers for the
repayment at the times stipulated. The two cases then, instead of having the
least resemblance, being essentially opposite; it is impossible that any
conclusion drawn from the one should be applicable to the other. Indeed the
bills given by an European bank have the same power as the silver promised by
'em; because the possessors have a right to receive, and do also receive on
demand the very firms expressed by such bills. But those of Pennsylvania
cannot, for a like reason, nor for any reason, be considered as land; for though
they be lent upon land, yet the possessors have no right to demand from any
man, or any body of men, any land for 'em.

Having shown that the value of the paper-money depends on the general
employment given it by trade; we from thence descend to prove that the
employment, and consequently the value of it, will, on a supposition of its
quantity continuing the same, be more or less in proportion to the INTRINSIC
WORTH of the moveable commodities exchanged by it.

When these increase in quantity without diminishing in goodness or quality, or
increase in quality without diminishing in quantity; their intrinsic worth is
increased.

The more any particular sort of goods is wanted, the more hands will be
employed in raising, making and transporting 'em to market for sale and vice
versa: From whence it follows, That the Intrinsic worth of moveable commodities
will be always proportioned to the labor and skill expended on the several
species, considered together, of which it is composed.

The value of the land belonging to a society may fall though the people
increase, if their diligence decreases in a greater proportion, as may
sometimes happen. But the value of the land will infallibly rise with the
intrinsic worth of the moveable commodities; which may be occasioned by an
increase of industry in the people as well as by an increase in their number.
Therefore it is plainly the interest of land-holders and the owners of houses
who propose a rent by them, to desire, above all others, a plenty of money;
for, without it, a great part of society, who, with it, might be engaged to set
their hands to useful work, will remain unemployed; while others whose
livelihood depends on their manual labor, and who, on an offer of ready money
would eagerly, constantly strive to earn it, will not work but as mere
necessity compels them. Hence it clearly appears that land-holders are the
natural guardians of the public interest; since without advancing their own
they cannot promote the other, nor suffer it to be lessened without suffering
themselves in an equal degree: Whereas merchants (or Mr. Lock is mistaken) as
well as usurers or money-jobbers, land-jobbers and super-numerary officers,
with their tribe of retainers and dependents, may all very possibly grow rich,
while the rest of the community are oppressed and kept poor. Yet because it is
the immediate interest of land-holders in general, to promote the public good,
that therefore it must always be the immediate interest of every one in
particular; or, supposing it to be the case, that therefore none of 'em will
sacrifice a real advantage to a lust of power, when an opportunity of
gratifying it presents; or to a desire of lording it over their brethren, though
the prospect may seem remote; is a fallacious way of arguing; though it is a
doctrine that has formerly been currently swallowed, to the great detriment of
the patients, in a certain colony which I forbear to name.

And now craving pardon for this digression, I reassume the principal argument
and pursue it thus;

Paper-money is only wanted to exchange commodities, which it does, whether
they be sold absolutely for it or only for a time, or whether the payment be
immediate or time be given for the payment. Commodities are never exchanged
unless they be wanted: Therefore the demand for paper-money must rise and fall
with the demand for the commodities (among which we must here include the land)
exchanged by it.

If the intrinsic worth of moveable commodities be not increased, neither rents
nor the value of land can rise, nor, consequently, the demand for money, to
discharge the one or purchase the other:

Neither, on the same supposition, can the continual variations in the value of
moveable commodities, with respect to one another, increase the demand for
money; for it is impossible that any of the sorts should rise unless the others
fall. As then the demand and consequently the value of the paper-money cannot
be increased, so it cannot be lessened, but in proportion to the intrinsic
worth of the moveable commodities exchanged by it. If the reader has not
forgot, that when this inference was offered to be proved, it was on a
supposition that the quantity of money in trade remained the same, he will more
clearly perceive the truth of the position now laying down, to wit, That, could
a method be fallen upon to augment and diminish the quantity of the currency
according to the demand for it; its value would remain* UNALTERABLE; for as the
proportion between the money extant and the intrinsic worth of the moveable
commodities exchanged by it, would be always alike; the same number of
shillings or pounds would at all times purchase the same quantity of labor and
art, or of the necessaries and conveniences of life, taking one article with
another; as for instance, should domestic commodities rise in price, with
respect to paper money, they would do so with respect to foreign goods, which
must therefore fall proportionably; so that when more money than usual is
required for the one, less will serve for the other. Thus, in every case that
can be put, the value of the money (supposing a constant proportion preserved
between the quantity extant and the intrinsic worth of the commodities
exchanged by it) will, as it stands in comparison not with one or a few, but
with all the commodities purchaseable by it, be found unalterable; which is the
highest pitch of perfection that money can arrive at; for beyond this point it
is impossible to carry it, without rendering invariable the natural and
constantly variable relations of commodities to one another.

Now in order to preserve a constant proportion between the quantity of money
floating in trade, and the demand for it, there needs nothing more than to open
a bank that shall lend on good real security for the natural interest, whatever
sums may be applied for; and shall also receive back any sum, if not too
trifling, from any person offering it, though not a borrower, allowing him the
natural interest or an equivalent to it, 'till he calls it out again.

An increase of trade will increase the number of borrowers, and consequently
the hire of money: Therefore the bank continuing to lend it out at the same
interest it let for before that increase, will at once be enabled to augment
the quantity accordingly. On the other hand a decrease in trade will decrease
the number of borrowers, and consequently the hire of money: Therefore the
bank, continuing to give the same interest it let for before, must inevitably
draw in the part, which on every decrease of commerce, will be left without
employment; and thus the quantity* of money floating in trade will be augmented
and diminished, exactly with the demand for it.

Admitting, for argument's sake, the natural rate of interest to be five per
cent* a premium of four and a half will probably prove sufficient to draw in
the superfluous cash at any time extant; for such an interest when with if the
principal may be had on demand, is at least as good as five per cent. on any
private security, where besides the risque, the lender can never be sure of
having his money again, as he would be at the bank, whenever an opportunity
offers of laying it out to greater advantage. Therefore should the full natural
interest between man and man be allowed by the bank for the money returned upon
it; the quantity extant, instead of ever exceeding, will rather fall short of
the proportion required by trade; which must incline it to sink instead of
rising in value. But this inconvenience may be easily avoided by lessening the
premium; which, without leaving it to the discretion of the managers of the
bank, may be regulated by a perpetual table, that the men of figures will
easily form on the Data, furnished 'em by one year's experience. On the same
Data, rules may be laid down for discovering at all times the hire of money at
market; for, as that lessens, the interest paid and received at the bank must
be lessened too. There can be no occasion to increase it at any time for the
natural interest between man and man (which, by the way, can never fall too
low) will be always falling until every branch of trade be fully supplied with
money. These last hints may seem superfluous to such as have duly reflected on
the nature of interest, as they really would be, were they added, only on their
account, to strengthen this conclusion, That the Scheme it as easy in practice,
as it is true in theory.

The end of money is to facilitate the exchange of commodities, and therefore
it is significantly called an instrument of commerce. It is the tool which
merchants work with, and its deficiency in power does more immediately affect
them than any other calling, because their business consists in exchanging and
distributing goods; for which reason Mr. Lock throws them together, from the
highest to the lowest class, under the general emphatical name of Brokers. Yet,
however necessary money may be to traders, they either will not (and with good
reason) contract for a paper-currency when they apprehend it likely to fall* or
they will raise the price of their goods according to the strength of that
apprehension; and in both cases the employment and value of the money will be
lessened. While these jealousies exist its power cannot be extended; and unless
they be removed, it will on every addition made to it, decrease faster in value
than it can be increased in quantity. But were this scheme to be carried into
execution, as no doubt it will, if the arguments before offered be found
conclusive; sellers, on the one hand, would be convinced the money could not
fall in value, and buyers, on the other, that it could not prove deficient in
quantity; which circumstances concurring would immediately cause it to
circulate through every vein of commerce, and at once blow up the truck-trade; a
manner of traffic, which, whether it be from the difficulties it is
accompanied with, or the opportunities it furnishes artful, dishonest traders
in exchanging and distributing commodities to cheat the raisers, makers and
consumers of 'em, or on both accounts; has always been reckoned by every polite
nation, where trade flourished, a mark of BARBARISM.

Exchange fell lately in Pennsylvania from 145 l. to 125 l. and in a few months
after rose to 165 l. which was owing to the sudden increase and decrease of the
trinsic worth of the commodities that gave employment to the currency. But if
its quantity had been augmented and diminished accordingly, the price of
sterling bills of exchange could not have risen or fallen but just half as much
as it did. And had the sum and power of the whole currency extant been the
treble of what it was, when exchange was at 145 l. it could not have risen
higher than 147 and a half nor fallen lower than 142 and a half. I omit the
demonstration here, for as much as the principles on which it is founded were
described very particularly in one of the public prints some months ago; and
the consequences flowing from thence were proved so clearly, that several
gentlemen, who think themselves knowing in the theory of money, because they
can give themselves leave to practice any unjustifiable arts of getting it,
were pleased to declare the writer gave himself an unnecessary trouble, since,
as they affirmed the points he then undertook to demonstrate, were before his
writing, as perspicuous to them as the meridian sun.

An exact judgment cannot be formed of the sum of money necessary for carrying
on the trade of any society, though we knew the number of the individuals* for
people are not in all places equally industrious; neither can we arrive at any
certainty in this matter, though we were acquainted with the annual quantity of
their several kinds of labor; for when the members of a community are settled
close together, each will apply himself to one single trade, which will cause a
greater exchange of commodities than if they were scattered on a large surface
(...) for then each would be obliged to follow several occupations at once, and
so (...) much less quantity of commodities would be exchanged. The running cash
(...) England is computed at twenty millions, to which if we add the bank-notes
and other paper-pledges that pass as ready money, which are therefore in this
case to be considered as part of the nation's cash, the whole cannot amount to
(...) than forty millions. This sum divided among ten millions of souls for so
many England is reckoned to contain, gives 4 l. for each. Now allowing there
are in Pennsylvania 150,000 souls, their currency, if it was to be proportioned
by that of England* should be equal in power to 600,000 l. sterling. But
abating the one half, for the reasons just now offered, it follows that the
80,000 l. now extant in Pennsylvania, as it has not a greater power than 50,000
l. sterling, is but the sixth part of what the trade of the province requires.
But though this at the best is but probable if it be even that, yet it is certain
that the currency of the colony is vastly short of what its domestic trade will
bear, since it is too evident the greatest branches of it depend on barter
only. Moreover as people cannot without great difficulty exchange their labor,
if money which is the medium of exchange be wanting, families are thereby drove
to live independently of one another, and to provide as much as possible within
themselves whatever is necessary for their support. The pleasures of society
having by this means lost the chief place in their thoughts, they seek out land
at the cheapest rate. To this it is in a great measure owing that his Majesty's
subjects in America, including many who are born as well as others who annually
arrive there, are daily retiring back in great numbers from the Sea, which
renders 'em as useless to the colony as to their Mother Country, for such
consume little or none of her manufactures On the other side, forasmuch as
people living close together and ready at hand to assist one another can, if
money be not wanting, more easily obtain the necessaries and comforts of life
than a like number more thinly settled; it is plain that a plentiful currency
would render the subjects much more useful to Great Britain and to one another
than they now are, as they would thereby be spontaneously drawn into a narrower
compass, to which in such a case, they would be farther allured by the rational
pleasures that accompany a social life. On these considerations one can hardly
forbear thinking, that the paper-money of Pennsylvania might in a few years
attain a power equal to 300,000 l. sterling. And then supposing the exports and
imports to be double of what they now are, and that the employment which they
at present furnish the paper-money in exchanging them should be even trebled;
yet its variation in value compared with silver (which, as was mentioned once
before, may for the most part be exactly discovered by the price of sterling
bills of exchange) would be trifling. In the mean while its worth in that metal
would, on this scheme, taking one time with another, be invariable, or at least
not perceptible 'till after many years; for though a vast quantity of silver and
gold is daily dug out of the earth, and found on the surface of it, yet it is
exceedingly small with respect to the sum of both in the trade of the world;
and therefore their declining worth cannot be easily perceived on a short
retrospect.

In the next number it will be shown, that the money cannot, consistent with
justice and public honor, be lent out at less than the natural interest; nor
that less than that interest, or an equivalent to it, can be refused to such as
shall be disposed to return any part of it on the bank. In discussing these
points, not only the reasonableness of the scheme, but the nature and
inestimable advantages of a paper-currency will be further illustrated.

Let liberty and property be secured ever so well, yet the labor and industry
of the people, from which the riches of every community are wholly derived,
cannot be drawn forth to the length they are capable of, without a plenty of
money. This considered, it may not be thought an extravagant assertion, that a
paper-currency must necessarily, in proportion to the number of the
individuals, prove to every society using it in the manner set forth, a more
valuable and a much more certain source of wealth, than the gold of Brazil is
to Portugal, or than the inexhaustible silver-mines of Potosi are to Spain.

ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 16. for sum of 1200. r. yearly sum of 130 l. Page 7. l. 6.
intrins^^ worth of the stock.


