Mr. STILES's Sermon On

Proverbs xxiv. 21. My Son, Fear thou the LORD, and the King: and medale not
with them that are given to Change.

A Looking-glass for Changlings.

A Seasonable CAVEAT AGAINST Meddling with them that are given to Change. IN A
SERMON PREACHED AT THE Free-mens Meeting at New Haven, April 11th, 1743.

By Isaac Styles, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in North-Haven.

Published at the desire and Cost of a number of the Hearers.

Job xxxiv. 30 That the Hypocrite Reign not, left the People be Ensnared

Hic primum fortuna fidem mutata novavit.
-- Quae mentem insania mutat?
-- Nunc te fata impia Tangunt, --
Virgil. N. London, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1743

A Looking-Glass FOR Changlings,
PROVERBS XXIV. 21. My Son, Fear thou the LORD, and the King: and meddle not
with them that are given to Change.


MAN was orginally formed and designed by the glorious, bounteous and
beneficent Author of his being, for Religion and Happiness; and in a wise and
harmonious subserviency hereunto for Society, mutual Converse, Commerce, Aid
and Helpfulness: As is evident from his original Make, Frame and Constitution;
and likewise from the Oracles of Truth.

Adam was first formed then Eve: For the LORD God said, It is not good that the
man should be alone. And if the first man Adam while in a state of Innocence,
would have been uneasy, even in the garden of Eden and grop'd for happiness in
the midst of Paradise: at least would not have been so happy as his Nature
(which was a Copy of the Divine and therefore Communicative) was capable of,
for want of a Companion of his own Species; a Fellow-helper and a Partner in
his Joys, had not God made him an Help-meet for him: If Company was necessary
to complete his Felicity while in a state of integrity and perfection; surely
we in this lapsed State, cannot subsist and live independent one of another.
Naked and helpless come we out of our Mothers womb and should soon return
thither, should die from the womb and give up the ghost as soon as born, did
not the knees prevent us and the breasts that we should suck. Nor are or wants
diminished as our days or years are multiplied, but rather grow and increase
upon us: Woe therefore to him that is alone and has not another to help him.

Mankind cousider's as divided into different and distinct Families, Churches,
Towns, Governments, etc. are Members one of another, and thence obliged to be
Social. God has so set and placed the several Members of each Body-politick of
each Comminity whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, that the Eye cannot say to the
Hand, I have no need of thee; nor again the Hand to the Foot, I have no need of
thee: For as in the Boby-natural, if one Member rejoice, all the Members
rejoicce with it; and e. c. if one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with
it; so it is here, -- The King cannot subsift without his Subjects; (for the
King is served by the Field) neither can the Subejct be safe and happy without
their Sovereign. When there is no King in Israel every one does what is right
in his own eyes: The dire Effects, fatal and destructive Consequences of which,
have made mankind long since, generally give into that Maxim, viz. That Tyranny
it self is better and more elegible than Anarchy. Had we no Ruler over us,
alas! how soon should we become like the Fishes of the Sea that devour one
another?

Well then, Since it is our interest to be under civil Government, it must
needs be our bounden duty to Revere, Honor and Obey them that have the Rule
over us; to be subject to the higher Powers, to the King as Supreme, and unto
Governors and Maginstrates and all in Civil Authority as unto them that are
sent by Him, derive their Authority from Him, and act in His Majesty's Name,
Accordingly, we find this duty strictly enjoined and frequently inculcated on
us throughout the Revelations of God; and particularly in the passage of sacred
Writ and words of Inspiration which I have now read to you. Which words are
found among the sage, judicious and pithy Sentences or wise Sayings of Solomon
the Son of David King of Israel; who was a divinely inspired Preacher, and
spoke as he was moved by the Holy Gohst

It Is said he spoke three Thousand Proverbs, and in this divine Collection of
them his Doctrine dropped as the Rain, his Speech distilled as the Dew, as the
small Rain upon the tender Herb and as the Showers upon the Grass: That it
might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet David his Royal
Father, saying, He shall come down like the Rain on the mown Grass and as the
Showers that water the Earth, Psalm. 72. 6.

It would now be an invasion of the Priests Office for Civil Rulers (as it is
for any others who are not called of God as was Aaron) to take this honor to
themselves, viz. to be public Teachers or Exhorters. ( The Lord rebuke the
madness of all such false Prophets who run before they are sent; such Sons of
Chorah, such presumptuous Vzza's who venture to touch the Ark.) Nevertheless in
the days of Inspiration and while the Mosaic Economy and Legal Administration
lasted, we find that some who were Kings were likewise Prophets and Teachers.
So Solomon by God's Commandment was anointed King, and by his Spirit was made
the Preacher: Nor does this great and renowned Prince think it beneath the
dignity of his Royal Character to undertake the Instruction of others in things
pertaining to God and Religion; -- For it is manifestly his great Scope and
Design in this (as also in his Book called Ecclesiastes) to teach men the fear
of the Lord which is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from evil which is
understanding. See Prove. 1.1, -- 4.

Happy were they that continually stood before him and heard his wisdom; and
happy are we that have these Divine Aphorisms copied out and handed down to us:
But especially since we know these things, happy are we if we do them.

Among many other Excellent words of Counsel, documents of Wisdom, precepts and
rules of Living contained in this Book, calculated and tending to render us
happy both here and hereafter, our Text is one; which is introduced with this
loving and endearing, kind and winning Compellation, My Son, -- A term or title
expressive of his tender Affection and paternal Regards to his fellow Men; of
his pitying them like as a Father pities his Children. And it may likewise be
designed to intimate to his Hearers that they ought (as becomes Children) to be
of a docible, tractable, teachable disposition, ready and forward to learn, to
hearken to and follow wholesome and good Advice.

The Counsel of GOD and the Divine Caution here given, is (if I mistake not)
peculiarly Seasonable for us at this Present Day.

Wherefore we shall now endeavor briefly to Explain and Enforce the same.

The words may be divided into Three parts or distinct Heads of Discourse,
which I shall a little Expatiate and Enlarge upon, in the Order wherein they
here stand placed.

And,

1. The first is, -- Fear thou the LORD, (...) Now to fear the Lord, is to be
truly, sincerely and practically Religious and Godly, or Holy in heart and
life. The phrase denotes universal Piety: And we are here implicitly enjoined
to labor after all that spiritual and divine Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Repentance, Reverence, Fear, Hope and holy Obedience which the Gospel makes
requisite and necessary in order to our finding Acceptance with God and being
Intided to that great Goodness, (that unspeakable and eternal Felicity) which
he has laid up for them that fear him, and trust in him before the Sons of men
-- Diligently to search and study the holy Scriptures, in order to know what we
are to believe concerning God and what duties he requires fo us, -- To believe
and medicate on the Being, Attributes and Perfections of the Deity, -- To
believe that God is, and that he is (through Christ) a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek and faithsully serve Him, -- To realize our naturally sinful
and guilly State, the Depravity, Corruption and Impotency of our fallen Nature,
and the great Guilt we have contracted by our multiplied acts of Rebession
against the Divine M jesty. -- To turn from Sin to God by Faith in Jesus Christ
-- To make choice of Him and delight in Him as the chief Object of happiness
and as our Summun ^^onum -- To see to it that our Hearts be right with God and
steadfast in his Covenant, conformed and obedient to his Preceptive and
Resigned to his Providential Will, -- To Love, Honor, Admire, Worship,
Reverence and Adore Him, -- To be Thankful to Him and bless his Name for all
his Benefits, -- To Pray and make Supplications to Him Sanctity his Day, wait
on him in all his Sacred insthutions, etc. In a word, To be as becomes the
Gospel both in the temper of our Mind and in the tenor of our Life and
practical Conversation. -- Our rightly fearing of the Lord implies thus much.
We find the same phrase frequently used in Scripture, importing a serious and
firm Belief, and conscientious Observance of all that God in his Word teacher
us and requires of us. And this Royal preacher in particular thus Expounds
himself, Eccl. 12. 13 Fear God, etc. for this is the whole of man: His whole
duty and interest.

Blessed of God and happy then are all they that fear Him and hope in his
Mercy, whose Mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his
Commandments. The fear of the Lord tends to Life, and he that has it shall
abide satisfied. The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Convenant. Surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him, and
as the Heaven is high above the Earth, so great is his Mercy toward them. He
will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great: He will fulfill their
desire, He also will hear their Cry and will save them.

But I pass on,

II. To consider the Importance of the next Head of advice contained in the
Text, or to show what it is to fear the King. The term King is undoubtedly here
figurately and synecdochically put for all that are in civil Authority, whom we
are frequently in Scripture commanded to Fear, Honor, Obey and be in all
dutiful Subjection unto. And as fearing the Lord imports universal Piety; so by
fearing the King, we may understand universal Loyalty, i e all the Duties we
owe to civil Rulers as such: Not only the King who is Supreme, but all who are
in Subordinate Authority have a right to what is couched and intended in this
expression See 1 Pet 2 12, 14 Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for
the Lord's sake; whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, etc.

This commandment in our text is exceeding broad and comprehensive: And would
we obey it in the full Latitude and Extent of it, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions and giving of Thanks must be made by us for Kings, and for all
that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2 1, 2.

Moreover, We must pay all due Respect and civil Honors to men of this
character, according to their dignity and worth; So St Peter expounds our Text,
1 Pet. 2.17. Fear GOD, Honor the King. Compare this with Romans 13.7. Render to
all their dues, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom
Honor. We should beware that we our selves do in no wise slight, despise or
cast contempt upon their Persons or Authority; and do all we can to prevent
this in others, -- And that their Honor may be upheld and their Persons had in
Reverence of all, -- That none may disregard and trample on their Authority,
vilify their Government, or lay their Honor in the dust. We are bound and
obliged by all the Laws of God respecting our duty toward them, to yield a
cheerful Obdience to all their good and wholesome Laws. Rebellion is as the sin
of Witchcraft. Before men adventure to transgress humane Laws, they had need be
sure that that Text will bear 'em out in so doing. Act. 4.19 Whether it be
right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, Judge ye. --
A Text frequently misapplyd, wrested, perverted and misimprov'd, especially at
this Day.

We must be able to make it evident from the lively Oracles, that Mischief is
framed and that Iniquity is established by a Law, before we may venture to act
Counter thereunto.

They certainly run a dreadful risque and do it at their utmost peril, who
disobey and trample on such Laws of Men, as are not repugnant but consonant to
the Divine Law. See Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher
Powers; for the Powers that be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

The Enacting human Laws and civil Statutes for the Punishment of evil doers
and the Encouragement of them that do well; the maintaining and promoting Peace
and good Order, the protection of the Church and furthering of the Commonweal,
the suppressing all Disorders, frowning away Seducers, and preventing the
prevailing and spreading of dangerous Errors, etc. is one (and none of the
least) of those ways wherein they that are invested with Legislative Power and
Authority are the Ministers of God unto their People for good: And it is a
despising the Divine goodness herein; a contemning and dishonouring our
Political Fathers, and a shameful violation of the fifth Commandment for any to
disregard, go abrest to or counter-act such Laws.

Further, We are bound in all proper ways and methods, to express our gratitude
and thankfulness not only to God, but likewise to these wise and good Patriots;
these Patrons of our Civil and Religious Enjoyments, Liberties, Rights and
Privileges; for all the Quietness we enjoy by their Providence, -- To testify
our Fidelity to them; to stand by 'em, to stand up for them and endeavor to
Encourage their Hearts and strengthen their Hands; and not imagine Mischief
against them, nor consult to cast them down from their Excellency. See Ezra,
10.4. Arise, for this matter belongs unto thee: we also will be with thee.

Further still, These public Laborers are worthy of their Hire, Rom 13.7. The
dignity of their Post their public Trust and extensive Usefulness demands an
answerable, that is, an honorable Reward. And the withholding more than is
meet in this case is a burning shame, a high disgrace and reproach to any
People, -- It argues them to be of a narrow, contracted, stingy, sordid and
ungrateful spirit and temper of mind. -- And such Parsimony for ever tends to
poverty.

III. We come now to consider the last and Cautionary Branch or part of the
Text, -- And meddle not with them that are given to Change.

And here I shall endeavor of show, 1. Who or what manner of Persons these
are. And. 2. That these are not to be meddl'd with.


To begin with the first.

1. I am to draw the ugly, misshapen and forlorn Picture of them that are given
to Change.

And this must be done in Miniaeture: For it would be endless to trace them in
their almost infinite mutations, mazes, meanders, intricate turnings and
windings, in all their Excentrick, Progressive and Retrograde, Apogee and
Perigee motions.

But to come to the Point and to the Case in hand.

They that are given to Change, are men that (being under the direction,
influence and government of no fixed steady Principles) are frequently altering
their Mind, shifting and changing their Opinion, and in consequence hereof
their Practice and Conduct, not for the better but for the worse

There is a good as well as a bad Change: A Change which all of us are, or must
be the Subjects of as ever we hope to be happy, viz. That which St Paul speaks
of; 2 Cor. 3.18 We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, oven as by the
Spirit of the Lord. There is such a thing as a man's changing from bad to good,
and from good to better, which cannot be condemned. If men have imbibed unsound
Principles, embraced Errors and espoused false Maxims and acted upon them; it is
fit they should change their Sentiments and alter their Course of acting --
It Is strictly Just, it is Honorary to our Profession as Christians, and our
Glory as Men to Embrece Truth when ever it offers it self to our Choice: It Is
highly commendable for any when they find themselves in an Error, whether in
Opinion or Practice, speedily to renounce, relinquish and abandon the same: To
exchange falsehood for truth, darkness for light, and bitter things for sweet.
It Is praiseworthy to do all we can to rectify our Mistakes and false Judgments
of things, and to turn from crooked and perverse Ways into such as are right
and strait, and the paths of Peace,

But this (I conceive) is not the Change here intended. No but a changing from
good to bad, or from better to worse; a changing true Maxims and Opinions for
false ones: turning away from the truth and turning unto fables, and turning
from the right ways of the Lord to commit works with the workers of Iniquity.

Changlings there are of this sort too too many. There are, who love and use
Changes, and are so addicted hereunot, that they are here said to be given to
Change; even as one that inordinately loves and follows strong Drink is said to
be given to it, 1 Timothy 3.8.

Some there are who are Unstable in all their ways, in their obedience to God,
and to the King, and are prone to Rebellion against both. They Change their
mind and manners almost as often as the Camaleon is said to change his Color:
Are as changeable as the Weather and variable as the Wind: Mere Weather-Cocks
-- Constant in nothing, save only in Inconstancy.

(1) They are given to change in matters of Religion. They seem always as though
they had their Religion to choose, in regard they are never fixed in any thing;
but are for ever wavering like a wave of the Sea, driven to and fro and carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines. One while these are allowed to be
sound Doctrines; anon, these are condemned and discharged. One while these are
good Preachers, orthodox and sound in the Faith; presently, these are deserted
and stigmatized by them as Heretics, Legalists, Letter-learned Pharisees,
Soul-daubers, etc. And others set up Caressed and Canonized, even such as come
from the Ends of the Earth, and for ought they Know may be Missionaries from
the Pontificate of Rome (For these that have turned the World upside down, are
come hither allo, whom some have received --) Which (by the way) can be no Mark
of their being Christ's Sheep: Joh. 10 5. And a Stranger will they not follow,
but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of Strangers. Compare this
with Chapt. 5.43 I am come in my Father's Name, and ye receive Me not: if
another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.

One while these are some of the best of Books; after a while these are
rejected, are nigh unto Cursing and their End is to be Burned. Nor can the
departed Spirits of their Authors be found (by the Extensive Charity of these
right Catholic men) any where but in the devouring Flames of Hell: and because
(as they think the Smoke of their Torment will ascend up for ever and ever,
they can sing Hallelujahs ou this Joyful Occasion: So Pityful, Tenderhearted
and full of Compassion are these dear Children and distinguished Saints. --

One while this is the best and the only true Form of Worship and
Church Discipline; the only likely Method to promote Religion, to further
Awakenings, etc. By and by this Scheme is disliked, cried down, laid aside and
superseded by another that is bran-new. Thus moveable are their ways that you
cannot know them. Perhaps a Hare does not oftener alter her course, interchange
ground, turn short about, wind and twist, than some of these change their Faith
and Practice. They are like Children tossed to and fro and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, and led aside by the cunning Craftiness of them that
lie in wait to deceive. Like a silly Dove wandering from Mountain to Valley,
seeking rest but finding none to their unsettled and wavering Minds. Like
Ephraim of old feeding on the wind, and following after the East wind. Their
goodness is as a morning Cloud and early Dew, it goes away, Hos. 6.4.

This is to be given to Change. --

So those men that wickedly forsake God and break his Laws, are said to change
their God, Jer. 2 11 And to change GOD's Judgments and Ordinances Isa. 24 5 The
Earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have
transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinances and broken the everlasting
Covenant. See also Ezekiel. 5 5, 6. -- So they did in the Prophet Elijah's day,
The children of Israel (says he) have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine
Altars and slaem thy Prophets with the sword. So in the time of the Prophet
Hosea; My people (says he) ask Counsel at their Stocks, and their Staff
declares unto them; for the spirit of Whoridom, has caused them to Err, and
they have gone a whoring from under their God: They Sacrifice (not in the Place
that God had chosen and appointed for this purpose) No, but upon the tops of
the Mountains, and burn Incense upon the Hills, under Oaks and Poplars and
Elms, because the shadow thereof is good Their Prophets prophesied Lies in
God's Name, and the People loved to have in so. See Chap 9 7, 8. The prophet is
a sool, the spiritual man is mad; a snare of a fowler in all his ways and
hatred in the house of his God. And in Ezekiel's time what Abominations were
committed, not only by Others, but by some of the Ancients of the house of
Israel in the dark, in the Chambers of their Imagery; which the Prophet saw in
Vision, Ezekiel. 8.11. And in the time of the last Prophet, how shamefully did
they despise and forsake God's Ordinances, profane his Day, etc.? The Table of
the Lord was polluted by them, -- They Vowed and then Sacrified unto the Lord a
Corrupt thing. -- The Table of the Lord is Contemptible. (This was their
Language) They said, What a weariness is it? And they snuffed at it. See a
black Bill of Indictment summarily drawn up and exhibited against them by God
Himself, Mal. 3.7. Even from the days of your Fathers ye are gone away from
mine Ordinances, and have not kept them.

Thus did they gad about to change their way; like a common Prostitute whose
Love is never fixed, but sometimes set on this, sometimes on that Paramour;
playing the Harlot with many Lovers. And are there none at the present Day who
might here behold their Face and proper Features as in a Glass?

(2) This sort of Men are likewise given to Change with reference to Civil
Affairs. In consequence of this Vertigo, or dizziness in the Head, this
instability, fickleness and variation in Opinion and Judgment, they are ever
and anon for change of Government, and thence are raising a Dust, making a
Bustle, and endeavoring to Overset the Government; to turn things topsy turvy
and bring all into Confusion. --

One while they are for this Model and Form of civil Government, another while
for that, and oftener for none at all. Those men they esteem the best Qualified
for Rulers (and accordingly will Vote for them) who are most like themselves,
viz. given to Change: well knowing that such are most likely to abett and
encourage, or at least to connive at their Fluctuating and extravagant
Principles and Practices. Not the upright and steadfast Oak, but the bending
cringing Willow is the Tree which they choose should Rule over them. Wise men
and understanding and known, i e. approved among our Tribes, known to be strong
Rods and fast Friends to the Government; Men who have for many Years Ruld us in
the Integrity of their Hearts and by the Skilfuness of their Hands, these must
by all means be laid aside, turned out, and Changlings set up -- Thus using
their Liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness and not as the Servants of God.

We have a flagrant Instance of this being given to Change, with regard to
State affairs, in the Children of Israel, their being so set for a new Form of
Government, even, while good old Samuel their chief Judge was yet living: And
that notwithstanding they were Advertised what the bad Consequence of such a
Change as they insisted on would be, what would be the manner of their King, --
how he would Monopolize their Estates, make Slaves of their Children, etc. This
notwithstanding, they were, it seems for Monarchical and not Aristocratical
Government, for Kings rather than Judges. This thing, it is said displeased the
Lord: Wherefore He gave them a King in his anger and took him away in his wrath
Which was written for our admonition. Faelex quem faciunt alienae pericula
Cautum, --

Lo, these are a part of their ways.

But I must pass on,

2. To show, That these men are not to be meddled with. To make way for which,
it may not be amiss of we take some brief Notice of what is implied in this
Caution, -- And meddle not with them that are give to Change.

According to the Original, it is, Mix not thy self with them, -- " i. e.
Either in their Counsels "and Practices, or in familiar Conversation." Vide
Pool in locum.
But there is moreover a Miosis in the words, more implied and intended than is
expressed. It Is not enough that we mix not our selves with them in their
Counsels and Practices, but we must use all lawful Methods and Endeavors that
the Counsel of these Ahithophels, these Changlings, may be turned into
Foolishness, that their Devices may be disappointed; that they may be taken in
their own Craftiness, that their Counsel may be carried headlong, and that
their hands may not perform their Enterprise.

When we plainly see them attempting to introduce a Change, whether in Church
or State, or both; a Change which is likely to be subversive of and destructive
to our most dear and valuable Interests: When we hear them say one to another,
Raze it, raze it, even to the Foundation thereof! Does it not concern us to
Counter-act them, and do what we can to prevent the growing and important
Mischief?

When they that are given to Change, are opening a wide and perilous Door for
the letting in of Enthusiastical Impulses, Trances, Visions and Revelation,
Antinomian and Familistical Heresy, and the like; and what loudly threatens a
Subversion to all the peaceable Order in a Government, and when the most
barefaced Contempt is cast upon Authority both Civil and Ecclesiastical; in
this case Neutrality seems hardly sufficient. Ephesians 5.10. Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of Darkness, but rather reprove them. It Is doubtless best
that such Grapes of Sodom and Clusters of Gomorrha be nipp'd in the Bud, that
the Cockatrice be crushed in the Egg. The way to do which (one would think) is
not to sit still and do nothing: Prove. 22.3 A prudent man foreseeth the Evil
and hides himself; but the simple pass on and are punished.

Proceed we now to make it our, that men given to Change are not to be meddled
with. And this may appear in the light of these following particulars.

1. The meddling with men of this Character is expressly Forbidden by the Holy
Ghost in this and implicitly in sundry other Texts of Scripture: Particularly
where we are Cautioned not to be Partakers of other men's Sins; To withdraw from
them that walk Disorderly; To mark them that cause Divisions and avoid them. --

2. Their being opposed in the Text to such as Fear GOD and the King, plainly
intimates that they are men of no Religion, men void of Piety and Loyalty; and
therefore they are not to be meddl'd with.

The mixing our selves with them in common Coversation, but especially in their
Counsels, is unprofitable, yea, it is hurtful: For their Heart studieth
Destruction and their Lips talk of Mischief, Prove. 24.2. Hence Job could say,
Chap. 21.16. The Counsel of the wicked is far from me. He that walks with the
wise shall be wise; but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. And persons
that Fear not GOD neither regard men clothed with Authority, must needs be
unqualify'd and unfit to sustain any public Post either in the Church or in
the State. Shall even he that hates right, govern? Job 34.17. So that they are
to be let alone and not meddl'd with in this respect. If they that are given to
Change are men that fear not GOD nor the King, what profit can we expect to
reap from intermeddling or mixing our selves with them in their Counsels and
Practices?

O may Soul, come not thou into their Secret! It was David' s honor and
happiness that he could Appeal to Almighty GOD and profess, I am a Companion of
all them that fear Thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts. And again, I have
not sat with Vain Persons, neither will I go in with Dissemblers: I hate the
congregation of Evil doers and will not sit with the Wicked. So Jeremiah, Chap.
15.17. I sat not in the Assembly of the Mockers, nor rejoiced. -- Blessed is
the man that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stands in the way
of Sinners, nor sits in the seat of the Scornful. The thoughts of the
righteous are right: but the counsels of the wicked are deceit, Prove. 12.5.

3. If we view them in that light (or rather in that darkness) wherein they
have been placed in the foregoing Discourse, we shall see sufficient Reason to
steer clear of, and have nothing to do with these men, --

It Is true, these are in their own Opinion, the only Lights of the World,
burning and shining Lights: But as the Moon is known to be an Opake Body, void
of innate Light, by its frequent Lunations and Changes; so their being given to
Change, is Evidential that the Light which is in them is Darkness, yea, it is
Darkness that may be felt: 1 John 2 9 He that says he is in the Light and
hates his Brother, is in Darkness even until now. He walks in Darkness and
knows not whither he goes, because Darkness has blinded his Eyes. Those
that are Unstable as water don't Excel: No, but render themselves many ways
mean and contemptible and very unfit for public Trust and Improvement. There
is no trust to be put in them, there is no depending upon them. Considence in
such men is like a broken tooth and a foot out of joint, Pr 25.19

4. The meddling with and preferring such men to places of public Trust and
Improvement, is like to be of very pernicious Consequence, and tends greatly to
hurt the Public. When the Righteous are in Authority the people rejoice; but
when the Wicked bears Rule the people mourn. As a roaring Lion and a ranging
Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor People. They that work Wickedness must
not be set up, Mal. 3.15. When Vile men are exalted they have it more in their
Power to injure the Public, -- And they seldom want a Will.

So what a Tumult and Rout was caused in the State by Absalom (a Seditious
Villain) and those that Tagg'd after him? Some of whom had little Wit, and
others as little Honesty: For of some it is said, That when called they went in
their simplicity and knew not any thing, l. e. of Absalom's wicked and
rebellious design. But this some wre well appriz'd of, particularly the Spies
or such as rid Post, whom he sent throughout all the Tribes of Israel, saying,
As soon as you hear the sound of the Trumpet, then ye shall say Absalom
Reigns in Hebron.

Again, What an ill-boding Change was made in the Republic by another
ambitious Top and aspiring Cox omb, together with that disaffected and
designing Crew of changlings with whom he conferred, consulted and consorted,
and who following Adonijah helped him?

I might further Instance in Jeroboam, (one mightily given to Change,
especially when 'twould serve his own ambitious and avititious Ends and
Designs) who first made a change in Civil, and then soon introduced one in
Sacred and Ecclesiastical affairs; whose Name is left on sacred Record with
this brand of Infamy fixed upon it, to his immortal Dishonor, -- Jeroboam the
son the Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

But what shall more say? For the Time would fail me to speak of the great and
manifold Disturbances, Disorders, Convulsions and Confusions both in Church and
State, and the infinite Mischiefs which have been fomented and brought forward
by men of this make and character; especially when they have been promoted to
Honor, had the plaudit of the Populace, and have been hailed and even
hosanna'd by the giddy Multitude of unthinking Mortals.

5. Another Reason wherefore we should not meddle or mix our selves with them
that are given to Change, (...), because the more such Changlings there are,
the greater Mischief they are capable of perpetrating and pushing forward, Vis
unita fortior. It Is pity there should be so much as one such belonging to a
Community, -- One Sinner deftroys much good, -- But when such are multiplied,
under one or more Ringleaders and Arch changlings (like the Plague of Locusis
or Lice brought upon the Egyptians) they carry all before there, darken a Land
and make a most fearful Desolation, (Nor is such a Plague when begun and
spreading, like to be stayed, except Phinchas rife up and execure Judgments.)
Like the tail of some baleful, baneful red-hot Comet, they scatter and diffuse
their malignant Influences far and wide, kindie a destroying Fire and make a
rueful Conflagration wherever they come. And were there enough such Phaetons,
they would soon set the whole World on Fire in good earnest, not in iction but
in fact.

Very grievous are they when once they get the lead, in so much that were a
Land as the garden of Eden before them, behind them it would be a desolate
Wilderness, yea and nothing could escape them. To allude to that, Joel 2.3
Should men of this turn and cast of mind once get the Staff of Government into
their hands, we should have Judgment without Mercy; their tender mercies would
be cruelty. Where there is no truth there is no mercy to be expected. See Hos
41. So Prove. 28.28. when the wicked rise men hide themselves. And I wish it
never come to this, That whosoever kills you, will think he does God service.

6. If we meddle with them and become partakers of their Sins, we must expect
to receive of their Plagues and Punishment. Though hand join in hand, the wicked
shall not go unpunished. The wicked, such are they whose bold transgressions of
the Laws of GOD and Man plainly says, that there is no fear of God before
their eyes. We are told that a participation or partnership with such in their
wickedness, very awfully exposes to divine Vengeance, See Ps. 50.17.

The Day is hastening when Christ the Judge will speak unto them in his Wrath
and vex them in his sore Displeasure; will break them with a rod of Iron, and
dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel: Will say, Bring hither these mine
Enemies, who would not that I should Reign over them and stay them before my
face: Bind them in bundies and burn them together. Is not destruction to the
wicked, (to all such as fear not the LORD and the King) and a strange
punishment to the workers of iniquity? The hypocrite in heart heap up wrach,
Job 36. 13 The wicked plotteth against the just; the LORD shall laugh at him,
for he sees that his day is coming: Into smoke shall they consume away; the
transgressors shall be destroyed together, Psalm. 37.12, --

How awful to this purpose are those words of St. Peter? 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3 But
there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction: And Many shall Follow their Pernicious Ways,
by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of: And through
Covetousness shall they with seigned words make merchandise of you; whose
Judgment now of a long time lingreth not and their Damnation slumbreth not. And
let it be remembered, that he that receives such into his house and bids him
God speed, is partaker of their evil deeds, John's Epist, 2 ver 10, 11.

But I hasten to make some brief Improvement.

And, 1. It is matter of deep Lamentation that there are so many among us who
fear not GOD and the King, but are given to Change. The bad changes both in
Principle and Practice visible in many, and that proximate prepareduess
hereunto, which appears in more than a few, may well fill every thoughtful Mind
with deep Concern, and constrain us to cry out with the weeping Prophet, O that
my head were waters and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night. Does not this spirit and practice which is so prevalent and rise among
us, argue a most lamentable decay (instead of revival) of Religion? And what
can be thought of, that is of more hurtful and dangerous Tendency or bodes more
ill to the Community? Alas! that there should be such Numbers who have changed
their glory for that which does not profit: Who have left their first love,
left off to be wise and to do the godly deed: Whose just character is that, 1
These. 2 15. They please not God, and are contrary to all men. God planted us a
noble Vine; how then are we turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine
unto him? Be aftonished O ye Heavens at this, and O Earth be horribly afraid
and very desolate. For these things I weep; mine eye, mine eye runs down
with water, -- When I remember I am afraid and trembling raketh hold on my
flesh. Would to God, there were not so many of these gray Hairs here and there
upon us, threatening symptoms of approaching ruin.

Are not these the Horns that have scattered our Judah, the Eyes that mock
their Fathers, the Vipers that eat through their Mothers bowels? Is not much of
the glory departed from our Israel? How is our gold become dim, how is our most
fine gold changed? And is there no cause (in a sense) to renew that complaint
of the Psalmist? Ps. 74-2, 8 -- Thine Enemies rore in the midst of thy
Congregations. They brake down the carved works thereof: They have defiled the
dwelling place of thy Name; they have cast fire into thy Sanctuary. For in
truth it is come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there is a stink, and
inftead of a girdle there is a rent, and burning instead of beauty, Isa 3 24
And I wish they don't advance a step further and revive the Marian Fire and
Faggot; yes, and at length burn Incense unto other Gods and cause their
Children to pass through the Fire unto Moloch. The God Vulcan having thus far
answered them by Fire, appears to be neither Asleep nor in a Journey, but much
nigher at hand and more propitious to them than he once was to the Prophets of
Baal, 1 King. 18 27

I see not but that the Abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel (in some
degree) is now standing in the holy Place, even in these American goings down
of the Sun. Are not the stones of the Sanctuary (in a sense) poured out in the
top of every Street, and the precious Sons of our Zion, comparable to fine
gold, how are they efteem'd as earthen Pitchers? Our Nobles are yet of our
selves (Blessed be GOD) and our Governor of our own choosing; but are not these
(as it were) hanged up by their hand? and the faces of the Elders are not
honored. Don't the very Child behave himself proudly against the Ancient; and
the Base against the Honorable?

For my part, I think it is high time to blow the Trumpet in Zion, to sound an
Alarm in God's Holy Mountain, and bear the most public Testimony and
Remonstrance against that horrid and insufferable Contempt that is cast upon
Authority both Civil and Ecclesinstical, not a little owing to the wild and
over officious Zeal of pragmatical restless Spirits, who like Self-conceited
and Rebellious Absalom, are ever wishing, Oh! That I were made Judge in the
Land, that every man that has any Suit or Cause might come unto me and I would
do him Justice: And to a spirit of Choraism, with which too many are deeply
Tinctured. These (with but too many others which are the reigning Evils of this
Unhappy Day, and which are the Fruits of our being given to Change) I cannot but
be of Opinion, have a more gloomy and threatening Aspect upon the Land, than
should the punishment of the Sword, Famine or Pestilence be sent among us.

The Kings of the Earth and all the Inhabitants of the World would not have
believed that the Adversary and the Enemy should have thus entered into the
gates of this Jerusalem, and kindled such a Fire, that it is well if it don't
devour the Foundation thereof.

Who ever reads the History of the rise and progress of the Anabaptists in
Germany in the Sixteenth Century, may have a taste of the bitter and fatal
Fruits of being given to Change, and see to what a prodigious Bulk and Size
Enthusiasin and Fanaticism may grow.

God forbid that any should imagine that Reformation consists in Changes that
tend to the utter Extirpation of Religion and Government; in Principles and
Practices which want a new Bible to justify them. He that was a Liar from the
beginning, and is the grand Author of Confusion, promoter of Disorder and sower
of Discord among Brethren, can have nothing against such Reformation; nor can
it make Infidels cry, but laugh and say, Aha! So we would have it.

Men may Separate themselves and yet not seek and intermeddle with all Wisdom;
but be Sensual and not have the Spirit. Hos. 4.14. For themselves are Separated
with Whores, and they Sacrifice with Harlots. Chap. 9 10. I found Israel likes
grapes in the Wilderness: I saw your Fathers as the first-ripe in the Figtree
at her first time; but they went to Baal-peor and Separated themselves unto
that shame, and their Abominations were according as they loved. Ezekiel. 14.7 For
every one of the House of Israel, or of the Stranger that sojourneth in Israel
which Separateth himself from Me, and sets up his Idols in his heart and
puts the Stumbling Block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to a
Prophet to Enquire of him concerning Me, I the LORD will answer him by my self.
Thus their Separation may be defiled, and so all their Time and Labor be lost.
See Numb. 6 12. People (which walk in a way that is not good, after their own
thoughts, that provoke GOD to anger continually to his Face; that eat Swines
flesh, and have the Broth of abominable things in their Vessels, and are a
Smoke in GOD's Nose, a Fire that burns all the day) may notwithstanding say,
Stand by thy self, Come not near to me; for I am holier than thou, Isa 65.2.5.
There is a generation that are pure in their own Eyes, that trust in themselves
that they are Righteous and despise Others, and yet are not washed from their
Filthiness; and by their Fruits ye shall know them; viz. By their not fearing
the LORD and the King, and their being given to Change.

We have great reason to Adore the Unchangeable JEHOVAH, for all the showers of
divine Grace and that Righteousness which He has rained upon the unworthy
People of this Land from time to time: But have cause (I think) to be deeply
Humbled for, to Mourn and Lament some of the Changes that have of late been
among us, ushered in by them who professing themselves to be wise (and are wise
above what is written) have changed the truth of God into a lie; and worshipped
and served the Creature, more than the Creator who is blessed for ever. For GOD
is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints.
GOD will be sought and served after the due Order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13.

II. Our Subject furnishes us with a Rule by which to proceed in the important
Affair we are now Convened upon and to be Active in. We are here Instructed (in
giving in our Suffrage or Votes, for men to be entrusted with the weighty
Affairs of Government.)

1 Not to meddle with them that are given to Change Them, that (if ever they
were otherwise) appear now to be Back: friends to the Government, and its
effectual Adversaries. Them, that (if they ever were subject to good and
wholesome Laws) are now tack't about, and are steering quite another Course;
breaking the Laws themselves, and teaching others to do the like. These deserve
to be least in the Kingdom of Men, and are by no means to be preferred to
places of public Trust. When a man has got the rounds, Phlebotomy or Bleeding
is more proper for him than Promotion. And would we hit such men in the right
Vein, in order to work a more thorough Cure, we must let 'em see and feel that
we don't look upon such Changlings qualified for public Improvement. No,
should such be set on high, 'twould serve only to make their Heads still more
dizzy and put their Brains into a more violent Rotation. It Is dangerous
venturing the Sword of civil Government in the hand of one that is Delirious or
in a Phrensy: And we know there is more than one sort of Phrensy. The spiritual
man may be mad, See Hos. 9.7.

What a pitiful Stick must he be for a Pillar to support and bear up the
Commonwealth, who may be twisted like a mere With, or who is for ever
shifting, veering and wheeling about like a Windmill. If he that is at Helm be
addle Headed and cannot stand Steady, he will make but wild Steerage, especially
in a Stormy and Tempestuous Season; when the Winds are Boistrous, the Seas
Roar, the Billows run high and Deep calls unto deep. The steady Trade-wind is
an Emblem of one that is sit to Rule over men, and not the blustering and
hurtful Whirlwind. Good Rulers are Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame Job
29 15. But if such as have lost their Way and are themselves got Bewildr'd,
were set to Lead and Conduct others, that would soon be fulfilled, Isa. 9.16.
The Leaders of this people cause them to Err, and they that are led of them are
destroyed

We may allow Solomon to be a good Politician, a wise and experienced
Statesman. Well, his Sentence, you see, is, That men of this Character are not
to be meddl'd with.

2. It Is implied (though not expressed) in our Text, that we ought in this case
to make Choice of men that are of fixed and steady Principles and uniform in
their Practice: Men that may be confided in and depended upon; Men of a true
greatness, stability and constancy of Mind; and such as appear to bear the
nearest Resemblance to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, in Wisdom and
Knowledge, in Holiness Justice, Goodness and Truth; with whom there is not
Variableness nor shadow of turning. He is in one mind, and who can turn him?
Job 23.13.

Civil Rulers should resemble the fixed Stars, acting and shining in their
exalted Spheres; and not be like the inferior Planets, which are given to
Change. They should be like a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots, whose
necks are clothed with Thunder, and who cannot be made afraid as a Grasshopper.
-- Men that cannot be swayed or turned about by Fear, or Hopes, or Gifts: That
will not basely Betray the cause of Truth and Sacrifice the most valuable
Interests of their People for fear of being turned out of their Posts, or least
they should rise no higher: That don't love the Praise of Men more than the
Praise of GOD.

Blessed be GOD, such there are who have hitherto been the Chariots of our
Israel and the Horsemen thereof; Strong and very Courageous in Protecting,
Maintaining and Promoting our hest Interests Civil and Religious; and can say
with the renowned David, who Ruled with GOD and was Faithful with the Saints,
Wherefore should I be afraid in the days of Evil, when the Iniquity of my heels
should compass me about? -- And I pray GOD blast the Designs and bring to
naught the Devices of any that may be attempting to deprive the Public of so
great a Blessing. He that Fears the LORD and the King, and is not given to
Change; He that if he has Sworn to his own hurt changes not, but sacrifices
his Interest and Profit to his Conscience and the reverence of GOD and of an
Oath: He that walks Uprightly and works Righteousness and speaks the Truth
in his heart; in whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned; but he honors them
that fear the LORD; Such a man being invested with Authority, will stand up for
GOD against the Evildoers, and do all he can to protect Religion and all that
is Sacred, from the daring Insults of them that sit in the Seat of the
Scornful; the Scoffers that are come in these Last and Perilous Times, and to
promote the Commonwealth of Israel. Such therefore (out of a just Awe of the
divine Majesty, and Loyalty to the King) we should give our Voice for -- Piety
is a friend to Policy, of which some given to Change, having made Shipwreck.
This is an admonition equivalent to, -- Noli me tangere, --

Not but that a man may be a sincere Christian, and yet a Novice in Political
Affairs; and likely to do much more hurt than good in the Quality and Capacity
of a civil Ruler, were he to sustain the Post.

Nevertheless what says the Scripture? The wicked walk on every side when the
vilest men are exalted, Psalm. 12.8. Such are they who despise Dominion and are
not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, etc. For these St Peter compares (and
that every Elegantly) to natural brute Beasts; Ignorant and Presumptuous are
they, Self-willed, Bold, Daring, Stubborn, Refractory, Headstrong, addicted to
their own Ways, and unwilling to be Ruled and Governed, like a Bullock
unaccustomed to the Yoke. --

Now then, Men and Brethren, Since we are Entrusted by GOD with this
Opportunity, to show our Piety to Him, and express our Loyalty to our King, as
well as a just Regard to our Selves, our Families and Friends; let us act
Conscientiously, Uprightly and in the Fear of GOD the Searcher of all Hearts,
and Vote for them who (as far we can judge) come the nearest the Scripture
Qualifications, both in Number and Degree. Let nothing be done through
Partiality or a Party-spirit, that may Expose us to that sore Judgment, Isa.
3.4. And I will give Children to be your Princes, and Babes shall Rule over
them; and the People shall be Oppressed every one of another.

Honesty in this case, my Brethren, is certainly the best Policy, --

We have lift up our Hand to Heaven, and Sworn by Him that lives for ever and
ever, That we will act in this Affair without Respect of Persons, and as we
shall in our Consciences think will be most for GOD's Glory and the Public
Weal. And know it, GOD will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in Vain.
That add to their other Crimes, the most heinous, aggravated and dreadful Sin
of Perjury.

Wherefore I Counsel thee to keep the King's Commandment, and that in regard of
the Oath of GOD. My Son, Fear thou the LORD, and the King, and meddle nor with
them that are given to Change; who, were they in the Administration and at the
Head of Affairs, would soon change the Laws and Customs of the Government, not
for the better but infinitely for the worse; and cause us all to Roar like
Bears and Mourn sore like Doves. Meddle not with a double-minded man, i. e. an
Hypocrite, who is Unstable in all his ways; whose Counsels, Purposes, Actions,
etc. are a Medley of Inconsistances. They speak Vanity, i. e. Falsehood, every
one with his Neightbour; with flattering Lips, and with a double Heart; with an
Heart and an Heart do they speak: Pretending one heart, and that they speak
from a kind and upright heart; when they really have another, even a cruel and
deceitful heart. See Psalm. 12.2. They delight in Lies; they bless with their
Mouth, but they Curse inwardly, Psalm. 62.4 He has put forth his hands against
such as be at peace with him: he has broken his Covenant. The words of his
Mouth were smoother than butter; but War was in his heart: his Words were
softer than oil, yet were they drawn Swords, Psalm. 55 20, 21. Their Tongue is
as an Arrow shot out, it speaks deceit: One speaks peaceably to his
Neighbor with his mouth, but in heart he lays his wait, Jer. 98. Should we
be instigated to Vote sot such, our Answer should be like that of the King of
Israel, to Benhadad, in another case, -- Thu thing I may not do. What tho the
Hypocrite be sill'd with his own ways, and Haman be hanged on the Gallows that
he had prepared for Mordecai, -- Better so than worse. Better some few should
die (in this sense) i. e. not be Promoted, than that the whole Nation perish.

The same mind, public Spirit and Love to our Country, should be in us, which
was in that Royal Personage the Celebrated Princess of Persia, when Petitioning
the King to Reverse the Letters devised by the Jews Enemy, which he (...)
destroy the Jews which I endure (says She) to see (...): For how can unto any
People, or how can I endure to (...) ^^struction of my Kindred? Esth. 8.6.

III. Finally, Let all be hence Excited to fear the LORD and the King, and
Cautioned against being given to Change. It Is the Criterion or distinguishing
Character of a good man, That his Heart is fixed; and that he is steadfaft and
immovable, steadfast in God's Covenant, and does not turn from the holy
Commandment delivered unto him. Whereas being given to Change, you see, is an
indication or Sign of a graceless heart; a Mark of one that fears not God: A
dark Character this! And let none of us merit the same. Oh! let us Cry mightily
unto God Most High (who performs all things for us) in the language of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 28.3. Draw me not away with the wiched, and with the workers of
iniquity; which speak peace to their Neighbors, but mischief is in their
hearts. Let us fear the Lord, trust in Him at all times, and pour out our
hearts before him; and we may humbly hope to find that Word made good to us,
Psalm. 112.4, 8 Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness, -- Surely
he shall not be moved for ever, -- He shall not be afraid of evel Tidings, his
heart is fixed trusting in the Lord; his heart is established, be shall not be
afraid until be see his desire upon his enemies.

(...) profession of our Faith (...); for he that wavereth is (...) of the Sea,
driven with the wind (...) The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot
rest: Whose waters cast up mire and dirt. We should hate the work of them that
turn aside, Psalm. 101.3. The works of the flesh which are manifest and are
these, -- Hatned, Variance, Emilations, Wrath, Strise, Seditions, Heresies,
Gal. 5.19. This is the will of God, viz. that there should be no Schism in the
Body, 1 Cor. 3.3. And by this (says our Seviour) shall all men know that ye are
my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Let us not then Judge our
Brother, or set at naught our Brother: But let us be kindly affectioned one
toward another, Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.

Let us stick fast to God's Testimonies. Some are saying, Lo, here is Christ or
there, that are not to be believed, Mat. 24 23. Let us strictly adhere to the
Unchangeable, Invariable, Unalterable Doctrines, Precepts and Rules of our holy
Religion contained in the Gospel, and not decline, warp or turn aside therefrom
to the right hand or to the left. This is the Way, walk in it. This is an
unerring Rule, and as many as walk according to it shall enter into Peace, Joy,
and Assurance for ever; Shall come to the Heavenly Zion with Songs and
everlasting Joy upon their Heads.

It Is now a day of great Overturnings, and many are given to Change: Many
Deceivers are entered into the World, who would deceive (if it were possible)
the very Elect. But Jesus Christ and his Gospel is the same Yesterday, to Day,
and for Ever.

Let me therefore urge and press you to Constancy in the true, incorrupt
Christian Profession, in the Faith once deliered to the Saints; the Truth as it
is in Jesus; and in the practice of pure and undefiled Religion. Look to your
selves that we lose not those things which we have wrought; but that we receive
a full Reward, Joh, 2 Epist. ver. 8.

O let us all covet earnestly these best Gifts, viz. the Wisdom which is from
above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy. And
those Fruits of the Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Righteousness and Truth. And
not say we are delivered to do all those Abominations which are contrary
hereunto, Jer. 7.8. -- 11.

It Is said, Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, Deceiving and
being Deceived: But continue thou in the Things which thou have learned and
have been assured of, knowing of whom, thou have learned them, 2 Timothy 3.13, 14.

To conclude, May GOD, ever our GOD Bless us and cause his Face to shine upon
us: And may the Heads of our Issachar have Understanding of the Times, and all
their Brethren be at their Commandment. And may we Experience the fulfillment of
that precious Promise, Isa 57.18. I have seen his ways and will heal him; I
will lead him also and restore Comforts to him and to his Mourners. Tur us
again, O LORD, unto Thee and we shallbe Turned; Renew our Days as of Old AMEN.

THE END.

