Mr. Lord's NARRATIVE, With suitable Reflections, Concerning the very
surprising Case of Mrs. M. WHEELER, etc.

GOD glorified in his Works, of Providence and Grace.

A Remarkable INSTANCE of it, IN The various and signal Deliverances, that
evidently appear to be wrought for Mrs. MERCY WHEELER, in Plainfield; lately
restored from extreme Impotence and long Confinement.

Published at the Desire of Many.

By Benjamin Lord, A. M.

Mark ix. 23. -- All Things are possible to him that believes.

Isaiah xxviii. 16. He that believes, shall not make haste.

Jonah ii. 9. Salvation is of the LORD.

Psalm lxix. 32, 33. The Humble shall see this, and be glad: and Your Heart
shall live, that seek GOD. For the LORD hears the Poor, and despises not his
Prisoners.

Psalm cxi. 4. He has made his wonderful Works to be remembered. --

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL for J. BLANCHARD at the Bible and Crown
near the Market. 1743.

GOD glorified in his Works of Providence and Grace: As it appears, in the
hopeful Conversion, and wonderful Restoration of Mrs. MERCY WHEELER, in
Plainfield.
The INTRODUCTION.
THERE is nothing more evident and universal, than the Proof of a DEITY, in all
those Works and Wonders, which constantly appear with such Marks of uncreated
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, as loudly speak their Author, GOD. For the
invisible Things of him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen,
being understood by the Things that are made, even his eternal Power and
Godhead: So that they who had only this Evidence of his Being and Perfections
from existing Nature, and that knew God only by the Light of Nature, and yet
glorified him not, as God; were without Excuse.

And not only are the Works of Creation, in the vast Variety of their Natures,
in their untold Numbers, in their shining Beauties, in their surprising Order,
Harmony, Direction, and Use; such evident Proofs of a God: But the Works of
Providence, are alike plain and uncontestable Evidences of a supreme Being,
that is infinitely wise, powerful and kind. In these, he has not left himself
without Witness, in that he did good. HE the true God did Good like a God, and,
so as no other could do. And, this, he does continually, in a Multitude of
Ways, defending and upholding of us, in Life and Motion, etc. For, in him we
live and move, as well as have our Being. Every Breath we draw, is by new Leave
and Power from him, and if he should withhold the same, one Moment, in that
Moment we should die.

Among the innumerable Instances of a divine and perpetually beneficent
Providence, some are eminently mavelous, in the Perservation, Defense and
Deliverance of his poor Creatures; and demand our most special Notice, as there
are in them the more signal Displays of the Wisdom, Power, Care, and
Faithfulness of a God; and by them, is given a more plain and ample Testimony
for God. So that they who remain evil and unthankful after all these, are left
without Excuse, indeed.

And when to all these, is added the most strong and affecting Proof of the
manifold Wisdom and rich Mercy of God, in the Redemption of Rebel-Man by JESUS
CHRIST; the Obligations to this glorious Being are increased beyond Expression.
And how can any under the Gospel, be excused, who don't with warm Affections of
Soul, improve these Evidences of the divine Being and Benevolence to the
Purposes of their Duty and God's Glory?

But as the Proofs of a Deity, which are displayed all abroad in Creation and
Providence, breaking forth, and shining out from every Part of the Creation, as
also in every Scene of Providence, are open to all serious Observers: So, the
brighter and more engaging Evidences of a God in the Revelation and Gift of
Jesus Christ the Savior, cannot escape the most pleasing Observation of all,
whose Eyes are opened to behold the Glory of God in the Face of his Son. Never,
O never do the Proofs of a Deity shine forth with such satisfying Clearness and
sweet Influence, as they do in Christ Jesus; in whom, the great and glorious
God may be known, and believed in; known, and loved; known, and rejoiced in and
enjoyed for ever. This Kind of Proof (surely) cannot fail of having a most
solemn, sweet and practical Regard from all that have felt the Power of it, in
their Conversion, and blessed Conformity to God by Jesus Christ.

And how often is it, that the Subjects whom Providence singles out, in a
remarkable Manner, to display the Perfections of God upon them; in their
Deliverance from bodily Evils; and so to make them Witnesses for him: Are the
very same whom Grace pitcheth upon too, for the same Purpose; in their
Salvation from Sin and Hell. And so, almighty Providence, and rich Grace
eminently meet at the Command of Sovereignty, which shines illustriously in
them both.

Thus it was in the Days of our Savior, when the Miracles of Power, in healing
Men's Bodies, were attended with those of Grace, in the healing of their Souls.
And how beautiful the Sight now, when in some Imitation thereof, the Subjects
of an extraordinary Deliverance by Providence, do appear to be also the
Subjects of converting and saving Grace? The Finger of God, in some few
Instances of late, has appeared in a very wonderful Manner, in healing and
restoring Persons from long Impotency and Confinement; whose Difficulties had
long baffled all Means, and seemed beyond the ordinary Methods of Cure. And O
how much more of God still, has there been in such Instances, when they have
been hopefully wrought upon, by almighty sovereign Grace too!

God's Creatures are all his own absolute Property, and he may single out which
of them he pleases to be the distinguished Subjects of his Power and Grace.
And this Person, of whose Deliverances I have undertaken to give some Account,
has appeared for a long Series of Years to have been a remarkable Subject, and
as it were a visible Seat of the divine Wonders. God's Dealings with her have
been very uncommon, and even singular all along. And by the whole Frame of his
Dispensations toward her, it has looked as if God might have some Reserves of
uncommon Favor for her, and Designs of displaying his sovereign Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness in something extraordinary with Respect to her, as the Event now
shows. Under some of the greatest Weight of the Hand of Providence upon her,
there often appeared a wonderful Uplifting of the Heart and Soul, by the Power
of Grace at Work in her. And the Work of God in her, has ever appeared to bear
some Proportion to the Dealings of God with her. And, now, what does at last so
evidently appear to be done for her, seems to have been aimed at, and designed
in the whole Scheme of Providence, and Train of Events concerning her; so much,
is it of a Piece with the rest. And though no one could pretend to have
foreseen it, yet now it has happened, it does seem to be some extraordinary
Result of divine Counsel and Compassion, the Fruit of resolute Mercy, which
though contented to appear in slow Progress for many Years (in Order to make
the more illustrious Discovery of it self in the Close) at Length breaks forth
and makes its Way through all Difficulty, appears more open, and exerts itself
in a very discernable and surprising Deliverance. A gracious Providence (it
seems) had for Years together before this, been doing enough, in a more gradual
Way, to fix her, and others Attention to God's signal Care of her, and to keep
up a secret Hope of some greater Deliverances still; but now, when the set Time
was come, to favor her with Liberty, and to make the divine Power and Praise
the more illustrious; behold, her Restoration; must take an unusual Stretch, as
if the Lord had not forgotten that Prerogative Character of his. -- The Lord
loses the Prisoners -- the Lord raises them that that are bowed down. And as
if he would yet be known in that his incomparable Character, Who is like unto
thee, O Lord -- glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders.
Verily, he has remembered her, in her low Estate, for, his Mercy endures
forever. And this, (as, I might observe) has been the Issue of much Prayer for
her, as well as in Consequence of great Faith, which has appeared to be wrought
in her, and exercised by her. But, God chooses whom he will to be the Subjects
of his Mercy, he has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. And so he fits, whom he
will, in and by them, to make his Power and Grace known, and to glorify himself
before the World.

The Design of publishing this Account, is not to extol the Subject of this
Deliverance, but the divine Author of it. And not to speak of what appears
excellent in her any further, than it may seem necessary, to give some ample
Testimony for God, in what he has done for her. According to her own Words, Oh
let the Lord humble me, and let none take Notice of me, but for God's Sake, and
for his Honor. And forasmuch, as she seems to view every Thing in her, that
justly looks well to others, as God's Creature and Gift, rather than as her
Excellence; and also to give all that God has any Way done for her, back again
unto him in Acknowledgement and Praise, I hope it will not be accounted any
Transgression of Rule, to speak of her as a Monument of the Power and Mercy of
God, which cannot be hid. Yea, such an open Instance hereof, wherein, the Lord
has been pleased to appear in his Strength of Salvation. Yea, it is so far from
being the Design of this Narrative to magnify a poor Worm, the Subject of it,
that it is rather to promote her Humility; by letting her yet more into herself
to see still more of her own Vileness and Nothingness in the Light of the
Knowledge of God, and of his Works of Wonder; which are here set before her; as
a Glass, wherein she may (as in some entire View of God's Dealings with her)
see what the Lord has done for her; and this ranged, something in the Order of
her Experience of it. And O let her Eyes be turned inward upon her self, as
well as lifted upwards to God and Christ, and let her Soul be filled with
sacred Love, Gratitude and Wonder, that even the Lord would look upon such a
vile Creature, and single her out, to be such a Monument of his Almighty Power
and Grace, something as it was with poor Mephibosheth, who bowed himself, and
said, what is thy Servant, that thou should look upon such a dead Dog as I am.

Furthermore, the Design hereof, is to fix the Remembrance of the Doings of the
Lord, upon the Hearts of the Beholders hereof, and so to impress those Truths,
and that Sense of God and divine Things, which some seemed to have received by
seeing how great Things the Lord had done for her.

I have (with others) been sundry Times to the Place, conversed frequently with
her, and seen her the Subject of Deliverances, as I had before seen her, the
Subject of Impotency. I have also made careful Enquiry into the Matters of
Fact, concerning her; and got Information of the Credibility of the particular
Witnesses to them. And took the utmost Care, I could that that might be a just
Account of Things, and have here represented them as they are, in their own
native Simplicity, without giving any determinate Opinion of the precise Nature
of the Deliverance wrought for her, especially in the surprizingly free Use of
her Feet, but leave the Reader entirely to judge thereof himself, according as
it shall appear to him from the whole. Only observe, that there does seem, upon
the strictest Examination into it, to be plentiful Matter of the divine Praise
and Glory, which I hope is the governing Design of this History. And in drawing
out the Materials of it, and ranging of Things in their own Order, it will be
something necessary and not incongruous to intermix something of her inward,
Christian Experience with the Train of God's Dealings with her: Because the
Designs of Providence and Grace, do really appear, to have been in Fact,
carried on together. And I trust this Intermixture will relish well with the
serious Reader, as it does actually reflect a Beauty upon the Work of the Lord,
and a Glory to the Author.

I shall only add this further, that the Things here related, are what many do
know and speak of, without any Doubt of the Truth and Certainty of them. And
that the most wonderful Event of all, (viz.) Her sudden rising up, and walking
and leaping as one at Liberty from long Impotency, didn't happen to her when
alone, nor was the Thing done in a Corner, but a Multitude, (who had been
worshipping with her at the House) saw it, and wondered. And since that Time,
the Evidence of her Deliverance growing yet stronger, it is the Opinion of many
serious and judicious Persons, that it is worthy of Notice, among the wonderful
Works of the Lord, which he will have to be remembered. At whose Desire, I have
here given the following Account, in brief, and in the Order as follows.

Mr. LORD'S Account OF Mrs. MERCY WHEELER.
MErcy Wheeler (Daughter of Mr. Isaac Wheeler of Plainfield, and of Sarah his
Wife) was born in the Year, 1706, and from a Child was favored with a signal
Measure of Health, until the 20th Year of her Age, wherein, she was seized with
the nervous Fever in the latter End of the Summer, in 1726. And thereupon, fell
into such Weakness, as proved almost beyond Example. By the Summer following
she was brought so low as to be wholly confined to her Bed, which Confinement
continued for many Years. And for several of those Years was so reduced, and
under such a prevailing Fever, that for a great while together, even every Day
was expected to be the last.

But, before I proceed to give the particular Account of her Weakness; I must
observe, that when first seized with her Sickness, she was under some
Awakenings and Concern about her Soul, which grew upon her greatly in the Time
of that Sickness, and in about six Weeks, her Soul-Distress rose to a Crisis,
when she experience such a Change, and received that Comfort, which proved a
continuing Thing, and of permanent Service to her, in all her subsequent low
Estate of Body. She appeared very calm and composed in her Mind, patient in
Tribulation, instant in Prayer, resigned to the divine Will, and serious in her
Discourse; but otherwise made little, or no Discovery of her Conversion then.
And therefore I shall refer the Account of this, to that Place in the
Narrative, where it most naturally comes in, as to the Date of her own more
explicit Relation of it -- And further, will only observe here, that all along,
even in the greatest Extremity of her Pain and Weakness. She had much Faith and
Hope, and Comfort in God through Jesus Christ, and often enjoyed sweet
Communion with him by his Word and Spirit, which were abundantly with her. Yea,
excepting some Seasons of Temptations, Darkness and Fear, she was very
comfortable in the whole Course of her Confinement. And when she could not
converse with her Friends, by Reason of her extreme Weakness, she had, (by her
Account afterward) refreshing Converse with Heaven: Insomuch, that she would
sometimes say, Since the Lord was with me, in that Prison, and made it as a
Palace to me, and with his Presence, I could freely go back there, if it was
his Will that I should. And it seems as if the Joy of the Lord was her Strength
in her Weakness and Confinement, or else it don't seem how the Frame of Nature
could have kept together, so long, under such extraordinary Misery, and
Impotency, before any remarkable Revival of Nature at all.

And now, that God may have all the Glory of upholding her thus, in such a low
Estate, for so long a Time, and at length reviving her; here follows the
Account of some Symptoms of her uncommon Weakness and low Estate.

Her Flesh consumed, 'till she was reduced to a mere Skeleton; for, her
Appetite was gone, and she not able to eat, or bear either Bread, or Flesh of
any Kind, for the Space of five Years; and as to Provision, supported only, by
thin liquid Food, and this some of the most mean in Nature and Dress, that can
be imagined, and put into her Mouth only by Spoonfuls; and them, but three at a
Time, twice a Day, and sometimes but once in a Day. Thus it was during this 5
Years, or the greatest Part of that Term.

Her Strength had failed, to that Degree, that she could not move her Head upon
the Pillow, for a great while together, nor yet any Limb to help herself at all.

And so weak in this Time, that when they turned her in the Bed, she often, and
usually fainted.

So weak that she could not spit at all, but only open her Mouth, and let her
Spittle run out of it.

So weak in her vital Parts, that her Speech wholly failed her, so that she was
not able to express her Thoughts by Whispers, to the Understanding of any, but
those of the Family, who had learnt by the Motion of her Lips rather than by
any distinct Articulation, to know her Mind in some Measure.

Her Strength so gone in this Time, that she scarce opened her Eyes at all. And
when she did, could hardly see, so as to distinguish Persons, whom she had been
most acquainted with; and knew but a very few, of all that came to see her.

Such was her extreme Weakness, that her Heart was not perceived to beat in all
this Time, and she generally lay with her Mouth open, panting for Breath, as if
a dying, and as it was though it, sometimes, actually a dying; and once, to
Appearance gone for a great while, so that they closed her Eyes, and thought
she would revive no more -- Such were the Symptoms of her low State, which
diverse knew, and have declared from their own Knowledge.

It may be noticed here, that in this Time of her extraordinary Weakness, a
Variety of Means, with much Expense, were used for her, but all in vain, 'till
after the Experiment of the cold Bath. Near the Close of this Time of her low
State, this was once used, and gave such a Shock to her feeble Frame, that for
a Month after, her Hands were drawn up and fast clenched, and not a Joint from
her Fingers Ends to her Shoulder, would bend any more, than one entire Bone.
Her Feet also, were affected in some like Manner. However, after this Shock, it
was observed, that Means began to operate upon her. Not only were her Joints
loosned, and her Fingers especially, which had been so suddenly contracted,
recovered gradually to their proper Extension. But, she began to revive with
inward Strength. Indeed her Knees and Ancles didn't recover now, nor all along,
any Thing like to her Arms and Hands. And even these were not suddenly restored
to their Use; for still she could not hold so much as a Spoon in her Hand to
feed her self; nor yet keep her Fingers out straight, when she held out her
Arm, but with their own Weight, they would drop. But yet she was for some Time
recovering vital Strength before she spoke out with an audible Voice.

Thus after something more than 5 Years from the beginning of her close
Confinement, she began to mend. And in April 1732, on the public Anniversary
Fast Day her Voice was restored to the Surprise of them about her; which, had
these Remarkables attending it. -- She had been for some Time now, under a
Cloud, in which Time, she besought the Lord, for the Manifestations of Divine
Light and Love, and prayed that if she was the Lord's, he would be pleased to
give her some Token for Good, and having a great Desire (if it might be) so to
recover from her long Weakness and present Darkness, as to be able to speak of
what, she was yet ready to hope, God had done for her, and especially to speak
something to her youthful Companions; her Thoughts ran much upon the Liberty of
Speech, with earnest Prayer that this might be restored. And accordingly, it
was so; and that very suddenly and surprisingly, so that she spoke out audibly,
and what she was first heard to say, was, O what God has done for me now, he
has opened my Mouth, that has been shut many Years. Upon which she went on
talking of God and divine Things in an agreeable Manner: And giving some
Account of God's Dealings with her, which she was much disposed to speak of,
and withal, expressed a great Desire of others Conversion, and being devoted to
God: But it seemed to her, (as she told me) That she had never done any Thing
for God. The Use of her Speech now, continued Forty eight Hours, and then
failed again for about the Space of two Years.

Now, it is not supposed that her Speech failed at first through any special
Defect in the Organs of Speech, but, rather through universal Weakness, and
Failure of vital Strength. So that, she was not able to deliver Breath enough,
to give the Air any forcible Vibration, to make an articulate Sound. And when
she did speak, (it seems) she had been some Time recovering vital Strength,
which in some Measure prepared her for it; and that she spoke so suddenly, and
with more Strength than she had seemed to have yet habitually recovered; might
be owing to an extraordinary Visit from God at that Time. And will it be
difficult unto us, to conceive, that what of gradually recovered Strength was
wanting to enable her to speak out thus, for this Season, might be supplied
with the extraordinary Influence of divine Thoughts and of Light and Comfort in
her Soul? which for the Time being, might possibly diffuse such further Vigor
and Strength into her animal Frame, and raise her Courage with her Disposition
to exert her self thus, as was sufficient for this Purpose. For if the Fear of
the Lord (or the vigorous Acting of the divine Life) is Health (or Medicine) to
the Navel, and does invigorate the Seat of animal Life? It seems, that, some
extraordinary Sense of divine Truth and Love, may do something, in a languid
State, to give new Springs to the Organs of Speech. Certain it is, that
Heaviness in the Heart of Man makes it stoop: But a good Word, (of which Kind
many were spoken to her Soul) makes it glad. And, out of the Abundance of the
Heart, especially, when refreshed with divine Light and Joy, the Mouth more
readily and powerfully speaks. It does seem as if there was something
extraordinary in her being able to speak for this 48 Hours, while under that
powerful Sense of divine Things; because, she failed again so soon; when yet,
afterward her animal Strength appeared, much as it was before. And now after
this Remark; I am not about to say, whether her speaking for this short Season,
was designed as a Specimen of further Favor, in her continued Power to speak;
nor whether its Failure for the two Years, might be to try her Faith and
Patience, and Resignation; though the Event answered well to both. -- For in
these two Years, it pleased the Lord to give her remarkable Quietness of Soul,
and Submission to his Will; and though sometimes in the Dark, yet for the most
Part, she appeared to know much of God, and as she humbly thinks, was
strengthened more and more to believe and hope in God; 'till her Speech was
restored to her again. But whatever was the Design of God in this extraordinary
Dispensation, or however accomplished; the Thing was in Fact so, she did speak,
and then could not for this Term of Time, as she and others relate it.

Sometime before she spoke again, she had recovered Strength, so as to be able
to sit up in the Bed, and to feed her self, which was now between seven and
eight Years, since she had so far helped her self, and was also able to whisper
more intelligibly then she had done in Years before, but, yet not able to speak
out. -- And a little before she did so, she was led to meditate on the Power of
Christ, in his opening the Mouth of the dumb Man -- And on his Power to help
her in that Case of Impotency that she was in: at which Time, it seemed as if
her Faith was greatly assisted, and she enabled to trust in the Power of
Christ, and was helped to take Courage from the Willingness of Christ, to help
such a poor Creature, as she was. Soon after this, she was enabled to exert her
self in the Use of Speech, even with surprising Force and Freedom. The People
by her, wondered, as they perceived her Mouth was opened, and her Lips showing
forth the Praises of God: And she her self, greatly affected with it. Now her
Heart and Mouth, was full with the 103 Psalm, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and
all that is within me, bless his holy Name, etc. She called upon others to
praise God, with and for her; and wanted that even every Thing that has Breath
should praise the Lord. Her Speech now continued, and is (I trust) through
God's Grace abundantly used in praising of him. As she appeared very much
subdued and resigned to God, under her various Restraints by Providence, so
upon every Release her Soul seemed to be the more enlarged in his Praise. And
in the general Course of her extraordinary Trials and Helps, it was remarkable,
that she seldom had Relief, but, she was first made willing to have every Thing
as God would have it to be. And as this rendered her Confinement and low State
easy to her, (because she saw it was the Will of God, that she should be in
that State, and was therefore reconciled to it, so every Relief and Mercy, both
in Kind and Degree derived its Sweetness from its being the Pleasure of the
Lord to give it to her. When she was very poor, she would say, I am well
enough, because I am just so well as God would have me, and I dar'n't say I
would have it otherwise. -- And when she was better, she would say, I rejoice
in the Ease and Help I have, only that God may be glorified in, and by me.

After she had had the Liberty of Speech some Time, she more particularly
related what God had hopefully done for her Soul in the Time of her Sickness;
and especially, that Experience of the Power of God upon her Heart, which, she
hopes is a saving Conversion to God. Of which, I shall in this Place, give the
Account, as both formerly, and now lately she has related it -- And though it
is what she experienced about six Weeks after her Sickness began; yet forasmuch
as she never gave any distinct Account of it, 'till after the Restoration of
her Speech the second Time, I conceive this is the most proper Place to insert
it. And it is as follows, --

In the latter End of August 1726, in the 20th Year of my Age, as I was taking
Care of my Sister in her Sickness, and when she was apprehensive of Death's
Approach; (appearing to have realising Views and to be under the powerful Sense
of eternal Things) she addressed her self to me, after this Manner, Sister, you
are young, and of an Age very much exposed to Temptation -- but you should
remember, that not your Youth will exempt you from the Stroke of Death,
therefore pray consider whether you are prepared for it, etc. -- Which, was a
Means, by the Blessing of God, of putting me upon (...) serious Consideration:
and not thinking (...) State to be good, yea, knowing that I was not prepared
to die, and not knowing how soon the Hand of the Lord might touch me, or how
soon Death might come, I felt something concerned about my Soul and Eternity.
And in a few Days after, (viz) on the first of September following, it pleased
God to visit me, with the same Distemper which my Sister had; and that, in a
terrible Manner. And now her Words seemed to be verified in this, that my Youth
was no Fence against Sickness and Death, for I was very sick, and Death in a
frightful View of it, stared me in the Face, and I expected no other but to die
in a little Time. And instead of my former vain Mirth, and youthful Follies, it
seemed as if I must be soon reaping the bitter Fruits of them. It pleased God
with this Sickness, to send his Holy Spirit to convince me of Sin, and of my
miserable State -- I expected to die, but it was something beyond the Grave,
which my Heart trembled and shrank at the Thought and View of. The Sins of my
Life, were now set in order before my Face. And even my whole Life appeared as
one continued Act of Sin, or Series of Rebellion against God: And nothing but
Destruction appeared before me, as my Portion. I attempted to cry for Mercy,
but a Sense of my Guiltiness, and the terrible Apprehensions of the Wrath of
God, almost overwhelmed me. Those Passages of Scripture in Prove. 1. 24-29. came
to Mind, and took Hold of me. -- Because I have called, and ye have refused,
etc. I also will laugh at your Calamity, etc. I saw, that I had slighted the
Offers of Grace, yea, been regardless of all the Warnings, Threatenings, Calls
and Invitations of the Word; and set light by all Means. And it seemed, as if
my Day of Grace was over, my Concern held, and increased for about six Weeks,
and in this Time it often appeared to me, that I was the most vile and
miserable Creature in the World. And in my Distress and Anguish of Soul, it
seemed sometimes, as if I should have been glad to have changed Conditions with
the Beasts of the Field, looking upon my Case infinitely worse than theirs, for
that I had an immortal Soul, destroyed by Sin, which I expected must bear the
dreadful Wrath of God for ever, for the Sin of my Nature, and the Sins of my
Life, which I saw cleaved to me. Then, sometimes, I should have more
Encouragement, that the Day of Grace was not past, that there might be Hope for
such an one as I. And was particularly encouraged from these Passages, Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found -- They that seek me early shall find me. And
now, I was (with more Courage) put upon seeking; if happily God might be found:
but then, such Texts would come into my Mind, Without Holiness, no Man shall
see the Lord. -- And the Sacrifices of the Wicked are an Abomination to the
Lord. So that I could not get any lasting Ease, and Relief, by all my Duties --
But, on the contrary, I was made to see such Evil in my self, and Sin in every
Thing I did, that the more I did, the worse I seemed to be: And the more
dreadful my Case appeared, for that my Prayers, and all could not help me. It
seemed, as if I was lost, and could never recover my self, but the more I
tried, the worse I grew; until my Distress was so great, that Sleep wholly
departed from my Eyes, so that I never shut them to sleep for three Days and
three Nights together. And when urged to try for Sleep, and to use forcible
Means for that End, my Concern was so great that I dare not, lest I should
awake in Hell, and I wondered I was not there, and saw that I could not charge
God with Injustice, if he should immediately send me there. But on the 4th Day;
after I had been thus kept awake by the terrible Apprehensions of God's Wrath,
and had lain, as one expecting the Execution of the dreadful Sentence of
everlasting Condemnation, and had seen the Justice and Righteousness of God, in
such a Sentence; it pleased the Lord, through the unsearchable Riches of his
Grace and Mercy, unexpectedly to manifest himself, in another Manner, in and
through the Redeemer; by these Words of the blessed Savior in Matthew. 11.28. Come
unto me all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, and I will give yon Rest. By
which, I was made to see Christ's Allsufficiency, infinite Sutableness, and
Willingness to save just such a sinful miserable Wretch, as I had made my self.
It now appeared real, that Christ was calling and inviting me to come unto him;
and O the Divinity which I saw in the Invitation, and in the Way of Salvation
by him: And it seems, as if I was constrained to come (as laden, and born down
as I was, with my Sins) and made to venture my Soul, and eternal ALL with him.
I think I was made to bow to his Terms, and resign up my self to him; and (if I
mistake not) found an absolute Willingness, and Desire, to take him for my
Prophet, Priest, and King; and at the same Time found my weary Soul refreshed
and comforted, and filled with Wonder and Admiration at the infinite Grace and
Condescension of the blessed Redeemer, that ever he should look upon one so
vile as I am. And when I thought what a glorious Being, and what Love and
Grace, I had sinned against, my Heart broke under it, and this opened the
Springs of Sorrow: And, Oh! Blessed be the Lord, the almighty Physician, who
heals the broken in Heart, that of his sovereign Grace, he has (as I hope)
healed my Soul. To him be Glory for ever.

Thus, I have given a brief Account, of her first notable Experience of the
Work of God, upon her Soul, which has been followed with an agreeable Christian
Experience, in the Course of her subsequent Life, and Trials and Deliverances;
something of which, will be necessarily wrought into the remaining Part of the
Narrative, unto which I now return.

In a little Time after this continued Power to speak, she was able to sit up
in the Bed, and to have her Clothes on. About which Time her Sight was
restored, so that she could see to read a little, which she had not done for
near Eight Years. As I have observed, her Sight failed through extreme Weakness
of Body, and as her Strength increased, this was restored, and nothing more
gradually than this. First she could only distinguish grosser Objects, and then
lesser, till she could distinguish Letters and Figures, which she then knew, as
well as ever she did, though at the same Time, she had lost the Knowledge of
almost all Things that had been so long locked up from her Senses. When first
carried abroad, just to take the Air, and, the Works of Nature opened to her
View; they were almost as new and surprising, as if they had but then started
into Being. Indeed, she had almost lost every particular Idea, and Remembrance
of the whole existing World without Doors, that she ever had any Knowledge of;
but had made a happy Proficiency (even by this Time) in the Knowledge of divine
Things with which she was so conversant.

When she was released from this Eight Years close Confinement to her Bed, and
could bear the Air, a little; she more evidently recovered Strength; and in
about Three Years more had gained so much as to be able to be held up in some
erect Posture, and so by Degrees to be led, or rather carried and born up,
between two, shoving her Feet along carefully upon the Floor, lest they turned
aside: For, even at this Time, her Ancle-Bones were exceeding loose, and
separate, by Reason of the long and great Relaxation of the Nerves and Tendons;
that she could in no wise lift them up and use them, as Persons are wont to do,
that yet have not Strength to walk without Help: Yea, so loose and separate
were they, that a String must sometimes, be used about her Feet and Ancles, to
keep her Feet in any proper Position, as she lay in the Bed. And also, her
Knee-Bones, were so weak and loose, that after she was able to turn herself in
Bed, she sometimes put them out in doing this.

But yet in the main, she gradually recruited, excepting in some intervening
Pits of the Pleurisy and other Fevers, and various Distempers, which retarded
her Recovery from her long Weakness; for, as it was observed, there was scarce
any Distemper sent into the Place, but she had a Share of it. Twice she had the
Throat-Distemper. The first Time, she was seized with it, she was under the
Effects of it from October to the July following, before any great Revival. And
the last Time, which was so lately, as in August 1740, she had it so bad, that
she was obliged to take to her Bed again, and never could help herself more,
any Thing considerable, 'till the last Day of the May, after. This now, was
going back again into the Depths, where she was tried with new Scenes of
Providence, but, supported also, with new Supplies of Grace.

At these Seasons, she had great Trials, and great Consolations to balance
them. She gave me the Account thus -- Once I was near choked, and thought I
should die. And was ready to hope for it, if it might be the Will of God. My
Evidences for Heaven then, O how clear were they? I had great Comfort in God. I
cannot tell how great. Upon some Abatement of my Distemper, I was sorely
exercised with extreme Hunger for Bread, but must not have it. I thought I
should gladly have taken it out of the Mouth of the Dogs, if I might have it. A
little after, I saw a Piece of Bread given to a Dog, which wrought strangely on
my Mind, and proved a Temptation to Uneasiness, which brought on great
Darkness. Could I belong to God, (said I to my self) when denied the Bread that
was given to the Dogs! Oh how it seemed for a little while! Clouds and Darkness
covered my Soul. But in this Time, those Words in Isai. 41.10. came to Mind,
Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, I will uphold thee with the right Hand
of my Righteousness: Which were improved upon my Heart, first to bow me to the
Will of God, and afterward to comfort me. After these, were given in these
Words, in Matthew. 4.4. Man shall not live by Bread alone, but by every Word
which proceeds out of the Mouth of God. Oh how was I helped hereby? And then
was repeated the former Words in Isai. Fear not, etc, which came now, with
great Power and Consolation. And about three Days after, I was able to take
Bread safely, and was resreshed and strengthened thereby. But, I was made to
see that I had been sinfully impatient in the Desires of Death, for it appeared
evident to me, that I ought to wait God's Time; and also, that I had been out
of Frame, under the other Trial. -- It seemed sometimes, as if God chastened me
to make me willing to die, and chastened me to make me willing to live; yet, in
neither, must be my own Chuser: But, to live, or die as he pleased -- And it
came to that, that I was many Times afraid to choose any Thing for myself here,
lest I should cross the Will of God. This only for a Specimen of her
Experiences under the Dealings of Providence. --

When this last mentioned Illness was over, and the Hysteric Disorders which
had mixed in with all, were abated; she mended by more sensible Degrees; so
that on the 25th of July 174^, she began to go with Crutches; bearing her
Weight with them, and slipping her Feet carefully along upon the Floor; for
they were not yet capable of their proper Use and Motion, by Reason of the
forementioned Relaxation, which still continued. In this Manner, she went at
Times, for the Course of Ten Months, in which Term she often made Trial of her
Strength to go without Crutches; and on the very Day of her great Deliverance,
she gat up, and stood alone, as she held her Hands on her Knees to steady
herself; but could not lift up a Foot, to take a Step. And never in all this
Course of 16 Years did go one Step alone, until that wonderful Event happened,
on the remarkable 25th of May last; which, seemed so visibly to crown all that
Providence had done for her before.

I shall here, distinctly tell what preceeded, attended, and followed it; in
which Method, the Reader may have the clearer View of it.

As the neighboring Ministers had frequently, at her Desire attended religious
Fasts and Lectures at her Father's House; so now, at her Request a Lecture was
appointed to be there on Wednesday, this 25th of May, and the Rev. Mr. Lord of
Preston invited to preach it. On the Saturday Evening before, she had a very
painful Sense of her Infirmities, and also an extraordinary Experience of the
Power and Sweetness of God's Word; which both supported her under her present
Trouble, and also encouraged her Faith in God, and Hope that it might be better
with her. Thus, God strengthened her, with Strength in her Soul, and so,
proportioned the Strength to the Day. For, in this Time of her great Exercise,
with Pain in her disordered Joints, and with Weakness in her vital Parts, the
Lord appeared for her in the Use of his Word, as he had been wont to do. And
first he set home that Word upon her Heart, Let Patience have its perfect Work.
The Sight she now had of the Will of God in her Affliction, that all was as
God, the wise, the good, and faithful God would have it, together with the View
she had of her own Unworthiness of any Favor, greatly promoted her Patience
and Submission. Then, came that Direction and Promise to her Mind, in Rev.
2.10. -- Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life,
which greatly encouraged her to hold out. And then, as if she must have a more
abundant Consolation, those Words in John 11.40. -- If thou would believe,
thou should see the Glory of God, were brought home with great Power upon her
Soul, which led her to view the Help there was for her in God, in the Way of
believing; and from that Time, such was the powerful Impression of that Word,
that she could not help thinking that God would some Way or other, glorify
himself in her further and remarkable Deliverance. Thus her Mind wro't from Day
to Day, 'till she had a strong Persuasion, that she should be healed, and that
the Power of God would be seen in it, though she knew not how. And whatever
Suspicion she had at Times, that her Faith in this Matter was not of God, and
whatever Temptations she had to struggle with, which suggested to her, that all
her Faith about being healed, was delusive, yet, it prevailed over all
Discouragement and Opposition, and kept up for the most Part, during these
three or four Days 'till her Deliverance came. On the Evening before the
Lecture, her Pains were very great, and her Ancles (as she observed) disordered
and separate as usual, yet she staggered not through Unbelief, but was enabled,
(as it seemed to her) to believe against Hope, i. e. Against all human
Probability; for all Hopes of healing in the ordinary Way, seemed to be cut
off, and a Doctor just before, upon the View of her disordered Joints, had
said, he thought she would always be a Cripple: But yet, her Faith was
strengthened to that Degree, that it did not seem to her any Thing the more
difficult for God to heal her, because her State was as it was. So far from
this, that her Faith seemed to rise the highest, when her own difficult State
appeared the plainest. And, notwithstanding every Discouragement in Nature, she
remained persuaded, that God would glorify himself in her healing, and her
Tho'ts ran much upon its being done on the Lecture-Day at Hand. On the Morning
of that Day, her Faith grew stronger still, and she could not help thinking,
that she should see the Glory of God that Day; but, this no Way served to
supersede or prevent her earnest Prayer to God for healing. For, she felt her
Soul let out much in seeking to the Lord Jesus to heal her. And her Faith was
more and more strengthened by meditating on the Miracles of Christ; especially,
on his healing the poor impotent Man, that had lain so long at the Pool. It
seems, it had been the Lord's Manner with her, to encourage, and help along,
her Faith and Hope by directing her to the View of his Miracles, wrought upon
one and another, wherein, she had often a clear Representation of her impotent
Case; and also a Soul-reviving View of the Power of Christ; so she had at this
Time, and it didn't seem difficult to her, to think that the Lord could and
would help her. With this Faith, she entered the Day; and was strong in Faith
and disposed to give Glory to God: Her Mind in an extraordinary raised Frame;
and could scarce keep from expressing it out full. When Mr. Lord came to attend
the Service appointed, She had a great Desire to tell him what she had lately
met with, and what her particular Faith was about her healing; but could not do
it. And when she saw how she was restrained from it, it appeared to her, that
it was best she should keep her Faith to herself, lest by her publishing it,
there might be an Expectation among the People of something extraordinary, or
otherways that Improvement be made of it, which might not be for the Glory of
God. Mr. Lord began with Prayer: And however earnest therein, for her; yet it
seemed to her, as if he was not so earnest for her healing, as he used to be at
other Times. For, so intent was her Mind on God's glorifying himself in her
healing, and he not having any such particular Faith as she had, was not led to
express himself so fully answerable to her raised Thoughts of this particular
Thing. However, she seemed to be in a happy Frame in Prayer, and Singing. And
when Mr. Lord proceeded to the Sermon, though it was trying, and kept her
Thoughts employed much in Self-Examination, yet it did not lower her Faith, but
tended all to strengthen her. He preached from Isa. 57.15. I dwell in the high
and holy Place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to
revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite ones.
-- After he had given some Description of the humble Heart, and had spoke of
the gracious Presence of God, promised to such an one, etc. he proceeded to
examine, whether thus humbled? -- She thought she could answer to his Rules of
Trial, and say Amen to them, and take the Comfort thereof. After he had gone
through with his Examination, he said, The Lord will revive the Hearts of the
Humble, and if you are truly humble, God will revive you; depend upon it, he
will, and fear not. Yea, if for his Glory, he will revive and bring you out of
a Furnace. Which seemed to sink into her Heart, as if the Lord did indeed set
it home by his Spirit: Then by the Power of the Word upon her Soul, she fell a
Trembling; but this without any Diffidence and Terror; for it was given to her
at that Time, to believe that the Lord would revive and help her, and bring her
out. This involuntary Shaking now, continued but a few Minutes; and Nothing in
her Behavior was there, to interrupt the religious Exercise of the People. Her
Mind and Heart kept up, in a raised Frame; but yet she was composed through the
whole, and was more and more confirmed in it, That the Lord would show his
Glory in helping her. After Service was over, Mr. Newel asked her how she was;
but she was too much overcome, to tell how. And when she began to speak, it was
something abruptly -- (somewhat like as the Spouse, when overcome with
Discoveries, begins thus -- The Voice of my Beloved:) Plainly showing that her
Mind was full of Thought, and that her Ideas crowded so fast to the Door of
Out-lett, that they could not observe the justest Order in their Expression,
and Manner of coming forth.

She was now set upon the Bed, something spent and overcome. Mr. Lord came, and
sat down by her, and discoursed with her a little, but soon perceived her to be
too much overcome for any Conversation almost: she expressed a great Desire of
submitting to the Will of God; but could not help talking about her Healing, and
said, she saw that Christ was willing to heal her. Upon which, Mr. Lord
replied, that she should have the Will of Christ concerning her. But by this
Time she was so overpowered with the Sense of God (as she expressed it) That
she could hardly speak, and could not tell what to compare herself to, but, An
Atom drowned in the Sea: So swallowed up was she, with the Thoughts and Sense
of God, and every Way surrounded with his Power. And then only observed to Mr.
Lord, that it seemed to her, as if GOD was with her of a Truth -- and so
stopped -- Upon which he replied, If so, then you are well of it, and I will
leave you for the present, which he thought best; because she was much spent,
and he was afraid she would be quite overcome with any more Conversation then.
So, he gat up and walked away among the People, that were yet tarrying in the
House. And no sooner was he gone from her, but it turned in her Mind -- The
Lecture is ended, and the Service all over, and I am not healed; what is become
of my Faith now? Will Not it be with me, as it used to be? Whereupon a Cloud of
great Darkness came over her, for a Minute or two; in which Time, she was led
again into her self, to see what a poor unworthy Creature she was, and had some
such Thoughts of the Wisdom and Goodness of God's Will, that she felt a
Disposition to be as God would have her be. Then those Words were repeated to
her, -- If thou will believe, thou shall see the Glory of God. By which her
Darkness was carried clear off, and under the Influence of this Word, NOW, she
seemed (as she expressed it) to be wholly taken out of her self, into the Hands
of God; and enabled to believe that he could and would heal her. Immediately
upon which, she felt a strange irresistible Motion and Shaking, which began
first with her Hands; and quickly spreading over her whole Frame; in which
Time, she felt a kind of Weight upon her; a sort of racking of her Frame; every
Joint as it were, working; and as if she was with Hands squeezed together, in
her weak Places. As this Trembling went off, her Pains went with it, and she
felt strong, especially in the Seat of Life, where she had been most remarkably
weak; and from thence Strength diffused it self all over her animal Frame, into
her Hips, Knees, Ancles etc. She felt strong and well, as if she had no Disease
upon her, and was under no Difficulty. And as she had this Sensation of new
Strength and Freedom, she felt as if she was a raising up, and must rise; and
immediately rose up and walked away among the People, with evident
Sprightliness and Vigor, to the Astonishment of her self and those about her.
She went this Time near 16 Feet, crying out, Bless the Lord Jesus, who has
healed me! but was soon damped with this Though It, that she was only in a Frenzy,
and not healed; and the more so, when Mr. Lord (surprised at seeing her to walk
thus, whom he had just before left impotent and overcome too, so that she could
hardly talk) did observe to her, that she was in a Frenzy, and accordingly took
hold of her and led her to the Bed, and bid her sit down; yea, even thrust her
down. But she could not be confined there; feeling yet strong and at Liberty,
she quickly rose up again, with those Words in her Mind, I have loved thee with
an everlasting Love, and with the high Praises of God in her Mouth. Her Soul
being filled with such Admiration and Love, as she declared was inexpressible.
Now she walked several Times across the Room with Strength and Steddiness;
which even constrained the People to think and say, Verily, This is the Power
of God! and they wondered and praised the same. And it was about 6 of the Clock
in the Afternoon that the Thing was done, at which they all marvelled, and
having united in a Prayer, and in Praise, on this remarkable Occasion, they
were dismissed to their several Homes, still wondering and rejoicing at what
their Eyes had beheld, and their Ears had heard that Day.

Thus I have related the Matter as exactly as I could have it, both from others
and her self. And as it may be expected, by some, in such a Matter as this,
here follow some Testimonies to her State before, and after this Event related;
which, when I have inserted, I shall go on with the History, and relate briefly
the Consequences of the Event, which will exhibit further Proof of the Reality
of it.

The Testimony of Philip Spaulding of Plainfield etc. of lawful Age, testifies
and says, That living near Mr. Isaac Wheeler's, Father to Mercy Wheeler, who
has for many Years past, lain confined and unable to walk, and being at the
House, her Mother desired me to look on her Feet, and see how her Ancle-Bones
were parted. I did so, and felt on them, and they were parted so, that I could
lay the Ball of my Thumb between them, and her Feet seemed to me, to turn any
Way, as though they had no Strength in them. And farther says the Deponent,
that being at the House, the next Morning after the Rev. Mr. Hezekiah Lord
preached there, I observed that Mercy had the Use of her Feet to my Admiration.

The Testimony of Doctor James Girauld, of lawful Age, testifies and says,
that sometime in the Month of May last, being at the House of Mr. Isaac
Wheeler, his Daughter Mercy desired me to look on her Ancle-Joynts, and the
Bones of her Ancles were parted to my Admiration. They were so parted from
their proper Place, that I could lay the Ball of my Thumb between the Bones.
And I further say, that I was there the next Day after Mr. Lord preached at the
House, and observed Mercy acknowledging the Goodness of God in her sudden
Relief, and she desired me to view her Ancles now; I did so, and the Bones were
drawed up to their proper Place, to my Admiration. --

The Testimony of Benjamin Wheeler of lawful Age, testifies and says, that
being at Isaac Wheeler's House some time before Mr. Lord preached there in May
last, his Wife desired me to look on Mercy's Feet. I did so, and the Bones of
the Ancle-Joynts were parted from each other.

Plainfield, June 20th. 1743. Then the above named Philip Spaulding, James
Girauld, and Benjamin Wheeler, all personally appeared, and made Oath to the
above written Evidences.

Before me Timothy Pierce, Assistant.



Now to return to the Narrative, and to speak particularly of the Consequences
of this Event, from the Close of that Day, on which it happened, and so forward
to this Day -- I have given Account of her walking alone, and with evident
Tokens of new Strength, in the Presence of many Witnesses, on that Day of her
Deliverance. So she continued able to walk all the Evening after, went to her
Bed, stood up and undrest her self, which she had not done before in 16 Years.
She lay down to rest, believing in God, and giving thanks for the Wonders he
had done, but, through the abundance of Thought, slept but little that Night.
Sometime in the Night felt such Return of her pains, as gave her to think, God
was about to try her; And moreover it was Suggested to her, Though you have had
Strength to walk, yet it will be soon taken away, and how will you bear that?
But this Temptation was presently over, as she felt her Will bowed to the Will
of God, and it seemed to her, as if she was made willing to go back again to
Prison, if it was the Pleasure of the Lord, that she should; and the whole Term
of her being there, now seemed short to her from the sweet Review she had of
God's presence with her there. In the Morning her Pains continued, but her
Faith though tried, sailed not. As soon as the Light favored her, she reached
for her Bible, and began to read, and found new Strength by the Word. Though it
had been darted into her Mind, "You will not be able to rise and walk." She found
present Relief by that Word. -- All Things are possible to him that believes.
And reading the Account of three Miracles which Christ wrought, she was still
more encouraged and strengthened in her Faith -- Her Pains abated, and it
seemed, as if she was bid to arise. She rose up, and dressed herself, without
Help, which she had not done before in all the Time of her Weakness. When
dressing her self, it came into her Mind to view and feel of her Ancles, which
she found to her Admiration and Thankfulness, were closed and firm, where
before they were separate and loose. As on the other Day, when she was, as it
were, taken by the Hand and lifted up, she perceived that immediately her Feet
and Ancle-Bones received Strength: So now, she saw, that they were closed up;
as they never had been before in all her Impotency. And so, she had an Evidence
of her Healing, from Sight, as well as Sense. She dressed, and walked, praising
God. After having walked about the House a while, she went abroad, and over to
her Brother's House, about twelve Rods. This was all new Exercise, to her; and
opened to her new Observations; and let in new Reflections. And the Discovery
and Sense of God in her late Deliverance, seemed to reflect a new Light upon
every Thing she saw and met with. She could turn her-Eyes no Way, but the World
about her, seemed full of the Evidence of a God and Providence, which all
served to keep her Soul at Work, and in its Exercise of Love and Duty to God.

On this Day (viz.) the Day after her Deliverance, Mr. Newel (who was then
preaching at Plainfield) preached a Sermon at her Father's House, from those
Words, in Joh. 5.14. Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto
him, Behold, Thou art made whole: Sin no more, lest a worst Thing come unto
thee. Which proved a seasonable Word unto her, as thereby she was taught the
Danger, which those are yet in of sinning, who have been the Subjects of great
Deliverances, and so was led to see her Danger of Pride, Sloth, Unthankfulness
etc. And as she had discovered a great Desire to be, and even a Persuasion that
she should be in the House of God the next Sabbath; so in hearing this Sermon
she was much confirmed therein. And accordingly on the very Sabbath following
(though cloudy and rainy, and before she had been used to the Air much) she was
enabled to ride to the House of the Lord, which was near three Miles; and had
not been upon an Horse, in sixteen Years before. As she was passing thereto, it
was suggested to her, You are got from your Father's House, and going where you
know not, and it may be will never return. Upon which, she had a Thought of
being carried back directly; but the Temptation was repelled with that Word,
They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be moved. And
(as she expressed it) it seemed to her, as though the Lord, by a strong Hand,
brought her to his Sanctuary, where she was enabled to attend on the public
Worship all the Day, without Pain, or Weariness, or taking any Cold. -- On the
first Day of June, Mr. Lord of Preston preached a public Lecture there from
Acts 3.6 -- 10. -- And immediately his Feet and Ancle-Bones received Strength,
and he leaping up, stood and walked, and entered with them into the Temple,
walking and leaping and praising God, and all the People saw him walking and
praising God. Which were so true of her, that, on that Day she entered with them
into the Temple walking, etc. and all the People saw it. -- On the 14th of
June, another Sermon was had there, from Matthew. 15.28. And she attended then,
and walked from the Meeting House, to a private one, many Rods. She has been
able to walk ever since, and generally has attended the public Worship on
Sabbath Days from the first, and begins to travel abroad into other Towns. The
last Week she rode to Norwich, which is 15 Miles; and was at the public
Worship and Communion with us the last Sabbath; and walked both to, and from
the House of God, Morning and Evening. -- Thus evident is her Restoration, and
increasing Strength and Health also. For, never did she, in all her former
Revivals, recover Health, nor ever could she take Food and Sleep for that
Purpose; as now, since this last Deliverance. And for this Reason has the
Narrative been the more readily delayed unto this Time; that Days might give
the stronger Proof of what was so sudden and surprising. Thus it constantly
appears, to have been no Frenzy of here is, that she first walked; but a Fact,
and Work of the Lord; for she has done so, many Months, and is as like to do so
still, as any other Person.

And a further Testimony for God, is yet exhibited, in her moral Conduct. She
walks praising GOD wherever she goes. It seems, as if her Soul was in Health,
and prospered. She appears to have an abiding Sense of God upon her Soul, and
to walk up and down in the Light of God's Countenance; rejoicing in God and
Jesus Christ, as her All. But, with great Self-Diffidence and cautionary Fear,
lest she should some Way or other dishonor God, and be a Stumbling Block to
Men. And so I shall close up the Narrative, with giving the Reader a Specimen
of her daily Reflections, and Breathings of Soul, in her own Language --

Scarce one Day now, do I look abroad, but the Works of Creation show me God,
and lead me to him: And yet dare not say that I live one Minute as I ought -- I
want to see more of the Dealings of God with me, that I might live more to him
-- Oh how should I live! entirely devoted to God, as my constant End and All --
If I could praise God, it seems that I should be content in any Condition, that
he would have me in -- Oh what a Life should I live? Never a Soul so indebted
to God as I am. It was the lowest Stoop that ever Christ made, when he looked
upon me -- When I think how he has passed by Thousands, and has had Mercy on
me, the Vilest of all; how surprising? It Is only because he will have Mercy on
whom he will have Mercy -- And yet how unthankful am I! My Heart is surely
worse than others. O my Ingratitude! How good is God, and how holy! -- It seems
that I never did any Thing -- And without Christ I can do nothing -- I long
that Christ may be all; and what is all else compared with him! Oh that I may
live wholly on him, and to God by him! -- But I am afraid to speak, lest it
would be to show my self: and yet I know that if others have any Thing to boast
of, I Have nothing, whereof to glory. O that God would humble me, and glorify
himself! -- Such Kind of Reflections and Breathings go into her daily
Conversation. And was it the Observation that Christ made of his Disciples? I
am glorified in them. May this be eminently true of her; and let all that has
been here said, be so received, that Christ may be glorified in and by her.
Yea, when, CHRIST comes to be glorified in his Saints, may He be admired in
her, as in all them that believe.

NORWICH, October 14. 1743.
FINIS.

