AN ENQUIRY Into the State of the Bills of Credit of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay IN NEW ENGLAND: IN A LETTER from a Gentleman in Boston TO A
Merchant in London.

Printed in the Year 1743.

BOSTON, FEB. 7, 1743. SIR,
ACCORDING to my Promise I now send you my Thoughts upon the State of the Paper
Currency in New England, which for several Years past has been the only general
Medium of it is Trade; and for your better Information I have endeavored to
trace the Account of it from it is first Emission in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay where it took it is Rise, to it is present State there, and
thereby to discover to you the real Causes of those Mischiefs, it has of late
Years produced, and the several Expedients tried by the Massachusetts
Government for remedying of them, with the Success which has attended those
Measures; And if in doing this, and communicating my own Observations thereupon
I shall strike out any Light for redressing the Evils of this Currency, and
promoting the united Interests of this Province and her Mother Country in this
Particular, which I look upon to be inseparably blended toge^^^^ I shall obtain
the End, I propose in troubling you wi^^ (...) Letter, and hope that will be a
sufficient Apology to (...) for the Length of it.

The first Emission of Bills of public Credit in New England was of l. 40,000
made by the Massachusetts Government in the Years 1690 and 1691, and projected
upon an extraordinary Emergency to discharge some Government Debts (due upon
Debentures) which had been contracted by the old Colony upon the First
Expedition against the French at Canada. These Bills were emitted upon Funds of
Taxes, (as they are called in Contradistinction to the Bills since emitted upon
Loans) that is, to be drawn back into the Treasury by Payment of the Duties of
Excise, and Impost, and of Taxes upon Polls and Estates real and personal; and
were issued out in Parcels: The first emitted Parcel, which amounted to l.
7,000 being a new Thing in the Country, and ill received by the People, were
soon brought into Discredit, and suffered a Discount from 10 to 20 per Cent;
but the next Parcel, which was emitted in the Spring following with the
Advantage of being received at the Treasury at 5 per Cent Advance, soon
obtained a Currency at Par with Silver: Of these Bills l. 10,000 was cancelled
and burnt in October 1691, and no Emissions of new Bills were made in the
Province 'till 1702; But in the intervening Years there were some Re-emissions
of the Remainder of the old Bills for defraying the necessary Charges of the
Government, to be drawn back into the Treasury by public Duties and Rates: The
last Re-emission was of l. 9,000 of them in 1701, being the only Bills then
extant in New England, and which were drawn in and burnt the same and next
succeeding Year: All these Bills were emitted and re-emitted by Votes or Orders
of the General Court, and not by solemn, formal Acts of the Legislature, and
were commonly called the old Charter Bills, on Account, I suppose, of their
having been at first emitted before the granting of the new Charter by King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY for incorporating the Inhabitants of the late Colony
into the present Province, though not during the Continuance of the old Charter,
which was in Reality vacated in 1684 by a Judgment obtained in the Court of
Chancery upon a Writ of Scire Facias then prosecuted against the Governor and
Company of the late Colony.

This space of Time may not improperly be distinguished as the first Period of
the Paper Currency in New England, both on Account of the small Sum in Bills of
Credit, which were then suffered by the Massachusetts Go vernment to be current
at one and the same Time, and of the Shortness of the Periods limited for
drawing the Bills back into the Treasury, which were confined to the Year next
succeeding their respective Emissions at farthest.

During this Period I find that all the Bills, except the first emitted Parcel,
were received at the Treasury at 5 per Cent Advance, and passed Current at Par
with Silver; and that an Act of the General Court was passed in 1699, for
compelling the Constables and other Collectors to gather and pay into the
Treasury the several Rates committed to their Charge at the Time limited in the
Treasurer's Warrants, by enabling the Treasurer to issue out Executions against
the Estates and Bodies of the deficient Constables and Collectors.

In 1702 begun a Series of new Emissions of Bills of Credit in the Province,
which were annually repeated, and in such large Sums toward the End of it, that
the Bills made and emitted between the Years 1701 and 1713, amounted to 227629
l. 16 s. 6 d. which Space of Time I shall call the second Period of the Paper
Currency, and observe upon it,

First, That the Emissions in 1702 and 1703 were of only l. 10,000 each, and
made by formal Acts of the General Court; the Preambles of which declare, That
the Government was under a Necessity of emitting those Bills for the present
Supply of the Treasury to pay the Soldiers and Seamen employed in His Majesty's
Service, and to carry on the War, and defray the other Expenses of the
Government; and that the Periods for drawing those Bills back into the Treasury
were confined to the Years next succeeding those of their respective Emissions;
but that the Emissions of the subsequent Years grew by Degrees im moderate,
particularly two of 'em within the Year 1711, one of them of l. 40,000, and the
other of 48,623^^ 16^^ d. both amounting to the Value of about l. 63,000
Sterling; that all these Bills were emitted and re-emitted upon (...) Votes or
Orders of the Court with less and less Ceremony, and were to be drawn in by
two, three, and sometimes four Parcels; and that the Periods for drawing them
in were gradually protracted from the first of the sixth Year after their
respective Emissions.

Secondly, That all the Bills of this Period were emitted upon Funds of Taxes
for defraying the necessary Charges of the Government, except the Sum of
48,6213 l. 16 s. 8 d. in 1711, which was emitted upon Loan to particular
Merchants to enable them to furnish her late Majesty's Land and Sea Forces then
rendezvous'd at Boston, in order to proceed upon the Canada Expedition, with
Provisions and other Necessaries for that Purpose, which they had undertaken to
do upon the Credit of Bills drawn by the Officers on the Government of Great
Britain; so that in Effect this Emission of Province-Bills was lent to her
Majesty's Government at Home for the Service of that Expedition.

Thirdly, That during this Period the Bills of Credit continued to be received
at the Treasury at 5 per Cent. Advance, and maintained their Value at Par with
Silver.

Fourthly, That in the Year 1712, to support the Value of the Province Bills,
which appeared to be in some Danger of depreciating by the growing Scarcity of
the Silver Currency, which was now reckoned to be reduced to the Proportion of
little more than a Third of what the Paper Currency amounted to, a Law was
passed that no Debtor, who should tender Payment of any Debt contracted since
October 1705, or to be contracted before the last Day of October 1715, (except
in the Case of Specialties and Contracts in Writing) in Province-Bills, should
be liable to have an Execution levied or served upon his Estate or Person;
which Tender of Bills, though it would not discharge the Debt, yet it did what
was tantamount, by taking away the Remedy which the Creditor had before the
Recovery of Silver Money and so compelled him to accept the Bills.

The Author of the Discourse concerning the Currencies of the British
Plantations in America, to whom this Pro vince in particular is obliged for his
accurate and very judi cious Enquiry into the Effects of Paper Money, and the
proper Regulation of it, dates the first depreciating of the Bills of Credit in
New England in the Year 1714; some others I find place it in 1711; To avoid the
Extreme of both Accounts I shall date it in 1713. in which Year the Price of
Silver in Bills of Credit rose from eight Shillings to eight Shillings and four
Pence per Ounce, and Exchange between London and New England from 40 to 50 per
Cent. Advance in Favor of the former: From this Year the Bills continued to
depreciate gradually in the Manner exhibited in the following Table.

Years. Price of Silver. Exchang. 50. p.cent. Years. Price of Silver. Exchang.
160. p.Ct. 1713. 8 s. 4 d.oz. advance. 1723. 15 s. p.oz. advance. 1714. 9 s.
60. 1724. 16 s. 200. 1715. 9 s. 60. 1725. 16 s. 200. 1716. 9 s. 2 d. 60. 1726.
16 s. 200. 1717. 10 s. 60. 1727. 16 s. 200. 1718. 11 s. 100. 1728. 16 s. 6 d.
200. 1719. 12 s. 110. 1729. 19 s. 240. 1720. 12 s. 4 d. 110. 1730. 18 s. 6 d.
240. 1721. 12 s. 6 d. 130. 1722. 14 s. 160.

Within this Period, which I shall distinguish by the Name of the third Period
of the Bills l.458,000 was emitted upon Funds of Taxes, for defraying the
necessary Charges of the Government, and l. 260,000 upon four Loans made
chiefly for increasing the Paper Medium; the first of these Emissions upon Loan
was of l. 50,000 in 1714, to be let out by a Committee named in the Act to the
Inhabitants of the Province in certain Proportions according to their Dis
cretion, upon real Security at 5 per Cent. the Principal to be repaid by equal
Proportions within five Years to the Court for both Principal and Interest,
which last was by the Act appropriated to the Support of the Government; the
second Emission upon Loan was in 1716, of l. 100,000, with the same
Appropriation of the Profits, and under the like Regulation, except that it was
to be distributed among the several Towns in Proportions limited by the
Emission-Act for such Town, and let out to the Inhabitants of the respective
Towns by different Committees named for each County in the Act; the Principal
to be repaid in ten Years after the Date of the Mortgages, upon which it was to
be lent; the third Emission upon Loan was of l. 50,000 in 1720, to be
distributed among the several Towns, in Proportions limited in the
Emission-Act, by Committees to be chosen by the Inhabitants of the respective
Towns; the Improvements and Profits to be wholly for the Benefit of the several
Towns, and the Principal to be drawn in by five Taxes of l. 10,000 each upon
Polls and Estates in 1726, and the four succeeding Years; and in the Year 1727,
there was a Re-emission of l. 60,000 upon Loan, under the like Regulations with
the last Loan as to the Distribution of it, and drawing the Bills back into the
Treasury in 1734, and the four next succeeding Years; and the Towns were
obliged to pay 4 per Cent. per Annum for their respective Dividends of the l.
60,000 into the Treasury, which was appropriated to the Support of the
Government; and two per Cent. more was to be paid by the Borrowers for the
Benefit of the Towns.

All the Bills of the l. 48,000 Loan in 1711 were drawn in and burnt long
since; but there is still outstanding of the l. 50,000 emitted in 1714, about
l. 2000, with the like Arrear due for Interest; of the l. 100,000 Loan in 1716,
about l. 7000, of the l. 50,000 Loan in 1720, l. 16, and of that of l. 60,000
in 1727, about l. 500; All which Sums are well secured, and may be expected to
be drawn in within five or six Months.

I shall further observe upon these several Loans, That the first of 'em in
1711 was at least excusable, if not a laudable Instance of the Province's Zeal
for his Majesty's Service; but that the four subsequent Loans, which had not
the same Reason for their Emission, very much contributed by the largeness of
their Sums and long Periods to depreciate the Bills of Credit in general, and
in Conjunction with the Rhode Island Loans, whose Bills begun now to obtain a
general Currency in this Province, even to lessen the real Quantity of that
Medium of Trade, which they were designed to increase; And that the
Massachusetts Government has long been so sensible of the Country's Error in
making these Loans, that they would not, I am persuaded, be in Danger of
relapsing into it, though they should be under no Restraint from His Majesty's
Instruction to his Governor.

In this Period also these further Particulars are observable,

First, That the Bills continued to be taken at the Treasury at 5 per Cent
Advance 'till 1718, ever since which Year that Allowance upon the Payment of
the Bills has been taken off by the General Court under a Notion that it did
not contribute toward supporting the Value of the Bills.

Secondly, That the Silver and Gold Currency now decreased more and more every
Year, and about the Year 1726 quite vanished, and coined Silver and Gold became
from that Time mere Merchandise.

Thirdly, That the Periods for drawing back the Bills emitted upon Funds of
Taxes into the Treasury were more and more protracted, 'till by the Year 1721
they were lengthened out to the Distance of thirteen Years from their
respective Emissions.

Fourthly, That the Instances of the Assembly's postponing the Apportionment of
the Taxes for drawing in the Bills according to their limited Periods were very
rare, and the Bills were generally actually drawn into the Treasury till 1721,
since which Year large Sums of the Bills emitted upon Funds of Taxes were
suffered by the Government to be outstanding beyond their stated Periods for
want of Executions being issued out against the deficient Collectors of the
Taxes according to the Province Law beforementioned, so that by the End of the
Year 1730 l. 164,755 5 s. 5 d. was outstanding by that Means.

Lastly, That the beforementioned Province Law for making Bills of Credit a
Tender proved in its Operation, during this whole Period, extremely injurious
to such Creditors, as had not ascertained the Value of their outstanding Debts
either in Sterling or Proclamation Money by special Contracts: For by Force of
it all other Creditors were obliged to accept of Province Bills according to
their nominal Value, Penny for Penny, in Satisfaction of their Debts, though the
Bills were greatly depreciated between the Time of the Debts being contracted
and the Payment of them, so that great Losses ensued continually to the British
Merchants trading to New England, by suffering large Discounts upon their
Debts, and to Widows and Orphans within the Province in particular: It also
proved mischievous in this Respect, that as the Debtor was by Means of the Act
a Gainer by the depreciating of the Bills, and the longer his Debt was
outstanding the more the Value of it was diminished, he was tempted to use
every Artifice to keep his Creditor out of his just Due, to which he was also
encouraged by the Fees of the Court of Judicature's being so lessened through
the depreciating of the Bills in which they were payable, and the Law's being
grown so cheap that the People were habituated to suffer themselves to be sued
for indisputable Debts, and an Insensibility of the Discredit of it so much
prevailed, that it was not uncommon even for Persons of some Circumstances and
Character to suffer Judgments to be given against 'em by Default to the
Superior Court of Judicature merely for Delay, whereby Lawsuits were
scandalously multiplied, and a litigious Spirit promoted among the lower Sort
of People.

This Law first expired in 1715, was afterward re-enacted in 1716, expired
again in 1722, and was then revived and continued to October 1730, and upon
every Trial of it produced the same Mischiefs, so that its pernicous Effects
could not be in the least doubted.

Hitherto His Majesty's Governors were under no Restraint from his Royal
Instructions as to the Bills of Credit current in the Province, except that
they were enjoined the Observation of the Act of the sixth of Queen ANNE for
ascertaining the Value of foreign Coins, and so were more excusably betrayed
into suffering Emissions upon Loans, and immoderate Sums to be outstanding
beyond their stated Periods: But in December 1730 I find that Governor BELCHER
communicated to the Council and House of Representatives his Majesty's 16th and
18th Instructions to him, by the former of which he was forbid to pass any Act
for issuing out Bills of Credit without a suspending Clause, except only for
the annual Support and Service of his Majesty's Government; and was ordered to
take especial Care that no more than l. 30,000 of such Bills should be ever
current at one and the same Time; and by the latter of 'em he was especially
directed to take Care that the Bills of Credit issued should be called in and
sunk according to the Periods and Provisions of the respective Acts, by which
they were issued; and his Excellency then complained in his Speech to the
Assembly that the Bills of Credit, according to the then Course and Manner of
'em, were a common Delusion to Mankind, and wished some better Way might be
seasonably thought of either by the Legislature or the People in Trade, whereby
they might be supplied with a better Medium than what then passed; and when an
engrossed Bill for reviving the Act to prevent the Oppression of Debtors and
make the Bills of Credit a Tender, then lately expired, was laid before him for
his Consent, two or three Days after he rejected it with this Message to the
House of Representatives, that he had not signed the Bill, inasmuch as he did
not think it for his Majesty's Service or the Good of the Province.

This seemed to afford a promising Prospect, among other Regulations of the
Bills, that the great Quantity of 'em then outstanding beyond their stated
Periods would be soon drawn in, and those Bills, whose Periods were not yet
arrived, would be duly called in and sunk upon their Arrival; and that now an
End would be put to the several Mischiefs, which had been occasioned by the
late Law, which made the Bills a Tender; But the Royal Instructions seem not to
have had their proper Influence: For upon comparing the Quantity of Bills,
which were outstanding beyond their limited Periods in 1730 with those which
were outstanding in 1741, it appears from the Accounts of the Province
Treasurers given in from Year to Year to the General Court, that the former
consisting wholly of Bills of the old Tenor did not exceed the Sum of l. 164755
5 s. 5 d, and that the latter, which consisted of Bills of the old and middle
Tenor, being all computed in Bills of the old Tenor, amounted to l. 390,863 14
s. 7 d. and exceeded the former Sum one third Part in their Value -- and the
latter Part of the Prospect soon vanished upon his Excellency's consenting to
the Revival of the late Law for preventing the Oppression of Debtors and making
the Bills of Credit a Tender, without any Provision for securing to Creditors
the Value of their future Debts against the depreciating of the Bills, whereby
were revived for ten Years longer the same Mischiefs, which the Province had so
long felt before under the Effects of the same Law, and the British Merchants
so justly complained of.

During this Administration, which I shall call the fourth Period of the Bills,
the General Court in 1733 re-emitted l. 76,500 in old Tenor Bills of the same
nominal Value with the Bills extant at the Time of reviving the
beforementioned Law in 1731 for making 'em a Tender, but of a less real Value
by 20 per Cent. and in 1734 made another Re-emission of Bills of like nominal
but less real Value by 60 per Cent, and in 1735 another Re-emission of Bills,
of like nominal but a less real Value by 160 per Cent; all which Bills, though so
much depreciated at the Time of their respective Re-emissions below the Value
of the Bills in 1731, were by Force of the beforementioned Province Law made a
Tender for the Payment of Debts contracted in the Year 1731, at which Time
Bills were of a much higher Value, so that the making of those three
Re-emissions of depreciated Bills, without providing that Creditors should have
an Allowance for their being sunk below the Value of Bills in 1731, was the
same Thing in Effect, as if the Government has passed a Law in each of those
Years that the Creditors upon simple Contract (and such all Creditors in Trade
generally are) should be obliged to accept in Satisfaction of their Debts
contracted in 1731 20, 60, and 160 per Cent. less than the real Value of 'em;
Which Observation will hold in a something less Degree with Respect to the
Debts contracted in 1732, 1733, and 1734.

This with Regard to the Governor seems to have been a most unparalled
Proceeding, viz. that he should not only give his Consent to an Act, the
passing of which he had but five Months before publicly declared to the
Assembly would be neither for his Majesty's Service nor the good of the
Province, without making the least Provision for preventing the Act's former
mischievous Effects for the future, but also go on from Year to Year with his
Eyes open to consent to the Emission of such Bills, as at the very Time of
their being emitted were, not a Delusion, as his Excellency was pleased in his
beforementioned Speech to call the Bills in general, but a palpable, gross
Imposition (to say no worse of 'em) upon the Creditor.

This Law had also the same pernicious Influence, which it had before, with
respect to habituating Debtors to suffer themselves to be sued for indisputable
Debts, and to appeal from Judgments obtained against 'em upon their own
Defaults to the Superior Court merely for Delay; and as the Fees of the Courts
of Judicature were further lessened (during the Continuance of this Law) by the
depreciating of the Bills, so this Sort of Actions multiplied in Proportion, to
the great Hurt and Scandal of the Country; insomuch that the Number of such
Suits within the Province was increased during this Administration, viz.
between the Years 1730 and 1742, to near double what it was before.

In the Year 1736 the Government emitted l. 9000 in Bills of a new Form and
Tenor, which afterward obtained the Name of the middle Tenor Bills, by which I
shall here distinguish 'em. -- These Bills were emitted upon Funds of Taxes to
be drawn back into the Treasury in 1741, with this Difference between them and
the old Bills, that by their Tenor they were not to be accepted in Payment for
the Duties of Impost, Tonnage of Shipping, and Incomes of the Light-House,
whereas the old Bills were by their Tenor to be accepted by the Treasurer and
subordinate Receivers in all public Payments whatsoever; and by this
Emission-Act six Shillings and eight Pence of the middle Tenor Bills were made
equal in Value to one Ounce of Troy Weight, Sterling Alloy. -- And for better
supporting the Value of these Bills Provision was made by the Act, that if any
of 'em should happen not to be paid into the Treasury at their limited Periods,
but be outstanding in the Hands of private Persons, the Possessors might at any
Time after the last Day of December 1742 bring 'em to the Treasury and receive
in Exchange for every six Shillings and eight Pence one Ounce of Silver or the
like Value in Gold, and proportionably for a greater or less Sum; and the
Treasurer was thereby ordered to exchange 'em accordingly. -- And for raising a
Fund of Silver and Gold for that Purpose, as well as for exchanging the Bills
of the old Tenor, which were before emitted and should be outstanding in the
Hands of private Persons after December 1742, it was further provided by that
Act that the Duties of Impost and Tonnage of Shipping, together with the
Incomes of the Light-House, should be paid in Silver at six Shillings and eight
Pence per Ounce, or in Gold of a proportionable Value, from and after the
Session of the General Court in May then next following, and until the End of
the Session in May 1742.

Two Things are observable in this Act, 1 st. That it excludes the old Tenor
Bills, as well as those of the middle Tenor, from being received in Payment for
the Duties of Impost, Tonnage of Shipping, and Incomes of the Light-House: This
the Government had a Right to do with Respect to the middle Tenor Bills,
because it was agreeable to the Form and Tenor of 'em; but it was repugnant to
the Tenor of the old Bills, by which they were to be accepted in all public
Poyments; and this the Merchants in the Time of it loudly complained of as an
Act of Injustice to the Possessors of the old Bills, and a manifest Breach of
public Faith; as indeed it must be acknowledged to have been: And it seems an
extraordinary Project for raising the Value and Credit of the Bills to make Use
of an Expedient, which had a direct Tendency to lessen their Credit; For what
sure Dependence could there be upon the Faith of an Act, (made for the securing
the Redemption of 'em six Years after) which was itself a present Instance of
the Violation of the Public Faith with regard to the old Tenor Bills.

2 dly. That at the Time of emitting the middle Tenor Bills the Price of Silver
in Bills of the old Tenor was twenty six Shillings and eight Pence at least per
Ounce, notwithstanding which twenty Shillings in old Tenor Bills (which would
not purchase more than three Quarters of an Ounce of Silver) was by that Act
made equal in all public Payments to six Shillings and eight Pence of the
middle Tenor Bills, which by the same Act is valued as equal to an Ounce of
Silver; and that the stating of this Proportion between the Value of these
Bills, which was as one to three, when the true Proportion between 'em was one
to four, ( six Shillings and eight Pence being only a fourth Part of twenty six
Shillings and eight Pence) had not the least Effect to raise the Value of the
old Tenor Bills, (which I suppose it might be intended to do) but on the
contrary to sink that of the middle Tenor Bills one third Part or 33 and a
third per Cent. below their Denomination, and the Value, at which they were
stated by the Act in Silver and Gold; For from the Time of their being first
issued out of the Treasury six Shillings and eight Pence in those Bills would
not purchase more than three Quarters of an Ounce of Silver, nor pass in
private Payments for more than twenty Shillings in Bills of the old Tenor,
(which still retained their former depreciated Value) and so vice versa twenty
Shillings in the old Tenor Bills passed in common Currency equal to six
Shillings and eight Pence in Bills of the middle Tenor.

In the Year 1737 two further Sums of l. 20,000, and 6,000 in Bills of the
middle Tenor, and in 1738 another Sum of 6,000 in the same Tenor were emitted;
for drawing back all which Bills into the Treasury in the Years 1738, 1739 and
1740, three several Taxes of equal Value with those Emissions were raised and
apportion'd by the several Emission Acts, and such of these Bills also, as
should not be paid into the Treasury for Taxes at their limited Periods, but
remain in the Hands of private Persons after December 1742, were made
exchangeable at the Treasury for Silver and Gold at the same Rates with the
middle Tenor Bills of the first Emission; and it is very remarkable, that
notwithstanding it had been found by Experience that the Bills of the first
Emission were depreciated 33 and a third per Cent, as is beforementioned, by
stating the Proportion between them and the outstanding Bills of the old Tenor
as one to three, or valuing six Shillings and eight Pence of the middle Tenor
Bills at twenty Shillings only of the old Tenor Bills, yet the Government
continued to state the same Proportion between the middle Tenor Bills of these
three other Emissions, and the Bills of the old Tenor, not only in all public
Payments, as was done by the Act in 1736, but all private Payments; which had
the same Effect to depreciate the middle Tenor Bills of these three last
Emissions successively, as the stating of the same Proportion had before to
depreciate those of the first Emission, without raising the Value of the old
Tenor Bills in the least.

And thus the Government persever'd to mis-state the Proportion between the
Value of the old and middle Tenor Bills, even when the Period limited for
exchanging the outstanding middle Tenor Bills for Silver and Gold at the
Treasury was within less than two Years and an Half of it is Arrival; the
Consequence of which was, that this Error cost the Country in December 1742 the
Value of l. 42,000 old Tenor, to pay the Difference between the false
Proportion of six Shillings and eight Pence middle Tenor for twenty Shillings
in the old Tenor, and the true Proportion of six Shillings and eight Pence in
the former for twenty six Shillings and eight Pence in the latter.

In the Year 1740, during the same Period, an Act of the General Court was
passed at their May Session for emitting l. 80,000 in Bills of the old Tenor,
which were not made redeemable with Silver and Gold, as the Bills of the middle
Tenor were; and a few Days after passed an Order at the same Session in July
directing the Treasurer to issue out such of the Bills (which had been drawn
into the Treasury) both of the old and middle Tenor, as were not worn and
defaced, in lieu of the new Bills, which were to have been struck off, and
emitted by Virtue of that Act; and about l. 17,000 in Bills of the middle Tenor
(which had been drawn back into the Treasury by public Payments) were issued
out by the Treasurer accordingly; and the same Proportion of one to three was
stated between the Bills of the middle Tenor re-emitted by Virtue of this
Order, and the Bills of the old Tenor, whereby these re-emitted middle Tenor
Bills were a second Time depreciated 33 and a third per Cent in like Manner, as
all the other Bills of the same Tenor had been from Time to Time, by stating
the same Proportion between them and the old Tenor Bills.

These l. 17,000 Bills indeed having been once drawn into the Treasury and
afterward re-emitted in lieu of Bills, which the Government had not stipulated
to exchange for Silver and Gold, were not exchangeable at the Treasury for
those Species, as the other middle Tenor Bills, which should be outstanding
upon the Foot of their Emission Acts after December 1742 would be, yet as these
non-redeemable Bills had no Ear-mark given 'em upon their Re-emission to
distinguish 'em from the redeemable Bills, with which they must necessarily be
so blended in common Currency, as that the one could not be discriminated from
the other by December 1742, it was evident that this Re-emission of the l.
17,000 non-redeemable Bills must lay the Government under this Dilemma, either
to admit the Demands of the Possessors of the outstanding non-redeemable Bills
in 1742, and exchange 'em for Silver in the Country's Wrong, or else to reject
the Demands of the Possessors of the outstanding redeemable Bills, who could
not possibly make it appear that the Bills in their Possession were not Part of
the non-redeemable Bills; which would be an Act of great Injustice with Regard
to them.

In December following when the Time for exchanging these Bills was advanced
six Months nearer, the General Court passed an Impost Act, whereby the Duties
of Impost, Tonnage of Shipping, etc. that by the beforementioned Act in 1736
were made payable 'till the End of May Session 1742 in Gold and Silver only,
which was to remain in the Treasury as a Fund for exchanging such of the
redeemable Bills as should be outstanding after December 1742, were from
thenceforward made payable in Bills both of the old and middle Tenor, so that
twenty Shillings in the former, and six Shillings and eight Pence in the latter
were from that Time accepted by the Impost Officer in Payment for those Duties
in lieu of six Shillings and eight Pence in coined Silver, or Gold of a
proportionable Value: And the Treasurer was by that Clause of the Act empowered
and directed to purchase Silver and Gold with the Bills thus paid in -- By this
Means the Fund provided in 1736 for the Security of the Possessors of the
redeemable Bills, and to enable the Treasurer to exchange 'em after December
1742 was from that Time necessarily lessened at least one third Part, or 33 and
a 3d per Cent. as to the Duties to be collected from December 1740 till the End
of May Session 1742, (that being the Difference between the Value of the Bills
and of the Silver to be purchased with 'em) so that the passing of this Act was
in Effect destroying the Fund in Part, and so far repealing that Clause of the
Act of 1736, which raised it for the Redemption of the outstanding redeemable
Bills in 1742, and ought to have been held inviolable, especially by the
Governor who is forbidden by His Majesty's Instructions to consent to the
repealing of any Act ( and consequently any Part of an Act) without inserting a
suspending Clause in the Act, which repeals it, to prevent it is taking Effect,
'till his Majesty's Royal Pleasure shall be known upon it.

The Reason given in the Act for this Proceeding was that the Payment of the
Duties of Impost, etc. in Silver and Gold had a Tendency to raise their Price
within the Province: Whereas it is most manifest that such Payment of the
Duties had a direct contrary Tendency by promoting the Importation of Silver
and Gold into the Province by Masters of Vessels liable to the Payment of those
Duties, who arrive here from Countries where there is a plenty of Silver and
Gold: And on the other Hand the Treasurer's purchasing Silver and Gold within
the Province with Bills must have as manifest a Tendency to raise the Price of
Silver and Gold in it, and not only to depreciate the Bills in general, but to
keep many of the middle Tenor Bills outstanding beyond December 1742.

It is not improbable that the repeated Complaints of the Merchants might have
a considerable Weight with the Government in Favor of the old Bills for
admitting them to be received in Payment of the Duties of Impost, etc. for the
future, according to the Tenor of 'em, though such Motive could not with a good
Grace be expressed in the Act, since that would have been a tacit
Acknowlegement, that the Exclusion of 'em from being accepted the three former
Years was a Wrong done to the Possessors: But whatever Necessity the Government
might apprehend it self to be under, with Regard to the old Tenor Bills, of
breaking into the Fund raised for the Redemption of 'em by the beforementioned
Act of 1736, it was certainly under none with Respect to the middle Tenor
Bills; and the admitting of them, contrary to their very Form and Tenor, to be
received for those Duties in lieu of Silver or Gold, in Diminution of the Fund,
was as manifest a Breach of the public Faith as the excluding of the old Tenor
Bills was at first.

In August 1741, Governor BELCHER's Administration ended and the present
Governor's succeeded it, at which Time there was outstanding beyond their
stated Periods for want of Executions being issued out, according to the
Province Law, against the deficient Collectors of the Taxes, to compel 'em to
bring in their several Rates pursuant to the Treasurer's Warrants, 267,964 l.
14 s. 7 d. in Province Bills of the old Tenor, and 40,664 l. 6 s. 8 d. in Bills
of the middle Tenor, both which Sums computed in old Tenor make together
390,863 l. 14 s. 7 d; and at the same Time were outstanding further Sums in
Bills of the old and middle Tenor amounting in the whole to the Value of l.
106,525 old Tenor, for drawing back which last mentioned Sums into the Treasury
Taxes ought to have been apportioned in May 1739 and 1741, pursuant to their
respective Emission-Acts, but were postpon'd by the Assembly during Governor
BELCHER's Administration; so that those Bills were, when he quitted the Chair,
outstanding without any Fund of Taxes for sinking 'em.

In October 1741 (there being considerable Arrears of Wages due to the Officers
and Servants of the Government) the House of Representatives and Council passed
a Supply Bill, to which the Governor refused his Assent, and pointed out to the
Assembly in a Speech the several exceptionable Matters contained in it; and,
among other Amendments, particularly recommended to 'em to make Provision for
the speedy drawing in of the l. 106,525 old Bills, and securing to Creditors
the full Value of their future Debts against the depreciating of the Bills of
Credit; which last he pressed upon 'em in such Terms, as in Effect to make it a
Condition of his Consent to the Bills continuing to be a Tender: As to the
Arrear of l. 390,863 14 s. 7 d. in Bills outstanding beyond their limited
Periods, which had been, during the late Administration, occasioned by the
Neglect of His Majesty's 16th and 18th Instructions, which Governor BELCHER
had communicated to the Assembly, as I have before mentioned, it was in the
Governor's Power to draw that in without the Aid of the Assembly, as fast as
the Circumstances of the People would admit of levying so heavy a Sum, by
causing Executions to be issued out by the Treasurer, pursuant to the Province
Law in that Case already provided in 1699. -- This Recommendation from the
Governor had it is proper Influence upon the Assembly in their November Session
following, when a Bill was passed for the Supply of the Treasury, in which
Provision was made for drawing in, within the Years 1742 and 1743, the
outstanding Bills of Credit, for which no Fund of Taxes had been yet raised,
and a Clause was therein inserted impowering the Treasurer, in Case the General
Court should not apportion the Taxes for drawing in the Bills at the Times
limited by the Act, to issue out his Warrants for assessing and levying 'em in
the same Proportions, which the last Tax-Act had apportion'd the Taxes of the
several Towns in; whereby it was put out of the Power of the Assembly to
post-pone the drawing of the Bills in further: And the same Clause having been
repeated in all the subsequent Supply-Acts, an effectual Method seems now to be
established for preventing all future Postponing by the Assembly.

The Bills emitted by this Act were of the same Form and Tenor as to the
Valuation of 'em, in Respect of Silver and Gold, with those of the middle
Tenor; but the Proportion stated between them and the Bills of the old Tenor
was as one to four, instead of the former Proportion of one to three, by which
Means they escaped the Fate, which all the Emissions of the middle Tenor Bills
had shared, of being depreciated 33 and a 3d per Cent below their Denomination,
and still keep the same Difference in Value between themselves and the old
Tenor Bills: and it is evident beyond all reasonable Doubt that if the
Proportion of one to four had been stated from the Beginning between the
several Emissions of the middle Tenor Bills, and the Bills of the old Tenor, it
would have saved the Province at least the l. 8,000 new Tenor Bills, which it
was obliged in December 1742 to pay the Possessors of the middle Tenor Bills
for the Difference between the two Proportions, so that it must have been an
inexcusable Error indeed if the Government had still persever'd in a Mistake,
which had been so thoroughly proved by the Experience of near five Years.

An Objection has indeed been made against raising the Denomination of the
Bills from that of the old Tenor to either that of the middle or the new Tenor
Bills, founded upon a Notion that it has occasioned the Rise of the Price of
Silver, and of Provisions; but it is a Mistake to imagine that any Denomination
of the Bills of Credit whatsoever can affect the Price of Silver, or of any
other Commodities in the Province; for besides that one does not appear to have
the least Relation to, or Connection with the other, this single Fact seems to
be a full Confutation of that Notion, viz. That the greatest Rise of the Price
of Silver, that ever happened in the Province within the same Compass of Time,
was that between the Years 1733 and 1735, when it rose from twenty Shillings
per Ounce in Bills of the old Tenor to twenty-seven Shillings and six Pence,
that is near 34 per Cent; and that happened before the Emission either of the
middle or new Tenor Bills, and when no other Bills were current but those of
the old Tenor: And on the other Hand, for about five Years next after the
Emission of the middle Tenor Bills, the Price of Silver continued very near at
a Stand -- As to the Price of Provisions; That must of Necessity follow the
Rise of the Price of Silver and all other Commodities in general; For otherwise
how is it possible for the Husbandman to subsist? The Rise of Provisions does
not indeed keep even Pace with that of the Price of Silver, which generally
rises by Starts, and then keeps at a Stand for some Time, but gradually as the
Countryman feels the Effects of the Rise of Silver in the Prices of all other
Commodities and Necessaries of Life, which he is obliged to purchase; And thus
it happened that the utmost Extent of the Rise of Provisions, which necessarily
followed the great Rise of Silver and depreciating of the Bills between 1733
and 1735, did not discover itself 'till after the first Emission of the middle
Tenor Bills in 1736, and so what was really the Effect of the Rise of the Price
of Silver, (which necessarily depreciates the Bills of Credit, and by Degrees
influences the Price of all other Commodities) is imputed by Mistake to the
different Denomination of the Bills of the middle Tenor and new Tenor from that
of the old Bills; that is, to the mere Difference of Sound in the several
Denominations; which is a groundless Notion, even though the Price of Provisions
sold at Market had been usually computed in Bills of the middle or new Tenor,
but must entirely vanish, when it is considered that the Price of 'em has been
constantly computed in Bills of the old Tenor, ever since the Emission of the
middle and new Tenor Bills, just as it was before their Emission, and with no
more Regard to or Consideration of either the middle or new Tenor Bills, than
if they had never been emitted.

And it may be further added as a strong Reason for the Governor's preferring
Bills of this Denomination, that it is the most conformable to the Act of
Parliament of the 6th of Queen ANEE, and her said late Majesty's Proclamation
for ascertaining the Value of foreign Coins; and to his Majesty's Instruction
to his Governor, which strictly enjoins him the Observation of that Act; and
it seems rather to be wondered at that the Province Act made in 1740 for
emitting l. 80,000 in Bills of the old Tenor was ever consented to, after the
Assembly had been brought to conform to the Act of Parliament and his Majesty's
Instruction for four Years, than that Emissions of Bills of the old Tenor
should be continued.

In the same November Session, a few Days after passing the beforementioned
Supply Bill, the Assembly passed another Bill entitled an Act to ascertain the
Value of Money, and of the Bills of public Credit of this Province, etc.
Whereby among other Things it was provided, that if the Bills then to be
emitted, or other Bills thereafter to be made, should be depreciated below the
Value, at which the Bills then issued were emitted, or the Bills afterward to
be issued should be emitted, in such Case the Justices of the respective Courts
of Judicature should give Judgment for so much Silver, as the true Debt should
appear to be, and in want thereof for so much in said Province Bills, with the
Addition of so much more, as would make Amends for the depreciating of the
Bills from the Value, at which they then were or should be afterward stated;
and that there might be one certain uniform Rule, by which the several Courts
should proceed in making up their Judgments, it was provided that the General
Assembly should once in every six Months determine the Rates, that the said
Bills commonly passed at in Proportion to Silver and Bills of Exchange payable
in London; and upon their failing to do it, that a Committee of the Members of
his Majesty's Council should do it; and in Case of their Failure, that the
Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature, in their several Terms in the
County of Suffolk, should appoint five able and sufficient Men to consider and
report the true Value of the Bills, as they would produce in Silver or Bills of
Exchange to the best of their Judgment, etc.

This was the first Act of it is Kind, which was ever passed in the Province,
and being a new Thing and likely to prove unpopular in the Execution of it,
neither the General Court nor the Members of his Majesty's Council, nor the
Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature, seemed fond of carrying it into
Execution; which was omitted to be done 'till the Governor called upon the
Judges by his Letter to 'em for that Purpose, at their February Term in 1742,
to do it; and by his special Directions the Act was accordingly then carried
into Execution by their appointing a Committee to value the Bills, etc. and so
has continued to be done in the same Channel (which is the most proper one for
it) according to the Amendments made by a subsequent Act passed in 1743, and
will no doubt continue to be executed.

The Effect of this Act, as it was passed at first, was that the Debtor was
obliged to pay the Creditor, over and above the nominal Sum of his Debt, so
much as the Bills were depreciated from the Value, at which they were first
emitted; which upon the Experience of it proved inconvenient and oppressive to
the Debtor, by compelling him to pay the Creditor in the first and only
Instance of it is having been then carried into Execution seven and an half per
Cent. more than was his just Due; wherefore in May 1743 the Assembly upon the
Governor's Message to 'em recommending the following Amendment of it, viz.
That the Creditor should be allowed only so much, as the Bills should be
depreciated below the Value, which they were of at the Time of contracting the
Debt, amended it accordingly: And thereby the true Point of Justice between the
Debtor and Creditor, which is that every Debtor should pay, and every Creditor
receive the full Value of his Debt, and no more, was established upon a firm
Basis, all possible Overreaching or Oppression of the Debtor avoided, and the
perpetual Execution of the Act well secured, which it would have been very
difficult to have preserved upon the Terms, in which the Act was framed at
first.

And this is all that the Governor could possibly do for preventing the
mischievous Effects of the Bills; and it is evident that this Provision in the
Act would effectually secure to every Person the Value of that Part of his
Estate, which is outstanding in Debts, and be an adequate Remedy for the chief
Mischiefs, that arose before from the depreciating of the Bills, and check that
litigious Spirit, which was grown to a considerable Head for want of such an
Act, if Creditors shall think fit to take the Benefit of it: In the Country
they generally have; but in Boston the Shopkeepers, who have long tasted the
Sweets of the depreciating of the Bills, are averse to complying with it
voluntarily, and the Merchants their Creditors are tender of forcing 'em into
it, by demanding an Allowance for the depreciating of the Bills in a Court of
Law; and so it has had little or no Effect there; But all that Government can
do, is to provide the Remedy, and to put it into the Power of the Creditor to
recover the full Value of his Debt.

However this Act together with the Alteration made in the Fees of the Courts
of Judicature in January 1741, by which they were raised to double what they
were before the last Act for preventing the Oppression of Debtors and making
the Bills a Tender expired in November preceding, seems to have had a very
considerable Influence for retrenching the former excessive Number of Law
Suits, which has by this Means been reduced near one Half, and in the Superior
Court, with Respect to indisputable Debts and Complaints upon Defaults, near
two third Parts.

At their May Sessions in 1742 the General Court found that the late Settlement
of the Boundary Line between this Province and New Hampshire, whereby some
whole Towns, which were before taxed toward the Support of the Massachusetts
Government, were now included within the Limits of New Hampshire Government,
and that other Towns under the same Situation were intersected by the Line, had
made a new Valuation of the Estates of the several Towns throughout the
Province necessary, before they could apportion the Taxes laid on that Year;
and as the settling of a new Valuation Act is generally an Affair of some
Length and Difficulty in the House of Representatives, and could not be
completed before the Governor's intended Interview with the Eastern Indians
that Summer, that Affair and the Apportionment of the Taxes for that Year was
put off 'till the next Meeting of the Court on the first of September, to which
short Day they were adjourned chiefly for that Purpose; But upon their Meeting
then they could make so little Progress in it, before the Season of the Year
necessarily called the Country-Members Home, that they rose again without
completing the new Valuation, but with a firm Resolution to come fully
prepared to go through the Valuation and Tax-Act by the End of November, to the
18th of which Month they were adjourned; But at their Meeting then also the
Zeal of the several Representatives for the Interest of their respective Towns
so increased the Difficulties and Contests in settling the Valuation, that though
the Committee for that Business attended it with the utmost Diligence and
Assiduity, yet it was not finished 'till January, and then the Assembly
instantly proceeded to make their Tax-Act for 1742, so that by this unforeseen
Accident the Apportionment of the Taxes for that Year was inevitably delayed
about five Months beyond the Time limited by the beforementioned Act in 1741,
and the Time for paying the Taxes into the Treasury about three Months, it
being impracticable for the Treasurer by issuing his Warrant to cause that Tax
to be assess'd and levied according to the Proportion settled by the last
preceding Tax-Act, as the Province had been since the making of that Act
dismembered of some Towns, which were included in that Tax, so that the same
Apportionment of the Taxes for the Year 1742 would have produced a Deficiency
in the levying of 'em; for which Reason a new Apportionment was necessary to be
made by the General Court; But at the next May Session, the Assembly punctually
apportion'd the Taxes for the Year 1743, so that they made two heavy Tax-Acts
within the Space of five Months: Which fully shows that the Delay in the former
Year was not in the least affected, but proceeded entirely from the
Difficulties, which the House of Representatives had in agreeing upon the new
Valuation.

In the Beginning of the November Session following the Governor in his Speech
reminded the Assembly of the Engagements, they were under to the Possessors of
the middle Tenor Bills; and pressed them to make a proper Provision for
answering their Demands, and ordered the Treasurer to lay before them for that
Purpose the State of the Treasury; upon which it was discovered that in
Consequence of the repeated Mistakes, which I have beforementioned, upwards of
l. 42,000 in Bills of the middle Tenor had been hoarded up by some moneyed Men
and was outstanding, and that there was no more than about l. 2,900 in Silver
and Gold in the Treasury to redeem them.

At this Time the middle Tenor Bills, which were current, passed at 33 and a 3d
per Cent less than the Rhode Island Bills of the same Tenor and equal
Denomination with themselves, though the middle Tenor Bills were within eight or
nine Weeks of the Time limited for their Redemption, and the Rhode Island Bills
were not redeemable at all with Silver and Gold, and the Period for drawing
them in was at 18 Years Distance; so that according to the common Rule of
Discount the Rhode Island Bills were of less Value than the middle Tenor Bills
^0 per Cent at least: This is a demonstrative Proof of what little Expectation
the People in general had that the middle Tenor Bills would be exchanged at the
Treasury, or rather of the general Persuasion, which prevailed that the
Possessors of those Bills would have no Satisfaction from the Government; And
indeed the Re-emission of l. 17,000 of these Bills in 1740, which were not
entitled to be redeemed at the Treasury by the Stipulation of the Government,
and their being so intermixed with the redeemable Bills of the same Tenor, that
the Redeemables could not be distinguished from the Non-redeemables, had in the
Opinion of Persons most judicious and knowing in the Temper of the Assembly
laid such an Obstacle in the Way of the Redemption of any of the Bills, that
very little or no Success was then expected from the Governor's Application to
the House of Representatives; and it is plain that the Council apprehended it
to be a Matter, which much labored in the House, from their pressing Message
to it upon that Subject; and accordingly by the Journals of the Court it
appears that it was the sixth Week of the Session before the House could be
brought to a Resolution to make any Satisfaction to the Possessors of the
middle Tenor Bills; and then they passed a Vote that for the future in all
public Payments twenty Shillings in Bills of the middle Tenor should be
received as equal to twenty Shillings in Bills of the last Emission, (that is
those emitted since the present Governor's coming to the Administration, which
though of no more than equal Denomination with the middle Tenor Bills passed for
about 33 and a third per Cent. more in public and private Payments than they
did) and so pro rata for a greater or less Sum; the Effect of which was that
the middle Tenor Bills should be received in all public Payment, at near 34
per Cent* more than they had been received at before: But the Benefit of this
Vote extending only to such Possessors of the middle Tenor Bills, as had
public Payments to make, the Governor on the next Day of the Court's Sitting
pressed the House to provide for making Satisfaction to all the Possessors in
general; and the House immediately voted that the Treasurer should be directed
to exchange to all Persons whatsoever Province Bills of the last Emission for
Bills of the middle Tenor, that is to say, a twenty Shilling Bill of the last
Emission for a twenty Shilling Bill of the middle Tenor, and so pro rata: And
an Act of the General Court was soon afterward passed for apportioning and
assessing a Tax of l 8,000 in Bills of the Tenor and Form last emitted, to make
good the Deficiency of the Funds of Taxes for drawing in the outstanding Bills,
which was occasioned by making this Satisfaction to the Possessors of the
middle Tenor Bills.

I find this is the first Instance of the Massachusetts Government's making a
Recompense to the Possessors of any of the Bills of Credit for their being
depreciated below the Value, at which they were first emitted; and it proved in
the Time of it is Transaction an exceeding critical Event, and was then esteemed
no small Point gained to have gone this Length toward procuring Justice for
the Possessors of the Bills, and saving the Credit of the Province from the
Danger, it was brought into of being irretrievably lost: For as to the
Province's purchasing a sufficient Quantity of Silver and Gold for exchanging
the l. 42,000 outstanding Bills, it was not practicable, had the Assembly been
disposed to have done it, between the beginning of the November Session, and
the Time of the Redemption of the Bills; and the l. 2,900 in the Treasury,
which would not have exceeded 9 d. in the Pound when divided amongst the
Possessors of all the outstanding Bills entitled to be exchanged by the
beforementioned Acts, was too trifling a Distribution to be thought of; so that
Province Bills seem to be the only Equivalent, that could be given in Exchange
for the middle Tenor Bills by the Time limited for the Possessors of 'em to
make their Demands; and that was given 'em according to the full Valuation of
Silver in Bills of the last Emission, as it was set by the Assembly in 1741 at
the Time of the Emission of the Bills, and since which the Price of Silver had
not really risen, though this Payment was in Fact 7 and an half per Cent. less in
Value than the House of Representatives estimated it at, and than the real
Price of Gold and Silver then was; But this Affair had so long labored in the
House of Representatives, and it is Success had proved so doubtful, that it was
thought a Point of Prudence for the Governor to pass the Order, and not to run
the Risque of losing all by rejecting it, and committing the Consideration of
the Matter a second Time to the lower House, whose Sentiments appeared upon the
transacting of this Affair not to be unalterably established for making any
Allowance to the Possessors of the Bills. -- And indeed when it is considered
that the Possessors had received these Bills at their depreciated Value, and
gained from the Province a Profit of 33 and a third per Cent. for hoarding 'em
up five or six Months, or perhaps some few of 'em a little longer; and that
those Bills of the middle Tenor, which were redeemable at the Treasury, were so
blended with the l. 17,000 of 'em, which the Government had not stipulated to
redeem, that none of the Possessors could be certain which of the two Sorts of
Bills his were; and that in such Case there was some Room for the Assembly to
have disputed the Redemption of the l. 17,000, which had been once sunk and
re-emitted by Mistake, and to have insisted that the Possessors (since it could
not be determined which of 'em had the redeemable Bills and which the
non-redeemable Ones) should make an Allowance (upon an Average among 'em all)
for the l. 17,000 non-redeemable Bills, according to the several Quota's of
Bills in each Man's Possession; I say when these Circumstances of the Bills are
considered, and that nevertheless the Government submitted to redeem all of 'em
in the Manner, they have done, there seems to be no great Reason for the
Possessors to impeach the Justice of the Assembly in this Particular, or to be
dissatisfied with the Terms, which were procured and consented to for 'em; And
indeed in the Time of the Transaction they appeared to be very well satisfied
with it.

Soon after the Alteration made by the late Act for ascertaining the Value of
Money and Bills of Credit, etc. in Favor of Creditors with Regard to future
Debts, the Judges of the Superior Court and two or three of the Inferior Courts
took Occasion from thence to alter their Rules for chancering of Forfeitures
upon old Bonds and Mortgages conditioned for the Payment of a Sum certain in
Bills on this Province, or for the Payment of a Sum either in those Bills or
lawful Money; which gave Rise to some Contests between the House of
Representatives and the Council, and a general Discontent of the Debtors, as
well as many others throughout the Province. -- Ever since the Publication of
the Law for preventing the Oppression of Debtors in 1712 'till that Time, all
Debts due upon Bonds and Mortgages of the beforementioned Tenor were
understood and consequently intended both by the Creditor and Debtor, at the
Time of contracting the same, to be payable in Bills of Credit on this
Province, according to their nominal Value, whether such Bills should rise or
fall in their real Value, between the Time of contracting the Debt and the
Payment of it; and the several Courts of Judicature had made the same
Construction of those Bonds and Mortgages, and governed themselves accordingly
in entering up Judgments, and awarding Executions for such Debts; and this
general Understanding of the Rule of Law, and the uninterrupted Practice of the
Courts of Judicature had influenced and governed Men in their Dealings,
Contracts, Purchases and Dispositions of their Estates at their Death during
the abovementioned thirty Years: As to the Creditor, who placed out his Money
at Interest, and consequently chose what Kind of Security his Debtor should
give him; if he made his Election to have his Debt ascertained and not to stand
the Chance of the Rise or Fall of the Bills in their Value, he took his Bond or
Mortgage with Condition for the Payment of so many Ounces of Silver, or a Sum
certain in Sterling Money, or in Proclamation Money only; If on the other Hand
he had an Opinion, that the Bills of Credit were more likely to rise than fall
in their Value, he took a Bond or Mortgage with Condition for the Payment of
Bills of Credit only, or for the Payment either of lawful Money or of Bills of
Credit; and the Debtor (who is obliged to give such Security as his Creditor
insists upon) under the Sanction of the settled Practice of all the Courts of
Judicature upon such Securities did not scruple to give his Bond or Mortgage
conditioned for the Payment of Bills of Credit or of lawful Money, though the
Money was at the Time of giving the Mortgage double, treble or four Times the
Value of the Bills and Sum lent him; and in such Case there never had been any
Instance of more than the nominal Sum of the Bills expressed in the Condition
of the Bond or Mortgage, and Interest due upon 'em in like Bills being ever
paid, or demanded in a Court of Judicature 'till 1742, when the Judges of the
Inferior Court for the County of Suffolk, and of the Superior Court of
Judicature altered their established Rule of chancering such Bonds and
Mortgages, and made the same Allowance to the Creditor for the depreciating of
the Bills in the Case of old Debts, as the beforementioned late Law had
provided should be made with Respect to future Debts.

Upon this Case I would observe, First, That some of those Creditors, who chose
to take the beforementioned Security for their Debts, had a View of an
exorbitant Gain in it arising from the general Persuasion, which prevailed for
a long Time, that by the Year 1741 all the old Bills would be drawn in; and
that the rest of the Creditors had at least an Opinion that the Bills could not
well fall lower, but were more likely to rise than fall in their Value; and it
seems not to be doubted, but that if the Bills had during this Course of Time
sometimes risen as well as fallen in their Value, and Creditors and Debtors had
promiscuously been sometimes Gainers sometimes Losers by the beforementioned
Contracts, every Person would have thought it just that the Gainers on both
Sides should have had the Benefit of their Contracts, so that all the
Difficulty in the Case arises from the Loss's having almost perpetually
happened on one Side.

Secondly, That this Departure of the Courts of Judicature from their settled
Practice was going contrary to the known Intent of the Parties at the Time of
contracting the Debt, which is not only the principal Rule of Equity, as it is
settled in the English Courts of Judicature, but likewise the general Rule of
Justice universally established in all Communities, and governing themselves by
the accidental Event of the Contracts, which was novel and unsafe to be
introduced into the Provincial Courts in any Instance.

Thirdly, That this new Rule was also liable to great Objections on Account of
it is being necessarily attended with Injuries and Wrongs in the following
Cases, viz.

Many Debtors, who under the Sanction of the late settled Rule of Practice upon
the Province Law, had accepted the Payment of Debts due to themselves upon the
like Securities in depreciated Bills of Credit, would by having the Rule
shifted upon 'em be compelled to pay their own Debts in Bills of an higher
Value.

And Persons who had purchased Lands subject to old Mortgages before this late
Alteration of the Practice of the Provincial Courts, and had only an Allowance
made in the Purchase Money for those Encumbrances according to the depreciated
Value of the Bills, would be compelled by the Mortgagees to pay for the
Redemption of those Lands more than what they were allowed in the Purchase of
'em for the Encumbrances by the Mortgageors.

And for these and other Mischiefs too long to be enumerated here, and which
would befall other Persons in the Community besides Debtors, if this new Rule
of Practice in the Courts of Judicature was to take Place in all Cases, it was
impossible for the Legislature to provide an adequate Remedy.

Fourthly, That as many of the old Debts would be doubled, some trebled, and
some few augmented almost fourfold by this new Rule of the Courts of
Judicature, it seemed unavoidable that some of the poorer Sort of Families in
the Province would be wholly broke up and ruined by it; which Consequences so
alarmed the House of Representatives, that upon the Petitions of two of the
Debtors they passed a Vote for nullifying these Judgments of Court; but they
miscarried in Council: And at the Close of the Session in April 1733 a Bill was
unanimously passed by the House of Representatives, and concurred by the
Council, and laid before the Gonernour for his Consent, the Purport of which
was to declare by Way of Explanation of the several Acts for preventing the
Oppression of Debtors, that the beforementioned Bonds and Mortgages were not
Specialties within the Exception of those Acts, according to the true Intent
and Meaning of 'em at the Time of their being passed: But I find by the
Governor's Speeches upon this Occasion, that though he was of Opinion that in
the Beginning the Creditor had the Rule of Law on their Side, yet he thought
the Law had been so long otherwise understood, and practiced upon by the Courts
of Judicature, that the general Error in that Case had obtained the Force of
Law, according to the received Maxim in the Courts of Law, Communis Error facit
Jus: And as he was of Opinion that the Courts of Judicature's departing from
their established Rule of Construction in this Case, and breaking through the
real Intent of the Parties would be of mischievous Consequence to the
Community, he joined with the Assembly in recommending it to the Judges of the
Superior Court of Judicature to re-consider at their next Court the Judgments,
which they had made up on old Bonds or Mortgages of the beforementioned Tenor
(which were only two in Number) and in their future chancering of old Bonds and
Mortgages of that Tenor to observe the Intent of the Parties according to their
former Rule of Construction; and in the mean Time Execution was stayed in those
two Cases, one of which was of the Value of about l. 100, and the other of
about l. 5 10 s. Sterling -- And for redressing the Creditors upon such
Securities, to whom the General Court had given a just Expectation by their
beforementioned Act in 1736, that the outstanding Bills of the old Tenor
should be exchanged at the Treasury in 1742 for Silver at the Rate of one Ounce
of Silver for every twenty Shillings in Bills, whereby they might be induced to
let their Bonds and Mortgages lie, depending upon the Bills in which they were
payable being finally redeemed in Silver at the abovementioned Rate, he
recommended it to the Assembly as a Point of Justice to make good to the
Creditors the Assurances given 'em in 1736, that the outstanding Bills should
be of the aforesaid Value in 1742; and this the Governor urged upon 'em in his
second Speech as what the public Faith of the Province was pledged to those
Creditors for the Performance of by the Act in 1736, and other subsequent Acts
passed in 1737, 1738 and 1740, in all which the Value of the Bills of the old
Tenor was stated as equal to Silver at twenty Shillings per Ounce both in
public and private Payments; and that the Government was bound to maintain 'em
to be of the same Value in 1742, at which Time it had stipulated by those
several Acts that they should be redeemed at the aforesaid Rate, and had
actually begun to raise a Fund for that Purpose; and insisted that these
Assurances from the Government amounted to a Warranty to the Possessor of the
Bills, that they should in 1742 be of the Value, at which they had been stated
by the several Acts; and I might add to the Governor's Argument, especially as
they had been made a Tender (...) Law by the Act passed in 1731: And his
Excellency finally proposed that the Government should make Good to those
Creditors, who had received no Recompense of any Kind from their Debtors for
the depreciating of the Bills, the Difference between the present depreciated
Value of 'em, and the several Values, they were of when the respective Debts
were contracted, not exceeding in such Valuation of the Bills the Rate of
twenty Shillings for one Ounce of Silver; and proposed a Committee to be
instantly raised for the Execution of that Affair.

What Effect this Recommendation from the General Court to the Judges of the
Superior Court of Judicature will have, with respect to their Judgments in
future Cases of the same Kind, is not certain, such Recommendation not being
binding upon 'em; the two Cases recommended to 'em for their Re-consideration
failed of obtaining it for want of being brought properly on before them at the
appointed Term; and upon the Debtor's petitioning the General Court to be
relieved further, the Prayer of it was granted by the Assembly but was not
consented to by the Governor; and so the Creditor had his Execution upon the
first Judgment: As to the several Judgments, which had been made up in the
Inferior Courts upon Bonds or Mortgages of the same Tenor, and from which there
was no Appeal to the Superior Court of Judicature, the Recommendation of the
General Court did not reach to those Cases; and though one or two subsequent
Petitions for Relief in 'em had been preferred to the General Court and
succeeded in the Council and House of Representatives, yet as the Debtors had
neglected to appeal and prosecute their Remedy at Law in the Superior Court,
and so had acquiesc'd in those Judgments, the Governor refused his Assent to
the Vote of the Assembly.

And whatever Influence the Governor's Determination in the Case considered as
it stood between the Creditors and the Government, which I find the Governor
pressed the Consideration of afterward in a Message and Speech to the
Assembly, may have; or however this Affair may end, it seems upon the whole,
that the Satisfaction proposed by his Excellency for the Creditors is more
plainly due to 'em from the Government than from the Debtors; is more safe and
salutary for the Public, and more consistent with the Rule of Justice, than to
exact it from the Debtors by a new devised Rule of Construction by the Courts
of Judicature, which is contradictory to the real Intent of the Parties in the
beforementioned Securities, as well as to the former settled Rule of the
Courts, which had led Debtors in to give such Securities, and which by
augmenting the Debts immoderately must necessarily distress many Families in
the Province, especially of the poor laboring Sort, and also work many
Injuries and Wrongs contrary to the Maxim of Law, Lex non facit Injuriam: All
which Considerations seem to be of no small Weight in the Scale of Government.

Upon the Inspection of the State of the Treasury, which had been laid before
the Assembly in November 1742 by Order of the Governor, when the Redemption of
the middle Tenor Bills was brought under Consideration, the beforementioned
Arrear of Bills outstanding beyond their stated Periods for want of Executions
having been duly issued out against the deficient Collectors of the Taxes,
pursuant to the Province-Law, was fully discovered by the Governor: And upon
the last burning of Bills in May 1743 it appeared that 132,394 l. 18 s. 2 d. of
'em had been drawn in and consumed, and that the remaining 258,468 l. 16 s. 5
d. was outstanding; whereupon the Treasurer was ordered forthwith to issue out
Executions against the deficient Collectors of the Taxes in general throughout
the Province to compel 'em to bring in the Remainder; whereby the whole 390,863
l. 14 s. 7 d. may be expected to be drawn in by May 1744.

This I find is the first Instance of issuing out Executions in general in such
Case; Executions had been before issued in particular Cases, where Collectors
were in Arrear and suspected of Insolvency; but they had never been issued out
against all the deficient Collectors in general, and merely for the Sake of
drawing the Bills into the Treasury, though his Majesty's two beforementioned
16th and 18th Instructions seem very explicit, and to have been expressly framed
for that Purpose.

The Payment of this large Arrear must, it is evident, be as much felt by the
People as if it had been a new Tax, and more burdensome to 'em than if the
several Parts of it had been collected, when they first became due; and this
happened too at a Time, when the Circumstances and extraordinary Charges of the
Government required higher Taxes to be laid upon the succeeding Years, than had
been usually raised within these last twenty-five Years; yet the Assembly has
granted 'em with the utmost Unanimity, and the People have cheerfully born 'em;
and if the public Charges should not be increased by a French War, as there is
no Reason to doubt but that the present Governor will direct the same Method
of drawing in the Bills by general Executions against all deficient Collectors
of Taxes to be pursued, and the Assembly will continue to raise equal Taxes
with those, they have granted since the Year 1740, whilst the Exigencies of the
Government require it, the current Quantity of the Massachusett Bills will be
reduced within l. 30,000 Sterling by the End of the Year 1746, and not one Bill
of that Government will be extant, except what is issued for the Service of the
current Year to be drawn in the same or next succeeding Year at farthest, by
the End of the Year 1753; and in the mean Time the Quantity of Bills current at
one and the same Time will be annually lessening, so that there is now a fair
Prospect of some End of those Grievances, which, instead of being diminished,
have increased more since the Arrival of his Majesty's two beforementioned
Instructions, which the late Governor communicated to the Assembly, till the
Year 1741, than they ever did within the same Compass of Time before.

And this is the utmost, that can be done by the Massachusetts Government
either for Remedying the mischievous Consequences of the depreciating of the
Bills, under which Creditors had suffered for these last thirty Years, and the
Community in general had been much hurt, or to prevent the depreciating itself,
which indeed would be plucking the Evil up by the Roots. -- As to the first,
the putting it into the Power of the Creditor to demand and have of his Debtor
a full Allowance for the depreciating of the Bills between the Time of the
contracting and Payment of the Debt, which the Act for ascertaining the Value
of Money, etc. has done, is (with respect to Debts owing within the Province)
an adequate Remedy for the malignant Effects, though not all the Inconveniences
of the depreciating of the Bills, whenever the Creditor shall think fit to take
the Benefit of the Act; but to cure the depreciating itself entirely is not in
the Power of this Government; For though I find that the depreciating of the
Bills has been generally imputed to immoderate Quantities of 'em having been
current at one and the same Time, and their long Periods, as the only Causes of
it, yet I think it is evident that it is primarily owing to this single
Circumstance of the Trade of the Province. viz. That the Quantity of Silver and
Gold and Bills of Exchange to be purchased within it, and in one or other of
which the Balance of Trade between the Province and Great Britain (which is
ever greatly in Favor of the latter) must necessarily be paid from Time to
Time, is not sufficient to answer the Demands for 'em for that Purpose,
occasioned by the Shortness of the Province's other Returns to Great Britain;
in which Case the Price of Bills of Exchange and of Silver and Gold in Bills of
Credit, with which only they are to be purchased, like that of all other
Commodities, which are much in Demand and very scarce at Market, is necessarily
raised by Means of the Buyers outbidding each other; and as such Demands for
Silver and Gold and Bills of Exchange for paying the Balance of Trade due to
Great Britain frequently recurs more or less in the Province, the Price of 'em
will upon every Occasion rise in Proportion to those Demands without any fixed
Bounds, or (to speak more properly) the Bills of Credit will more and more
depreciate; on the other Hand when the Quantity of Silver and Gold, and Bills
of Exchange to be bought at Market is sufficient to answer every Purchaser's
Occasions, it is Manifest that the Price of 'em will continue at a Stand, let
the Quantity of the current Bills of Credit be what it will, because the only
Reason which can be assigned for any general Merchandise or Commodity's
advancing in it is Price (except in the Case of a Monopoly or some unlawful
Combination) is the Scarcity of it, which induces the Purchasers to raise the
Price of it by outbidding each other, especially if some of 'em are under a
Necessity of buying it at any Rate, which is the Case of several Purchasers of
Gold or Silver or Bills of Exchange in the Povince for Returns to Great
Britain: Further, if even the Balance of Trade against the Province should
increase in any Year, when there happened an Increase of the Paper Currency,
yet if there should also happen to be an Increase of the Quantity of Silver and
Bills of Exchange in the same Year sufficient to pay that Balance, it is plain
that the Price of Silver and Bills of Exchange would not be raised that Year
even by the joint Increase of the Balance of Trade, and of the Quantity of the
Bills of Credit: And on the contrary if the Balance of Trade should happen to
decrease in any Year, when there should happen to be a Decrease likewise of the
Paper Currency, yet if there should happen to be a less Quantity of Silver and
Gold and Bills of Exchange in the same Year, than what will satisfy that
Balance, it is evident that the Buyers, who are in want of it to make Returns
to Great Britain, will outbid each other for 'em, and so the Price of Silver
and Exchange will necessarily rise that Year; or (to speak more properly) the
Bills of Credit will depreciate, notwithstanding the Decrease of the Balance
of Trade and of their own Quantity; so that if these Observations are just, it
is evident that the Rise or Fall of the Price of Silver and Gold and Bills of
Exchange, in which consists wholly the rising or depreciating of the Bills of
Credit, does not primarily depend upon the Increase or Decrease of the Quantity
of the Paper Currency, but singly upon the Proportion, which the Quantity of
Silver and Gold and Bills of Exchange to be bought at Market beats to the
Demands which there are for 'em, to make Returns to Great Britain; and that the
Increase or Decrease of the Quantity of Bills of Credit cannot affect the Price
of Silver and Gold and Bills of Exchange any further, than as it checks or
inlarges the Trade of the Province with Great Britain, from whence arise the
annual Demands for Silver and Gold and Bills of Exchange to pay off the
Balance, which is ever in favor of the latter.

If indeed an Increase of the Bills of Credit sets in at the same Time with an
Increase of the Balance of Trade, and a Decrease of the Quantity of Silver and
Gold, and Bills of Exchange in the Province, the Increase of the Paper Currency
at such a Conjuncture will contribute exceedingly to raise the Price of Silver
and depreciate the Bills of Credit: Thus in the Year 1734, when the Act of
Parliament for laying the present Duty upon the Importation of foreign Melasses
first took Place, which abridg'd the Trade of the Province in one of its most
considerable Branches for a short Time, and there happened also some Failure of
its Cod and Whale Fishery, both which occasioned a great Deficiency in its
Returns that Year, and there was the usual Importation of English Goods, and no
Increase of the Silver and Gold generally imported into the Province, and of
the Bills of Exchange to be purchased there, and about the same Time there
happened a large Increase of the Paper Currency by a new Emission of
Rhode Island Bills and a Scheme of Notes commonly called Merchant's Notes, this
Conjunction of Circumstances caused Silver to rise from twenty Shillings, to
twenty seven Shillings and six Pence per Ounce, and consequently the Bills of
Credit to depreciate above one third Part of their former Value; in which
immoderate Fall of 'em the great Increase of their Quantity had no small Share
as a secondary Cause; But during the five next succeeding Years the Price of
Silver and Exchange, and the Value of the Bills kept nearly at a Stand; not
because the Quantity of the Paper Currency was diminished; For on the contrary
it greatly increased within that Time; But as the immoderate depreciating of
the Bills had occasioned excessive Losses to the British Merchants upon their
outstanding Debts in this Province, it very much discouraged and lessened the
Importation of English Goods in the five next succeeding Years, and the
Province by Degrees soon retrieved it is Melasses Trade, and the like Failure of
their other Branches of Trade did not happen, so that by Means of lessening the
Importation of Goods from England and of the Increase of the Quantity of their
Returns, the Balance of Trade in Favor of Great Britain was so much
diminished that the Demands for Silver, and Gold, and Bills of Exchange to
discharge it did not exceed the Quantity, which was to be had of 'em in the
Province within those five Years, and so their Price kept very near at a Stand,
and consequently the Bills of Credit depreciated very little within that Time.

I shall illustrate this Observation with one Fact more: I find that in the
Year 1721 there was current in the Province 179038 l. 15 s. 9 d. in Bills of
the old Tenor, which then were equivalent to 716153 l. 3 s. 0 d. in Bills of
the same Tenor and Denomination, according to their present depreciated Value,
which Sum exceeds the Quantity of all the Bills of Credit now current in the
Province; and yet the Bills of Credit continued at Par with Silver till the
Year 1713, and were not in the least depreciated by their immoderate Quantity,
though l. 88,000 of it, which was then equal to l. 352,000 was emitted within the
Year 1711, and the Bulk of the Remainder was all issued in the Compass of a few
Years before; which seems to be a full Demonstration that the depreciating of
the Bills from 40 to 495 per Cent. Advance, (the middle Price of Exchange at
this Day) is not primarily owing to the immoderate Quantity of the Emissions of
the Paper Currency in the subsequent Years; though I doubt not but it has
frequently contributed toward it at such particular Conjunctures, as I have
before mentioned. -- The true Account of the Matter is this; The Trade of the
Province had till this Time been in very flourishing Circumstances; the
Massachusetts Bay formerly supplied not only the rest of New England, but the
Colonies of New York, the Jerseys, Pennsylvania, and other Parts of the
Continent, even as far as South Carolina, with the chief Part of their English
and other European Goods, and carried on a very large Cod-Fishery at Canso, and
a considerable Whale-Fishery in it is own Bay, supplied the English West Indies
wholly with Lumber and live Stock, and Jamaica and Barbados with great Part of
their Wines from Madeira and the Cape de Verd Islands, drove a large Trade to
the Bay of Honduras, Surinam, Newfoundland, Holland, the Streights and the
Mediterranean; by all which it was furnished with a Variety of Returns to
England besides Silver and Gold and Bills of Exchange in great Abundance; and
with these Advantages it had a Silver Currency of it is own Coinage; But as it
wholly lost some of these Branches of Trade, and others in Part, the Cod
Fishery in particular by the Encroachments of the French upon the Canso
Fishery; and the Trade of Newfoundland by their Encroachments on the British
Fishery; and their Whale Fishery was much decayed by the Whales being beat off
the fishing Ground 'till the last Year, when they in some Measure returned into
the Bay; The Balance of Trade with Great Britain has by Degrees not only
drained the Province entirely of it is Gold and Silver Currency, so that those
Species are become a mere Merchandise, but has of late Years constantly
exceeded the Quantity of Gold and Silver imported from Time to Time into the
Province from the West Indies, and the Bills of Exchange to be purchased within
it so much, that by raising the Price of 'em from Time to Time it has
depreciated the Bills of Credit by Degrees to their present fallen Value.

The preceding Account of the Difference between the nominal Sum and real
Value of the Bills of Credit current in this Province in 1712, and the nominal
Sum and Value of Bills now current will furnish us with the following
Observations. First, That though the nominal Sum of the Bills of Credit now
current in the Province, computed in Bills of the same Tenor and Denomination
with those which were current in the Year 1712, vastly exceeds the nominal Sum
of the Bills then current, yet their real Value or Quantity is much less than
that of the Bills, which were current in that Year, so that the immoderate
Emissions of Bills since that Time, instead of increasing, have much diminished
the Medium of Trade; which is one very remarkable Mischief of the excessive
Quantity of 'em. Secondly, That it is impossible absolutely to fix the Value of
the Bills of Credit under the present Circumstances of the Trade of this
Province, and that the utmost, which can be done for the Creditor, is to secure
to him the Value of his outstanding Debts against the depreciaring of the
Bills. Thirdly, That this demonstrates how unfit Bills of public Credit are to
serve as a Medium of Trade in New England, and the great Wisdom of His
MAJESTY's Royal Instruction to the Governors of his two Provinces there
restraining 'em to Emissions of Bills for the necessary Support of his
Government only, and to a limited Sum of 'em even for that Purpose. Fourthly,
That notwithstanding his Majesty's two Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay and
New Hampshire are by Virtue of his Royal Instructions to the respective
Governors of 'em limited in their Emissions of Bills of public Credit, as to
the Sums allowed to be current at one and the same Time, and such Sums to be
only for the necessary Support of his Majesty's Government within those
Provinces, yet as the Bills of public Credit emitted by the two Colonies there
will always from the Circumstances of the Trade between them, and the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, obtain a general Currency within that Province
(notwithstanding the utmost Endeavors of the Massachusetts Government to
prevent it) and the two Colonies are at Liberty to emit such Quantities of
Bills upon Loan, as are not only sufficient to supply themselves with a Medium
of Trade within their own Government, but also with a surplus Stock to purchase
whatever Merchandises they want from the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, or
to lend any Sums to the Inhabitants of that Province upon personal or real
Security, the Inhabitants of the four Governments in New England considered
collectively will be at Liberty to supply themselves with what Quantity of
Paper Medium they please, notwithstanding the Restrictions laid on the
particular Governments of the two Provinces; for though neither the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay nor of New Hampshire should be permitted to issue out one
Bill, yet they would be supplied with whatever Sums they desired from the
Colony of Rhode Island in particular, five Sixths of whose Bills, to the amount
of at least l. 350,000 old Tenor, are already circulating within the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay; and His Majesty's Instructions to his Governors of
his two Provinces, though the most exact Obedience should be paid to 'em, would
wholly lose their intended Effect as to remedying the Mischiefs arising to the
British Merchants in particular from an unlimited Paper Currency in New England.

And I think, Sir, upon the whole, that were the same Regulations of the Paper
Currency to be extended to the two Governments of Connecticut and Rhode Island
as I have beforementioned to have been made in this Province; and those two
Colonies were to be limited in their Emissions of Bills with Respect to the
Sums allowed to be current at one and the same Time within each of 'em, in
which Case I shall suppose the whole Sum allowed among all the four Governments
would not exceed the Value of l. 60,000 Sterling at the most, and those Sums to
be restrained to the necessary Support of his Majesty's Government, and secured
to be drawn in by Funds of Taxes equal to the Sums emitted, in the same or next
succeeding Year at furthest, and the Bills of all the four Governments to have
the Advantage of being received at their respective Treasuries at 5 per Cent.
Advance, it would go far toward restoring a Silver and Gold Currency, (the
only proper Medium of Trade) in New England, would prevent in a great Measure,
though not absolutely, the depreciating itself of the Bills of Credit, and bid
fair for curing all their mischievous Effects.

Since I began this Letter the Governor made a Speech to the Assembly on the
9th Instant upon the Subject of the Bills of Credit of the Colonies of
Rhode Island and Connecticut, setting forth the pernicious Effects of 'em with
Regard to this Province, which as it seems to have had a remarkable Influence
upon the Members of the Assembly and the People in general, I shall here
transcribe: Viz.

Gentlemen of the Council and House of Representatives,

THE chief Occasion of my calling you together at this Time is to lay before
you, for your Consideration, the State of the Province with Respect to the
Bills of Credit on the neighboring Governments: -- Of these there may be
reckoned to be now current among us the Sum of l. 400,000 computed in Bills of
the old Tenor, viz. l. 350,000 of it in Bills of the Colony of Rhode Island,
and l. 50,000 in those of the Colony of Connecticut: Upon this Sum the
Inhabitants of this Province have by the general depreciating of the Bills from
l. 450 to 485 per Cent Advance, which seems to be the middle Price of the
present Exchange, lost within these nine Months l. 25,000 old Tenor, which the
Inbitants of the two Colonies have gained (some small Deduction for the Bills
of this Government, which may be current within the Colonies, only excepted) --
And on looking back to the Year 1734, in which the Bills of Credit depreciated
a third Part of their whole Value, I find that the Province then lost upon l.
320,000 of the Bills of those two Colonies, which may be computed to have been
at that Time current in it, upwards of l. 106,000 old Tenor, (such Deduction as
I have beforementioned only excepted) -- and whoever would make a minute
Calculation of the Losses sustained by this Province from Time to Time upon the
several Depreciations of the Bills of the two beforementioned Governments
current among us, will, I doubt not, find 'em amount to l. 180,000 old Tenor at
least: This of it self would be a grievous Loss to the Community, was it to
stop here; but as we may very reasonably expect further large Emissions of
these Bills, and (if we may judge by our present Proportion of those already
extant, what our Share of their future Emissions will be) that five sixths of
the Rhode Island Bills, and more than half of those of Connecticut, or at least
some other large Proportion of 'em will center in this Province; and that under
the present Circumstances of our Trade, and of the Bills of these Colonies, the
depreciating of the Bills in general will continue to be unavoidable, how
insupportabl^ ^^is Community must it is growing Loss be?

The Loss already sustained by it is Inhabitants, like other general Losses of a
Community, may not have been sufficiently regarded by 'em, especially as the
Bills of this Government have depreciated pari passu with the Bills of the
Colonies, and all of 'em have had a promiscuous Currency among us, so that the
Loss arising upon the Bills of the Colonies have not been separated and
distinguished from that, which arises upon the Bills in general; but it is
evident that every Person must share in it more or less, and the Debtors, who
are subject by the late Province Law to make an Allowance to their Creditors
for the depreciating of the Bills, must feel it in a particular Manner.

I have hitherto, Gentlemen, only observed to you the Loss arising to the
Province by the depreciating of the Bills of the two Colonies in our Hands,
which must be sustained, though the Bills should be finally redeemed from the
Possessors: But what just Grounds have we to conceive any such Expectations? Or
with what are they to be redeemed? The present Emissions of the Rhode Island
Government may be reckoned to amount in the whole to about l. 440,000, l.
70,000 of which appears to be sufficient for the Medium of their own Trade, and
to defray the Charges of their Government: The l. 350,000 current in this
Province is a surplus Stock, with which the Inhabitants of the Colony have
purchased European Commodities from the Merchants and Traders of this Province:
Is there any Prospect of finding Vent for this immoderate Sum by the Purchase
of any Merchandises within their Colony? This cannot be expected 'till the whole
Trade of this Province shall be transferred to them; and it may be a Question
whether even Part of that would be easily accepted by 'em; for it is certainly
more eligible for 'em to purchase British Manufactures in Boston with their
Colony Bills, than to remit their own Substance for 'em to Great Britain: I
will suppose, and doubt not but that the Government of Rhode Island will call
upon the Borrowers of these Bills to discharge their Bonds, when their distant
Periods shall arrive; but can we reasonably depend upon their compelling their
own Inhabitants to redeem the Bills outstanding in this Province with their
Houses, or Lands, or any other Part of their Estates? May they not rather
assist 'em with further Emissions of Bills to enable 'em to pay off their old
Debts to the Rhode Island Government: And will not the Consequence of that be
to augment the Quantity of their Colony Bills, which the Inhabitants of this
Province have already current among 'em, in so excessive a Degree as that the
Province must at last sink under the Loss arising to it by 'em: The Circulation
of the Bills among our selves may possibly hide the pernicious Effects of 'em
to the Province for some Time; But can it be reasonably thought that a
Circulation of Bills without any Prospect of their Redemption by the Government
that emitted 'em, and with very little other Value to this Province at the
bottom, than what they receive by the Circulation it self in the Province,
should not fail in a few Years; and what a Scene of Distress and Ruin that
would produce in the Province I need not tell you.

These, Gentlemen, are Matters, that demand your closest Attention, and the
most speedy Redress: What will it avail the Province for this Government to
take due Care of the Regulation of it is own Bills, if it must still be exposed
to be ruined by the immoderate Quantities of the Bills of it is Neighbors,
emitted for no other visible Purpose, than to be sunk in this Province; whereby
they have it in their Power to become Masters of whatever Share of our
Substance and our Trade they shall be pleased to take in exchange for their
Bills.

As to the proper Method for procuring the Redemption of the Bills of these two
Government already introduced among us, or preventing the Introduction of more
of 'em into the Province, I should be glad if I could suggest to you any Thing,
which it may be in the Power of this Government to do further than what they
have already done: In 1738 an Act with a considerable Penalty in it was passed
for preventing the Bills of any of the neighboring Governments, which had been
emitted since the first Day of May in the same Year, or should afterward be
emitted, from being uttered in this Province, unless they were made redeemable
by lawful Money upon good Security within ten Years after their first Emission,
and it should so appear by the Tenor and upon the Face of the Bills: But this
you are sensible, Gentlemen, had not any Effect to check the Currency of 'em
among us before September last, when a Proclamation was issued with the Advice
and Consent of his Majesty's Council to enforce the Observation of it upon all
His Majesty's Subjects within this Province in general, and the civil Officers
within it in particular: This I hope may have had it is proper Effect upon the
Officers, but doubt much whether it has had any upon others: And in June last a
Committee was appointed by the General Court on Behalf of this Province to
treat with such other Gentlemen, as might be appointed by the three
neighboring Governments on their Parts, in order to project some Measures for
preventing the further depreciating of the Bills of Credit of the respective
Governments, or otherwise to consider of some Method for bringing 'em to a
Period in such Matter, as should be just and equal, and most for the Interest
of the Inhabitants of these Governments: And I am informed by Mr. Secretary
that he sent Letters of Advice concerning this Matter to the several
neighboring Governments, desiring their Concurrence in these Measures, but
without having received any Answer from 'em. -- If any Thing can be still
further done for remedying these Mischiefs by this Government, I shall readily
concur with you in it.

Gentlemen,

Whatever some Persons may persuade themselves, it is certainly an Error to
think that any of His Majesty's Colonies have the Privilege conferred upon 'em
by Charter to make Money; Coinage is an undoubted Part of the Royal
Prerogative, and the Practice of striking Bills of public Credit to pass in
Lieu of Money stands solely upon the Royal Indulgence, and is warrantable no
further than it is necessary for the Support of His Majesty's Government within
the Colony or Province, that uses it: The Bills of this Government, which have
been issued within these last ten Years, stand indeed upon a different
Foundation from that of the Bills of the two beforementioned Colonies: They
have been emitted by formal Acts of the Legislature, which have received the
Sanction of His Majesty's Royal Approbation: And they are no less distinguished
from those of the two Colonies by their Quality, having been emitted only to
defray the necessary Expenses of Government, and being secured to be drawn back
into the Treasury generally at such reasonable Periods, as the Circumstances of
the People would bear, by sufficient Funds of Taxes, which is the proper
Government Method for raising public Money: The whole Arrear of Bills lately
outstanding beyond their stated Periods are now drawing in by Executions issued
in general against all the deficient Constables and other Collectors of Taxes
throughout the Province, and will be very speedily sunk: And the sinking of the
Bills of the new Tenor, whose Periods are not yet arrived, at the Time limited
by their Emission Acts, are by a late Provision made in the Acts themselves
secured from all Danger of being postponed: The Government has now secured to
Creditors the full Value of their outstanding Debts against the future
depreciating of it is Bills, and has lately paid the Possessors a very large Sum
in Satisfaction for the past depreciating of 'em.

And I should think, Gentlemen, if it was even possible that the saving of this
Province from the great Loss which it must sustain, unless the Redemption of
that immoderate Sum in the Bills of the two Colonies already Current in it is
procured, and from the further Loss which it must incurr by their future
Emissions of Bills, unless they are limited in 'em could seem a small Matter in
your (...) that it would still be a Point of Prudence in you to concert proper
Measures for vindicating, in Case of a Parliamentary Inquiry into the Mischiefs
which I have mentioned to you, the Justice of this Government and the Credit of
it is Bills from all possible Imputation of those Abuses, which the other
Governments may possibly be deemed to have committed in their Emissions; and by
a proper Representation of the different Circumstances of the Bills of this
Government from those of the two Colonies to secure 'em from the Danger of
being involved in the Censure and Condemnation, which the Colony Bills may be
exposed to the Danger of. -- But these Measures I shall leave to your own
Determination; and you may depend upon my ready Concurrence with you in any
Thing, which shall appear to be for the real Interest of the Province upon this
Occasion, etc.

The Departure of the Vessel, by which this will be conveyed to you, will not
permit me to delay the closing of it, till I can inform you what particular
Resolution the Assembly will come into upon this Occasion: But it is apparent
by their Proceedings hitherto, that the Governor's Speech has opened the Eyes
of all the Members to discern the pernicious Consequences of the immoderate
Quantity of Bills of Credit in general, and seems to have entirely weaned their
Affections from the Connecticut and Rhode Island Bills in particular, to
prevent the mischievous Effects of which they seem to be bent upon finding some
Method out before they rise; But what the Result of their Deliberations will be
must communicated in my next.

In the mean Time I must observe, that this sudden Change of the Sentiments of
the Assembly in general, some few Gentlemen in it only excepted, who were
before appriz'd of the ill Consequences of the Use of Bills of Credit further
than the necessary Charges of his Majesty's Government required, and the
weaning of their Affections so far from a Paper Medium of Trade at once, must
be very much attributed to the Governor's opening (...) Eyes of the Debtors in
particular with Respect to their ^^are in the several Mischiefs he had pointed
out in his Speech: Had he made the same Speech to 'em before he had introduced
the late Law passed for obliging the Debtors to make an Allowance to their
Creditors for the depreciating of the Bills and carried it into Execution among
'em, it may well be questioned whether his Excellency could have wro't the same
Conviction in 'em, or at least have had the same Influence upon 'em, whilst
they themselves were Gainers by the depreciating of the Bills: But as the
Tables are now turned upon 'em by the late Province Law, the plain unavoidable
Consequence was to engage their most hearty Endeavors for fixing the Value of
the Bills, and putting an End to the immoderate Quantities of 'em usually
circulating before within the Province, so that the present Crisis of the Paper
Currency within all the four New England Governments may be as justly imputed
to the Effect of the beforementioned Law introduced into this Province for
securing the Value of outstanding Debts, as to the Influence which this
Representation of the other Mischiefs enumerated in the Governor's Speech, and
which the Members of the Assembly had not seen before in the same strong Light,
might have: And had not both together made a very deep Impression indeed upon
'em, they would never have been brought into the same unanimous Disposition for
redressing the Mischiefs in some Way or other, which at present appears in 'em.

I am, Sir, Your etc.


