THE FULFILLING OF THE SCRIPTURE. OR An Essay showing the exact Accomplishment
of the WORD of GOD, in his WORKS performed and to be performed. For confirming
of Believers, and convincing Atheists of the present Time: Containing some rare
HISTORIES of the Works and the Servants of GOD in the Church of SCOTLAND.

By the Reverend Mr. Robert Fleming, Late Pastor of a Church in Rotterdam.

With a Preface by Mr. Foxcroft, Pastor to the first Church in Boston.

ACT.1. 16. This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled -- JOH. 10. 35. --
And the Scripture cannot be broken. BOSTON, New England, Printed by ROGERS and
FOUL, for NATHANAEL PROCTER at the Bible and Dove in Ann-street, near the
Drawbridge. 1743.

To the READER.
THIS excellent Book, The Fulfilling of the Scriptures, has long been a
celebrated Piece, and much read in a great Part of the Protestant World; as to
should seem by the numerous Editions of it, in various Countries. It found such
Entertainment at its first Publication, that quickly there was a new Impression
[Anno 1671.] When the Author revised his Work, and made considerable
Enlargements in the Body of it (constantly distinguishing those Additions, with
this Mark both before and after) and further added an Appendix, to lead us into
some practical Reflections, and proper Uses of the whole. -- It Is from this
Edition, with such Alterations and Improvements, that the present Impression is
done.

Being desired to revise the Copy, before it went to the Press, I found a
Multitude of typographical Errata, which according to my best Skill I
endeavored to amend; though upon a Review I observe, some lesser Mistakes have
escaped the Printer's or my Correction, especially in the Pointing, which seems
a little to cloud the Sense in several Places: but such Care has been used,
that I hope no very great Errors have been committed in this Impression.

In some Instances, with Regard to the Diction, I have presumed to use the like
Liberty, as the late Rev. Mr. DANIEL BURGESS, in republishing another valuable
Performance of the same Author, has done before me. Besides the Authority of
his Example, I have this Apology to make in his Words. "No Lion found I in my
Way: but a sorry Worm I counted the Exclamation of some nice Folk, against the
Phrase and Style of this confessedly excellent Work. Dutifully I compassionated
the weak; and no less the many sick, of Curiosity: Who have such Ulcers in
their Palates, that they cannot, without cruel Pain, swallow the most desirable
Dainties, unless they may take them in Oil and Sugar; cannot prevail with
themselves to read Periods that require an attentive Mind, and the least Strain
of their Understanding. Wherefore I used my Sponge, and took out as many
Expressions of my Author's native Language, that I thought would disturb an
English Reader; substituting such as appeared sufficiently intelligible." But
where important Matters of Fact are related, I have thought it best to leave
the Language altogether untouched.

The first and other Editions of the present Treatise were anonymous: But I
have taken the Freedom to prefix the reputed Writer's Name to this: Though not so
much upon the Credit of Tradition and common Fame, as of an express Testimony,
the said Mr. BURGESS has left us of the Fact; who having discovered the Author
( about the Year 1693) corresponded with him, then living in Holland, and drew
him out of his affected Secrecy. In his Edition of the Treatise, entitled, The
confirming Work of Religion, he has ( to do Honor to the Writer) inserted in
the Title Page this Clause, "Written by R. FLEMING, Author of The Fulfilling of
the Scriptures." And in his Epistle to the Reader he has the following
Paragraphs, which I take Leave to transcribe into mine.

"The highest Angels are most humble Creatures: The Church of God is full of
their Services; but knows next to nothing of their Names. Their Works praise
their Lord and ours, but not themselves. And if the evangelical Author of this
Book could have had his Will, the Churches of Christ should not have had his
Name. He would have kept himself together a Benefactor and a Sort of Stranger
unto them.

"Against his Will it came to be known, that his Book of the Fulfilling of the
Scriptures was his. And by the divine Providence it was made necessary, that
his latter Works should bear his Name. Obscurity was his Ambition; though his
Gifts and Graces prove too big and too bright to be covered. And, in short, it
has pleased the supreme Ruler (and Fountain of Honor) to honor him whether
he would or no.

"The Book first named [ The Fulfilling of the Scriptures] is followed with the
Eulogies of the greatest DIVINES; and is a Manna sweet to the Taste of all
serious Christians. His Epistolary Discourse, dedicated to the Queen's Majesty,
was most graciously accepted by Her, and highly valued by those that I must
think the best of her Subjects. Being, as is his Discourse of Earthquakes, a
Treasure of Things old and new; Michtams, golden Jewels; Arguments, several,
not so much as touched by any Pen within her Dominions, or beyond them, save
Mr. FLEMING's."

The said Rev. Editor has added, The JUDGMENT of some London-Ministers
concerning one of his Treatises, who say, "We give our great Thanks to the
Author of every good Gift, who has drawn this his richly furnished Scribe, to
supply us with so very needful a Treatise, as is here offered. Some of us do
profess, that in reading it we were surprised with Joy, and with Wonder, that a
Topic so little written, discoursed, or thought of, should be treated on with
such Depth of Judgment, and with such Experience as is rarely found in the most
laudible Writers. Through the divine Blessing which we implore, we hope, that we
and our Brethren throughout these Nations shall find good Success of our
People's Use of this most instructive Work. For which, with the excellent
Author, (who did but consent to this Edition of it) we are indebted unto the
Reverend and worthy Publisher, by whose Means we receive it. We join with both
of them, in Prayer to the Most High, that this rich Seed of the Sower may be
made Bread of Life to the Eater." -- The above Attestation is signed by the
late Dr. BATES, Mr. MEAD, Mr. COLE, Mr. HOW, Mr. SYLVESTER, Dr. WILLIAMS, and
Mr. SHOWERS, some of the most burning and shining Lights among the dissenting
Ministers of the last Age.

After so ample and honorable Testimonies from such eminent Hands, and
contemporary with Mr. FLEMING, it were a needless and a vain Attempt in me, to
offer at any Thing, further in Praise of the Author of The Fulfilling of the
Scriptures, or in order to bespeak a welcome Reception of this his Performance
among us. -- I trust it will be found a Word in Season.

I shall take Occasion here to observe, that when I deliberate on Mr. FLEMING's
Monuments of Grace in former Days, particularly his Accounts of that memorable
WORK of GOD in the West of Scotland about the Year 1625, and That in Ireland
about three Years after ( recorded in this Book, Page 393, 394.) and then view
in a comparative Light some recent Accounts from Scotland of a Revival of
Religion there, together with what we have seen and heard of the late
remarkable Work in our English America; I cannot but concur in Sentiments with
such as believe a near Resemblance, in many Respects, between the several
Cases: I behold a surprising Display of Divine Power and Grace, a very
conspicuous Ministration of the SPIRIT, in each of these admirable Instances;
and desire to give GOD the Glory due to his great Name. I think, we have in the
Months past seen among these Churches, what Mr. FLEMING distinguishes by the
Name of more solemn Times of the SPIRIT, and high Spring-Tides of the Gospel,
whence a great Flight of Souls to Christ usually follows, with various other
observable Events. [ See Page 134, -- 140.]

I am aware indeed, that some Circumstances of the late religious Commotion (
as they call it) are Matter of Stumbling to many, and have occasioned much
Debate, both in private Conversation, and in public Discourse and Writing. But
I think, none deny, that uncommon Impressions, of a religious Aspect, have been
prevalent of late in many Places, through out all New England, and the Provinces
adjacent. And I judge it worthy a particular Remark, concerning those who
account for the Rise and Progress of these religious Impressions by the
Principles of Enthusiasm, or the Laws of Mechanism, resolving them into no
better Original than an overheated Brain, a Fire in the Imagination, and a
Tumult in animal Nature; yet the more sober and impartial Inquirers, among
those who view the Affair in this Philosophical Light, have nevertheless made
such frank and full CONCESSIONS, with Regard to the happy Termination of these
unusual Impressions in numerous Instances, which I suppose Ingenuity and the
Force of a rational Conviction drew from them, as are enough ( one would think)
to rebuke their Incredulity, and to silence their ignorant Invectives against
the Times, who (in open Contradiction to the great Rules of Piety, Charity,
Truth, and Decency toward their Superiors) may have presumed to declare the
late mavelous Work of GOD among us a mere Scene of Delusion and Imposture,
and to absolutely pronounce the Accounts of it romantic Deceivings, which some
of our most experienced, wise, and learned, both in the Magistracy and
Ministry, have given the Public.

I find it expressly confessed, by some in the Opposition to this uncommon
Appearance, that they will not deny, there is a GREAT DEAL of that among us,
which must be acknowledged to be true Religion, mixed with that which some may
think to be the Effect of Imagination. -- They say, they do not deny, that
there may be a Mixture of real Christianity with great Enthusiasm. -- And they
doubt not, the unusual Appearance among us has been a Means to rouse MANY, who
were before thoughtless; and to quicken MANY, who had fallen into a Slumber.
They are not against allowing, that a GOOD NUMBER of Sinners have (probably)
been converted into Saints; and as GREAT a Number of Saints enlivened in their
Christian Work. -- I find them repeatedly acknowledging, they are of Opinion,
that the Appearances among us -- have been the Means of awakning the Attention
of many; and a GOOD NUMBER, they hope, have settled into a truly Christian
Temper. -- In a Word, they say, That Good has been done, is granted on all
Hands; but it is denied by many, that near so much has been done, as to
warrant this high Encomium upon the Work. -- [ These are Passages occurring in
sundry printed Pieces, French Prophets, Page 100, 102. -- Letter to Mr.
Wishart, P. 21. -- Religious Commotions in N. E. Pref. P. 2.
which I thought it worth while to collect, and thus present in one View before
the Reader.] Now I gladly accept these Concessions, as some Testimony to a
special Presence and Power of the SPIRIT OF GRACE in the late remarkable
Season; although their intended and real Meaning may possibly be only this, That
while our unhappy Case has been, "Enthusiasm raging," and "the superstitious
Panick running very high," a merciful GOD has interposed, and controuled these
strange "Fervours of Imagination," has "sanctified these Impressions to the
spiritual Advantage of many," and wonderfully overruled in this Affair, to
produce gracious Effects, contrary to the natural Operation of second Causes;
bringing Good out of Evil, and fetching Meat out of the Eater. -- Well, were
this a just Construction of the Ma^^^^, What then? Notwithstanding, every Way,
whether in Pretense, or in Truth, Christ is preached, and CHRIST is exalted,
his Body increased by the winning of many Souls: And I therein do rejoice; yea,
and I will rejoice. However, though I thus speak, I am clearly of Opinion, the
State of the Case ought to be otherwise represented: and I believe, it will be
no Mis-application of Simeon's Declaration, if I say in the Language of that,
God AT THE FIRST did visit these Lands, to take out of them a People for his
Name. For I am persuaded, that the religious Impressions, so general among us,
owed their Rise, as well as Progress, and happy Issue (in the confessedly
multiplied Instances hereof) to the exceeding Grace of GOD, and a special
Influence of his Holy SPIRIT. -- Though, I Am not insensible, while good Wheat
has been sowing in Abundance, the Enemy of all Righteousness has been
uncommonly buisy in mingling his Tares: Nevertheless, still I must say, I look
upon it to have been a Day of Visitation, a signal Day of the Mediator's Power:
And that his Name is near, his wondrous Works declare; both his Works of common
Grace in Conviction and Reformation, and his Works of special Grace in
Conversion, in progressive Sanctification, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost.

Pursuant to the late TESTIMONY of a numerous Body of Ministers, I Am truly glad
to find those very worthy Persons, the Rev. and aged Mr. STONE and Mr. LORING,
notwithstanding the Difficulties that seem to incumber their Thoughts, in
Relation to the unusual Appearances among us, and certain Articles of Conduct,
which they enumerate and declare against; yet so far joining with their
Brethren, as to give the Public the following Attestation. These are some of
their Words. -- "That there is a SIGNAL Work of the HOLY GHOST of late, to and
fro in New England, SUPERIOR to what has been in many past Years, seems
evident; and that the great JEHOVAH is for it to be adored by us. But there
doubtless is a very grievous Failure in many Professors, in their not
distinguishing between the good Seed sowed in the Field, and the Tares sowed by
an Enemy, i. e. the Devil. -- In what appears of late among us, there seems
evidently to be the Work of the Holy Ghost, in convincing, humbling, and
converting Souls; and as evidently, a Work of the Devil, in promoting what
tends to blast and ruin that Work."

To which I would add, in this complex State of Things, I think, we have a
notable Discovery of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures. This Book may administer
much Light and many seasonable Tho'ts, in such a Coincidence of Facts.

We should be equally cautious, What we ascribe to the HOLY SPIRIT's Influence,
and lest we deny or disparage What is of the HOLY GHOST; and has his Signature.
-- Therefore I think it meet to record here a Paragraph in a late Protestation
presented to the Philadelphia-Synod, by the Rev. Messi. Dickinson, Pierson,
Pemberton, etc. " WE protest against all th^se Passages in any of the
Pamphlets, lately published in these Parts, which seem to reflect upon the Work
of divine Power and Grace, that has been carrying on in so wonderful a Manner,
in many of our Congregations: and declare to all the World, that we look upon
it to be the indispensable Duty of all our Ministers, to encourage that
glorious Work with their most faithful and diligent Endeavors. And we in like
Manner protest and declare against all divisive and irregular Methods and
Practices, by which the Peace and good Order of our Churches have been broken
in upon."

To this I subscribe -- THOMAS FOXCROFT.
Boston, Sept. 16. 1743.
The Author's Epistle to the READER.
READER,
IT is like you may expect some account of the rise and occasion of this
Discourse; that on so great and weighty a subject, so small an Essay should
venture abroad; especially in a time, when it seems more safe and prudent, to
keep silence, to be swift to hear, and slow to speak, which seldom has an
after-challenge. The Author will say little for his apology herein, though he
hops, he may find it more easy to satisfy others, than he did himself. This
freedom only he (...) take, to confess, that sometimes it has been matter of
earnest, yea, has caused some tossing and exercise upon his spirit, and
pressed a more serious enquiry and search, with a respect to his own case, to
be persuaded about the Scripture's divine authority, that Godliness is not an
empty name or shadow, but of an undoubted truth, what indeed of all other
things is the greatest, and of most near concernment. And truly about that,
this grave convincing argument of the Scripture's certain Accomplishment, has
not only often stared him in the face, with a satisfying discovery and impression
thereof, as a most quieting and unansweroble demonstration of the truth; but he
must also say, that by very remarkable confirmations from the Lord this has
been so convincingly witnessed to his Experience, as leaves him under
engagement (were such a poor testimony of weight) to put his seal to the Word,
that it falls not to the ground, neither does the promise of God fail.

It is a dark time now with the Church of Christ; which we see every where
almost suffering and afflicted, whilst the whole earth besides seems to be at
ease; Christians also even beyond others in their private lot, assaulted with
very sharp trials; though, I think, suffering may be the least of our fear at
this day, while Atheism does now appear on so formidable a growth, and has a
more threatening aspect, than the rage or violence of men. We see a sad decay
likewise on the Churches abroad; Religion every where under a great
consumption, and wearing out, that seems to have reached it in its vital
parts: Men search after an unusual way of sinning, as if they scorned to be
wicked at a common and ordinary rate; prejudice easily taken up and entertained
against the way of God; whilst the good man does (alas!) perish, without any
affecting observation thereof; the choice and excellent of the earth plucked
away, and none to fill their room; Christians burials now frequent, but the
birth and in-bringing of such to the Church, rare. This is indeed a sad
subject, and so much the sadder, that few are sound whose eye affects their
heart, whose tears and groaning seem to answer such a stroke and ruin which now
is like to fall under our hand: but I shall leave this. Prayer will be the best
cure, and is this day more fit, than complaining, to turn unto him, who sees
the ways of his People, that he may heal them, and can prevent those with
mercy, who seem least fit for the same. -- Only two or three sad remarks of
this time, I cannot altogether pass; which indeed are strange symptoms of the
Church's present case and distemper. -- (1.) To see men own the doctrine of
sanctification, who yet can professedly disown, yea, make it their work by
reproach to beget a prejudice against the practice thereof. On strange! to find
such as will dip their pen in gall against a tender and strict walk in
Religion, and revile it in the power thereof; whilst they do not deny those
truths, and principles, that necessarily oblige to such a tender practice; who,
in the most grave concerning duties of Christianity, think it enough to charge
their brethren with Pharisaical Ostentation, and Hypocrisy, whilst they must
confess these duties to be unquestionably binding; and that they can be no
competent judges of such a challenge, which the great witness of the heart and
in ward parts of of men can only determine. (2.) It is a sad remark also of the
time, that Protestant Writers, professing the reformed Religion, shall state
themselves in opposition to the most concerning grounds thereof, such as
imputed righteousness, and justification by faith, which is well called
Articulus stantis et cadentis Ecclesiae. I cannot have that charity, that it is
from ignorance, but from a height of malice, that some of ^ate reproach the
Protestant doctrine, in this great fundamental of justification; as if it
pressed believing and resting upon Christ without respect to works and
holiness. I confess, we put not inherent righteousness in the room of imputed;
though we assert each is necessary in their own place, the one in order to our
right, the other in order to our actual and full possession of that right, yea,
that holiness is absolutely necessary, not only necessitate precepti, sed
medii; and justifying faith does necessarily require works, sed non qua, et
quatenus justificat. But sure, if these men grant that we are justified by the
satisfaction of Christ, they must needs confess it is by imputation; since if
the debtor be acquitted by the Cautioners payment, is it not by the Imputation
thereof to him? O sad! to see some put their invention upon the rack how to
wound the Church (yea, a death-wound it would be, if they could reach their
end) in that great truth of imputed righteousness! But it were best they denied
that 6 th ver. of the 4. Chapter to the the Romans to be canonial Scripture, which
none can read, and shift; it being so clear, that the blessed man is there held
forth, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works. Sure that cannot be
inherent righteousness, else it were contradictio in adjecto. I profess, those
(what ever they pretend) I must look on as adversaries to the Reformed
Churches; and there is nothing more dangerous than a pirat going forth under a
counterfit flag. -- (3.) Is it not likewise sad, yea, astonishing to see,
Ministers now in these times, who are the express Ambassadors of Christ given
to the Church for her edification, stand so directly cross to the very end of
their work and Ministry; many, of whom it may be said, that knowingly and
deliberately they oppose piety! That such should persecute, whose work is to
feed; should wound, in stead of healing; grieve the spirit of the Godly, who
should be helpers of their joy! that none are a greater plague, to corrupt the
Church, and cause the sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred, than some of those
who should be the salt of the earth! yea, none more obstruct the treaty of the
Gospel, betwixt Christ and his Church, than Ministers who are called the
friends of the bridegroom! Oh what a strange and astonishing contradiction may
this seem! But it should be no reproach to that holy and excellent calling of
the Ministry; for of such the Scripture has expressly warned. I confess, it may
be said, No Atheist like an unsanctified Minister; yea, no Atheism of so black
a die as theirs, who being still employed about holy things, have yet no sense
thereof.

Now in this very dark hour, wherein the Church seems to have fallen into a
death like pang, and oh many of her Children in a sad lethargy) that if we
looked in an ordinary way, her wound might seem incureable, there are two great
and concerning Quaeries, that I think should much take us up. The one is, to
know what the Scripture speaks to the Church; what solid ground of
encouragement is there held forth? For truly, if we had not that sure testimony
of the Word, we might fear, Religion would quite wear out, and Truth perish
from the earth: but does the Scripture speak peace? all then is well. That (O
that) is sufficient security, to put the Church's hope beyond further debate;
though men should threaten, though the earth were overturned, and the foundation
shaken! This is a determination, above men, above all the rules of humane
policy, yea, above the stars, which frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and
makes diviners mad; even that revealed Counsel of God, taking place about his
work and People.

I know, some grave writers of these late times do express their fear, that the
horrid wickedness and apostasy of the Gentile Church may at last resolve in the
Lord's departure, and an universal darkness; that as the rejection of the Jews
made way for the Gentiles incoming, so their fall may as remarkably preceed
that solemn return and restoration of the Jewish Church; it is also become the
fear of many, that Popery may yet once overrun the whole Reformed Churches,
before Antichrist's fall. But since these sad tho'ts nor any appearance of the
time, are no part of our Bible, we should learn neither to stretch our fears,
nor expectations, beyond that which the Scripture warranteth: and if the Lord
be God, and this his very word, let us adhere to it, and wait for its
accomplishment. -- A second Quere, which is indeed no less concerning in such a
time, may be about Duty: What do so eminent an hazard of the Church, and this
great decay of Christianity, most pressingly call for? But this is a subject
which requires another pen, and too large, to touch with a passing word: yea,
we may say, the great want of these days is not about the discovery of duty,
but of the practice of known, and discovered duties. For the Scripture gives a
certain and distinct found, in the darkest time; and has not left us to
doubtful enquiries, and debate in this matter. I shall therefore leave it, with
a few things only to be in the general considered. (1.) It is sure, that every
time has its present duty; and the wise discerners thereof will know thence
what they ought to do, what work and service the present circumstances of that
time call for. Shall the earth have its seasons, wherein things are beautiful?
shall the stork and swallow know their time? and yet Christians not know how to
bring forth fruit in their season, and discern the special time and opportunity
of duty! (2.) It is also sure, that every Christian, in what soever capacity or
condition, as he has his measure and talent, so has some work, and
opportunity of duty; wherein they may serve the Lord in their generation: yea,
it is not the meanest lot or condition, that shuts that door upon any, that
they have no work for God, who desire to be faithful for him. O that in this
threatening time, when darkness is like to overspread the Church, it were more
upon the hearts of Christians, to strive together, and contend by a serious
improvement of their several capacities, to preserve Religion, and transmit the
knowledge of Jesus Christ to the posterity; that the Christian parent, or
Master of family, did witness more that great resolution, in a time when many
are drawing back, But as for me, I and my house will serve the Lord! -- (3.) It
is found, that the most eminent and honorable service of the Church does
usually befall her in a low and suffering condition. When there has been but
little strength, and many outward disadvantages, then both their call and
furniture has been most observable, to confess the truth, to endure for the
Gospel of Christ, to overcome by the Word of his testimony; a piece of service,
whereto more prosperous times do not give such an opportunity. Yea, it has
been in such a case, Dan. 11. 32. that those who knew their God, were made
strong to do exploits. -- (4.) It does much concern us, to put a high value on
the truth, in a time when men must either lose it, or buy it. And O! what a
choice purchase is that, which cannot be bought too dear, though at the rate of
our liberty, estate, credit and reputation, yea, with the loss of peace, when
it comes in competition with it? For it is that great depositum, once
delivered to the Saints, the inheritance of our Children, that way whereby
Jesus Christ keeps intercourse with his Bride on the earth, yea, the charter
of all our mercies, and of our hope through eternity. -- (5.) Though evety line
of divine truth is inestimble; yet it is sure, there is a more pressing call
for our adherence to that truth, which is most controverted in the time. For it
is the word of his patience, and the matter of our present testimony: and it is
known through all ages, what a singular blessing has followed the contending
and witnessing of a few for the truth (in a torrent of public defection) to
keep it alive, when it was like to be swallowed up; yea, to effects above
rational belief; unus Athanasius contra totum orbem! Many such remarks have not
been wanting. -- (6.) I shall only add, that which is always necessary and
binding, yet we may say in a time of the Church's hazard and suffering is more
pressingly called for, even the study of Christian PRUDENCE; a duty
convincingly necessary, for regulating of duties, according to the
circumstances of the Church's case: which does so nearly concern the interest
and preservation of Religion, that I must say, A breach in that Concord betwixt
ZEAL and Christian PRUDENCE, when there is not some equal respect studied in
the exercise of both, cannot but give the Church a sore WOUND. This is indeed a
large theme; but I shall only point at in three things. 1. In our avoiding and
being tender to give offense; not only to keep a distance from evil, but from
the smallest appearance thereof. I must say, they are bad casuists, and have
little respect to the Churches edification, who make it their work, not so much
to keep men from sin, as to show them, quam prope ad peccatum sine peccato
accedere liceat. O what a becoming fear is that, not to lay a stumbling block
in the way of others, to grieve the weak, or confirm such who use to found
their prejudice against the truth and way of God, upon the miscarriage of such
as profess the same. 2. This excellent study of Christian Prudence has a
respect to men's taking offense, as well as their giving it; to our being sober
in judging, in personal reflections, to cover and hide the infirmities of
others, rather than spread them, even for the Gospel's sake; yea, to shut as it
were our eyes, and cast a mantle on their nakedness, who though overtaken with
the violence of some temptation may yet be serviceable to the Church; but
especially this should press us to a watchful regard of any breach and rent in
the Church, and to study a healing spirit, so far as is possible, without
prejudice to truth. 3. It is also a concerning piece of Christian Prudence, how
to walk wisely toward those who are without, when prejudice against the way of
God is now in such a growth; to study how we may convince, gain ground, and by
Christianly prudent and tender carriage conciliate respect to the truth; and
thus commend holiness, and those who profess it, to the conscience of men; to
study that rule of Expediency much in things of themselves warrantable, what
fitness and advantage present circumstances may offer, or deny for edification
and promoting that great interest of the Gospel in our converse with men.

I shall now cease to trouble you further; only would premise some few things
with a respect to the subject of this following essay. -- (1.) Should we not
with wonder and astonishment look on this great record of the Scripture? by
which the glorious Majesty of God does speak to men, yea does as certainly
communicate his Counsel and mind, we may say more certainly, than if we had an
immediate audible voice from Heaven. O could we have such ordinary thoughts of
this, if we consider how near GOD comes therein to us? I think, if there were
but one corner of the earth, though in the remotest parts, where men might go
and get a look of so wonderful and important a thing as God's express Will
written and sent from Heaven to the earth, about our duty here, and blessedness
for ever, should we not think it worth our crossing the sea, and the greatest
expense of time or labor? It is truly a wonder how we can read and consider
the Scripture, without wondering. -- (2.) It is a great concernment, to know
that the Scripture has such a witness, as Experience! and that there is such a
trade and correspondence as this betwixt the Saints and the Word, which lies
not in the common road of the World. O what an empty thing would Religion be,
if it had not this word Experience in its grammar; that secret and sure mark,
whereby the Christian knows the Scripture is of God; how thus the Lord has
often sealed their instruction in a dark plunge; how life and power, inlivening
influences, to the melting of their heart, have often met them therein a very
dead frame; and now they know that verily God hears prayer: now they are
persuaded, and have learned by the cross, that he is indeed a Comforter; yea,
many can show how by the Word their first acquaintance with the Lord did begin;
how some particular truth, like a grain of corn sown in their heart, by the
blessing of the great husbandman was made to take life, and grow. -- (3.) It
much concerns us, to know what an excellent key the Scripture is to unlock
that sealed book of providence; and that no other key can fit the same; many
have tried another way, but lost themselves on the search, and the more they
attempt by human wisdom, they became the more dark. I truly think, there is not
a more satisfying discovery within time, than this, to trace divine truth back
until we see its first breaking forth out of his eternal decree and council,
who is the author thereof; how thence it takes hold of the word, which is the
adequate sign and declaration of his purpose; and then how the word takes hold
of his work and providence, where we may see the face and condition of the
Church clearly written out through all the changes of time; how providence
keeps a certain and steady course, even amidst the most perplexed motions and
reelings of the earth; yea, how all things, even those which would seem most
contradictory, run within that strait channel of the word, and cannot go
without these bounds. -- (4.) It is the principal and most concerning
Scripture-promises, that are only touched in this following discourse, these
which carry along with them a clear continued series of the Church's condition
through time, and show the most remarkable changes of her lot. For it is clear,
that in diverse prophecies and in a different manner the Spirit does point at
one and the same thing: and truly it should cause no mistake or prejudice, that
we find several of the Scripture-prophecies expressed in such dark terms, since
the wisdom of God saw it fit that for a time these truths should be locked up
and sealed. But now light has so far broken forth with the event, as we may
see how very significant and suitable to the matter these most dark aenigmatick
terms are. -- (5.) We should upon no account shut our ears, where the Scripture
is clear, and gives us ground to hope that the outgoing of the Lord, for his
people in their deliveranee, and for the destruction of his enemies, now in
these last times, shall be very glorious; yea, by some stately and stupendous
acts of providence, that he shall accomplish his judgment on Antichrist:
neither must we take a prejudice at truth, because of the wild Fancies of many
who would extend it beyond its bounds, or that near Resemblance which the Error
of some in this time may seem to have thereto. For that has been an old
stratagem of the Devil, to prejudice the World at some of the truths of God, by
setting up a counterfeit thereto. I shall add no more, only what account is
given, upon the close of the last argument, of some remarkable passages of
providence in the late times, as herein the Author has some confidence to
profess, he did endeavor what could be attained for certainty of the same, and
if any circumstances of these relations should be found a mistake, he dare say
before Him who is greater than our conscience, it was not the neglect of
serious inquiry; so he must also premise, the inserting of them was upon no
further intent, than to be a witness to that truth of the Lord's eminent
appearance for his Church in the last days. It would be of great use and profit
to the Church, that some more fitly qualified would study a more large
Collection of this kind. O that this might go forth with a blessing from Him,
who by the meanest things can serve himself, and promote the edification of his
Church; and that the Lord would raise some up with much of his Spirit, to make
a further search and enquiry into this great and weighty truth.

INDEX.
THE grave subject of the Scripture's accomplishment considered in some special
truths, previously held forth for giving light to the same. 1. I. What is
thereby to be understood, in nine Particulars opened. 2. II. The verification
of the Scripture, considered as the Lord's peculiar work and design in the
World, and in the whole conduct of providence. 7. III. How clear and manifest
this great truth is. 12. IV. That this, notwithstanding of clear demonstrative
evidences of the same, is hid from the most of men, and a great mystery to
them. 15. V. What an unanswerable witness and argument, the fulfilling of the
Scripture is, of its divinity, to satisfy and quiet the soul about this. 21.
VI. That it is a most solacing, and singularly delectable truth. 25. VII. How
much the Godly are concerned, now in these latter times, to study the
fulfilling of the Scripture, and what advantage they have for the same beyond
former ages. 32. VIII. How weighty a duty it is, and on what pressing grounds
it lies at each Christian's door. 36. Five Arguments set down, whence this
truth is in the following treatise largely demonstrated. 40.
The First ARGUMENT,
FRom the solid and sure Experience of the Godly in all ages; which does
witness the real performance of the Scripture. This cleared in five Instances.
41. 1. Instance, That there is a contrariety betwixt the flesh and the spirit,
witnessed by Christian experience, as clearly as it is held forth in the
Scripture. 43. 2. Instance, Of the deceitfulness of man's heart, with that
witness given in from experience thereto. 46. 3. Instance, That there is an
invisible adversary without, as clear and discernable, as that there is
corruption within. 48. 4. Instance, Shows that real intercourse betwixt a
Christian and the promises of the word, by sure experience, and how clea^^^ ^is
may be demonstrated. 51. Some previous considerations, for our right
understanding this. 53. A more particular demonstration in ten special
promises, wherewith the Godly, through their life, have a most usual and
continual trade. 55. 1. The Promise considered with respect to our believing,
and adventuring on the naked word, without any probable appearance of its
fulfilling; and how clearly this is verified. 56. 2. That God hears and answers
Prayer, from solid experience demonstrated. 58. 3. That the pouring out of the
Spirit, and its sealing and mavelous power on the soul, is no delusion, but
certainly known, demonstrated. 61. 4. That light and counsel to the Godly, and
the directing of their steps, according to the promise, is made out to those
who commit their way to God. 65. 5. The promise of pardon and forgiveness, how
it is sealed by experience. 67. 6. The promise to integrity, and encouragement
to the Godly under the cross, verified. 70. 7. The promise to integrity and
uprightness in an evil times 73. 8. That the promise of assistance and strength
for duty, is truly made out and verified. 75. 9. The promise of all things
working together for their good who love God, clearly verified in experience.
77. 10. The great gain and advantage of Godliness, demonstrated according to
the promise. 80. 5. Instance, Holds forth the verification of
Scripture-threatnings, such under whose ^each the Godly may fall. 83. Some
things premised for clearing this. 84. Some special threatenings instanced, with
that witness the experience of Christians bea^s to the (...). 85. A rational
demonstration of the truth and reality of Godliness, and the validity of that
witness which the experience of the Saints in all ages bears to the fulfilling
of the Scripture, from several grounds held forth 95. Several weighty Queries.
103. The great import of this argument from experience, in seven particulars
considered; and what a transport of joy and wondering this, when it is brought
near to our thoughts, may cause. 105. Two eminent witnesses, who have left a
Seal to the Truth. 1^^.
The II. ARGUMENT,
Demonstrates the certain accomplishing of the Scripture from the Church's
continued Observation in all ages. 119. The first Branch of the argument does
witness the Scripture's verification, in those promises which concern the
universal Church. As, 1. That concerning the Church's continuance and
preservation, and how great and mavelous a thing it is, demonstrated. 120. 2.
Her advance and increase; and how in an ordinary way this could not be without
a miraculous and supernatural power. 124. 3. The promise of giving the Spirit,
as it respects the Church, and its accompanying the truth and doc^^ine of
Christ in all ages, demonstrated from clear evidences thereof. 130. 4. How the
Lord has given his Church deliverance in her greatest exigences, according to
the promise thereof. 136. 5. That comprehensive promise of all Things working
together for Good, with respect to the Church, clearly verified, in the
observation of each time. 141. Second branch of the argument demonstrates the
fulfilling of those Scripture-threatnings, which concern the visible Church.
145. Seven instances held forth, wherein this is made clear. 146. Third Branch
of the argument, Does witness the clear verification of the Scripture in those
passages of providence, with seem to the World dark and astonishing, whereat
many are shaken. 154. This demonstration, in 14 instances, followed out; how
those convincingly verify the Scripture, and are great confirmations of the
truth, whereat upon the first appearance we are ready to stumble. As (...) That
with the first stirrings toward the Church's delivery, (...) straits and
trouble seem to increase. 155. 2. A serious endeavor for reformation, and to
promote the Kingdom of Christ, meeting with great interruptions, how it
confirms the Scripture. 156. 3. How a great overclouding and darkness on the
Church, following remarkable manifestations of the glory and power of God, do
clearly verify the truth of the word. 158. 4. That when judgment comes on a
laud, it begins first at the best. 160. 5. That strange success which follows
the worst of men sometimes in an evil course, made clear. 161. 6. Those
disappointments the Church often meets with, when ordinary means seem most
promising. 162. 7. The long continuance of a heavy afflicting rod on the
Church, and what a confirmation this is of the word. 163. 8. That Satan has
usually such a counterfeit of any remarkable work of God set on foot in a land,
cleared. 164. 9. The abounding of error and heresy under the Gospel, more than
under the old Testament, how clearly it answers the Scripture. 165. 10. Those
great stirs and commotions, that often attend the Gospel, when it breaks forth
with power a land. 166. 11. That men of great natural endowments are so usual
opposers of the truth. 167. 12. What strange judgments may befall some of the
saints in their outward lot. 168. 13. The gross falling of some, who have
shined with a great luster once in the Church. 169. 14. The strange contingency
of events in the World, and how this is not at an adventure, but clearly
answers the Scripture. 169. This further commended to our serious study, and
the great concernment thereof held forth, to be observing how clearly the
Scripture is confirmed by these things in the way of the Lord and in the
administra- of his providence, which to many seem grounds of shaking, whence
they are are ready to question the truth. 171. This cleared in ten instances
more added, whence the godly should be more strengthened in the truth; though
they seem at the first look very strange. 1. That the Church of Christ should
be so universally low, when the whole earth besides seems to be at rest. 170.
2. The short-breathings of the Church, under the new Testament, that we see her
lucid intervals usually of so small continuance, and how thus the Scripture is
verified. 177. 3. The wearing out of life and power in the Church so often with
a further increase of light, and how thus the truth is confirmed. 180. 4. That
the great men of the earth, and those who sit in the place of judgment, are so
usually the Church's greatest adversaries. 184. 5. That instruments sometime
eminently useful in the Church, with the change of times, should be found to
change their principles, is a confirming witness also to the truth. 188. 6.
Men's personating godliness and the power hereof at the greatest rate, who on an
after-discovery are found gross hypocrites, how it is no ground for reflecting
on the truth, but should confirm it. 192. 7. Those sad jars and divisions,
which so frequently are seen within the Church, cleared. 195. 8. That the
Lord's immediate band may seem more heavy on his Church and people in suffering
times, than the hand of men, considered. 198. 9. To what a strange height a
judicial stroke of induration on the spirit of men may come, and how thus the
Scripture is confirmed. 201. 10. The righteous falling sometime with the wicked
in a common judgment, whilst some notorious for wickedness may be seen to go to
the grave in peace, cleared. 204.
The III. ARGUMENT,
PRoves the verification of the Scripture, in that to the view and conviction
of the World it is undeniable obvious. P. 206. In 14 Instances this
demonstrated. 1. That man now is fallen from that excellent state, wherein once
he was formed. P. 208. 2. The truth and reality of conversion, and how far this
mavelous change is above nature, demonstrated. P. 210. What true cause there
is of wondering at this great work, and how demonstrative an argument it is of
the grace of God, and truth of the Scripture, further cleared, with an addition
of several evidences more. P. 214. Three remarkable Instances of Conversion. P.
218. 3. The truth of fellowship here betwixt God and the soul, and that this is
no fancy or delusion, made clear to the World. P. 220. 4. That the righteous is
more excellent than his neighbor. P. 223. 5. That the promised encouragement
to the Godly under their sufferings for the truth, falls not to the ground. P.
225. 6. That there is a conscience within men, which clearly answers the
discovery of Scripture about it. P. 228. A further demonstration of this truth,
and how convincing a witness this is against Atheism, held forth. P. 230. 7.
How clearly it is made out, there is a reward for the righteous. P. 233. 8.
That verily there is a God who judges in the earth, demonstrtted to the
conviction of the World, from several clear grounds. P. 236. 9. That there are
evil spirits, and such a diabolical power as the Scripture holds forth,
witnessed. P. 245. 10. The enmity betwixt the Children of God and the World
held forth, and how great a witness it is to the truth. P. 248. 11. That the
creature is made subject to vanity, because of sin, clearly demonstrated to the
World, and the truth of the Scripture therein. P. 250. 12. That the end of the
righteous is peace. P. 259. 13. That great truth of the soul's immortality, and
how mistaken a thing it is, considered and demonstrated from some clear
undeniable arguments. P. 258. How great and astonishing a truth it is, and what
other thoughts men would have thereof, were it rightly understood. P. 264. 14.
That the way of the Lord is perfect, and all his works done in judgment, held
forth. P. 266. This demonstration more particularly followed out; First, in the
whole frame and structure of the visible Church, P. 268. 2. In the conduct and
administration of providence about the Church. P. 271. 3. In the great work and
contrivance of Redemption. P. 276. 4. In that mavelous order and disposal of
the works of God, through the whole creation, and with what a subserviency all
things are framed and directed to some special end, considered. P. 279.
The IV. ARGUMENT,
DEmonstrates the exact accomplishment of the prophetical part of the
Scripture, and the special predictions thereof, in those periods of time to
which they relate. Some things premised thereabout. -- P. 287. I. What is
ALREADY fulfilled, considered. 1. That prophecy of old by Noah concerning the
flood, and its certain taking place held forth. P. 288. 2. How that strange
stroke and judgment on men in confounding their languages, has clearly come to
pass according to the Scripture: and how this in an ordinary way could not have
been brought about, but the very finger of God unanswerably manifest therein,
demonstrated. P. 290. 3. The fulfilling of that which was prophesied concerning
the Church's delivery from Egypt. P. 294. 4. What was promised about the Church
of Israel's more full growth, clearly made out. P. 295. 5. How the Scripture
and Prophecies thereof with respect to the declining times of the Jewish Church
are verified. P. 296. 6. The exact performance of what by Daniel was foretold
concerning the rise and fall of the Monarchies. P. 297. 7. That greatest
Prophecy, which is the intent of the whole Scripture of God, the coming of the
Messiah, how clearly verified to the World in the appointed time. P. 299. A
rational demonstration thereof, from manifest and undeniable grounds, held
forth. P. 300. 8. The sure performance of that remarkable Prophecy of the
incalling of the Gentiles; and how this mavelous work, without a divine
miraculous power, could not be conceived. P. 307. 9. How clearly that dreadful
desolating stroke on the Jews, does verify what was prophesied about it, held
forth. P. 312. 10. How manifest the coming of Antichrist, and his being
revealed to the World, now is in the event. P. 316. Some serious queries about
this great adversary, held forth; to show what an infatuation those must be
under, who cannot see him, when before their eyes so clearly discovered. P.
320. The Author's judgment humbly offered about the number of the beast, and
the meaning of the Scripture therein, with some grounds for clearing the same.
P. 328. 11. What was prophesied about the killing of the witnesses, now made
clear in the event. P. 332. II. What of the Prophetical part of the Scripture
is YET to be accomplished. P. 334. 1. The full ruin of Antichrist and his
kingdom. P. 335. 2. The incalling of the Jews. P. 338. 3. A great flourishing
of the Church, both of Jews and Gentiles. P. 341. 4. Satan's binding, and the
Church's reign with Christ. P. 345. 5. The fall and destruction of the Turkish
Empire. P. 348. 6. Satan's loosing, and the victory over Gog and Magog. P. 349.
The V. ARGUMENT.
THat we have already several grounds of confirmation, and pledges in our hand
to assure us, that what of the Scripture is to be accomplished shall be
certainly fulfilled. P. 351. 1. The very being of the world is one ground. P.
352. 2. Those truths that are of all other most strange, are already
accomplished; as about the coming of the Messiah. P. 359. 3. That Jesus Christ
has begun the war against Antichrist, and the enemies of his Church. P. 361.
4. That the Church's victory over Antichrist is not only begun, but in a great
measure advanced. P. 367. Wherein the Lord's extraordinary providence is no
less discernable, than in the first planting of Christianity by the Apostles,
proved by seven witnesses. 1. The wonderful success the Gospel has had in
these last times. P. 369. 2. The Church in these last times has met with as
sharp assaults of cruel and powerful enemies, as in the primitive times, showed
in several instances P. 371. 3. The wonderful patience, resolution and
cheerfulness of sufferers in these late times; with instances thereof. P. 373.
4. The remarkable judgments of God on opposers of his work, of Reformation from
Antichristianism, in several instances both foreign and domestic, and two more
lately. P. 378. 5. The large measure of the Spirit, that followed the ministry
of the Gospel in these late times, P. 391. besides foreign instances, P. 392.
The Work in the West of SCOTLAND about the year 1625, P. 393, and in Clidesdale
about year 1630, and in Ireland about the year 1628, and thereafter, P. 394.
and in Scotland in the year 1638 and thereafter, P. 396. Instances of
particular Persons, as Mr. Welsh and Mr. Forbes, P. 397. and Mr. Rutherford. P.
398. 6. That extraordinary Apostolic and Prophetic Spirit, that appeared in
some ministers and others raised in these late times, P. 399 As, in SCOTLAND
Mr. John Welsh, P. 400 Mr. Robert Bruce, P. 405. Mr. Davidson, P. 409. Mr.
Patrick Simson, P. 412. Mr. Andrew Melvin, P. 415. Mr. Hugh Kennedy, P. 417.
More of Mr. Robert Bruce, P. 418. and Mr. John Welsh, P. 422. Mr. John
Scrimger, P. 426. Mr. Robert Blair, P. 427. The Lord of Raith, P. 433. Mr.
James Faber, in France. P. 434 In Ireland, Mr. Andrew Steward, P. 436. Mr. John
Steward, Provost of Air, P. 440. A godly Gentlewoman, P. 442. A strange Passage
of Judgment on a wicked Nobleman, P. 445. 7. Those mavelous providence of
God confirming the truth, since the breaking forth of the Gospel; whereof
several rare particulars are mentioned, former and later, at home and abroad,
P. 446.
In the APPENDIX five Inferences.
1. A Christian has from the fulfilling of the Scripture a great advantage for
his establishment. P. 469. 2. There is a special debt on each Christian to bear
witness to the faithfulness of God. P. 473. 3. This debt lies also on the
Church, to witness the Lord's faithfulness, and on every age. P. 479. 4. It is
a duty to discern the times, and enquire seriously thereabout. 487. -- (1.)
What is the present state of the Church. 488. -- (2.) What the present signs of
the times seem to point at, 493, -- (3.) To discern the particular snares and
hazards of the time. 503. -- (4.) What at such a time can the righteous do. 510
5. The Scripture-truths, as they are great and mavelous, they are also in the
evidence of their verification so clear and obvious, as may convince the
greatest Atheist. 517.
ERRATA.
Page 23. lin. 24. blot out the Colon. P. 24. l. 11. r. Righteousness: that --
P. 25. l. 31. r. Contemplate, the P. 29. l. 26. r. us: how -- P. 33. l. 18. r.
vail! When P. 43. l. 23. r. The truth -- P. 50. l. 18. r. ply with -- P. 51. l.
26. r. Devices -- P. 53. l. 17. r. better than that -- P. 61. l. 32. r. 16, 26.
-- P. 67. l. 16. r. true, real -- P. 83. l. 12. r. met with -- P. 84. l. r.
Sluth-hound -- P. 86. l. 16. r. deserting -- P. 90. l. 14. r. Defection -- P.
91. l. 6. r. another Rod -- P. 102. l. 12. r. Antidote -- P. 106. l. ult. r.
cause to -- P. 107. l. 22. r. Sight -- P. 111. l. 10. r. EYPHKA -- P. 120. l.
33. for discouraged, read destroyed. -- P. 122. l. 1. r. 3. We P. 138. l. 30.
for that, read has -- P. 393. l. 29. r. sin) P. 408. l. 31. r. virtute -- P.
422. l. 28. r. Town.

Other Escapes are lest to the Candor of the intelligent Rea^^r.

The Fulfilling OF THE SCRIPTURE.
THERE are two Means by which the blessed Majesty of GOD has chosen to reveal
himself to the sons of men, his WORD and his WORKS: which may be called the two
great Luminaries, for giving Light to the Church, though the one be greater, I
mean does more clearly shine forth, yea, does communicate light to the other.
These, men must not divide, which by so strait a tie the Lord has joined, and
by a mavelous correspondence has set the one over against the other, that it
may be easy to see his faithfulness, and the accomplishment of the Scripture
therein: and indeed this (...) a great concerning truth, that calls for a
serious study, the solid persuasion of which should afford a sweet ground of
repose, and rest for the soul, though the earth were all in a combustion round
about, and give a satisfying answer to our most sollicitous thoughts and fears.
Now this this being the intended subject of the following discourse, I shall
first touch it a little in the general, (...) then hold forth some more
particular grounds, whence it may be clearly demonstrated.

I. That the Scripture of God has a certain Accomplishment here in the World,
and what is to be understood by the same, I shall endeavor to clear in these
things, which would be considered.

1. This is the very unfolding of the Lord's decree, and secret purpose, the
bringing forth of his work, now within time, to the view of Angels and Men,
which was before him in the deep of his thoughts, and Counsel from eternity; it
is an opening up of the sealed Book, which we must not understand to be that
secret Roll of Election, and the Book of Life, wherein the Names of the Elect
are writ; but Liber fatidicus, the sealed Book of God's Dispensations in the
World, showing out his Counsels, and Designs, which should be brought forth in
the After-ages of Time: for as the Lord did fully comprehend what he was to do,
and all that was to befall his Church, and People from the Beginning to the End,
long before there was a Beginning, before the Mountains were formed, so has he
copied, and written out his Heart in the Word about the same, wherein he has
most plainly showed forth, what were his blessed Purposes, and Counsel of old;
and thus the Thoughts of his Heart, his Word and his Works do sweetly agree,
and each one wonderfully answers to another. For his Work does bring forth, and
accomplish his Word, that his Decree and Counsel from all Eternity may take
Place.

2. The Scripture's Accomplishment is the Transcript and Writing of it over in
Providence: where we may see and admire how the Word does shine upon all the
Paths and Footsteps of the Lord toward his Church in every Age, and gives Light
to the same, and what an evident Reflection his Work has again upon the Word;
so that through the whole Series and Course of Providence in the Earth, we have
a most exact Portraiture, and Image of the Scripture, answering one to another
as Face answers to Face in the glass, where it may be easy to discern the copy
by the principal, and that Resemblance which is betwixt the Building, and that
excellent pattern, and Model, which is held forth thereof in the Word.

3. The Accomplishment of the Scripture is the very turning that, which was the
Object of our Faith and Contemplation, to be the Object of our Sense and
Feeling: it is the real Birth, and bringing forth these Truths unto the World
in their appointed Time and season concerning the Church, and particular
Christians, which were hid in that Womb of the promise, and many dark
Predictions of the Word; it is such a Thing as gives the Promises and
Prophecies, a visible Being, yea brings Truth so near within the Reach of our
Senses, that we may even touch, as it were, and handle the Words of Life. O
what an excellent Interpreter is Experience! Taste and see: for thus the
serious Christian gets a View of the Scripture, and spiritual Things, which
the most subtle, and piercing Eye of unsanctified Schoolmen cannot reach, yea,
by the Practice of Truth, Nearness to God, and retiring of the Soul to him,
has often got more Light in an Hour, than others by many Days putting their
Judgment and Invention upon the Rack.

4. This is God's own Seal, which he puts to the Word to confirm and ratify
the same; I do not only mean that secret Seal of the Spirit within, but
something more external, that solemn Testimony of his Works, whereby he does
every Day appeal to Men's Consciences about his Truth: for his Works are very
manifest, whereon there is so clear an ingraving of his Truth and Faithfulness,
that as the Impress and Image of the seal is upon the wax, men may also see
whose superscription and image that is, which does appear on such, and such
passages of providence.

5. This is something we are not to seek only in the extraordinary acts of
providence, or in any singular and eminent path of a Christian's experience;
nay, it does shine forth in the smallest and most casual things that fall out,
yea in every Page of that great Volume of Providence may it be clearly read.

6. The Scripture's accomplishment is such a thing as concerns every Christian
in his personal case; to which his ordinary experience does relate; whereof
such have a large register, what of the Word has been certainly proved in the
several steps and changes of their life, whose practice does much lie betwixt
improvement of the Word, and observation how it is fulfilled: such can witness,
how under a spiritual decay to be carnally minded is death, and when its well,
what great peace they have who love God's Law: they have often found, that in a
strait he is a very present help, and in the way of duty that it is surely good
to draw near to him; (...) in the close of their life, can from many remarkable
and convincing providence declare the truth, and faithfulness of God. And
truly whilst I speak here, of the Christian's experience, I think it is sad, and
a great short-coming, that there is not a more serious improvement of it for
this end: which is a very concerning duty on such who have tasted that the Lord
is gracious, and O what an excellent addition would this be to their will or
testament, when they are to leave the World, to leave a testimony behind them
to the faithfulness of God in his Word and promise, and thus put their seal to
the same, from what they have often proved by sure experience! For this should
prove a singular help to strengthen others, and spread abroad the fame and good
report of religion: yea, thus one generation should declare the works of the
Lord to another, and transmit the memory of his goodness to succeeding ages.

7. This is something which not only the Christian's experience does witness,
and in every time takes place but has also a peculiar reference to those
ages, and periods of times, wherein such particular truths should have their
accomplishment. For its true, that the Prophets of old did not only in their
predictions hold forth in general, the truth and certainty of those things,
which should fall out: but they also inquired and searched diligently about the
time; to what or what manner of time the Spirit by them did point. I Pet. I.
II. -- For it is truly clear, that a piece of the Word was under the Law to have
its peculiar accomplishment; that part of it also under the Messia's Kingdom,
in the days of the gospel should be fulfilled, and we find a very concerning
part thereof belongs to these latter times. And there is betwixt such periods
of time and revolution of the Church's case, and the bringing forth of such a
piece of the Scripture to a performance, a very certain and undoubted
connection. It Is true, we do not yet well understand (which will be one of the
last manifestations the Church shall have, at the end of time, when the mystery
of God is finished) how to sort the event exactly to the Word: but it is sure
(and were worthy of our study and observation) how every age has something of
the Scripture peculiar thereto, yea carries forward the Lord's work and design
a further step. May we not see how one age fulfilleth such a piece of the
Church's sufferings appointed for her, and puts some great trial and sad
persecution over her head, which she was to meet with; whilst another age
carries he^ through an other change, and gives her a time of rest and
breathing? How such a time brings Antichrist forward to his height, and such
a following age begins the turn of the Church's case? Yea, every several period
and revolution of time, still adds something, to that excellent history of
the Word and Providence, which we have since the beginning, and brings forth
something further into the world, of the Lord's counsel and design about his
Church.

8. The accomplishing of the Scripture is such a thing, we are to look after,
in a special way here, which concerns this militant and traveling condition of
the Church: for if the Scriptures were once fully accomplished, and the great
mystery of God therein finished, there were then nothing more to do, his work
of providence were at an end, and time should be no more. This is something,
that is not here perfected at once, but is still gradually carrying on, and
then shall be complete at the resurrection of the just, and second coming of
the Lord, which is the last part of Canonical Scripture to be made out, when
both his work and his word, and time, shall be all finished together; but while
the saints are yet by the way, they have the written word and all those
precious promises therein, for present use and encouragement. For that is its
proper work, to take them safe through this labyrinth of the world, and when it
has brought them to land, it has no more to do; there will be then no more
need for a Christian to go to a promise, and adventure upon it; we shall then
no more watch, with the watchmen in a dark and stormy night, and hope for the
breaking of the day: faith then shall not be at a stand, how such a word shall
be made out, because of invincible difficulties in its way; no, th^^ it has
done its work, and that which is written shall be swallowed up, in that which
is seen and enjoyed, all the streams of our encouragement will then lose
themselves in a greater depth. O then its finished and done, what all the
promises, prophesies, and threatenings of the Word were bringing forth: and then
no more need of something as a pledge and earnest in hand, to them who have the
full possession of the inheritance, and under whose feet the God of peace has
trod Satan and all their enemies.

9. I shall add this, the accomplishment of the Scripture is something, which
is not only demonstrated to a Christian by sensible influences, and God's
secret working with his Spirit, but is made out to the observation of men, in
the way of providence; and not only witnessed by that internal evidence of the
Spirit, but by an external testimony, which both rationally holds this out to
the judgment, and sensibly to the sight and experience: and this is the
strongest and most full of all outward evidences, since the world must shut
their eyes if they do not see it, and a Christian must deny what he both sees
and feels, if he deny a witness to this.

II. We would consider the accomplishment of the Scripture, as that which is
the Lord's peculiar work and design in the World, and that great business which
is upon the wheels of providence amidst the various changes and revolutions,
which are here within time, for bringing about whereof the blessed thoughts of
his heart are fixed and unalterable. This is indeed a grave and serious truth,
worthy to be more noticed and laid to heart by men, that the glorious
providence of God, which goes throughout the earth, and does particularly
reach all things which come to pass, the smallest as well as the greatest
interests of men, in all these does move certainly and infallibly for the
accomplishing of the Scripture, which is that great thing God has before his
eyes: for it is no personal interests of men, how great so ever they be, that
can answer this end; it is something beyond the setting up of Kings, or
overturning Kingdoms and Nations, that he does mind amidst these various
changes, which are in the World; it is some greater thing, than that which we
most notice, the Lord thereby designs, how such a party is advanced, and others
brought low, for these things come within the reach of his care and providence,
in so far as the fulfilling of the Scripture is therein concerned, -- the
outmaking of the promises, and threatenings: one syllable whereof he does more
value than all the Crowns and Kingdoms of the earth, yea will not let it fall
to the ground, though it should be at the rate of laying cities and countries
desolate. For it is in this the Lord takes pleasure, and exercises his blessed
tho'ts, even the bringing about what he has spoken in his Word.

Now to clear this further, I shall hold forth these following grounds, whence
it may appear.

First, The fulfilling of the Scripture, or written Word, is so great a thing,
and of such Concernment, that the blessed Majesty of God thought it worthy of a
place in his heart from all eternity. This was before him in his thoughts and
counsels of old; even that mavelous work, which should be the after-product,
and outmaking of his Word to his Church here within time, and surely was such a
plot and contrivance, that as no less than infinite love, wisdom and power,
were required to bring it about, so it was well becoming the Majesty of God,
and worthy to be the work of all the three blessed persons of the Trinity. O if
we could go down a little into this deep, and see the wonders that are there,
we should find, that knowledge which usually lesseneth our admiration of other
things, would heighten it here: it would be new to us every day to think how
great and marvelous a thing that is which the Word is bringing forth.

2. It is upon this, even the Performance of the Word, that the present
encouragement, and future blessedness of the saints does lie. For the great
interest of the Church is adventured upon the Word, and embarked with it, which
would be lost; yea their stock and treasure which is laid up in heaven, and all
that a Christian is worth, which is laid up in the promise, were then perished,
-- if the Scripture should want an accomplishment: the godly man has then run
and labored in vain, and those who are fallen asleep in Christ, have died in a
sad delusion: providence would be like the work of the foolish builder, who
begun and knew not how to finish. O how highly then is the Lord concerned in
fulfilling of his Word? That he may perfect what concerns his people, and
having surely paid the price put them also in possession.

3. There is yet more than the interests of Angels and men, yea than heaven and
earth is worth, that depends upon the outmaking of the Scripture; the glory of
God, and especially the praise of that great attribute his faithfulness, which
he will have no less shine forth in the performance of his Word, than his power
and wisdom in this great fabric of the universe, and these mavelous
productions of nature. For he has magnified his Word above all his works:
therefore is his heart greatly set upon this, even the bringing to pass what he
has spoken; which if in the least should fail, this were no less than to make
God a liar, and falsify his Word, who is through all the Church known by this
blessed name, The God of truth.

4. We should consider this, as that great trust, which is put in his hand who
only in heaven and earth was found worthy to open the Book of God's decrees and
counsels, and loose the seals thereof: a trust, which the Lord did not
adventure upon the Angels, the smallest promise being such as requires no less
than an omnipotent power and the arm of Jehovah, to bring it about. For which
end, he whom the Father has anointed, is gone forth as a mighty man who
rejoiceth to run his race, that he may perform his Word, and execute this great
design in the administration of providence, about his Church and People; which
he will not cease or give over, until the mystery of God in the Scripture, and
all that was spoken by the Prophets, be put to a close, when Heaven and Earth
at the pouring out of the last vial, shall give that solemn shout and
exclamation, It is finished, it is finished. O if this were once fully perfect,
there would be no more to do; then the Winter were past, and the Summer come,
the song of Moses and the Lamb should be heard, because the bride has made her
self ready, then let all the trees of the wood rejoice, the hills break forth
into singing, and all that is therein be glad, because the Scripture and the
great design thereof is fully finished, and the day of the perfect liberty of
the Sons of God is come.

5. The accomplishment of the Scripture is of such concernment, that nothing
can be done until it be once finished. For this, time must wait, the Sun must
keep its course, and the ordinances of the Heaven continue as they are: the
World is but a scaffold until this building be perfected; for this the grave
does still retain her prisoners, and the dust of the Saints must yet rest in
hope, the creation still groaneth, and the marriage-supper of the Lamb is
deferred, the cry of the souls under the altar get not a full return, until all
that is written in the Word be fullfilled.

6. We would consider, this is the great thing which the Lord this day is
carrying on, even the accomplishment of his Word. For this is most brought upon
debate, of any thing besides; the World challenges it, and the hearts of the
godly do often call it in question; the Atheist scoffs at it, and says, Where
is the promise of his coming? There are often to appearance insuperable
difficulties in the way of its performance: therefore does the Majesty of God
so much concern himself in this, for bringing about of which he is in a holy
way restless, and providence in an uncessant motion, until he has done that
which he has spoken in his Word. It was for this cause (that the Scripture
might be accomplished) that the Word was made flesh, and he who counted it no
robbery to be equal with God, did take upon himself the form of a servant. This
is of such account in his eyes, that what time he speaks concerning a Nation or
People, ere it come not to pass, he will rather put forth omnipotency, for the
working of miracles, and change the very course of nature: for this, he will
make the deep dry, make a way through the red Sea, and cause Jordan to stand as
in heaps, that he may keep promise to his People; if there be no way for
bringing about his Word, but through a Sea of blood, and over the bones and
carcasses of his enemies, he will do it, and bring it to pass, though Walled
Cities, and the Sons of Anak mighty and strong, should stand in the way
thereof. Abraham's old age, and Sarah's dead womb, must not frustrate this: if
the promise of the Church's restoration cannot be made out without a wonder
showed upon dry bones scattered at the graves mouth, this shall not be wanting;
when God says, he will bring down the enemies of his Church, if the dust of the
ground should arise, down they must come. How many great designs of men has
this blessed design (that the counsel of the Lord may stand) crushed and
broken? so that their work and counsel has been as the Spider's web, when it
stood cross to this end. The godly need not fear, that he be not a present help
in time of trouble: for he will keep his word herein, though the Earth should
be overturned, and the Mountains cast into the midst of the Sea. O who has
resisted his counsel! What are all these vicissitudes and changes here in the
World, but making way for the Scripture's accomplishment? With what desire does
he move toward this end? So that as in Z^chary 6. 8. the instruments by him
appointed for executing his judgment and the threatinings of the Word, it is
said, they have quieted his Spirit, his decrees are mountains of brass, which
are unchangeable; the thoughts of his heart take place in all generations:
therefore the Word which is gone forth out of his mouth, shall not return
empty, but the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

III. The accomplishment of the Scripture is a truth very clear and manifest,
whereof none can pretend ignorance, if they do not shut their eyes, and force
their own light, from the fear of such a discovery. For the obstruction does
not lie in the darkness of the object, or that men cannot see this; since we
have it so clearly held forth in great and legible characters: nay, we must
say, the cause is culpable, there is much of the will in it, which renders such
an ignorance without excuse. O that this should be so little looked after, a
matter of such near and weighty concernment, when there needs not an other
demonstration, but come and see the works of the Lord through the earth! For he
has here so far condescended to his People, as to bring the truth near, that
they even feel and handle the same: yea, he does in a manner say to every one
as to Thomas, put in your bands, touch the Word, and truth thereof, and be no
longer faithless, but taste and see, that the Lord is good, and that he is true
in what he has spoken.

We are indeed to look for a more clear and full discovery of this truth, the
nearer the Church is to the end of time. There is a labyrinth, as it were, of
turnings and windings, through which we may see the Word often brought, so as we
lose sight thereof, and are ready to stagger about its performance: but it is as
true, that the most eminent confirmations, the saints ever had of this truth,
have been after greatest shakings thereabout. Yea, the Lord has in all ages,
so visibly sealed his Word by its performance, that we may say, can he be a
Christian and a stranger to this in his experience! or a serious on-looker on
providence and the dispensations of the time, wherein he lives, and a stranger
to it, in his observation! yea, can any be so wholly brutish, as not to discern
a thing so clear that oft-times those who run, may read?

But to speak a little more to this, I shall here point at some things, that
may show how manifest this truth is.

1. Is it not very clear, which we see every day brings to light? A truth so
conspicuous, both in God's ordinary way with his Church, and in the several
steps and passages of a Christian's life! For these mercies which bring the
Word and promise to pass, are new every morning, and cry aloud, if we could
hear, great is his faithfulness. This is indeed tried: and needs there more, to
convince a blind man, that his sight is restored to him, but that he certainly
sees? sure they never wanted confirmations here, who do but seriously seek to
be comfirmed.

2. Is it not a clear truth, which not only is found upon the exactest trial;
but is witnessed by such who ever tried it in their most pressing straits, and
extremity? for it is in the darkest night this truth has most brightly shined:
and these more remarkable venturous acts of faith, have they not still brought
forth most convincing experiments of this truth? We may say, there is none can
give a better account of the performance of the Word, then those who against
hope, have believed in hope, that this never made them ashamed.

3. Is it not also clear, whereof there are such solemn extraordinary
confirmations in all ages? For that his name is near, his wondrous works
declare. I am sure, no time could ever deny its witness, how by great
convincing providence, both of judgment and mercy, it has been so sealed, as
has forced Atheists to keep Silence: no time, wherein the Church had not cause
to erect a pillar, and engrave thereon, We have seen with our eyes the great
and wondrous works of the Lord, by which he has witnessed the truth of his
Word.

4. Is it not a manifest truth, which even in the most strange, and dark
footsteps of providence, so clearly shines forth? These, which at the first
look are an astonishment, and hard to be understood, yet after most clearly
verify the Scripture; that whilst the Lord's way goes out of our sight, yea,
out of the ordinary road of his working, through a labyrinth of turnings, and
cross dispensations, yet at length it does evidently clear, and disintangle it
self, which men may often see break forth as the sun out of a dark cloud, that
shines the more brightly, the more at was obscured.

5. Is it not very clear, which can be demonstrated by such visible effects in
these great changes of the World? For the fulfilling of the Scripture is not a
thing hid in a corner, but often published in the housetops, that men may see
legibly written, upon Kingdoms and Nations, the desolate ruins, and devastation
of cities and houses great and fair, which are made to be without inhabitants,
so as those who go by may clearly read the cause, and bear that witness, Lo,
there is fin visibly punished according to the Word.

6. How clear is this, which we have so evidently drawn out, and acted over in
a Christian walk? For what else is the spiritual conversation of such, those
visible effects and evidences of the grace of God all along a Christian's way,
but a visible convincing witness to the performance of the word? Have not such
a very audible Echo and resound to that which is the great drift and Scope of
the Scripture? where men may see the Bible turned over into a practical
history, written forth, and acted on the heart, and conversation of the saints,
as on a stage, or theater: the Word living, speaking, moving, and clearly
diffusing it self through all the veins, as it were, and conduits of a
Christian's life; so that if the truth, and reality of the grace of God be a
thing manifest, and unquestionable, we must also see therein the real
performance of the Scripture.

7. I shall add, we may clearly see how one piece of the Scripture is nothing
else but the punctual fulfilling, and accomplishment of the other: how that
which was shadowed out by dark types, under the Law, and held in a Prophecy,
through the Old Testament, is written before our eyes in a plain, and real
history in the New Testament, and that the gospel is only a fulfilling of the
Law and the Prophets.

IV. Though it is very manifest, and by undeniable proofs can be demonstrated,
that the Scripture has a real accomplishment, and does certainly take place,
in the constant course of providence here in the World, that I am sure if men
do not darken themselves they can be no strangers to such a thing; yet we must
say, This truth which most nearly concerns us, is to the most of men, (even
such who seem to give a large assent to the Word) a mystery and dark riddle.
There are few who do but enquire if there be such a thing, if the promises and
threatenings have indeed a certain outmaking: few do seriously ponder the
providence of God, in which the truth and faithfulness of the Word shines
forth, that they may thereby be further confirmed we see that to many (alas too
many) the great concernments of the Law and everlasting happiness are a trivial
and an impertinent business: this is a truth the World does pass without
regarding: such as sport at Religion, when they come to earnest here, dare not
stand before this discovery; it concerns them much to reconcile their
principles with their practice, their fear begets hatred, and both put their
wit and invention on the rack, how to dispute away any remainder of a
conscience, to imprison their light, and under the pretext of reason, run down
godliness, and the absolute necessity thereof: yea, besides, does not
sensuality, wherein many wallow, and steep themselves, so dull and drown the
soul, put such an interposition of the Earth betwixt them, and this truth, as
wholly darkens it? And, oh, how sad, that many having a large profession to be
Christians, scarce ever knew what it is to put the Word to an essay and trial,
in the concernments of their life; to have their light followed with
experience, wherein the very truth and reality of Religion lies.

To clear this, I shall hold forth some things, which may show how little this
truth of the Scripture's accomplishment is known, or studied by the most of men.

1. The abounding of so much Atheism, that there are many who not only disclaim
the practice of that Religion they seem to profess, but do state themselves in
most direct opposition to the rules and principles thereof; these to whom the
Scripture is but as a Romance, yea, who do only converse therewith to prove
their wit and parts in impugning the same; who avowedly mock at the judgments,
and providence of God; I confess these may be reckoned Monsters, a very
prodigy in the time, wherein they live; though, alas, it is not the least part
of the World! and which is strange! (...) the most horrid Athiests do usually
abound where the light of the Gospel has most shined: the savage places of the
Earth bring forth no such monstrous births, as are hatched within the visible
Church; for thus the judgment of God puts a blacker dye on them than others.
O what a terrible sound would the fulfilling of the Scripture have in men's
ears, if they once came to have serious thoughts thereof; since they cannot
admit this, but they must certainly read their own sentence of death, which a
few days shall put in execution; and if the Scripture be true, they are then
unspeakably miserable!

2. That indifferency which we see amongst men about Religion, and the most
concerning truths of scripture, does show how little this is known or laid to
heart: whence, there is such a generation who do not professedly deny the
scripture, yet can turn it over in a school-problem, and wonder that men should
engage so far upon it. It is not that it is hid from them, but they truly choose
to hide themselves from it; as more suiting that interest they drive, that the
truth of God should be rather a matter of opinion than of faith, a thing which
they would dispute, but not believe. But, O, what other thoughts would a clear
sight of this, cause, -- That within so few days the truths and threatenings of
the Word shall be sad earnest; the fulfilling whereof no sharpness of wit, nor
subtle arguments, will be able to evade!

3. That there is so much barren theory of Divine truths in the world, with so
little serious Christian diligence, does it not sadly witness how small
acquaintance men have with this truth? Whence, we see so great a part of those
who professedly acknowledge the word, and are daily conversing with it, yet can
give no other account thereof, but report; so many that can satisfyingly
discourse of the Scripture, could never put their seal to it, that God is true
therein. Whence are so many great School-divines, and able Ministers for parts,
such visible Atheists in their way, and practice? Is it not, they really judge
Divinity and Religion, rather a science, and matter of speculation, than a
matter of sense and feeling, which men should more live than speak, and cannot
be known without experience, the true end of knowledge? But, O this cannot be
found in books, men will not meet with it in a throng of choicest notions, it
confounds the wise, and the disputer of this world, whilst the meanest and
most simple Christian of^ knows more than those of greatest parts.

4. The great Hypocrisy which is in the world, I mean within the visible
Church, does too clearly show, that this truth is little thought on, or laid to
heart. For what is that false show, and appearance (which we may say is not a
sin, but the very sinfulness of sin) Is it not the height of Atheism? And a
real contradiction in their practice, to this, that the Scripture of God is
true, and will have an unquestionable accomplishment? O could any be so
monstrously irrational, to drive this poor plot, how to appear that which they
are not, to be at such pain to act the part handsomely of a serious Christian,
to personate his tears, and grief, his spiritual frame, his zeal for God, if he
did think gravely on this truth, and did believe the threatenings of the Word;
that they will surely take place and be within a little while no complement,
but sad earnest, and that he is every hour standing under that Scripture-wo
against Hypocrites? I am sure it would make his very hair stand upright, his
joints loose, and his thighs smite upon one another, could he but seriously
think upon this.

5. Those unwarrantable ways which in a time of trial men take for their
escape, may witness this, that the word they do not judge a sure ground to
venture on. Whence is there such hesitation in suffering times? From that day
many taking their leave of Christ, who have rather chosen sin than affliction?
O is it not that they judge the testimony of the God of truth is not sufficient
security to carry them through such a strait, and are not fully persuaded that
it must come to pass what he has promised? For if they were, they should
reckon it their greatest safety to embarque their interest on so sure a ground,
and with much quietness repose their soul, and disburthen their care by putting
it over on the word.

6. What does the frequent discouragement and uncomfortable walk of the People
of God speak forth? does it not witness how little they are in earnest with
this great truth of the Scripture's accomplishment, or established herein? What
means these distrustful fears, and perplexed complaints? If their eyes be but
open to know they have such a well as the promise of God, at their hand, how is
it that the smallest straits are so puzling, and ready to outwit them, that
they so usually stumble at the cross? And as things from without do appear,
their encouragement made to ebb and flow? Is not here the cause, That they
stagger at the promise, whilst probabilities in some visible way, do not go
along for its performance? It Is truly easy to have some sweet notions of faith
at a distance, but whilst the trial comes near, upon such a close approach,
that there is not another way, but to put the whole stress of their particular
interest on the Word, and on it alone, many are then at a stand, because they
are not thoro'ly assured, that though the earth should be overturned, there is
an absolute necessity for the promise of God (...) take place.

Now from these things may it not appear, that this grave truth of the
Scripture's accomplishment is but little known, or studied? I confess, we may
think on it with astonishment, how a matter so nearly concerning us is not more
our work! there are indeed many things worthy to be known, but our short life
can scarce allow time, or give leisure for the study thereof. But O this,
though we had only two days to live, I think might require the one, to be sure
and persuaded about the truth of that whereon our heaven and eternal
Blessedness lies, and on which we must lay our last Hold, when we are in the
passage at that strange step betwixt time and eternity. O what a wonder, how
rational souls who walk on the border of the greatest hope and fear imaginable,
can yet be so unconcerned thereabout! such serious thoughts might force men to
retire, and go fit alone; and truly these things gravely considered may seem
strange and hard to reconcile.

1. That there is such a thing as the very Word and Testimony of God this day
upon record, wherewith we have so much to do, which does offer itself to men's
trial, and exactest search; and yet we put it so little to that touchstone,
that we may know it upon an other account, than report or hearsay.

2. How in a matter of such high importance as salvation through all eternity,
and the ground of this hope, m^^^ should take the truth on an implicit faith,
or satisfy themselves with a common assent thereto, as though it were enough to
witness our believing the same, because we did never doubt or call it in
question: I am sure, men would not be so lax, and so easy to satisfy, in the
most common interest they have here in the World.

3. How can men render to others a reason of their hope, when it is enquired,
who did never ask a reason of this at themselves? or will those seal the truth
with their blood, who never had it sealed upon their heart by experience?

4. Whence is it that men can have comfort in Scripture, who are not well
grounded in the faith thereof? Indeed those who are solidly persuaded about the
truth, and its certain out-making, may have much joy and peace; whilst they
know, the ground of their confidence can bear up any stress or burden they lay
upon i^ And for what end did the Lord witness the certainty of his Word by two
immutable things, wherein it is impossible for him to lie, but that from so sure
and strong a ground, his People might have strong consolation?

5. How can any think to adventure their immortal soul upon that, whereon they
fear to venture an outward interest? or put over their dearest things into his
hand and keeping, who could never say, they know in whom they believed?

6. May it not seem strange, that men can believe a certain performance of the
Word and promises, and not be more deeply affected therewith? O is this true,
shall it surely come to pass, and not one jot thereof fall to the ground! and
should it not cause us to awake in the night, and ever bear us company? Ought
we not to think our selves at a sad pass, that day, wherein we take not a turn
in the meditation of divine truths, if we be sure that these must take place?

7. I would add, if this be indeed the Scripture of God, which surely has an
accomplishment, O how is it we are so little Christians? Why does men's walk so
sadly jar with so great an hope? What manner of persons should those be, that
are persuaded, within a little time these heavens must pass away as a scroll,
the elements melt with fervent heat, and the earth be burnt up? I think, if
this will not press home on men, to be fervent and diligent, they must be in a
very sad lethargy.

V. The accomplishment of Scripture is a most clear, and undeniable witness of
its divinity; that it is his Word, who is not like man to lie, or the son of
man to repent, and has this as its distinguishing character, that not one
syllable thereof falls to the ground: This is the undoubted privilege of God,
and of him alone, to foresee things contingent, which are many ages after to
fall out, and have no dependence upon necessary, and natural cause^; and truly,
this may be a convincing argument, yea, we may say, of all external testimonies
is the greatest; but it is strange to think what a generation there is, who can
sport at the Scripture, and question the truth thereof! who yet did never once
seriously enquire if such a thing be true, else so clear a witness might stare
them in the face. Such a party we should look on with compassion. It Is also sad
to think at how poor a rate, far below their allowance, many of the Saints do
here live, because there is so little of that excellent and more noble Spirit,
to search the Scripture for their further comfort and establishment thereby.

It is true, this blessed record does bear witness to it self, and is known by
its own light: whereon there is such a visible impress of the glorious God,
such convincing marks of its true descent, as may thoroughly show whose it is,
and how far it exceeds all human invention; and thus by a clear manifestation
of the truth, does commend it self to men's consciences, as a safe ground
whereon they may repose their soul. It is also clear, how wonderfully the
Scripture has been preserved, and the original copies thereof kept through all
ages, that what ever small variation there may appear as to some Apiculi, which
in some places has caused diverse readings, yet in any necessary, or saving
truth, the greatest Critics will confess they do not in the least vary: and it
is known (wherein we are to adore that special providence of God) that the
Jewish Church, to whom this sacred depositum was delivered, did with such exact
and singular care look to the same, even in the least tittle, or letter
thereof; this being the great work and study of the Mazorites, from one age to
another, to see to the preserving of that great record, from being in the least
vitiated or corrupted; and the greatest adversaries of the truth cannot
possibly deny that agreement betwixt those many original copies, in the whole
substance, which may be very convincing to the World. And do not men see, how
marvelous the whole frame of the Scripture is? What a correspondency betwixt
all the parts thereof, that nothing in it does in the least vitiate the
proportion and beauty of the work, but it has all along an evident tendency to
advance holiness and conform the soul to God. With a wonderful consent and
harmony in answering to this great end, we see the simplicity, and plainness of
its style, yet backed with a convincing Majesty, and authority upon the
conscience; yea, besides, it has been attested by miracles, that were great in
themselves, famous in their time, transmitted to the Church in after-ages, with
unanswerable evidences of their truth; that not only the witness of the Word,
but other pressing and rational grounds may let us see there could be no
deceit, or imposture therein.

These are a great testimony to the truth: but I may say on very sure ground,
that, next to that great witness of the Spirit, there is no argument more
convincing to reach Atheism a stroke, and thoroughly satisfy an exercised
spirit, who may be plunged about this great thing, the authority of the
Scripture, than a clear discovery of its performance whilst under the assault
of such a temptation: if this be the very word of God, they may but retire
within, and then turn their eyes abroad in the World, to see what a visible
impress of the Word is stamped on every piece of the work, and providence of
God. Now for further clearing I would offer these few things.

1. The accomplishment of the Scripture is a very public testimony from Heaven
to its divinity, whilst the Lord by his works through the earth, which are done
in the view of Angels and men, does solemnly avow that this is his Word. For we
must say, his work within on the hearts of his People, and without about the
Church, is such, whereat men, yea all the magicians of the earth, may stand
amazed, and confess that nothing less than a divine almighty power can
accomplish the same.

2. This gives in the witness of all the generation of the righteous: who from
the beginning have proved the truth thereof, yea, it is sealed by the blood of
many excellent Christians, some of whom though they could not well dispute for
it, yet had so strong a demonstration of the power of the truth within, as made
it an easy work to die for the same.

3. This does clearly show, the Scripture is an unchangeable rule of
righteousness that alters not; but takes place in all ages, whence such as are
wise to bring providence in to the Word, and compare the experience and remarks
of one time with another, may have a great reach, and be thus led in a sure
path, as to the foreseeing of events.

4. This also does demonstrate, that it is his Word, who does rule and guide
the World, and has a sovereign dominion over the same: whilst we may here see
such remarkable events, which both in the present and in former times have
fallen out, as may show a power, that can reach the greatest with a stroke,
shake the most established Kingdoms, and even over the belly of insuperable
difficulties, accomplish the Word; yea, that surely the Spirit of the wheels
which moves them, is from him whose Word this is. For it is not more clear,
that these curtains of the Heavens are stretched forth over the earth, than that
the Scripture is stretched out over the whole work and frame of providence: so
as that all the motions and steps thereof, even of the most casual things that
fall out, have a visible tendency to accomplish those ends which the Scripture
has held forth.

5. This clearly shows, it must be his Word, who has foreseen all things
that were to befall the Church, and the various changes and adventures of every
Christian's life through time: whilst it is so wonderfully shaped and suited to
every new trial of the church, as if intended only for that time, and to every
case of a godly man, as though it had been alone writ for them.

6. This also shows, that he who is the author of the Scripture, and has
framed that admirable piece, must have some immediate correspondence with the
Spirit of man, knows our sitting down, and rising up, yea, does search the
heart and the reins. For experience can tell how the Word is directed to the
heart, does reach the most inward contrivances thereof, does so clearly reveal
and open up a Christian to himself, that we may say, of a truth he is the God
of the Spirits of all flesh, and one greater than our heart, whose it is.

7. I shall further add, the fulfilling of the Scripture in the experience of
the Saints does show, it is nor a dead letter, but has power, and life; and
there must be an enlightening quickening Spirit, that surely goes along with the
same. This clearly demonstrates something above words, yea, above nature, in
the written Word, that can make such a change upon the soul, give life to the
dead, open the eyes of the blind, yea, can turn a lump of earth, that formerly
tended downward, now without any violence to move, from a principle of life
toward God, as the sparks flee upward.

VI. The accomplishment of the Scripture is a most pleasant, and truly
delectable subject, worthy of our serious thoughts, and study. For here is held
out the highest truth, for the judgment to contemplate the truth and
faithfulness of God in the Word; and here is also the greatest good for the
affections to embrace, and delight in, as that wherein our whole happiness is
certainly wrapped up. It is undeniable, that it is the godly man, who knows
best what true and solid pleasure is; which he does not lose, by turning his
heart from the creature to God, but makes a blessed exchange. O, how far do
the joys and delights of the soul exceed these of the senses! And the delight
of a Christian, how far does it surpass that of a natural man, even in his best
estate! and sure, this precious study of the daily performance of the Word, is
one of these paths of pleasure, which would bring in more solid joy to the
spirit in some few hours, than some years wallowing in the carnal delights of
the flesh, which is but as pleasure in sport, but quickly turns to grief in
earnest. It is one of the great mistakes of the World, that religion tends so
much to sadden and disquiet the Soul; nay, it is certainly the want of this,
because we are so little truly religious. When we shuffle over our duty, and
take but a passing look of the ways and work of God in the World, then it is
indeed very affrighting, and unpleasant; but when in a more Christian way, we
do seriously look thereupon, and get our heart near God, taking the Word along
with us, O how delightful, and ravishing a sight will this be! I truly think,
though there were not a command, though it were no duty, nor such advantage in
the study of this grave truth, yet that joy and refreshment, which the soul
would find in such a diligent search, in going down into this blessed deep,
should invite us thereto.

But when I speak of this, what a sweet, and delightful subject, the
performance and outmaking of the Scripture is, it must be understood, that it
is so only to the saints: and it is no wonder; the World keep at such a
distance from it; for this is a truth they can not bear, they hate it, which
(as Micajah) does prophesy always hard things, and carries a message of death
to them; a serious View of this truth, to ungodly men, is as the handwriting
upon the wall before them, which does foretell their approaching ruin, and
should cause them all to tremble; the knowledge whereof must increase their
sorrow, and disquietness, yea, cause them to cry out, O, do not torment us
before the time. For they are surely undone, and ruined, if the Scripture of
God be true, and has a performance. But, O what pleasant and refreshful
tidings, does this carry to a Christian! What a sweet view does he here get of
the inheritance, and blessed estate of the saints, which may cause such an
exclamation, How great is that goodness, which is laid up for those that fear
thee!

To demonstrate this, I shall hold out some things, from which we may see how
delightful a subject the accomplishment of the Scripture is, for a Christian to
study.

1. Serious converse with this grave truth leads forward to practice, and
thus helps to bring down theory to experience: which is the most sweet, and
desirable of all other demonstrations, that we can have of the truth of the
Scripture, and makes our light clear, and pleasant to the eyes, turning the
exercise of our judgment and reason thereabout, into sense and feeling; we are
then made to see what a difference there is, betwixt that discovery (...) a
spiritual man (whose religion is his practice) has of this, and the cold
winter-light of natural understanding, that has no heat or warmth therewith;
which is as great a difference, as betwixt hearing of such a thing by report,
and seeing it with our eyes.

2. This blessed study, how the Scripture has certain accomplishment, would
help us to read the Word with an other kind of pleasure. O, what representation
should then the truths and promises thereof have to the godly man? It would be
as one going in to look over his charters, and the great things therein
contained, which he does not in the least debate, or question, since they are
past the seals, and fully ratified, and now considers all which is promised,
as his own, which he looked in former times upon, but as a common thing, whilst
he made not earnest of the certainty thereof, and what an interest he had in
the same. O, when he reads that promise of a new heaven and earth, and that
glorious estate which abides the Saints; He cannot turn his eyes and thoughts
so easily off it, but is made to stand, and wonder, that so great a thing, that
will make such a mavelous change in his condition, is even shortly to come to
pass! How sweet and pleasant is it, for such an one to turn over the promises,
who can set to his seal, and bear this witness, that he has as really proved
the truth thereof by sure experience, as he knows he has a real being!
Surely the Bible is an other thing to these, than it is to the greater part of
men, who only make it the subject of their contemplation.

3. In this blessed study we should have much bro't to our hand to observe, and
our observation made sweet, and pleasant to us. For there we might see how all
the paths of the Lord toward his People are mercy and truth: this would give
us a refreshing diary of providence; how in such a plunging strait we found the
(...) sensibly sealed; what observable confirmations we have had therewith, at
such a time and in such a condition; the after-recounting of which in an hour
of trial, or in the evening of our life, would exceed the greatest pleasures,
the men of this World can have, in looking over their gold and greatest
treasures, which for many years they have been laying up.

4. In the serious study of the daily accomplishing of the Scripture, we should
have a most satisfying view and prospect of what God is doing up and down the
earth; what purposes and designs he has on foot; and how things here beneath
do work together for carrying on of the same. We should see what in excellent
and curious piece of work this frame of providence is, which the more it is
considered, it will be the more a wonder; how perfect in all its various
colors; what an observable concurrence there is here; how several discords,
which we see here, do yet agree with one consent, for the completing of God's
design, which is still going on: and whilst we think there must be some
disorder amongst the wheels, we are made after to see that this confusion was
an excellent step of providence, confounding the wisdom of men; every piece of
his way being so knit to another, as discovers to such who make this blessed
truth their serious study, a most rare contexture, beyond the reach of the
greatest artists that ever was. Here also we might go up to that (...) tower of
Christian observation, and from thence take a grave view of God's way, and lay
his work in the World to the scripture as the measuring line; where we should
see (and find the sight thereof very pleasant) how the Word every day takes
place, does issue through all the veins and arteries of providence, each line
whereof is so exactly drawn, as by a pencil in some skilful hand, to that great
exemplar of the Scripture. Here we might discern those eminent examples of
judgment and mercy, that in every age are set before us how wicked men prosper
for a time, yet have a dreadful issue, and are suddenly cast into destruction;
they spread as a green bay tree, and within a little time their place cannot be
found; also ^ow the godly are often sore afflicted, yet flourishing as the
palm tree, and the more they are depressed, the more they grow: -- how the
enemies of the Church are often lifted up, for a sorer fall; and the Church
brought ^ow, in order to her greater enlargement: -- how judgment finds out
sinners, and is often exactly proportioned in measure and kind to the sin; and on
the other hand how integrity is sore tossed often, yet still falls upon its
feet, and overclouded that it may shine more brightly after: How the
threatenings of the Word do visibly overtake Kingdoms and Nations, bring down
great houses, cause those brought up in scarlet to embrace the dunghill, and
often let not the hoary head of cruel and wicked men go into the grave in peace:
and again to consider how the Lord forsakes not his People, but shows
respect to their way; the good man walks in his integrity, and his seed after
him is blessed. O, how sweet an exercise were this for a Christian, even to
lose himself in!

5. From thence we might in a great measure discern what of the night it is
with the Church: if there be any evidences that it is near day; and what such a
sinful case does threaten; we should be skilful to feel the Churches pulse, and
thereby find what symptoms there are of life or death and perceive a dark cloud
of judgment advancing, when it is but like an handbreadth. Surely this study
would make us wise to know the times, and what we ought to do therein; for
amongst those various events which fall out in every age, the Lord's way is
constant with itself, and with his truth, if we be right Observers.

6. Here we should have a most pleasant and clear view, how the Scripture of
God comprehends the whole state of the Church, from the beginning to the end
of time: that it is a most full, and perfect register of all the vicissitudes
and alterations, which are to go over her head, whilst in a militant condition;
and does also most exactly point out those occurrences, and remarkable events,
which fall out in the ordinary way and course of providence, that we may read
them as evidently in the Word, as we see them with our eyes fall out in the
World. For in following this study, we should clearly see how the Scripture
brings the Church to light, out of the womb of an eternal decree, and does
trace it from the first promulgation of the Gospel after the fall, through
these dark times before the flood, whilst it was but in families, and through
that long trial in Egypt, and all its settled and flourishing condition in
Canaan, and carries her for-ward through all the several changes of her case,
under her following decay, and in the time of the captivity, even to the
manifestation of Christ, and dawning of the gospel: and as it thus takes in
within its reach the whole estate and the special events, which did befall the
Church under the Law, so we may see how the Scripture also follows the
Church, through the whole time of the gospel, and brings her as a grain of
mustard seed from a day of small things, until it bring her to perfection,
takes her as it were by the hand from her infancy, and goes with her through
all the turnings of her condition; through that long and dark night of
Antichrist's reign, points clearly out her condition, and various assaults
that she should endure in that time, and that blessed victory which she should
afterward have, though not all at once, but gradually, over her enemies; and
that the Word and the Church do never part, but one walks step for step with
the other, until it bring her safe to land, and as it were put her off its hand
and guard, at the coming of Christ.

7. This would also help us to sweet thoughts, and give us matter of a song in
the saddest night of the Church's condition. When we see how God's great design
in the World is the accomplishing of the Scripture, and know that his ends
which he has held forth therein, cannot be frustrated, it would serve to
silence all our complaints, with wondering at God's way, and triumphing in the
works of his hands: we should not then be afraid of evil tidings; a stormy time
would not outwit us; being persuaded that though the earth should be
overturned, it shall be surely well with the righteous, the Church must
flourish, and all her enemies be found liars, because he is faithful that has
promised, whose Word will as surely come to pass, as the sun does return after
a dark night.

VII. It does now more specially concern the godly in these latter times, to
study this great truth of the accomplishment of the Scripture, and set about a
serious inquiry and search therein, as a truth that shall yet be in a further
measure discovered, and opened up, the nearer the Church is to the end of time:
which may thus appear.

1. Herein is the Word express, that one piece of the Scripture, which from
former ages was sealed up, should in the latter days be clear, and easy to
understand. Dan. 12. 4* 9. The seal is there put on; but go thy way Daniel, for
these Words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end. But, Rev. 22. 9.
We have that bar taken of, Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this book;
for the time is at hand; because then the time did draw near, to which a more
full discovery and opening of the Scripture was reserved, and a more large
manifestation of the spirit beyond former ages. Now by the last days, we are
not only to understand the whole time of the gospel, though it is thus termed
in the Scripture, but the latter part of these last times, which is more
especially pointed at, even the close and evening of time, that last Epoch,
and period of prophetic chronology, to which a greater accomplishment of
Scripture-Prophecies is reserved.

2. This also is expressly promised that in the latter days, the Church shall
have a more full discovery of this truth, how the Scripture is verified, Dan.
12. 4. Many shall run to fro, and knowledge shall be increased; which increase,
as it clearly points at the last times, and that bright day the Church shall
have, when Israel shall be brought in to Christ, it does also point at and
promise some greater light, and a more full opening up of the mysteries of the
word, and fulfilling thereof: For the former part of the Chapter shows, that
increase of knowledge does relate to those things which were before sealed. We
wait and believe the further accomplishment of this promise to the Church,
beyond all we have yet seen; that many Scripture-truths, now dark and abstruse,
shall be made so clear, as shall even cause us to wonder at the gross mistakes
we once had thereof, yea, that after-generations shall have a discovery and
insight into some Prophecies now obscure, which shall as far exceed us, as this
time does go beyond former ages, which comparatively we must say were very
dark. O! when that promise of the in-calling of the Jews shall once take place,
what a wonder will they be to themselves, that their understanding should have
been under such a vail, when the truth shall be clear, and evident to them in
that day! Will it not be a sweet and easy work, for the godly to sort together
the predictions of the Word, and the events? And truly there is much now wrapped
up in Scripture-Prophecies, not yet fulfilled, which (we may say) in
aftertimes, when the event shall unvail their meaning, will exceed, yea,
confound all those comments, many have had upon them.

3. Is it not also clear, that those Prophecies, which of all the Scripture
were most obscure, and overclouded with dark figures and allegories, concerning
which there had been such mistake and hesitation by the Church, so many
perplexing queries, have a peculiar respect to the last times? And that then
they shall be made plain, and easy, when so notable a key, as the event does
open them up; such as those of the witnesses recovering life, and rising again,
Babylon's fall and ruin, Christ reigning with his Saints a thousand Years,
which now are in some measure already cleared, from their begun accomplishment,
beyond former times; but we wait for a more full commentary, that time shall
give upon the same.

4. It is in the latter times, that the glory of God in his truth and
faithfulness, shall most eminently shine forth. That is a part of the solemn
congratulation of the Church upon Babylon's fall, Rev. 15. 3. not only Great
and mavelous are thy works, but, just and true are thy ways. For truly in
this stroke of the judgment of God, and those remarkable providence concurring
therewith, the fulfilling of the Scripture will be so plain and undeniable,
that we may say, it will then dazel the eyes of men, even greatest Atheists,
alarm the World, yea very effectually contribute (we have ground so to judge)
to that promised increase of the Church, and incoming of the Jews, when in
Antichrist's fall and ruin they shall see so convincing a seal put to one of
the most considerable Prophecies of the Word; in the accomplishment whereof
much of the Prophetic part of the New Testament, relating to the Church's
state, and her long trial under Antichrist's reign, may be seen clearly
verified.

5. The Lord has reserved his greatest Works to the latter days, wherein his
judgments shall be manifest, and the Word confirmed by such solemn convincing
providence, that men will not get them passed without a remark: we are this
day witnesses to many such, and are looking what these times shall yet bring
forth, that the great and remarkable acts of the Lord must force the World to
see a divine power; and say, lo, there is an undoubted accomplishment of the
Scripture.

6. The Church in these last Times has peculiar advantages, for understanding
this truth of the Scripture's accomplishment, which former ages had not. 1. A
great part thereof is now fulfilled, that men may see with their eyes, if they
but know how to lay the Word and Work of God together. The Christian Church had
in former times but dark glances at these great things, which we have this day
visibly transcribed in providence; the promises were then traveling in birth
of that which is now brought forth. 2. Are we not mounted, as it were, on the
shoulders of that experience and observation of former times, which has been
transmitted to us? and we must say upon that account, the Church has now a
greater seal and confirmation of the truth, then what it had in the days of the
Prophets, and the Apostles, even when Christ was in the flesh. 3. The Temple of
God and Ark of his Testament is now opened in Heaven, light more fully
abounding, and the means of knowledge. And, O! should not this be much our
study, who have a greater talent than former ages! certainly this will be a sin
of a deeper dye, than in times of ignorance; since we can be no strangers to
this truth, without shutting our eyes, blinding the conscience, doing violence
to our light, when the Lord does give his People such solemn confirmations.

7. I shall add, is it not clearly foretold in that Dan. 12. 4. that in the
last times this will be one of the special exercises of the saints to enquire,
and make a diligent search concerning the Scriptures accomplishment? For it is
there said, many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased;
importing, that this shall be much their study, and cause a diligent search,
whereunto the great works of God in these times shall invite them: And what
should be the posture of the Godly in these days, on whom the end of the world
is come? should it not be like the watchman in the last-watch of the night, who
looks often what appearance there is from the east of the day breaking? a
serious enquiry what of the Scripture is fulfilled, whereby we may know on very
clear grounds, if the night be far spent, the day at hand, and that the coming
of the Lord to judgment draws near.

VIII. This is a great, and concerning duty for Christians to study this truth,
that they may have something more than Report, how the Scripture has a sure
accomplishment, and does take place in the providence of the time wherein we
live. I must think it strange, that there is such a great help as this, so
near, and yet we see it not, nor do seriously ponder the same, when the command
is so express to observe the works of the Lord, which for that end are showed
forth, that men may enquire, and read the faithfulness of God therein; yea,
that so great a truth, which would abide the search of all the critics of the
World, a truth wherein our blessedness through time and eternity lies, should
offer it self to our trial, and yet, is so little known! O, who can dispense
with the neglect of this duty? by which we answer that solemn call and
invitation of the works of God, do honor him, serve our generation, are
helpers to our own faith, and are thereby helped to strengthen others, yea, are
brought to see with our eyes, and from experience, what before was as a strange
thing unto us.

Now to clear how much this is a Christian's duty, to study a practical
converse with the Word, and to be serious observers of its accomplishment, let
us consider.

1. We are thus helped to declare the Works of the Lord, and to give him the
glory of his faithfulness. And is not that a weighty duty? Which at all times,
in every station and condition of life, should engage men to this study. Thus,
every Christian may become a witness to the truth, and put his seal thereto;
for which he should think his life truly desirable, and does in no small
measure attain the true end thereof, though he had no other opportunity, for
his master's service. We may say, this truth of the Scripture's accomplishment,
like a great roll, has been transmitted from hand to hand, from one age to
another, attested and as it were subscribed by so many witnesses, it does thus
come to our time, and to every man's door and require their personal witnessing
and sealing of the same.

2. This should make it an easy work, to trust the Word, and to adventure
thereon in the ordinary occurrences of their life. They may well trust God in a
strait, who have so strong an argument to make use of, that often they have tried
him, and the truth of his Word, by many, many experiences. Will not those that
know his name, trust on him? Which was a notable testimony from a serious
Christian in a very sharp trial; "Often have I tried God, and shall I not learn
to trust him once?

3. This does lay the Christian in the way of that promise. Psalm. 107. last.
ver. a promise truly large and comprehensive, but little considered, that such
as are wise to observe the works of God, they shall see the loving kindness of
the Lord, even in their own particular case made out to them, yea, whilst they
are serious to observe his works abroad in the World, and his way to others,
they shall be no losers thereby at home; but find this promise meet them and
turn their general observation, into personal experience of the loving kindness
of the Lord.

4. Thus the saints by experiencing the truth of the Word, get a convincing
seal thereby to their interest in the promise. For begun possession is indeed a
strong witness to this right, when they can say, they have got as certain
returns of the Word, which they have put to an essay, in some particulars of
their life, as they are sure of any thing they did ever see; so that from
unquestionable experience they may set up a pillar, and write thereon, Hitherto
has the Lord helped us.

5. Thus should Christians, with much advantage, be helped to convince
gainsayers. For it is sure, Atheism could not make so bold and public an
appearance, if men did not so much take their religion on trust. O, the serious
experienced man can with an other confidence own the truth; whose experience
and observation of the works of God give him an argument that none can answer,
while not only he can assert, but conduct and lead men to the things
themselves, that they may see, if in such and such particulars the Scripture be
not truly fulfilled.

6. Thus the providence of God would have a more sweet refreshing countenance:
when from this great height, that watchtower of Christian observation, we take
a view thereof. And truly, otherways, men will stumble at the most ordinary
dispensations, and think God's Work is a mass of confusion: but here we are
taught to see, how the written Word and his way are linked in a most sweet
agreement.

7. We may thus trace Divine truth, even by our sense and feeling, and join the
Word and experience in a regular correspondence: yea, thus we should have a
clear transcript of the Lord's way with his Church, taken out of that great
authentic original of the Scripture, and there see on what a solid basis and
foundation, that magnificent structure of providence is raised up. What a
notable key should we thus have for opening the Scripture, by a serious humble
inquiry after the works of God? Where not only the impression and sign of the
power, but of the truth and faithfulness of the Lord, are so very legible.

8. This is a piece of our talent, wherewith we are entrusted; of which every
Christian should study a serious improvement, knowing they must render an
account, what their observation of this great truth has gained, and what
further establishment and confirmation they have thus attained.

9. I would add, the concernment and weight of this study may press it much on
us. For, if the Scripture's accomplishment be an undoubted truth, O! then this
is sure, the Saints have a great inheritance: they are Princes, though now
under a disguise; and though yet minors, they are heirs of more than the World
can shadow forth. The Christian is then more happy on a dunghill, scraping his
sores, than such who are clothed in purple, and fare delicately every day. If
this be sure, we should look with compassion, rather then envy, on those whom
the World does account happy: We need not question the gain of Godliness; then
it is sure, that such who sow in tears, shall reap in joy; and the righteous
though now trampled upon, in the morning shall have dominion. Yea, in a word,
we may then on sure ground solace our selves with the thoughts of that great
change, which will be within a little time when the grave must render back her
prisoners; and may with as much assurance of a blessed resurrection, lie down
in the dust, as we are sure there will be a morning, when we lie down at night.
O! then, there is a Heaven, and a Hell, that is certain; eternity is not a
night-dream; and one moment shall shortly put an end to all our services, yea,
the shutting of our eyelids at death, shall but open them in the Paradise of
God.

Having touched this truth a little in the general, I shall now hold forth some
arguments, whence the accomplishment of the Scripture may be demonstrated: they
are these five, which I intend to prosecute in the following discourse.

FIRST Argument, To prove the Scripture is certainly fulfilled, and has an
accomplishment, is this; That which has been in all ages the testimony of the
Saints; what every particular Christian does seal, from their frequent and sure
experience; what is found and proved by them, in their daily walk, upon
exactest trial; yea, what as many as ever were serious in religion, do witness,
must be certain and true.

But the accomplishment of the Scripture is such: Therefore, etc,

II. Argument. That which is manifest and legible in the whole course and tenor
of providence about the Church, and by clear convincing instances both of
judgment and mercy is made out to the observation of every age, must be a
certtin truth. But the Scripture's accomplishment is such, -- Therefore, etc.

III. Argument. That which has not only the Christian's testimony from
experience, and of the Church from constant observation, but is obvious even to
the view of the World; that which, from the conscience of the worst of men does
force a testimony, that they can neither shift nor deny; which also may be
demonstrated to the conviction of ordinary observers, and has a public
acknowledgement from greatest Atheists and mockers of religion in every age,
must surely be a clear truth.

But, etc. Therefore --.

IV. Argument. That which was to take place in such and such periods of time,
and has accordingly come to pass, the event exactly answering to the
prediction; yea, that whereof a great part is now fulfilled, and but a little
at this day remains to be made out, must be a certain truth.

But a great part of the Scripture is thus already fulfilled, and but a little
thereof now remains.

Therefore, etc.

V. Argument. That which not only is for the most part already accomplished,
but is a thing whereof we have such sure confirmations, yea, so great a pledge
in our hand from the Lord, that what yet remains shall be certainly fulfilled,
must it not be an undoubted truth? -- But the Scripture, as to these special
predictions, that are not yet made out, is such concerning which the Lord has
given his People a very large pledge, and strong confirmations, now in these
latter times, to believe their certain accomplishment. Therefore, etc.

The FIRST ARGUMENT.
THat the Scripture of God, contained in the old and new Testaments, wherein
our great hope and comfort does lie, is certainly true, and has a real
accomplishment, may be thus demonstrated: That it is tried, and proved in the
godly man's Experience, to which in all ages, yea, from innumerable Proofs, the
saints have put to their seal, that this is a sure and faithful testimony.

Experience is indeed a strong demonstration: and it is such a witness, as
leaves no room for debate. For here the truth is felt, proved, and acted on
the heart; which the Christian knows well, and is as sure of, as he is
persuaded that he lives, or that the sun when it shines, has light and
warmth therewith. It is true, the World lives at a great distance from this;
they only converse with the sound of such a thing: and we know, the naked
theory of Scripture-truth has but a short reach, and that it differs as far
from that which a serious practical Christian has, as the sight of a country
in a map is from a real discovery of the same; where the difference is not in
the degree, but in the kind. Yet, though this weighty testimony of experience is
a thing whereto many (alas! too many) are strangers, we must say, so much
thereof is obvious, as may force its authority on men's consciences, and show
there can be no fallacy or delusion in this witness, if they but allow the use
and exercise of reason: seeing it is not the record of a few, at one time, or
in one corner of the earth, but a solemn witness from the saints and followers
of God, whose judgment and integrity their adversaries must often confess; yea,
of all the saints in every age through the whole universal Church in parts of
the earth most remote from other; and this by most frequent renewed proofs has
found and experienced the truth and real accomplishment of the Word. And now,
if this be not sufficiently convincing, I would but add, O will you then come
and see! be but Christians indeed, and then ye will no more debate that
testimony. And truly it is a very poor shift, for men, who have the Scripture
before them, which of itself does witness its authority, and this backed with
so solemn a seal from the Lord by his works and providence, to debate the
Christians witness, from their experience, because they do not see this
themselves: For what is the cause thereof? is it not their choice, that they do
not follow on to know the same? The truth of God seeks credit from no man
upon trust; yea, craveth no more but that by a practical converse they would
put it to a trial: and then it shall not decline their judgment.

Now to prosecute this argument a little, I shall point at some special
Scripture-truths, with which Christians have most usual trade and converse in
their own case; and give in therewith their testimony how these are clearly
proved and verified by most sure experience. It is not to be here understood,
the giving a particular account, with respect to persons, time, or other
circumstances, how the Word does thus take place. I think, it may be
sufficiently convincing, to instance in the general such clear uncontroverted
experiences, which are well known to the godly, and have by them been often
proved amidst the various changes of their life (though not by all in the same
measure, but in some suitable proportion to their different sizes, trials, and
wrestlings) which can witness that real correspondence, which the Word has
with the experience of the saints: and truly concerning these I may with some
confidence assert, they are not naked or airy notions, but such as can witness
their truth to the serious experienced Christian, whom on this account I dare
attest.

I shall here instance in five special truths of the Word, which are much tried
and proved in Christians experience. 1. That there is such a contrariety
betwixt the flesh and the spirit, as the Scripture holds forth. 2. The
deceitfulness of man's heart. 3. That there is a spiritual and invisible
adversary, with whom we have war. 4. That the promises of the Word have
undoubted accomplishment. 5. That truth also of the threatenings; I mean, such
under whose reach the godly may fall.

I. That there is a contrariety betwixt the flesh and the spirit, a Law in our
members rebelling against the Law of our mind, is a truth very clearly proved
to the Christian; whose experience, though sad, does undeniably verify and
confirm the Scripture, Gal. 5. 17. Romans 7. 19, 21, 23. This is a piece of the
Word which holds forth man's nature in its true shape and form, whither their
bias and inclination most easily turns: yea, so marvellously answers their
experience, that to question the same, were to put it far beyond question, that
they know nothing of a new nature or principle of grace within. For whatever
made earnest of Religion, but their first acquaintance with the peace of God
was the beginning of this war? It is then that the house divides, and
corruption sets up a standard; yea, no sooner can any begin to be a
Christian, but he must be a soldier also. And we may say, none ever attained
such a measure of mortification, or was so old in the grace of God, as could
privilege them from the stirrings of the old man, and necessity of that
complaint, Who shall deliver us from the body of death! But what ever advantage
some of the saints have above others, yet in this their experience can witness.

1. They now know two different parties within themselves, that until once
grace came they could not understand; which at the same time, in the very same
action, do act oppositly one to the other: yea, that there is no spiritual
duty, wherein the flesh (though not always in such a prevalent degree) does not
show some active resistance.

2. That all the stirrings and motions of the flesh have still a tendency,
congruous to their own nature, to turn the heart carnal, and to alienate it
from God; so as it is easy to discern, how in these the rise and the end do
thoroughly correspond.

3. That this is a cruel taskmaster, if once it bear sway; imperious in its
command, and violent in its pursuit: so that their experience may herein tell,
it is a sore and an intolerable thing, for a servant to bear rule.

4. That to things most forbidden the flesh moves most impetuously; so, as it
will even break through the hedge, though sure thereby to be scratcht with
thorns: yea, it is often so eager in its pursuit, that it will follow the bait,
while the hook is most discernable.

5. That when once this does swell, and wax fat; they may upon another interest
cry, Woe's us, our leanness! For, like the scales of the balance, they find a
proportionable abatement and depressing of their spiritual life, as the flesh
goes up; yea, they have cause to know how every step of their heart going
forth to the World, is a step that does put them further off from God.

6. That the more closely the Law is pressed in its spiritual extent, yea, the
more spiritual a duty is, the more fully opposite they find their carnal heart:
and though the flesh may bear up a little with the form of Religion, and has
more complacency with that way which lies most in externals, yet it cannot
endure the power thereof; it can suffer men to be Hypocrites, but not truly
Christians.

7. To restrain and bring this under bondage, they find that it does put the
spirit so much at liberty, which getting loose reins for a little while will
leave the soul work for many days, and with sad after-groans pay back an hour's
pleasure: yea, they also know, when the outward man is low, and under a
sensible decay, it has not then hindered, but rather effectually helped their
inward joy and strength.

8. That indulgence to the flesh causes a sensible thick interposition between
Heaven and the soul; whence they are so clogged and hampered in their flight
and motion toward God; yea, thus have often their choicest duties been made a
sore and grievous task.

9. That this is the true rise of their usual perturbations, and does still put
some jar betwixt them and their lot and does hinder a satisfied enjoying of
that which they have, through murmuring at that they want; yea, they know, that
to please the flesh has been often the cause of their greatest grief and
displeasure.

10. They also find how the defilement of their spirit does help to darken it:
which overgrown with the flesh, can have no clear discovery of spiritual
things; but the more separate from the body, and purged from these gross dregs,
they find themselves at a further advantage to converse with divine truths,
which thus they get discovered, beyond all that nature can reach.

11. That the heart of man is deceitful, and desperately evil (Jer. 17. 9. Jer.
4. 14. Prove. 4. 23.) Is a Scripture truth, where to the Christians experience
does answer, as the face answers to its self in the glass: yea, we may say,
it is so clearly demonstrated to those who were ever serious about their inward
case, that while they thus read the Word in themselves, and are made to read
themselves in the Word, they may with wonder acknowledge, that he which can
sound this great deep of the heart, and draw so vive a portraicture thereof, is
surely one before whom all things are manifest; who does search and try the
reigns, and know what is our mould and fashion. This is one of the very first
lessons, which practical Religion does teach: and the more nearness with God,
and further measure of grace, that is attained, the more clear discovery there
will be of this. O what sad hours, what bitter complaints, has it caused? This
often does mar the Christian's feast, and mingle their Wine with Gall and
wormwood. I am sure, if that excellent company of the Saints, who have been
from the beginning to this day, could be brought together, to give in their
suffrage, and witness concerning the deceitfulness of the heart, there would be
one joint testimony to this truth. We should find that Enoch who walked with
God, Moses with whom he spoke face to face, that beloved Disciple who leaned on
Christ's bosom, and he who was caught up to the third Heavens, were no
strangers (...), but could witness thus.

1. That it is within which aileth them most, and their greatest adversaries
are men of their own house: yea, that in the worst of times, there is still
more cause to complain of an evil heatt, then of an evil and corrupt World;
there being no worse company, than they are often to themselves.

2. That no time of their life, but might give them some further proof, that
they are fools, who trust their own heart, which often will escape and overreach
their quickest reflection, even when both their eyes are on it; yea, that there
is no time that allows the putting off their armor, or to dismiss their
guard; not the best case, the greatest establishment in grace, nor the evening
of the day, though they were within some minutes of the crown and complete
victory, does privilege them from the experience of a deceitful heart.

3. That under the best frame, they find, there will often lurk that which
after-time does discover, that for the present (though it had been told) they
could not have believed, until frequent experience makes them see, that the
Word knew their heart better than themselves.

4. That to bring home their heart, when once it goes abroad, or recall the
liberty they have given it, is not easy; which does no sooner parley with a
temptation at a distance or adventure to sport therewith, but it quickly
turns to earnest and is ready to yield.

5. They know the constant need to have a watch upon their senses, and to make
a Covenant with their eyes, which do quickly betray their heart; so easy it is
to be deceived, yea, to grow warm, and to take fire upon the smallest touch.

6. How quickly also their spirit does slacken, and lose its bent, even in the
greatest advantage of their case; their experience can tell, that when in some
measure they have been raised up in any spiritual enjoyment, they were then in
hazard to be lift up to the wind, and to have their substance dissolved in the
more solid part of Christianity.

7. What a sight have they sometime of themselves? such as would be a terror
to them, if the heart and motions thereof could be writ out to the view of
others, or that any were witnesses to that which in one room will dwell besides
the grace of God as its next door-neighbor.

8. In a word their experience does witness, how soon the strongest resolutions
will evanish; that they are not often in the evening, what they were in the
morning, nor for many hours do they keep the ground they had attained: but
Reuben's Character, unstable as water, may be still their complaint. Yea, I am
sure as many as ever obtained mercy to know themselves, can tell that it is past
all reckoning, how often their heart has deceived them, when they trusted it
most. This every day may cause them to sit down, and admire the grace of God;
which can mend what they so often mar; and is stronger to save and preserve,
than they are to destroy.

III. That as there is a body of death within, they also know there is, An
adversary without, Ephesians. 6. v. 12. 1. Pet. 5. ver. 8. Joh. 8. v. 44. whose way
and devices and method of tempting do most exactly answer the discovery of the
Word. This is indeed a truth, which Christian experience in all ages does
witness, that no sooner they had a serious look after God, but found themselves
pursued by an invisible party, whose approaches, though spiritual, are yet
certain, and most sensibly demonstrated; beside that which the Word does
clearly teach. Yea, it is true none (...) saints were ever privileged from
such experiences, for herein does the Christian's warfare lie. But O how sweet
may the evening be, while they sit down, and can sing that song, Our soul has
escaped as a bird from the fowler. I shall here give in something of the godly
man's experience, which can bear witness to this.

1. That there is surely another party than the World, or themselves, with
which they have to do; an invisible adversary without, whom they perceive by
that sensible correspondence he keeps with their heart within, by those
violent inroads, importunate solicitations, those impetuous motions, wherewith
they are so strangely hurried, and often driven over light, and judgment, yea,
over their strongest resolutions, so as he may be as discernable to them, and
that there is something therein beside themselves, as if they conversed with
him in an outward visible shape.

2. That since the time when they begun to look after God, and to know any
thing of his work upon their spirits, they have been acquainted with most
affrighting, dreadful temptations, and do now perceive his rage, and violent
pursuit to bring them back, which they knew not before, when at peace with
their idols and sinful way.

3. That the mark he levelleth at, to which his usual temptations have a
tendency, is their soul and inward man, to hinder communion with God, and to
turn their heart off from him, to break the Law, and lay aside commanded duties.

4. That his ordinary approaches to the heart are often by a very small thing: he
needs no more but an open door, or a sinful look for the dispatch of a
temptation, and knows by a wound in the eye, how to carry death in unto the
soul.

5. That he is such a party as knows his time and opportunity, can change his
weapons, (...) busk the hook with diverse baits, and yet he is always at hand,
when the heart is lifted up, when they are out of their duty, and in a carnal
frame, to set in then with some temptation, and fish in such a troubled water.

6. That his way does truly answer his name, Spiritual wickedness in high
places; this being so discerned by daily experience, that he has the advantage
of the ground, is a most subtle observing adversary, who lies in the dark to
us, while we are in the light to him, and knows how to correspond with our
corruption, and to suit his temptation to our natural temper (wherewith he is
well acquainted) and to our calling, and our company, to the present strait, to
our predominant inclination, and to our retirement and solitude; yea, that he
is one who knows how to follow in, and play with such a gale, when we are in
hot blood, or in any distemper and discomposure of spirit.

7. That he can transform himself into an Angel of light, and suit his
temptations to the spiritual exercises and enjoyments of the saints; that there
are temptations on the right hand as well as the left, which are so refined,
and so like a Christian exercise, that they can scarcely discern the weed from
the flower, and most dreadful errors from the choicest truths, to which they
often have a great resemblance; though at last it does appear that the native
tendency even of the most specious errors in the judgment, is to looseness in
practice, and to make men religiously irreligious.

8. That he is also a roaring lion; which they have often proved by dreadful
blasphemous injections, these fiery darts which are thrown in with violence,
wherewith there is no concurrence of the inclination or consent, but a
discernable force put upon them, assaulting them with most horrid Atheistical
thot's, even while their heart does rise with abhorrence, and enter their
dissent against the same.

9. That he is a most restless adversary; who is going still about, and gives
no cessation, but with purpose to return at some greater advantage; and is no
less terrible in his flight, than in his assault; and that he can speak out of
a friend, as well as out of a foe; yea, and does then most dangerously tempt,
when the temptation is least seen or discovered.

10. That his temptations do not only drive at engaging of the heart to bring
sin to the thought, but also the bringing it forth to the act, for putting some
blot upon their walk and conversation.

11. That he is one who is overcome by resistance, and does flee before those
that withstand him; which they have often proved, that they have returned from
prayer with the spoil of their adversary, and at such a time have been made to
wonder, how that which has often foiled them, should have been their temptation.

13. They also find by frequent observation, that though he is most subtle,
being indeed one who through long experience and continued practice has
attained a great deal of dexterity in tempting; yet, he has one usual method,
and such device which the serious Christian, by daily experience and
watchfulness, may easily discern, and perceive his temptations in their rise,
and at a distance while they are, as it were, creeping up the wall: yea, thus
in some measure he may find out the depths of Satan, and know how to avoid the
net spread by that great fowler.

IV. That the promises of the Word which are held forth to the Godly, for their
use and encouragement while they are in the way, have a certain accomplishment,
and are a safe ground to adventure upon, and worthy to be credited, is a truth
tried in all ages; whereto experience of the saints can give a large testimony.

Now in speaking to this grave subject, it is not needful to speak any thing of
the nature and diverse kinds of promises, nor whence it is that we live at so
poor a rate and so uncomfortably, while such as well as this is at our hand.
For it is easy to read the cause within ourselves, we sow sparingly, and venture
little out, therefore we have so small an increase; there is a price for
wisdom, but it is in the hands of fools, who have no heart thereto. But this
does not concern us here; for I only aim to hold out this, that the promises
which God has given his People in the Scripture, are of unquestionable verity,
and have as real and sure performance in the saints experience, as they are
sure of that which comes most necessarily to pass by the work and concurrence
of natural causes, as that the fire does burn when combustible matter is added,
or the sun rise after its going down. For indeed this truth is so manifest,
proved by such innumerable experiments, amidst the various changes of a
Christian's condition, that we might summon as many witnesses as have been
followers of God in the World, which are not a few, who in all ages have put
the promises to an essay, and set their seal that God is true. Yea, to ask at
such, if they know whether there be a truth in Scripture-promises, that comes
not to pass, I think were to enquire at a living man, whither he sees and
feels, or if there he such a thing as motion, since they have as sure and
sensible a demonstration of the one, as he has of the other.

But ^ere I speak any thing particularly to this, I would first premise some
things, to clear what we understand here, by the saints experience of the truth
of the promises, in these following considerations.

1. We would consider, though the Scripture has here it is accomplishment, and
is intended for the use of the Church, and every particular Christian, while on
the way in his militant condition, yet there are some promises of the Word
(yea, the greatest) which belong to the saints, that will not be fulfilled,
until they have cast off their armor, and are called to divide the spoil:
their experience of which, will be the high prize of the calling of God in
Christ, whereof, all which they now enjoy, is but an earnest.

2. We would consider that the great intent of the Scripture, and promises
thereof, is not for contemplation, but that we may know them by experience, and
drive a blessed trade and commerce therewith; the merchandise of which is
better nor that of gold: for here lies the Christian's life in the World, yea,
it is a great part of their talent, the promises, which are not to be laid up
in their heart and memory, as (...) a napkin, but they must give an account
what experience they have gained thereby, and thus the diligent hand should
make rich.

3. What ever be the different sizes, and degrees of experience among the
saints, according to their growth and age in Christ, yet it is certain that the
meanest who have interest in the promises, and did ever embrace them in
earnest, and put them to trial, must know something of the performance of the
same in their own case; for the Lord does not suffer his work in his People to
want a seal.

4. The godly's experience hereof, is then much made out, when they are much in
observation; and we know little of the truth and performance of the promises,
because we are not more habitually in a frame to observe. Thus he goes by, and
we perceive not; but they never wanted confirmations, who were seriously
seeking to be confirmed in the truth of the Word.

5. The special mercies and providence of a Christian life, are a certain
return of the promise, and in that way do meet them, as the proper channel of
their conveyance; for they are the sure mercies of the Covenant: and how
refreshful is it, that all the several cases of the Saints, their meanest as
well as their greatest necessities, and their outgate or relief are
comprehended in the Word, and under some promise, and were all foreseen in his
everlasting view, who has so marvellously suited the same to all that his
People stand in need of, as if it had been directed to such and such a
Christian only!

6. This helps to make the mercies of the godly man to have a peculiar and
sweet relish, and to be some way twice his mercy, when he gets them in so
immediate a way reached to him as it were out of the promise, and as an
observable return from Heaven; when thus the Lord seals his Word to him by
his work, and the way of the Word he finds has been the way of his
comfortable Relief; that when he has had no other escape, but to turn in to
the promise, and to cast himself upon it, he gained this experience, he trusted
in God, and was helped; and can give in this testimony of him, that he has
both spoken it, and himself also has done it, according to his Word.

7. It is not any extraordinary thing, we here understand, by the Christian
man's experience of the truth of the promises; it is not a rapture or
revelation, or such as some of the Saints have upon some singular and special
account had; for we have not any promise for these things: But it is something
well grounded upon the Word, which constantly holds in the Lord's
ordinary-way of procedure with his People, according to the tenor of the
Covenant. For his Word, does good to them that walk uprightly; and does
certainly take place in the experience of every serious and diligent Christian.

8. This is not the testimony of a few, but the record of all the Saints since
the beginning, whose experience does all most harmoniously agree, and bear one
witness, that he is faithful who has promised; and it is not that which a
Christian has found once or twice in his life, but the daily food of such as
live by faith.

9. This does put a strong obligation on the godly man to the Word, for the
time to come; for these who have tried it often, may with much confidence trust
it in the day of their strait.

10. The experience which the godly has of the real performance of the
promises, is a most convinicng evidence of his state in Christ. It is the
earnest and pledge of the inheritance, and full accomplishment of that which
remains; that the Lord will perfect what concerns him, who has been his
help hitherto; and will be his exceeding great reward in the end, who has made
him find so much of the gain of godliness here by the way.

Now having premised these things, I shall here instance some particular
promises, wherein the Christian's most usual trade and commerce does lie, and
to which they give in their seal and witness. I confess, if all these proofs
which the Saints have had, of the fulfilling of the promises, could be gathered
together, we might make use of that Divine hyperbole, The World could not
contain the books that should be written thereof. O what an admirable volume,
what an excellent commentary, and copy should this be of the Scripture, to see
it thus turned over into the experience of every Christian! It would be some
(...) easy to number the drops of rain and dew since the creation, as to reckon
all these precious drops and emanations of love, these sensible returns and
accomplishments of the promise, which they have had in their experience. I
truly think, it could hardly be believed, though it were told, what some of
the godly here have found in the way of the Word: but it is sufficient, to
answer the design of this work, to show that there is a sensible demonstration
and performance of Scripture-promises, concerning which the experience of the
Saints in all ages does agree; that by many confirmations the Lord has often
sealed the truth thereof to their souls.

There are 10 special promises, held forth to the godly in the Word, which I
shall here instance, and therewith hold forth what a clear testimony their
experience can give, of the undoubted truth and accomplishment of the same.

FIRST Instance, is that promise given to Believing; to such who credit the
naked word, when there is no probable appearance of its fulfilling, and thus
give God the glory of his faithfulness; which we have expressly held out, 1 Chronicles. 20. 20. Ps. 112. 7. 8. Joh. 1. 50.

To clear the accomplishment of this promise, I shall but appeal to that
testimony the saints in all ages have left thereof; yea, to the present
experience of the godly at this day, if they have not certainly found it so --

1. That when in a particular they have trusted God therewith, and got their
spirit quiet in a recumbency on him, he has dealt with them according to his
word; yea, if then from clear convincing returns of the promise, they have not
been made to say, it did never repent them, that they gave more credit to the
testimony of God, than of their own hearts.

2. That they have not found a more sweet and observable issue, than when their
help lay most immediately on the word alone; never a more comfortable Relief
than when least of sense and most of faith was in carrying them through, when
little of the creature and much of God appeared in their mercy, and when they
were at the lowest, having no way of escape but to throw themselves on the
promise, they have then had the best retreat, yea, their supply as sensibly
felt, as their need and burden had formerly been.

3. That their greatest difficulties and shakings about the promise, have
helped to their further confirming and establishment: so as they can say, the
Lord's way, by perplexing them first, yea, to their sense losing their Hold,
has helped to fasten it better; and that which for the time did speak their
case most helpless, has made way for his more eminent appearance and
manifesting of himself.

4. That their greatest venture, and giving most out, has usually had the
richest income: the most eminent experiences of their life have followed the
most adventurous acts of their faith; yea, upon an after-reckoning they have
often found, that their adventuring of life, estate, and credit on the promise of
God, even in these things, has very observably been their Advantage.

5. That where they have most been a friend to their faith, there has faith
also been most a friend to them: in their standing to the credit of the
promise, nor dismayed by the greatest objections and false reports raised
thereof, they have found a very evident mark of God's respect to the same,
causing them to see, that he will honor such who thus honor him. And it is
indeed worthy of a remark, what we have of Caleb upon record, that he took part
with the promise of God against that discouraging report which then was raised
of the Anakims, and their walled cities; and therefore the inheritance of the
Children of Anak was given to Caleb and his sons, in their lot from the Lord.

6. That believing does always make way for sense, and in their closing with
the naked Word of promises, they have not wanted the seal of the Spirit of
promise; but have found a sweet-calm, their burden sensibly cased, when once
they got it said over on the word, which they can say has been their first
resting place, like the very fixing of the motion of the needle toward its
right point, when their spirit had been restless and in greatest agitation.

7. That the greatest disappointments, which their hope in the Word seemed to
have, they have found afterward most to their advantage; when their returns
have not only been according to their faith, but have often exceeded their
adventure, and been far beyond what they believed: yea that from frequent
experience they may say, the issue of trusting the Word, how long so ever they
thought it deserted, yet came always in season, was never too late and out of
time.

8. That this did never occasion bitter reflections, or was their reproach
before the World, that they trusted God in a day of strait and were not helped:
but this testimony have all such left, who have most credited it in a dismal
hour, that none should fear after them to hazard upon such a hand and venture
on the promise; for their faith has often carried them well and comfortably
through, where both sense and reason have been ready to sink.

SECOND Instance, Whereby we may see the performance of the promise in
Christi^^ experience, is this, That God truly hears prayer; is near unto his
People in what they call upon him for, agreeable to his Word, and will answer
their desires; we have this promise most express. Phil. 4. 6. Psalm. 32. 6.
Psalm. 65. 2. Psalm. 91. 15.

Now the accomplishing of this part of Scripture is so very clear, that I can
attest the experience of all the generation of the righteous, since the
beginning, what frequent and unanswerable confirmations they have got of this
truth in their Christian walk: so that I am sure, no man ever was in earnest in
the matter of Religion, and a stranger to this; yea, that he was never more
certainly persuaded of any thing, than of this, that God does hear prayer. O if
men's souls were but in their souls stead, whose evening-wrestlings and tears
the Lord has often turned into a morning-song, they would know this is no
delusion. I shall here touch something of that experience, which by many proofs
the saints can give, as a witness to this promise.

1. That when they have often with Hannah gone in before the Lord in the
bitterness of their spirit, they have been made to return with a sensible and
mavelous change in their case; yea, when in going about prayer, they have
been put to wrestle with much distemper and deadness, they have often seen the
wind discernibly change, and therewith their spirits lightened from under that
burden, an observable calm and serenity following much inward perturbation;
yea, they can say, that they have found their hearts thawed, and put in a flush
of tenderness, upon the back of a most sensible restraint.

2. That access and liberty to pour forth their souls to God, when he has
filled their mouth with arguments, and enabled them both to wrestle and wait,
they have found a favorable Crisis, and begun Relief, yea, the very turn of a
sad case, which they have got from the Lord, as the pledge of a further answer,
and that when he thus prepares the heart, he does cause his ear to hear.

3. That when they have been under a most dark cloud, they have found their sky
clear, have got a very sensible taste of God's acceptance in prayer, and of
his taking their suit off their hand, even while the matter was still in
dependence before him; yea, that they have often had such a satisfying impression
of God's mind, and persuasion of his answering their desire, as has helped
them cheerfully to wait, yea, sometimes to sing the triumph before the victory.

4. That when they had been much in prayer, they must also say, it has been
the time wherein their spirit has flourished, was most lively; yea, then they
had their best days; then the candle of the Lord shined upon their paths, and
his dew lay all night upon their branches. But they have found there is an
evident and proportionable abatement of their spiritual life and encouragement
in God, according to their wearing out in the exercise of this duty.

5. They have many times found, that when there was nothing left them, but to
turn in to God, and they knew of no other way to come through, but to pray and
look up, they never found a more sweet and seasonable relief: so that most
observable times of prayer have been also the most observable times of their
experience; and they can say from many proofs, it is no hopeless business,
which is put over upon God by prayer, though there be small outward appearance.

6. That it is not in vain to follow out a suit before the throne, but access
and interest in Heaven is as sure a way to come speed (which they know well) as
greatest interest upon earth; having so evidently found, while many seek the
ruler's favor, that the determination of every thing is from the Lord.

7. That prayer, with quiet waiting in the use of means, gets comfortably
through, where overcaring and carnal policy, in the use of all other shifts,
has been forced to stick.

8. They know by experience, that as there are judicial times, wherein an
inhibition as it were is (...) on them from the Lord, in their wrestling, yea,
and a sore restraint on their spirits, which has been very sensible, so also
they have found times of more easy access, and abundant liberty, a spirit of
prayer let forth, before some special mercy and deliverance to the Church,
whereby they could in some measure discern its near approach.

9. That on the back of some solemn address and application to God by prayer
and fasting in a day of strait, they have often seen cause even from that day and
upward to date a remarkable return, and deliverance, in which even common
observers might discern what an evident answer the Church's intercession with
God in times of extremity has had.

10. I may add, the saints know this so well by experience that surely God
hears prayer, even in such and such a particular, that they can with much
confidence adventure, and make an errand of the meanest, as well as their
greatest concernments to him; having so often tried, and found that seriousness
and sincerity in address to God was never in vain, but what ever be the times,
therein this promise takes place, your heart shall live, that seek God.

THIRD Instance, Is the promise of the Spirit, and pouring out of the same;
which we have clear in the Word, Is. 59. 21. Joh. 14. 16. Luke 24. 49. Re^. 8.
16. 6.

The accomplishment of which is so manifest, such a sensible demonstration
thereof in the experience of the saints, that I am sure this can no more be
denied, than those who are warmed with the heat of the sun, can deny their
sense and feeling, that the sun has such an influence: and does not the
Christian's spiritual walk, bear as convincing a witness to the fulfilling of
this promise, as any living man by walking in the way shows that he has a
soul and principle of life within him. Now to demonstrate this a little, I
would but touch some of the ordinary experiences of the saints therein, which
they do testify and by clear undeniable evidences know to be no delusion.

1. That which causes so real a change upon them, which makes them alive to
God, who once were dead, creating them as it were of new, that which brings a
clod of earth so near Heaven, raises so far above themselves to a delightful
converse with things not seen, that while their place and abode is here, their
company and fellowship is above; that which makes all things new to them and
does so far change their nature and inclination, as causes them to find more
sweetness in a spiritual life, than in the pleasures of sin, yea, reconcileth
them with the Law, and exercises of a Christian, where once there was such
contrariety: Oh! is not this a real effect of the Spirit, and no imaginary
thing!

2. That whereof they were altogether ignorant, when they were strangers to
God, and knew not if there were a Holy Ghost, but by report, now since their
being born again they find themselves entered in another World, brought out of
darkness unto a mavelous light, and of this are sure, that once they were
blind, but now they see, is not this a proof of the truth of this promise?

3. That which makes them see more of God in his Wood, and Works, at one time
than at another; whence is this difference and inequality, the Scriptures are
at one time the great things of God's Law, which are at an other time, but
common things to them! the object is the same, but O! what different
manifestation thereof? whence is it that such a light springs up in the Word,
that opens up this deep, and makes them see the wonders of his Law, and
within a little time nothing but dark night; do not the saints know this well,
and that it is no delusion?

4. That which makes such sensible liberty in their soul, and confidence in
their approach to God, after sore bondage and fear; which raises them often so
far above their ordinary frame as they are not only quickened and refreshed
themselves, but do observably warm others. O how piercing, and savory are their
words, which show what difference there is often, betwixt a Christian, and
himself, betwixt a dead exercise of a gift which reaches the ear, and that
which melts the heart, and does even reach bystanders, with a pleasant
perfume!

5. That which makes such a sudden change in their case under ordinances: that
their heart, that died within them as a stone, ere they were aware has got
life, and taken fire with a Word; yea, has been poured out within them so as
their Beloved's voice has had another sound! O then they think not the time
long, the Word is as the honey from the comb, so as they have often wished a
perpetual arrest upon their spirit in such a condition, that none may stir up
their beloved until ^e please! Can that be any delusion?

6. That which brings in promises seasonably into their mind in the day of
their strait, and causes the Word to come in so suitably to their present
case, with such a satisfying impression of the same, as does give most sensible
and present ease.

7. That which so clearly by the Word discovers to men their own heart, and
does search them out in their most close and retired thoughts, that they have
been often made to wonder, how the Word is upon all their secrets; is not this
the candle of the Lord?

8. That which does demonstrate their state and being in Christ, by an argument
which is beyond all words, and does by power in an irresistible way answer all
objections, and turn the most froward case into a blessed calm, and has made a
simple word more effectual in a moment, than most persuasive arguments could be.

9. That which makes such abundant joy spring up in the heart, when there is
no visible grounds for* the same, like the dry bone gushing out water, must
surely be some supernatural and excellent power, that cannot only bring it out
of nothing, but out of contraries.

10. That which gives them so sensible a taste of the powers of the World to
come, such a ravishing glance of the inheritance, that they could hardly
sometime forbear to rise at midnight and sing for joy in the hope thereof; and
has given them such a discovery of God at some special times, as has made
them ^dge that all they ever knew of him before, was but (...) hearing of the
ear.

11. That which is so discernable and sensibly felt at the present time, that
Christ's return to the soul, and (...) effusion of the Spirit, has been as
evident often to the saints, as to that Martyr who was forced to cry out at the
stake, He is come, he is come! and has been so sweet when enjoyed, that the
remembrance of some of these times has been very pleasant and refreshing; yea,
this is such a thing as most observably occurs to the godly man in the way of
his duty, according to the Word.

12. That is no delusion, the withdrawing whereof is so sensible to them, as it
makes their duty wherein they have had delight, become their burden; when they
are put to row with oars, the wind being gone; and makes it like night to the
soul, when the sun is gone down: and sad experience has often showed them, how
the overclouding of their soul, the withdrawing of the Spirit, the comforter,
does observably follow a neglect of their duty, and yiedling to any known sin,
by which it is grieved.

FOURTH Instance, is that Promise for Direction, which God has given his
People in the Word; that ^e will guide them with his Counsel, will order and
direct their steps, who do commit their way, to him, and teach them the way
that they shall choose, Psalm. 37. 5. Ps. 25. 9. 14. Ps. 74. 24.

The fulfilling of which has been so manifest to those who ever made earnest
of acknowledging God in their ways, and committing the conduct thereof to him,
that I shall but attest their experience, if they have not this testimony to
give --

1. That to trust God with their case, and give him the guiding of their way,
has carried them much more easily through a plunging case, than overcaring
anxiety; yea, the Lord's directing their steps, and making things successful,
when they have committed the same to him, has been often as sensible to them,
as their strait and difficulty was.

2. That the way of the word has been the best expedient for carrying them
safe and comfortably through; and that they never repented, that they did more
consult their duty, than inclination, when they were at a stand about a
particular, and did not debate the command, even while there seemed a lion in
the way.

3. That they were never left without counsel and direction, when their eye was
single, and serious about it; and that it was not so much want of light, as of
an heart to close therewith, that made their way often so dark: but when they
subjected themselves to God's mind, they found, that such who follow him, shall
not walk in darkness.

4. That light and counsel does meet men in following the command, and the
practice of known duty, has helped them to know more their duty; and that
light did most abound, when it was most their serious study to follow the same.

5. They found, it was never in vain, to enquire after God's mind by prayer,
and also in the temple to make a reference of a particular to him, when it was
too hard for them; but have often seen the Word evidently directed to such and
such a case, as if they had got a return from Heaven by an audible voice.

6. They also know, that God's following in light with a powerful impression,
his teaching the reins, and instructing with a strong hand is no delusion, but
the sure and well grounded experience of most solid Christians in all ages;
yea, most discernable from any false impulse: and that some special piece of
work and service, which God has laid in their Way, wants not usually some
special call, backed with such light and authority, as in an irresistible way
can answer all objections, to make them go bound in the Spirit, about such a
duty.

7. How God's special directing hand has been o^t very observable, not only in
preventing and crossing their way, to withdraw them by some sharp dispensation,
from their purpose; but sensibly ever-powering them, so that they have been
plucked as it were back, from unavoidable hazard, that they could not find
their paths.

8. I shall add, they have often observably found, how easy their way was made to
them when the Lord does countenance and prosper the same: what sweet
concurrence of providence; how then difficulties have most sensibly been taken
out of the way, yea, wind, and tide going along with them, in such a manner,
that they have been forced to see and confess a divine hand therein.

FIFTH Instance, is the promise of Pardon, and forgiveness which God has given
his People in the Word: that for his names sake he will blot out their
iniquity, and remember their sin no more; yea, is ready to pardon; which is
expressly held forth, to those who are truly humbled. Mic. 7. 18. Jer. 31. 34
Is. 43. 25.

Now that there is a real accomplishment of this, I am sure, the experience of
the saints can in all ages clearly witness; what joy and peace this has
occasioned, what a sensible demonstration and solemn confirmations they have
had of this promise, so as their very bones might sing; Who is like unto thee,
O Lord! It is true real pardon does not always infer the sensible feeling
thereof; and when Sin is remitted in Heaven, there is not always a declaration
of it in the conscience. But it is also sure, that this is sensibly felt, and
that it is tried by all, even all the generation of the righteous, to have had
as powerful an operation on a disquieted troubled soul, as ever wine or the
choicest cordial could have on the sick, or faint. O! if those who question
this, were in their case, to whom God speaks peace after a storm, they would
know how real and certain that is! I would offer the Christians witness to this
promise, from many, many experiments, by which the Lord has sealed it to their
soul, whereby they know assuredly it is no fancy or delusion.

1. How this has as sensible a connection with the serious exercise of
contrition and repentance, in their experience, as it certainly has in the
word and promise; while they find, that in silence and keeping up their case
from God, their bones have been troubled, their spirit in a restless and
disquieted condition, until once they made an address, and got their soul
vented by confessing to the Lord, which was then like a kindly turn and cool of
a fever.

2. They know it is no delusion, that is found so certain a cure to a wounded
spirit, under the sense of sin; a wound which the world and all its diversions
could never heal; whose pain and grief no music can allay (a drop of divine
displeasure being enough to turn all their pleasures into wormwood and gall)
but O! a taste of this unspeakable cordial, one warming look of a reconciled
God, they know by experience, can give present ease.

3. It is no delusion, which they can not command; no more, than the sun to
shine when overclouded, or the wind to blow, but when it li^teth: which the
most persuading moral arguments can no ways effectuate, nor all their former
experience, nay, nor the letter of most refreshing promises, which sometimes
are to them but as the white of an egg, without taste, until once the spirit
breathe; which not only discovers the ground of their joy in the word, but
does also cause them to rejoice therein, when it shines upon the same.

4. It must be no delusion, which causes so mavelous a change, that after
greatest disquieting fears they have found most sensible manifestations of
love; the greatest flood on the back of the lowest ebb in their spiritual
condition; which often has forced them to retract, what their fears and
jealousies did utter; yea, has made them enquire with wonder, whence they are
so cheerful to day, who yesternight were so broken and crushed? whence their
spirit should be in so sweet a calm, that so lately was like the raging and
troubled sea?

5. That this has often met them, as a blessed surprizal and unexpected welcome,
when they have in a backsliding case come in to God, they certainly know: that
when they knew not how to adventure, and at what end of their raveled condition
to begin, counts having run long over; yet on their very first address, have
got a sweet disappointment to their fears, been helped to their feet, yea, some
times have had as it were the fatted calf killed, to make merry with their
friends.

6. That which has an audible voice within, so strong an impression upon the
soul, which carries with it such a clear satisfying discovery of God's heart
and love, is surely no delusion; while the intimation of that one truth, Your
sins are forgiven, or any other word of promise for that end, they have found
to be an argument beyond words, which they could not resist, but for the time
have been as sure, they see and feel this, as that they live; yea, can no more
now call it ^n question, than formerly they could get it believed.

7. That is no delusion, which causes them with another kind of freedom to
approach to God; makes them know, there is a Spirit of adoption, which sets
the soul at liberty from the sore bondage and thraldom, under which their
former backsliding had put them; yea, a thing not only sensibly felt by
themselves, but may be discerned by others, while they cannot smother the joy
of their heart, or hide in their countenance such a change of their condition,
that truly God has dealt comfortably with them.

8. Has not this the Saints in all ages witnessed, even a joy unspeakable and
full of glory, which though but of short continuance, yet for the present so
strong, as has ravished their soul with the hope of the inheritance above, and
clear view of their interest in it; yea, sometimes made them sing for joy, in
expectation of that blessed day! But, O! this is better felt, than expressed.

9. And in a word, can that be a delusion, that has often turned the poor man's
hell into a Heaven; which meets the Christian in the way of his duty, and the
work does so exactly answer the promise; most sensibly felt after greatest
shakings of the conscience by the law; and can make a sad outward lot, so very
sweet and pleasant; cause them to triumph over the wrath of men, to sing in a
dungeon, to abound and have all things under greatest wants, look grim death
cheerfully in the face in its most dreadful aspect; yea, does make so great and
visible a difference betwixt the Christian, and himself!

SIXTH Instance, Is that promise of Encouragement, and support under the Cross:
which is expressly held forth in the Word, that the Lord will own his People,
bear their charges, and be with them in trouble, in the day of their suffering
for his truth; yea, will bind up the broken in heart, and heal their wounds.
Psalm. 91. 15. Isai. 43. 2. Cap. 41. 17. and Cap. 49. 14. Psalm. 9. 9. Isai 51.
12.

Now that this promise is a truth, and has a certain accomplishment, the
experience of the Saints in all ages will witness: and we know their testimony
is true. What at solemn times of God's presence they have had in a barren
wilderness, how great a cloud of witnesses does seal this, and give their
testimony to the Cross of Christ! Of which we may say, the fame and sweet
favor has gone forth, and spread abroad through the Church; the Fathers have
told it to the Children, and one generation to another: but how little a part
thereof can be expressed! I think, it would be a mavelous record, if the
suffering, and prison experiments of the Saints were particularly set down,
what they have found under the cross. But it is well, we know this promise has
been, and this day is evidently sealed; concerning which I dare attest the
experience of as many as did ever drink of this blessed cup, and were counted
worthy to suffer for the testimony of Christ, if this be not a faithful and
true witness --

First, that they have often tasted what communion with God is, in the secret
duties of a Christian, also in the public ordinances, and in a special
measure, at some more solemn times; but, O! never knew his presence and
communion with him more sensibly than under the Cross: yea, have found that the
work and service of a suffering-time, as it is not the ordinary Service of
every day, has also a peculiar and more than ordinary allowance.

2. That they never knew divine strength more sensibly, than when they have
been most pressed above their own strength: that in the day they were cast on
God's immediate care, and ordinary means of their help most withdrawn, they had
never less cause to complain, but might often say this as their experience,
they thirsted not when he led them through the wilderness; yea, that they have
at no time of their life, found their mercies more observably attend them, nor
more sweet and satisfying, than when by prayer and believing, they were put to
dig the well, and wait for the rain coming down to fill it.

3. That they never found more true liberty, than in the house of bondage: more
refreshing company, than amidst their greatest solitude; while they found Him
near, whom gates and bars cannot shut out: in the day when all things else
seemed to frown upon them, that their midnight-songs have been sweeter, than
all the prosperity they sometimes enjoyed; and that they have often proved, that
the deeper any are in affliction for Christ and his truth, they are also the
deeper in consolation.

4. They must say, the most satisfying and clear discoveries of the word are
under searching and sharpest trials; that a sanctified exercising affliction,
they have found one of the best interpreters of the bible, and the word then to
be an other thing, than it is at other times; yea, even to have been that to
them, which they could desire it to be, so as they are sure it has been shaped
out and directed for that present plunge their soul was in.

5. That there is a very easy passage and dispatch, betwixt Heaven and an
oppressed afflicted soul, an observable vent by prayer, and more sensible
access to God's face, when other things have most frowned; yea, they can
witness from experience that he stays his rough wind in the day of his East
wind: that while he shuts one door, he has set an other open; that when the
storm without has been very sharp, they have found a sweet calm and sunshine
within, to make it easy; and that when he lays on one sore trial, he will
take an other off.

6. They can tell what a sweet comfortable parting, they have often had, with
some sharp trial; which at the first was bitter as death, but in the close,
after sanctified exercise under the same, they have found cause to leave it
their blessing, and confess, that the time of greatest jealousy and fear upon
their part, they have found on God's part has been a time of greatest kindness
and love; the sharpest wounds from such an hand and heart as his, have tended
to a cure; yea, that circumstance and ingredient in the same, which of all was
most bitter and grievous, even there they have found their relief and
encouragement most remarkable.

7. That the peculiar advantage of a sanctified trial is not so well seen in
the present time, as afterward, when the case has altered; then they found a
long and rough storm recompensed at their landing, with a rich lading of
experience; an other kind of discovery of God, his way, and the certainty of
his word, than they formerly had attained: so as now they can speak of him, and
the good of the cross, and adventuring any thing for Christ, with some greater
esteem, on an other ground, than report, or an hearing thereof by the ear.

8. I shall add what has been the frequent testimony of those who ever endured
tribulation for the gospel, that their remembrance and after-reckoning upon
this account has not been sad or bitter, when they sat down and compared their
gain with their loss, their supports and reliefs with these days of trial,
which have gone over their head: so that they would not then exchange their
experience, or want what they have found by the cross; no, not for many more
days of trouble and affliction.

SEVENTH Instance, is that promise of the word which integrity, in an evil time
has; that it shall preserve their steps, and be the best means to help those
through, that keep God's way, yea, even in this life shall not want some
witness of God's respect. Ps. 18. 25. Ps. 112. 4. Rev. 3. 10.

Now to hold forth the accomplishment of this, I may with confidence appeal to
the observation of the saints in all ages, who ever made it their serious study
to keep their garments clean in a time of trial, if their experience has not
this testimony to give.

First, that though at present, honesty in evil times has brought them in
hazard, and with Joseph to a prison, yet it has brought them out also, with
observable advantage; yea, how ever the Lord did order their Deliverance, they
have found this did land them well, and always bring them to a comfortable
harbor.

2. That honesty and faithfulness has an authority even on the conscience of
their enemies, and leaves usually a conviction upon them: Yea, has forced a
testimony and approbation from such men, and they have often found better
entertainment, than those who in a sinful way have sought to please them.

3. They have found this integrity always the choicest expedient and best
policy in a dangerous time, which has observably met them, when they had most
to do; A thing whereof they have reaped the fruits in the day of their strait,
and times of judgment; yea, though it has occasioned sometime their
sufferings, yet it has been also their safety and protection from sadder
sufferings.

4. That though integrity is often under a dark cloud of reproach, yet it still
gets well out from under the same, and has shined usually more bright
afterward: So as they have had cause to observe, what unexpected means the Lord
has made use of, for their clearing.

5. That while their enemies might have (were it not for the preventing
goodness of God) quarrelled upon some other ground, they have been observably
led to pursue, and make them the Butt of their malice, for their honesty, and
that wherein they have peace before God, and have been kept from hitting on the
right cause.

6. They find how unspeakably sweet this is upon an after-reckoning, and in the
evening of their life, that then they reap a comfortable harvest, of that they
have sown with much suffering and tears. O! then it does not repent them, that
integrity was their choice.

7. They have sometime found a hundredfold even in this life; and an
observable gain in that, which they have been willing to risk and hazard most.

8. They must also say, integrity was never their ruin; but an escape was often
brought about in a way they could not have expected; yea, the Lord's shutting
all other doors upon them has been, that he might open one himself, like
Hagar's well springing up in the wilderness.

9. That in making their aim, when they had a large heart for God, they have
not then wanted an opportunity for evidencing the same; their encouragement
has abounded with their duty; and they have got much in, in giving much out
for Christ; that there was no such feast in the world, as they have sensibly
found in the testimony of a good conscience.

EIGHTH Instance is that promise, which is held forth to the Christian in the
word, of strength and assistance to go about duties. Is. 40. 29. 30. 31. Ps.
18. 6. 14. Ps. 84. 5. Ps 68. 28.

To clear this, that it has an unquestionable performance, I attest the
experience of the generation of the righteous. Who ever knew what it was to
serve the Lord in the spirit; and by many sensible confirmations, have not
proved the certainty of these things?

First, that when they have gone about duty under much deadness and straitness
of spirit, they have found a very sensible enlargement, and got their bonds
leased: which surely they could no more command, without the concurrence of
divine help, and something above nature, than these who spread out the sail,
can command a fair wind, when it is cross.

2. That God's help and concurrence was never more discernably carrying them
through, and making them strong, then in the day, that (to their own sense)
they were most weak, when they have gone about duty under greatest fears, and
fainting in spirit.

3. That when they had most confidence in themselves, and judged they were at
greatest advantage in their going about some duty, they have usually had the
saddest retreat; and found that a sure truth, the race is not to the swift, nor
the battle to the strong.

4. They know well what an influence divine concurrence has, not only upon
their inward frame, but also upon the exercise of their gifts, yea, upon the
commonest abilities of judgment, and memory; and that there is a most
remarkable difference, betwixt themselves at one time, and another, according
to the blowing of this wind.

5. They must also witness this as their experience, they found duty never more
easy to them, than when they have had most to do, and were kept most thronged
and pressed therein; yea, when much work was laid to their hand, they then
wanted not an enlarged allowance for the same.

6. That their spirits have been fitted for duty, and carried (...)
difficulties, where at some other time and in an other frame they would have
fainted: and thereby have seen, that none needs to start at any piece of duty,
when God calls them to it; for while difficulties have appeared greatest at
first, the less they have found them afterward, yea, the hardest piece of
service often made most easy.

7. They find God does raise the spirit of his followers, with a suitable
elevation for their work, and can fit them for the service of that time, and
other trials thereof, even beyond their ordinary reach.

8. That there is an open door, and sensible assistance, when there has been
work for the Gospel in such a place; while, on the other hand, they have found
an inhibition sensibly served on them, the door as it were shut, when the tide
was going back, and the work of the Gospel at a stand in such a part.

9. That it is not greatest abilities, which make undertakings successful; it
being in vain, to rise up early, without the Lord.

10. It has often been their experience, that in following the way of God, his
candle did then shine upon their paths, the Spirit of the Lord was with them,
and sensibly poured out: the withdrawing whereof has been no less discernable,
while they turned aside from him; that they have then been put to bear the
burden alone, and found difficulty and despondency of spirit at once growing
upon their hand.

11. I may add, what those who are serious in Religion have often tried, that
there is no such help and furniture for going about duties, as a spiritual
frame, and nearness with God: for then light, and counsel, inward freedom, and
sweet composure of spirit, have brought most sensible advantage to them: in
their greatest, yea, and in their most common undertakings, this has been very
evident.

NINTH Instance, is that great promise; we have, Romans 8. 28. That all things
shall work together for good to them who love God. And Psalm. 25. 10. All the
paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep his Covenant. -- I
confess, it is not easy sometimes to reconcile God's way and this piece of his
Word together: those who take only an ordinary passing view of providence,
cannot well judge, how such things, wherewith often the godly in their life are
exercised, should contribute to their good and advantage; while nothing would
seem more directly cross to the same. But the Christian and wise observer can
give another account: they know what a sure truth this is, that there is no
real jarr betwixt the promise and providence of God in this matter; and what
ever be the present thoughts, patient waiting has had cause to say this, --

1. When his way and their thoughts have most differed, in the accomplishment
of his Word and bringing about their mercy, they have found it was to their
advantage; that his choice was always better then theirs; yea, they have been
often made to confess, that their saddest disappointments therein have tended to
their further Benefit.

2. That the Lord's denying them some outward thing, which they have most
desired, they have found (as afterward has appeared) was to grant them more
than their desire; he has refused them as it were in an Ishmael, that he might
give them an Isaac.

3. They can often say, they had been undone, if they had not been undone; that
it was their mercy, the Lord took such a way to cast them in a fever, to
prevent a lethargy; and by some sharp cross gave them a wound in the flesh, to
cure and let out some gross impostume in their soul, which would have made
their case worse.

4. How greatest shakings have helped their further establishment; so as they
were never more confirmed, than in that about which they have been most
perplexed. Yea, they have also found this the Lord's way, to cure their
frowardness and misbelief by some further addition to their cross: that when
they would not believe, he has caused them to come in upon a greater
disadvantage; while as a small affliction has made them impatient, a more
heavy and pressing trouble has been their cure, and helped them to keep
silence under God's hand.

5. That the growing of difficulties in their way, and some further pressure in
the trial, they have found was from the Lord in order to its removal, and to
the bringing forth of some greater good: and that all visible grounds of
confidence have been often broken, but with this advantage in the upshot, that
their mercy, they had it more immediately out of God's own hand; yea, that the
less moderation there was whilst their trial has come to an extremity, they
have found it then upon the turn, and their hope and encouragement often made to
spring up therewith.

6. How the Lord's deferring their mercy, which they had often sought, has been
indeed their mercy and advantage, which did always meet them in the season;
yea, they must say, his way is always nearest, and waiting on God without
making haste, does truly make the quickest dispatch.

7. Their experience can also witness, how men's reproach, and venting their
malice that way to ruin their reputation, has often been the occasion, ordered
by the Lord, to bring forth their further clearing, and vindication even by
that very mean.

8. How by some sad cross he does often prevent a sadder; which though strange at
first, they have been forced upon after-discovery to confess: The man, who
riding in haste to the seaport, to have passage over seas with a ship going
then off, fell and broke his leg by the way, which was the saving of his life;
for the ship, and all its passengers, perished in that voyage; yet this was a
bitter astonishing providence to him for the present.

9. How their loss, even by some sad slip and failing, in their spiritual
condition, has really tended to their further humbling and advantage; yea,
that which brought them under some visible decay, as to the wonted luster of
their Christian profession has helped them to grow more under ground, in the
root and substantials of Christianity.

10. They can tell how those steps of the providence of God, which seemed most
cross to that design he was carrying on, yea, looked like the very crushing of
their hope, have often been the very mean which has wrought most effectually to
bring about their mercy.

11. I shall add but this, as the Christian's witness to the truth of this
promise; That the sharpest reproo^s have seemed the wounds of a friend, and
most pressing straits made the mean for their further enlargement; how the Lord
has brought them into some dark and plunging trial, which then looked like a
fearful pit, that he might bring them out with advantage, set their feet on a
rock, and establish their goings; yea, that in the hottest furnace, they lost
nothing but what they might well spare, even some of their dross.

TENTH Instance, is that general promise made to Godliness, and those who make
it their serious study, that it shall be great gain; that verily it shall be
will with the righteous, for they shall eat the fruit of their labor, and in
keeping of the command there is a great reward. 1 Timothy 6. 6. 1. Pet. 3. 12, 13.
Psalm. 19. 11.

This is indeed a great concerning truth; but a truth, which, I am sure, none
who did ever make earnest of religion, will call in question. Many convincing
experiments has the Christian had thereof through his Life: such want not some
diary and record, wherein they can cast up the advantage, they have reaped in
close following of God and their duty; yea, from most remarkable providence
they may often say, This I had, because I kept thy precepts. Now, that this
promise has a large witness, I shall here touch some things, which I may with
some confidence say, both in the present and in former times have been proved,
and sealed by the saints in their experience.

1. That they never more effectually consulted their good and advantage, than
when they did with greatest singleness consult their duty, and least with flesh
and blood: they did never more truly seek themselves, than in the practice of
self-denial; yea, in what they intended God most, and least their own private
interest, they have therein found a very sensible advantage.

2. That a serious endeavor to walk before God acceptably, they have found
still the best policy, even in the worst of times; and have found his way then
very satisfying, while it was most their study how to please him: yea, they
have been obliged to confess, that when the Lord's way was their choice, they
have found it also their reward.

3. They have found more real joy and peace in withstanding temptations, than
in any thing the temptation offered; and in laying their interest at God's
feet, and their will underneath his, more than in all their carnal enjoyments.
O the taste, and testimony of God's approbation! how sweet a smile is his, in
whose countenance Heaven lies!

4. That inward peace and tranquillity of mind, a sweet calm and composure of
spirit, does as really attend a spiritual frame and walk, as the shadow the
body; and their best and most comfortable days, wherein they have truly walked
at liberty, have been when their heart was most subject to the Law, with a
single respect to the same.

5. That Religion and a spiritual walk is the best friend, even as to a
contented and comfortable life here in the World; and that they have then most
freedom to enjoy themselves and their lot with satisfaction, when they most
enjoy God: yea, that nearness and communion with him tends to the sublimating
and refining of their natural spirit, and has been an observable help to their
very common abilities and parts.

6. That there is truly a reality in the blessing, which makes a small thing
signify much, and yield more than greater abundance.

7. That when they give God their heart, it is then sweet and matter of
satisfaction, to observe his ways; and the observation is very refreshing, how
far the Lord condescends to their desires, when they sum them all up in
himself, and make him their delight.

8. That the pleasure of Religion is in the practice thereof; and the way to
have Religion easy, is to be thoroughly religious. Duty is then sweet, when men
do it from an inward principle; and holiness would be a more pleasant work,
yea, a reward to its self, if there were less mixture of hypocrisy.

9. That real humility, and walking low in their own eyes, and before God, did
never lose to them respect and credit from men; but self-abasement does
observably go before lifting up, and true honor follows such, who least hunt
after vain applause from the World.

10. That when they were most faithful to observe and improve a little, then
for their encouragement more has been added; and they never wanted matter and
motive to be thankful, when opportunities were improved and taken hold of for
that end: yea, they have found there is a mercy within a mercy, and some
peculiar mercy in every cross, which is only found and brought forth by the
exercised serious improver of the same.

11. That much sincerity has also much sense following the same; secret
honesty before God has met them openly before men, and faithfulness in
Christian freedom purchased them more favor and respect, even from the worst,
than when they studied most to please them in a sinful way.

12. That they never saw so clearly the gain and real advantage of Godliness,
and what a difference there is betwixt those that serve God, and those that
serve him not, as in a time of trouble and strait; how then tenderness in their
former walk, and that which they entertained in the morning, does now meet them
at night, and pay them home with advantage in an hour of temptation.

13. They have been forced to observe, that there is an invisible guard about
his People in their duty; that the Ministry of the Angels toward such is no
delusion, and have often been made to wonder how hazard within an hair breadth
has been prevented; relief, and help come as betwixt the bridge and the water;
how they have been sensibly preserved amidst greatest dangers, while (as it
were) an inhibition has been served upon these, that they should come near,
but not hurt, and only meet with them, that they might read their preservation
from them.

14. That an enlarged heart does meet with an enlarged allowance; and bearing
burden with others of the People of God, has helped to make their own private
burden the lighter.

15. That real Godliness and Religion has as much in hand, as it may be a
reward to its self; which beautifieth the soul, and makes the face and
conversation to shine with an observable luster; that guardeth and preserves
the heart from many vexing crosses, preventeth sad strokes and sorrows, that
others are pierced with, who will follow their idols, and the ways of sin,
which are bitter in the close.

In a word, this is surely found, that God is the best friend; and when there
is peace with him, things without do not offend: but they shall then understand
what it is to be in league with the beasts of the field and stones of the
ground, having a sweet agreement with all the providence and dispensations
that come in their way.

V. That the Scripture-Threatnings have also a certain accomplishment, are
found to be sad earnest, and do not fall to the ground, the Christian can also
seal from his experience.

We are not here to understand the threatenings of vindictive wrath (from which
believers are freed in in Christ) but of a fatherly displeasure, which because
of sin may draw deep, yea, bring forth very dreadful effects, to witness that
it is an evil and bitter thing to depart from God, and that their own doings
shall chastise them; and these threatenings of the Covenant, If thy children
forsake my Law, I will punish their transgression with rods, etc. (Psalm. 89.
30.) are sure truths, which want not in every time a performance.

To clear this (ere I speak any thing particularly) I would premise some things
to be considered.

1. That the word is a perpetual rule, which in every time must take place; and
though affliction is a piece of the common misery of man, yet does it not arise
out of the dust, neither fall out at an adventure, but does often visibly follow
the tract of sin (as a Huth-hound A Dog so called in Scotland, that has an
exquisite sense of Smelling.
) pointing at such evils as the cause, by the stroke, and at the truth and
fulfilling of the threatenings, written upon both.

2. We should adore his sovereignty, whose way both in the measure and manner
of his People's chastisement is so various, as that none can infallibly
conclude, what he is to do in such a case; I mean, we are not to limit the Lord
to such a way and method in his working: yet, this we may assert and firmly
conclude, that not only the threatenings of the word have a performance, but men
may also have even beforehand some more than probable conjecture, yea, a clear
discovery, what such a case does threaten, and what will be the issue of a
sinful course, by considering the Lord's ordinary procedure, both with
themselves and others; how sin has very sad effects, and his way in all ages
is still uniform, agreeing with its self, and with the word.

3. Though a gracious state does surely privilege from wrath and condemnation,
yet not from affliction, and sad strokes of divine anger because of sin; for he
takes vengeance on men's inventions, even when he will spare the inventors.

4. The Lord does often contend with his People for their folly and miscarriages,
more severely than with others; and will not overlook in them, that which he
passes by in the World, without being a reprover; but when light and love and
the Law will not hedge up their way, he will set briar^ and thorns before them,
yea, speak by chastisement upon their bones, to withdraw men from their purpose.

5. It is known, how very deep the holy Anger of God may draw against his
children, even sometimes to pursue them out of the land of the living, and
follow them to the grave, with some remarkable stroke; yea, it has made them
dreadful examples of judgment in this life, for whom he has accepted an
eternal sacrifice in Christ.

6. I shall add, this is the Lord's blessed end in making out his threatenings
against his People, that they should not perish with the World. O! what a blessed
exchange is it, that the flaming sword, which once stood to guard the tree of
life, does now stand as it were in the way of the saints, to keep them from
running into the paths of death.

Having premised these things, I shall now instance some particular evils,
wherewith the godly are ready to be overtaken, which the word does expressly
threaten, and hold forth the hazard of, both as to outward and spiritual
strokes, and give in here the Christians witness from their experience, in all
ages, of the truth of these threatenings.

FIRST. Security and carnal confidence, which we find the word does threaten,
is one evil wherewith Christians are ready to be overtaken; but they do also
know by sad experience, what bitter fruit this brings forth, and that therein
the word falls not to the ground, which is held forth in Hos 2. 1, 9. Hos 7.
9. Isa. 30. 16, 17.

First, that a secure condition is the usual forerunner of some sad change;
that when they are most at ease in a dull and dead temper of spirit, some sharp
rousing dispensation is upon the back of it; either a gross sin, or a searching
cross, as a thorn in the bed of their security, to drive them to their feet.

2. That seldom-reckoning with conscience, the running on of counts for some
time upon their hand, does ravel their case, unto a sad confusion, and makes
it a bitter and heartless work to retire alone, or within themselves; yea, has
a most direct tendency to a further hardening, and real desert of their duty.

3. That when security and deadness grows within, it quickly makes them dry
up and wither without, in the external performance of duty, and in that
vigorous lively appearance, which did formerly brighten their walk and carriage
before others, so as very bystanders may read the languishing of grace, in the
dead exercise of their gifts.

4. That going about duty with most confidence in themselves does usually give
them the most clear discovery of their weakness yea, when they have least looked
for any cross, they have then been sure to meet with it, with that sad
addition, of being a surprizal in a secure condition: whereas, on the other
hand, they may tell what refreshing disappointments they have got, where some
trials have been most feared and looked for.

5. That secure sporting with a temptation may soon turn to sad earnest; they
have found it very hard to dance about the fire, and not be burnt: and the
temptation, which at a distance seemed small, upon a nearer approach they have
found had more bands on their heart, and was another thing than they could have
believed.

6. That the means, whereon they have laid most weight, they have also found to
have given them the saddest disappointment: the putting of them in God's room,
and out of their own place, has been the way to cause them to miscarry; yea,
to turn their cross. Whereas they have often seen some thing unexpected, made the
mean of their help, that they might know means are ordered of the Lord, and are
useful, because he makes them so.

7. Their experience can also witness, that carnal confidence despising the
trial at a distance, is usually punished with carnal diffidence and despondency
of spirit under the same; one extremity made the punishment of the other, like
the hot and cold fits of an ague, which do mutually make one the other more
intense: yea, that their immoderate confidence and expectation of a thing, has
after resolved in as immoderate discouragement as their stroke.

SECOND. The Christians Unwatchfulness and intermitting in the exercise of that
so necessary and commanded duty, we find the Word threateneth, and holds
forth the hazard thereof, Lest ye enter into Temptation, the verifying whereof
their experience can also witness. Luke 21. 34. 36. Matthew. 26. 41.

1. That it is not easy to guide their walk and conversation, when their guard
over the heart does slacken; but the giving loose reins for a little may make
such a sad and large breach, that many (many) days will not easily make up:
yea, they do also know, how a sensible withdrawing of the Spirit, and drying up
their life and liberty, is the usual fruit, which unwatchfulness brings forth.

2. That this helps to make their sun-shines transient, and causes a low ebb
after the greatest enlargement, whilst they do not guard against their peculiar
evils; and that usually there does haunt such a condition the swelling of the
flesh (when the spirit is most enlarged) which will soon put them as far
behind, as they formerly thought themselves at an advantage.

3. That when once the heart lies open, it is quickly seized on and made a
prey; with what a bitter sting does it return: after it has taken liberty to
wander? yea, does find there is a swift progress, that sin has from the
thoughts to the rolling of it to the imagination, and thence to the affection,
wherewith it is more easy to engage, than to shake this off.

4. That unwatchfulness has often turned the most special times and
opportunities for advantage, to the greatest loss; which, through their neglect
of these, has put them further behind, then they were: it has turned their
retirement and solitude, to be their snare; made the desert worse and more
dangerous, than the city; and made them find, that vain thoughts, the following
whereof seems pleasant to the mouth, will prove gall and wormwood in the
belly; there being no sadder company, than a man's spirit let loose upon it
self, whilst they cannot stop that current, whereto they had given a vent.

5. Their experience of this can witness that unwatchfulness has an undoubted
tendency to cast of prayer. How hard is it, in the evening to retire to God,
whilst the heart is abroad all the day? To be Religious in Worship, when men
are not so in their walk; Yea, they do find, that this will bring their
distemper within, out of doors; to some disorder, impertinency or passion in
their words, or outward communication: a thing, which experience may tell, does
wound the soul, make a sad breach in their peace, and does quickly overcloud
the Spirit, and unfit them for communion with God, and going about of spiritual
duties.

THIRD. To restrain Prayer, and neglect calling on God, is an evil also which
the Word does threaten, and hold forth the same hazard thereof, as of
unwatchfulness, lest ye enter into temptation; yea, that this is even a step to
the casting off fear, the Christians experience, from frequent trial can
witness, that this Scripture threatening is true, Matthew 26. 41. Job. 15. 4.

1. That they have found this the rise, which gives life and increase to their
prevailing evils; and that corruption then is upon a sensible growth, as the
lively exercise of prayer begins to be intermitted.

2. That this wears out their spiritual life, and brings a consumption upon
the vital spirits of Christianity; so that those who sometime flourished, and
kept green (as by the scent of water) that correspondence, which they had with
the fountain of their life, while his dew did lie all night on their branches,
has through neglect of prayer been brought to a poor shadow; so although
sometimes the greatness of their loss and distemper has been hid from
themselves, yet might be easily discerned by lookers on.

3. That wearing out of prayer and of delight therein will quickly make them
disrelish any other piece of Religion; put them out of frame to meditate, or to
give thanks, or entertain fellowship with the Saints; yea, the more lively and
spiritual these are, it makes them the more a burden and torment to them.

4. That wearing out of this is a strong temptation to a further forbearance,
and will sensibly wear them out of any sense of their need hereof, and make
them strangers to themselves and to their own case: so that they shall find,
the less they are in this exercise, the further they shall be indisposed; and
the fewer errands they have, the less felt necessity of the same.

5. Their experience can also witness, that little prayer makes a heavy
burden; does multiply their straits; and cause their care to grow, as this is
abated they must then bear their burden alone, and with heaviness take counsel
within themselves, while they ply not this blessed tried remedy, to make their
requests in all things known to God.

FOURTH. We find the Word does threaten D^^ction from the Truth, and turning
from the way of God in a time of trial, as an evil, into which those that are
kept by grace from final apostasy, may yet through the violence of a temptation
fall. Jerem. 9. 13. 15. Psalm. 89. 30, 32. Jos. 8. 11. and their sad experience
can witness the truth of the Scripture-threatnings concerning this also, while
they have found,

1. That in one day they may adventure on that, which through most of their
life they have not got over, but it has made them go with their back bowed
down to the grave: that their giving the Lord's work a wrong touch, is one of
those things which does scarcely leave them all their time; but, beyond other
sins, they have found this still come up with a bitter and heavy reflection:
yea, in the evening of their life they have found this so sore on their spirit,
that it could not lie hid or silent, but they were forced to witness their
sense of it before the World, ere they could obtain any ease.

2. That this the Lord does usually meet, with some sharp and public reproof,
even before men; that though he pardon his People, yea, give some sensible
intimation thereof to their souls, yet he has no past them, as to some visible
mark of his displeasure because of such a thing.

3. They see, that a crooked and uncleanly way proves not the mean of
extricating them out of trouble; but their straits have been made to grow
therewith: yea, they have found, that which they eschewed in God's way, has
more sadly accosted them in another road; and that there is a thick dreg in the
bottom of the cup, which makes it worse to drink thereof at the close, than at
the beginning.

4. That it is not easy to make a stand in turning aside from the way of God,
when once they are engaged; a retrograde motion is very violent, and yielding
in a little will bring with it some necessity of going further, as a judicial
stroke.

5. That foregoing of some clear opportunity, to give a testimony for the
truth, when called thereto, has turned to be their judgment, that they should
not have further access, or be made useful that way; a thing truly obvious to
such as are wise to observe the judgments of God in their time; yea, likewise
that public backsliding does often visibly wear men out of personal tenderness.

FIFTH. Unsubduedness of spirit, and w^nt of mortification to outward things,
the Word does clearly threaten, and hold out its hazard; the accomplishment
whereof Christians experience can witness. Romans 8. 6, 7.

1. That God has often turned their id^l to be their cross; put a mark of his
jealousy on their dearest things, when once they put them in his room* yea,
frequent observation of the Lord's way, both with themselves and others, does
show, if they would be quit of a thing, they may set their heart immoderately
on it; such eagerness and exorbitancy of affection being a sure presage, it
shall either be their judgment, or sorrow, or cease to be.

2. That outward things did never yield less, than whilst they pressed them
most: that when they are eager in pursuit of the World, and satisfaction there,
their spirits are sensibly hurried with many perturbations; so that they must
say, that which keeps them from enjoying of God, does also hinder the
comfortable enjoying of themselves.

3. They have found, that flow advance in the work of mortification, has at
last doubled their smart; and been the procuring cause of some very sharp cure,
when the disease did come to that height, that a small and ordinary potion
could not do the turn.

4. That immoderate desire and pressing after an outward thing, they have
sometime got answered, but therewith a sharp reproof from the Lord; yea,
usually have found small satisfaction in their enjoying that, about which they
were so unsober in their pursuit. Give me children, or else I die, said Rachel;
she obtained children, and she died in bringing one of them forth.

5. Their experience can also witness, how overcaring anxiety has often caused
things to thrive worse under their hand; whilst they found never a more
satisfying issue in a particular, than by a quiet submissive dependence on the
Lord for the same.

SIXTH. The doing violence to light, and sinning against conscience, as it is
clearly threatened in the Word, so likewise the sad effects thereof have been
clearly witnessed, in all ages. Prove. 29. 1. Psalm. 81. 11, 12.

1. What a direct tendency this has to the further darkning of their light,
and to a judicial hardening; and that reproofs not entertained, do usually
become less frequent, yea, less pungent and searching; their heart then does
not so easily smite them, and put tears in their eye, as sometimes a word, or
secret rebuke of the conscience, would have done: so as they can now digest
greater things, who would sometimes have stood at that which comparatively was
very small.

2. That when they would not read their bosom-distemper, which both by the word
and conscience was pointed out, others have got leave to read the same written
on their forehead; and the shifting off of discovered guilt, and of all serious
endeavor to get the quarrel taken up in secret, betwixt God and them, has
brought the matter at last to some public hearing, even before the generation.

3. That their darkening of their light upon some private interest, while they
would again and again enquire if such a thing be warrantable, concerning which
the Lord had once cleared their mind, is a most perilous thing; yea, has got
an answer according to the idol of their heart, and their choice made to be
their judgment.

I shall but add, what bitter and sad experience can tell, how dreadful it is,
to give the conscience a blow, which is more easily hurt than healed: that
deliberate, adventuring on the occasion of a temptation, when they would go to
the high priest's hall, without warrant or a call, has cost them dear; and
they have found that bold sinning does afterward make saint believing.

() I know, it is by serious and experienced Christians, and by these only,
that this argument in the meaning thereof can be reached; and it is sure, such
will not debate the same, who know the truth, and have it dwelling in them, and
on another ground than report, are established in its certainty. For these can
witness, what sweet comforting hours they have had with Jesus Christ, in a sad
uncomfortable time; that he has both spoken, and himself also has done it:
and such must therefore seal his word and the truth thereof, because he has
sealed it on their heart; yea, does so surely know, it is God who works all
their works in them, that with their last words and dying breath they have
confidence to assert this, and commend that excellent study of godliness to
others.

I know, that with a great many of the World this grave convincing argument of
experience has no weight; for strangers intermedle not with that joy, and
therefore fancy it a pure fiction, as the only expedient and preservative to
their heart from the horror and inexpressible torment, which must seize on
them, if the certainty and necessity of godliness were granted; these scoff at
this excellent thing, as some vain conceit or distemper, because they would
have it so. But with such I must here crave a serious and free communing; yea,
in so great and concerning a business must obtest, that they would not shut
their eyes, but allow reason that weight, they would do in any other case. O
what do you allege, on what ground do you reject this great witness of
experience? If you deny it, because you have not found it, do not others assert
this, because they surely know it? And their assertion has these two
advantages; (one) that they once had the same sentiment and opinion with you,
which now they reflect on with much horror. (2.) The reality of its effects on
them proves both the reality of the cause, and the excellency thereof. And now
if these be indeed serious, and their testimony true, whom you thus challenge,
are you not in a sad and dreadful case; since you cannot think to lodge
together at night, or that your interest and theirs will meet in another world,
which has been so very opposite here by the way! You must surely part with
these at death, and land at some other port, to whom all your life you have
walked so cross! O sit but with your selves alone, and consider this; you ^ate
serious Religion, and therefore you reproach it: will you take such a revenge
on your selves, and out of prejudice to it, run on so great and eternal a ruin?
But know assuredly, it is not what you judged, and if once you pass (in this
delusion) that great and last step betwixt time and eternity, you are undone,
oh undone for ever! And sure, if you admit the authority of the Scripture, you
cannot debate the Christians experience; while there you have so great a cloud
of witnesses, who bear that same testimony; but it is on your self you must
reflect (not on the truth) that you know so little in this way.

Now, to leave some Conviction on the Atheists of this time, and those who take
liberty to scoff at serious Religion, I would here offer some rational Grounds;
which even to the World and bystanders may convincingly demonstrate, if they
would but consider the same in earnest, that this testimony the Saints do in
all ages bear, from their experience, to the truth, can be no cunning device or
falsehood, but is most certain and sure. For

1. That must be a sure testimony, and is no cheat, if you judge that those who
declare the same, have the sense of a Deity, and have any truth, or moral
candor. For it is a clear dilemma: either such, whose witness this is, are
impostors of the highest degree, yea, in Atheism and gross deceit must exceed
all the world beside: or, it is true and valid, what they witness. Now, for the
first, I shall crave no more in their behalf, but an appeal to your conscience
and sober thoughts, if you could judge thus of them.

2. This testimony must be sure, if you but allow those the use of judgment and
reason, who bear it, and do not judge them wholly demented: for it were a
strange and unheard of madness, that men should pursue a shadow with so great
seriousness, and on this interest venture so far, if Religion and the power
thereof were not a reality (...) Sure, one of these two must hold; if
Christians do not experience themselves what they hold out to others, that they
are either in the highest measure profligate and wicked, even beyond the
ordinary rate and depravation of humane nature; or they must be under a strange
madness and delirium. They must either design to cheat the World, or
themselves, but though their adversaries could wish to have it so, I think
their malice will not make them so mad, as to own that challenge: and since
these cannot be alleged, I profess were I the greatest Atheist, who did not
own the Scripture, I could not seriously consider the way and walk of such who
are tender Christians, without astonishment; or conceive how in such a world
and so many visible disadvantages they should be thus engaged, on any other
consideration, than the truth and reality of Christianity.

3. Do you not see, this is their testimony, who are willing to be tried
therein, and render a reason of that hope which is in them? yea, do in this
offer themselves to trial, and with greatest seriousness obtest the the world,
not to credit implicitly their witness, and take it on trust, but themselves
put it to the most exact inquiry and search! And truly, if there be an appeal
and reference to men's sense and feeling, which can admit no debate, I know not
what ground they have to question this witness, until they first put it to an
essay, that from their own experience they could contradict the same.

4. Should you not admit this for a sure testimony if you grant any moral
certainty of a thing, that there is some case wherein a humane testimony can
allow no debate, which in this present case must be undeniable; for you know by
two witnesses a matter is judicially established: but is it not more confirming
when they are of known judgment and integrity (...) yea, out of diverse and
remote places of the earth, and otherwise strangers amongst themselves, but yet
more, not only when dying they own and assert this, but are willing to die upon
a testimony thereto, and seal it with their blood, and this also through all
ages renewed? O what can be more convincing as to moral certainty! Now I do
attest the world, if this argument of Christian experience have not as full and
unanswerable proofs of its certainty.

5. This witness can be no counterfeit, and you must judge they are worthy of
credit, to verify the Scripture from experience, on whose practice you see it
so convincingly transcribed. Should not the declaration of such about the truth
of the promise, have much weight, whilst you see what a serious respect these
have to the rule; to have their walk ordered in that way, where the Scripture
warrants them to expect the fulfilling of the promise! And are not these seen
to be the most tender serious Christians, whose way uses to have greatest
authority over your conscience, who do most own this witness, and has the
largest account to give thereof?

6. Is not this their testimony also, whom on your exactest and most narrow
notice, you may see study Religion in the secret and retired duties thereof?
where some other interest, than the observation of men, must be an incitement.
Yea, may you not observe there are such, who do seriously own the practice of
these duties, when the view of those about them might be a greater hinderance
and ground of fear, than any persuading motive? And whilst you challenge the
light profession of many within the Church, do but also ask your conscience, if
there be not others, whose way you must justify, even in spite of your hatred
and prejudice against them, that it has a convincing savor of humility? yea,
there growth under ground, and being serious and real in what they profess, may
be clearly discerned from a naked and empty show.

7. Can those intend, by such a testimony, to deceive others, who have often been
in so great fear and disquiet, that they be not themselves deceived? O how
convincing may this be to the world, (...) consider what perplexing queries and
doubts Christians have sometime about their own inward case; yea, after such
sharp wrestlings, a most sweet calm and composure of spirit may be discerned.
It is strange this puts not Atheists to a more serious inquiry, what such
changes can mean, which will make men differ so far from themselves, whilst no
outward cause can be discerned. It is true some matters lie much under ground;
the heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle with
its joy; yea, the deepest plunge and exercise may make little noise without:
yet this is sure, there is so much under these vicissitudes, that is obvious,
even to the view of lookers on, as may leave some conviction, that their
enjoyments must be true and real, when the want thereof is so sensibly felt;
and the world is not so stupidly inadvertent, not to observe this, if they did
not shut their eyes for fear of such a discovery.

8. Should not their testimony be very convincing, whose complaints and
challenges you may find more at home upon themselves, than against others; who
are often bemoaning over those evils, which the eyes of man could not reach? may
not the world see how some are pressed with anguish of soul, to the wasting of of
their body, when no cause from without is known, and otherwise rational and
most composed? Yea, may it not sometimes be discerned, there is more smothered
within, which gets no vent, than appears without? for grief in earnest wants
not some peculiar marks, by which it may be witnessed to others. I think, this
should put the world to such a reflection, there must be some grief and joy and
a cause for it, which goes above the world or the things thereof.

9. This is their testimony, whose confidence and composure of spirit, in the
greatest exigences, may witness to others that persuasion they have of the
truth within their own souls. You see also at what labor and work these are in
the duties of Religion; yea, when they are most serious, how native and
unconstrained their motions are. O does not this show, the grace of God and a
new nature is another thing than words; and that they must surely find
satisfaction in these duties, which makes that a special delight and pleasure
to them, which you would reckon an intolerable and sore toil.

10. Do you not see how these agree every where and at every time in this
testimony, that the Scripture is verified by experience, and the breathings and
influences of God on the Soul meet them in the way of duty according to the
promise, even whilst they most remarkably differ amongst themselves in their
natural temper and disposition? And is it not known whatever particular and
lesser differences, through the prevalence of corruption, are too frequent
amongst these, yet no challenge, no reflection on the truth in reality of
godliness in it self, will be found when their challenges are most bitter one
upon another? I must further attest your conscience, whilst you have heard the
sad Moans of dying Christians about the interest of their soul and short-coming
in the study of godliness, have not these complaints been still to commend
Religion, and the excellency thereof, and reflect only upon themselves? but
none ever was heard to have such a complaint, that they did cheat the world in
that matter, by obtruding upon them a falsehood.

11. May you not see this testimony which Christians give to the way of
godliness, that it is from those who act deliberately in that great interest,
and have a rational account to give of the grounds on which they walk? Do you
not find they are Men, as well as Christians; and that none are more friends to
reason and the right exercise thereof, than such who are most serious in the
study of Religion? It is sure, could the world have their sight, and with Moses
such a look of an invisible God, it would be easy for them to be of their
judgment also.

12. That you are so ready to challenge the Christian's testimony, may you not
find the true cause within your self; not from your judgment, but a rooted
prejudice and enmity at the way of the Lord, whereof you can give no reason?
Yea, have you not often reproached Christians at a distance whom upon a more near
particular acquaintance you have from some irresistible conviction left upon
you, been forced to justify? For godliness has this singular advantage, to
silence all its adversaries, that none will challenge or reproach the same, but
those who never knew it: and should such a witness be admitted? O strange, with
what liberty men can deride this, who yet dare not go alone to have some
serious thoughts about it!

13. I know you will not deny there is such a thing as hypocrisy and a false
show of godliness; yet sure you have no ground of challenge, or to question the
truth and power of this, which is so convincingly witnessed to, even by
hypocrisy; for there should be no use for such a cover, no cause for that
imposture, if there were not also a truth and reality therein you cannot
conceive a counterfeit, but as it stands related to that which is true. If
there were not such a thing as serious godliness, the world could never have
known how to personate it. Could there be a lie, if there were not a truth? You
see also it is the most serious discerning Christians, that such usually do
fear and have an awful regard of; for which there were no ground, if they were
not conscious of the truth of that in others, whereof they only study the
appearance: yea, here I must also appeal the world and ordinary Observers, if
there be not even to them, some discernable difference betwixt the power of
Religion, and an empty show, though this make greater noise; betwixt those who
are serious and tender in following the Lord, and others who glory in
appearance, but not in heart; for the one by a convincing manifestation of the
truth does commend it self to men's conscience, has a living air and breath,
which by no art or cunning can be drawn to the life, no more than an exquisite
painter with the choicest colors, in drawing a dead man, can therewith draw
the vital acts of breathing and moving.

14. May you not see, holiness must be some excellent thing, which has such
credit, even with it is real adversaries and the worst of men, as to make them
grasp at the appearance and shadow of that, which others know, they hate the
power and practice thereof! And here I would ask the world, is it not to the
Scripture and truth thereof, the experience of the Saints bears witness, that
they do indeed feel and prove within their soul, what you see written before
you, in this blessed record? But is it not also sure, that nothing is more
directly cross and opposite to the Scripture, than a false appearance, and show
of that which is not real?

15. Can you debate whether there are such Christians in the world, yea, many
such, whose experience does witness the truth of religion, of whom it must be
said ( even their enemies being judges) their being serious in that way, and
choice thereof, must be for it self, and has no outward design or interest, to
which it can be subservient, whilst in this often they run the greatest hazard,
and are rendered a prey to others? O must it not be a marvelous thing, which
has that dominion over the souls, to teach men the practice of self-denial;
not only to quit but to cheerfully quit their nearest interest, to smile on the
spoilers, to rejoice in their suffering and reproaches, to forgive wrongs, and
take revenge by good will! this is indeed above nature, and is peculiar to
Christianity, which can also turn poison to an ontidote and cure, and gain by
its greatest losses.

16. You may see what different sizes are amongst the Saints, how great a
difference also betwixt the experiences of one and another: some made to
witness much bitterness in departing from God, and others that singular
advantage in drawing near to him; yea, how near sometimes will great extremes
in their condition border with other! At a strait to express their joy, who not
long before would have thought a vent to their grief a special ease; O must not
this be a matter of Reality! and when you see how much these amongst themselves
do thus differ, that yet all these differences meet together and concur in a
most clear testimony to the Scripture, and truth of godliness; yea, how this
wonderful contrivance of the Scripture is suited to answer all this variety of
changes in the Christian's case, and passes none over!

But oh, what can be said here, where weeping should be more fit than words, to
see what contempt the greatest part of men put on serious religion, which does
truly raise them above the condition of the beasts! Is not the atheism of the
time at that height that we must say, the assault of the adversary is not so
(...) at one single truth, as at the root and being of all religion? And truly
we may fear some sharp and extraordinary cure, to recover this generation, of a
disease, that would seem in an ordinary way incurable. I shall but further
offer these few queries, and plead so far with the adversary, that they would,
ere they pass them, have but some serious thoughts thereon.

(1.) If there be a God, or truth in any Religion, is it not with this blessed
record of the Scripture you must close, as the alone rule thereof? yea, if your
judgment and conscience be not both extinct, must you not consent to the law
and doctrine therein held forth, that it is good, what ever be your aversion
therefrom? -- (2.) Is not an immortal soul and a being for ever, such a venture
as is of more value, and should be to you, than the whole world? -- (3.) O how
can you be thus indetermined about so great an interest? you seem to be
hesitant and unsure, if there be another world, a heaven or a hell: but oh, are
you sure these are not? and how then can you be secured from such a fear, which
of all fears is the greatest? (4) What a horrid and uncomfortable thing is it
to be an Atheist, which gives men no hope beyond this present life? Yea, what a
world would this be to dwell in, if there were no true godliness in it, since
without this, no comfortable humane society, no kindly and right subjection to
the magistrate, can be expected from those, who have no tie from above, and
know not what it is to pay homage to a sovereign being. (5.) Is not the native
tendency of Atheism to all ungodliness in men's practice? yea, how far does it
debase humane nature, and level it even with the beasts? -- (6.) Whilst you
scoff at serious Religion, I dare appeal your selves, if in your retirements
when you have any sober reflections, you are not forced to have other thoughts!
and why is it, you so much fear to go alone, and be in any measure serious with
your soul; Oh what a desperate security is that?

I shall only add, is it not rare to find a professed Atheist, at death, when
once the approach of another world does awake the sense of a Deity? But then it
is easy to see men, who have sported at godliness in their life, weep over that
wretched mirth, when it comes to death, and call for such Ministers, whom once
they hated: and oh, what a dreadful cure will hell be of atheism! for there
they know the truth in earnest, though it be their terror; it is also sure the
Devil is no atheist, who believes there is a God, and trembles.

I must yet a little further crave liberty, ere I pass this argument, to speak
a word even to those who know and have experienced the same, O how great should
this be in our eyes, and with what astonishment may we consider it, which by so
full, so satisfying a demonstration does witness, not to the eye or ear, but to
the soul, the certainty of divine truth, and the power and reality of
godliness! Should we not think, if there were but one in an age, or that every
particular Christian were but once at some solemn time of his life, thus
confirmed, that he could say, then did he taste and see the word, and found it
surely verified on his soul, as sure as he knows that he lives, at what a
rate would he value and preserve so singular a seal and confirmation of the
truth, yea, keep up the remembrance of such a special time whilst he lived? But
oh, must it be said, that this grave witness, this clear demonstration of the
Scripture and of the certainty of the words of truth, which we have by
experience, does lose its weight, and the inestimable value thereof is to be
less regarded, that it is the Christian's daily bread? O what a reach has this
argument; what great things are there held forth? I think a serious View of the
same, if it were brought near to us, might put us to question, whether we
believe the same, or not? are we in a dream, or awake and see them with our
eyes, which this does so convincingly demonstrate? whilst we can so easily pass
them, with so little weight thereof on our spirit. Now to hold that forth, let
us but bring near this argument, and gravely consider the same with respect to
some of those great truths, which, by this unanswerable demonstration of
experience, are witnessed: I must say, such truths that we may wonder how men
can so easily admit their being true, and in so ordinary a way look thereon
without wondering and astonishment.

1. Does not this argument of experience, by a very clear demonstration,
witness that great truth of a Godhead, whereon the whole superstructure of
truth and godliness does stand? yea, in another manner does enforce on men the
persuasion of this by a more near and convincing discovery, then the greatest
works of God, or these glorious appearances of his power and wisdom in the
heavens, and earth do! It is true, these bring him near to our eye and ear; but
O this brings the blessed and invisible God nearer, into the heart and soul,
that we may both taste and see, that surely He is, and is that which in the
Scripture he is declared to be. It is not the contemplation of nature, in its
highest slight, can answer such an assault of the Devil, which may exercise the
most established Christian about the being of God; but there is a demonstration
within, which goes further than the judgment, and passes natural
understanding; whence we feel, we taste, we enjoy, yea, his voice is heard in
the soul, which we surely know (...), and this is the reach and import of this
argument. There is indeed cause to wonder at the atheism of the world, since
men can look no where, without some witness of a Deity, to stare them in the
face; but oh, there is a more refined atheism, that lies in the bosom of a
professed assent to divine truth, and is not easily discerned, though not the
less dreadful that it goes under a cover, not only from the view of others, but
even from a man's self -- I would here offer some things, which do witness a
special advantage the godly man is at thereby to believe, and to be more
thoroughly persuaded of the glorious being of God. (1.) That he finds the
believing of this is a very great thing, and not so easy to reach, as the world
do suppose. For it is no small matter even to attain this: Oh, what ordinary
thoughts have many about it, who think it easy to pass an assent to this
marvelous truth, because they never considered the greatness thereof; but it is
sure, the more serious and grave a Christian is, it will give him the more
work, and we may find these usually are more plunged and exercised about this,
than others. -- (2.) It is a great advantage, when this is so far men's serious
study, as to be upon an inquiry after a further establishment in so great a
truth; O what another sight of the invisible God? What a satisfying persuasion
of his blessed being might we have, if our soul were indeed herein exercised;
and knew but how little we know and have reached in this, that there is a
nearer approach to God, which should show us, the faith of a Deity is something
beyond those former thoughts we have had thereof! We lose many singular
confirmations about this, because we do not in earnest look after them. -- (3.)
They are at a special advantage to whom believing of this truth (O blessed
truth, that God is) is their exceeding joy, and amidst their heaviness can say,
the thought and meditation of him is sweet; that when through a variety of
temptations they are ready to faint, this restores their soul, yea, will cause
it leap within for joy; and is their Enough when other encouragements are
furthest off, that God lives! O what a thing is it in such a world, and in some
deep perplexing plunge, to know that the Lord is God, whom he has now for a
rock and a shield, and in the close of time for his exceeding great reward! Can
we have serious thoughts of this, and so easily turn our selves to other things
without astonishment! yea, is it not strange, there should be often so near and
immediate a bordering betwixt our thoughts of the glorious God and the meanest
trifle. (4.) It is no small advantage, where men can open the Bible and retire
into it, under the sense and impression of a Godhead, and that near
correspondence he has this way with his people; on whose soul these words have
aw and authority, Thus says the Lord; yea, have that repose upon his testimony
and promise, which the solid persuasion of his being and faithfulness should
cause. -- (5.) They have come a great length here, that in their ordinary walk
are under some weight and impression of this that God is near; who knows their
sitting down and rising up; from whose sight they cannot shift one thought;
yea, that on him they have such an absolute dependence, that without him they
can not draw their breath. O where this is believed, must it not cause both
fear and wondering?

2. Is not this an argument, which by a sure and unanswerable demonstration
does witness the truth and reality of grace that there is such a thing, and is
no empty sound, which does raise man above the natural state of men, as far as
reason puts him above the state of the beast! It is truly strange, this should
be believed, and yet is not more mavelous in our eyes, how we can be at such
rest, whilst one of these two lies under debate, the reality of grace, or our
being really interested therein. O is there not cause of astonishment, that
such a product of heaven should be found in the earth, whose descent and
original is so clearly demonstrated by its breathing upwards after God, its
native tendency and motion toward him, whence it came? Surely grace is a great
subject to think on; and that it is not so in our eyes, it must be either
because we do not believe it, or do not consider what a change it makes on the
soul, which is no transient disposition, but the seed of God that remains. Is
not this such a thing as makes spring in the winter, causes men to grow under
their greatest weights, lifts the soul up from the clay, yea does by bringing
it low in its own eyes, raise it nearer God? This makes a man to have another
appearance, on which the world is forced to look with some astonishment. One
Christian does admire this in another; and the more it shows it self, it
causes a more near approach betwixt their souls. It will cause fear in them
who hate it, and has a power even over its persecuters. Now it is the truth
and reality of this excellent thing, that this argument ^o's witness; yea such
a witness that can admit no debate, where experience makes it sure: I confess a
serious view and persuasion of this might make the Christian's life a continued
wonder: that there is such a thing, which by a mavelous surprisal did prevent
him when he was not aware, has entered him into a new world, and translated him
from a state of darkness unto a mavelous light, causes the soul to breath in
another air, brings him so near that state of the angels, subdues the will
without violence, and subjects it with its own consent; yea, by so strait a tie
is link's with an eternal glory and blessedness! Surely this is one of the most
stately pieces of the work of God, that exceeds the whole structure of the
universe. O with what astonishment should we look on this mavelous thing, if
we could consider the whole frame and structure of the grace of God in a
Christian, and there make as it were a dissection in its several parts and
proportions, its decay and languishing, its different changes and sizes, its
vigorous actings and abatements; how it breathes, is nourished, is kept green
and preserved by a continued intercourse with the fountain of its being! and
lo, whilst we consider this great wonder, both in the whole and in its parts,
we may see how in these it does most exactly answer that model we have thereof
in the scripture of God.

3. This is a great argument, and should be so in our eyes, which does not only
witness the reality of grace in its acting and exercise (which in this former
section is specially pointed at) but does unanswerably demonstrate a spiritual
life and being, which the Christian knows and is persuaded thereof, as he is
sure he breathes and has a natural life! O what a mavelous demonstration is
this, wherein sense and feeling does in as certain a way concur, as in any
discovery we have by our outward senses, that there is a new life and another
being, (besides that we have by nature) which answers to a new birth; yea,
another breathing and acting, that is also suited thereto! but oh, can it be
said, we believe and know it is assuredly true, who have such common and
passing thoughts thereof, and do not consider what it is whereof we are sure!
-- (1.) That this is so great a thing; it may indeed cause wonder, to think we
are men, and that we have a rational being: but O a spiritual life is another
cause for wondering, which comes not by our birth, has no natural causes, yet
a life that has its proper operation, and vital acts put forth, as truly as
these natural actions of breathing and moving are put forth, by a living man; a
life that has in as sensible a way quickening and refreshing influences, as the
earth or bodies of men know the influences of the heavens; which has a
pleasure and delight peculiar to its nature, that has no affinity with things
we enjoy by the senses, but is a pleasure does far exceed the same! And is this
a small matter to be persuaded of? (2.) What a demonstration is it, which does
witness even to our sense and feeling a power on the soul by the word, above
the most persuasive words of man, and above all moral influences; by which men
are not only reached, but transformed into the same image; whence the Christian
knows, and knows assuredly, those great truths, the sealing, witnessing,
teaching, comforting of the Spirit, etc. are no matter of words, or some
strange devised names, but are undoubted realities acted and verified on the
soul. -- (3.) If this demonstration of a spiritual life be sure, have we not
thus also an eternal life and being with God put beyond debate? for, if we be
certain of the one, O is not this undeniable, that this noble being of the new
creature, this life that is here begun, must have a more full growth, and be at
the furthest stature of the man in Christ; when we now see it with our eyes in
its infancy, and upon a growing advance toward the same? For the one is surely
as demonstrative of the other, as a young child which we see in a growing
tendency toward a man, does show there is a man in his furthest growth. (4.)
If we assuredly know this Spiritual life, must we not also admit the undoubted
truth of spiritual beings, and of an invisible world, with which this life has
its correspondence; yea, thus as by a stream be led up to the true fountain, to
know an invisible God!

4. How great an argument is this, which gives us such a demonstration, that
heaven is not altogether deferred until we be there, but that such a thing is
sure now, as the real presence of the glorious God, and a near familiar
approach of him to the soul, which is here as really felt and enjoyed, as we
can be sure of any thing? O how mavelous should this be to us! I cannot doubt
but the report hereof does sometime a change on their soul, and composure of
mind, that even bystanders might see where they have been! Now this is the
Christian's witness, which all who are serious in the way of the Lord, can in
some measure bear, that in a way no less sure and demonstrative than any thing
here beneath can be known, they have had such a discovery: and now these
strange Scripture-truths, the meaning whereof once they could not know (such
as, to have their soul melting within at the voice of their beloved, to have
his name as ointment poured forth, and be brought near to see his face with
joy) they know well that they are as truly verified on the heart, as they are
written before their eyes in the word. -- I shall but add, it is a very great
thing these know, who know assuredly the real presence of God here; for thus
they are made sure that He is, as one may know the sun, when he feels its
warming heat, and when he sees it with its own light: thus they are confirmed
of the truth of the Scripture, whilst they see and feel one of the most
mavelous things therein verified.

5. This is an argument that does clearly witness a truth and reality in
Prayer; which may be called one of the great wonders of Religion: That such a
way is, wherein there is so near so immediate an address to the Majesty of God
in all our concernments, is not this a very great thing! that poor man, now
upon the earth, has such a passage to heaven, and may speak up unto him who
inhabits eternity, the glorious object of the adoration of angels, without the
intervening of any creature: yea, with so sure a warrant may approach the
throne of God, and there pour out his soul, and present his requests unto him
who lives and sees! O with what astonishment should we consider this! suppose
at some solemn times in our life this only might be attained, yea, that it were
but in one part of the earth, should we not dazzle the world with amazment, and
puts the grossest of men to strange thoughts. But oh, may not this make them
question its reality, whether those that bear such a witness do truly feel and
enjoy the same, who by their way and appearance do so little declare any deep
impression, that this has on them! I have sometimes thought it strange, how
men are taken even in a kind of transport with the discovery of some rare
experiment and demonstration in nature, which could make that poor man cry out
EUPEKA, as though therewith he had gained the whole earth! but O here is another
kind of demonstration, of a more transcendent value and interest! to know and
be sure of this near approach and intercourse betwixt God and the soul; that
even with men in the earth he will verily dwell, and have so real a converse;
this does indeed rise above Archimedes reach, and such who ever followed the
search of nature in their most exact and subtle inquiry. O blessed souls, who
have found it! for they have found a treasure; the tho'ts whereof may make it a
new thing every day, and make them consider this with a renewed wondering, to
know, there is not only a claim and title to the inheritance above, but that
the first fruits and earnest thereof is got here; that as surely as there is a
real and immediate converse betwixt men, they have found such a near immediate
fellowship with God, that all the words of the world cannot express; such a
meeting betwixt him and them, where their soul has been drawn out with desire,
where they have found a breaking up of the day with an astonishing brightness,
after a most cloudy and dark night; O is not this a great thing! Have they not
cause both for joy and wondering, who have fallen on such an experiment, that
they can say (and not from report) I do surely feel, I enjoy, I am persuaded
this is the Lord; and thus have come forth from him with such look on the whole
earth besides as accursed; and reckon an abode there, were it a barren desert
and wilderness, to be preferable to all other advantages! It may truly be a
question, whilst we are most in the practice of this duty, if we believe the
truth and reality thereof: but it is beyond question, what Christians have most
sensibly found here, that they can say, if they be sure they have a soul, they
have been as sure, in this blessed way, they have had their soul restored and
returned again; and under some deliquium, that by wrestling they have at last
prevailed; yea, have got an answer from heaven, as if they had got it by an
audible voice. Now is not this a great and mavelous demonstration!

But oh what common thoughts have we thereof! and may not these things seem
strange, if seriously considered! -- (1.) That we are not more restless, to be
surely persuaded, this is a truth, when we are so highly concerned therein;
that we may have further confirmations about this, which we should look on as
an inestimable treasure, both for our joy and establishment. -- (2.) It is
strange, we can find it so easy a matter to pray and appear before God; that we
are not afraid, to be hasty in uttering a matter before him, whilst we consider
God is in heaven, and we are but on the earth! It is sure, if we intend the
bringing of our soul with us in such a duty, it should be more our study to
watch unto prayer, throughout our walk. -- (3.) It may seem strange, how easily
we can step out from the world and the noise thereof, in before the Lord,
without the least pause or time intervening, which the impression of so great a
business should require; yea, so immediately, in our return, again step into
the world, as if we had wholly forgot where we have been. -- (4.) How strange
is formality in such a business as prayer; which is an address to the living
God, one of the most solemn acts of the soul; yea, we may call it the most
natural work of a Christian, like the breathing of the child after the breast.
Alas, it is sad, that this seems rather a piece of invention many times, than a
matter of earnest with the Lord; not so much the breathing of the soul in
desire after him, as the expressing what should be our desires. O to what a
class can such a piece of Atheism be reduced, as appears in our formal
approaches to God? -- (5.) Should we look on prayer as a duty, and not consider
it as a singular enjoyment also; without which this earth would have a near
appearance of hell, if we could not thus solace the soul in God, and get a vent
under its greatest pressures? O prayer! What* thoughts should we have of it, if
the truth thereof were more believed! I think, that man who is sure of the
being and faithfulness of God, and of the reality of prayer, needs not be
solicitous with what face the World look on him; when thus his great interest
and encouragement is secure, and a well is at his hand, that can answer all his
complaints.

6. Have we not this demonstration also by that Argument of experience, how
near the blessed Majesty of God does in the way of providence approach to his
people, and is surely known by a real correspondence he has with them in this
way, in which he does so clearly verify his word, holds forth light and
counsel, and gives the return of prayer, sometimes with such remarkable
circumstances, as causes fear as well as joy, and will force that testimony,
This is verily the Lord! It is true, that in the smallest things God is great,
and thus declares himself to be God: but there is a more solemn and near
approach, by some special steps of his providence: yea, by the r^d he does
sometimes speak, as with an audible voice, and with such a convoy of his power
opens the ears of men and seals their instruction, as will force its passage
down to the reins, and in the hidden part cause them to understand wisdom.
There is sometime also so wonderful a tract and series of providence, and
these so convincing, that men cannot but see something greater than man
therein, whilst things have been attended with such a surprisal, in the very
opportune time and season, that their mercy, though great in it self, has not
so much taken them up, as the way how it is brought about, and their discovery
of the immediate hand of God therein, and the truth of his word and promise.

7. I must further add, O! is not this a great Argument, which persuades the
soul of these truths by so sure a way as experience, that thus we have an
inward and sensible demonstration of the things of God, that are as certainly
witnessed, as those visible Heavens and Earth are to our eyes, when they are
most fixed thereon! O what is this, which the Christian knows yet knows so
little what he has thereby! This is indeed a sight, which puts the thing seen
beyond question or debates; for the soul has its feeling and taste, as sure as
the body; and has a favor and relish of things suitable to its own nature,
whereby it can discern a peculiar sweetness and fragrancy, in that which may
seem bitter and grievous to the flesh. It is by this sight which experience
gives, that the Christian is a witness himself, is therein personally
concerned, does see these great things with his own eyes, and not with the eyes
of others; the consolations of God, which are not small, are no matter of
report to him; he knows how no mercy has been more sweet and relishing, than
that which has had a bitter cross going before: yea, never more sensibly found
his own burden, than he had found it taken off; the laying on whereof was not
so grievous, as that relief and ease has been sweet upon its removal.

Now to shut up this Argument, I shall but add the testimony of two great and
eminent Witnesses to the truth; who after they had been helped to serve their
generation by the will of God, and were dying, had a large account to give from
their experience of the truth and faithfulness of God in his word, and have
left a seal to the same, worthy to be transmitted to posterity. The one is that
great Servant of Christ BEZA; who in his younger years, after the Lord had
touched his heart by the word, was one day in the Church of Charenton,
exercised with that 91 st Psalm, which then was expounded, and with such power
was followed, that not only he found it marvellously sweet to him at present,
but was then helped to believe, yea to a great persuasion of the Lord's making
out all these promises to him in his persuasion, which as he after found
verified, did at his death with much comfort witness the same; that as he had
been then helped to close with that great truth in the second Verse, in taking
the Lord for his God, and got a sure claim thereto, yea, that he should be his
refuge and fortress, he had found him that most remarkably in the after-changes
of his life; that he had delivered him from the snare of the fowler and ^he
noisome pestilence, having been in frequent hazard by the lying in wait of many
to ensnare him, and sometimes was in great hazard from the pestilence in those
places where he was called to reside; yea amidst the civil wars, which were
then so hot in France, had most convincing deliverances from many imminent
hazards, when he was called to be present sometimes with the Protestant Princes
upon the fields, where thousands did fall about him; and thus whilst near his
death, he found that Psalm so observably verified, whereon he was caused 'to
hope, that he went through all these promises, declaring the comfortable
accomplishment thereof, and how he had found the Lord's giving his Angels
charge over him, had often answered him when he had called on him, had been with
him in trouble, delivered him; yea had satisfied him with a long life. And now,
says he, I have no more to wait for, but the fulfilling of that last word of
the Psalm, to show him his salvation, for which in confidence he longed. This,
though not writ by these who have given an account of his life in our language;
yet I had the same from those most worthy of credit, who not only from some of
the greatest French Protestants had it, when they were in France, as a known
and sure passage, but told me they read the same there in a printed relation in
that language, about his life and death.

The 2d. testimony I shall here offer is from a grave an eminent minister of
Christ in our own Church within these few years, Mr. GEORGE GILLESPIE; who near
his death did declare to those who were by, what a large proof he had, and
assured persuasion of the truth of the Scripture from experience; that he knew
so well what adventuring on the word was, and what it was to live on divine
assistance, and be thus in all his concernments carried through, that he could
not desire, were he to live in the world, a more desirable and satisfying life,
than that of a continued reliance and depending on the Lord: and truly amongst
many notable experiments that man of God had thereof, this was one very
convincing, how in a strange land, whither he was called on the service of the
Church, and in a grave assembly of many of the greatest divines in that age,
when one day he was surprised with an unexpected rencounter of a learned Man
Mr. Seldom, who came on design, with some others of that party upon the
Erastian interest, to debate for it, by the strongest arguments which they had
then praemeditated for its defense; whilst none appeared in that great assembly
to give a return, though there were many singularly learned and able, he did on
an immediate reliance on God adventure (lest the adversary should take
advantage thereat) and gave a short account of those arguments adduced, wherein
the strength of his discourse did most lie, with so clear and satisfying an
answer as astonished all; yea, did silence the adversary, with a mavelous
conviction. Now this was the more convincing, that having a little paper-book
in his hand, in which he was before observed to write down something, he was by
some after pressed to let them see his notes, supposing the heads of his
following discourse were in it, but found only in some Pages these words
several times writ down, -- Light, O Lord, and assistance, -- his soul being
then carried upward for the same. Thus did that blessed man give in his witness
to the truth, when he was dying, from the sure experience he had thereof,
through his life; and with much assurance of the salvation of God, died. Which,
I must say, is a remark, that in many instances might be obvious; how great
peace and an abundant entrance, those have found in the close of the day, who
have been helped to most faithfulness in the public interests of Christ and
his Church, and to the most severe adherence to their light, about the duties
of the time; which I knew in another worthy Minister of Christ, not many years
since, who by some of his last words did witness an unexpressible joy he found
in this, that the Lord had kept him in a time of many trials, from giving his
Ark a wrong touch; which he then declared to standers-by, when he was on the
very threshold betwixt this and another World. ()

The SECOND ARGUMENT.
Our SECOND Argument, to demonstrate the accomplishment of the Scripture, is
this, that not only Christian experience, but the observation of the Church and
people of God, does in all ages bear witness thereto, how the Lord's way in
these providence both of mercy and judgment, about the Church, amidst the
various changes of her condition, yea, in the most strange things which fall
out in the world, does convincingly answer the word, and verify the same.

IT is indeed undeniable that the Scripture of God, as it is written to the
personal case of his people, and does in their experience take place; so is
there a part of it in a peculiar way directed to the Church, the fulfilling
whereof in the providence and events of the time should be the subject of our
observation, and would singularly help to confirm our faith of the truth
thereof.

For prosecuting this argument I would touch it a little in these three
branches.

1. How these general promises which belong to the Church universal, and
concern her in all ages, have an accomplishment.

2. How these threatenings also of the word, which do not only concern the
Church, but have a respect to her adversaries, are certainly fulfilled, and
take place in men's observation, who do observe the judgments of their time.

3. How the Scripture of God does clearly shine upon the darkest footsteps of
Providence, even these which would seem most strange and hard to understand, so
that it may be demonstrate nothing falls out in the world, or befalls the
saints, but what is most consonant to the Scripture.

FIRST BRANCH. As to the first branch of this argument, I shall but instance
five general promises which we find held forth in the word concerning the
Church; and endeavor to show how very clear and obvious the accomplishment of
them is, if men do not willingly shut their own eyes.

FIRST Promise, wherein we find the Scripture express, is the preservation of
the Church: that he will be with her to the end of the World, and though he
make an end of other nations, yet, will he not make an utter end of her, but
while the ordinances of the sun, and the moon do last, and as the days of
heaven, so shall her days be prolonged; against her the gates of hell shall not
prevail. Jer. 30. 11. Math. 16. 18. Now that God has truly verified this his
pomise, and is as good as his word, is a truth, though mavelous, yet, so very
clear, and manifest, that I am sure no atheist can deny, it may be so easily
demonstrated.

First, that the Church does continue, and is kept alive to this day, it does
certainly prove the truth of his promise. For it can be said of her, and none
can say it is a lie, she has outlived all her opposers, the greatest of whom
have found their grave in the quarrel, over whose tomb that last confession of
a great adversary, Julian, may be written, vicistitandem, G^liloe^ Has not
this deadly and irreconcilable seed been perpetuated from fathers to children!
but who has prospered in that enterprise! the archers have often shot, and
wounded her sore, but her bow does abide in strength, as at this day, this is
her motto, Persecuted, but not forsaken? cast down, but not discouraged. She
who has brought many children, yet cease not to bear, whose age has not
marred her beauty, her eyes are not dim, nor her strength failed; a sight which
may cause us no less to stand and consider this great wonder, then Moses did,
at that which was but the shadow and emblem thereof, a bush burning, and not
consumed. For, behold, a Church kept alive, yet, still in the flames! and when
to appearance consumed, it does arise more glorious out of her own ashes! This
is indeed the only Phoenix, and we know no other, of whom that can be said.
Has she not born out those universal deluges, which did like an inundation go
over her head, of idolatry and paganism in the first times, and
Antichristianism with Arianism in the after-ages; yet not swallowed up! Which
may be no less mavelous, than when she was kept above the waters, in the ark:
and though her enemies have often sung her funeral song, and rejoiced over the
dead bodies of her witnesses, yet, they have risen again; her dry bones have
taken life, and come together; and behold she is alive at this day.

2. Not only the Churches preservation, but the continued series and succession
thereof unto this time, does witness the fulfilling of this promise: that in
the darkest times of her condition, she has not altogether disappeared, even,
when she was so long hid in the wilderness, but still in every age had some
witnesses; and though the Church has often cried out for the want of Children,
and been heard weeping, bemoaning her self because they were not, yet, we may
say she never wanted an offspring to this day; she did never die without an
heir, and seed of her own, to raise up her name, even since the Covenant was
first made with her in Adam's family. And though particular Churches have their
set times, which like the sun, have the usual periods, their height and
flourishing, and afterward a gradual decay, making way to the departure of
light; yet, this made never void the promise of God to the Church universal,
whose lamp was never put out, nay, shall not while the days of heaven do last.

2. We must also say that the continuance and preservation of the Church is
peculiar to her alone; and can be said of no other interest and party beneath
the sun. For it is clear, that there was no Kingdom or Empire so firmly rooted,
no society so well governed by Laws, backed with power, which has had the best
title and claim, but Time at last did prevail over it, and made the same a
trophe of her conquest; yea, the greatest Monarchies, and flourishing Cities
have at last yielded, so as of them it may be said, Nunc seges est ubi Troia
fuit. But time cannot to this day boast of a triumph over the Church of God:
though no nation, no family in the earth could ever plead antiquity with her.
This is that interest, which has born out all those great revolutions, that so
often changed the very face of the world; yea, has outlived so many Kingdoms and
successions thereof.

4. It does convincingly demonstrate the truth of this promise of the Church's
preservation, that the World, yea, greatest Atheists may see, this has not
come to pass at an adventure; nay, not in an ordinary way of providence, but by
a divine power most discernable therein: while it is so clear, (1.) That no
interest, or party had ever such adversaries, as the Church, against whom the
powers of World, and the powers of darkness have always been on foot. -- (2.)
That outward advantages have usually been on her adversaries side, not only the
great men of the earth, but these of greatest parts, and ablities. (3.) That
their will was never wanting to their power, and their design no less than to
raze her to the foundation. -- (4.) That this enmity has been rooted, and
irreconcilable, which time to this day could never take up (5.) That no other
interest did ever endure such violent assaults, so many sharp batteries: for it
is observable, that most of the wars and commotions of every age have been some
way stated on the Church's account; and what ever private quarrels men have had
among themselves, yet it has not hindered the pursuit of their malice against
the woman and her seed. -- (6.) That such who have come out of her bowels, even
the men of her own house, have often been her greatest enemies, and lain in wait
to take her at an advantage in the day of her halting. -- (7.) That her real
friends have often fainted in a time of her strait, and stood ^far off; yea,
almost none of the Children, which she had brought forth, have been then found
to take her by the hand. -- (8.) That the depths of Satan, in her enemies, as
an angel of light, have sometimes given her a sore assault; so that if it had
been possible, and ordinary Means could have reached their end, they should have
deceived the very elect. -- (9.) I must add this further witness to the
mavelous preservation of the Church, which in an ordinary way could not come
to pass* that we find no other party was ever brought so low and near death,
and be yet alive. The knife was once at the Church's throat in Isaac; she did
seek to adopt a bond-woman's son, instead of a lawful heir, when Abraham agreed
to Sarah's overture for the outmaking of the promise; how near exspiring do we
find her in Egypt, when a sentence to destroy all her male issue was gone
forth? Yea, what but a miracle could have preserved her, when she was betwixt
Pharaoh and the red sea? How low was the Church in the wilderness, and after in
the days of the captivity, even broken to pieces with small appearance of life,
when her face was all blured with weeping, and her enemies made sport over her
ruins at the rivers of Babylon, when the Children of Edom cried out, let us
raze her even to the foundation? Yea, could the Church be nearer the grave,
than when her bones were scattered at the graves mouth; but above all in that
dark night, when her head and shepherd was smitten, and her hope seemed to be
buried in the grave with a stone put upon it; when she could get no
entertainment among the Jews, was wounded in the house of her friends, and the
Gentiles in wrath rose up against her; that for some hundred years the great
Empire, which had trod down all the nations about, put forth the utmost of
power and malice for her undoing! O who could have thought the Church should
outlive this? Yea, after all we find her tossed and hurried by Antichrist into
the wilderness, an adversary more cruel than any that had gone before, where
the Dragon watched to get her destroyed: but how in all these, and through that
long dark night, she has continued, and marvellously flourished, as the
palm tree, under greatest weights; so that we cannot but see that which her
enemies (being judges) will not deny, that this promise to the Church, of her
preservation, is this day fulfilled; yea, that it has not in an ordinary way
been brought about. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, nor
divination against Israel; all her enemies have been found liars; happy art
thou above other People; for the eternal God is they refuge, and underneath are
everlasting arms! Else long since she should have been swallowed up; may we not
still say with astonishment, O what has God wrought, in her behalf!

SECOND promise, which I shall here instance, that God had made to his Church
in the Word, Of her Increase and Enlargement: that the Earth should be covered
with the knowledge of God, as the sea of water; and her seed be as the stars of
Heaven; that her bounds should be from the sea to the utmost rivers; which was
promised to Christ in the behalf of his Church, and that she should possess the
gates of her enemies. -- Psalm. 89. 25. Psalm. 2. 8. Isa. 42. 4. Isa. 54. 3.

As this promise is express in the Scripture, we must say it is no less clear
and evident in its accomplishment; that surely the Lord has kept his Word,
whereto the event does most exactly answer; and though yet it be not to the
full made out, I am sure there is so much at this day manifest, considering the
former condition of the Church, as undeniably proves the fulfilling of the
forementioned promise, which even to the conviction of greatest Atheists may be
demonstrated from these grounds.

1. That vast extent which the Kingdom of Christ has had in the World. For
this cannot be denied, that the greatest Empire or Monarchy could never so far
extend their conquest, as the Church has done, since the wall of partition was
taken down; short are the limits of the Grecian, and Roman Empire; considered
with this, whose bounds have been the ends and uttermost parts of the Earth,
where neither Greece or Rome did ever set up their Trophies. Has not the
Gospel, as the sun made its circuit from the East to the West? yea, crossed the
seas, to the dark northern nations, thus fulfilling its course, in order to its
turn again, to the place of its first rising; that it may, as we are sure it
shall once, visit the Jews again, and the eastern places of the World, that now
are buried in a night of darkness: which, I think, will be as sure a presage of
the break of day, and second coming of the Lord, as the Morning Star is to the
World of the Sun's accomplishing its course, and that it is returning again to
the East where it should rise. Has not the Gospel now been through Asia, where
it did not tarry for a night; for many flourishing Churches were there, and the
going back of the tide from thence was its flowing to another part of the
World: which is indeed observable of the Church as it is of the sea, that what
it has lost in one part, it has gained in another. Did the vast distance of
Africa, its great barren deserts, or scorching heat, hinder the Gospel's making
a visit thither! No, it was once a fertile soil, and brought forth many famous
lights; yea, something yet does both there and in the Ea^^ parts of the World
remain, to show the Gospel was truly in these places. And has Europe, though
last, been least on this account? Yea, what do mean the late discoveries of
unknown parts of the Earth, but to make way for a more full performance of this
promise, that the Gospel might stretch its conquest over the line? which surely
was the gold and treasure Christ designed from thence, that even America might
have her day also, and the voice of the turtle be heard in those lands.

2. Not only the large extent of the Church as to its bounds, does witness
this, but also the great and numerous offspring of Sons and Daughters, which
in those parts where the Gospel has been, were brought forth to Christ. For we
may say, what John saw in vision, has been very manifest to after-ages, an
innumerable company, of all Tongues. Nations and Languages, of whom it could be
said, These are born in Zion! O how great a harvest of the Nations is even
already gathered? What a fleece has every particular Church cast? What a
mavelous increase has been in some places, after special tides of the
Gospel? May we not say, that truth is now beyond debate, that out of one, and
him not only as good as dead, but truly dead, there has come forth as the sand
of the sea, and Stars of Heaven, in number! the Church has inherited Joseph's
blessing, of the womb, and the breasts, in a fruit^^^ offspring. The dew of
Christ's youth has been as the womb of the morning. O what a mavelous and
goodly company will this once be, when gathered together! Then will the
performance of these precious promises be fully manifested.

3. This truth may be demonstrated not only from the real conquest of the
Gospel, and those excellent trophies of her victory over many noted enemies,
who have after been vessels of honor, but also from the feigned subjection,
that so many have been made to render. Is it not strange, what a multitude do
in these times profess the truth, and yet hate it; and were never drawn with
the cords of love? How very many have courted the name of a Christian, and
wooed the shadow of religion, who never knew the truth thereof? which certainly
is a convincing evidence of the Gospel's conquest, that so many knees should
bow to the name of Jesus, whose hearts were never bowed, or really subdued to
him.

4. It is an unanswerable proof of this truth, that we see, the Church's
increase and enlargement has come to pass most punctually after that manner,
yea, with all the circumstances, as was foretold and promised: so that the
event does in every thing answer the word. For (First) it is there held out,
that from a day of small things, which men would be ready to despise, it should
grow up as a tender plant, and spread forth its branches over the nations; that
the children of the desolate should be more than of the married Wife, and the
glory of the second Temple, exceed that of the first: and O! has it not
accordingly come to pass. -- (2.) This great increase and enlargement of the
church was to fall out in the days of the new Testament; when Christ should be
lifted up, that then he should draw all men after him. For those promises we
have thereof in the old testament, do clearly point at the times of the Gospel:
and does not the event here accordingly answer?-(3.) The Scripture holds out
that the falling away of the Jews should be the riches of the Gentiles, and
that their rejection should make way for the fulfilling of this promise, even
the ingathering of of the nations: and do not men see the event, with this very
circumstance?

4. We find the Isles, and utmost parts of the earth, are given to Christ for
his inheritance; and foretold as a special part of the Church's increase. And
do we not clearly see, there is no place of the world, where Christ's Kingdom
is more visible, where more children have been begot to him by the gospel, we
may say, than in these northern places, even in these isles of Britain, and
Ireland, which are almost the uttermost parts of the earth; there being but
little from that, and nearer the pole, which is inhabited, yea we may judge
has been that Thule, whereof the Ancients did so much speak. -- (5.) Was it
not also foretold that the Church should possess the gates of her enemies, at
whose great increase the world should wonder; the princes thereof see, and be
troubled, while God is known in her palaces, for a refuge? And does not the
event witness this, (...) all the counsels and essays, which the world has
had, to hinder the church's growth, her rising has always been upon the ruins
of her greatest enemies; yea, those who have been a terror in the land of the
living, did often fall, and break themselves, in that attempt! Can men deny the
mavelous progress of the Church, how from a small beginning she at last
possessed the gates of both the east, and western Empire, her old enemies: and
do we not this day see her conquest advancing on the ruins of Antichrist, her
last, and greatest adversary!

5. As the fulfilling of this promise about the church's increase is
undeniable, since men cannot contradict their sense therein, we must also say,
this is a thing great and mavelous, which no less than some divine and
extraordinary power could bring about; if we consider these things: (first)
that quick dispatch, which the churches growth, under the days of the new
Testament, has made. O might not the pagan world wonder, how in the space of
two or three hundred years it was almost become wholly Christian? O strange! a
Dioclesian and Maximus, so grievously persecuting, and trampling on the very
name of Christianity, and yet near that same age, this great Roman Empire and
Emperor submitting to the Gospel, which was fulfilled in the days of
Constantine! -- (2.) How astonishing was it, for the Church's rise and increase
to be brought about upon the ruin and downfall of the idols of the nations who
had their temples, and were worshipped as God; that the world should be made to
renounce its Bible, and that religion which for so many ages was deeply rooted
by tradition from their fathers; those altars, which were had in such
reverence, demolished, and their temples made a ruinous heap; yea, that very
name of their God's should be thus obliterated, was not this indeed very
wonderful? But Dagon has no strength to stand before the ark of the God of
Israel. (3.) That it should be thus advanced by such means, as the preaching of
the word, even of that which to the Jews was a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness! how this voice should put to perpetual silence those
Oracles, that for so many ages had given a response to the world, might be
indeed astonishing; yea, that the Churches increase should thus be brought
about, at no less rate, than the overturning of greatest Kingdoms, the
conversion of so many nations; should tame and civilize the most savage and
barbarous, cause the lion to lie down with the lamb, and even make so great and
universal a change in the face of the universe. -- (4.) Does it not speak forth
some divine power, the carrying on of the Church's growth and increase, not
only over the violence of men, but over all those dreadful errors and
inventions, those thick mists which both in former and later times, have
ascended out of the pit, to choke her; that we may say, the Church has not
only been helped to tread upon the lion, and dragon, but on the adder and
cockatrice also; and does carry the trophies of her conquest over all these at
this day! -- (5.) I would add, is it not mavelous, how the Church's increase
has been advanced in a way most contrary to all the rules of ordinary policy,
by which States and Empires have risen; not by dissimulation, but greatest
plainness and free dealing for Christ, and his Ministers did never flatter the
world to embrace the truth; not by open violence, but a more excellent spirit
and power, before which men could not stand? where foolishness was made to
confound and outwit humane wisdom, and weakness to overcome strength: that we
may say, O how little of man, and how much of God was to be seen therein!

THIRD Promise, which the Lord has given to his Church in the word, is the
giving of the Spirit and pouring out of the same; which is there expressly held
forth, and promised, Zach. 12. 10. Joh. 14. 17. Is^. 59. 21. And does concern
all times of the Church, though in a more full measure, to be let out in the
days of the Gospel.

It is true, the Christians inward experience can best witness this; for these
have an argument from within; they know, and are sure they have received the
Spirit by the word, whereby they understand those things which are spiritually
discerned. But that which here is intended, it is to show, that the Spirit is
truly given forth to the Church according to the promise. That it does
accompany the truth and doctrine of Christ, and purity of the ordinances, is a
thing, which from clear undeniable evidences may be demonstrated, to the
conviction of the greatest Atheist. For I must think, even bystanders, such
who never knew any saving work of the Spirit, but live in these parts where the
ordinances are dispensed with purity and power, if they shut not their eyes,
may often clearly see something going forth with the word, that is beyond words,
a divine Spirit and power, which sends forth its favor in the daily
administration of the Gospel; yea, by its effects, and some convincing
discovery thereof, does force this truth in upon men's consciences, who are
otherways strangers thereto.

Now to hold forth the accomplishment of so great a promise, that God is
faithful and true therein, I would give in these clear and convincing witnesses
to the same.

1. Those excellent gifts and endowments given to the Church, are they not a
visible proof of this truth? For it is undeniable, where once the Gospel
comes, that instruments are raised with another spirit; reapers sent forth,
while there is a harvest to be gathered, and shaped for their work; yea, those
who were of mean and ordinary parts, when called forth to the service of the
Church, will have another luster; that it may be often seen with astonishment,
how far not only they exceed themselves, but those who were of more eminent
natural endowments. I would but seriously ask men who never laid this truth to
heart, Whence is that variety of Gifts, so sutably dispensed to the various
employments, and different pieces of service, the Church does call for? How are
they thus suited to the several times; yea, to the very genius and temper of
such a time? Whence is it, that every gift and qualification is so fitted and
disposed for its proper use; some most peculiarly shaped out to awake and
threaten (those Boanerges) while others are set forth with a spirit eminently
fitted to comfort; some mighty in persuasion, yet not so fit to expound; others
most dexterous to instruct, yet not so powerful to apply; some having the gifts
of tongues, and others the tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to
the weary; to some the face of a lion is given, when a heroic spirit of
courage and resolution is called for, and to others the face of a calf, for
patient enduring in suffering time! Surely it were a choice meditation, to
think how with as great wonder we may say of this excellent body of the Church,
as of the natural body of man, how curiously, yea, marvellously is it framed;
where every part does answer another, and to the use of the whole, each has
its peculiar excellency, and something proper to every one's gift may be then
seen, as well as in the face of man, by which in some things they differ from
all other.

2. These more eminent extraordinary out pourings of the Spirit do also witness
this truth; which at some special times, when the Churches necessity requires
it, have been most discernable. When the Lord sends forth his servants about
a more then ordinary piece of work, either to do, or suffer; when he is to
plant the Church in some place, where the Gospel will meet with much
opposition; is it not then manifest, how some more than ordinary power and
irresistible efficacy does accompany the truth, before which there is no
standing? The disputer is then, in his reasoning, confounded by something above
reason; the untoward and rude are forced to stoop before the word, and to
confess they have to do, with power, and not with words; yea, those whom the
Lord makes use of, who were feeble and weak as others, in that day are made as
a brazen wall, and a fenced city.

3. Is it not also undeniable, that now under the New Testament there are
Ministers of the Spirit, and not of a dead letter, and empty ^ound? That with
the word there goes along a ministration of power and life; whence a Majesty
and authority attending the public ordinances is often so discernable, that even
those who know not what the Spirit is, are made to see something therein which
does dazzle them with astonishment. Whence is it that at some times such a
beauty and power shine forth with ordinances, like a glance of the glory of
God, even going before men's eyes, which for the present has made a wonderful
change upon some very gross men, and put them in an other temper, yea, forced
them with fear to acknowledge, that surely God it near in the assemblies of his
people? And I would ask, whence is it the word gives law to men's consciences?
that it should speak with such an authority, as makes them all to shiver, that
even the worst of men are some times made to stand before the ministry of the
word, like men standing at the bar, upon life and death, before a judge whose
authority they durst not decline!

4. It is very discernable, what a great difference and another appearance,
there is both on Ministers, and Christians at one time, from what they are at
another, in the discharge of duty, as if these were not the same persons; which
appears not only in the enlargement, and straitning of their gift, but also
in power and life. Is it not seen, with what liberty these do some times pray,
and are as a Ship with a full gale before the wind? That it is then easy to
preach; when at other times there is like a shut door, that even hearers may
perceive a sensible languishing, and them hampered in their very expressions,
yea, as men rowing against a contrary wind; the word wanting that favor and
relish it has had at other times; and this not through a natural
indisposition, or want of preparation, but that which all who ever served God
in the spirit must confess, has most sensibly attended them when they have
thought themselves at the greatest advantage, for going about duty: O who can
deny this evidence of the spirit, a thing in all ages so sensibly felt, yea,
even obvious to the worst of men!

5. It is also clear, that where ever the Lord has had a Church, at some
special turns of her condition there have usually been some more solemn times
of the spirit, and high spring-tides of the gospel. There was indeed a
mavelous flowing forth of the spirit of God after Christ's ascension, which
like a mighty current did carry all before it; at which time more success did
follow one sermon, than has been by the ministry of many others in an age;
this made the world wonder, as if some universal enchantment had fallen on men;
what that could be, which the more they sought to bear down, the more it
increased, that made the rich choose poverty, and those who dwelt in palaces
betake themselves with cheerfulness to the dens and caves of the earth. But
besides this, it is very manifest, that in a large measure the Spirit has been
let forth to the Church in after-ages; yea, there is no particular Church where
the light has shined, but has had it is special times, some solemn day of the
pouring out of the spirit, before the sun went down: which may be observed
either at the first breaking out of the Gospel, or at some other remarkable
time and change of her condition; whence a great Flight of souls to Christ has
followed; besides the reaching of the conscience and stirring the affection of
many others under a common work of the spirit, which usually goes along with
solemn times.

6. The going back of the tide, and visible withdrawing of the Spirit from
particular churches, where it has sometimes in a large measure been let forth,
is a very convincing witness to the truth of this promise. For it is clearly
seen, at what a stand the Gospel is in those places were it most eminently
shined; that the land which blossomed, and was like a wat^ed garden, has been
made as the heath in the wilderne^s; and then that the ministers of Christ,
whose lot has fallen in such a time, are put to very sore work, to work (as it
were) with oars for want of wind, to cast out the net all night, and catch
nothing; a shut door is upon them in the exercise of their Ministry; duty is
made burdensome, because the Lord is against them, there is an evident
restraint upon the word, and its intercourse is more with the ear, than with
the consciences of men: yea, any liberty they find is to execute a commission
of Judgment, and to denounce the woe of the Gospel. O, does not so manifest
withdrawing of the Spirit witness the out-pouring thereof, and that it is a
certain and real thing.

7. Do not the stirrings and strong convictions, which even the worst of men
have sometimes under the word, witness a divine Spirit and power going along
therewith; that which forces an assent from their conscience to the truth,
which otherways they hate; yea, makes them for the time wonder they should not
have been more serious in the ways of God! Yea, it does often put a thorn in
the bed of their security! for indeed the word and the light thereof does
torment those who dwell in the earth. And truly this is a mavelous thing,
which gets in upon men's secret designs and counsels, does reveal to them
the most close thoughts of their heart, which they are sure men's eye could not
reach, takes them down through themselves; and yet, that the world knows not
whence it is! Yea, are they not forced to confess, what a great difference they
find betwixt the word from the mouth of some who are holy and serious, though
held out in greatest simplicity, than from others even of greater gifts, and
accompanied with more show of eloquence, that surely the one has another sound
and relish, speaks more feelingly home to their heart, than the most polished
discourse of greatest orators!

8. One witness more I shall here give to the truth of this promise, even those
eminent examples of the great grace of God, which in every age have shined in
the firmament of the Church; some in love, and zeal, some in patience, and
humility, some in the strong acts of faith, and self-denial; which do certainly
demonstrate a more excellent spirit, than that which is in the world; whence
they appear with another luster in their walk and carriage, and have a sweet
and fragrant favor of the Spirit, to the very discerning of bystanders; which
truly shows that his wind does blow on his garden, when the spices send forth
so pleasant a Scent.

FOURTH. We find an express Promise in the word of Deliverance to the Church in
a low and oppressed condition; that surely the Lord will plead her cause, will
deliver his People when he ^eeth their strength is gone, and save them from the
hands of their enemies. Ps. 18. 47, 48, 50. Ps. 22. 4, 5. Is. 54. 17. Is. 51.
23.

It is true, this promise has its bounds, limits, and proviso's, which should
be taken along in the application thereof. We know, the Covenant of God with
particular Churches is conditional only; he promises, that he will be with
them, while they are with him: yea, it is often seen (and there is no jarr here
with this promise) that a People professing the Gospel, confederate with God
following duty, have even turned their back before the enemy, and in the holy
providence of God have for a time been given up to their fierce rage and
violence. But it is also sure, that this promise has an accomplishment, and in
the day of the Church's strait the Lord has often appeared, by a strong
outstretched hand for her help; his own arm brought salvation to his People,
when they sought to him: for God is known in her palaces for a refuge; yea,
surely the Church might often sing that song on such clear grounds, as though
with Israel she had been standing at the red sea, Thy right hand, O Lord, is
full of power, thy right hand has dashed in pieces thy enemies. For what
nation, or People is like this, to whom he has showed such mavelous things?

Now to show forth the faithfulness of God in this promise, I would offer some
few things that are a most clear and undeniable witness thereto.

1. There are few ages, but we have some record of the church's condition,
which hold forth such signal convincing providence of God, in behalf of his
oppressed church and people, as may be a manifest seal to this truth. It is
true, some times have been more remarkable for suffering, times of Judgment and
of a growing trial, wherein this truth has not so clearly shined forth; yea,
that long night which the church had under Antichrist, might seem to call it in
question: but nevertheless, if men take a serious View of the Lord's way, and
the series of providence in ages past, comparing one time with another, what
the straits and most extreme case of the church has at last resolved in, they
will find cause to cry with astonishment, Great deliverances gives he to his
people, yea, the Lord has done great things for them! I am sure, were there a
full record, with that true account which might be given, of those more
remarkable deliverances, that particular churches have met with, since the
first planting of the Gospel among them, wherein God's very immediate hand for
their help has been discernable, it would nonplus the World, and greatest
Atheists, about the real fulfilling of this promise.

2. The confessions even of the Church's enemies has often witnessed this truth,
that in pursuing their malice, to trouble and undo her, they have but undone
themselves; how tormenting disappointments have caused their very flesh to pine
away, and the close and issue of their rage forced this conviction from them at
last, that the Church is a burdensome stone, to be lifted up; a party, with
whom it is full of hazard to meddle. Have not such been made to discern
something of a divine hand, so clearly against them, blasting their counsels
and most promising attempts, as if their eyes with Balaam has been opened to
see the Angel in their way! Yea, in all ages it is known, how the conscience
even of the worst has often bewrayed something of a presaging fear, they have
had, of those whom they pursued with greatest malice, and a dreadful impression
they had of a praying people, and their prayers.

3. This truth has had the clearest witness in times of the Church's greatest
strait and extremity; when difficulties have appeared insuperable, and relief
in an ordinary way of providence most hopeless; when visible means have been
withdrawn, all refuge failed, and none to help; that in such a day the Lord
has been seen upon the mount, and unexpectedly by very strange means brought
deliverance to a broken, and almost ruined Church, even as it were betwixt the
bridge and the water: so that who would have a clear view of the accomplishment
of this promise, may but turn back on these more remarkable extreme exigences
of the Church's condition, and there have it; how often a sweet sunshine that
followed the most dark and cloudy times, a raging storm has resolved into a
refreshing calm; yea, that with a further growth of the Church's trial, and
doubling of her burden, her enlargement and deliverance has broken out with
those great and obvious remarks therein, that it was a convincing return of
prayer and wrestling, with a further addition of some new and singular mercy
there with, yea, some eminent act of judgment upon her adversaries.

4. The greatest advantages and victories, which men have got over the Churches
and people of God, can also bear witness to this, that when the wicked have
sprung up like the grass, and the workers of iniquity seemed to flourish, this
very way has the Lord taken to bring about a more full deliverance: Yea, on
the other hand, has it not been very obvious how the Church's gain has been
brought forth out of greatest loss; that those wounds which seemed most deadly,
by the infinitely wise providence of God, have turned to her most effectual and
thorough cure; and men's unreasonable violence and rage against the Church has
often had an evident tendency to bring about even that whereto it seemed most
directly contrary, some further mercy, and deliverance, than could have been
expected; as the Amorites refusing Israel but passage through their land, did
prove the very mean to give them more than they sought, the possession of that
land for an inheritance.

5. This witness the observation of the Church in all ages can bear to this
promise, that deliverance has often sprung up, and been brought to her hand,
from a quarter, and by such means, as none would have expected; by such, as
none but God could do; a sudden report and rumor (1 Samuel 23. 27.) Means that
have been not only small and improbable, but that looked directly contrary, as
in bringing the Church out of Egypt; yea, sometime by the wicked's being
ensnared in the work of their own hands. Is it not obvious, how the Lord has
employed men's private interests, to put them on for befriending his Church?
and has caused the earth to help the woman, and raised up one oppressor to
punish another; yea, often has prepared carpenters, whence it was least
thought, to cut the horns of those who had scattered his people!

6. There is this convincing witness to the truth of such a promise, that
sudden remarkable change, which may be often discerned both on men's inward
frame, and the outward face of the Church, when a time of mercy and enlargement
is come; instruments raised of the Lord, with a discernable elevation of their
spirits to act, and do exploits; the feeble then made strong; and those who
sometime would have fainted at an ordinary piece of service, dare with such a
gale of divine assistance run (as it were) through a troop, and overleap a
wall. For indeed this may in all ages be obvious, how easy it is to move, in
the day when the Lord moves for his people, and strengthens the girdle of
their loins; that it was not their bow, or sword, which got them the victory,
but the very finger of God, something above the counsels of men, or ordinary
means; which has sometimes been made clear as the noonday, so that even, at
some distance, those who are wise to discern the times, did see when there was
a breaking out of a day of a Church's hope; how there was a previous motion and
stir amongst the dry bones; the Lord, as in the top of the mulberry trees, has
been then discernable, and some promising appearance from the present
disposition and temper of the Godly in that time (though we must grant, mercy and
sovereign grace has often met the Church, when little of this has appeared)
which, like the breaking out of that cloud in the top of mount Carmel, to the
Prophet, though at first but as an handbreadth, has showed that deliverance to
the Church was not far off.

7. I would add this witness also; those convincing providence, which in all
ages have been showed against the enemies of the Church, such as men could not
pass without some remark: what an issue those have had, who have sometimes been
a sore rod on the People of God, yea, a terror in the land of the living! How
they have become a most abject and contemptible party, like bees who have lost
their sting; their countenance has been changed, and they ceased to be any
more a fear, when once their work was done, and the date of their commission
for the humbling and trying of the Church expired; yea a judicial Stroke from
the Lord has been often seen upon their very judgment, and resolutions, which
could not then serve them to trouble and afflict the Church; the day being
turned, and the time of her deliverance come.

FIFTH. There is this Promise also which concerns the Church in general, as
well as Christians in their personal case, That all things work together for
the good of those who love God, Romans 8. 28. the accomplishment whereof, as it
is written out in providence to the observation of men, I would here touch.

This is indeed a great and comprehensive promise, which in the constant course
and tenor of providence about the Church, we may see, it does take place; how
those turnings and changes of the World, the most strange emergents of the
time, the various motions and interests of men, do cooperate together, and
have an undoubted tendency to bring forth the Church's good, as though they did
intentionally act for the same. There will indeed, one day, be a more clear and
mavelous discovery of this, when the Lord has perfected his work, and the
mystery of God it finished, the Church brought safe to the harbor: then shall
it be fully manifest, to what end all those storms and cross winds in the
counsels and designs of men were; those things, which in the time could not be
understood, but seemed perplexed and strange, did really work for the Church's
good. For then men will see with their eyes a full performance of the word: yet
we must say, even here, in every age, amidst the various changes of the
Church's case, this has so clear a Fulfillment, that there is no serious
observer of providence, but may bear witness to it.

1. That not only the Church's good, but even her greatest good, has most
clearly had its rise, and been brought forth, out of the greatest mischiefs and
hurts intended against her. If we search the Scripture, and will turn over
those after-records of the Church's condition, we shall there find, that the
most remarkable attempts and plots, such as Pharaoh's last essay to destroy the
Israelites, Haman's great design to root out the seed of the Jews, that great
Master-plot Satan once had on foot, to crush the Gospel and the Christian
Church by crucifying her head, yea, in these last times Antichrist's killing
the witnesses, have all, as if really intended by the instruments as well as
the first mover, brought forth the Church's greatest good; so as the
after-mercy and relief has carried some visible proportion to her trial, and
to the greatness of her adversaries design.

2. It may be also clear, if we but trace back those memorable changes, which
have been up and down the earth, how direct a tendency they have had to this
end, Did not the bringing down that great image of the (...) witness this? We
find Nebuchadnezar raised up as a rod to the Church, and Cyrus for a deliverer;
we may see the Persian and Grecian Monarchies brought down, to make way for the
setting up of the Messiah his Kingdom. Antiochus must stand up a little for a
sharp trial, and his downfall give the Church a new breathing, and hold forth to
after-ages a remarkable monument of the judgment of God against his enemies.
Peaceable Augustus must fall in with his time in whose days shall be abundance
of peace. We find a Titus set up to execute the judgment of God on the Jews,
to make way for a further enlagement to the gentile Church; a Nero and Domitian
to help forward the Churches suffering, and a Constantine to give her some
rest, after so long and sore an assault; and at last, the Roman empire mouldred
down, for Antichrist's up setting, to accomplish what did remain of the
sufferings of Christ, in his Church, by that adversary.

3. We may often see a very strange concurrence of things! how instruments act to
bring about the Lord's end, and advance his Church's interest, even while each
one does most vigorously drive their own proper end and design; which shows,
there is surely a living spirit in the wheels, that orders these motions, a
supreme and first mover that can thus determine them, whether they will, or
not, to serve his end, and to promote the Church's good, when they most
directly intend the contrary.

4. We have seen how in men's plotting the ruin of the Church, there is often an
unseen hand determining their judgment and inclination, to fall upon that very
way, than which we would think nothing could have been more direct for her good
and their own ruin; how an Hushai has been sent in, or some have been stirred
up amongst themselves (upon their own interest) to break the pernicious
counsels and designs of others.

5. We have also seen the personal quarrels of the Church's enemies among
themselves brought to such an height, and to fall out so seasonably, that
observers might clearly perceive that it has been from the Lord; a judgment
for their rage and violence against his poor oppressed People.

6. We have seen the Church's enemies raised to a strange height, all
advantages favoring them, until their mine has been ripe for springing; and
lo, at that very juncture, something unexpected has fallen out, which did turn
their former success to their further ruin, yea, disappoint all. This, the
World is ready to call some fatal and malevolent conjunction, which cannot be
resisted: and what is this, in effect, but the witness of men's conscience to a
divine hand*

7. Have we not seen some sore dash and overthrow of the Church bring forth her
good, and a more full victory? how visible help and means have been taken out
of the way, that something above means might be seen in her condition, even in
that day, when all has been given for lost; yea, truth's losing the day upon
the field, bring forth her triumph on the scaffold and at the stake.

8. We have seen most despicable and ordinary things made subservient for some
great piece of the Lord's work; a very small thing made the first rise of
strange revolutions; that remarkable changes have been often lying in the bosom
of a common providence: yea, truly we find both Scripture, and the observation
of after-ages, Witness, that the Church's deliverance and relief did almost
never come that way, by such a method and means, as she had most expected the
same; and that God's time of working may be often very contrary to our time of
expecting.

I shall only add; Is it not often seen (which, I am sure, all ages can witness)
how men's endeavors to darken the truth by error, have been the effectual
means for its further clearing? That the growing of a trial, a violent and sore
exacting upon the Church, has kindly wrought toward her relief and
enlargement; her meat has been often brought even out of the eater, by means
most destructive thereto; and a sword must pierce the Church's heart, that the
tho'ts of many may be discovered; a time of persecution must help to cure the
divisions amongst the godly, and bring them together in the furnace, which
prosperity could not do: yea, it is often seen, which former ages can also
witness, that the very undoing of the Church has been God's blessed way, to keep
her from being undone.

THE SECOND BRANCH
Does concern those Scripture-threatnings, which are held forth in the word,
with a respect to the visible Church, and against a people professing the
Gospel; that no privileges they have above others, shall exempt them from
judgment, yea and from very sad strokes; he has known them above the rest of
the World, he therefore will contend with them most severely, because of sin,
and such particular evils as we find the Word threatens.

I touched a little some Scripture-threatnings, in the preceding argument, as
concerned Christians in their private experience: what I here intend, is to
point at this truth, as it is written in the providence and judgments of every
time, to men's observation; how judgments from the Lord, which point, as with
the finger, at the abounding sins of that time, do reach a land, and particular
Churches, according to the threatenings of the word. This is indeed manifest,
that the greatest promises made to a people, we find backed with sadest
threatenings: and accordingly we find, the greatest monuments of wrath have
usually been set up, where sometimes the largest offers of the Gospel were;
yea, that the anger of the Lord may draw so deep, against a people professing
his name as to make their land desolate, and the high ways thereof mourn; for
in this precinct of the Church does both judgment and mercy most eminently
shine forth, and the Lord's way there does differ from that he has with any
other people.

Now to clear this grave truth a little, how those threatenings of the word,
against a nation and people, because of sin, are also verified in their
judgments, I shall touch a few instances, that are most known and obvious,
where we may lay the word and observation of the Church together, and see how
they answer one the other.

First, We find the Threatenings of the word do point at the time of a people's
judgment. 1 These. 2. 16. Rev. 14. 15, 18. That when they fill up the measure of
their sin, and their cup is full, the Lord will not then defer the execution;
until the cup of the Amorites was full, he did let them alone: and we find
answer deferred, to the cry of the souls under the altar, for avenging their
blood on Antichrist, because that accursed party has yet more to do against
the Church, and the Saints more to suffer under their hand.

Now to witness the accomplishment of this; let us but consider what in all
times may be observed. First, that there is an ordinary growth and height of
sin, which a land comes to, before destruction; some national and universal
spreading thereof, prodigious outbreakings, the utter rejecting of reproof,
which show that a people's case must then be on some turn; yea, that strange
and unusual sinning uses to go before some strange stroke. -- 2. Before
judgment come, is it not seen, how the sin of a people has become so daring,
that it has had a loud cry? yea, their case has been such as did justify the
Lord's procedure against them, even in the conscience of all Observers, that he
did it not without much cause. -- 3. Is it not easy, for such as are wise to
know the times, to see night coming on a land, when sin is at some dreadful
height, by considering the word and the Lord's usual way with a people in such
a case? Yea, have there not then been some special forewarnings, a more then
ordinary impression of judgment upon the spirits of the godly, and the hiding
of many of them in the grave; which, as threatening presages, have showed the
near approach of a stroke. -- 4. There does not usually want even some Noah, or
Jonas, the Ministers of God sent forth to threaten, who as watchmen upon the
wall are discerning hazard at a distance; yea, with an observable pressure then
upon their spirit, and a more than ordinary agreement amongst themselves, to
cry out, and give the people warning, when the time of judgment has been
drawing near.

2. It is clear, there are some special evils and sins of a time, which we find
the word most dreadfully does threaten: yea, in a peculiar way it does put a
mark upon them, that though the Lord should pass by many infirmities in a
Church and people professing his name; yet, for such and such sins (as we find
in Amos 1. 3.) he will not turn away the punishment thereof; but has solemnly
declared, by his truth and faithfulness, that these shall not pass without some
visible mark, even before the world, of his anger. Now in this the Scripture is
clear, and lets us see, there are some sins more particularly threatened, some
land-destroying sins, that have as it were the mark set on (...) which do
especially provoke the holy indignation and jealousy of God; such as idolatry,
corrupting the Worship of God; Perjury, and Covenant Breaking, -- Shall they
break my Covenant, and escape? says the Lord, Ezekiel. 17. 15. Also departing
from God, and his way; For this the land shall be desolate, as in Jerem. 9. 12,
13. Yea, blood guiltiness, which the earth shall not cover, and for which the
sword shall not depart, even from the house and family of David. 2 Samuel 12. 10.

Now to evidence the accomplishment hereof, I shall point at some things most
obvious to the observation of every time, how terribly the Lord uses to plead,
for such things, and by some exemplary stroke and judgment point them out, as
we find them particularly set by themselves in the word, and threatenings
thereof.

First, that in these sins, thus marked, men may see how their judgments use
not wholly to be deferred to another world, but though much is often passed here,
and laid over to that last and great judgment, yet, upon such sins the Lord
has put some mark of his displeasure, even in this life. -- 2. That for these
he uses to contend before the sun, and in the view of men: his judgments are
indeed often secret, and do consume as a moth; but upon such sins, we may
frequently see, some public and visible stroke is made to follow, that the
world cannot pass without a remark. -- 3. That the Lord also uses to be a very
swift witness against such evils. For, as we find, the oppression of the Church
has a loud cry, and the blood of the saints a how long? it is also seen those
forementioned sins do much hasten judgment, so as seldom that generation
passes away without some witness thereto. It is rarely found, that some great
revolt of a people from God, and breaking Covenant with him, does lie long
unpunished, nor does the hoary head of the violent and bloody man go often to the
grave in peace. -- 4. That these sins use to be followed with some very
dreadful and eminent stroke, which has made the land desolate, their cities
sometime wast, and a ruinous heap; yea, houses great and fair, to be without
inhabitants; so as men have with astonishment enquired, Why is all this come to
pass! and it was easy to answer, even for such and such evils has the Lord
done this, according to his word. -- 5. That a divine hand uses to be most
discernable in the punishment of such sins, because of a very clear resemblance
betwixt them, and the stroke; which has forced their own conscience, as well
as Beholders to confess the Righteousness of God therein. -- 6. That the Lord
will put some mark of his anger on the choicest of his servants for any
accession to such sins; these to whom he has given their soul for a prey, have
yet got a sore outward stroke, upon such an account, which has followed them
to the grave; For this the sword shall not depart from David's house. Idolatry
rent the Kingdom from the posterity of Solomon. Jonas shall not escape for his
rebellion. Yea, God was wroth with Moses, and no entreaty shall hinder his
dying in the wilderness. I may add, has not the Lord's controversy on this
ground even reached their posterity! Which may show that these threatenings are
sad earnest; and such sins are not more particularly pointed at in the word,
than they have been in after-ages made exemplary in judgment.

3. A people's lukewarmness, their slighting of the Gospel and not receiving
the love of the truth, we find sadly threatened in the word, Rev. 3. 15. 16. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. And truly we must say, they have not fallen to the ground in
any age, without an accomplishment, as frequent observation can witness. First,
how a people's entering upon a Religious way, their pursuing a form of
reformation, and not thorough for God therein, but on carnal grounds, has thus
put them in a worse condition than before. For truly men's hypocrisy in going
about a good work, does threaten more, than the performance thereof does
promise. Jehu got a temporal reward, but his posterity must at length reckon
for all the blood of Jezreel. -- 2. That no people use to be further from
getting good of the gospel, than such who have been under most clear and
greatest convictions; so as it is found, there is often more access to gain
amongst the savages, than those who have sit their day while the tide did flow;
yea, ministers have found most discouragement, to labor in those parts where
the word has been long preached with power. -- 3. It is seen, how light not
improved will turn a People more gross, and is usually followed with some
remarkable growth in sin; that the more the word does put a restraint on men's
corruption, the more it rages; so as it may be observed what a very black die,
the powerful preaching of the Gospel has put upon a People, as a visible mark
of Judgment on such who profit not thereby. -- 4. Is it not seen how men's
formality in the matters of God has been often punished even with the taking
away of the form? Yea, that seldom error and delusion does want a harvest
amongst a People who receive not the truth in love. -- 5. Has not slighting of
the Gospel been at last followed with some visible restraint and inhibition
both upon the ordinances and dispensers thereof, a judicial withdrawing of the
Spirit, as to the work of conversion and conviction; whereby the Lord does
plainly cease to be a reprover to such; yea, even says, Bind up the Law, and
seal the Testimony.

The word does also threaten carnal Security (a disease whereof the Church is
often in great hazard) yea, we find it holds forth a certain connection betwixt
spiritual judgments upon a People, and some outward strokes to follow thereon;
that those who are under that first woe and plague upon their spirits, are then
near to some judgment upon their persons, and may expect a sharp wakening; in
hearing they shall not understand, etc. but the close is, until their cities be
consumed without inhabitants, and there be an utter desolation: yea, we find,
judgment does begin as a moth, in that 5 th of Hos. but in the 14 th ver. it
does turn at last to be a lion. We may truly say, the fulfilling of this has
in all ages of the Church been obvious. 1. That as the first part of the
Church's deliverance is usually spiritual, so it is found the first step of
judgment, and the execution thereof against a People, has been upon their
spirits; that serious discerners of the time might know, the night was fast
coming on, and some sad outward stroke on a land, by the abounding of spiritual
judgments. -- 2. It is clear the most dreadful strokes that ever come on a
particular Church, do usually find it in such a case, judicially hardened, and
under many warnings plagued with security. Thus did the flood find the old
World, and before that desolating stroke on Jerusalem by the Romans, were not
the Jews in such a case? Salvian can tell how it was with the African Churches,
before that dreadful inundation of the Goths and Vandals; yea, the Church's
records in all ages do witness, that before any sad stroke or persecution came
upon a People, a deep sleep and lethargy has been previous thereto; gray hairs
might have been seen upon them: and the Word does even show, that this will be
the last disease, whereof the Church shall be sick before the great day of the
Lord. -- 3. It is also seen how spiritual judgments, when they grow upon a
people, make great dispatch, and do quickly ripen for some further stroke; that
when men have run down their conscience, and are past reproof of the word,
going on from evil to worse, the case comes then to be clear, and ready for
the final discussion of the process.

5. The word does denounce woe against the troublers of the Church, and those
who are her persecutors; that the Lord shall recompense tribulation to such,
and plead with her oppressors: the accomplishment whereof has been truly
manifest, yea to the observation even of the world. Isa. 10. 5. 2 These. 1. 6.
-- First, That eminent oppressors of the Church have seldom gone out of the
world, without some mark of divine anger upon them. Surely if there were a
record of such instances, that in every age have been conspicuous, men would be
forced to see, and say, that the most noted enemies and persecutors of the
saints have been also the most convincing and noted examples of judgment in the
ti^e. -- 2. That the Church's suffering uses to go before a day of vengeance
on the instruments thereof. We find, Jehu got an outward reward for executing
the judgment of God on his enemies: but as for those men who have been the rod
of the Church, it has been seen, that they have not long wanted some scourge
as sore upon themselves, as they have been to his People, and that at last
these have paid dear for their service. -- 3. We may see how this also does
help to finish the controversy of God, with men and their houses; that for this
he has taken many away in the midst of their days, and made them cease to be,
who would not cease to trouble the Church, while they had a being; yea that he
had taken them in his own hand, whom men could not reach, and made their
down-casting in the midst of themselves.

6. Does not the Scripture threaten carnal confidence, in a People; the putting
of their trust in man, or in any outward instruments? Jer. 17. 5, 6, 17. To
clear the accomplishment whereof, let us but compare the word, and the Church's
observation together; and we shall find, -- 1. That outward means have never
more miscarried, than when most promising, and when there was greatest
expectation from the same; yea, that very eminent instruments when much leaned
to, have been observably blasted, and made to shrink under such a burden. -- 2.
That those whom the Lord had made much use of, yea, honored to be great
instruments in the service of the Church, have often had some discernable blot,
to reprove men's overlading of instruments with their esteem; a Tertullian, an
Origin in ancient times, yea, even a Luther, in these latter ages must go with
some halt to the grave. -- 3. That many who have been useful in the Church for
a time, the Lord does often lay by; yea, makes not use of them to the end; but,
the last may be made first. And truly that excess in men's esteem, putting a
further weight on some means, than they could bear, has often helped to render
many useless. -- 4. Is it not also seen, how one extremity is thus plagued with
another? None more ready to shrink in a day of trouble, than such who at a
distance seemed most daring; yea, none more ready to fall in to that excess of
undervaluing instruments, than those who have most exceeded upon the other hand.

7. Do we not find the word threaten, and in a special way point at corrupt
ministers, unfaithful watchmen, who give not warning to the Church; those
shepherds that feed themselves, but not the flock, the leaders of a people that
cause them to err, and by their practice, to stumble at the law? Mal. 2. 3, 4.

The accomplishment whereof has in all ages been very discernable. First, how
such have usually been most noted as the greatest and most violent enemies,
which the Church has at any time had; yea, that no course has been so evil
and gross that has wanted some of these to help it on, whose hatred and
persecution of the Godly has been found to exceed the most openly profane and
profligate in that time. -- 2. That as they are particularly threatened above
others in the word, so they get also some remarkable cast above others in their
judgment, and having once lost their savor, become vile and loathsome, even to
the worst of men; are contemptible in the eyes of such whom they seek in a
sinful way to please; yea, have a worse favor, than the prophanest wretches;
that being verified in them, Corruption optimi, pessima. -- 3. That these do
seldom make a good retreat from an evil way: so as it is an usual observation,
it is rare for Churchmen to repent, or a fallen star to shine again. -- 4. Are
not such often smitten even in their gifts; which we may see wither, and dry up
upon them, while not faithfully improved; yea, to the very conviction of their
hearers, to have lost that edge which once they had in their ministry? -- 5. I
must add another remark (though I desire to deal with fear, and much
tenderness, in such an application of the judgment of God) how the Lord does
often put some note of his wrath on the children and offspring of unfaithful
Ministers; that it has been seen, none more wretched and gross: whereto as
their evil practice and example has been a special help, so likewise are they
thus punished of the Lord, who did not seek to beget Children to him, by the
Word, but through their way did rather cause many to err and fall.

THE THIRD BRANCH.
HAving spoke something how the Scripture both as to the promises, and
threatenings thereof, is evidently fulfilled in the Lord's ordinary way of
procedure with his Church, I would a little further follow this argument, How
this also has a manifold accomplishment, even in these most strange and dark
passages of providence, whereat men are ready to stumble and challenge the
spotless righteousness of God, and his faithfulness therein; but if we lay them
to that measure, and line of the word which is stretched over the whole work of
providence, we will see how well these do agree, and answer one to the other,
yea, that all the paths wherein God walks toward his Church, and people, are
surely mercy, and truth.

To clear this I shall point at some footsteps of the providence of God in the
world, and about the Church which would seem most dark, yea a contradiction to
his word, and promise, but are plain and manifest, if weighed in the balance
of the sanctuary, where we may have a satisfying look, and resolution of these
things which other ways would be too hard for us to understand, and may see,
how straight these paths are which we thought crooked; yea, how easy and
passable, the greatest deeps of providence would be, both as to God's way with
his Church, and in our own particular case, when once they are set over against
the word. I shall touch this a little in these following instances.

1. It may seem strange how the Church's trouble and strait is often seen to
increase, with the first stirrings of her deliverance; yea, when some
remarkable mercy, and outgate is in the bringing forth, the first step thereof
would seem to put her further back, and in a worse condition than before. This
is indeed a piece of the Lord's way with his Church which in many instances may
be witnessed, but let us take the word along therewith, and we will find. -- 1.
How the Church is often at the brink of the grave even when her case is upon a
turn, and how it is congruous to his way (whose paths are in the deep waters,
who cloatheth himself with darkness, that men should not find any thing after
him, or lay down absolute conclusions concerning his dealing) that the motions
of providence should be often so perplexed, and various -- 2. Did not the case of
the Church in Egypt seem much worse, their burdens doubled upon them, even when
their deliverance was breaking up? -- 3. Joseph ^o be sold as a slave, and in
Egypt turned into a dungeon would seem steps of providence, very unlike the
thing which God was driving at thereby, and yet we see how kindly these did
work toward the same. -- 4. The Church in Micah. 4: ver 10. When she was even
at the door next to a deliverance, her trial was even at the greatest height,
be in pain, and labor to bring forth, for ye shall go to Babylon and there be
delivered: but sorest pangs in the birth do usually promise the best issue --
5. It was the step of the prodence of God, which of all seemed most dreadful to
the Church in Esther, the sealing of the decree, and sending it forth to root
out the whole seed of the Jews, while Haman still flourished, but lo this was
the very step that wrought most thoroughly for her deliverance; and is not a wet
mourning seed time a Scripture-presage of a good harvest.

2. The sore interruptions which a people's endeavors for Reformation, and to
promote the Kingdom of Christ have met with, even when set about with a clear
call, yea, solemn and serious engagements to God, would seem strange, and a
shaking piece of providence: and truly this is often seen, as an usual attendant
on reformation, how unsuperable like difficulties, and unexpected lets do grow
up in the way thereof: thus when Luther, and other instruments were raised up
in Germany, to pursue the Church's Reformation, what cruel edicts were then set
forth to give it a dash? division among themselves, the rising up of the Boors,
and Anabaptists: what a pure, and thorough reformation was on foot under Edward
the sixth in England, and what a dreadful storm did quickly break it up, for
that time? and I would add, what the present case of the Churches in Britain,
and Ireland may at this day witness, where once the Lord so eminently appeared
in a begun Reformation, which now is at so great a stand, but let us go in to
the scripture with this and we will find. -- 1. There is a vive portraicture of
providence in the affairs of the Church held forth in that vision which Ezekiel
had of the wheels at the river Chebar, whose mysterious motions, and turnings
so cross one to the other, without any discord therein, as to the end, to which
they were directed, does witness the rational, and wise conduct of providence:
the Lord's work about his Church is a most shadowed and elaborate piece, which
men cannot see, before their eye, as they see behind upon a review, while
ordinary causes do often vary in their operation, yea, go out of the common road,
but scripture will make this very plain. -- 2. Was not Nehemiah, Ezra, and
Zerobabel at their work, and duty, and had an express call for building of the
temple, yet, how great, and frequent interruptions did they find, sometimes
environed with difficulties, Zach. 4. 7. Who art thou great mountain before
Zerobabel? Yea, they were put to hold the sword and build, to watch and work at
once, because of their enemies. -- 3. What a very sore backset was the Church
at, Hab. 3. Revive thy work, O Lord, in the midst of the years. This was both a
great and long interruption, yea, do we not find her almost at a nonplus with a
Query which no visible appearance could answer, by whom shall Jacob arise for
he is small? 4. We find a special reformation set on foot by Hezekiah with a
solemn Covenant, by the Princes, Priests, and body of the People, with a
setting up of the pure Worship, and ordinances of God, but lo a sharp storm is
soon after, by Sennacherib; yea Hezekiah scarcely is in his grave, when his Son
does bring in corruption, and persecution both at once; and when the christian
Church in the times of the Apostles begun to flourish, success following the
Gospel, did not a sad interruption, and scattering follow, Act. 8. 5. This is
promised that Zion's walls shall even in troublesome times be built, and her
being brought to a heap of rubbish was but making way for a further advance,
that in the building of her again the Lord might appear in his glory; and is it
not clear, that Christ coming in the Gospel, and power thereof to purge his
Church, and carry on a reformation, Mal. 3. 4. proves a searching and trying
time which men cannot endure, for the power of the Word, and clear discovery of
sin, and other shaking dispensations which do usually attend such times and
torment them who dwell on the earth, yea, and put the Devil, and corruption of
men aloft, with all rage to oppose the same.

3. That a sad overclouding, and darkness should come on a land after most
special manifestation of the power and glory of God therein, and that a time of
the Gospel with much light should be so near a forerunner of wrath, and
judgment, would seem a strange piece of providence, and cause a serious enquiry
how such eminent appearances of God for a people, such great confirmations,
observable success for a time, with many signal encouragements, should all seem
to resolve in a desolating stroke, and ruin? This may be instanced in that
Protestant war in France where instruments were remarkably raised, fitted of
the Lord for the service of that time, had much of his presence, and
countenance, yet to resolve thus in a bloody massacre; likewise these
confederate German Princes, Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse, Men eminent for
piety, carried forth with much zeal for God, for defense of the truth, yea, in
the beginning of that war having many promising encouragments, yet, remarkably
deserted of the Lord with very sad like consequences following the same. Let us
consider also the late Bohemian war, stated upon necessary defense of Religion
and liberty, and at first attended with some smiling providence, should
resolve into so great a desolation, and ruin: yea, the Church of Ireland, O,
what a dreadful massacre of the protestants there did quickly follow one of the
most solemn times of the power of God and outpouring of the Spirit that we ever
heard of since the days of the Apostles. I confess this may have a strange
aspect, and is a part of the mavelous ways of the Lord, but when we take it
in to the word, we will find there is no jar, or discord here, for, 1. It might
seem as strange, and astonishing what Baruch got from the Lord in answer to his
complaint, Jerem. 45. that he would pluck up what he had planted, and cast down
that which he had built, for a work to be thus thrown down, where the Lord had
once so eminently appeared and given his People many confirmations might then
occasion great thoughts of heart, yet the unspotted righteousness of God, and
his truth was apparent therein; yea, after that discourse, and all these large
promises, which Christ gave his disciples in that sixteenth of John, we find
all is shut up with that, the hour is coming, and now is that ye shall be
scattered. -- 2. What strange providence did tryst the Church in the
wilderness, sometime brought back to the red sea, tried with hunger, and
nakedness, consumed with various strokes, and many years wandering until most
of that generation, who came out of Egypt filled their graves in the journey,
and yet this was after most eminent confirmations, and as clear signs of God's
presence as ever People had. -- 3. We find a public reformation most zealously
prosecuted by Josias, which looked like the renewed espousals of that land with
God, by a solemn Covenant, yet, quickly after night came on that land with a
long captivity, and Josias did fall by the sword. -- 4. Was there not a bright
sun-blink, and flourishing plantation of the Gospel in Judea a little before
the desolation of that land by the Romans, yea, we will find it clear from the
word that times of much light, and reformation do much sooner ripen for a
stroke than any other times. -- 5. It is very manifest that particular Churches
have their day where the Gospel has its appointed work, and their stroke at
last may reach the length of removing the candlestick. I truly think that sad
instance of Bohemia's case may have this observable in it, that it had longer
day, and enjoyment of the light even from the times of John Hus, and Jerome of
Prague, which was near an 100 years before there was any daybreak on other
parts, so that we would consider if their night did come soon on, that their
day was also much longer, yea, the stroke might tryst with the ebb of the tide,
when their harvest was much gathered in, under so long a continuance of the
Gospel, though I dare not think the Lord's work is utterly extinct there, but
that Bohemia's dead and withered root has life yet in it and shall once again
bud forth.

4. Is it not usually seen when judgment comes on a land, that the Godly get
the first stroke? but let us also consider this in the word, where it is clear.
-- 1. That judgment must begin at the house of God, and the green tree; and
that the Churches trouble, and persecution is a forerunner of vengeance on her
adversaries, do we not find, there is a cup of the judgment of God? And O the
last is of a strong composition, for the wine is red and mixed, and the dreg
very thick which is reserved for the troublers of the Church, and for such who
are at case in a day of her grief, and truly they have the advantage that drink
first, Blessed are they whom thou chastnest, etc. that they may rest in the day
of their adversity until the pit be dug for the wicked, yea, Rev. 3. 10. we
find keeping of the word of patience, which does import suffering to the
Church, goes before some more universal stroke; and in that day proves the
safety, and protection of the People of God. -- 2. It is also clear that men
may be raised up of the Lord, and followed with success, when he has them for
a rod to his church, but that at last (...) rod of my wrath will I cast in the
fire, says the Lord, it is truly an evidence of great wrath upon a party to be
made the rod, and executioners of judgment upon the People of God, for they
shall pay for it, by some sadder stroke then any trouble or suffering whereof
they have been instruments.

5. That prosperity, and success should follow sometimes the worst of men in an
evil course, and cause, such a concurrence, and series of providence, as
seems to smile on them even to the bringing of their sinful devices to pass,
while the People of God have been made to fall in a just quarrel before their
adversary, would seem an astonishing providence, but let us lay it fore-against
the Word, and there we will see. -- 1. That there is a prosperity which tends
to destruction, Prove. 1. ver. 32. the tabernacles of the robbers prosper, Job.
12. ver. 6. and they that provoke God are secure, into whose hands he brings
abundantly, but they do not see that wickedness is its own punishment, and how
it is a dreadful stroke to thrive in an ill course. Was not the Church shaken
with such a providence, Mal. 3. 15. Yea, tempted to call the proud happy, but
in the ver. 18. They were taught from further observation to discern or put a
difference between the righteous and the wicked. -- 2. Do we not find that even
the signs, and predictions of false prophets, in favor of a sinful way, may
come to pass, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. Whereof the Church is there warned, and God's
intent in the same cleared, that it is for the trial of his People, whether
they will love and fear the Lord, and cleave to his way, when providence would
seem to shine on a crooked path. -- 3. Did not success for a time attend
Absalom? Israel as one man went after him, yea, the friends and counselors of
David; a fair wind did also favor Haman in his essay to ruin the Church.
Jeremy is almost shaken with it, yea they have taken root, yea, they grow, and
bring forth fruit. But is not this at last usually ^ound an ominous weather
breeder before a storm though the brutish Man knows not, nor fools lay it to
heart for what the wicked does often spring, and flourish. I would add Isreal's
falling before Benjamin, it was an astonishing like providence; and Habakkuk
was put to a stand with such a thing, why the Lord looked on, while the wicked
devoured the righteous. Yea, Joshua was to cry out in an amazement. O Lord,
what shall I say, when Israel turns their back before their enemies! But we
have also the Lord's intent therein witnessed by his word, that this is to
humble and prove his People, that he may do them good in the latter end; and
thus he beats them off from all carnal grounds of confidence; he wounds
them to a cure; that by bringing them low, he may raise and fit them for a
further mercy

6. What great disappointments has the Church met with, when (...) grounds of
confidence, and ordinary means have been most promising, as it is a thing most
true, so it may seem strange at the first look: but let us bring it to the word
and the case will be there answered. Deuteronomy. 32. Why should one chase a thousand,
but because their rock has sold them! And therefore their strength is gone,
with the Lord's departing from them. For, when a time of judgment is come, even
the mighty then find not their hands, counsel fails to the ancient, ordinary
means bring not forth their wonted effects: which Solomon shows, and
after-ages have often seen, The race not ever to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong. It is also clear from the word, how threatening a condition that is, for
the People of God to be much carried out after means, or lifted up therewith:
Isai. 30. they will ride on horses, and this shall be their punishment. But on
the other hand, the Lord's way in bringing forth his greatest works, has not
been by might and by power, but often by means most improbable, and unexpected.

7. The long continuance of a heavy afflicting rod on the Church, without the
appearance of an escape, or any return to much wrestling and prayer on that
account, may seem a strange step in God's way with his People. But the word
will answer us in such a case where it is clear, -- 1. That there are no bounds
in the Scripture set to the continuance of a trial. It does not tell how long a
sharp storm may ly on, either as to the Church, or any particular Christian;
for it is a piece of the Lord's secret counsel, but not of that which is
revealed: it is enough, that we know from it, that men cannot make the Church's
suffering longer, than God's time. -- 2. It was a long term that of Isreal's
trial in Egypt; and after under the captivity, three hundred and ninety days
must the Church ly on her left side. O how many a sad day and wearysome night
was there in that word 70 weeks are determined upon thy people, and city
Jerusalem. -- 3. Have not the saints under a long trouble gone almost the
length of blasphemy, in their complaints! Isa. 40. 27. My way is hid from the
Lord, and my judgment post over from my God. Daniel, how pressing with the Lord
was he, that He would hearken, and do and not defer! and yet the return comes
not until the first year of Cyrus. Yea, that cry of the souls under the altar?
How long! does it not even get a dilatory answer? For thus the Lord does often
interpose his long-suffering for sometime, betwixt his people, and avenging of
them. -- 4. It is also clear that there are many prayers before the Throne, the
return whereof is suspended, and an Answer to Christians, in their particular,
until that Time when God shall build up Zion, and then the Prayer of the
destitute shall be remembered, even as to Christians private enlargement, when
the Church shall be raised up. -- 5. We know the Church's enemies must have
time to ripen, and it is not a storm of a few days, that will purge away the
filth of the Daughter of Zion. Too soon letting out of a sore may cause it to
putrify the more, and gather new matter. And truly the word can resolve us in
this, that one minute sooner than God's time would not be his people's mercy.

8. It is often seen when there is some remarkable work of God on foot in a land,
and some great outpouring of the spirit, how Satan sets up some usual
counterfeit thereof, and brings forth something of his work in such a time,
with a very strange resemblance of the same. Thus, with the preaching of the
freedom of grace, and a clear discovery of that truth, did Libertinism under a
very specious pretext spring up. Thus we find the Anabaptist, and Antinomian
party, set up in Germany, to run down a Church-reformation, under the show of a
more pure and spiritual way: and of late did not Familism in England, under
pretext of a more spiritual dispensation, cast off the very letter of the
Scripture, turning it over in to Allegory, and in behalf of the liberty of
prophesying cry down a standing ministry? But though this may seem strange, yet
the Scripture is very clear, concerning it; -- 1. That even Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light, and in no shape proves more dangerous to
the Church. -- 2. That the most dreadful errors and a false way will often come
near to the choicest exercises of the saints, and have such a resemblance to
the same, that if it were possible the very elect should be deceived. -- 3. Was
there not a Simon Magus with false miracles set up over against the Apostles?
And when the time of the Messiah drew near, did not then a Theudas; and Judas
of Galilee, break forth to amuse the people? We find also an altar from
Damascus set up beside that which way showed to Moses the Servant of the Lord
in the mount; yea, when Moses and Aaron were giving Pharaoh a sign, and did
show forth the mavelous power of God, then did the Magicians cast down their
rod also, to counterfeit the same, by which the heart of Pharaoh was hardened.

9. The abounding of much error and heresy, now in the time the Gospel, with
that swift growth thereof, which is often seen where the light most clearly
shi^eth, seems strange; yea, is a thing whereat many are ready to stumble, and
thus to challenge the way of God: But is not the Scripture in this clearly
verified, so that this piece of providence, which is so shaking to many, if we
take the word along with it, might be a very convincing confirmation to us of
the same? For, -- 1. We find the Apostles, yea, Christ himself has given
express warning thereof, that this should be one of the special and greatest
trials of the Christian Church; whereof the Old Testament we find does little
mention, that trial not concerning the Church then so much, as these aftertimes
under the Messiah's Kingdom: wherein the event may be clearly seen, to answer
these predictions, which are so frequent thereof in the New Testament. -- 2.
Does not the event also answer the word as to that particular way and method,
how error should be propagated, which is there clearly foretold, by subtle
undermining, under the pretext of liberty, with plausible insinuations? so that
we must say, not only as to the matter, but with all these discernable tokens,
even upon the manner, the word is made out. -- 3. Do we not find, this should
be a judgment on men, who receive not the love of the truth; and that after
flourishing times of the Church, when he who rides on the white horse, is gone
forth, the black horse and his rider does quickly follow? And truly it is seen,
that in the time of hottest persecutions, the Church has not been so much
troubled with this adversary, as when she did begin to get rest, and (...)
liberty, not yet so at the first breaking (...) Gospel, as after some time of
its continuance. 4. Does not the event likewise thus answer the word, that in
the breaking out of heresy in the Church, a spirit of error, the depths and
mighty working of Satan should be seen; which I am sure is undeniable, how
manifest the interposing of these powers of darkness is therein, if we
consider, 1. Its mavelous dispatch and growth, like a plague, and the arrow
that flies by day. -- 2. With what a discernable fury and violence men are
thus driven, as with an impetuous current: yea, often a change on their very
natural temper is seen most evidently. -- 3. Those monstrous and horrid things,
which are often brought forth, may show whose hand is in such a birth. -- 4. That
usual tendency, that at last error has to looseness in practice which as it
poisoneth the spring, and corrupts the leading faculty, the judgment, so we
see, it moves toward the vital spirits, and does influence the conversation;
and the leprosy in the head breaks forth in blains through the whole body. --
5. And do we not see how many gross and profane have been carried away at such
a time, how few have power to stand, but are still carried from one step to
another? And it is clear, the world did never put out its rage so much against
that way, as it has done against the truth, except when some outward interest
makes it a quarrel.

10. These great shakings and commotions, that use to attend the Gospel, when
it comes in power to a land may also seem strange, yea, are ready to make many
stumble. But is not the word verified herein, what great stirs and troubles did
exercise the Church after great light in pouring out of the spirit? Joel. 2.
29. We may there likewise see, how this gives the World an Alarm, makes the
Kings and great men of (...) rising of Christ's (...) us break his bands, etc.
For (...) Christ's rising in the Gospel has (...) its enemies, that this
should be their fall (...). When the Apostle has an effectual door opened in
his ministry, he has also much opposition thereto. But on the other hand, all
is still and quiet, while the strong man does keep the house. Yea, it is clear
from the word, that where the Gospel comes there is a red flag hung forth,
that if men will not receive the same, and subject to him who rides on the
white horse, one shall come after, whose work is to take peace from the earth,
to put the world in a flame, and to accomplish the judgment of a despised
gospel; who shall divide betwixt the husband and wife, the parents and
children: wherein our blessed Lord Jesus is express, Matthew. 10. 34. I come not to
send peace on the earth, but rather a sword. Which might seem strange from him;
but it is to tell men, if they will not embrace the offer of his peace, they
shall not have peace among themselves. For the message of the gospel must
either be the best, or the worst sight, that ever a land had.

11. This may seem strange how in all ages men of greatest parts and learning,
are such usual opposers of truth; yea, how the most sober and calm will even
appear violent in their way, the more the gospel is followed with power. But,
O! how well does this answer the scripture? For the wisdom of this world is
enmity to God. -- 1 Cor. 3. 19. Not many wise according to the flesh,
comparatively with these who hate the truth. -- Of all the beasts of the field
was not the serpent Satan's choice? and if there be an Achitophel in the time,
at him he will have a special pull; to such the simplicity of the gospel is
foolishness; whereat they stumble; to such Christ is a rock of offense. We
find, the light does torment them that dwell in the earth, will cause men to
blaspheme, and discover that which would not appear, whilst they got leave to
enjoy their sinful peace without disturbance.

12. Those strange judgments which may sometimes befall the Saints in their
outward lot, yea, sometimes attended with some very astonishing circumstances,
would at the first look put men to a stand, and to challenge the holy way of
God. But let us weigh it in that balance of the Scripture, and we will find,
1. That such has been the complaint of the Saints, the Lord's wounding them
with the wound of a cruel one; what a strange query is that in Lament 2. 20.
Behold, and consider, to whom thou have done this! shall the women eat the
fruit of their womb? shall the Priest and Prophet be slain in the sanctuary of
the Lord? yea, did it not even to Solomon seem strange, Eccles. 8. 14. That
there are just men to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked! 2.
It looked like some strange stroke which forced David to this complaint, my
enemies cast iniquity on me, and say an evil disease (or as the original
reads it, a thing of Belial) cleaves to him. We find, Josias fell by the
sword; Eli, with one stroke, has his sons killed, his Daughter-in-law dying,
and himself falling from his seat, and breaking his neck; yea Aaron has both
his sons killed before his eyes, by an immediate stroke from the Lord. 3. The
word does also show, there is no jar betwixt this, and the tenor of the
Covenant, which God has made with his people, to punish their transgression
with rods, yea, sometimes by a strange rod, while he takes not his loving
kindness from them. And do we not find, that a profitable trial may attend the
saints, which the world would think a dreadful judgment; for great sufferings
may be ordered of the Lord, to give some great examples thereby; we have heard
of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord.

13. The gross falling of those who have sometimes shined with much luster in
the Church, may be astonishing: but here also we may see the scripture made
out, for it is clear, First, that few instances of the most eminent of the
Saints, we have on Scripture-record, but there is some particular spot and
blemish also noted, a Noah, Lot, Moses and David, yea, under the new Testament
that great Apostle, whose denial of his master is set forth, to show how far
some may fall, whom grace will again restore, and make up. 2. It is there
clear, that some of understanding do fall for a judgment to others; that such
who will stumble, whose prejudice at the way of God is their choice, may thus
further fall and be broken. -- 3. The blessed meaning and intend hereof we may
there also read to Alarm men to watchfulness, that such who stand may take heed
lest they fall; to warrant also their adventuring on the grace of God, that
none should fear to come in after such eminent examples.

14. The contingency of events, that we see many things in such a casual way
fall out in the world, as by chance only, without the rational conduct of
providence (which does infallibly direct things to a certain end) this might at
the first look, put men to a stand, yea, would seem to give Atheists some
shadow to say, How does God see, or does the God of Jacob regard? But upon a
more serious enquiry, setting the word over against it, O what a sweet exercise
should it be to consider, -- 1. That though the providence of God, in things
here beneath, moves sutably to the nature of inferior causes, whither
necessary, free, or contingent, not violencing them, or otherways making use of
them but according to their nature, so that though the event be necessary and
infallible, with a respect to the first cause, the determined counsel of God,
it is nevertheless contingent in respect of its nearest cause; yet, this also
on the other hand is clear, how these smallest and most casual motions do
certainly fall under that comprehensive reach of providence, that even a
sparrow falls not to the ground by guess; Rebecca comes not with her pitcher
to the well, nor Ruth to glean in Boaz's field at an adventure: but in these
the providence of God must reach its end, and cannot miscarry. -- 2. That those
things which to us would seem most casual, we often see in their tendency and
product have been intended by the Lord, as a special means for the promoting of
his glory; wherein such a wonderful meeting and uniting of things, in
themselves most remote, for that end, may be truly discerned, that if prejudice
do not shut men's eyes, they must confess, this can be no blind chance but some
high counsel, and conduct of the same. What would look more contingent, than
that Ahasuerus was indisposed to sleep, and could have no rest in the night? Or
that a reflection of the sun upon the waters, should make them appear as blood
to the Children of Moab? But we see what great things the Lord is thus bringing
about. 3. Is it not often manifest how not the smallest casuality, or
circumstance, providence does pass without some improvement thereof? yea, that
it guides the stroke of a man's sword in the battle, and directs the bullet
to its appointed mark, and does evidently check the stars, and control that
fatal necessity, which we are ready to fear may or will follow their aspect,
and does even determine those which in themselves are most free and absolute,
the heart and will of man! Must not the crowing of the cock, and the soldiers
dividing of Christ's garments fall out for an accomplishment of the Scripture?
And though it was at a venture, that that man drew the bow, which sent Ahab to
his grave, yet it was no chance did direct the arrow between the very joints of
his armor. -- 4. Amidst the various emergents and hazards of men's life, may
not experience tell, that surely things contingent are not abandoned to
fortune, but there is a providence, which does number our hairs, and without
which they cannot fall to the ground! O how astonishing may it be, to think how
surprising hazards have been often obviated; By what unexpected means men have
been delivered from violent assaults! how help unlooked for has even come in
at an extremity, yea, while their foot was slipping even betwixt their falling,
and fall, they have been surprised with some remarkable cast of mercy. -- 5. Is
it not easy to discern, how many accidents which seem most casual, yet by no
humane prudence or industry can be prevented, but are observably brought about
and guided to fulfill the threatenings of the word on ungodly men! How was Sisera
led in to the house of Jael, by other places! How should Haman's suit for
Mordecai's death, fall in with that very morning, when the King's thoughts were
favorable to him! for it might seem, had Haman been one day sooner, he would
have got his will.

() This is a grave and serious subject, and in such a day should be much
studied, when so many are ready to quarrel at the way of the Lord, and out of
every thing suck poison, when prejudices are now so universally abounding
against the truth: that we may see what a witness there is, even in the most
dark and astonishing steps of providence, to the truth and faithfulness of God;
yea how great a confirmation we may thence have of our faith, in such shaking
times, whilst we see how these are special grounds against Atheism, and a most
convincing refutation of the same, which are so much made use of to strengthen
men in that way. I know the holy sovereignty of God should teach us to adore
and keep silence, when we cannot fathom the depths of providence; and on this
great satisfying truth we should stay, and fix our selves, when things seem
strange to us, He is the Lord and with him there is no unrighteousness. It is
sure, the condition of the damned in hell takes not off that obligation to
declare his faithfulness, and adore his unspotted justice: but O then it would
cease to be hell, if such a blessed frame could have a being there. However, it
is a necessary and concerning duty, when a matter seems too hard for us to
understand, to enquire in the sanctuary; there is a warrantable search after
the works of God that we may know them. Now besides those instances which have
been already mentioned, I would yet further touch some few steps of the
providence of God, with a special respect to this present time, which may seem
very strange, and be amazing; but when bro't to that test of divine truth, will
be found a most satisfying confirmation thereof.

1. It may seem strange, to see the Church of Christ this day so universally
brought low, and in a suffering condition, whilst the whole earth besides is at
such rest and quiet: that if we now look any where abroad, affliction and
contempt from men is seen in a very great measure, to attend the profession of
godliness, but more especially the power thereof; yea that almost in every
place the Church would seem to be upon a decay and a declining, rather than in
an advance. I confess, this may cause great tho'ts of heart, when we consider
that inestimable value, he whose the Church is, has put thereon; what glorious
things are spoken of her in the word, especially with a respect to the latter
days: and we have judged (I humbly think with a safe warrant) that this should
be a solemn time of fulfilling those promises, which yet point at a more
universal raising and enlargment of the Church of Christ; yea, that in so great
a measure we have seen some begun performance thereof, and therefore should
conclude, the Lord's work herein cannot halt, until it be at the full height
and at the perfect day. Shall I bring to the birth and not cause to bring
forth? says the Lord. Shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? says
thy God. Is. 66. 9. But let us go in to the Scripture, and there enquire
concerning this, and we will find, -- 1. How the Church and the World, in that
interest of their joy and grief, as well as other interests, are stated in a
most direct opposition. Joh. 16. 20. Verily, says Christ, ye shall lament and
weep, but the world shall rejoice. It should not be expected, those can be at
rest together; since the trouble and suffering of the Church, it is a part of
the world's ease and quiet. What a solemn jubilee does that cause to her
adversaries, when they see before them the dead bodies of the witnesses of
Christ! Revelat. 11. 10. No sight more rejoicing to such, because these are
they who torment them who dwell in the earth. But when once the truth casts off
her sackcloth, and the witnesses recover their feet; O what a terror does this
cause! They are pained, yea, their eyes ready to consume in their eye-holes
with bitterness and anguish, that they have been at so sore work, and done so
much against the Church, and yet cannot undo her. -- 2. Should this be more
strange now, than at that time when the city of Shusan and whole seed of the
Jews were in perplexity, whilst the King and Haman sat down to feast, and
rejoice over such a threatened ruin; for this seemed to strike at the root of
the Church universal! And was not that a broad and dark cloud, when this was
writ in the Lamentation of the Church, Zion is a wilderness, and Jerusalem a
desolation; yea, could find no rest, no comforter any where! Lam. 1. 16, 17.
But if such a providence seem strange, that the Church now at this day should
be with so violent and universal a storm run down, when so great things are
promised, let us consider his way, who by the greatest downcasting and straits
uses to bring about the most remarkable mercies; and do we not know the Devil
appears with greatest wrath, and raises the forest storms, when he knows that
his time is short. -- 3. If we consult the Scripture, we shall find, the
adversaries of the Church have an hour which is their hour, and the power of
darkness; for their sunshine is indeed a black and dark time; and then is there
a strange astonishing concurrence of outward advantages on their side: for they
are thus established for judgment, and the wind must serve, and the tide make,
until that that work in their hand be fulfilled. They could never have been
such a a rod on the Church, if they were not appointed of the Lord for the
same. Yea, is it not observable, whilst this their hour continues, there is
then a power of darkness; such a time, when that has an unusual force, and
would seem to carry all before it, has then a marvelous quick dispatch in its
spreading from one place to another, to make a dark night, where the Gospel
sometimes has had a bright day! Yet we see how such a strange darkness has
but its hour, as to the prevalence thereof, even a set time for the Churches
trial; and it is such an eclipse, were it never so universal, that must go over
at its appointed period, and give place to light, before which the darkness can
no longer stand: and then it shall be said to her, who had almost abandoned
herself to sorrow, Arise and shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the
Lord is risen. 4. Why should we be amazed at this where we may read so clearly
something of the Lord's design, even by so sore and universal a stroke to
appear in his glory, Psalm. 102. 16. and thus raise his Church with an
unspeakable advantage by such a supposed ruin! The Scripture is in this very
manifest, that when the Lord is about some great building, and has some
excellent piece of work to raise up, a great deal of rubbish and breaking down
uses to go before. Is it not thus also he makes the suffering graces of his
Spirit in his people shine forth; that here the faith and patience of the
Saints may be witnessed! yea, should we not know there is in every age a
filling up of the sufferings of Christ in his people, and a testimony thus
required to his truth, which the great witness himself did once seal and
confirm with his blood, even he who before Pontius Pilate gave a good
confession, and through all ages even to the close of time, there must not want
some witnesses to the same! It is known, how some times of the Church are
beyond others made remarkable for suffering: but it is no less clear, that in
these times also the truth has had the greatest victory, and herein a most
special clearing up of some truths, which the world has most studied to
darken. Thus we see some ages of the Church may have a larger part of this
testimony assigned. Yea, this remark may not only be of some different lot and
service assigned to particular ages, but to particular Churches also. -- 5. If
we enquire about this at the Scripture, we shall find also some remarkable
proportion, that the turning again of the Churches captivity has to her former
bondage. Read Isa. 49. 19, 20. and 55. 13. Jer. 31. 39. And you may see what an
ample restoration is there, which as with a measuring line is made to answer in
breadth and length to her former calamity. We find Zion's rejoicing, when her
time of refreshment comes from the presence of the Lord, must reach all her
mourners, and be as universal as once the cause of lamentation was. Isai. 66.
10. Is it not such an hour sometime with the Church, that a refreshing report
is no where to be heard, but the tidings of the next day add more grief to the
former days ^orrow? Yet has not such a time quickly followed, wherein the
Church might say, The Lord has increased her greatness, and comforted her on
every side! And has had a spring and reviving upon the return of the Sun, as
universal, as her decay and withering once was through the dead winter, Isai.
51. 3. And truly, whilst we consider the time in which we are now fallen, how
the Church of Christ is every where low, and in a most languishing condition,
Antichristianism now upon a formidable growth, as if there were an universal
conspiracy to return again to Babylon, and if we will enquire hereabout at the
Scripture, as we see this sad decay, we may thence conclude a certain delivery:
Yea, that even by a day of vengeance the Lord can bring about the year of his
redeemed. I humbly think, we may with a safe Scripture-warrant judge, that so
universal a decay, such a great overspeading of darkness over the reformed
Ch^^^^es through the whole World, may give us ground to believe such a breaking
out also of the Gospel, and of the knowledge of the Lord, that shall be of as
large extent, even to the filling of the earth therewith, as the waters cover
the sea. It will not be a particular shower and sunshine of refreshing
influences on some Church, It will not be the reviving of the work of God in
these nations, I must think, will answer so broad a cloud, and so universal a
vastation and lamentation through the whole Churches of Christ: But we may
according to the Scripture look on this as a part of the last and most
remarkable assault, that the Church universal shall have from Antichrist,
before that full stroke on the seat of the beast; Yea, that this is a very
promising forerunner thereof. For when this party seems now to get up, and
begins to move war, we have sure ground to believe his further falling thereby,
and that every new assault which that grand adversary makes upon the Church;
shall so far put forward her interest, and hasten his own ruin. Blessed are
they who are helped in this dark hour to watch and wait until the vision break
out, for it will assuredly speak in the appointed time.

2. These short breathings of the Church, now under the New Testament, may seem
also strange, that we see her sunshine so quickly darkened with clouds, and
followed with showers; that any lucid interval she enjoys, wants not long a new
storm. We see this very clear, what has been the usual lot of the Church
universal through all the times of the gospel, how sore tossed and overclouded,
her rest of short continuance: and as to particular Churches, is it not a small
period of time, which uses to be betwixt one assault and another? So that they
draw but a little their breath for some new trial. I confess this would be
puzling, if such a piece of divine providence we should essay to unriddle
without the Scripture; but we have the word near us, where we may see the fate
and condition of the Church under the Gospel, the most remarkable steps in her
way, those sharp assaults and short breathings she was to expect, most clearly
foretold and held forth; yea by consulting this blessed record, we will find
these. -- 1. That a more continued and fixed rest, than that which may be seen
hitherto in the Church's condition, could not well be reconciled with the
Scripture. There was indeed a great breathing, a most remarkable cessation
under Constantine's reign, after a storm of some ages continuance; but O how
short! And it is said Rev. 8. 1. There was silence in heaven for half an hour.
I would here offer some remarks about the way of the Lord in this. -- (1.) That
the cross and much affliction, we find, have a more peculiar respect to the
dispensation of the gospel, than the times of the law; and this is specially
suited thereto, To go through many tribulations. It is very consentaneous to a
greater manifestation of grace under the New Testament, that greater and more
frequent trials for its exercise should also be let forth. -- (2.) We find,
such sore and usual assaults are not only suited to the most excellent condition
of the Church in regard of spiritual privileges, but do often befall the most
excellent of the saints. Read Heb. 11. 32. (3.) This remark uses not to fail,
how every particular Church, besides these ordinary changes and tossings in her
lot, has also some more solemn remarkable trials and some great assault beyond
others, and accordingly has some more singular breathings and sun-blinks
suited thereto. -- (4.) We cannot find any such calm and breathing, which has
not been very short, if we turn back and trace the history of the Church in
former times, but the clouds have returned quickly after the rain; yea, we may
observe how the most excellent Princes and Magistrates, under whom the Church
has had some sweet repose, have been often in a very short time taken away, and
have but lived a few years. -- 2. If we wonder at such a piece of the Lord's
way, why his Church is thus tossed, does not the Scripture show what need she
has to be emptied from vessel to vessel; a long calm being no less her hazard,
than a sharp storm; and more cause often to watch over her outward rest, than
weep over her trouble and tossings. Oh how often has the Church lost more by a
few years peace, than a long continued war! yea, the necessity of a sharp
winter, for her recovery, has been so discernable ere it came, that if it were
not for the downbearing of truth, and shaking of the faith of the saints, the
continuance thereof might be almost wished as her advantage, at least is to be
quietly submitted unto. -- 3. Does not the Scripture also witness that
continued lasting quarrel, which is betwixt the World and the Church, and is
perpetuated from generation to generation, that time cannot wear it out; so
that if she had not so great a party for her, and an immediate support from
heaven, we might find more cause to wonder she yet breaths, than to ask why her
breathings are so short, when there is so great a power against her? O if the
Church had not this to answer all the messengers of the nations, about her
security, That the Lord has founded Zion, sure that long-breathing design for
so many ages should at last have taken place, even to the razing of her
foundation. -- 4. It is clear the most singular fellowship, and free access
thereinto, with Jesus Christ on the earth, is by the cross, and in that way
witnessed; that it must be said, if such afflicting times did not often return
upon his people, there would be a shut door betwixt the Church and a large part
of the Bible, both as to its meaning, and as to its full breasts of
consolation. Are there not most sweet refreshing truths there, which the godly
cannot reach so near and feeling a converse with, in an outward calm, as under
some sharpest wrestlings! O what an excellent commentary has a suffering time
given upon these, beyond all that ever was written, on such a truth of the
Scripture, Persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed, as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. And thus, we see how in our stumbling at such
a providence, we err not knowing the Scriptures, and mistake our own mercies.
-- 5. Whilst we see those short intervals, which have so usually been under the
New Testament, betwixt one trial of the Church and another, and the cause
thereof so clear from the word; let us also consider what warrant there is yet
to expect, before the end a more solemn and remarkable time of the Church's
Enlargement; that not only shall be very universal in its extent, but a more
lasting and continued rest from the violence of the world, than has formerly
been: which I humbly judge, on clear Scripture grounds, we are to believe upon
the coming of that full stroke on Babylon, and those solemn espousals of the
Jewish Church to Christ, which seems to be the most remarkable period of that
time appointed for the Church's reign. And though this will not want some sharp
trials, and a mixture of outward trouble, yet we find no ground from the
Scripture, after the discussing of Antichrist and the throwing down of the
Turkish empire, for any remarkable interruption and overclouding, or that the
Church shall have any great assault until that final gathering of the world and
her forces together, to the last battle of the Lamb.

3. Is not this a strange remark likewise, which is so usual a complaint
through the Church, that with a greater increase of light and knowledge, there
is seen a visible wearing out of life and power; and now in these more knowing
times, there should be so much ground to say, tenderness and the serious
exercise of Godliness is more worn out, and in a further decay, than in the
times of greater ignorance: let us but look through the reformed Churches at
this day, and then turn home to our selves, and we shall find this remark too
sadly verified; how after a great increase of knowledge, the truths of God in
such a measure cleared beyond former ages, it may be said, Oh whither is the
life and power of godliness gone, and that fervor which once so convincingly
appeared in following the Lord. We know, there is a sweet agreement betwixt the
Christian's light and life, which have a mutual subserviency to each other, and
yet to see so sad a jar this day, and so little proportion the one has to the
other, may put us with astonishment to a serious inquiry thereabout; but the
scripture is clear and makes it plain, if we will consider. 1. That there is a
time of a people's espousals to the Lord, and then the kindness of their youth
and a remarkable time of love is seen. Jer. 21. 2. When their affection will be
aloft after him; yea, such a solemn period of the Church's condition may be
seen, when it has not reached that light and knowledge, as after: but do we
not also find, how rare it is for a people, to hold up at that rate and measure
in their life and love, which at such times has appeared, whatever advance
there may be as to light: Thence we find the Church's holding up with the name
and profession of godliness Rev. 3. 2. when very sore spent in her life; yea,
this decay often upon such an unsensible growth, that it will be hard to get such
convinced thereof, and remember whence they are fallen. -- 2. If we will ask at
the scripture, it will also show that judicial tendency, which light not
imp^rved has to a further hardening; how under the gospel men may be made deaf
with hearing. for judgment am I come in the world, faith Christ. Joh. 9. 39.
which has that effect, that those who see should be made blind. Light is
surely one of the greatest talents of the Church, and brings with it either a
remarkable gain, or loss; nothing so dreadful as this, when it is abused. O at
what a rate does it run down and stupify the conscience! that thus men are not
only more deadned, but bcome the more dead and blind that they were once
enlightened. -- 3. May we not thence know how this is one of the Devil's
greatest engines he makes use of, to turn men's light against their life and
tenderness, even to incite them, from that excellent discovery of the grace of
God, unto wantonness. Jud. 4. and thus essay an agreement betwixt light and
darkness. O what a dreadful po^son must that be! which can imbitter so
excellent a stream, and turn so choice and quickening a mean of our spiritual
life, to be destructive thereto! that we see knowledge, whose true and native
tendency is to humble and abase, being thus impoisoned does work the contrary
effect, even to swell men and puff them up; to oppose those gifts against the
Church, which are given of the Lord for its edification, and for defense of,
the gospel! Thus we find it clear, when light has made a further advance in
the Church, the Devil is there at work to destroy love, by many bitter,
contentious Debates, where the interest may be often seen more personal, to wit,
men's repute and credit, than the interest of God and his truth. I am far from
any intended reflection on that grave and necessary duty of appearing in
defense of the truth, and men's stating themselves in opposition to those who
are its adversaries; a quarrel, wherein they should know neither friend nor
brother: for this is to stand in the breach, when it is assaulted, to contend
for the faith. O blessed contention, where such with that excellent man
Melanchton can say, Non quoero gloriam propriam, sed veritatem. -- Though this
is a very sad and threatening symptom that night is coming on a Church where the
light shines, but the heat and warming influence thereof is gone; yet here is a
riddle, we find the Scripture does wonderfully unfold, how the Lord makes
things bring forth contrary effects, and causes a remarkable consumption, that
seems to reach the Church in her inward and vital parts, resolve in an
overflowing with righteousness. Is. 10. 22. yea, thus lets us see a people so
far spent in life and spirituality, that the things which remain are ready to
die, whilst even there, the Lord is pursuing their recovery. It is herein he
makes his grace mavelous, to order his people's raising to be from so low a
step of their condition, and cause his Church when bro't to a small remnant, to
take root downward, and bring forth fruit upward. Is. 37. 31. It would seem a
strange connection, but not strange to the grace of God, Ps. 102. that the time
of his favoring Zion even that set time, should find her in a heap of stones
and rubbish; yea, that a reviving and the breaking out of her day begins there
with the weeping of her friends over her ruins. I shall further add, with
respect to the present time, we may believe on very sure grounds, that
godliness and the power thereof will yet break out in the world, though it were
at the lowest ebb, yea, as at its last breathing; that little spark now under
ashes must assuredly revive and blow up to a flame; yea, send forth its heat to
warm the nations; For on solid grounds we may thus reason, if such a death-like
decay had a respect only to some particular Church, and if this withering,
abatement and languishing of the exercise of grace, were confined but to a
corner, it might be a sad presage, that their sun, when so far declined and
gone down, were near to the setting: but since this seems to be a consumption
over the whole earth, a matter of lamentation and a spreading complaint,
through the whole reformed Church, we may look on it as a very promising
ground, of confidence and hope of a recovery for if that be sure, the Church
universal cannot die under such a disease, it is also sure, this sickness is
not unto death; yea, so remarkable an opposition to the power of godliness, as
is this day through the world, we may judge a very refreshing presage of some,
more universal out breaking of the same, wherein God will be seen by some
blessed surprisal in a very immediate way: for there is hope of this tree,
which in a special way he had himself planted, that it shall grow, though now
cut down, by the scent of waters, even by the river the streams whereof makes
glad the city of God; which can in old age cause her to bring forth fruit. O
what life is there in the Church of Christ, when it seems to be buried! for she
is in the root, that cannot dry up; and herein must his promise and his peoples
praise meet, that her dry bones shall flourish as a green herb, there can be
now no less appearance of this, than at that time when the Lord turned again
the captivity of his people, which was so little expected, Ps. 126. that they
knew not whether it was a dream, or real. It may indeed be a very humbling
discovery, that we must say, our ruin is of our selves; yet must it not ruin
our hope, since in these great things which the Lord has done for the Church,
the greatness of his power has not been more clearly witnessed, than the
freedom and sovereignty of his grace, that men may see, this is the Lord's
doing, and should be mavelous in their eyes.

4. May it not seem strange, and be matter of astonishment, that the great men
of the earth, and such who sit in the place of judgment, are usually found to
be greatest adversaries to the Church; yea, it is too well known, that
magistracy (so excellent an ordinance of God) has been so far perverted, that
even under the Christian Magistrate the Church of Christ has suffered more
since first breaking out than from any other quarter, this indeed may seem
mavelous; I do not deny, there have been great men in the world, who have no
less outshined others in fervor and zeal for truth, than in their place and
quality. But oh we may say, an age brings forth few such; and that which
Salvian says of his time, has been a true remark in most ages of the world,
and too frequently seen, that the contempt upon religion by those who were in
greatest power had this effect, Ut mali cogantur esse, ne viles habeantur. I
confess this may cause wonder, (if we consider for what end the great Lawgiver
has designed that ordinance) how men should so far counteract his interest,
from whom they derive their power, and for being subservient thereto have
received it: sure the doctrine of the Church of Christ can give no ground of
quarrel: and its strange these should, expect from others homage and
subjection, who turn the seat of judgment to be a grievous yoke, and deny their
subjection so avowedly to the great judge: O how sad is it, that none are often
such a terror to the godly, such a support to evil doers, as Magistrates, and
the great men of the world so usually found to be the greatest examples of
wickedness! This should indeed be matter of lamentation, yea, that those are
often times advanced, who have nothing to commend them, but some advance beyond
others in a higher measure of impiety. But we must go to the Scripture, and
there inquire which will show, (1.) That it is not strange, though iniquity
have a throne, under whose shadow mischief may not only shelter, but come that
length to be framed into a law. Ps. 94. 20. yea, it must not be strange, that
the adversaries of the truth be among the chief of the time; which complaint we
find Lam. 1. 5. The world is not yet cured of that madness, of which the
Prophet speaks with amazement, Ps. 2. 1. why the Kings and rulers of the earth
should attempt a vain thing, to ruin the Church, and make his decree void, who
by his word created the world. We may see, it is not of late the servants of
Christ have been convened before rulers in defense of the truth, and have
suffered by the law, where the crime was, their adherence to the express
command of the great lawgiver. Luke 21. 12. It is also clear, the Kings of the
earth for many ages have amidst all their private differences with one consent
agreed to make war with the lamb, and give their strength for upholding
Antichrist; yet is this nothing else, but what the Scripture has foretold,
Rev. 17. It was written of an excellent man in the days of Phocas, that after
some humble expostulating with the Lord, why he set up so vile a wretch in the
highest place of power that he had this return, quia non inveni pejorem. Herein
is the way of the Lord unspotted, how sad so ever it be in it self, that those
who should execute judgment for the oppressed, are in his holy displeasure made
the executioners of his judgments on men, and show themselves the greatest
oppressors (2.) If this be strange to us, do not the Scripture prevent our
stumbling, by a most sweet and choice antidote, that when we see the oppression
of the poor, and such a wrathful aspect rulers usually have on the Church of
God, we should not marvel, or be much moved thereat, even when we see those
whom death has plucked away, and with shame rolled in the grave, still return
with the same resemblance in their successors, and piety in all ages run down
by power: For it is written, that he who is higher then the highest does regard
the same, Eccl. 5. 8. O how far are they below God, yea, infinitely below him,
who are highest among men! has not their violence and oppression of the Church
him for a witness, whom they must also have for a judge? And the further they
seem raised above human reach, they lie more near to some immediate stroke of a
divine hand; that when there is no reprover on earth, none there to give their
cruelty against the Church a check, he sits in heaven, who laughs them to
scorn; which they shall find to be sad earnest, when he speaks to them in his
wrath, and vexes them in his sore displeasure. -- (3.) Does not the Scripture
witness the Lord's blessed design in this, to make his Church thrive another
way, when she is destitute of the help and countenance of civil authority, and
thus lead her in to him, who has the key of David, that opens and none can
shut, unto him who is a known refuge for the oppressed? It is here he declares
himself to be God, and the greatness of his power who can keep her alive, and
preserve his interest in a destroying flame, and under a cruel oppressing
Magistrate; yea, thus cause her to flourish in his days, and have peace in his
reign, even under the grievous reign of her adversaries. Do we not likewise
find ( Neh. 9. 36.) the Church's distress there and oppression from her rulers,
makes them resolve in a more near tie and conjunction with God? which is seen
in the last verse, And because of this we make a sure covenant, etc. O blessed
violence and oppression, that lands here, where the storm drives to such an
anchor, as a further cleaving to the Lord, and surrender of themselves to him!
-- (4.) As the Scripture prevents men's stumbling at this ordinary suffering of
the Church under Magistracy, it does also witness the Lord's contending very
remarkably against these on such an account; and clearly shows, that no human
greatness can secure from him who cuts off the spirit of Princes, and is
terrible to the Kings of the earth; consider Ps. 2. 9. and 93. 4. It is here we
may read the cause of the changes of Kingdoms and states, that are so frequent
in the world. Whatever influence personal interests seem to have, there is a
holy revenging God, and his arm made bare therein upon the quarrel of his
Church that he may recompense tribulation to those who have troubled her. None
needs wonder, that flourishing states are broken in such a quarrel; to see the
supreme head of the Church ( that in all things he may have the pre-eminence)
wound the head over many countries, and rule the nations with an iron rod, yea,
turn great men out of their grandeur and authority, and and throw them down:
for the cause is obvious, they keep no bounds and marches, with the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, but will be over him and invade his interest, until he who must
reign, and have all dominion and power subjected to him, carry that war back
upon themselves, and stand up against such evil neighbors, for his own right;
for which he will strike thorough Kings in the Day of his wrath, yea, pursue
the race and seed of such oppressors, the father and the children, as a
standing quarrel from generation to generation. -- (5.) It is sure, corrupt
Magistracy is one of the great plagues of God on the world; wherein his
unspotted righteousness, and the provoking cause from men, may be seen in the
Scripture; that when such will throw off his yoke, and quarrel with his
authority, in subjection to which their liberty lies, they should have one more
grievous, and unsufferable, wreathed on them, and be delivered up to the hands
of such cruel exactors. I must here say, the Lord does visibly contend, by such
a stroke, with that excessive flattery and respect the nations gives their
rulers, that blind obedience they give, contrary to the express will of the
Lawgiver, by a willing following of the commandment; and thus writes that ^sin
on their judgment, that the hand of men should be heavy and sore on their own
interests, who can so easily comply with their oppression of the Church and
invading the interests of God. But here is no intended reflection on that
divine ordinance of Magistracy, whereon his image is so visibly impressed;
though in all ages there has been sad cause to bewail the abuse of so great a
trust and power, and to see it so destructive to the end for which it is
designed.

5. This also seems strange and is a very shaking thing, to see some of
greatest repute and eminency in the Church, who have been singularly useful to
engage others in the way of the Lord, change their principles with the time,
and turn at last in opposition thereto; yea, make it their work to cast down
what once with great zeal they seemed to build; I confess, this may give sad
ground of stumbling, and nothing Atheism takes more advantage of, to question
the truth of all Religion, whether there be any thing further than a humane
interest in it, when men's light in the matters of God and the doctrine of
Ministers are found so cross to themselves with the changes of the time.
Blessed are they who are not offended at Christ because of this; but let us
consult the Scripture, and then instead of being shaken or brangled we shall
find this such a special confirmation of the truth, that if it were not thus,
men might rather question the same. For, (1.) Such a shaking trial is clearly
foretold, from cross tides of Doctrine, that should be within the Church, Ephesians.
4. 14. yea, a warning given of those who handle the word deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4.
2. by accommodating it to their private interest and design, and a corrupt
Application thereof: for when men do once establish the Conclusion before the
premises, for compliance with a sinful course, they are then at work to wrest
the Scripture by misapplying it. 2 Pet. 3. which is indeed to oppose the truth
against it self, and suit it to their biass, that they may salve such a visible
opposition betwixt them and themselves in their way and practice. And thus what
ever fair show they make in the flesh, they expose the word, and their parts
and abilities in handling of it, to sale (O an accursed sale and merchandise!)
Now if this seem strange and be stumbling, that amongst the dispensers of the
mysteries of God, and of greatest repute in the Church, such should be found,
read 2. Cor. 2. 17. And you will there see the cause why many corrupt the word,
because they are not in sincerity and as in the sight of God therein, which is
absolutely required to qualify a faithful Minister of Christ. Oh! The want of
that candor and uprightness of heart is a worm, which lies hid at the root of
all their other parts, and as a dead corrupting fly in so excellent a box of
ointment. Thus we may see, this is so far from being a cause of stumbling at
the truth, that it does most convincingly fulfill and and verify the same. (2.)
When we have so sad a discovery in the Church, have we not this antidote
likewise from the Scripture, not to be shaken or moved thereat, Heb. 13. 9. But
that we study to know and be persuaded of the truth, that they quiet and
support the soul, though we should be left alone in following duty. The
testimony of God is sure, and immovable; and he is true, though all men should
be liars. We must have the persons of none in admiration which has so usual a
tendency to bribe the judgment, and betray the truth: but though an Apostle or
an Angel from heaven should come to oppose the Scripture of God, we ought in so
far to let him be accursed. -- (3.) Here also is the holy counsel and design of
the Lord made known, that those who are approved may be made manifest; and such
have an opportunity to discover themselves, who turn aside to crooked paths,
and tread in the dark to the prejudice of the truth. Ps. 125. 5. They may dig
very deep to hide their opposition to God, not only from others, but even from
themselves: but providence herein has a deeper reach, and ensnares them in the
work of their own hands; yea, does thus bring them forth with the workers of
iniquity, and as his greatest adversaries, who wound and betray his interest
under that mask, and disguise of a friend, this is indeed a preventing mercy to
the Church, whose hurt and hazard has been more from these who walk under a
cover then any other party; and here is the counsel of the Lord showed, that
when a piercing trial comes, which will go through the soul like a sword, the
thoughts of many hearts may be then discovered. There is a falling in of many
with the Church under a calm, who must fall off with a storm. It is strange, to
think how small the first entry of a further declining will be, when once there
is a tendency and bias that way, how hard is it to join in a familiar
correspondence with the adversaries of the truth without joining in some
measure with their way; yea, it is seen, these usually are more ensnared, then
the adverse party by any such tampering are bettered; It is a sad truth, which
is said of Ephraim, strangers devoured his strength, yet he knew it not. Hos.
7. 8. It is no wonder, when men come the length of detaining the truth in
unrighteousness, and withstand the giving of a testimony thereto when called,
that the next step be, some appearance against it (4) Is it not clear from the
Scripture, that the righteous God, does thus rain snares on men? yea, this is
one of the woes the world is under because of offenses; for the fall and
turning aside of such is a sad stroke on others, whilst they use not to fall
alone when those become a stumbling block, whose lips should preserve
knowledge, whom the people are to consult concerning the law, and thus be the
greatest cause of offense themselves, whose work is to strengthen and confirm
others. O what a sore plague is this on a poor Church, when it is low, to break
her further, and make her distemper grow. We may truly say, it is more
threatening then sword, famine or pestilence, against a nation. It is a strange
ground, which is given of the departure of these from the faith, who were once
in repute of the Church, yea, of the breaking out of Antichrist in the world, 2
These. 2. 12. that it was to punish them who believed not the truth, and would
not embrace the same; O it is a sad and dreadful time to live in, where such
offenses abound! for it clearly shows a judicially plaguing time upon the
Church, and some great abuse of the Gospel which has gone before. -- (5.) When
this seems strange to us, should we not learn to adore and justify him, who
thus stains the pride of all flesh and will silence the confidence or boasting
of instruments, that the Church may know where her strength lys, this is a
remark, though sad, which seldom fails, that the greatest endowments and gifts,
where men are swelled and lift up therewith, have a more easy and native bias
against the truth, then for it, and threatens the Churches hazard, more than
any advantage the exercise of these gifts can promise and the greater repute
men walk under, where humility keeps not low, lays them the more near some
humbling stroke, to bring them low, ere they go off the stage, that no flesh
may glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 26. We must say, the greatest Hero's in
the Church of Christ, who have shined, even to their setting, most brightly,
have been also the most humble. -- (6.) As it is clear, there is no jar betwixt
the Scripture and this, but it is so great a confirmation thereof, that it
should further strengthen and establish us in the way of the Lord (for the
falling off of such from the truth is a trial most expressly foretold, and a
convincing witness to the truth of the Scripture) so this also must be granted,
that there are Ministers and watchmen in the Church of Christ, in all ages,
found faithful to their Masters interest, who have been not only helped to
confess the truth, and deliver the counsel of God to the World, but to witness
their adherence to and persuasion of it by suffering. O can the World debate
this, that such in the worst of times are found to drive a treaty of
reconciliation betwixt Christ and sinners, who are in earnest, and have a
weight of that work on them, without respect to outward encouragement? O happy
Servants of so great a Master who consider that they shine with borrowed light,
and derive all from him, whether as to grace or gifts, that therein they may
return to him again, by a faithful improvement of their talent; who reckon
they cannot be low, where he is exalted; they cannot lose where the gain is
his; but in this does rejoice, to see him increase, and his Kingdom on an
advance, though they decrease, and be darkened with the brightness of his
rising!

6. I know this is an astonishing thing, which many pretend a cause for
stumbling, to see how some have walked, and at what a rate, under a profession
of godliness, and for so long a time have had the appearance of being serious
and tender, yea, have thus personated the walk of a Christian, whom an
after-discovery has proved, not in some particular only, but in the main
interest of religion, to be without reality and truth. This may indeed seem
strange, and because of wonder, that men having the use of reason should be at
so sore a toil, to hold up a form of godliness, and the external exercise of
Christian duties, only for a form, who, might with another kind of facility and
unspeakable pleasure have reached both the shadow and the substance, by being
truly serious: and it is sure, if such get not the impression of a Deity razed
out of the soul (which is impossible) there must be sometimes terror in their
approach to God; though not in any secret retirements, (for this should be a
piece of their torment, to come so near their conscience, and be alone with it,
lest it flee in their face) yet with others, when such a witness they have
within, that it is their deliberate work, to deceive at once, the great God,
their generation, and their own soul! But oh this is not more strange, than
true; yea, many such pretenders are, and will be, within the pale of the
visible Church. And is there not a divine hand marvelously often seen in rending
that vail, and bringing those forth to the light, in such a way as may witness
that this is from the Lord! Now there is no ground of challenge or reflection
here, on his holy and unspotted way, or the reality of godliness, if we will
but seriously enquire at the Scripture; where we have this (1.) expressly
foretold, that men should have a form of godliness, and deny the power thereof.
1. Tim. 3. 5. profess to know God, being abominable, disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate. Tit. 1. last ver. Yea, will come in sheeps clothing,
yet be ravenous wolves! Have not some of the Church's sharpest trials been in
such a way ushered in, even under a false show? and have not the most cruel
persecuters entered the stage as friends: You know how the man of sin did first
step in; was he not thus masked? and is not the Scripture clear, that to seek a
Church free of such a mixture out of heaven, is to seek that which we will
never find, for it is there only, no unclean thing can enter. -- (2.) Does not
this blessed record of the scripture show, with what singular art and advantage
such may act that part, and with Jehu enquire, if the man's heart be right,
whilst his own is most false; what a strange confidence will these have, who
glory in appearance, and not in heart? Will they not cry unto God, and make
mention of him, but not in truth. Is. 48. Yea, should we wonder, though such be
found, who can mask their private interest with such an appearance, even whilst
they seek a rule for their religion out of Matchiavel, but not out of the
Bible! -- (3.) If the length that these may come, seem strange, will you
consult the Scripture, which goes as great a length in its discovery, and you
will know how deep it works, sometimes not at an ordinary rate, but they will
invite the world to see their zeal for God, who dare not endure the view of
their own conscience. Therein you may find an Apostle, and one of the twelve,
and yet a Devil. To witness this, should be no reflection on the Church of
Christ, though an eminent Minister thereof be found rotten and unsound, who
has made a great show in the flesh. -- (4.) Does the Scripture allow or
flatter any in such a way? You cannot there have one line for its
encouragement: but whilst human law does not reach this, divine Law most
severely threatens, Joh 8. 13. etc. Matthew. 7. 15, etc. And there you may see it
in its own color, how horrid a thing it is, which the more near it does
approach Religion (that is so excellent and lovely in itself) this false show
thereof is the more hateful and loathsome. Yea, even these who comply with it
in themselves, are made to loathe it in others, which is in the highest measure
a falsehood and lie, because a lying to the God of truth. (5.) You cannot
challenge the Church and followers of Jesus Christ, that by them any such thing
is owned or justified: but it may be seen, what an offense and wound such a
discovery will prove, to these. It is indeed a cause of grief, but no cause of
reflection on the truth of God: for in so far this is verified, They went out
from us, because they were not of us, 1 John 2. 29. -- (6.) Is not that horrid
and black roll mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 3. claspt as it were betwixt
these two, a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof? It is not
strange, when Religion is attended with much power in a place, that hypocrisy
is found there also: but it is clear, what remarkable discoveries have been
made thereof, that seldom such who have most industriously studied that
accursed art, have gone to the grave under this cover; though I deny not but
some may. I must further add, that some special incitement and concurrence of
the devil is here often very manifest and his power as remarkably put forth, as
in any lust of the flesh, to put some forward on such a design; yea, even may
be subservient to them in the exercise of common gifts, that may deceive for
the time very discerning Christians. I cannot question the truth of this,
having ground to instance such, who have been in an express covenant with
Satan, and have after acknowledged his help and assistance, for their dexterous
managing so dreadful a design: if you think this strange, you may consider,
that the devil himself is transformed to an Angel of light. But it is well, the
grossest defilement of men can no ways stain Religion, and the way of the Lord,
which is pure and undefiled.

7. Those sad jarrs and divisions, which are so frequent in the Church of
Christ, may seem very strange, and be the cause of stumbling and offense to
many? that whilst the World is at such an agreement, and of one mind to oppose
the truth, those are often found at war, most bitterly contending amongst
themselves, even those who should stand in the breach, for the truth and in
defense of the Gospel, the fellow servants at strife and smiting one another,
when they should be striving together about their Master's work. I confess,
this is sad, and is a rock whereon many have split; of which they have made
that use to a further heightening of their prejudice against the truth: Yea, it
is strange that this destroying plague does so observably attend any peace or
calm, that the Church has in her outward condition. But there is no cause for
such stumbling; if we will allow it some serious thoughts, it may rather help
to fix and establish us in the way of the Lord, and in stead of being a poison,
may be an effectual antidote against the same, I mean the Atheism of the time,
which pretends so great an advantage from this. For the Scripture is clear,
(1.) Though it is a sore stroke on the Church, and the most sad departure of God
from a People, which we have upon divine record, we find usually attends them
in such a torn and divided case; yea, though in all the records of aftertimes,
this may be traced in the breaking out of a judgment, as a very immediate
forerunner thereof: yet, have we no warrant to expect the Church militant shall
be in that condition in which there shall be no such discord and breach. No,
that is heaven, and it is there only that perfect peace and concord will be
found; read, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Romans 15. 5. And what an early trial was this to the
Church which did occasion that grave and solemn meeting of the Apostles and
Elders (Acts 15.) to let us see how the Lord can serve himself of the greatest
evil for the advantage of his truth. -- (2.) There is no cause of challenge
here or reflecting on the truth, whatever be on those who profess it, since the
Scripture shows that we know but in part, and prophecy in part, and such a
prevailing mixture of corruption, that some will preach Christ out of strife
and contention, not sincerely. Phil. 1. 15. Yea, whilst there are such
different sizes amongst the Saints, that those who eat not, are ready to judge
them who eat, and those who eat, are ready to despise him who eats not. (3.)
If we consult the Scripture, we shall find that peace and concord within the
Church, which is so excellent in it self and desirable, must be severely
qualified with a respect to holiness. Heb. 12. 14. For else such an agreement
would not be the true peace of the Church, but her plague. And is not that
wisdom, which is from above, first pure, and then peaceable? It is sure, they
are its best friends, who have least latitude to take or give in the interest
of truth: but it is often found, how such indirect tamperings for peace, have in
the judgment of the Lord caused a further breach. There is no true jar betwixt
the zeal of God, and an ardent desire and endeavor for peace, but what our
corruption causes. O this is a blessed peacemaker, who can go the furthest
length to yield in his own things, whether credit or private interest, yea,
overlook the most sharp personal reflections, to promote that excellent design;
but has nothing to yield or quit upon his Master's interest, and can resist,
whosoever they be that would prejudice this, even to their face! have we not
that Heroic practice of the Apostle ( Gal. 2. 5.) upon divine record to this
day? to whom we gave place no not for an hour, that the truth of the gospel
might continue with you. Is not that also a special remark, that those who
cause division in the Church, and were therefore to be noted (Romans 16. 17.) it
was those who did oppose the doctrine of the Church? For it is men's falling
off from the truth, which is indeed the cause of a schism and rent; but not
their adherence to it, though for this they should be men of contention and
looked on as signs and wonders in the time. -- (4.) Whatever advantage some may
take to challenge the way of the Lord, from these breaches, I am sure, they
cannot deny, there is a fellowship and concord in the Church of Christ beyond
any in the world. There is a communion of the saints, even here, with one heart
and mind; yea, in such a measure as may show the world this is a bond that
exceeds the most near and strait ties of natural relations. Ephesians. 4. 3. 16. and
truly every jar and difference amongst the followers of Christ, make not a
breach.

8. I know, that this will seem strange and astonishing in the way of the Lord,
that when the Church from her adversaries without is oppressed and brought low,
his hand in a very immediate way also is so heavy, yea, seems more sore upon
his people, than the hand of men; and does even by some sad strokes in their
private interests, and upon their persons, appear more remarkably against them,
than against any others. this may occasion great thoughts of heart, when we
consider that tenderness which the Lord does witness toward his people, that
he stirs not up all his wrath nor will lay upon them above that they can bear,
but stays his rough wind in the day of the east wind, and has promised to be a
sanctuary, and hiding place, when they are scattered by men, Ezekiel. 11. 16. And
with another party the Church might debate, yea, hold her own with her greatest
adversaries: But oh! it is time to flee, and there can be no standing, where
the Almighty pursues. There is then true cause of fear and terror, when he
becomes his people's party! Yet let us consult the Scripture, that great
interpreter of providence, and of every step of the way and procedure of the
Lord with his Church; and it will let us see, (1.) That it is no strange case,
or untroden path, but we may find the Prophet, Jer. 17. 17. at such a grievous
cry, Be not a terror to me, thou art my hope in the evil day. And had not the
Church the same cause of complaint, Jer. 30. 14, 16. that the Lord seemed to
wound her, with the wound of an enemy, and the stroke of a cruel one. It was
the appearance of this, that was a very sad addition to her trial beyond any
other thing, Is. 63. 10. that they found the Lord turned to be their enemy, and
in an immediate way seem to fight against them. -- (2.) Does not the Scripture
show that the rod may have a dreadful appearance, and the way of the Lord by
some strange and singular circumstances in dealing with his people may be
matter of amazement, when yet he designs a further increase of their grace;
yea, their trial, more than their punishment? This is indeed one of the deeps
of providence, which we have discovered in, Job 1, and 2. Chap. how by a divine
permission Satan may very effectualy concur in a stroke on the Church, or some
particular Christian, and thus cause strange concurrence of bitter things, that
in such a case the hand of the Lord would seem very terrible, whilst he only
minds his people's trial: and it is clear, that the fiery trial, mentioned by
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 12. may have such strange and singular circumstances,
that the godly will be at a question, if such did ever befall others, and yet
you see it there held forth more as a ground of joy, than of fear. O how deep,
in afflicting times of the Church, may the plot and contrivance of the Devil
be! which yet in the holy counsel of the Lord is often forced to run against its
own bias, and to bring forth the very contrary effect! -- (3.) If we
understand the Scripture, we may there know, how the trial of the Church has
its appointed bounds and measure; yea, by some remarkable steps will grow that
length, and have such an advance, until it surround them on all hands, Lam. 2.
22. Thou have called my terrors round about, as in a solemn day: Yet, when it
is so, we find it is not without cause, but may be needful for the Church and
particular Christians, to be in heaviness through manifold temptations. 1 Pet.
1. 6. And truly in such an unusual coincidence and variety of straits, the
tendency thereof is often seen to be for as manifold use and advantage, as the
many afflicting ingredients in that trial have been remarkable. -- (4) We may
also see from the Scripture what an usual resemblance there is, betwixt the
public lot of the Church in suffering times, and the private case of the
saints: how under some sad trial and departure of the Lord from his people, his
dispensations are many ways corrective and judicial, that do then reach them in
all their personal interests; there is a backsliding time, and a day when
judgment particularly points at the green tree, which uses not to be a
comforting time, that then Satan is more observably let loose to afflict, and
few will miss some touch (...) his hand. Read Lam. 1. 2. where you find the
sword abroad devouring, a time of public judgment, and then it was at home
also as death: and in the 16th V. under such sore afflicting strokes there is
one further held forth, that was most imbittering of all to the godly in that
time, that the comforter who should relieve their soul, was far off. It is
clear, nothing does more endear a mercy and make it sweet, than the Lord's
immediate appearance therein: and nothing does more imbitter the rod, which put
David to that cry, Psalm. 39. Remove that stroke from me, I am consumed by the
blow of thine hand. -- (5) Upon a serious inquiry about this strange thing, may
we not understand the meaning thereof by the Scripture, why in some trials the
Lord does thus show himself his people's party, and his hand more heavy on them
than on others, that there is some provoking cause, whereat these providence
clearly point? When the godly are pursuing their case and satisfaction under
the rod, more than to answer its design; when they are ready to take
mortification and a humble stooping undertrouble for aco^ching underneath their
burden, it is not then strange though that sad Woe, Amos 6. 6. do so far reach
them, as their personal ease makes them forget the affliction of Joseph. For
thus the righteous God, suits their stroke to the sin; and keeps such a
proportion, that a light burden of the care of the Church should make their
care otherways abound, and in their own things press them with much trouble,
when these go betwixt them and the interest of Christ. There is a very unseen
cause often, why many of the saints may be sick and some fall asleep. Yea, this
truth must be likewise verified, there is a saving of things, by which we put
them in further hazard; and a securing thereof, by a surrender to the Lord: An
immoderate fear of a stroke from men, to the prejudice of present and necessary
duty, may bring with it some sad immediate strokes, in the displeasure of the
Lord, from his hand; yea, that he should thus bereave his Church of many
choicest instruments by his very immediate hand, to make it appear, the anger
and jealousy of the most high God is more to be dreaded, than the wrath and
violence of all our adversaries. But yet in the close of these judgments, even
when a Church may seem quite consumed, and her strength worn out, have we not
there some ground of hope, that the Lord may prevent his people's thoughts, by
as mavelous, as immediate restoring providence when he sees their power is
gone, and that there is none to help? yea, is it not easy with him, and like
his way, to return and restore what the former years have taken away, by the
locust and caterpiller, etc. which he had sent amongst them? Joel. 2. 25.

9. There is a step of the holy providence of God and his unspotted judgment,
which would also seem strange and amazing, that which is inflicted upon the
soul and conscience by an immediate stroke of judical induration, and is very
evident, Oh how undeniably evident, and clear at this day! that men under great
light, some special discoveries of God, after known convictions and wrestlings
of conscience, yea, after solemn engagements and their declared resolution to
follow the Lord in his way, have yet come such a length and degree in a
deliberate resisting and opposing themselves to him and his truth, without the
least appearance of a check or trouble! I confess, this is one of the
mavelous things of God, and a very visible demonstration of his being, who
has such a dominion over the soul, both in its hardening and softening: but no
cause to stumble hereat. It does truly call us to fear, and is a stroke that
may force on Atheists the awful conviction of a Deity; or though it is not felt
by those who are under the same, because the want of sense and feeling is a
part of that disease, yet all who look on (if they did not shut their own eyes)
may learn to know that this is the very work of God, and a piece of his
judgment which be makes known in the earth. But let us ask the Scripture, and
we shall find, instead of any ground for stumbling, what a special confirmation
this should be of the truth: since it is clear, -- (1.) How in this the way of
the Lord is holy and righteous, who is under no debt, no obligation to the sons
of men, Romans 9. 18. but is absolutely free, to let forth grace to, or withhold
it from, whom he pleases. His blessed will being the alone rule of
righteousness, he comprehends the reason of all his counsels and judgments,
which are to us incomprehensible: yet does he so far condescend, to let men
see, his unspotted Justice, as well as his Sovereignty, in this shines forth,
that they who are unjust by a deliberate choice, should be unjust still by a
further arrest, Rev. 22. and those who will not hearken and will have none of
him, should be delivered up to the lusts of their own heart. Ps. 81. 11. We see
in what a measure Pharaoh was hardened of the Lord, which was a plague worse
than the other ten: But (...) find Exo. 6. 34. that Pharaoh hardened his own
heart; and thus was a stroke suited to such a resolute resisting of light. (2.)
Does not the Scripture show the mavelous conveyance of this judgment Is. 6.
6. how this sad sentence is more immediately passed on the soul; yea, by those
most singular means, the wordand ordinances for enlivening, is it executed
thereon; men preached deaf and dead, where others find life; this is a stroke,
that does not draw a bar betwixt them and external fellowship with the
ordinances, but O it draws an invisible bar betwixt them and the power and
efficacy thereof. It is a judgment that walks in the dark, and binds where none
can loose; it kills without a cry; yea gives men a death-stroke when the pain
of that wound is not felt. (3.) Do you not see how this strange judgment is in
as great a height and measure held forth by the Scripture, as you see it in any
example before your eyes, that men will be mad in their opposition to God, even
when he is most remarkably opposing them? such as Ahaz who did trespass the
more, the more he was distressed, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. Yea, such who with these men
of Sodom would grope after the door, and persist in that wickedness when God
has immediately smitten them with blindness for the same. O what may be the
next stroke, where men renew their assault against God, after he has once and
against smitten them; who, in stead of repenting under his sore plagues, turn
enraged to blaspheme him, who has power over the same! Is not that a strange
degree of judicial induration, Act. 7. 57. that when they saw the face of
Stephen shine, and looked steadfastly thereon, they did then run with fury
against him! Yea, it may be seen in all ages, that such a length this judgment
will come, to look on the most convincing extraordinary judgments of God on
others, and yet not be moved therewith themselves; that when his hand is lifted
up, they will not see: but the posterity take up the same quarrel, and pursue
it wherein they have seen their fathers fall, under the stroke of an avenging
God. -- (4.) We may also know from the Scripture, how deep this judgment may
draw in its dreadful effects: what a judical arrest is thus served on men, by
which they are bound over to destruction, and their bands made strong on them,
as that they can neither stir nor move, but as malefactors shut up in jail, and
under fetters; which is not more evident before the execution, than this arrest
on their soul is by obduration before some further stroke. Thus they ly near
sudden destruction, and a blow that is irrecoverable, who have hardened
themselves under frequent reproofs. (Prove. 29.) It is known, what Pharaoh's
last rebuke was, after he had rejected many; it stands upon public record to
after-ages. I shall add, is there not something of hell here, and of those
everlasting fetters, in some measure made visible in the earth? For where light
and conviction do resolve into rage and malice against the truth, nothing can
be more like hell, or have a more near resemblance to the devil.

10. I shall add one instance more, which may seem also strange, and a
mavelous piece of the providence of God, that the righteous should fall, and
have one event with the wicked in a time of judgment; whilst we see some
notorious for wickedness, and their horrid actings in opposition to the Church,
go to the grave in peace, as to any remarkable stroke from the Lord upon them.
I know, men are ready to wonder hereat; yea, thence an Atheist will infer,
things must fall out at an adventure: But O if these would bring this to the
Scripture, and set it in the light of the word! they should there see how
convincingly it is verified, and that there is nothing here which does not
clearly agree with that blessed record. For it shows, (1.) That by no external
providence, or any thing dispensed within time, yea, by no affliction obvious
to sense, the way of the Lord and his respects to his people can be judged,
even amidst the great variety of events, which here fall out: But we are in
this obliged to adore God, whose judgments are incomprehensible, when we see at
the same time a just man perish in his righteousness, and a wicked man prolong
his life in wickedness. Eccl. 7. 25. -- (2.) The Scripture gives us this return
also about such a providence, why the sword devours both, and as Saul and
Jonathan fall together, that there the Lord does in a special way difference
betwixt one and another. Josias died in peace, as was promised, 2 Kings 22. 20.
yet he fell upon the high places of the field, in the common judgment: But he
was then taken from the evil to come; yea, thus was delivered, even by a stroke
of the hot displeasure of God, on others. It is not strange, that some may be
hid in the grave from a further storm, by the same judgment wherein the Lord is
pursuing the land, in which they have their abode.-(3.) It is clear from the
Scripure, how small an accession to a sinful course may in the holy displeasure
of God bring some of his people under the same stroke with his adversaries, and
so far involve them in that judgment. We find Ps. 1. 1. there is a standing in
the way, and joining in the counsel of the ungodly, held forth as a partaking
with them in their sin: and Ezekiel. 9. tells us, that not mourning for, and
witnessing a dissent against the national sins of the time, puts men far out of
that blessed roll of those whom the Lord does difference from others by a mark
of his preservation. -- Now as to that other, how it is the wicked prolong
their days in wickedness, and may go in some external peace to the grave, do
but enquire at the Scripture; and it will show, (1.) It was no less strange to
the Prophet Jeremiah, Cap. 12. They prosper, and have taken root. Did it not
amaze that blessed man, Ps. 73. that not only their eyes stand out with
fatness, but they have no bands in their death! -- But (2.) Is not way of the
Lord in this manifest, how graciously he prevents some by a sad temporal
stroke, and can serve himself, of a scaffold or gibbet to bring about their
mercy; as he did to the thief on the cross, whilst he plagues others by a long
forbearance, and his holding off such strokes, Eccel. 8. 11. the dreadful
effects whereof are held forth, because sentence is not speedily executed
against wicked men, their heart is therefore set on mischief. -- (3.) As in
every age we are called to adore the Severeignty of God in such a thing, he
gives men also cause to observe his great judgments, some remarkable strokes on
his adversaries; which they cannot pass without such a remark, Behold a man
that made not God his strength! Ps. 52. ver. 7. But we must further wait for
that full discrimination, which the last sentence of the judge shall put
betwixt those who fear the Lord and those who fear him not. ()

THE THIRD ARGUMENT
FOr the Scriptures accomplishment is this; that which not only the Christian's
experience, and observation of the Church, bear witness to, but is also a truth
which even to the view and conviction of the World, may be demonstrated from
whom it does often force a testimony, yea, in every age the worst of men have
been forced to acknowledge; it must be a thing every evident. But the
accomplishment of the Scripture can be thus witnessed; therefore, etc.

It is true, those sweet and sensible enjoyments, which the Saints have of this
truth, the World cannot reach; but it is also sure, that in every age, the
works of the Lord, and some more remarkable convincing providence, both of
judgment and mercy, do solemnly invite men to observe the accomplishment of the
word therein; yea, no time has wanted something of a public witness from
ungodly men, even greatest mockers of Religion, who under that constraining
power of conscience at death, or in some day of their strait, have been forced
to seal the truth, by a very open confession of the righteousness of God
toward them. And this is indeed the Lord's blessed design, in making his works
sometime so conspicuous, that they may not only confirm the faith of his
people, but render Atheism inexcusable; that the glory of his faithfulness, as
well as of his power, and wisdom, may shine forth before the sons of men. I
confess, we may wonder why the World looks so little upon this; and how the
conviction of so great a truth, which they cannot shun, does not more press
them: but the Holy Ghost, does fully resolve this, The brutish man knows not,
neither do fools lay to heart, how the Scripture takes place, that flourishing
of wicked men is but in judgment for their further ruin.

To prosecute this argument a little, there are some special truths I would
instance, wherein the faithfulness of God in fulfilling his word may be seen by
the World; yea, is obvious to the most ordinary observers. And though they be
but a few, which I shall here touch, yet I may say, they are such concerning
truths, and have so near a reference to the foundation of our faith, that men
cannot acknowledge the same, but must also confess the Scripture's Divinity,
and that there is a truth and reality in godliness and in Christian Religion. I
may truly here with some confidence challenge the greatest Atheists yea, appeal
to their conscience and serious thoughts, if in these following instances
(though but a little of what might be said on such a subject) the truth and
accomplishment of the Scripture be not very manifest.

FIRST. I shall first hold forth this truth, that man is surely fallen from
that excellent estate wherein once he was formed, (Romans 5. 18, 19.) and now is
not that which he was at the beginning. A truth so clear that we may say, even
without the discovery of the word, might be easy for any serious observer to
discern the same; yea, had not even heathens some glance at this? The evidence
whereof they could not altogether shun.

It is true, the cause and original of this dreadful contagion; how sin entered
into the World; how it is derived to the whole race of man, by imputation, as
well as inhesion; how that poison is carried from the fountain to the cistern;
this the Scripture does only discover: but this, I am sure, may be obvious to
all, that poor man is thus sick and diseased, and now bears the marks of such
a fall and ruin, as we read of in the word. I confess, it is strange, that when
this is so very ^^^vincingly manifest, it should not force men to (...) serious
enquiry, whence such a thing is, or whether there can be a recovery of so sad
and desperate like case. But to clear this a little, I would offer these three
things to be considered.

1. That there is some remainder of that excellent fabric, which may yet
appear among its ruins! some print and appearance (though dark) of that
primitive luster and beauty; some draughts, which sin has not wholly worn out;
that may clearly tell what man once was, and point out his former excellency,
that he has been an other creature, of whom Absalom's character might be truly
said, without all blemish from the head to the foot. For we see the deep
impressions of a Deity still rooted in men, even among the most wild and
savage, which no invention can utterly raze; we see some common principles of
reason, that are imprinted in the most rude and ignorant; some innate notions
and Ideas, which the soul has of good and evil, among all, and in every place
of the earth; likewise those natural truths KOINAI ENNOIAI, which we may see
are no ways impressed on the soul from any objects of sense, but such whereto men
by an unavoidable necessity are forced to assent: and besides, what means the
witness of the conscience, and authority thereof in every man, which they
cannot possibly decline? O do not these witness, that from some great height
poor man has fallen.

2. Does not the present appearance of man's nature clearly show, that he is
fallen into some dreadful disease; that it is surely overspread with some
horrid leprosy and contagion, the symptoms whereof now are most discernable? O
what an exorbitancy does appear in his desires? with what contrary tides is he
hurried? still at jar with his present lot! his reason and will, once in a
sweet league, are now at war, betwixt which he is often rent in pieces, as one
betwixt wild horses. How is he now restless in an unreasonable pursuit? he
labors in the fire, and for a shadow: yea, what do these tumults and
commotions of the earth mean? men upon the smallest account sheathing their
swords in others bowels, homo homini lupus; ruptures in families; unsatiable in
revenge, and the earth so often in an uproar as a raging sea. O do not these too
visibly witness, what a dreadful disorder and perturbation there must be
within, impetuous boiling of man's lusts! so that here we may see a very
manifest rupture and breach of a building, once well knit and framed.

3. I would ask, wherein man's true advantage and excellency, above others of
the creatures, can be seen, if not with some respect to what he once was, and
that blessed restoration by grace: For his Knowledge does often serve but to
increase his sorrow; to show the good he wants, and the evil he is subject
to. Is there any of the creatures subject to such outward misery and pain! to
so many diseases! yea, as to a sensual life, may we not say, the beasts have
even some preference! Or are these so unruly? do they so much go out of their
bounds and station? which the many laws made for man in the world, with the
convincing necessity thereof, can witness. We see also that sore travel is
appointed to man; at how much toil he is for an outward subsistence; how he
does often sow and not reap; the beasts withdraw from the yoke; those over whom
he had dominion, ready to assault him; how women bring forth their children in
sorrow; the men are attended with fear, their life often made bitter with care
and labor; yea, as men increase in the world, their care and discontent
increasing therewith! But besides all, is he not in the greatest slavery, of
all the creatures, through the violence of his lusts? that make him pursue the
bait, though he knows it will undo him; while his corruption does often like a
strong man bind him in fetters, and his flesh imperiously drag him at its
heels! O may we not say, was poor man thus framed at the beginning? or raised
so far above the rest of the creatures, only to make him the more miserable!
For truly if a lively portraicture could be drawn of sinful depraved nature,
there is none so gross but should abhor, yea, be affrighted, to see that in the
third person, with which (alas) they are so friendly to in themselves.

SECOND. That so great a change is truly wrought upon men in Conversion, (as
the Scripture does promise and hold forth, Joh. 3. 3, 6. Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Coloss.
3. 1, 2.) wherein something above nature, even the mavelous power of the
grace of God, may be seen; is a truth I am sure, known, and undeniable to the
world: yea, the greatest mockers at religion must confess, can be no delusion,
but is indeed real and certain; upon these following grounds.

(1.) That the most gross, who in their practice have been openly profane, in
the place wherein they lived, it has been seen how grace has reached them:
and thus the Leopard has been made to change his spots, and such who were
accustomed to do evil, have learned to do well. O! Do not many famous instances
witness this, in every age? -- (2.) That also men most principled in their
judgment against the way of God, who were wont to deride holiness as a fancy,
even on such, so great a change has been wrought as has made the world to
wonder: but then they were forced to lay down their prejudice, yea, to wonder
at themselves, how they could stand before the truth so long, whereof they have
got such an impression. Sure, Atheists must grant there have been as professed
Atheists as themselves, who have been made eminent examples of grace. -- (3.)
That such even in the height of their wickedness (like Saul breathing out
cruelty, and of late Vergerius while he was writing against the truth) grace
has sometimes reached them. It has been found, that of Christ's greatest
enemies some have thus fallen, upon their high places, before the power of the
word; some such trophies of the gospel's conquest have been conspicuous in
every age: yea, it is often seen that some remarkable height in sin has proved
an evident Crisis, and turn in men's condition, either to judgment, or mercy.
-- (4.) That some of the most eminent adversaries of the truth have, through
grace, been made eminently useful instruments in the Church, the world cannot
deny; that there have not been choiser vessels of honor, more zealous for the
Lord in their time, than such, who were once most violent in their opposition.
-- (5.) That such whom the world did reckon most wise and discerning, yea, that
did want no judgment to know the value of outward things, as well as others,
grace has reached. Can the Atheists object, Do any of the rulers, or Rabbis
believe in Christ, or follow that way! when it is so clear, that not more wise,
learned, and judicious (even themselves being judges) have been in their time,
then some who are most serious in the matter of Religion. -- (6.) Has not this
change been made discernable upon the simple, the most stupid, and dull, yea,
upon some such as their natural incapacity might have obstructed the work, if
something above nature had not carried it on! which may be also manifest by
some change even on their understanding, to show that this can make wise the
simple, and in the way of holiness, the wayfaring man, though a fool, shall
not err. -- (7.) That by a very improbable mean, the word, and that sometimes
by weakest instruments, we see this great change has been wrought: and it is
remarkable, how little of the work of conversion did follow the putting forth
of miracles in the primitive times, but by the simplicity of the preached
gospel much more. For indeed the conversion of a ^oul, and such a change is it
self some way a miracle. -- (8.) That they are not a few, on whom this change
has been wrought, is undeniable: and truly, besides these ordinary proofs, I
think, it is a great defect there should not be some more special record by the
Church, of these illustrious and eminent instances of the grace of God, which
have been in such an age, as well as remarkable instances of judgment. (9.) Men
must see this falls not out at an adventure, which is wrought upon one, and
not another, whilst both are alike discerning; yea, some who seem furthest from
the grace of God, very gross and rude, have been taken, when the more civil and
refined, and of a more promising natural disposition, have been past by. O does
not this witness the grace of God, and sovereignty thereof! (10.) Is not this
change often discernable upon men in a time while no advantage from without does
appear? even times of presecution and hazard, from which many have dated their
first acquaintance with God; when they could expect nothing but a suffering
lot. Sure there must be something above nature in it. (11.) It is also known
how great a cloud of witnesses have sealed this truth. O! can there be such an
universal enchantment, that in every age, in several, yea, in most remote
places of the earth, has fallen upon so many, who have witnessed the power of
the Gospel? or can all these be void of understanding? What gain or outward
advantage could they design in that which is so usually attended with outward
hazard and loss! or what credit from men, while it makes them the very butt of
the world's hatred and reproach? Yea, can it be thought that all these could
have combined to conspire into so great a cheat? I must appeal Atheists to
their serious thoughts of this matter. -- (12.) The mavelous effect of this
change, does it not witness that this is no fancy or delusion; when men are
reached with such a stroke, and by one word, as has made the stout-hearted and
most daring to tremble, and to show by their very countenance, that there is
another tribunal than man's, before which they are arraigned? Must it not be
sad earnest, and a mavelous power, that can make so willing a divorce betwixt
men, and their idols, which were once as their right eye to them; and beat them
off that ground of self-righteousness, which they had been so long establishing
to themselves; that should cause them also choose the reproach of Christ, and
his cross, before any outward advantage, and abandon that society, without
which sometimes they could not live? Must not this speak forth something above
natural reason! O! may not the world often wonder what is become of their old
friends! though I confess, this should rather put them, with wonder and
astonishment, to some serious inquiry whence so great a change can be!

() It is strange, the World, does not more wonder at Conversion, which is so
great a miracle, yea it may be said, one of the greatest has been in the
earth; since it is no less mavelous, than to raise out of the grave such who
are truly dead. O how convincingly demonstrative is this, of the truth and
reality of grace; yea, even to the view of the World, does witness an
irresistible efficacious power with the word, that converteth the soul,
enlightens the eye, and makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19. 7. Should we not with
astonishment look on a Christian, if we did seriously consider what a change
the grace of God makes here, from that he once was, and how great a change
glory will ere long make from that he now is! I know, there are many things we
wonder at from our ignorance. But oh! it is men's ignorance and estrangement
from this, makes it so little their wonder. For, if we be assuredly persuaded
of the truth of Conversion, which the World cannot deny without a contradiction
both to sense and reason, we have then three great truths unanswerably
demonstrated. 1. That the Scripture of God is faithful and true, which holds
this forth. 2. That there is a divine Spirit, and a power above nature, that
does certainly accompany the same. 3. It is then clear, there are two contrary
states in another World, since they are here so manifest. Now, besides these
evidences already mentioned, I would here offer some further upon so grave, and
weighty a subject, to show how very clear and convincing the demonstration of
this truth is, that the World cannot but see the very immediate power of God,
and something above nature in Conversion, if they do not shut their eyes
thereat. Consider but these, --

(1.)Is it not a strange and mavelous thing, that could change one species of
a creature into another, turn a wolf or tiger into a lamb, sure this would be
astonishing; yet such a change is here, which makes so vast a difference
betwixt one and himself, takes him off his former delights and exercises, his
old friends and society, with whom he once thought the time short, yea, makes
the man who was a persecutor of the truth, and took Pleasure therein, now
rejoice to suffer persecution on that same account! I think, the World will not
debate, where so many known instances are at all times obvious. (2.) Is it not
mavelous, which can estrange men from their worldly interests, and take their
heart off that which was as their right eye, and subdue under them that which
once took them captive at its pleasure? O does it not show, they have got their
eyes opened to see things, which were formerly hid! Yea, how strange is it that
those whose praedominant Sin was love to the World, and have been in their
natural disposition most narrow and griping, that they could not allow
themselves the comfortable use of that they had, even these this change has so
powerfully reached, as to cause a willing surrender and quitting of all for
Christ! I could offer known instances of this; and those at as great an
advantage then, in the exercise of their judgment and reason, as ever, whom the
World might see were most serious and composed therein. (3.) Would you debate
the efficacious power of that which should melt and dissolve the hardest stone?
and may you not wonder what a power this must be, which will make men melt and
dissolve in tears, and stand trembling before the word, who through their life
were known to be most obdurate and stupid? Yea, is not this great change
sometimes with such terror and downcasting ushered in, that may convince
observers, it is a matter of greatest earnest, and no counterfeit? and surely
these must be reached by some power, before which there is no standing. -- (4.)
How great a thing is that which takes men unawares, beyond their thoughts and
intention? Matthew, and those other disciples, did not know in the morning what
should befall them before night: it was indeed a happy day, when on their return
they had that account to give, We have found the Messiah! and it is sure, many
since have been thus surprised; yea, in one hour have got such a sight, which
will never go from their heart; they now see what report could never have made
them believed; they now know what it is to be taken out of a dreadful gulf of
darkness into a mavelous light! And truly there is this usually discernable
in it, how some one word will force its passage, and take fire within, as a
word beyond all others fitly spoken, and fitted by divine appointment to open
the heart. -- (5.) It is a mavelous change, which does even reach young ones,
and these sometimes of an age little above infancy. For it is certainly known,
how such whose years might show there was no design to cheat the world, yea,
sometimes in a family where little advantage for their education has appeared,
have given evidence of this wonderfully, above themselves and their age; yea,
at death have witnessed some power of the grace of God, and his Spirit on their
soul, their hope and the grounds of it, with such judgment and seriousness, as
has forced on bystanders this discovery of an immediate teaching of the
Spirit, and of a mighty power of God, that can witness in these, ere they can
well speak or exercise reason, the power of Religion. O whence should this be!
and truly for the truth thereof I could offer known instances, if it should be
brought on debate. -- (6.) What a change is it that does also reach men in
their old age, who have been long rooted and inured to the world, who have sat
out many a call, in their resisting the Gospel; yet is it not seen, how these
in their gray hairs have been made to weep and confess, after sixty or seventy
years living under the Gospel, that then only they begun to know what it is to
be Christians. I confess, this is one of the rare trophies of the grace of God;
yet no age wants some such instances, to prove, how far grace can prevail over
nature, custom, education, and all those disadvantages, which use to attend the
time of old age. -- (7.) What a strange power is it, which has been so
evidently witnessed on some horridly flagitious, who have outrun others in all
manner of wickedness; yea, even then whilst justice was crying for punishment
to cut them off, grace has stepped in to save, and reached them at a scaffold or
gibbet! It is sure, the world cannot question this truth: and O should it not
be convincing, to see two brought to a public death for some gross crime, who
have the same hazard before them, and the same means made use of for their
conviction; yet the one melting in contrition, and the other most hardened! You
cannot say, that this is from a different nature and constitution, since
sometimes those of a more promising nature, and better disposition, have been
seen further off, than such of whom least was expected. -- (8.) Is it not a
strange change, which even on those where no ordinary means could be
subservient, can be witnessed? where no company, no example, no usual way for
instruction, can be alleged; so that it may be seen, they have been truly
taught of the Lord; that there is such a thing as his immediate teaching; that
in a very extraordinary way, by means most improbable, he can convey himself
into the soul. In a word, this can be no result of one's natural complexion;
for then it would appear in, and accompany, their younger years in some
measure, and grow up with them. This change also, in those of most different
natures, most unlike and cross to others humor and disposition, is made
discernable. Yea, must it not be something above moral swasion, or any
perswasives of humane eloquence, since here the foolishness of preaching is
found more effectual, than any such way? Yea, it is seen how the most sublime
and polished strains of oratory, and greatest gifts, have often come short of
that success, which has followed more improbable means. I shall add, O is not
this something above nature, which makes men partake of the divine nature, and
does so visibly impress the image of God on them!

I shall shut this up with three remarkable Instances of the power and efficacy
of grace in Conversion; of which in every age there may be a large record.
First, that excellent man JUNIUS; whose life we have in some measure set down
by himself, with many notable remarks of providence, and therein showing the
Lord's engaging him at first; how being very loose, and carried away with evil
company, yea, tempted to Atheism, he was one day moved to go and read the
Scripture; and at the first opening, accosted with that of the first of John;
which whilst he read (as he says) did suddenly astonish him, and leave a
mavelous conviction on his soul, of the divinity of the subject, the Majesty
and Authority of the writing; so that all day he knew not where, and what he
was: but thus turns himself with these words to the Lord, Thou wast mindful of
me, O my God, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies! Yea, gives this
account, that he then had a sight of the Scripture, which made him see it did
exceed all humane eloquence; and this was followed with such power, that his
body trembled, and his mind became astonished, with such a surprising and
mavelous light: and from that day he begun to be serious in the way of the
Lord.

A second instance I shall offer is, the remarkable Conversion of worthy Master
BOLTON, a choice Minister in the Church of England; in whose life this is
recorded, that being eminently profane, a horrid swearer, and much accustomed
to mock at holiness, and these who most shined therein, and particularly that
excellent Man of God Mr. Perkins, then Preacher in Cambridge, whom he much
undervalued for his plainness in preaching the truths of God; yea, was near the
length of Popery: but on the Lord's gracious appearance to him, was put to have
other thoughts, with a very remarkable change upon him, though with that
terror, that (as he said himself) the Lord seemed to run upon him, like a
giant, throwing him to the ground, and with such a terrifying discovery of sin,
as caused him to roar in anguish, and often rise in the ^ight on that account,
which continued for diverse months; Yea, these assaults in the pangs of the new
birth were such, that it might have been said, Ut nec color, nec sensus, nec
sanguis superesset. But at last a blessed sunshine brake out, and he after to
his old age proved a burning and shining light. -- Now besides these two great
men, I think it not unsuitable, (since it is to commend the grace of God and
witness the reality thereof, who of all kind of sinners, as well as of all
kindreds and nations, has brought some to glory) that I set down one very
strange instance in this country, of a poor Buggerer, who not many years ago
was put to death in the town of Air, for that horrid wickedness. He had been a
most stupid and brutish person; such an one who looked, to all who knew him, as
if he had been above the reach of ordinary means: but in the prison, the Lord
did marvellously witness the power of his grace, and in such a measure
discovered to him his sinfulness, that after much serious exercise upon his
soul, and fore wrestling, a most kindly word of repentance did appear with
great assurance; so that when he came to the stake, he could not cease from
crying out to the people, under the sense of pardon, and that comforting
sunshine of the presence of God; O he is a great forgiver! He is a great
forgiver! and had therewith these words; Now has perfect love cast out all
fear: I know, God has nothing to lay against me, for Jesus Christ has paid
all, and those are free whom the son makes free! Thus, in a transport of wonder
and joy, did he die; the mavelous grace of God raising him then above other
men, who not long before seemed, in some respect, below a beast. ()

THIRD. That the communion and fellowship with God, whereto the Saints are in
this life admitted, and brought near to him in the spirit, is a most real
thing, and no delusion; is a truth which may be very convincingly demonstrated,
even to the view of the World, and to such who are but Spectators of the same.
1 John 1. 3. Phil. 3. 20. I know, this is a truth that must be spiritually
discerned, and therefore the world cannot know it, or reach that unspeakable
joy and delight, which is found by the Saints in that sweet path: yet I must
say, there are some things, and some such convincing evidences, as may witness
to men, and rationally demonstrate the same; the conviction whereof they cannot
possibly shun, if they but come near, and in their serious thoughts consider,
--

1. How great and excellent a company do bear this testimony, even as many as
in every time did ever serve God in the Spirit. Is not this transmitted by the
father to the children, as their experience? And as certainly tried by
succeeding ages; a truth which is not once, or twice proved in the Christian's
life! For the proofs thereof are innumerable, and past reckoning, which they
have had; yea, amongst all the Saints since the days of Abel, to this present
time, there was never one contradictory witness could be produced.

2. Are not those, who do thus testify what they have often found in secret
retirements to God, such whose testimony, in any other matter, the worst of men
could not refuse, or deny to be famous? I am sure, the World is convinced, that
the followers of Christ dare not, yea, use not to deal falsely in other things
with those they have to do with, however their malice carry them to reproach
them; yea, that they are more to be credited, than such, who make a scorn of
Religion.

3. Have they not had as great interest, and share of the World as others, and
been of as discerning spirits to know the true value of things, who from their
experience do not only declare, there is an undoubted reality in converse with
God; but that the joy and delight herein, which they have found, is above all
the pleasures of the flesh? O! what must that be, which could make such, who
wanted no outword allurements, who had not lost their taste, and were flesh and
blood as well as others, to turn their back on all for Christ, and by their
walk testify they have found some more satisfying enjoyment in fellowship with
God?

4. Must not this be very obvious, and convincing, that when men once become
serious in the way of God, they have got some new acquaintance? that sure there
is another world, and some other society, than that of men, with which they
have intercourse. Whence are these frequent retirements, from which they have
been seen so often to come forth with greatest satisfaction, and with some
remarkable change in their case? Does it not thus appear, They are not alone,
when they are alone; yea, in such a solitude must find something very
desirable?

5. Is not this also testified, in times when men could not well dissemble, or
be suspected of deceit? in times of great outward affliction; when the World
also has been most tempting them with its offers; yea at death, when they are
stepping over that threshold; a time, wherein the words of dying men are of
greatest weight and credit, the spirits of such being then more unbyassed, and
free of those ordinary temptations wherewith others are swayed! How often have
they at such times declared, that surely God is familiar with men, which they
have found, and though they were going to change their place, yet were not to
change their company!

6. Can that be a delusion, which is so sensible at the time present? When the
Saints are not more sure that they live, than they are sure of this truth, what
near approaches and refreshing views they have got while God has come near to
their soul, what a discernable elevation of their spirits does go along with
this? Yea, on the other hand, as the withdrawing hereof is very sensible to
themselves, is there not something of this even obvious to those about them,
how great a change and difference this will make in their case, from other
times, which they cannot get hid?

7. Does not something of this truth appear on the very countenance and outward
carriage of Christians? what a luster, and resemblance of Heaven, a holy
stayedness and composure of spirit, when they have been brought near God, in
secret converse with him, and taken up to the mountain! In a word, does not the
walk of a serious mortified Christian convincingly witness this? yea, it cannot
but be some way astonishing to the World, what should make them look so well,
and with such satisfaction, when no visible cause for it, when shut up in
prison from converse with friends, and acquaintance? Sure, men will not think a
rational spirit so demented as to quit their former pleasures, and choose the
cross, that they may only deceive the World with a counterfeit joy and
satisfaction, if they did not really find the same. And while it is too too
evident, what a dreadful society and commerce many have with the Devil, should
any question or debate; whether the Saints have truly communion and fellowship
with God, the Father of Spirits, whom they serve and worship.

FOURTH. That the righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26.
And has another spirit, which is greater and more choice, than that which is
in the World, is a truth, which, I am sure, men (notwithstanding all their
prejudice) must needs confess; and that therein the Scripture is truly
verified, when such clear and convincing evidences do stare them in the face. I
confess, the Saints are much under a dark cloud here, through the prevalence of
corruption; yea, are often accounted as the filth of the world: but when grace in
any greater measure, and in vigorous exercise, does show it self, then there
appears so much as will darken all (...) grandour of this earth, and force
men to see an excellency upon the saints, beyond any others. They cannot
altogether shun such a conviction, -- 1. What an evident difference is betwixt
their way, who walk with God, and that of the most polished moralist. Something
is in the one, which does witness a more excellent spirit, a higher elevation,
a sweet harmony, and equability in their way, that they move in some higher
sphere, act from other principles, with a respect to some greater interest than
any thing here, have more of a large heart to serve their generation, than
these whose self interest is seen to be the first and last in all their motions.

2. May it not also appear to observers that tender serious Christians who live
near God, do truly witness their resemblance and likeness to him; to whom they
move, as to their great and last end? yea, do evidence a more true excellency
of spirit, what a sweet calm and serenity they have within, while going through
things that are most cross and vexing; with what discernable quietness these
can look upon most affrighting revolutions in the world, as such whose treasure
and great interest is beyond hazard, though the earth were all turned to ashes.

3. Is there not so much in the way and carriage of the saints, yea, such a
majesty and authority, that attends holiness, and does force respect and
fear, even from those who most hate them; yea, and does force men to justify
such in their conscience, whom they openly reproach, and persecute; Whence it
is, that a serious tender Christian is often a scare crow and terror to the
profane, when there is no outward cause for it, but that they are struck with
the conviction of a more excellent spirit in these, carrying such a resemblance
to the image of God, as forces fear and subjection from that spirit which is
in the world.

4. Does not a Christian and holy walk cause men to shine as a light in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation? Yea, darken all their neighbors?
And in the darkest night, is it not seen how grace shines with the greatest
luster? what a sweet and odoriferous scent does this send through the country,
where they live; that may show to all, how great a difference there is betwixt
such, and those who are wallowing in this puddle of the earth!

5. Is it not obvious, what a luster and beauty, yea, something more becoming
our immortal soul, that is in the self-denial of Christians, their bearing
injuries, forgiving such as injure them, without reviling, than in that proud
vindictive spirit that is in the world; that sure such walk by a more excellent
rule, and move from a higher principle!

6. It may be also evident to the world, what an other spirit is in those who
do not run with the current of every time, nor yield to men because of their
outward power, than in that spirit which is in the world? that while the one
does press men to save themselves on any terms, the other does cause the
Christian to take up his cross, yea, lay down his life, to save his conscience!
And whence is that patience, and resolution, by which the godly in times of
suffering have overcome their persecutors; their bold avowing of the truth
before men, when hazards are most obvious; and that advantage, wherewith they
appear above others, in such a time? O! does it not clearly witness, they are
of another metal, who do thus abide the fire; yea, become more bright by that
wherewith others are consumed?

I would add, that which the world cannot deny, how this spirit, which is in
the Saints, has prevailed over the greatest entisements of carnal gain and
pleasure, which to many may seem a wonder: as the Popish party did once say of
Luther, Bestia haec non curat aurum. That which they did speak in contempt,
that it did prove him a beast, did in effect show him therein to be something
above men; for that is a thing before which the spirit of the world. could
never stand.

FIFTH. That the promised encouragement, which is held forth to the People of
God under trouble and suffering for his name, is a truth, and the Scripture
herein verified, I am sure, not only Christian experience can witness; but may
even to the observation of others, be demonstrated from very convincing
grounds, that it is no fancy or delusion. Ps. 9. 9. Is. 51. 12.

1. The very countenance and outward appearance of the godly, in a suffering
time, does often declare the peace and tranquillity of their soul, so as surely
they must have joy and satisfaction from whence the world does not know, and
have some other correspondence, than with things visible. For it may be often
said, as of Daniel, and his fellows, that under greatest pressures and a very
mean condition they look as well, yea, with as much cheerfulness, as those who
live on the Kings allowance.

2. It can be no counterfeit, which should thus reconcile the christian with a
suffering lot. For it is known how very searching affliction and trouble
proves; which often does broach the vessel, and bring forth what has formerly
most closely lurked. And O! Does not that holy confidence and freedom, which
the Saints have evidenced in confessing the truth, before the princes of this
world and their most cruel adversaries, yea, that cheerfulness which in most
extreme articles of suffering they often do witness, even when they are resisting
to the blood; does not this speak forth something beyond the gallantry of a
natural spirit, that far exceeds the ordinary way of men, and is a thing the
world cannot but wonder, and whither they will, or will not, see God's very
immediate help, and hand in the same, according to his word?

3. Is it not seen, how the cheerful way of the Godly under suffering, while
there is no outward ground for the same, does not only astonish, but is an
exceeding torment to adversaries? when they are forced to see, how all their
endeavors (when their wrath and malice has been to the utmost put forth) have
yet been in vain, either to turn them aside, or to ruin their encouragement;
but that the most sharp sufferings of the Godly do still give them the forest
dash, help to strengthen others, justify God's way, and that tender respect he
has to his suffering people, even before all observers!

4. Is it not also manifest, that such whose natural disposition was known to
be very fainting and timorous, yet when called to suffer for the truth, have
with out the least appearance of discouragement, showed an invincible
resolution, and not only their own fears, but the expectations of others have a
mavelous disappointment! O is there not there a visible fulfilling of the
Scripture, that shaking reeds should be made to stand, were strongest cedars
have bowed; yea, some of very mean and ordinary parts have been so discernably
raised above themselves, as they were made to confound the wise and learned!

5. Must it not be confessed, that the zeal and resolution of the saints did
never more appear than in times of greatest opposition? that at no time they
have looked more, like Christians with more advantage, and with some peculiar
beauty and luster of the grace of God, than under suffering! a thing, which as
it eminently does commend the gospel, has also so far convinced their enemies,
as in some measure it has blunted their edge, and taken off their prejudice
against the way of God, and followers thereof.

6. I may appeal the greatest Atheists to their conscience, if any moral
arguments, (whatever influence they may have upon men's patient enduring (could
ever produce such effects, as rejoicing in tribulation, the choosing affliction
before sin and all its pleasures; making men to triumph over persecutors, and
to go with such a calm and cheerfulness to a scaffold, to sing amidst a dark
prison, yea, and to abound, and have all things, under greatest want? O! whence
is this! Sure, something above nature must be here, that is stronger than moral
reasons, by which the Saints have thus overcome the world! Yea, is it not
obvious to all who look on, how great a difference there is betwixt the
pretended resolution of a natural spirit in death and suffering, and that joy
and confidence of a Christian, which has then showed the composure and
tranquillity of his soul within? The one being but a dark shadow, and the other
drawn to the life.

SIXTH. That there is a Conscience within men, whose power both as a judge, and
witness, does answer that clear discovery, the Scripture gives thereof, Romans
2. 9. is a thing obvious even to the world, which they must needs confess, both
from it is visible effect on others, and the working thereof within themselves.
That herein the word is verified, these things make it clear and undeniable, --

1. That sure there is something within, which thus makes men afraid to be
alone with themselves, yea, will cause them to go abroad, and frame diversions,
to be out of its noise: must it not be sad earnest, which has so dreadful a
sound in their ear, does haunt the wicked man whither he will, or not?
wherewith he would gladly be at peace; but amidst his greatest mirth and
prosperity this does mingle his vine with gall and wormwood.

2. Is it not also sure, that men have often an accuser within their breast
(while they seem to brave it out before others) whose judgment and sentence
they can by no means decline; but after the committing of sin, yea, on the back
of their sinful pleasures, does follow the same with a bitter sting, and ring
this dreadful peal in their ear, that in the end their way will be bitterness!
O! is not this an accusing conscience, which does begin the torment of some
before the time?

3. What is it that should make men's guilt so legible often in their
countenance, even when they study most to conceal it, and thus cause them to
give their tongue the lie; yea, bewray to bystanders, whether they will or not,
some secret trouble, and sore they have within? Does it not clearly show the
power of conscience, which has such authority on men, that without violence or
constraint from others, does even force them to confess the truth, and supply
the room of witnesses;

4. Whence is it, that some are so much disquieted for secret sins, which the
eyes of others could not reach, yea, that as to some gross sins, even the most
profligate amongst men, have an horror at them, without respect to outward
hazard? Does it not show the power of natural conscience, that holds forth a
greater party, than the world with which they have to do, to whom (...) are
manifest, and some greater witness than that of man?

5. How is it that even greatest men, whom the world could not reach, and in he
midst of all probable advantages, have yet often most affrighting thoughts,
much terror, and disquieting reflections? Must it not be something within,
which does cause them to fear, an other power than that of the world, and a
judgment greater than of men?

6. What must it be which does force men to justify God, when his hand does
pursue them, and makes them so easily find out sin in a time of their strait?
Why is the sense of guilt so very affrighting at death? Is it not the
conscience, which does presage a future judgment, and extend its power to
matters of an everlasting concernment and duration?

7. What should make men tremble at the word, and so much hate a searching
ministry! Is it not because the light does torment them? That though the word
does particularly name none, yet there is something within, which makes
application of the truth, and does plainly say, Thou art the man!

8. How do the worst of men often justify those in secret, whom they openly have
condemned: that while they are even persecuting the saints for truth, and
holiness, yet for these they give them and their way a favorable testimony,
notwithstanding all their prejudices? Yea, what is it that does cause a secret
fear and awful regard of such whom they hate? -- Does it not show something
within, whose judgment they are not able to resist?

9. I must further ask, whence is that horror, and those dreadful cries and
groans, which wicked men often have in their sickness, even such who were wont to
sport at sin, with a daring countenance? Can the world get this past without
some remark, how intolerable a thing an evil Conscience is, when once let
loose? when in all ages such terrifying examples of this kind have been set up,
for all that past by to look on, such as Spira, Latomus. Olivarius, etc. And
truly I think, it is a great Defect, that there should not be a more particular
record of such, which would give Atheism so great a dash; yea, force men to
confess the truth of a Deity, and of the written word.

() This is a great truth, and a great demonstration of God (blessed for ever!)
his being, and of the truth of his word, that there is a Conscience: so strange
a power, which every man has within him and over him, that forces the soul to
a reflection on it self, even when it trembles at that sight, and with an awful
sound tells the Atheist, there is a God, when he seems to have no fear or
conviction thereof! This is that great tormentor and troubler of the world,
from which there is no retreat, though one should flee to the uttermost parts
of the earth: this keeps a high court of justice under the authority of the
great Judge, and there without respect of persons does summons great and small,
does arrest, bring in witness, and passes sentence, yea, in some measure puts
that in execution, and can make hell begin there, by an unexpressible anguish
and horror. It is strange, that such a thing, when it is so undeniable, does
not stare the world in the face with more amazement. But I shall further offer
some few evidences of this truth, besides those already mentioned.

(1.) Could there be such a Power in man to difference betwixt that good and
evil which is within him, if there were not also some higher power above him,
who has thus formed him, with such principles? Yea, could there be a judging
and witnessing within a man, if there were not a law and rule over him? For it
is sure, the conscience in all its actings has respect to a higher judgment,
and to a law, which even nature's light, though very dim, holds forth, but is
express and clear in the Scripture which is that great rule of the Conscience.
-- (2.) Is it not very strange, to see such a power within a man, and yet
against him; that the grossest Atheist is an enemy to it, yet cannot be without
it, or get it shaken off; and whilst it is known how strong a bias and
inclination these have to evil, more than good, they are yet forced to justify
the one, more than the other! The drunkard cannot drown this conviction, nor
the worldling bury it in the earth, where his treasure lies. -- (3.) Though men
may come some length to divert the conscience, and silence it, that it cannot
exercise its function, without some special divine excitation; yet is it not
manifest, how then when once it is awaked, there is no possible withstanding!
Then the stout-hearted cannot keep his ground, to debate with it; yea, when
they run, it follows with as swift a pace; no skill, no arguments can defend
from its force; there is no violence against such a power, but whilst in the
practice of sin they overreach the witness of men, lo! this is continually at
hand to tell them, that He who is greater than the conscience, does regard. --
(4.) Can any thing be more real and certain, than these effects of the
conscience, I mean that trouble and fear men have in sinning, and that peace
and satisfaction that attends well-doing; Do you know such a place of the
earth, whither this power has not some access to over-aw men, even without any
visible aw or hazard? And can all mankind, through the whole World, in all
ages, be in so strange a delusion, if there were no real ground for it? -- (5.)
How convincingly does this witness to a conscience, and the reality of it, that
men are at so much work to bribe it, to frame diversions thereto, yea, to find
out false grounds of peace, and some such gloss and commentary, as many
reconcile the rule with their grossest actings and exorbitancies? And why is
this, but that in outdaring it, they find it stronger then they, and therefore
must counterwork, by darkening that great light, and find out some show of
reason to silence conscience, and promise peace to themselves, though they walk
in the wickness of their heart. -- (6.) Do not these strange extremes, which
often are obvious in men's condition, witness the reality of this power? O what a
mavelous thing, to see one stupid, this day; and desperate the next, the
conscience breaking out, at that rate, that to be rid thereof and its torment,
the poor man would seek a shelter in the grave? Yea, is it not usual to see
some wear out their time as beasts, yet at dying seized with an inexpressible
horror of God? Is not this something wakened, which was formerly asleep? --
(7.) Do not men see such desparate acts of wickedness in the World, such
furious running over warnings and convictions, that may even convincingly show
some pursuit of the conscience, and that horrid way they take to be rid of it
by revenge, to give it a further wound and silence its noise, by some violent
deep stroke! -- (8.) Are not these sudden unlooked for out-breakings of the
conscience most remarkable; how it takes some unawares and grows upon them, the
more they strive with it? It is known also, what reflections men usually have
on themselves and their actions, in some present exigent and hazard; yea, how
they are thus affrighted, or in some measure quiet, as they are put to condemn
or acquit themselves on that score. Now is not this a convincing witness of the
force of a natural conscience; And likewise that usual recourse, which the
grossest of men will in such an extremity have to God by prayer, does both
declare this, and that impression they have upon them of a Deity. -- (9.) How
mavelous a confidence and support does the conscience afford where it is a
friend, under the greatest misery and trouble from without; For thus a man's
spirit can sustain its infirmities. But O when it is an adversary, nothing
(nothing) so unsupportable; it will torment and tear one within, when there is
none without dare provoke him; yea, cause the oppressor to tremble, whilst it
upholds the oppressed with confidence; it makes the one eat his bread with joy,
when it imbitters the pleasant morsels of others. ()

SEVENTH. That there is a reward for the righteous, and unquestionable gain in
Godliness, is a piece of the Scripture not only well known, and witnessed to
the observing Christian in his experience, but is also held forth in every age,
as in great letters to the view of the world. Ps. 58. 11. Ps. 97. 11. Is. 3.
10. It is true, that the Christians lot is often followed with much trouble, and
sometimes with loss of his life, which may seem to have a very dismal aspect.
For that great goodness, which the man who fears God, has ensured to him, is
much laid up in another world: but it is also sure, that there are such clear
convincing proofs of this truth held forth even to the observation of men, by
which the Lord has in every age confirmed the same, that I am sure the
greatest Atheist cannot answer even these. --

1. That this is the very dictate of a natural conscience, not only that God
is, but that he is a rewarder of such as serve him: yea, none amongst men are
so gross, or brutish, who are not in some measure principled to difference
betwixt good and evil, with some fear of a punishment to the one, and some hope
of recompense to the other; and are also forced to notice some more signal and
convincing examples, which have been of that kind in their time.

2. Must we not say, yea, does not the World see, in every age, that history of
Joseph in some part acted over again? Sure, there have not been wanting many
such remarkable instances, wherein it might be easy to trace an upright and
straight walk through a very maze and labyrinth of changes, and to show how
that has been their condition, and at last integrity has brought them to land
in a comfortable harbor; yea, how often they have had a mavelous, unlooked
for relief, contrary to all humane appearance. This indeed is no romance; but a
most true history, which through all times, and many examples, might be written
of the Word and providence, which would surpass the richest fancy, that any
fiction or romance did ever contain.

3. Must it not be convincing, even to the worst of men, what a visible
blessing does often follow the mean lot of some of the Saints, which can make
their little reach far, and cause them to abound more in their poverty, than
others amidst their abundance? Which, I think, the world cannot shun to
observe, and gather that there is surely something else than men's own care,
which does their business: and how that ordinary proverb falls not to the
ground, that it is better to be happy than wise, when they see a secret
judgment blow upon some men's estate, that no means can prevent; and a secret
blessing, which makes things prosper and take effect, accompany the
Christian's little: so as it may be easy for such who look abroad, to see where
real contentment, with cheerfulness and giving of thanks, uses to dwell.

4. May not the world see, there is a feast in a good conscience, how little
soever they partake of the World? that well doing, and the practice of
godliness, has some present reward in its hand? Whereas so remarkable a
difference may be discerned betwixt the countenance and carriage of such, and
of them who trust in falsehood, that surely in a time of strait, those have
another kind of security and confidence, when greatest natural spirits fail;
yea, that those alone can enjoy themselves, (...) the most calm and composed
spirits, amidst the several changes of their life; that according to outward
things their peace does not ebb, nor flow, but they are at a seen advantage
above others, in the day when men are sore outwitted with their straits. So as
it will be most easy then to see the good and advantage of religion, when the
vanity of other advantages is most discernable.

5. Is it not also seen, that true honor does truly wait on humility, and
follows such; But that it flees from them who do most pursue it: yea, that
faithfulness and an upright walk will gain credit even amongst her enemies, and
respect before the World?

6. That those who are faithful in their life, and diligent improvers of a
small talent, have usually more added, with some discernable growth following
the same: and as the drying up of the parts of some, as a judgment on
unfaithfulness, is often obvious, so also such a blessing upon serious diligence,
as has made the last to be first, and even outrun such who were once before
them. Yea, it is truly seen, how grace helps men's gifts, does raise and
sublimate their spirits, above that which once they were.

7. Does not the Lord put some visible difference often, betwixt the righteous
and the wicked in a time of common calamity? that a strange deliverance with
the concurrence of very mavelous providence, does sometime await such, even
to the conviction of observers; which may tell the World, such have had an
invisible hedge of preservation about them, and have been under some better
care, than their own.

8. What a clear witness do ungodly men often bear to this truth, at their death,
or at some other strait, so that their conscience has forced them to justify
the godly man's choice, and to say, that the lot of such is only most
desirable: (...), with much bitterness to lament their own folly, (...) made
not religion more their business, the good and advantage whereof is now no
matter of debate. Sure, the World will confess, how often the confession and
testimony of such men, to this truth, has reached their ear.

9. I shall but add, that which is so very manifest, how faithfulness and
integrity does transmit men's name with more honor; yea, makes it have a
sweeter savor in their generations, than either riches or outward preferment:
yea, that there is a great difference betwixt the memorial of the righteous,
and of the wicked, even to the conviction of the world.

EIGHT. That verily there is a God who judges in the earth, Ps. 58. 11. who
does render unto men vengeance, and does pursue the transgressor, because of
sin, is a truth, which the world has in every age by many convincing instances
held forth to them, where they may see the Scripture clearly verifyed.

I have a little touched this in the second Argument how the accomplishing of
Scripture threatenings is witnessed to the observation of the Church, and to
those who are wise to discern the times, wherein they live. I shall here point
at this truth, as it is in the providence of God, written in such great
letters, as are obvious to the view of the World, so as most common observers
cannot pass this without a remark. It is true, much may be laid over to that
great general assize of the last judgment, that day of retribution; yea,
sometimes we see the most wicked and vile go in peace to the grave; the
sovereignty of God does also appear very observably in the different measure
and kind of punishment; and it is too evident, how prone men are to look more
to the interest that second causes have in such a thing, than to a divine hand:
but this is also sure, that the Lord is known on the earth by the judgments
which he executes, and in every age does set up such convincing examples
before men, that the greatest Atheist may see, yea, often their conscience must
break the jay^, restrain it as they will, and force this acknowledgement, that
such judgments can be no casual thing; while something of a power higher than
man, and a clear verifying of the word, are so discernable therein.

Now to demonstrate this truth, I would offer some things which may show how
very near this comes to the observation of men, so as none can be a stranger
thereto, or want conviction of this piece of the truth of God, except they
willingly shut their eyes, while it is clear,

1. That the very Heathens, who never knew the Scripture, nor a written Law,
have yet so much of a natural conscience, that not only they can put some
difference between virtue and vice, but even in some measure can discern God's
putting some difference betwixt the same, and how flagitious crimes use to be
punished by a divine hand. We may say, time could never yet wear out the
observation of this truth, through the World: and though many things may be
received and credited, which not having a sure ground do quickly evanish (it
being truth's privilege still to out live falsehood) yet it is sure, how in the
darkest parts of the earth, this has been still noticed with a special remark,
and transmitted from one age to another; yea, the records of the nations, even
by heathen writers, show what remarkable punishment has followed cruel
oppression, Covenant Breaking, and such other gross sins against the second
table; yea, how these have been the usual forerunners of great strokes on
Kingdoms and families.

2. Does not the World see, that in those remarkable judgments, which have come
on a Nation and People, there is something higher than instruments, or second
causes, which may be very evident in bringing the same about: so that all who
go by, must confess, such is no casual occurrence, nor does arise out of the
dust, but that surely a divine hand is there? And truly, though some desolating
strokes are very terrible in themselves, and blood and ruins should be no
matter of pleasure; yet, whereas thereby that stately sound is heard, even his
voice who makes the earth to tremble, and God is made known to the sons of
men, we should not only with fear, but even some holy congratulation consider
his work. Now to clear what a convincing witness these are to this truth, I
shall point at some very obvious remarks, which I am sure the World cannot
contradict, of the Lord's own immediate hand in such judgments. -- (1.) That
strange concurrence of providence, which uses to appear when God is against a
People; how all things will then conspire, as a fatal conjunction, to work
their woe and ruin, that men may see, surely this is from the Lord, who is
wonderful in counsel, and from a hand against which there is no striving. (2.)
How such remarkable strokes are seen to fall in with some great and remarkable
height of sin in such a nation and People; so that it is easy then for all
lookers on to confess the righteousness of God thereon. -- (3.) When judgment
is coming on a land, it may appear how instruments are raised, and in a more
then ordinary way acted with all advantages for such a piece of service. --
(4.) There is a visible blasting then both of counsel and strength, and those
means, which otherways looked most probable; how remarkably such are
confounded, even in the use of their ordinary abilities, and their heart and
usual courage taken from them, while the Lord is on a work of judgment. -- (5.)
That astonishing success, which is usually seen to follow those whom the Lord
sends forth to execute his judgment; how then they move swiftly, and with
vigor; they do not stumble, or weary; it is neither rivers nor walled cities
can stand in their way; mountains are made valleys, to show it is the Lord,
whose hand in that day is strong upon them, to strengthen their loins, and make
the sword and ax sharp for his service. (6.) Amidst these various strokes which
come on a land, can men pass that of the Pestilence without some special note?
where God's immediate hand, something supernatural, above ordinary or natural
causes, may be clearly seen, in its strange progress and spreading, which like
lightning does often go through cities and countries in a small time! Do not these
tell, aloud to the World that they come not unsent, and without some special
commission; and that there is no striving against them, nor are ordinary means
effectual in some such extraordinary plagues, until he who brought it on, do
also by his own hand take it off.

3. Very obvious even to the world is that clear resemblance, which is often
betwixt sin, and the stroke: how holy justice does keep a proportion, and does
shape out the judgment so exactly, both in measure and kind, that it may be
easy to see the stroke pointing (as with an hand) to the cause, by its
discernable likeness; and both at the righteous judgment of God, which thus
measure out to men, as they have dealt with others. We see how the Lord judged
Agag, and Adonibezeck; how Sodom's burning lust was punished with fire from
heaven: Yea, what even David had measured out for his murder and adultery; for
the one, the sword shall not depart from his house, and for the other, his
wives by his own son abused. And truly every age's observation can witness this
truth from many convincing examples, that there is a God who judges in the
earth. It being often seen if men would seriously observe, (1.) How an universal
overspreading of sin in a land, has usually some national and universal stroke
following. -- (2.) That blood waits on bloody men, and suffers them not often
to live out half their days; one oppressor punished by another: the unmerciful
man paid home in his own coin, by such as shall show as little mercy to him,
or his. -- (3.) How the proud and insolent, who do most hunt after outward
glory, are usually punished with some humbling abasing stroke. He pours
Contempt on princes; and such who will not honor God, shall not obtain that
honor they seek from men. -- (4.) That such who have been most given up to
Uncleanness, are often seen not to increase as to their Posterity, but their
issue observably made to fail; yea, by a divine hand rooted out: sure many such
signal examples might be instanced. -- (5.) How such who have chosen sin, to
shun trouble and suffering, have in their sinful way got as large a measure
thereof, as that man, who in Q. Mary's time said, he could not burn for the
truth, and therefore forsook it, by an unseen hand, had both himself and his
house in one night burnt. -- (6.) That the treacherous and deceitful men are
thus dealt with by others, yea, children who have been undutiful to their
parents, have from their's met with the same recompense. -- (7.) That whilst
men, to make a purchase, have even denied themselves the necessary use of
outward things, they are often seen to leave their estate to such, who do quickly
waste and scatter the same; and thus the sinful parsimony of parents is
punished with the prodigality of such who succeed them. -- (8.) That the
frequent use of some dreadful imprecations is often punished by the Lord with a
suitable stroke, to the conviction both of themselves and observers (9) How
such as have joined together, and united themselves against the truth, have
been visibly broken as to their own private interest: and truly we must say,
there is often such a conjunction of very convincing circumstances, in some acts
of the judgment of God, with such a resemblance to the sin, yea, judgment
sometimes pursuing men in the very place, where the sin has been acted, that
it may be easy for all who (...), to say, there is indeed a God who judges in
the earth.

4. Does it not appear, how very convincing and obvious this truth is even to
the World, from those ordinary remarks and proverbial sayings, which we find in
all ages and in every part of the earth, even the most rude and ignorant have
had, of the judgment of God. For truly what else are these but an express
witness, how universally this truth is known, and received by men, how much the
World is convinced thereof, through a long tract of observation, from the
fathers to the children: yea, thence they have had a divinity of their own,
drawn out thereof; how such sins do not use to pass without some exemplary
punishment. Now I would but name some few of these remarks, that have been most
usual in all times. (1.) How some families have not thriven, but a secret
judgment has been discernable thereon, since they had hand in some gross acts
of wickedness, such as bloodshed; their former prosperity from such a day
visibly declining. -- (2.) How that an evil purchase uses not to be of long
continuance, but their estate often in a very strange and unsensible may made to
vanish, which their children though frugal can by no means keep up: and the
cause hereof men do easily point at, it was purchased by fraud, transmitted
with a curse cleaving thereto, and so there was no warding off the judgment of
God. -- (3.) Such who do not much consider God's controversy, yet are often
forced to remark, that since some have meddled or matched with such an house,
they have sadly smarted thereby, something of a curse even following the race
and posterity of some. -- (4.) How sacrilegious meddling with that which has
been for a pious and public use, has caused a visible waste and consumption
in their own estate. -- (5.) That men's asking counsel from the Devil, and
turning to that quarter for their help, does usually resolve in a sad and
tragic close; and truly this, many in the shutting up of their life have been
forced to confess. -- (6.) That falsehood does not use to keep its feet, nor a
wicked way long prosper, what ever it seem to at the first view: yea, I may
add, as one of the world's remarks, which they cannot well shun, that which
seems was an ordinary saying in the time of Esther, that it is not safe
troubling the Church, or for men to state themselves in opposition to that
party; and I dare not question, but this shall be yet as convincing and obvious
to the World, as it has been in any former ages.

5. Is not the appearance of a divine hand often very obvious to the World in the
discovery of sin, and bringing to light some gross acts of wickedness, even in
extraordinary way? while its seen, (1.) By what strange unexpected means these
have been brought forth; such an astonishing affliction, and concurrence of
things therein, as has forced not only lookers on to some special remark, but
has even struck the guilty party through the heart with wonder, and conviction
of the same. -- (2.) How the hand of Justice pursuing men for some notorious,
and public crime, does often bring to light some that have been most secret,
which they thought the World could never reach: yea, it may be frequently seen
while men have been in one fin found out, it has also brought forth the
discovery of some other, and forced them to confess, that it was a righteous
judgment pursuing them for the same. It is a thing also known, yea, by many
undeniable instances witnessed, that mavelous discovery of concealed murder,
by the bleeding of the body upon the touch of the murderer. I confess, it
should be hard to assert the lawful and warrantable practice of such an appeal
to so extraordinary and stupendous a sign from the Lord, where Scripture goes
not clearly before us: but on the other hand, such a thing so surely tried for
such an end, and in the case where all ordinary means of discovery have been
wanting, I think, calls us to a serious remark thereof, while it so visibly
seems to witness his hand, who does make inquisition for blood.

6. Is not the dreadful consternation, those tormenting fears, which men after
some gross acts of wickedness do bewray, a very obvious witness to this truth,
that there is a God who judges on the earth, in whose hands it is a terrible
thing to fall, and shows, how great a punishment wickedness is to its self?
Truly if Atheists turn not brutish and stupid, they must notice this, and
confess a thing which does so often reach their ears, what have been the horrid
cries of many dying men, who have most sported with sin in their life; that may
tell standers by, there is a Judge who can stretch forth his hand on the soul
and conscience, whereto no rack or outward torment is any way comparable.

7. I would further add; those extraordinary signs and prodigies, which do
usually go before some stroke and judgment on a land, do they not clearly point
at a divine hand in the same? For as these are a solemn forewarning from
Heaven, to give men an alarm, before remarkable changes, the truth whereof the
World cannot deny; so we must say, they are a convincing testimony, that these
judgments are no casual things, which the Atheist cannot answer; it being so
clear, (1.) That such signs and prodigies have been in every age visible to the
World's experience, and the gravest histories both of ancient and latter times,
do fully witness. -- (2.) That such things should also be previous to great
revolutions in the World, we know the Scripture is most express, Joel. 2. 30.
Luke 21. 11. And as we should guard against any superstitious respect, we
should also beware of stupid Atheistical inadvertency at these strange works of
the Lord, which call both for fear and observation. -- (3.) That such have been
usually previous to great calamities and judgments on a People, is a thing that
all ages must witness; even those, who have been most cautious and discerning
in their time, who could not shun this as a remark. Herodotus does set that
down as a thing most sure, in his sixth Book. Cum Deus puniturus est gentem and
urbem prodigiis, id solet significare. And Lucan could tell what went before
the Romans civil wars, -- Superique minaces Prodigiis terras implerunt. Yea, it
can hardly be instanced any great change or revolution in the earth, which has
not had some such extraordinary Herald going before. -- (4.) Can the World deny
how sometimes these prodigious signs have been shaped out to point at the very
nature of the stroke then imminent, by a strange resemblance to the same; such
as a flaming sword in the air, the appearance of armies fighting even sometimes
upon the earth, to the view of many, most sober and judicious Spectators, also
showers of blood, the noise of drums, and such like, which are known usually to
go before wars and commotions.

NINTH. That there are evil spirits, (Ephesians. 6. 12. Rev. 20. 2, 3.) and a
Diabolical power, such as the Scripture has held forth, whose constant work is
the ruin and undoing of man, is a truth, not only witnessed from that
experience Christians have of their assault but is undeniable by the world, and
greatest Atheists, except they deny the discovery of sense, as well as reason.

I confess, it may cause fear and astonishment, to think on this, that spirits
so knowing and once originally excellent, have fallen thus into such an height
of indignation against infinite goodness, that it is now their only aim and
pleasure, to dishonor God, and destroy his image in man. It should indeed
cause us to fear him, that spared not the Angels who sinned. But the truth it
self is sure, that such a party is at this day encompassing the earth, and
trafficking up and down there: to prove which by arguments, were to light a
candle to let men see that it is day, while it is known what ordinary familiar
converse many have therewith, and alas too easy to discern that power, which
the prince of this World has upon the children of disobedience. How obvious
are the marks of his conquest almost every where; Thousands lying in his
chains! How far do we see many transformed into the very image of the Devil;
which in those desperate prodigious acts of wickedness that are often in the
world, may appear; such, whereat we should think human nature, though corrupt,
could not but tremble, yea, look on with horror! how many in all ages have even
been in an express covenant with them? and is not there a great part of the
earth, where the Devil is visibly and audibly known, where he has a kind of
neighborhood with men? But there being no need for such a demonstration, I
only here aim to hold forth what a concerning truth this is, and of great
consequence, if seriously considered; yea, how both the Scripture, and
Christian Religion, is hereby evidently confirmed since these things must
necessarily follow, --

1. That in this the Scripture is truly fulfilled, which does witness what
these Spirits are, adversaries to man; in their nature and Inclination
desperately evil; whose actings in the earth have a visible tendency to men's
hurt and ruin; yea, their pretended savours always directed to that end; whence
we see such a natural inbred horror, which is in man against them.

2. That it is no common thing, which they so much pursue; something more
precious than the body, for which so great and cruel an adversary is in
continual labor; for their actings have no such tendency to ruin men's estate
in the World: no, it is most evident, this is the soul, the immortal soul, to
undo them in that great interest, is the mark, whereat they level; that poor
man might be sharer of that misery, under which they are concluded.

3. Is it not an undeniable consequence of this truth, that there must be an
invisible World, that has inhabitants of another kind than such as are here;
that sure there is some being above man; yea, a real correspondence betwixt men
and Spirits? And should not man, thus placed in a middle estate betwixt the
Angels and the beasts here below, partaking in his body with the one, but in
his reasonable soul with the other, thence raise himself to thoughts of some
more excellent condition, for which he is framed, than a sensual life; and that
surely the soul has an interest in another world, which he should most look
after?

4. Must not this also be sure, that there is an invisible guard; and these
desperate Spirits are under restraint, by a power stronger than they, which can
bound their malice? For, this may be certain, that these who have so great
enmity to man who are so near, and have such advantages over us, could not keep
at such a distance, but that they are kept in chains by a higher power.

5. How is it that now by the Gospel and within this precinct of the Church,
Satan's power is so much restrained, in respect of former times; while it is
known, what a familiar converse they had with men, did even haunt their houses,
and were so public in their appearance under such names of Faries and
Brounies, which since the breaking out of the light of the Gospel has not
been? Yea, has not the Devil to this day an open throne and dominion in those
parts of the earth, where Christ is not worshipped? It is also known, how the
oracles of old did cease, and that public worship, which the world for many
ages had given them, with the very time of Christ's appearance, and breaking
out of the Gospel; these night-beasts getting to their dens, when once the day
was broke. Plutarch and other heathen writers are witness to this.

6. Whence is it that within the Church, where Satan is most restrained, yet
there he does more stir, than in all the world besides? Does it not show, that
that is the party with which he is at war? Hence does he more rage, the more
clear the light shines: yea, is there not seen something, besides men's
natural enmity at the truth, even a fury and violence, wherewith some are
visibly driven, in their acting with such an unsatiable cruelty against the
followers of Christ, without the least shadow of provocation, as holds forth a
lively resemblance of the Devil, and some violent pressure and incitement from
that quarter!

7. Is it not sure, that there is such a party, by this, that he is an
adversary to God and holiness; for which reason he does so impetuously tempt
and press men to the outward acts of sin? Yea, that there is a Spirit of
blasphemy, which so visibly rages in the world, and acts men to war against
Heaven with their tongues, by cursing and blasphemous oaths, which has no
carnal pleasure or gain, but yet they can not forbear; from a violent
incitement, which may be seen swaying ^o the same.

8. Whence is it, which is so very known and notorious that those horrid
wretches who give themselves to the Devil, cannot enter in any formal
engagement without renouncing Christ and their baptism? does at not show that
direct opposition he stands in to Christ, yea, to the very name and shadow of
Christianity?

9. Whence is it that even the grossest Atheists, upon any appearance of the
Devil, or apprehension from that quarter, will not then make scorn of prayer,
but burn in earnest to that, which at other times they mocked? O does it not
show, men's Atheism is their judgment; that not only there is a dreadful horror
and fear, which by nature men have of these evil Spirits, but some inbred sense
also and impression of a Deity, which does bewray it self, whither they will or
not, in a pressing strait and extremity!

TENTH. That there is such an enmity betwixt the seed of the woman, and the
Serpent, as the Scripture has held forth, is very manifest: a truth, wherein
the world may see the Scripture clearly verified, Gal. 4. 29.

It is truly strange, that this puts not men to more serious thoughts, to
pursue such a thing to its true rise, what should cause such a violent and
unreasonable contrariety against the ways and followers of God; for here, upon
grave reflections, they must needs see, that their way in this is a convincing
witness to the truth of the Scripture, which might put them in some other
humor, yea, help to turn this poison into an antidote against it self. But
this is sure and undeniable, the discovery whereof cannot but stare the
greatest Atheist in the face, from these convincing evidences.

1. That it is seen, no private quarrel which ever was among men, has been
with such vigor and malice pursued, as this upon the account of religion;
which has still put the World more in a flame, than any private interest: yea,
it is very manifest how men are carried with the stream of their own natural
inclination, to oppose the Church and People of God.

2. That this seed and enmity could (...) be taken up through all the
successions of time; a strife which is not late begun, to be seen only in one
age, betwixt the children of the bondwoman, and of the free. No, the most sage
and wise amongst men, the greatest Peacemakers, could yet never fall on a way
to reconcile these two parties; but the children have still served themselves
heirs to the quarrel and hatred of their fathers against the Church.

3. Is it not seen, that those who are more civil, and can hold a little up
with the form of religion, yet will break forth in greatest rage against the
power thereof, when once it begins to appear? It is indeed here, that inbred
contrariety, which is in men against holiness, does bewray it self, even in
those who are otherways noted for a calm and peaceable disposition, while once
they begin to be scorcht with its heat.

4. What strong natural antipathy is this, which causes men to pursue with so
much bitterness those from whom they never had any personal injury? Sure their
conscience must often tell, that they have no reason, or any other provocation,
than what is from the appearance of the image of God in such: but this is their
nature and disposition, an enmity which they can no more help, than they can
change their nature, or the Leopard can change its spots.

5. Form what a strong inclination, and inward principle, does the World thus
act in its opposition to the Church and followers of God? whilst it is clear,
though these were never so quiet and peaceable yet their enemies are still
restless, and cannot sleep beside them.

6. It is seen, how this does separate betwixt nearest friends and relations
and alienate such who have sometimes been most dear to other: no bond in nature
so strait, which it will not break. It does often set the husband against the
wife, and the parents against the children; Yea, when religion once breaks out
in a corner of a land, or a family, does it not then make a visible jar, and
put all in a flame.

7. It is clear, that when once grace appears in men, they are as a sign and
wonder to a profane generation. The World does then sensibly change her
countenance, and looks like a stepmother: while on other hand it is clear,
that professors turning loose, and running to an excess of riot with others,
will cause their old adversaries to warm toward them; and alas, proves the
surest way to gain men's friendship, while the World thinks, they are their
own, when once they turn profane.

ELEVENTH. That the Creature is made subject to vanity, because of sin: which
not only the wisest of men, but the Spirit of God, does witness, that things
here beneath the sun, are indeed vanity, and vexation of spirit, (Romans 8. 20.
Eccles. 2. 11.) is a piece of the Scripture, in such great letters written
forth to the view of men, that none can be strangers thereto.

It is true, the cause, and solid remedy of this so general a complaint, are
only reached by the Godly man; who knows how to read the vanity of the
creature, as a piece of the fulfilling of the word, and does seriously consider
things as they are, and not as they appear. But it is also sure, that in every
age through the various changes of man's life this is so clearly witnessed,
that the most gross and brutish cannot shift the conviction thereof: but in one
of these two times have been forced to a public acknowledging of the same; at
death, when they are leaving the World, or in a day of strait, when the World
is leaving them. How to demonstrate this, I shall he^^ but offer these few
queries.

1. Have not the greatest instances of the glory of the World, been usually the
greatest examples of its vanity, and change? How few has ambition raised, but
it has also ruined; yea, given the sorest fall to those it had lifted most
high? What sudden changes do attend great men, and high places; which those who
sit low, do escape? Sure, if the tragedies of Princes, and such who in their
condition have been raised above others, were put by themselves in record, it
would make a great volumn, and show how their glory and prosperous estate did
only make their fall the more observable.

2. Is it not obvious, what a frail dying disposition is in all worldly things;
that even the greatest Kingdoms and politic bodies, to maintain which neither
policy nor strength was wanting, yet like natural bodies of men had their
inevitable periods, their youth and flourishing times, their declining and old
age, and at last been brought to their grave? Has not the glory of greatest
Empires and Monarchies sunk in the dust? yea, scarce a heap of stones left this
day, to tell us where once famous cities have stood, Nun^ Seges est ubi Troja
suit: the ruins whereof and such excellent pieces of the World, does clearly
show that certain dissolution of the whole far brick at last.

3. What a small distance we may see betwixt extremities in outward things,
even greatest plenty and poverty, the highest place and a low condition! So
that the morning has seen some happy and flourishing in the World, whom the
evening has seen miserable: and in a most short time, such who have been
objects of envy and admiration, made the object of men's contempt and pity;
yea, have so suddenly disappeared, have sunk into so little bounds, that men
have been put narrowly to confider them, and with admiration ask, Are these
they who were once a terror in the land of the living! And their place has
not been found, who a few days before seemed to place themselves alone in the
midst of the earth?

4. What else is it but the very present moment of time, that makes such a
difference betwixt the rich and poor? since as to what is past, and the former
time, men's happiness and misery may be reckoned as though it has never been.
Nam quicquid retroest, m^rs tenet. And who but a fool would boast of that which
is to come, a thing so uncertain? This only is sure, that a few days will make
all conditions equal, when the bones of the rich, and the dust of greatest
Princes, will not be discernable from those of the poor man.

5. Is there any thing so pleasant, which has not a worm at the root thereof,
a moth which naturally breeds in the most satisfying enjoyments, that quickly
eats out the heart thereof, and blasts their hope before the harvest? How often
is greatest longing, in the pursuit of things, turned to loathing and
weariness, when obtained? because it is not the nature of the thing, so much as
an humor, and the novelty thereof, that makes them pleasant. Hence many
sensual men have turned Monastic, and greatest. Monarchs become melancholy;
yea, how usual is it for many to survive their pleasures, and bury their joy
and delights in the World, even before themselves; while nothing remains of all
their former enjoyments, but some sad sighs and groans with a heavy farewell.

6. Is it not found that riches, and abundance of the earth does load more than
it fills, and men's wealth only further heighten their wants? How very poor are
some amidst their fullness; more than those who earn their bread with sore
labor; whom the world does wholly possess, while they do not all possess it,
neither is it in their power to make use of that they have. Yea, are they not
sick and die in Princes courts, as well as in the meanest cottage, and the
complaints of the great and rich usually more than those of the poor? Sure it
is known, that the great man does oftener want a stomach and rest, than the poor
want meat and a bed to ly in.

7. In what an endless circle do voluptuous man move, from one thing to
another; in a perpetual search after other enjoyments, to satisfy their
spirits? It shows what a great want is there, which still calls for variety
of things, and some fresh supply, to take off the weariness of one pleasure by
another: else the delight they have therein, would quickly languish and wear
out. Yea, is it not still found, that the best of outward things are not, on a
near approach, what they seemed to be at a distance? the eye not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing! But the more they are pressed, the less they
yield. Neither do they enjoy such things with most satisfaction, who take a
full draught, who wallow and steep themselves in their enjoyments; being more
in expectation, than in possession; so that sometime men's attaining their
desire has caused their delight, and pleasure in these things to cease.

8. It is also clear, that outward things are incident to the worst, without
making them the better; and separable from the best, without making them the
worse; and what can silver, or gold suit an immortal soul, or answer such a
capacity, more than virtue and godliness could answer to fill an empty chest or
glass bottle?

9. How rare is it for men to get their lot in the World brought up to their
desire? But are still at some jar with their present condition; so that often
there needs no more to turn men discontented, but the thought of some lot,
which they apprehend more satisfying than their own; the want whereof makes
them more disquieted than all their enjoyments are pleasing. Yea, it is also
evident, many men's labor and disquiet does increase with their wealth, and
turns the flame more violent; and that even in the condition of the poor there
is something the great man is made to envy, while the poor may find cause of
times to pity and compassionate some great men in the midst of their prosperous
estate.

10. What is the enjoying of the best of the earth, but its very passing away,
while it perishes in the present use? And what! Are not men going through the
world, and leaving it behind them, in the midst of their most satisfying
enjoyments? Is not the excellency of most outward things only according to
opinion, or the institution of men, while they have but small intrinsic worth
from their own quality? In some parts of the earth, whiteness is reckoned
deformity, and the blackest color the greatest beauty, and therefore they
paint the Devil white: What a poor smoke is swelling titles of honor, if
soberly weighed? while the proud man's happiness does some way hang upon the
poor who go by, which they must beg from others with the greatest artifice: And
would the choicest jewels, or a bag of gold laid upon the heart of a dying man,
any way quiet his spirit, or ease his pain? Surely this is vanity.

11. Is it not often seen amidst the various changes of the earth, Princes and
great men walking on foot, and servants riding on horseback; the children often
put to ask an alms, from such who have served their fathers? fools loaded with
wealth, and great styles, while men of the choicest spirit are buried under
contempt and poverty? yea, do we not see how quickly men are cried up, and down
in the World? That which in one age is raised, is often rased in another; yea,
many at much labor to undo that which others have done with greatest care and
expense? what a sore vanity is this!

12. Will not the want of a very small thing often embitter the pleasantest lot,
and turn it into wormwood, and gall? The smallest touch of pain, the gravel, or
tooth-ake, yea, even some melancholy thought, will make men disrelish all their
present enjoyments. What torment does a small ruffle and affront often prove to
the proud man, even in the midst of his glory? is it not also found, how carnal
mirth and joy of men wallowing in the delights of the World, has still in the
close a bitter sting and harsh reflection, which as the shadow attends the
body, is the native and unseparable consequent thereof. And surely that may be
easy to discern, there is no condition, which can want a cross, or some mixture
of discontent, even where there is least seen cause.

I would add, which cannot want a remark in every time, that while men seem to
be at the top, and furthest period of their thoughts and projects, have things
according to their desire brought to some happy close, they are often then upon
some turn and change in their condition, either by death or some very sad
cross, and even in that day their thoughts have perished. Truly such as are
wise observers of the World, and of the course of things therein, may often see,
how usual an occurrance this is, that when there is too bright a sunshine in
outward prosperity, if great sobriety and moderation do not accompany the same,
it is an ominous and fatal presage of a storm, and ad summum quicquid venit,
and exitium prope est.

TWELFTH. There is this truth, which has in all ages been clearly witnessed,
even to the conviction of the World, that the end of the upright man is peace;
and integrity, what ever rub it may seem to have by the way, yet has a sweet
and comfortable close. Psalm. 37. 37.

This is an undeniable truth, not only because the saints are then entering into
perfect peace: but it is also clear, that however the godly man may have very
sharp assaults in the close of his days, and some who have shined very bright,
do set in a dark cloud, their evening full of sorrow and bitterness, yea, their
reflection on some sad slip, which they have made by the way, bearing them
company even to the grave; yet this truth is still verified, yea, may be
descernable to the conviction of the world, that integrity and an upright walk
has much peace in the end, and does land men upon a comfortable harbor: as to
which, I can appeal to the World, and the most ordinary observers, if this has
not been often very convincing, and discernable to them; from many instances of
the Lord's usual way with those who have been faithful in their generation, at
their death; from that testimony which they have then given to this, yea, from
most visible signs and evidences hereof, even upon their countenance and
carriage: whilst it is seen, --

1. How great an advantage such use to have above others, when Death
approaches; so that it has not been Balaam's wish alone, to die the death of
the righteous, and to have his latter end like theirs, but the worst of men are
still forced to witness their respect to the lot of a dying Christian, and
would wish a share thereof when it comes to their turn; about which I may ask
the greatest mockers at Religion and at the life of a Godly man, if they can
possibly shun this conviction, that surely such are at the best estate, and at
the greatest advantage, in their end.

2. This I am sure cannot be hid from the World, that abundant peace the saints
do then testify in their choice; what a present unspeakable complacency they
have with this, that they valued Christ above all other advantages, did choose
affliction rather than fin; and now while they are turning their face to the
wall, find the witness of a good conscience, and in God's approbation so sweet
a feast, that their joy and peace on this account, they can not smother or keep
in, but declare to all who stand by, what they find. And truly it has been often
seen, how the inward joy which some of these have had, has exceeded their
outward pain, been more sensible to them, than their sickness; yea, they have
been in leaving the World much more cheerful than those whom they left behind.

3. It is also known, and may be very obvious to standers by, how with a sweet
composure and recumbency of soul such have laid themselves upon the promise, in
that hour, while they were grapling with the king of terrors; their spirit then
quiet and calm, having taken the truth and testimony of God for their shield
and buckler: which may tell the World what another kind of security and
confidence these have beyond others; yea, that surely the the ground on which
this confidence is founded, must be a thing that is able to bear out the
greatest storm and assault, and is something above nature.

4. Is it not clear, that even an untimely and violent death could not hinder
or frustrate that peace, which integrity causes in the close? For innumerable
instances can witness what mavelous joy and satisfaction the Saints have
showed at a stake, and upon a scaffold; and thence have had more cheerful going
out of time, than the rich man stretched upon his soft bed, or the greatest
Monarch amidst all outward advantages. Sure we must say, that sweet refreshing
close of the upright man has never been more visible, and writ in greater
letters, than in such a case.

5. What very sad conflicts have some of the Saints had in their life: yea,
even upon the setting of the sun have been put to cry out through fore
perplexing fears, and doubts, wherewith they have been assaulted, who have at
last had this turned into a song, and such a mavelous change in their case,
as has not been more sensible to themselves, than discernable to all lookers
on, like a sudden calm and sunshine, after some dark storm. I must here ask the
Atheist, and such as reckon Godliness but a fancy, whence should so strange, so
sudden and great alteration proceed; that those who a little before were under
such horror, could have no rest, no arguments could serve their turn, do thus
witness the abundant peace of their souls; yea, (which is often seen) that
fervent desire, wherewith some of the Saints are taken away, the very luster of
heaven being upon their countenance! How mavelous and piercing are their
words, which may clearly tell that now they feel, they see, and have got some
glance of that, which lookers on cannot reach, though they cannot deny an
acknowledgment of this.

6. Must not the World grant, yea, the greatest enemies to godliness allow this
charity, that sure this peace and joy which such have witnessed at death, can
be no counterfeit? That there is no temptation could thus bias them to deceive
others, and themselves, in a matter of such high concernment; and at a time,
when it is expected, the grossest of men would speak truth; yea, that this does
appear, while men cannot in the least charge dying Christians, with any
distemper in their judgment, but while they have been most composed, stayed,
and present in mind, and as to other things of their concernment, most
deliberate and sober; even then they have born this witness.

() Since that peace and joy, which integrity has in the close of the day,
when the Saints are dying, is undeniable, even to the conviction of the World,
I would add something about that great truth, The immortality of the soul, and
its subsisting after death: to which this joy, when the Christian is finishing
his course, has a special respect; and is a truth, wherein the Scriptures
accomplishment, and the certainty of that blessed record, may be convincingly
witnessed, and demonstrated to the World. For it is thus (I mean, by the light
of the Scripture) that life and immortality is brought to light, and made known
to the sons of men. I know, this seems so common and uncontroverted a thing, an
after-being of the soul, and its eternal subsistence, that to essay more than
the naming of it may be looked on as impertinent. But oh, how unknown a truth
is it! of which there needs no more to show the little solid persuasion men
have, but that it is so usually passed with so few, and these very common
thoughts. It is not indeed much questioned, not because it is believed and men
are sure thereof, but because they are not in earnest about such a thing. It
concerns the World to keep at a distance from a thorough knowing of that which
would be their torment to know; and there is cause for this sad regret within
the Church, that the most great and fundamental truths, wherein our comfort is
most concerned, are usually least studied. But O should it not put us to other
thoughts, if we could have a serious view of this? It may truly be said, the
better part is so buried in the worst part, that until men are dying, few lay
this to heart, that their souls must live for ever, yea, must once part
fellowship with the body, and enter in another World, and an unknown state,
until the resurrection. What I intend here, is only a short touch at this great
truth, as it is a convincing witness to the Scripture, and the accomplishment
thereof; about which I would offer these three to be considered. 1. How express
and clear a testimony the Scripture gives to this. 2. On what plain and
undeniable grounds of reason this truth is demonstrable to the world. 3. How
great a thing it is, to believe and be assuredly persuaded thereof: for it
seems, men rather dream, than have their judgments seriously exercised, or are
in earnest about such a thing.

As to the first, It is undeniable that not only the Scripture holds this
forth, but that there only men have a clear and right discovery of it. It is
indeed known, what glances the world has had of this, yea, what has been writ
thereon, by some whose sole guide was the light of nature, in this search. But
it is no less evident, how very dark and uncertain, these have been: they could
not shift some conviction thereof, but it was through a dark cloud, and as some
pleasant dream, they looked thereon; because they did not know its rise and
original, and what the end was, to which in its actings it ought to be
directed; they knew not what its after-condition could truly mean. Hence with
such wavering and uncertainly do they express their thoughts. I do not here
mean the schools of Epicurus only, to whom the soul was but a complexion of
atoms; but ye see how perplexed and uncertain both Aristotle and others of
those famous ancients have showed themselves about this: which speaks out more
some perplexed and disordered notion, which they could not ward off, than any
clear and certain discovery which they had on solid grounds thereof; for they
knew not the Scripture, where its original, whence it is and whither it must
return, is so clearly held forth. Eccl. 12. 7. And you may further see, Heb.
12. 9. Genesis 2. 7. Luke 16. 22, 23. 1 Pet. 3. 9

2. This grave testimony, which the Scripture of God does bear to such a truth,
may be also held forth to the world from such a clear and rational
demonstration, that the most brutish of men can hardly sink so far into the
condition of a beast, as to deny they have a never-dying soul, which will not
go to he dust or inherit corruption with the body. I should be loath to borrow
so much of your time, by any discourse on a subject, which by others has been
so much handled; for which there are many, many arguments, unanswerably
demonstrative of this truth, both Physical and Moral; yet having mentioned it,
I cannot altogether pass the same without a touch at some few, that may be most
convincing and obvious. (1.) If you should question the being and subsistence
of the soul after death, you must also deny its frame; that it is a simple,
immaterial and active substance, which has neither quantity nor parts, and is
not compounded of any principles, and therefore can be resolved to none. --
(2.) Do but consider, if the soul have no cause of corruption, and from to
contraries can suffer opposition, at the body does, through the prevalency of
heat or cold, how should it then admit of a dissolution with the body! For you
know generation and corruption they are by contraries. And if you argue from
any natural cause, it must surely be one of two, which makes the soul partake
with the body in its decay and mouldering down; either a dependence on matter,
as the soul of the beast has, which is but a material form, or a conflict from
contrary qualities, which you know helps the bodies wasting and its fall: but I
think, you would not so far contradict reason, as to allege any of these
concerning the soul of man. -- (3.) Consider, if by those diseases to which the
body is subject, the soul is not reached, must it not also have a distinct
existence from it? And I am sure, you must grant, the soul does not directly
suffer from any outward diseases; but the body may be under expressible pain
and anguish, when there is a sweet calm and serenity within. -- (4.) Does not
this witness, that the soul lies not a dying with the body, nor falls with it,
since it suffers no decrease, but is found strong and vigorous in its actings,
when the flesh is brought low, and on a visible decay? Yea, is it not at the
greatest advantage in its exercise and discerning, the more separate from the
body, and sensible things? Now it is sure, that cannot be destructive to the
soul in its being, which is so subservient to it in its operation. I think,
those who ever observed the joy and peace of a dying Christian, and the
excellent frame and composure of his soul, under a pained and languishing body,
through many diseases, may clearly see this truth, and there read a lecture of
the immortality of the soul. -- (5.) Will you consider, can the soul of man
have a dependence on the body in its being, when it does no way depend thereon
in its acting and exercise? For it is sure, it does truly act, yea has a clear
ratiocination, even when the body sleeps: and O does it not prove, that this
soul that is found waking, when the other is asleep, must have a distinct
subsistence, and live when that dies. (6.) If you admit that there are Spirits
and incorporeal beings, which do act without a body, and yet have a true and
real subsistence, can you doubt or question the existing of the soul, or its
exercising the faculties thereof, without the body, though you do not reach how
this should be? And if there be indeed a converse and intercourse betwixt us
and Spiritual beings, yea, a truth in fellowship with God the Father of
Spirits, O may not this satisfyingly demonstrate that existence and acting of
the soul; even when the body is at a distance and in the grave! -- (7.)
Consider, that which you must grant has a dominon and praeminence over the
body; by its making a rational choice of good when it is most cross to the
desire and delight of the flesh; yea can not only determine it to endure most
grievous torments, but does often witness a special delectation therein, must it
not be something truly distinct from the body, and what can have a subsistence
without it? Now this, I am sure, you will not deny, that there is such a
dominion over the flesh, and a captivating of it to the law of the mind; which
the most sensual and brutish will not deny in many instances, how little
acquaintance soever they have with it themselves. -- (8.) Since there is a
discovery and knowledge of things, not only above the reach and impressions of
sense, but even contrary thereto, that men do rationally judge and assent to
truths, which truly contradicts their senses, as the rotundity of the earth,
which sems to us a plain, etc. O does it not show, that this soul in man, which
can so far soar above the earth, and does so far exceed the body, must be of a
more excellent mould, and something truly different from it? I shall but add,
what means that war and struggling which to every Christian is known betwixt the
flesh and the Spirit; yea, to every man is known betwixt him and his natural
conscience? what mean those reflex acts of the soul on its self, those
mavelous products of the understanding, and new discovery? why are men so
anxious and concerned about their surviving name, which is a most poor airy
accident, not worth the regarding, if there were a destruction of the whole?
what means that mavelous deportment of so many martyrs for the truth, that
they should show such a joy and satisfaction amidst their torments, as though
they had no bodies; the pleasure of the soul so far overcoming the pain of the
flesh? what means so universal a consent to this truth, that those who hate and
fear it, yet cannot be rid thereof? and I must also ask, how are the choice and
the excellent of the earth so often crushed under the feet of their oppressors,
whilst these wretches do often wallow in all satisfying outward delights; yea,
sometimes go hence without bands in their death? In a word, O what is it that
makes so vast a difference betwixt men and beasts, since these you see have a
sensual life, want not some natural sagacity, and have their enjoyments by the
senses as well as man?

3. Let us consider how great and astonishing a truth this is. O immortality,
do men believe it (the soul's surviving the body, and that condition wherein it
will enter) and yet have so few thoughts thereof! For this is a matter of such
concernment, that may turn much of our life in a continued wondering. I must
say, can this be believed, our having an immortal soul, which is of a more
excellent nature and inestimable value, than these visible heavens, sun, moon
and stars; and which no less than the blood of him who was truly God, could
ransom from everlasting wrath, and yet that we put so small a price thereon! Is
it indeed believed by men, whilst they are so hot in their pursuit after the
world; since here is a question may silence all flesh, What should it avail a
man to gain were it the whole world, when it is purchased with the losing of
the soul? It is sure, there is no imaginable proportion betwixt that and a
piece of red earth, or betwixt a few years of time and long eternity. I
remember a passage of worthy Mr. Blair, our own country man, who the first time
he heard Mr. Bruce preach, said, The same of so great a man caused him to
expect something very extraordinary from him; but his whole Sermon did press
this truth of the soul's being immortal, and that it was a great thing to
believe it; he confessed, it did at first some way amuse him, why he dwelt so
much upon so known and common a subject: but after, he found it was some other
thing than appears at the first look; for which men may dispute, and toss it as
a notion in the schools, who never knew what it was to believe the truth
thereof; and that a serious impression of it on the heart is something else
than a swiming of it in the head, by some ordinary speculation of this. O what
a truth would it appear, and what astonishment would it cause, if men would but
some times go alone, and consider, -- (1.) What it is they have thus held out
to them, and how great a change is before them which ere many days must be in
their condition, when once that strange step is passed, betwixt time and
another world, which they can step but once. -- (2.) That this mavelous
change is truly near; time making long steps, the vessel under full sail, which
carries men forward, whether they sleep or wake, to that port: for it is sure,
this cannot be long deferred, and it is very unsure, but this night thy soul
may be required. -- (3.) That this change must be in a moment, in the very
twinkling of an eye, and no interval, but a present entering of the soul into
that after-state, which shall then put the Christian in the fullness of an
inconceivable joy, in the immediate presence of God, in the embracements of the
Mediator, amongst the angels, and spirits of the just made perfect; but one
moment also must put others out of their sensual pleasures and delights, the
Prince off his throne, and those who have been wallowing in the world, down to
those dark and horrid prisons, where with the ceasing of this world's melody,
they are forthwith met with that horrid noise and howling of the Devils and of
all the company of the damned. -- (4.) Oh! if men would consider, what thoughts
they shall then have in another world, of that other world, and what other
thoughts of their former state and condition; how far they will find this
beyond all they ever thought or conceived at a distance. -- ((...).) Should it
not cause astonishment to think seriously on this great change, which admits no
after-change; But that there long Eternity is the true measure of the soul's
duration after death! O what a long breathing-word, to be ever ever blessed or
miserable, where the one has no fear and can go no more out, and the other no
hope or possibility thereof! The hope of the hireling is not there, that he may
change his master at the next term; for these gates are everlastingly shut, by
the decree of him who alters not.

Now to shut up this argument, I shall offer one instance more, wherein the
world may see the truth of the Scripture, and therewith of a divine providence,
convincingly demonstrated, if prejudice did not draw a vail and obstruct so
excellent a discovery: it is this, That the way of God is perfect (Psalm. 18.
30.) and that his works are perfect; and his ways, judgment, (Deuteronomy. 32. 4.)
yea, that he does all things well (Mark. 7. 37.) which testimony then the
multitude was forced to bear to this great truth: And O how great a truth is
it! which can be said neither of Angels nor men, but to Him has a peculiar
respect, even to him alone, in whose way there is nothing crooked, no mistake,
no inequality, nothing too much or superfluous, nothing out of due time, that
is either too soon, or too late, nothing incongruous, nothing misplaced; yea,
in all he does nothing which is not best done, which any could rectify or make
better, but in every piece of his work leaves matter of wonder behind, and thus
declares himself to be God! I know, this is a truth the World cannot well bear,
but pretends a visible contradiction from the great disorder, that things here
seem to be in; for men will oppose to this, what a miscarrying there is of
instruments, what a strange emergency there is of most grievous and cross
accidents, the most promising means frequently blasted; yea, how good and evil
are so strangely interweaved; and is not the present day often undoing the work
and labor of the former? Yet whatever the World can say to darken this great
truth, That the way of the Lord is absolutely perfect, it must shine: yea, it
does not want clearness, when by a thick interposition betwixt us and the same,
there may be need of clearing it. The sun ceases not to shine, when the clouds
obstruct its brightness, as to us. O that those who will (...) so great a
truth, would but come near, and by a serious perpending, consider the work of
the Lord, then should they see so much in the daily tract and administration of
providence, yea, even in most ordinary passages thereof, that might arrest
their spirit with astonishment, the discovery whereof they shun, by keeping at
a distance from it.

I shall touch a little this demonstration, how this piece of divine truth is
verified and writ out in the event, to the observation of the World, that they
who cannot spiritually discern the same, yet have so much witnessed is to dazzle
their eyes, and force this acknowledgement, that the way of the Lord is
perfect, and he has done all things well! and for clearing, I would offer some
particulars, though few, yet so very comprehensive, that in a large measure
they reach not only th^se great works of God, wherein he most eminently
declares himself about the Church, but takes in also the most ordinary things
of providence, here under the sun, and therein demonstrates the certainty of
this truth.

First, you may see this clearly verified, that the way of the Lord is perfect,
in the whole frame and structure of the Church of Christ here; which is made a
great wonder, and an astonishing piece of the work of God, beyond the most
exquisite humane contrivance, that ever was. It is true, her glory, that does
most affect the eye, and ravish the heart, it is within, and lies not in the
common road of men's observation: yea, some parts of this excellent body
oftimes are in such a disorder, as darkens the beauty of the whole; there is
such an intermixture of the hay and stubble of humane inventions, with this
choice building, that helps to mar its order and beauty; the carved work also
may be spoiled and broken down, as with axes and hammers; yet with all these
disadvantages, there is a glory on the Church of Christ, an awful Majesty, such
convincing marks of its grandeur, even under its ruins, as have forced the
World, and the great men thereof, to consider that sight with wonder and
amazement, which you see Psalm. 48. they saw, they marvelled, and hasted away.
And the preceding words give clear reason, for God was known in her palaces
for a refuge. They saw something both in the grandeur and frame of the Church,
and in her preservation, that forced them to see that it was something more
than humane. Now to clear this a little, do but consider these few instances,
wherein you may see the great and stupendous fabric of the Church, and how
all things are there well ordered by him who has framed it. -- (1.) You may
see on what a sure foundation it is built, even that of the Prophets and
Apostles which is the Scripture of God, whereon as it is manifestly founded: it
is no less marvellously united and joined together in Jesus Christ, who is the
chief cornerstone: will you seriously consider the form of the house, and the
fashion thereof, its goings out and comings in, with all its ordinances, and
there you may see how marvellously exact and uniform this building is. (2.) Is
it not likewise obvious, that the Church, thus fitly joined together and knit,
by all that the joints do supply, in its whole complex frame grows up as a
building to the Lord? Yea, is there not a very strait union and correspondence
betwixt all the parts thereof in the same faith and worship; that though divided
in so many parcels through the World, yet is still one entire body, the union
whereof, the variety of members and these of such various sizes, that great
inequality amongst them in their growth, the remoteness of place, different
languages, exile or change of countries, yet cannot break off that near tie,
that joins the Church of Christ together. -- (3.) What a wonderful contrivance
is it, which is in the World, yet not of it? that spreads itself among the
Nations, yet loses not its own distinct being; is mixed with humane societies,
yet an enclosure and incorporation by her self; a fountain of sweet waters
sealed, though surrounded with this great salt Ocean of the world; is made up
of many particular Churches, yet every part homogeneous, and of the same nature
with the whole; and though it seems to be open to sore assaults, yet is a
defenced city, which is impaled, has both her walls and watchmen, her bulwarks
and strong towers! (4) This is of such a frame, that is both visible and
invisible, yet not two distinct Churches; though, under diverse considerations,
it comprehends both without any jar, and has communion with Jesus Christ as
her head for life; standing related to him as his mystical body, and yet as a
visible politic body, is related also to him, as its supreme head, by a
political government and guidance, and has an express charter granted for its
extents and rights. -- (5.) This must be said of it, though black, yet comely;
though it does not want some spots they do not so far mar its beauty, but, that
in all its several administrations there appears a singular grace. It has
indeed its blemishes and failings, yet every measure and degree thereof does
not forfeit her relation, rights, and priledges. -- (6.) Is it not a mavelous
frame, which does not want a corrupt mixture, yet in its rule and constitution
does allow no corruption; and though many are found gross within, yet does it
difference betwixt the precious and the vile; yea, shuts its gates, as well as
it opens, and is no more tender and easy in her admission, then awful and
authoritative in her rejection? -- (7) Its so well constituted, that all her
officers have their appointment, and each their work and charge designed, yet
no greater variety of service and employments, than there is of gifts, which
from her head are dispensed and suited to the same. -- (8.) She is of such a
mould and frame, that though she can boast of an intrinsic power, within her
self, yet must derive it from another fountain; yea, must have a directory and
rule from her supreme head and lawgiver, for exerting the acts of that power:
which also has its proper objects, even the inward man, and its peculiar end,
the edification of the body, to which this power and the exercise thereof is
directed. -- (9.) This is such a body, the members whereof are indeed subject
to the magistrates, and denies no due obedience to that power, yet without any
subordination or subjecting of the Church, as such, to an humane power: and
though it has not its authority or jurisdiction from men, it denies no just
respect to these: it does bind and loose upon the earth, which no humane power
can make void; and though cast in among the nations, yet by peculiar bounds is
kept from all other societies distinct: she has her judicatories, and there a
subordination of the lesser to the greater, yet no allowed preeminence and
inequality amongst her officers: yea, though her government is trnly monarchick
with respect to her head, for there is but one supreme Lord; yet with respect
to the servants and officers, it is a most excellent well tempered aristocracy,
which holds off those gradual differences of power and greatness amongst them,
which are so much in use amongst the nations. In a word, O do you consider this
choice and exquisite frame, and you will see how both tenderness and severity
do here concur; what a healing there is here in her sharpest rebukes and
censures, whilst a private essay for gaining, is to go before a public and
judicial procedure; yea, her authoritative determinations without prejudice to
the judgment of Christian prudence and discretion, which belongs to every one
of her members. Consider also how she wears not out, but has still a spring
after the winter, has both her signs and her seasons, and whilst she is losing
and in a decay as to particular members, she is still travailing in birth for a
new offspring and succession. O that they who stand afar, would but come near,
and seriously look on this rare piece of work! Go about Zion, consider well her
towers and bulwarks, etc. that you may see, this is a fabric the Lord has
founded, and raised up, and that surely this piece of the word is therein
fulfilled, His way is perfect, and he does all things well.

Secondly, Is not this great truth clearly demonstrated, not only in the frame,
but in the whole conduct and administration of providence about the Church?
Which is indeed one of the most mavelous discoveries, we have of God here;
yea, even to the world, is often convincingly obvious, through what a variety of
dispensations he uses to bring forth his work, and makes his way often break out
of the bosom of a dark cloud; yea, so unexpectedly can make those perplexed
changes, with which the Church militant is tossed, resolve in such a satisfying
close, that it may be seen they were all directed for her interest and
advantage. I know, this is a great deep, and we cannot have such a discovery of
the providence of God about the Church, nor reach the meaning of things in
their first mould, as in their after-tendency and product. O that mavelous
sight, which shall once be, when that great work of providence, that now is put
over into the hand of the Mediator, has its perfect close; and the whole frame
and contexture set up together as one entire piece to look upon, that is now by
several pieces and through a various succession of ages carried on! Yet we must
say, the Lord herein comes so near, even in the darkest times, and makes the
glory of this truth in such a measure shine forth, as may convincingly witness
to any ordinary observers, the way of the Lord is perfect in all that he does.
I shall here offer some few things, that in every time are obvious to those who
take pleasure in such a discovery, and desire not to keep at a distance
therewith. (1.) Must it not be said of his way, that he does nothing in vain,
but makes all things congruous to his end, even things that amongst themselves
do most cross one another? Does he not carry on his design by the miscarrying
of instruments, and bring forth his greatest works by means most small and
contemptible? I know, the world would object, they can see no such thing; and
indeed providence cannot be understood, or the meaning thereof by one look: but
I must ask, do you discern the motion of the hand upon the clock, even whilst
it is certainly going forward? yet when it comes to the hour, and strikes, you
will see it was then moving. It is sure, there are such periods, that
providence has, where its meaning does not clearly break forth, until is comes
to the striking of the hour, if we may (...) say; and then the most stupid are
forced to (...) what once seemed most improbable, in the way (...) the Lord. --
(2.) Is it not also obvious how the (...) does ensnare men in the work of their
own hand, (...) turns their wrath unto his praise? how he takes the wise, and
outwits them by their counsels; makes events fall out contrary to the second
causes; frustrates the most promising means; and by things unknown and
unthought upon, does often bring forth the deliverance of the Church; yea, how
out of shame and reproach he does even bring about his glory Sure these are not
so far in the dark, that in any age the world can altogether pretend ignorance
thereof. And is not his way perfect, of which such things can be said? -- (3.)
Have we not this discovery, how the Church is often fed by the rod; yea, under
that appears with such advantage, that may be said, her meat has been brought
forth out of the eater? How usually is her mercy and enlargment prepared for
her, by the sharpest down-casting? often is she humbled, in order to an upraising
and deliverance^ ^ea, often is one step of the way of the Lord made clear to her
by another. O is not here so excellent and mavelous a method, that all the
wit and invention of the world cannot follow* -- (4.) His way is indeed
perfect, and by an infinite wisdom managed, which does at once, and by the very
same providence, reach so many several (...): yea, bring forth such various and
contrary effects, that no humane reason could ever judge the result and
conclusion by the premises; how severity and mercy should be at once brought
forth; a more full stroke on the adversary, by their further raising, yea, by a
long forbearance of that stroke; how he should also make use of the same mean
both for humbling and proving and to do his people good in the latter end. O
how perfect must his way be, where all the steps thereof, and after-product;
would seem repugnant; yet no real jar. For the Church sinking, yet does not
perish; in a flame, yet not consumed, but is thereby kept alive; brought under
the yoke of the oppressor, to make her grow and flourish; is wounded and
smitten, for her further healing, and a witness of God's tenderness to her
thereby; has a greater weight and burden put on, to give her thus ease and
enlargement; yea, is chastned and meets with suffering, to prevent suffering,
that she may rest in the day of trouble! Sure these are a part of the ways of
God, and may be visibly demonstrated in the conduct of his providence about the
Church, even to the conviction of the world. But oh! it is hard to see, when
men will shut their eyes. -- (5.) Is it not obvious, what strange things do
sometime fall in betwixt the beginning and close of some special piece of
providence about the Church, that do pass humane reach to give a present reason
for the same: yet in all these may there not be discerned a remarkable
dependence and connection of things? how in such a variety of cross events, and
in a long continued tract of providence, every thing falls in aright, in its
own place; yea, every step, every circumstance, so proportioned by a mavelous
disposal and conduct thereof, to suit another, for making the whole complex
providence beautiful; that on a serious review the world must confess, this is
a concatenation so strange, that it must be his work, and his alone, who sees
things from the beginning to the end! (6.) How perfect is his way, who can
hasten and dispatch his work by delays; and when he seems to take a long
circuit in bringing about his design, yet loses no time, but in such a visible
going back does most effectually move forward! Yea, is it not seen, how he
makes things fall in, that are very unexpected, cross and remote (that would
never have entered in our thoughts) to answer his blessed end? and even dispose
that which above all might seem most directly destructive to the Church, to be
of all other things most effectual and subservient to her advance; brings her
more quickly forward to the harbor by a storm, than a calm! O have we not such
great things to observe in the way of the Lord, that may show it is indeed
perfect! -- (7.) It is also very clear, though not on the first view, yet in
the close and issue, what a certain steady motion providence has, and keeps on
its course, whilst the World is reeling to and fro: how the Church's mercy has
by greatest disappointments been more fully answered, than in the most probable
way; yea, when her relief seemed furthest off, and had been much followed with
many a weary look from some other quarter, with what a strange surprisal does
providence often break out at her hand, as it were from under the ground, with an
unexpected mercy? -- (8.) You may see his way is perfect, who puts a peculiar
beauty upon every occurrent of providence, and brings it forth in the very fit
opportune time, that it could not fall out more seasonably and with more
advantage to the Church. Is there not a seen cause for her sharp trials, and
the necessity thereof no less discernable, than there is of the winter, for the
profit and advantage of the earth? and is it not also manifest, her reviving
came never too late, but in the very fittest time? I know, the World may
object, they can see this in the revolutions of the Year, but not in any such
changes of the Church: yet I am sure, this is manifest, that the Church of
Christ has her sad and her more comforting times here, with as descernable a
succession of the one to the other, as there is of the Summer to the Winter;
yea, that under these vicissitudes of her condition she is still seen to look
forth with a peculiar advantage. I shall add; what a mavellous composition and
temperament of contraries is discernable in this excellent frame of providence?
There is nothing here incongruous; nothing here too small, which does not fall
under its reach, and nothing so great that can overreach it; here is no jar or
disagreeing with the diligent use of means, yet does this rise so far above the
same, that no human care can bend it to their will, nor is there any running
cross to such a current. Here is indeed an unsearchable deep! Yet so much is
there broken forth and made clear, that may convincingly witness and verify
this truth, even to ordinary observers, the way of the Lord is perfect. And
what now we cannot attain in its discovery we should learn to admire and
solidly believe a more clear manifestation thereof.

3. I shall yet further pursue this demonstration which respect to that great
and mavelous work of God in the redemption of the Church; a contrivance, we
may say, more wonderful (...) this whole structure of the universe, of the
heaven and earth, which are so exquisitely framed! For here the thing itself is
not more astonishing, than the way and conduct of infinite wisdom is, in the
whole frame, and all the steps thereof. O this great thing, that men's distance
therefrom does only keep them from being dazzled; where their ignorance is the
great let why they do not more wonder at it! This is indeed far above nature,
that without a divine illumination it cannot be known, or understood: yet we
must say, so much is brought forth and discovered, that those who have only
report, and thence give some ordinary assent thereto, cannot have their reason
and judgment in exercise without some such conviction upon their souls, that
surely this is a contrivance above humane teach, and worthy of the great God;
yea, that herein his way is most absolutely perfect: and no sight can be like
this, where we may see so excellent a correspondence between the foundation and
superstructure, that the whole tract of the Gospel is but one entire and
complete mean for glorifying God, and does in this as the ultimate end resolve.
Here men may see the greatness of his power, that unexpressible freedom of his
grace, the holy severity of justice, all meet and join together in a sweet
agreement; where both justice is salved and fully answered, and yet sinners
saved; where mercy does rejoice over condemnation; vengeance is taken on our
inventions, and the inventers escape. O strange! a redemption without price and
absolutely free, as to sinners; yet all that a just God could exact, fully
satisfied and told down! It is here we may rise and pursue this great thing up
to the fountainhead, which is the sovereign pleasure of God, and is the
internal impulsive cause; and thence follow it down to that infinite
satisfaction of the Mediator, which is the great meritorious cause! And here we
may see, how marvellously well ordered all the steps of this way are, all the
parts of this contrivance; how the elect are made meet for the inheritance,
through sanctification of the Spirit; how faith has its special concurrence
and instrumentality, without prejudice to the absolute freedom of grace, since
it is freely given to believe; how those excellent means are by a most strait
connection linked with the eternal counsel of God, and in a most beautiful
order joined one with another! Here does sanctification flow from an eternal
decree, and like an excellent stream does run down through time, until it lose
it self (to say so) in that great deep of everlasting blessedness! Yea, thus
the purpose of the Lord runs under the ground, concerning his people, until it
break out at last in their heart, by their answering the call of the Gospel! O
how stately a pei^e of work this is! And is not his way perfect therein, where
you may see that grand plot of the Devil to undo man, break upon himself, and
by the seed of the woman, his head crushed! where so glorious a fabric is
raised out of so great a ruin, and poor man established by his fall! where the
glory of the sovereign God, the freedon of grace, and man's blessedness, do at
once meet together! where the cure is as broad and large as the wound, and the
restoration made to answer to every piece of that ruin: I mean, not only in
man's being ransomed from eternal wrath, but that the enmity should be killed
and taken away, and such a mavelous change of his nature by the renewing of
the Spirit, which even here restores him in part to that he lost! It is on this
blessed contrivance we may see men brought under a constraint by irresistible
grace, yet without violence; their reason further raised and refined, yet not
broken, and its true liberty not taken away, but restored; yea, a notable
consistency betwixt moral persuasive arguments and the efficacious power of
grace; betwixt men's planting and watering in the use of means, and the alone
increase thereof from the Lord; betwixt a physical and moral concurrence in
producing one and the same effect; betwixt those two desires in prayer, Da (
Domine) quod jubes, et jube quod vis. Is there not likewise here a most
excellent sutableness and congruity, betwixt repentance and remission of sins,
without prejudice to the freedom of grace; since he gives repentance, as well
as requires it, and makes his people what he would have them to be! O how
mavelous a contrivance is this, where the blessed Majesty of God finds an
argument in himself, when man had none wherewith to plead; was found in the
form of a servant, and became our nearest Kinsman, to redeem the inheritance:
where his people's standing is ensured by another surety and strength, than
their own; not on their apprehending, but their being apprehended: where the
Lord does oblige himself by bond, to make that good which is only of grace, and
is most freely given: where he both frames the desire within the soul, and
satisfies it! I shall only add, it is here the redeemed having nothing in
themselves to boast; and the reprobate none but themselves to challenge; for on
whomsoever that door is shut, they have therein actively concurred, to draw a
bar for shutting themselves out.

4. I shall offer one instance more, wherein this great truth may be
demonstrated to the world (that (...) way of the Lord is perfect, that his
works are done in judgment, yea that he does all things well) with respect to
that mavelous order of nature, and disposal of the works of God under the
sun: how unexpressible well all are fitted for some use, and directed to their
proper end. This is indeed a truth, wherein the greatest Atheists may see this
piece of the Scripture convincingly verified, wherein God comes so near, that
men may feel after him. (Acts. 17. 27.) that it may be said, there is no way to
shift this discovery, but to stop their ears, and shut their eyes. O what a
wonderful disposal may be seen, even in the commonest things, with a mutual
subserviency to each other! and in this great variety and throng of the
creatures, is it not obvious how each has its voice and speech, to give us
something of instruction; and every thing has some matter of wonder in it,
that we may say, it is hard to be an Atheist! There must be a strange
violenting of their light, where the invisible God comes so near, to make
himself known by things visible, and by so mavelous a conduct and ordering
thereof, shows unto the sons of men, he does all things well. Oh, may it not
be said, we cease to wonder, because every day we live and converse amongst
wonders! Now it is here the world has a demonstration of the Scripture, that
they dare not debate, lest they should deny sense, as well as reason: and if
any will question the glorious former of all things, why things are thus
ordered and disposed, let him but retire within himself and he will find the want
and defect is truly within, which he would challenge in the way of the Lord.
May we not see with astonishment this frame and composure of the universe, how
each thing does answer its part, and to the conservation of the whole; how
amidst a great contrariety an excellent concord is manifest, in all its
different parts, natures and dispositions! I must truly say, not only duty, but
delight and pleasure may call men to this study; yea, even to lose themselves,
as it were, in so sweet a labyrinth, where it is more easy to enter, than to
find an outlet; and all things do witness, even to men's senses, the truth of
the Scripture. It is sad, we have so choice and true a history every day to
read, of the works of God, which are not in themselves greater, than that
wisdom is by which they are ordered; and yet should be for the most part as a
sealed book. But it is not here in a general this truth can be reached; O will
you come and see! Consider the work of the Lord, and you must also see it is
perfect, and his ways are judgment, yea, that he has done all things well. Do
but consider this stupendous frame of the universe, a fabric that in all its
parts is most exactly joined, and nothing in it defective or out of order. Here
you may see that great Minister of nature, the sun, with what advantage it is
placed and fitted to dispense its light and refreshing influences to the earth;
is it not with such wisdom, that to move in a higher or lower orb would not
thus answer the advantage of things below! with what a constant motion does it
travel betwixt the tropicks, to fulfill its annual course; and in diverse parts
does successively arise, that by turns it may give the several parts of the
earth a visit! should we cease to wonder at the rising and setting thereof,
because it is so frequently seen! O may not this arrest our thoughts with
astonishment, with what wisdom it is made subservient, all along its course, to
^ause Summer and Winter, Spring and Harvest! Yea, how its approaches and
withdrawings are gradual, that by its ascent in the spring it may dispose our
bodies for the summer, and by its descent in such a degree in the harvest may
prepare and fit us for the Winter, that there should not be an immediate
bordering betwixt these extremes! Is not its correspondence also manifest, that
it has with things here below; which does not only reach the surface of the
earth, but the most inward bowels and secret caverns thereof? For its power is
known on minerals as well as plants. Is it not also evident, that this glorious
body of the moon, though of a lesser glory than the other, is for another use
than for men to gaze thereon? how it keeps them from groaping in utter darkness
through the night, and lights a candle to the world, when the sun is gone down,
which by its withdrawing does so far discover the glory of the moon and stars,
that its brightness did vail and darken; its influence is known also upon the
sea, upon seeds and plants, yea, upon the humors and complexion of men's
bodies. O what innumerable employments are those, by which it is made
continually subservient to the world! And do you not see, how the night has
its special use, and is well ordered as well as the day; yea, that it has its
peculiar beauty; and by its darkness does commend the light, and makes its
approach more sweet and desirable? This gives the laboring world some time for
repose, and most observably answers man's weariness, and necessity of such a
rest, with so fit a season, that we may say, it but draws a curtain about us
for that end, and does thus retire the earth and put it in a sweet and silent
compos^re from the noise and hurryings of the day. Yea, does not every evening
solemnly warn men of their approaching death, and the swift passing away of
time, that they may have no excuse for being surprised in this great change,
who have so grave, so frequent a monitor, to speak of it to them? But let us a
little further follow this choice enquiry and search of nature, which is so
clear a witness to the Scripture; and you may see, how mavelous these various
motions of the heavens are, the position of the stars and constellations, where
each has its own proper course, yet all carried about to one general and
common end, to show there must be a first mover, who is not subject to motion
or change, but does manifestly determine all these. -- O strange! How does this
great body of the earth hang upon nothing! that a thing so vast and ponderous
should lean upon the air, as on a foundation! Must there not be here a piece of
art above humane reach; how thus it does keep its center, and rests thereupon;
and is it not clear, how steady the axis of the earth is, and perpetually
parallel with it self, that it cannot tumble this or that way? What a
mavelous order is also seen in those higher motions of the celestial bodies?
of which some are flow, others more rapid; some tend to the east, others
toward the west; and yet from these, though thus cross to other, there results
a singular harmony, in which the conservation of the World and production of
things here below are concerned, which could not so well have answered this;
without such a variety in their courses. It is true, the Lord might have made
every day a year's length, and caused the sun to keep its course from east to
west so long: but O how well are all these things ordered, and that thus he
does divide our life in such short stages, to make us more frequently mind our
change! We see likewise how marvellously the earth is framed in its various
parts and proportions, and the singular advantage it has both in its posture
and figure; the mountains and high places do not mar its beauty, nor want their
use, where the beasts have a shelter provided; and is not nature likewise more
displayed and laid open to men by the plains and valleys, which are to the
earth a special ornament? How manifold is the use of the air, which fills up
that vast space betwixt the heavens and earth, and is so fit a medium for
correspondence betwixt the higher and lower world? It is here the birds find
use for their wings; thorough this the rains find an easy passage; this does
interveen betwixt the sun and the earth, yet is no let to the communication
either of light or heat, but its scorching is thus qualified by that sweet cool
breathing of the air. Is not the singular use and advantage of the winds also
known? And how these are both directed and bounded, so that men can neither
cause a storm, nor a calm, at their pleasure. And O can you look on the sea,
and not wonder, what mavelous things are there! how it is shut up with gates
and bars, and has its appointed bounds, without which there could be no reason
why a bank of sand should restrain the great Ocean from breaking forth. Its
manifold use and advantage is also known: would any wish, that the whole earth
were dry land? and O strange that this not only is made passable, but by that
art of navigation become a more easy way for transport and commerce, by which
cities and countries are made to flourish! Do you not see that regular course
it keeps in its ebbings and flowings, the singular use and subservience of the
tides; so that when men are difficulted in an inquiry about the natural cause
of these, they cannot but observe the special end and advantage thereof? May we
not with wonder also see, how those parts of the world, which have the most
scorching day and greatest heat, have usually the longest night, to qualify it
with such a cooling moisture? How these countries, which have no rain, as
Egypt, have some supply thereof by an overflowing of the rivers? Do you see,
any members either of men, or beasts, superfluous, and wanting an use? or is
there any poison, but has some peculiar antidote provided? yea, the most
hurtful creatures, as Serpents and Vipers, are found of singular use in
medicine, against their own hurt, as the oil of Scorpions is against the sting
thereof. You see, the poor people have medicinal waters provided without money;
and it is a notable remark, which is certainly known, of one who enclosed some
such well in his ground, that he might put an impost thereon, had it taken away
and run dry on his hand. What a mavelous use is there of natural antipathies
and sympathies, whereon the operation of medicine, the special improvement of
navigation, by making use of the lodestone, does so much depend? You see how
the harvest gives a large compensation for the toil of the spring; and do not
the poor man's labors through the day make his bed soft in the evening, and
his rest sweet unto him? You see that correspondence the heavens keep with the
earth in those sweet refreshing showers, by which its seminal virtue is drawn
forth, and thus the rain does moisten what the heat would scorch: you may see
how it is distilled and dropped down, not in violent streams, but as it were
through a small sieve, or otherwise it would hurt, more than help: you would
not desire to want rain, nor yet to have it perpetual, and thus it is ordered.
Are not the vapors exhaled from the earth, that by refreshing showers they may
return thither again? O how manifold are the works of the Lord! And in what
wisdom has he done them al^! -- Is not the pain and travel of the beasts, in
bringing forth their young, proportioned to their condition, and to that
longing they have? Job. 39. 3. They how themselves, and bring forth their
young, and cast forth their sorrows. And as their time and duration is for most
part shorter than man's, is not their growth also suited thereto? You see, men
have their lodging furnished ere they come into the World, the breasts are
provided, and by a wonderful instinct they are taught to seek after the same.
It is known how the want of hearing or sight uses some other way to be
recompensed with some special natural sagacity: Yea, a want and defect in some
parts of the body is often supplied with a greater agility in some other members
thereof; which is known in many remarkable instances; such as that woman in
this country, not long since, who had no arms from her birth, but could with no
less dexterity make use of her right foot for all the uses of her hand. You see
how the beasts have some natural defense, and are taught self-preservation; and
what the hare and hind wants of the lion's paw and strength, is made up often by
a more swift foot; what an advantageous antipathy there is amongst the beasts,
lest the earth should be overrun with those which are hurtful; the dog fitted
by a strange tendency of its kind, to pursue the wolf and the fox, and the cat
for destroying of rats. You see how the oxen are tamed to endure the yoke, and
brought under discipline, whose strength is above many of the wild beasts. Are
not those things that are most absolutely necessary, most easy likewise to be
had? and whilst there is such a veriety of labor and toil does attend the lot
of man here, does not the earth also afford a variety of delights? You see, the
birds need no instructor to build their nests, and choose a fit place, nor do
thy mistake their seasons: yea, do not these sweet Musicians by their natural
melody call men to praise, whose debt is much above theirs? Is there not a
mavelous coalition betwixt the graft and the tree, which exceeds humane art,
if nature did not so wonderfully cooperate therein, and in the inoculating a
small bud into a stock? and O that wonderful increase, that follows the seed
thrown into the ground! how it dies and rots there, that it may rise with the
greater luster and advantage; and by such a significant emblem teach men the
certainty of the raising of their bodies. For it is sure, the ordinary things of
nature are great and convincing Hieroglyphics, to hold forth more divine
things, if we could but read them. Do you not see what veins of coals and other
minerals go through the earth? whence it is furnished and has fit materials for
daily use, and for an improvement of men's faculties? Is not the earth watered
by an intercourse which springs and rivers has with the sea? And what some
parts of the world want, is it not in other things supplied; that every country
has almost some peculiar advantages? It is known, how the coldest places of
the earth, do most abound with the warmest furs. You see the beasts want not
their table: and is not the lilly well clothed? Does the grass of the ground
want its use? Yea, is not the very color thereof notably suited for men's eyes?
What cause of wonder is there of the different forms, the virtues and variety
of plants; You see, the little ants have their magazine and storehouse; the
bees want not some order and government; yea, no human skill can frame such
work as theirs is. But, O Man! what a curious and exquisite fabric is that
which did come in amongst the last of the creation, but as the greatest wonder
thereof, a most rare piece of work, of a strange various and subtle
composition, in which there is so notable an harmony made up of many
contraries! I think, those who would learn Atheism, are not only concerned to
stifle their reason, but to shut their eyes from looking on themselves and the
frame of their bodies, which is so curiously wrought with nerves, sinews and
veins, with such a variety of parts, and yet not one bone or Muscle
superfluous.()

THE FOURTH ARGUMENT
I shall here offer to prove the Scriptures accomplishment, is this, That
whereof the most part, as to those special predictions and promises that
concern the Church, is fulfilled, and has new taken place in their appointed
times, which we may at this day clearly read in the event, and but a little
part thereof now remain^^h to be made out, must be a sure truth. But the
Scripture is thus fulfilled, and the prophecies thereof (...) made legible in
the history of providence, and in the works of God about his Church. Therefore,
etc.

I would premise here some few things, ere I (...) particularly to this
argument.

1. Though the Scripture is thus wonderfully suited by the Lord, and takes
place in every generation, as if it were alone directed to that time; yet it is
also clear, that a special part thereof has its proper accomplishment in those
ages and periods of time, to which it does in a peculiar way relate: some part
of it, which did concern the times of the Old Testament, some that does also
answer to the times of the Gospel, and a part of it which has a peculiar
respect to these latter days, which the Lord is now bringing forth, and we wait
for a more full accomplishment, that it is on a near approach.

2. It is also sure, that the whole work of God, and his providence about his
Church here in the World, which was perfect from the beginning, and before him
from eternity, is comprehended under the written word; where the Lord has
fully revealed his mind and counsel about every event and concernment of the
Church; though we often be in the dark, in finding out the same, but the event
will in due time speak for it self, which should cause us until then with much
sobriety to pass our judgment on some of those truths, that are not yet
fulfilled.

3. It is clear, that the Prophets of old did not only foretell such great
changes and revolutions, as were to go over the Church's head, and declare the
certainty thereof, but we find these prophecies often point at the times and
periods of time, whereto they did relate; and though sometimes in dark terms,
yet did clearly show that there was a certain prefixed time, and not at every
time could they have their performance.

4. We should consider how the full accomplishing of the Scripture, and the
perfecting the Lord's work about his Church, will be at once, and does keep
pace together, and then shall a full and satisfying discovery of God's way and
providence and all that he has been doing in the World, clearly break forth,
when the great mystery of God in his written word is finished, and the Church
so near to land.

That I may speak a little to so grave a subject, I would lay down these two
things to be considered.

1. How much of the Scripture, and predictions thereof, may be now seen clearly
verified in the event.

2. What does yet remain to have an accomplishment in these last times; by
which we may certainly judge, how near the Lord's work about his Church is to a
close. Under the first I shall point at some of those most concerning events
and changes, which the Church has met with, wherein we may see what of the
Scripture may at this day be read in the history of providence, and is
certainly fulfilled.

The first thing to be considered, is, -- WHAT IS ALREADY ACCOMPLISHED.

I. Let us go back to those first times after the fall; and see that dreadful
stroke, which came upon the old World by the flood, after an universal
defection from God, and we shall there find the fulfilling of that which Noah,
that great Preacher of righteousness, had often foretold, and of those
threatenings which by Moses were there recorded: Wherein it may be very
manifest, (1.) That this truth, besides Divine authority, no records of ancient
Times (no antiquity) could ever contradict; yea, some of the eldest writers do
clearly witness something of an universal deluge over the earth, with the
strange preservation of some from it, however they were in the dark as to many
circumstances of it. Josephus does cite Berosus the Caldears about this, who
without doubt had then some of those oldest records true and incorrupt.
Eusebius also does mention some fragments of Abidenus, and App^^idorus, which
in his time were extant, clearly pointing at the flood, and at Noah under the
name of Ziuthrus, with his sending out of birds to see if the waters were
assuaged. -- (2.) There is nothing here does contradict reason, how this might
be brought about, even in the way of ordinary natural causes, which the Lord
did make use of for that end. For we find, the windows of Heaven were opened,
the air being condensed into clouds, and their retentive power loosed, these
great floodgates were thus set open; which falling not in drops, but all in a
full body, like the spouts and cataracts of the West Indies, might soon
overwhelm, the earth with abundance of water; while those fountains also of the
great deep beneath were broken up, which was not only the Ocean let forth to go
over its banks, but an universal vent to all the veins of the earth, and that
great mass of waters which is in the bowels thereof, which from beneath meeting
those that were from above, may give men a clear and rational account how such
a thing might be. -- (3.) This piece of the Scripture is most congruous and
agreeable to the whole, and the great scope and drift of the same. For it points
out an universal defection, and an universal stroke meeting together: it leads
us forward to Christ, of whom the ark was an excellent shadow, and of that
salvation which in and by him the Church has from eternal wrath: and is a very
manifest pledge and sign of that last destruction of the World, which though
not in that manner, yet shall once surely be, and find men in such a condition,
as this flood found them into in the days of Noah.

() II. What we find expressly threatened by the Lord ( Genesis 11. 7.) as a stroke
and judgment upon men for their ambition and pride, The confounding of their
languages, is it not also most clearly verified and writ forth to the view of
the world in the event? that whilst men cannot deny or debate a thing which is
so conspicuous and undeniable, they must also see a fulfilling of the
Scripture, and that there was a divine hand in this strange stroke; which may
be a convincing refutation of Atheism, if such do not willingly shut their eyes
at these clear evidences. -- (1.) That it is sure, there is such a confusion
and variety of languages in the earth at this day; whence it is divided, one
part thereof so much rent from another, commerce and correspondence thus made
difficult, and a bar drawn betwixt nations, by a different speech. And do not
the most ancient records of the world witness the same to have been in former
ages? -- (2.) It is also sure, that no tradition or humane history, but the
Scripture only, gives us an account of this strange thing how it should be, or
whence its true rise is; yea, those who have writ most of other things, yet can
give no reason why they write in one language more than in another, but that it
is proper to their country, where they had their education. But how the race of
men, who have such a community in other things, should be thus divided, is
indeed a mystery, which divine truth can only unvail and show its meaning. --
(3.) It is sure, there is no language one more than another, that is natural to
men, but what ex institutio is acquired, whether by long continued use as
children does their mother tongue, or by set rules. It is true, Adam who was
the first man, had his by some extraordinary infusion: but it is found a
pitiful fancy alleged by some, that young children, who have never heard
speech, and have been thus kept at a distance, would speak the first language
of the world, and consequently Hebrew; for the contrary of this is certainly
proved. -- (4.) Is not this confusion and diversity of languages, which is in
the world, a most strange and mavelous thing, which in no ordinary way, yea
not without something of a miracle, could be brought about, and to no
continuance of time or invention of men can be attributed, if we consider these
things. -- (1.) It is clear, that if man can be traced back to some original
and beginning, there must then have been some one language, whilst the world
was but in a family; so that if you will admit the truth of the creation, you
may see it was not so at the beginning. -- (2.) Is it not undeniable, that men
could not choose so great a plague and judgment on themselves, if they had any
use of reason? which would divide betwixt them and the greater part of mankind,
hinder trade and mutual interchange with other countries, either in exporting or
importing most necessary commodities; that which also would obstruct humane
knowledge, and the discovery of those excellent inventions and experiments of
other places; yea, give man, whose days are so few, such a sore toil and labor
to acquire but a few of those many different languages, which are in the world.
-- (3.) Is it not also clear, that this is above human reach, which men cannot
judge, how in an ordinary way such different languages could have been found
out, and afterward acquired by the body of nations, yea, how there should be
such an agreement in this amongst a vast multitude of different tempers and
capacities. For it is obvious, there should have then been an inventing of
those first radical languages; I mean these that are not dependant upon, or
interwoven one with another, but are wholly different as Greek, Latin, etc: And
therewith such a vast Dictionary, of words with their significations, and rules
to enjoin them in sentences, must have necessarily been framed, and abandoning
also and turning off of some former language, so far as to the bringing of it
in oblivion: yea, would the universal consent and concurrence of the multitude
in such places be required? I confess, this were not so strange, if such a
difference betwixt Languages were but in some peculiar mode or propriety of
phrases, and alteration of words according to the various tempers, and climates
of the earth: but we may see what different languages there are, wholly
independent on one another, not only in original words, but in the very whole
frame and bulk, which can be no compound of other languages, as many of our
modern tongues are, which does truly state the case in such a manner, that the
Scripture only can resolve how this should be; yea, it is known, besides many
branches, commixtures and variations of languages, which through continuance of
time, through conquest and mingling of nations together, are in the World, there
is also a vast number of those that may be on clearest ground judged original
and mother-tongues, of which (whatever lesser variation there has been by the
adding of some new words, or the quitting of old, yet the whole bulk does
remain entire. -- (4) What a strange and mavelous thing m^st this be, if we
consider that most of ancient maternal languages were previous to the use of
letters, whence rules or a method could be conveyed from one to another, if it
had been only some humane invention? For we may know from surest antiquity, how
long it was ere several nations reached a further way to communicate knowledge,
and represent their conceptions, than by speech and a vocal tradition, or some
significant symbols or Hieroglyphics, which were then much in use to supply
the want of letters. Is it not know how little either by pen or printing has
been discovered to the World, but of such late time, as is from clearest
histories written to us? Thence we find very little of the Greek language upon
record before Homer's time. Now may not this clearly demonstrate, that in an
ordinary way these languages could not then have been acquired? -- (5) It may
be very convincing, what the Scripture about this holds forth, that by these
different languages, nations and families were at first divided. Genes. 11.
yea, that this was the first rise of bounding one of them from another, for
which the World could never give another cause. Thus did the Lord enclose his
Church in Israel; and by this diversity of languages did outlaw the rest of
the earth; for there was that venerable first language of the Hebrew kept up,
by which these sacred oracles of the Old Testament were made known. I shall
further add. Is not a divine hand eminently seen in this? that so great a bar,
which for so long a time was betwixt the Church and the world, should not only
at last be taken off, but such a curse turned into a blessing; that the power
of God and his very immediate work in spreading the light amongst so many
people of a strange language, might now under the gospel be more conspicuous,
that once such an interdiction has been served on the world thereby, to shut
the nations out from the Church: for we may say, there has been as signal a
miracle in the gift of tongues under the New Testament, as there was formerly
in the confusion thereof. ()

III. What we have expressly promised in the word of the Church's delivery from
Egypt, and was foretold by Joseph at his death, that God would surely bring
back his People out of that land, for which he left his bones to lie unburied
as a pledge thereof, has now many ages past been fulfilled. It is long since
that remarkable day, when God made a way for his People through the red sea,
and his power known upon Pharaoh, and the Egyptians; since Moses with the
Church did sing that triumphant song, The horse and his rider he has cast in
the sea. Wherein these things are most clear, --

1. That this was a deed known and public in the time; which was not done in a
corner, but in the view of the World, and before all the Children of Israel,
and by them attested, and with greatest carefulness transmitted to their
children, and by these to the following generations, as a thing never to be
forgotten.

2. Was testified by Moses, so great a person, and eye witness thereof; one
whom even the most ancient of heathen writers do mention with much respect, and
in this did never challenge his testimony, though a matter of fact, and of that
moment, which all the nations about could not but know, and both in the present
and after-ages have the remembrance thereof kept up; so that they might easily
refute such a thing, if false. And we may judge, the Egyptians and many others
could want no good will to put disgrace on a People, they so much hated, nor be
ignorant of that which Moses published in his own time; to whose works some of
the ancientest heathen writers do show they have been no strangers.

3. A truth, which by Moses was put in record, and this delivered to the Jews
to be kept by them and their children in all succeeding ages: a record, which
they did so narrowly look to, and had in that reverence and esteem, that all
the syllables and letters thereof were by them numbered, lest in the smallest
point it should be wronged; yea, were more careful to preserve it than any
nation can be of their most concerning rights, and charters.

4. A thing, whereof the remembrance was yearly from that time celebrated by
the Jewish Church: whence the institution of the passover had its rise; that
deliverance being as a sign and sacramental pledge of that great salvation by
him who is our true passover.

IV. What is held forth in the Scripture concerning the more full growth of the
Jewish Church; that Judah should enjoy a Scepter, which was foretold by dying
Jacob; and promised once and again to Abraham by the Lord, that his seed should
be as the sand of the sea, and enjoy Canaan for an inheritance; has it not
long since been fulfi^led? Wherein these things are clear, --

1. That for many ages Israel did enjoy that land in a most flourishing
condition; which does in part appear from those very ruins and desolations,
over which they have so long lamented, the glory of Jerusalem, and the Temple
once so famous, which causes such reverence amongst them to the very rubbish
thereof at this day.

2. That they were once a people by themselves, who were not mingled with the
Nations but kept at a distance, by their Religion and Laws, from the rest of
the World, as a peculiar people to the Lord is a Thing undeniable.

3. That whilst they enjoyed it, there was a singular blessing of fruitfulness
thereon above other places; so as that small piece of ground was enough for an
innumerable multitude of inhabitants; but the same is now at this day a barren
land, an extraordinary curse no less seen thereon, than the blessing was in
former times.

4. It is also evident, that something in the way, and carriage of this people,
even in their low wandering condition, does discover they have not forgot what
once they were, nor their former grandeur and flourishing, but still keep by
themselves, with some respect to their own land, which their fathers did enjoy.

V. That piece of the Scripture, which did concern the declining times of the
Church under the Old Testament, what Jeremiah foretold of the Babylonish
Captivity, has now many ages since been fulfilled: a truth, which we have
attested by sacred history, an history which does clearly justify itself and
its authority by such convincing marks thereof, that we may say those who do
seriously converse with the word, cannot take up Atheism without the laying
down of reason, and putting a Force upon their own light.

Now as to this particular prophecy we would but seriously consider, --

1. That which Jeremiah did foretell about the captivity, was not its
accomplishment put on record in a book of the Church's lamentations? Where this
truth may be read in her tears; and truly such as ever knew grief in a high
measure, may easily know what is there expressed, to be sad earnest, and read the
lively motions of an afflicted case herein. And besides has not this been
witnessed to after-ages by a visible monument, even the destruction of the
Temple, that great and excellent work, which though after rebuilt did never
attain its former splendour.

2. This was a matter of fact of great note, and famous in the time, done in
the view of all the nations, a considerable piece of the Babylonish conquest a
yea, that testimony the Scripture bears to the same, was it not a few ages
after made public to other parts of the world by the Septuagint translation,
so that it had been easy for Ptolemy or any in that time to have discovered the
falsehood of a thing so lately done: yet, those times, nor the most professed
enemies to the Church therein, could not in the least contradict the same.

3. Though much of humane History, and those records of ancient times that we
now have, are both corrupt and defective, yet there wants not some consent,
from the surest of these, to many of the most observable things that we have of
the history of the old testament; and as to the certainty of this truth,
besides its own authority, we shall find some of these oldest Writers, Berosus,
Herodot, and Xenophon, give some light to the same, whose witness the Atheist
cannot challenge; yea, is it not clear that Josephus, not only from sacred
history, but from these old records and fragments of former times, which were
then extant (though since have been much lost) composed his Jewish antiquities,
which give so particular a relation of this truth.

VI. What was foretold by Daniel concerning the rise and fall of the
Monarchies, and change of those great Empires, which had been so sore a rod
upon the Church, has it not many ages past had a most punctual performance? It
is now long since that great Image showed to the Prophet in a vision, has been
brought down and broken, so that scarce the toes thereof do now remain: which,
besides the Scripture, may be clearly demonstrated upon other rational grounds.

1. It Is being granted, that the Prophecy of Daniel was translated in Greek,
and laid up in that great library of Alexandria, long before much of it was
fulfilled, before Antiochus Epiphanes, and the rising of the Roman Empire, of
which Porphyrius could not be ignorant, though all he could answer to that
evident agreement betwixt his Prophecy and the event was, that it must have
been writ after these things were accomplished; whilst it is clear, that a
part of the Prophecy of Daniel, which concerned the fourth Monarchy, was not
even in his times fully made out, yea we must say, something thereof does reach
to the last end of time.

2. It is also undeniable, that in these great revolutions of the Monarchies
there is a discernable consent and harmony betwixt the Scripture, and these
ancient records, which we yet have of those times: so that not only the things
themselves, but some of the most observable circumstances thereof, which are
particularly mentioned by Daniel, we may read in Xenophen, Herodot, and
Diodorus Siculus.

3. It must also be granted, that some things which in Daniel's Prophecy would
seem most strange and improbable, such as Belshazar's death in that very night
the hand writing was showed to him, may be particularly understood in
Xenophon's history; how Cyrus took the advantage of the Babylonian security,
whilst they were in the midst of a solemn Feast, and by diverting the channel
of Euphrates did enter the city without opposition; also how that great horn of
the high goat was so suddenly broken, and the coming up of four in his room,
which by Daniel are expounded of the Grecian Monarchy, and the dividing of that
Empire after Alexander's death, is it not punctually held forth by all the
histories of that time?

4. Was there not a very convincing appearance of a divine hand, both in the
rise and fall of these Monarchies, and an extraordinary providence which we
cannot but see, when we read these histories, that surely something above
ordinary means and second causes was both in Cyrus's conquest over the
Babylonians, and the mavelous swift progress and success of Alexander against
the Persians.

VII. That which was the great scope of all Prophesies under the Old Testament,
The coming of the Messiah, is surely verified, and now many ages past has had
an accomplishment. The Lord is come unto his Temple, even he whose day Abraham
and the Saints under the law did long after: this was the most happy and
notable crisis, that ever the Church was under, the great Epoch and period of
time, from which she does now reckon. We know, this is no fable, or cunning
device of man, that God was manifested in the flesh, did make his abode for
some time in the earth, suffered at Jerusalem in the view of the World, before
many witnesses, did arise from death on the third day, was seen and known by
his Disciples thereafter, and having finished the work for which he came, was
received up again into glory.

This is indeed a great truth, which concerns us no less to know, and be sure
of, than our soul is worth, and our interest through eternity: the fulfilling
whereof, besides the authority of sacred writ, the witness and records of the
Evangelists and Apostles of Jesus Christ, who testify what they certainly knew,
is a truth which from such convincing rational grounds may be demonstrated,
that the greatest height of Atheism knows not how to state it self in a
direct opposition to the same. And truly in this, we may say, the Lord has so
tendered the strengthening of his people's faith and their encouragement, that
as it is the most concerning promise of the Scripture, on which our whole hope
and blessedness depends, so is it also most clear and conspicuous in the event.
I shall but only touch this, whereof so much has been said by others.

1. It is undeniable, the Messiah was to come: to whom all the sacrifices under
the Law, those ancient types and shadows, did clearly point; to whom the
Prophets bear witness; and it was the faith of the ancient Jewish Church, of
which promise they were persuaded, even whilst they saw it but a far off, yea,
did embrace it and repose themselves thereon. And is there not a most clear and
exact portraicture drawn forth under the Old Testament, of the Messiah; what an
one he should be, and by what peculiar characters he should be known, who was
to be revealed to Israel?

2. The special season, and period of time, wherein Christ should come, we find
prefixed and showed to the ancient Church: which, though under some figurative
expressions seemed then dark, yet was so far revealed, that upon diligent a
search and enquiry, and particular collation of the times, it might be easy to
discern the Messiah's coming and near approach. Of which salvation the Prophets
did enquire, 1 Pet. 1. 10. And truly the fall of the Monarchies, and right
understanding of Daniel's weeks, were sure and solid grounds for a clear
computation. Thence was it, that so general an expectation of the Messiah was
among the Jews, at that very time when he came; so as diverse impostors did
arise, who in the People were ready to follow; and we see with what amazement
the Pharisees did inquire at John the Baptist, if he were the Christ, or not;
yea, Josephus shows how the persuasion of this did most excite that People to
war with the Romans from the prophecies they had in holy writ, that from Judea
should about that time come he who was to be Emperor of the World.

3. It is also sure, there was such an one, who in the days of Tiberius, and
under the reign of Herod, was made manifest to Israel: and came with no outward
show and observation, but did great and mavelous things before all the
People; was crucified at Jerusalem, under Pontius Pilate; and notwithstanding
the ignominy of his death, was after adored, and followed, both by many of the
Jews and the Gentiles; whose doctrine did also in short time spread through the
World: a truth, which the greatest adversaries of the Gospel have ever
confessed, and do attest the history thereof, de facto, to be a faithful
relation. Not only Jews, but the heathen writers, Suetonius, Tacitus, and
Plinius the younger, that lived near, and some of them contemporary with the
Times of the Apostles, do witness that this JESUS, whom the Christians worship,
did truly suffer in the time of Pilate's jurisdiction over the Jews.

4. Is it not clear, how this appearance of Christ to the World did exactly
fall in with the very time, foretold by the Prophets therefore? Was not Jacob's
prophecy thus accomplished? For until that time it is clear, the royal line of
David's house did not cease, until Herod a stranger came to reign, by whom it
was utterly cut off. And it is manifest, those 70 weeks mentioned by Daniel,
must be understood of years; else they could admit no other sense: which
reckoning from the decree given out by Cyrus, to rebuild the temple, are 490
Years, and does answer to the very time of Christ being in the World, and his
death, which necessarily falls in the last of these weeks, a thing so manifest,
that Porphyrius an avowed enemy to the Christian Religion, could have no
answer, but that this prophecy had been devised after the event: which I am
sure; the Jews, though as direct adversaries, would be loath to admit.

5. It is most clear, that in him, who at that time was revealed to Israel and
whom the Christian Church does this day worship, was exactly accomplished
whatever was by the Prophets told concerning the Messiah. And it is no small
advantage for the Christian cause, that it needs but appeal to those records,
which have been kept in the hands of her adversaries, where there is so clear a
portraicture of him held forth, as to his person, his way of coming, the place
whence, the entertainment he should have, and his death, that I must think it a
contradiction to reason, men should acknowledge the Old Testament, and not
grant the New; since it is clear, the Jews, look for no other Messiah, than
such an one as is held out by the Prophets, and they acknowledge also the
divine authority of Isaiah, Daniel, Micah Malachi, etc. who do by such clear
marks point him forth, and show the Church how they should know him when he
comes. For truly it may thence appear, that it is not more certain, the
Messiah should come, than that Jesus Christ is he. I would but seriously ask,
what do the Jews this day miss in our blessed Lord Jesus, which the Old
Testament allows them to expect in the Messiah! Is it that he came not with
outward show and glory? sure, according to the Scripture, such an one we ought
not to acknowledge; no, should he not be the seed of the woman ( Genesis 2.) who
should be born of a virgin, as, Isaiah shows: his voice not heard in the
streets; despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows? Such an one, as was
shadowed out under the Law, who should be made a sacrifice for sin; yea, come
with no outward pomp, but meek and lowly, and riding upon an ass, was to be
betrayed, and sold (and his price showed by Zachariah) for 30 pieces; a
crucified dying Christ, that should be wounded in the house of his friends, and
cut off from amongst the children of his People! O! can men possibly deny so
clear an accomplishment of these in our blessed Lord?

6. Is it not undeniable, that the Jews now, in their present case, cannot
possibly expect the accomplishment of this promise; that the Messiah cannot
this day come, according to the Scripture, except they could be put in such a
condition, as they were in then at Christ's coming? Certainly it is impossible,
that the Old Testament be ever fulfilled about this, if it be not already. Can
he come forth out of Bethlehem, whilst now no such place is known by that name?
Can he come into his Temple, that is utterly destroyed? Is there not now a
subversion of the Tribes, and the family of David not known at this day? Yea,
are not the gentiles brought in, whom Isaiah shows should be gathered under
the standard of the Messiah? Does not the daily sacrifice cease? which, the
Jews will confess, has been so for many ages; and this was to be after his
coming. And I would ask, how was that ever fulfilled, that the glory of the
second Temple should exceed the glory of the first? for this cannot be on the
account of its structure, or outward magnificence; sure there is nothing,
wherein this glory could appear, but as it points at Christ, and the breaking
out of that glorious light, which was before its destruction.

7. There is an innumerable company, who have embraced the Gospel, and received
the spirit by the ministry thereof, since the times of the Apostles, who have
put this seal thereto in all ages, that it is the power and wisdom of God. And
truly without partial respect (which the consciences of the worst of men have
been forced to justify) it may be said, these were the excellent of the earth
in their time: many of greatest outward parts and abilities, whose moral
integrity and candor was beyond question even with their adversaries; and
these both of Jews and Gentiles, of all ranks of men, of all nations and
languages; who not only by a naked profession, but by their walk and sufferings
did show forth the power and virtue of a crucified Christ; yea, shine as lights
whilst they were in the World, to the conviction of spectators. And is not this
a convincing witness to the truth of the Gospel, which its enemies cannot
possibly deny?

8. That excellent doctrine, delivered to the Church in the New Testament, by
Christ and his Apostles, does it not clearly show whence it is, and witness its
own authority? For here we may see a manifest agreement betwixt this and the
doctrine of the ancient Jewish Church; that as the five Books of Moses hold
forth the sum of the Gospel, the Covenant of grace, and that mystery of
Salvation by Christ, so the Prophets do carry it on with further clearness, and
the Evangelists bring it forward: like an excellent edifice that is founded and
advanced in the one, but perfected in the other: all breathing the same spirit,
with a convincing tendency to the same end. So that we may say the old Jews
under the Law were in effect Christians, and the followers of Christ now under
the Gospel in some respect are Jews; being one in the substantials of their
religion. For it is clear, that poor Apostate people now of the Jewish nation
has wholly departed from their own doctrine, and will not come to the light,
that they may be judged according to the Old Testament. Now in this I would
seriously attest the adversaries of the Gospel, if paganism, the Turks Alcoran,
or Jewish Talmud hold forth any such doctrine or rule as that which the
Christian Religion does! such pure, and excellent precepts, to restrain the
inordinacy of corrupt affection, backed with arguments becoming an immortal
soul; a doctrine so sincere, solid, and rational, so consistent with it self,
and agreeable to the true scope and drift thereof, which holds forth the most
exquisite rule of perfection, for men to press after; yea, where every page and
line breaths forth holiness toward God, and righteousness and humanity
toward man!

9. I shall add, those clear convincing evidences of the truth of the Gospel,
which did attend the first publishing thereof were so manifest and undeniable a
seal from the Lord, as may force the greatest Atheist to silence. For, -- (1.)
They were Jews as much concerned in the Religion of their Fathers as any, who
did first publish the Gospel; none more zealous according to the Law, than Paul
was before his conversion; none also could challenge their driving an outward
interest hereby, since persecution and bonds, yea, greatest hazard was that
which they must expect. -- (2.) It is clear, they walked by no rule of human
policy, nor those ordinary ways of insinuation which the World does use, to
engage men, and make a party to themselves: but did deliver the truth, truth
most repugnant to the flesh and its interests, with greatest candor and
simplicity, though likewise with a convincing authority and confidence; yea,
came with a message to the World, which had no other convoy, or persuading
argument, but the evidence of its own truth, yet withal such a power
accompanying the same, before which men could not stand. -- (3.) What is
published concerning Christ by the Evangelists, the great works he did, his
dying at Jerusalem with all the stupendous circumstances thereof and signs from
Heaven, was not a thing done in a corner, but in the public view of men, which
in those days was most known and famous: but yet there cannot be produced one
contradictory testimony, to the truth of these relations, by any adversary of
the Gospel, either at that time, or since. Sure the World wanted no malice, and
these great things were early published by the Evangelists and Apostles,
whilst much of that generation was alive; yet it is clear, though in a matter
of that concernment, which made then so great a noise, and was at that time
putting the earth all in a flame, none was found either among Jews or gentiles,
who could or durst put forth a manifesto, to discover the least cheat or
falsehood in those things attested in the History of the Gospel. -- (4.)
Whatever different parties and sects did break out with the first time of the
Church, to oppose the truth in other things, yet in this they had all one
consent, that he who was crucified at Jerusalem, was the Messiah, and Christ.
Which truly did witness the clear irresistible manifestation of this truth in
those times; since, if there could have been the least ground to challenge any
imposture or deceit in this great foundation of the Christian faith, it is more
than probable, those bitter contentions, followed with such animosity and heat
and irritation, of those whom the Apostles and Church in that time did with
much zeal and sharpest censures pursue, would have engaged them to put all the
disgrace upon the truth, which they could, if they might have had where to
fasten their teeth. I would further add, that even the arguments and
objections, which the adversaries of the Gospel could ever bring, to oppose the
same, are indeed a convincing witness and confirmation, and show how little
they could any way say, in giving their malice a vent. We find that absurd
allegation of the Jews, that the great works Christ did in the days of his
flesh, were by stealing the name JEHOVAH out of the templ^^, which they allege
he sewed up in his thigh: which truly needs no further refutation but the
reciting thereof. And here they are even forced to witness the truth of those
relations held forth by the Evangelists, as to the matter of fact, which we
find also these later Atheists, such as Vanninus, Cardan, etc. dare not
challenge or debate: only they would ascribe these great works which Christ
then wrought, to the influence of the stars; a challenge so absurd, that needs
no other answer but to relate it.

VIII. We have that remarkable Prophecy of the incoming of the Gentiles, a
truth indeed great and mavelous, which is expressly held forth in the Old
Testament ( Is. 54. 1, 2. Is. 60. 3, 9.) is a thing so clearly now written
forth in the event, that I am sure, the greatest Athests can have no shift
here; but must own that in this strange work of God about his Church, the
Scripture has an undeniable accomplishment. Now to clear this let us but
consider, --

1. That for many ages this truth about the incalling of the gentiles was
sealed up in a prophecy; a thing so great and astonishing to the ancient Jewish
Church, that they could not well comprehend the same, until once the event
brought it forth. For this was indeed a mystery hid from ages, how the Gentiles
should be fellow-heirs, of the same body, and Partakers of the promise in
Christ; when the bounds and extent of the Church did not exceed Judea, that
small enclosure, whilst the whole World beside did lie buried, like an
outfield, in dark Paganism. For it is well known, that the most pleasant places
of Africa, Asia, and Europe, where afterward many famous Churches were, within
these 1600 years was but a savage wilderness: Britain, Germany and France, did
then worship the sun and stars, they sacrificed to the Gods of the heathens;
yea, those eastern parts on which the sun did first rise, did not then know the
God of Israel: a truth, which not only the Roman and Grecian Histories, but the
records of particular Nations can clearly attest.

2. It is clear, that this prophecy was not held forth only in general; but we
find the time also prefixed (with other special circumstances) when it should
have its accomplishment, at the appearing of the Messiah. He should be revealed
to Israel; before which time a bar was drawn in the way of the Nations, and a
wall of partition betwixt them and the Church, until he stand up who should
hold forth an ensign to the People, and gather the Gentiles under his standard;
which Isaiah does clearly show, Is. 11. 10. and 34. 1, 2. and 60. 1. etc. And
then must the mountains flow down at his presence, Nations be born at once;
yea, the light break forth to the East and the West; then should the Children
of the desolate be more then of the married wife, when this time even the set
time for the gentiles is once come. And it may be very convincing, which is
most observable, that notwithstanding of a more flourishing condition of the
Jewish Church in former ages, when her grandeur and prosperity was more
tempting, and the neighborhood and commerce which the Nations about had with
that People, yea, though by the captivity they were scattered among the
Persians and Babylonians; yet was there no such stir or change of the World,
until the appointed time once came.

3. It may be easy to prove the event of this prophecy, and its manifest
accomplishment, even at the time thereof. For this men cannot deny, that the
Lord did visit the Gentiles with the knowledge of his truth: Which then caused
such a change in the earth, as a great part of it has been brought from
heathenish idolatry, to worship the God of Israel; and such who once were
strangers and aliens, now made to profess the same faith (as to the substance
thereof) of the ancient Jewish Church. Sure this truth needs not want a
witness, whilst Nations and much of the known World have been for so long a
time, and yet to this day are, a visible proof thereof; a truth of such
concernment, that in former ages made a great and stupendous change upon the
face of the earth, so that not only an innumerable company out of all Nations
and languages, but the generality, the very complex body of Kingdoms and
Nations can bear Witness thereto. And now the Gospel has been preached through
much of the World; yea, we may say, there are few parts thereof, where there
has not been some face of a Church: Though the promise has not yet had it is
full accomplishment, but we wait for (according to the Scripture) a more
flourishing time, and great harvest among the Nations, when Israel shall be
gathered: however, it is sure, the Lord has in a great part fulfilled this his
promise, so that the Church might then with astonishment cry out, Who has
begotten all these Children! Who are these that flee as a cloud, like the doves
to their Windows! O blessed day, in which the light did first break forth on
the poor offspring of Japhet, who then dwelt in the shadow and region of death!
O blessed day, that brought salvation with it to the Gentiles, wherein the Lord
did visit those dark places of the earth, which were full of the habitations of
cruelty. I think, the sense of so great a mercy should never let us want an
errand for giving thanks, yea, put much to silence our other complaints.

4. It is not only as to the time, but those very places of the earth, which
Esaias and other of the Prophets did particularly point at, this promise had an
exact accomplishment? For it is this day manifest, as to the Isles, which we
find so frequently mentioned, that these should wait for his Law, and the
uttermost parts of the earth, whence he should bring the Daughter of his
dispersed, we may get a clear commentary upon the same, from what the Lord has
done to Britain and Ireland, with other remote parts of the earth: yea, have
not AEthiopians been made to stretch out their hands even in those sunburned
places of Africa? Has not Christ also had a conquest, where many a ^lack-moor
was through grace made as the snow of Salmon, and the feathers of a dove? So
that it is clear, how these particular places, which were so often pointed at by
the Prophets, have been visited by the Gospel, and fallen to the share of the
Church.

5. This change, which by the incoming of the gentiles to the Church was
wrought upon the Earth, is a thing so great and astonishing, that were it still
in the promise, and this not yet fulfilled, it would truly staggar our Faith,
how such a thing should ever come to pass: and is there not here a miracle,
that that the World cannot possibly deny? (Even this great work of God in
bringing in of the gentiles, which without an extraordinary power, could not be
effected) if men will consider -- (First) That swift progress which then the
Gospel had: how it did run, and was glorified, through the furthest parts of
the earth, and like lightning break forth from one place to another; so that in
the Apostles time, the Scripture does show, how most of the conspicuous
Provinces of Asia had received the Gospel; and Tertullian who lived in the
second Century (in his Book contra Judaeos) does there witness how many
nations, and these most remote from other, Parthians, Medes, Armenia, Phrygia,
Cappadocia, Pontus, and Pamphilia, with much of Egypt, and diverse parts of
Africa, besides Rome, Spain, and other places of Europe, were in his time
almost wholly Christian. For it is indeed clear, that the bounds of the Church
was then of a larger extent, than it is now at this day. -- (2.) It is also
undeniable, that in this solemn day of the Gospel's spreading amongst the
nations, suffering and persecution did all that time attend the Church; yea, in
such a measure, that as the writers of those times do witness, neither famine,
pestilence, nor the sword did destroy so many of the World, as then were of
Christians in the two first centuries put to death for adhering to the truth:
and it is clear, that this great work of God, in such a swift spreading of the
Church, was most discernable in those times of hottest persecution; yea, then
was her most effectual growth and increase, which upon her getting some rest,
and beginning to flourish with external peace, was at a visible stand. -- (3.)
How mavelous a thing was this, to be brought about, if we consider the many
different languages, that did then stop Correspondence between the Church and
the rest of the Earth. For how could the truth thus spread among the nations,
yea, in such remote places of the World Churches be planted by the Apostles,
and have the Scripture translated, and made legible to them; without that
extraordinary Gift of Tongues, which for that end was then given from the Lord?
Sure, beside sacred authority in this matter, reason may convincingly witness
to the World the truth of such a miracle. -- (4.) How strange and wonderful a
change was this, that in so short a time the Gospel should thus enlighten and
put such a luster on the most rude and savage places of the earth, where scarce
humanity had been, and bring them from the condition of beasts, to be men;
should thus tame and civilize the greatest Barbarians, and cause the lion to ly
down with the lamb, yea, by the preaching of that Gospel, and of a crucified
Christ, which as it was to the Jews a stumbling block, so to the Greeks
foolishness!

And in a word, was not this indeed a miracle, how in a matter of such high
concernment as that wherein men's souls and everlasting interest lay, they
should be turned off from their old ^ay and religion, in which they and their
Fathers had been so long rooted; and that a little spark which did break out in
Judea, should bring down the idols of the nations, and burn up their temples!

Alas, that there is so little of a large heart, of that primitive zeal and
fervor this day among Christians for the enlargement of the Church! that such
merchants are now rare, who would venture out to trade with other parts, for
this excellent ware, the merchandise whereof is better than of gold! O that in
these parts where the truth is known and professed the Lord would raise up men
of such a spirit, and such a Magistrate, who would make it their work, and lay
down solid grounds how to advance the Kingdom of Christ in the dark places of
the earth, and reckon their interest in a foreign plantation upon the account
of the Gospel, no less than on the account of trade! we would pray, and yet
hope for this.

IX. What we find foretold by Daniel, yea, by Christ himself, about the
destruction of Jerusalem, and ceasing of the Jewish daily sacrifice, with the
rejection of that people, (Dan. 12. 11. Math. 24. 2.) has many ages ago come
to pass, wherein the World may see how clearly the event does answer this
Prophecy. For it is manifest,

1. That this is a truth which does need no other witness, than the scattered
remnant and desolate ruins of that once flourishing Church and nation of the
Jews, which we see with our eyes at this day whose present state is so great a
monument of divine judgment, so clear a witness to the Scripture, that I think
men cannot look thereon, if they be in any measure serious, but must have such
a conviction.

2. What has befallen this people, may it not be an astonishment to the World
in all succeeding ages! A stroke, that has put them in a more sad condition
than any nation or people we ever yet heard of! Tha^ cast them out of their own
land, and scattered them as vagabonds through the earth, so that these many
ages they have had no scepter nor lawgiver, no piece of the earth they can
call their own, but at the mercy and arbitrary disposal of every place they
reside in; no privilege, or liberties, but a naked permission to possess their
lives and estates during the pleasure of those under whom they get shelter! A
people put by themselves with a visible mark of divine wrath upon them, like a
beacon set up for all the nations to look on, even these who were once
eminently owned of the Lord, who was known in their palaces for a refuge! yea,
it is very manifest, that no stir or essay that ever they made for their
relief, but was still to their further ruin, and found God's hand visibly cross
to them therein! Sure, Ammianus Marcellinus, a heathen writer, did intend no
testimony to the Christian cause in relating that strange passage, which near
his time fell out how the Jews by Julian's warrant and permission did attempt
to build the Temple again, but a fire breaking out from the foundation thereof,
which destroyed many of the workmen, forced them with much terror to desist.

3. Must it not be some strange and dreadful provocation, beyond the sin of
their forefathers, whereat so strange and unusual a stroke does point? Whilst
it is clear, that notwithstanding frequent Idolatry, and departing from God,
when they were at that height in wickedness as to offer up their children to
Moloch, and set up altars in the groves, to reject the message of the Prophets,
and thrust some of them in a dungeon; yet were only punished with 70 years
captivity and after by God's very immediate hand brought again, those who had
taken them captive concurring with them to re-build the Temple: But now how
long and dark has their night been, since this judgment came on them! and
though they could not these many ages charge themselves with Idolatry, yet no
Savior or Deliverer has been raised up, no Prophet sent forth, no sign or
appearance at this day of relief, now for these 1600 years; yea, amidst these
frequent changes and revolutions, that have been in the World, no change in
their condition! Sure, if that people were in speaking terms with their
consciences, this might put them to a strange demurr, what should be the cause,
if they be not guilty of killing the Messiah, and that blood pursuing them;
what atrocious provocation beyond others they can instance in, for which the
Lord does so long and so sorely, by such an unusual and unheard of stroke, thus
contend.

4. What a mavelous concurrence of providence, and convincing appearance of
a divine hand, was in this judgment, the besieging of Jerusalem by the Romans
falling in with the very time of the passover; whilst so great a confluence of
people from all parts of the land were there on that account, that both sword
and famine might contribute their help to destroy! What unreasonable and
astonishing obstinacy against all offers of peace, and the most pressing
insinuations thereof, which Titus Vespasian made, even whilst their ruin was
otherwise inevitable! An unheard of strife, where the enemy did contend to
save, but they to undo themselves! How judicially hardened under most
remarkable prodigies and warnings, which they had of that approaching
desolation; divided wholly amongst themselves, yea, so cruel one upon another
within, that their adversary without could not but look thereon with
compassion! O what a stroke was this, wherein greatest Atheists would grant a
fatality! For indeed men cannot consider the same without acknowledging a
divine hand, and something above ordinary means and causes, where all did thus
meet together in a solemn conspiracy to accomplish that people's ruin.

5. But it is here we may see a singular providence of God for his Church, that
those who of all the World are most violent enemies to the Christian truth, are
also a most convincing witness to the same. Whilst (first) these do clearly
attest the Scripture which is our alone charter, (...) divine authority of
Moses and the Prophets, the ^rue copies whereof they did most tenderly
preserve, what ever absurd glosses some of their Rabbis have thereon; yea,
durst never offer in the least to vitiate the original, but have had the same
transmitted, still from one age to another; to which records, that are this day
in their hand, the Christian Church can with much confidence appeal, and
demonstrate from the Old Testament the undoubted truth of the New. Yea, in this
we may appeal the Atheist to his conscience, that the Scripture is no
imposture, or any cunning device of Christians, which is so far witnessed even
by the greatest adversary and maligners of the Christian Religion. (2.) That
strange induration of the Jews, their unreasonable rejecting of the truth, who
after so long a time cannot see the cause, which is most discernable in their
stroke. O is not this also a most convincing seal to the Scripture, and clear
fulfilling thereof, there is a vail over their mind, as the Apostle shows,
whilst they read the Law, judicially smitten by the Lord with blindness that
they cannot see until once this vail be taken off? And truly we may say, there
is nothing in their judgment more strange and astonishing, than such a
continued obstinacy against the truth; how they should be thus dark in the
noonday, but that herein the Scripture is fulfilled; so that we may even turn
a poison into an antidote!

X. That which is so expressly foretold in the New Testament, yea, as the great
drift of the Prophecies thereof, The coming of Antichrist, and revealing of the
man of sin to the World (2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9,) has long since been
accomplished; wherein, we may say, the wonderful corresponding of the event
with the prophecy is so clear, that this truth is now as plain and obvious, as
once it was dark to the Church; these things being undeniable, --

1. How the Spirit of God in the Scripture has been in a more than ordinary
way particular, to point Antichrist forth by such notorious marks and
characters, that after-ages may know him, if they will not shut their eyes. I
confess, it is not strange, the popish party should seal up the Scripture, and
forbid the ordinary reading of it, since the breaking forth of that light would
soon make their Kingdom dark. For if men would but set the history of the
Church, since the times of the Apostles, over against the Scripture, and make
use of that notable key for opening the prophecies of the New Testament, it
should be then easy to know, the Antichrist is surely come, and who this is;
and herein does the Lord's tender respect to his Church appear, that he does
not only in a very solemn manner forewarn men about this great trial, and as it
were by the sound of a trumpet give an alarm, that such an adversary was
coming, yea, of the time thereof, who would do more hurt, than all who had gone
before, but does also make so clear a discovery of the whole fabric, ri^e, and
progress of that party, with such particular circumstances and differencing
characters from any other enemy of the Church, as may render the World most
inexcusable, if they will needs dash on that rock, whereon the Scripture has
set so conspicuous a beacon.

2. That this Prophecy should now want an accomplishment, or Antichrist be yet
to come, is a thing most repugnant to sacred truth: since it is sure, that
mystery of iniquity even in the times of the Apostles did begin to work; and
what then for a time withheld his coming, the heathen Empire of Rome, has long
since been taken out of the way; which caused some Christians in those days to
wish the standing and continuance of that Empire! from the terror they had of
that adversary, who according to the word they knew was to fill his room. Yea,
do we not find, the Churches trial from Antichrist should be the most sore and
lasting trial of the Church under the New Testament? which after her begun
breathing from heathenish persecution, was to continue for many ages, wherein
the word is most express and clear, that the rise and fall of this enemy should
be gradual, and not at once; whose beginning and first appearance might be
traced to the first times of the Church, and his close and final ruin near the
second coming of Christ, by the brightness whereof ^e shall be destroyed! And
therefore this is so much the subject of the Prophecies of the New Testament,
the great intent and scope of the Revelation of John, in which the true state
of the Christian Church, with the various changes of her condition, even from
the opening of the first seal to the blowing of the last trumpet, is
particularly held forth; and there may we all along trace the steps of the rise
and fall of that man of sin.

3. That such an one as the Scripture points forth, does most fully answer to
all those marks which are there given of Antichrist, has come, and been
revealed to the World, is a thing so very manifest, that except men will needs
force their light and conscience, it cannot but be beyond question and debate;
even such an one whose coming should be after the working of Satan with all
power, signs, and lying wonders, forbidding to marry, and to abstain from meats
which God had appointed, who sits in the temple of God, having a name full
of blasphemy, and does exalt himself above all that is called God, who
bewitcheth the Kings and great men of the earth with his enchantments; yea,
that even by his livery may he be known, he most usually has scarlet and
purple which I think truly mavelous, how particularly these are mentioned in
the Scripture; and in a word, such an one whose traffic, and merchandise, is
not only gold and silver, but the souls of men; who should be drunk with the
blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus Christ; under whose reign the Church
must flee to the wilderness, and there be latent for a long time; and his seat,
that City which is situate upon sevens hills, even that great city which does
rule over the Kings of the earth. O strange, how men can acknowledge this for
the Scripture of God, and yet not see it fulfilled before their eyes, that
there is so lively an image and portraicture of Antichrist there held forth,
such peculiar characters which do convincingly point at the Pope, and popish
hierarchy; yea, could answer to no other adversary, which Christ ever had under
the New Testament, either Pagan, or Mahumetan: and yet so much of the World
does not know him when he is before their eyes!

4. It is clear, that no age since Antichrist was revealed, did altogether want
some witness, to point him forth, even in the darkest times; many of whom loved
not their lives unto the death, that they might seal this truth; and it may be
a question, if more of the blood of the Saints was shed under heathens, than in
aftertimes under Antichrist. Yea, though we had not such express marks to
discover him, from the world, it may be easy for men to judge who that is, that
is this day so directly opposite to Jesus Christ, and to the great design of
the Gospel; that assumes to himself what is alone due to God, to forgive sin,
and be worshipped with Religious adoration; that challenges a Magisterial power
and supremacy over the whole Church, as its head, a style too great for any of
the Angels; who makes void the merit of Christ, and lays down a way of life
and salvation, on the same terms that it stood in the Covenant of works, who
does destroy the great intent of the Gospel; and in effect, denies Jesus
Christ to have come in the flesh; who sets Heaven upon sale for money, and
permits none to perish and go to hell, but the poor, who does dispense with
grossest acts of sin, and the express commands of the Lawgiver, makes moral
prohibitions void by his authority; yea, halloweth the very stews, and most
horrid acts of uncleaness; takes on him to change the condition of the dead,
and ensure to their friends the happy state of their souls, if they will make
large offerings on that account. O! who is this, if not that Antichrist, whose
way does state him in such direct terms of opposition to Christ?

5. Have we not cause to wonder, no less at the strange induration and
blindness of the popish party, than of the Jews, that whilst the one does
confess the Old Testament, and yet knows (...) Christ, the other should grant
the truth of the New Testament, and not know Antichrist, that he New Testament,
even he after whom a great part of the World for these many ages has been
wondering? Sure, so clear an agreement betwixt this prophecy and the event may
not only put this beyond debate, but leave a conviction upon the greatest
Atheists, of the truth and divinity of the Scripture. For what ever former
times might pretend ignorance, whilst this Mystery was but working, now when
the man of sin has come to his full height and stature, and is so clearly
revealed by the light of the Gospel, is takes away all excuse; and I profess,
in these latter times, I cannot see how one can be a knowing Papist, and not an
Atheist also.

() I know it is a sore judgment on men, who will not receive the truth, that
the discovery thereof should be their pain and torment; and I am sure, whatever
advantages of outward peace the followers of Antichrist have this day, they can
have no sound sleep, whilst the light with that clearness does shine, that they
can neither stand before it, nor yet flee and escape, where their conscience
will not follow. But O! ^here is the scripture evidently fulfilled, and their
judgment far begun, as it is held forth in Rev. 16. that the greater discovery
the light makes, the more they should rage, and in fury rise against it: for
the heat of this cannot but scorch, where it does not warm. There is no help,
where God does judicially harden men: no blindness, like that where they shut
their eyes, and the righteous God makes it their plague by putting his seal to
it. However, wisdom must be justified of her children; the truth cannot lose
its errand, even when its effects are sad and judicial; for it is a sweet
savor to God in them who perish. It is truly a sad sight, and there seems no
access to convince, where malice at the way of the Lord turns men mad, yea,
cruel against themselves; but since the Popish Church does not avowedly deny
the scriptures, the divinity of the New Testament and prophesies thereof (which
is the great advantage we require, to have its authority admitted, and their
Religion brought to this test) which is the alone rule of all true Religion;
and since they must grant that to be joined with Antichrist, or partaker in
such a way, is most dreadful, and involves them under the greatest of
judgments; for it is a matter of no less weight, than an eternal salvation, or
damnation: yea since this concerns Ministers of the Gospel, as one special part
of their work now in the last times, to bear witness against Antichrist, (that
great, we must say the greatest adversary, which Christ ever had in the earth)
to warn and pursue without ceasing this call, whatever success it have, that
men would come out of Babylon, and haste from under an approaching wrath and
vengeance, which on some other ground, than appearance, we are sure, now makes
haste; I would here in behalf of the truth offer some queries on this subject.
(besides any thing has been already mentioned) and herein appeal the adversary
to the Scripture of God, that great and uncontroverted judge and to their own
conscience, yea to the sober and retired tho'ts of such, who are under any awe
or impression of a Deity, when they are alone with themselves, if this so
remarkable a Prophesy, about the Antichrist and his coming, be not now clearly
verified, that men may see him with their eyes, or else must shut them at such
a sight.

1. Is there not a very full and particular discovery which the Scripture gives
of this great Adversary, both in his rise and growth, his reign and fall; and
not merely by a passing word: whom the Apostle, 2. These. 2. 3, 4. points out by
such peculiar marks; whom John does describe and difference from all other
Antichrists, that were only to be his forerunners, and shows him a more noted
and principal adversary of Christ above others; yea, we have through the whole
Revelation most clearly discovered, under different styles, what he should be,
and what a sore and long trial the Christian Church was to have under his
reign. I profess, when I read the Scripture, and there see so express and clear
a forewarning, which many ages before we have about the coming of this
adversary, with such peculiar distinguishing circumstances and marks, as are at
this day most exactly verified in the event, I am constrained to admire at so
convincing and unanswerable a witness to the Scripture's divinity; and must
think it strange, how men at such a rate can wrestle against the truth, except
by getting a victory over their conscience, and putting the light in fetters,
whilst they own these Prophesies of the New Testament to be of divine verity;
which yet they so evidently distort, against the clear sense and meaning
thereof; yea, do adventure such a commentary on the same, that manifestly
destroys the text.

2. Can you possibly expect Antichrist's coming to the world now according to
the Scripture, if he be not already revealed; when his forerunners were so many
ages before, even in the times of the Apostles, to show he was then coming? I
must ask, if this adversary should this day begin to appear, could you judge
this is he, or reconcile such a contradiction, how he is now breaking out, who
was beginning to discover himself 1500 years ago? For it is so long since the
Apostle showed, this mystery of iniquity was working (2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.) which
clearly points at Antichrist, who then was hatching, though not on such a
growth and ascendant, as after; and could he be yet latent, yet in the bud?
Has there been no further advance, after so many ages? Has this mystery yet
not wrought it self above ground? O where has he been? that such a working
thing, so dreadful a spark could keep so many ages under ashes, and no flame,
no fire perceived? For it is sure if he was then at work, he has not yet
ceased. Yea, if you admit the Scripture, is not the rising of the Turkish
Empire, in the order of the trumpets, clearly after the revealing of the
Antichrist; and this horrid scourge held forth ( Rev. 9. 20.) as a remarkable
judgment from the Lord, on the Christian world, then turned Antichristian, for
their idolatry, worshipping of images, etc. which was not brought into the
Church till the man of sin was toward his height?

3. Is not this unanswerably manifest, that he who did withold, and as a bar
restrained Antichrists coming for a time, cannot now be standing in the way?
You see, the Scripture shows expressly there is a bar must be removed, and then
should this man of sin be revealed and this cannot be doubted, but that some
temporal power was hereby meant, which did then forcibly withstand (as the
original word KATEX^N imports.) For it is very clear, whilst the Roman Empire
was heathen, he could not brook Rome, or as a Monarch have his seat in that
city with seven hills; he could not then both sit in the temple of God, and
have the Kings of the earth to give their power with consent to him. New let me
but appeal men to their reason and judgment, if any such bar could be yet
standing, after so great, yea, such innumerable mutations and changes of the
world. When, many ages since, there have been such various successions of
States and Kingdoms, and a wearing out of greatest families, how could any
temporal power be ever since the days of the Apostles a continued let in the
way of the adversary?

4. This query I would seriously offer; if such a party can be found this day,
to whom all the marks of Antichrist held forth by the Scripture, do truly
agree, could you then deny that he is come; if so be you look for such an
Antichrist, and under that cognizance, as the holy Ghost points him forth in
the world? O will you be so much in earnest with your conscience, as to suffer
the truth to come thus near, that you may impartially judge what is there of
the Prophesies, that concerns Antichrist coming in the world, which is not now
verified in the event before your eyes; and admit the Scripture but judge
therein, whether there is any such particular distinguishing badge and mark,
held forth in that blessed record for his discovery, which does not
convincingly quadrate with the Pope, and his followers.

5. I shall in this also appeal your conscience, if there be now or has been
under the new Testament an other party, or such an adversary to the Church of
Christ, to whom these distinguishing characters of Antichrist could agree: such
an one who should be no open adversary, but sit in the temple of God under the
vail of a friend, with a show of great wonders and miracles, and yet under that
show exalt himself against God. I know, you will deny that this has a clear
respect to the Popish party, or is justly applicable to them: but I am sure, if
without a prejudicate bias you would seriously judge, and abstract from
application, in this you could not deny an assent, that such a party (whosoever
he be) bears that great badge of Antichrist, in exalting himself against God?
who, as a friend, does assume those titles only due and competent to the
glorious God, and to the Mediator, to be Head and chief Doctor of the Catholic
Church, and alleges her for his spouse, who challenges an infinite power, by
making use of that, Mat. 28. 18. All power is given unto me, etc. (which that
book, entitled Pontifical Ceremonies, does assert Lib. 1. sol. 36. who assumes
an authority to bind men's conscience by his law, and to free their conscience
from those laws which are divine and unchangable; who appoints divine worship
and adoration to creatures, by directing prayers to them; does subject the
faith of the Church to the determination of a man, in which, as infallible, all
must rest: is not that a dethroning of him who is the great Prophet and teacher
of his Church, yea, a making his authority void? Now, beside these
distinguishing characters, which the Scripture, so expressly gives of
Antichrist, are not these also so notorious and plain, that I think it strange
how men can have their reason and judgment in exercise, and not know to whom
they belong; I mean, the forbidding of marriage, and of the use of meats, which
the Apostle holds forth, 1 Timothy 4. 3. and in Rev. 18. 13. you have there a
merchandise with the souls of men. And O can any be in the dark, who these are,
that have such a peculiar traffic with this ware, by redeeming souls for
money, and making a sale of pardons and indulgences, which concern men's souls.
I shall add that likewise Rev. 9. 20. the worshipping of idols of gold and
silver; and herein crave the world to be judge, yea, can appeal to some of
their own greatest writers, if this be not both the doctrine and the practice
of the Romish Church, which one of the most learned among them does expressly
assert, that the images of the Trinity are not set up for a show, but for
Religious Adoration. And is not this a most direct making void of the moral
law? which so expressly forbids any worshipping of the invisible God under the
similitude of a corruptible man, or under any visible representation.

6. Is not this foretold of Antichrist, what a dominion he should have over the
Kings of the earth ( Rev. 17. 18.) unto whom they should agree, and give their
power and Kingdoms, to support his interest? Now if this be not convincingly
verified, and has been for many ages in the Pope, it is easy to judge: and I
am sure, his followers would be loath to deny a thing, in which they so much
boast. I confess, were it not thus foretold by the Scripture, we could not
think it credible, how the Kings and great men of the earth should be in such a
measure bewitched, to enslave themselves and their interest to that party, and
yield to so strange a subjection under their yoke; it seems so very irrational,
yea, like an infatuation, since they cannot but see under what a terror he
keeps them by his interdictions, by assuming a power to loose subjects from any
tie to their Princes; and thus binding and loosing their conscience at his
pleasure, what interest he has in their counsels, by that subtle device of
auricular confession; what intolerable homage and service he requires from
Princes; what vast treasure he draws for support of his Hierarchy, from those
places where he has power; yea, what a visible tendency his actings have to
promote a worldly interest, and make the great men of the earth dependent on
him; how easily he can dispense with the greatest breaches of the moral law,
whilst most cruel and inexorable in any thing that interferes with his power
and supremacy; O how astonishing might this blind devoting of great men, both
themselves and their power, to the support of such an interest be, if we had
not a clear resolution from the Scripture, that this is from the Lord, who has
put it in their heart, and so far gives them up in his secret judgment!

7. I must ask, is not that a convincing witness to the Scripture, and a clear
argument for the Protestant reformed Church, which you so much object against
her, that her condition for so many ages has been low and abject, and did so
little appear, whilst the Popish interest was resplendent and flourishing; For
it is sure, such a long continued suffering, and latent condition of the Church
under Antichrist, is expressly foretold, wherein the witnesses should be put to
prophesy in sackcloth, and the poor woman (which is meant of the Church) put to
flee to the wilderness and be there hid: so that you cannot say, the Church and
followers of Christ have been more low in these worst and darkest times, than
the word holds her out to be. Yet, has there been still a succession, and some
witness for the truth, and the Church thus continued in all these times, which
(as one excellently says) was like a fresh river that made her way through that
horrid lake of Antichristianism, without mixing therewith, and at last did
break out gloriously.

8. Is not the Antichrist in a special way pointed out in the Scripture, by
some proper mark? some visible sign and cognizance, which his followers should
receive, for differencing them for any other party, Rev. 13. 16. Now in this I
desire the World and commonest observers to judge, if those many strange
ceremonies and rites of the Romish Church, their distinguishing signs and
badges (which they so much own and indispensibly require, as visible characters
of their profession, yea, are so peculiar to that party beyond others) do not
convincingly quadrate with the Scripture herein, and most clearly verify the
same in the event. The World knows, and the ordinary way and practice of these
can witness, that frequent use (oh a most horrid, idolatrous abuse!) of the
sign of the cross; which not only in a special manner they take as a
differencing badge of their party from others, by so frequent a crossing of
their forehead and breast, and putting this as their mark on all they baptize,
or receive by confirmation; but do ascribe also to it an effective and
operative power, and as a charm or magical sign makes use of it to effect
things surpernatural, to restrain sin, drive away the Devil. For thus they
conjure spirits, thus they wear it in their rings, and pendiaries; yea, is it
not by them adored and worshipped, and made use of for the blessing and
consecration of all other things: Sure, this can be no matter of debate, since
it is so known and obvious, and that it is easy thus to discern a Roman
Catholic, if he but avow his profession, by such a visible sign, and find him
but by his mark; which that party does pursue with greatest fervor, and
thereby correspond and discover themselves one to another.

I shall further add, Is not this the Antichrist, whose name must be
understood, and reckoned by the number thereof, which is the number of a man!
Rev. 13. 18. It is true, this seems very dark and mysterious, and in stead of a
more clear discovery, might rather be judged a drawing a vail over this
adversary: but since we have the Scriptures express call and warrant, to make a
serious inquiry and search about its meaning, yea, does not only hold it forth
as duty, but shows such a thing is attainable, and may be understood, I shall
desire in humble sobriety, without peremptory asserting, to offer some few
thoughts on this Scripture, both as to its meaning, and how clearly the man of
sin is thus pointed out and his name made known by the number (...) about which
I humbly judge (and must therein crave liberty to differ from others, and those
whose judgment I most highly respect) that this number (as it is here set down)
is explicatory, and given as the very key to the Church, for opening the
mystery of this name, and of that man of whom also it is the number; and thus
shows, it is not to be reckoned as the name of a single person, nor is it to
be found by Arithmetical computation in the numeral letters of a man, but is
the name of a politic body, a name which comprehends a plurality, such as
those numerous orders and degrees of the pontifical Hierarchy are; and by such
a scale, his number does remarkably ascend in so many degrees, until it
terminate in a man, even in one absolute Monarch and universal Head, as the
very Summa totalis, in whom that whole number resolves, and therefore it is the
number of a man. Yea, by this reckoning, we may thus clearly know what a man
that is; that as he cannot be known, if we take him alone, without respect to a
politic body and the whole complex Hierarchy, of which number he is made up,
as the constituent parts, we must also understand, by this computation, the
Antichrist, with respect to a long continued series and succession, which here
the Scripture shows to the Church: that he is not a single individual person
only, or such a politic body, of many numerous degrees, resolving in one head,
which should be but for an age, or of a short duration; but that he is an
adversary who is to be continued, in a numerous succession, through a series of
many ages. And thus may the man of sin and his name be understood, by this
number, of which he is made up. Now in this, I humbly judge, the scope of the
Scripture is clear, in setting down such a rule to count Antichrist by his
number, and thus does prophetically obviate that great mistake, after-ages
would fall into, and is to this day entertained, that this adversary is but one
individual person, who should get up, and cause a remarkable Apostasy in the
Church; therefore it is, that the World will not know this is he, when they see
him before their eyes; not considering that such a numerous body and succession
is contained in his name, from which he cannot be separate.

But for further clearing, I shall offer some few things to be seriously
considered in his reckoning. (1) Here is a number, and plurality, by the Holy
Ghost particularly set down, by which Antichrist must be known and counted: and
the tie is so close betwixt him and his number, that both the man, and his name
is formally made up thereof. -- (2.) Here is a number which is not to be sought
after by the subtle computations of Arithmetic, or any curious inquiry in the
numeral letters of a man's name; since thus we cannot know the true use of
Christian wisdom and prudence, which the Scripture requires; yea, it is clear,
this way might answer several other names, as well as Lateinos, which could not
in an ordinary way be determined, without a pretending to some extraordinary
revelation and discovery. But here may be judged work for spiritual wisdom, to
count this number of Antichrist, and his name, with respect to his nature,
frame, and composition. -- (3.) Here is such a number, which is all summed up
in one man, and cannot otherways be counted or understood, but as it has a
respect to a single person, in a continued succession, wherein it resolves.
Now, is there not such a number, to which the Pope stands as nearly related, as
the total sum is to those degrees, and lesser numbers, of which it is made up?
And here is wisdom, to join aright that man of sin, and his number, and there
see how exactly they quadrate in the event, and each gives light to an other.
-- (4.) We find here a large number, wherein there is a plurality of many
different degrees, rising one above other, and is therefore definitely
expressed by so great a number as 666. -- (5.) This is also a number (and
herein there seems clear ground for such a remark) which is most unite and
compact, with a close concatenation, a remarkable order, and rising from a
lower to a higher degree, with a special subordination and dependence on other;
yea, is thus knit, that one part comprehends the other; such as is most clear
and obvious, in that subtle politic constitution of the Romish State, and
that numerous Hierarchy, with which this definite number of 666 seems
marvellously to quadrate: where by a scale of so many steps and degrees, you
may follow up this number, as it were from six to sixty, etc. by Deans,
Provincials, Generals of Orders, to Bishops, thence Archbishops, Primates,
Patriarchs, Cardinals, until you find all resolve in one man; who is as
straightly related to it, as a name can be to so many syllables, whereof it is
made up. I know, this may seem too curious an inquiry, and not so suiting the
gravity and weight of the Scripture; but since the Spirit of God has chose
such a definite number before another, wherein there is so strange an order and
quadration, to discover that adversary, and gives us such ground that his
number points at his frame and composition, I think, without any challenge of
unsobriety, such a remark very suitable. -- 6. Whilst the Scripture shows, this
is the number of a man, and of his name, does it not also show, it is such a
number that lies nearest Antichrist, and is most straightly related to him; and
as the formal cause, does most specially concur in his constitution, yea, gives
as it were life to that image? Now let it be seriously considered what this is,
yea, whither that mystery of Antichristianism does not in a peculiar way lie in
his Supremacy, and being infallible and the ultimate judge of controversies,
which he claims as absolute Head of the Church universal, and that fountain
whence all those degrees of power in the Romish Hierarchy do flow, and in whom
they fully terminate. For it is clear, thence are all those gross tenets, and
corruptions in doctrine. Thus he most directly exalts himself against God, and
puts the Mediator off his throne: thus he does exercise authority over men's
conscience; thus Antichristianism, and that avowed opposition to Jesus Christ,
takes life, is nourished, and has its strength, even under those wings of his
absolute supremacy. Now if it be clear that this is the number which lies
nearest to Antichrist, from which he can no ways be separated, and does most
formally make up that man of sin, then by the exercise of Christian wisdom may
that number, and its true meaning be thence understood. -- (7.) Is not this
such a number, that is peculiarly restricted, in a class by it self, which the
18th Ver. does show, wherein that great Bulk of the Romish Church is not to be
sought? For though it is there clear, that such who receive the mark, and by
some visible profession own the doctrine of the Romish Church, are of the
largest extent, and therefore it is said, great and small, rich and poor, must
come that length, yet as to the number of the beast, and of his name, it is
expressed by its self, and as a higher class, in which all of the common rank
who must receive the mark, do not fall: but as lying more close and near to
Antichrist, is in a peculiar manner restricted by a distinguishing note; which
a serious study of that Scripture will help to clear. ()

XI. What was prophesied about the killing of the witnesses under Antichrist,
(Rev. 11. 3, 7, 8.) we may say, has clearly come to pass, and at this day may
read the same in the event. For it is manifest, --

1. That during Antichrist's reign, even in the darkest times, there wanted not
some to seal the truth, and bear witness thereto, both by open confession, and
suffering on that account, which the Church-Histories can abundantly make out.

2. That during that dark night those who did give a testimony, and any way
appeared against the grievous encroachments of Antichrist, in behalf of
down-born truth, were put to prophecy in sackcloth, when there was nothing
left, but to weep over the Church's ruins, and witness their detestation and
grief for the growing Apostasy of such times.

3. It is clear, that as the prophecy does point at some more remarkable
suffering and persecution, which the Church was to meet with from Antichrist,
beyond all it had endured from that adversary in former ages; yea, a special
permission from the Lord to that party, to vent their rage and cruelty against
the Saints, which should fall out after the witnesses finishing their
testimony, who had so long in an abject low condition, as in sackcloth,
prophesied; yea, when Antichrist should be at his height, and his Kingdom upon
the turn, that then must this remarkable killing of the witnesses be
accomplished: so likewise did the event convincingly verify the same. For it is
known that upon the close of Antichrist's reign, whilst the truth began to
break out, this sorest storm of persecution beyond all that had been before,
did then break upon the Church, even in its budding forth, that we may say,
that adversary did not only put forth the utmost of his power and rage against
the Saints, but seemed in some measure to bring his cruel designs to pass;
which the dreadful massacres in France, Provence, and the Valleys of Piemont,
the sore and violent persecution of the Church through the Netherlands, under the
Duke of Alva, and in England by Queen Mary, in Germany after the defeat of the
Duke of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse, can clearly witness.

4. Is it not also clear, how this remarkable storm, and cutting down of the
Saints, over whose dead bodies their adversaries did rejoice, was according to
this prophecy to be previous to some eminent enlargment and reviving of the
Church, which did accordingly fall out in the event, like a resurrection of the
witnesses from the dead, to the astonishment of the World, that immediately
followed upon the back thereof? so that when their enemies thought they had
gained their end, as they did conclude by such persecutions, particularly that
French massacre, that the Protestant interest should be quite ruined, they were
yet forced to see their labor in vain, and the Church more eminently
flourishing after the same.

I shall further add, that Antichrist has not only been revealed, and his
Kingdom come to its height: but it is clear this day, that it is on the falling
hand, and his ruin is now begun. Upon which account we may say, yea, have cause
to sing, that the winter is past, the fig tree puts forth her leaves, that
shows the summer's approach; yea, the singing of birds is heard in our land:
let us go forth, and meet him, who is now gone out as a mighty man, for the
salvation of his Church, and takes the fields against this great adversary of
his truth and people, on whose side victory does surely wait.

The second thing proposed, was to consider, -- WHAT IS YET TO BE ACCOMPLISHED.

Having touched a little some of the most concerning prophecies of the
Scripture, both under the New and Old Testament, which are already fulfilled,
and the truth thereof so clearly written forth in the history of providence;
that we may say, the most ordinary observers, if they will not shut their eyes,
cannot want a conviction thereof: I shall now in the next place point at that
which yet remains of the prophetical part of the Scripture, to be
accomplished; those prophecies which concern the Church in these last times.
Whereby we may have a sure demonstration, how far the night is spent, and of
the near approach of that blessed day of the liberty of the sons of God: for
this does finish the mystery of God, and fully prefecteth his work, if once
that which remains of the prophecies of the word were fulfilled.

There are those truths, the accomplishment whereof we have a sure warrant to
expect before the end. As (1.) The full ruin, and downfall of Babylon. (2.) The
conversion and incalling of the Jews to Jesus Christ. -- (3.) A solemn day of
the Church's flourishing, both Jews and Gentiles, which shall follow the making
out of the former promise. (4.) The fall and destruction of the Turkish Empire,
that cruel party who have been raised up and established for judgment, with
whom the Lord shall yet reckon, for all that Christian blood by them so
unjustly shed, as seems clearly held forth, Rev. 16. 12. (5.) We are also to
expect, after all these, that full and last stroke upon Gog and Magog: and then
the Lord is at hand, and that great mystery of the prophecies and promises of
the Scripture shall then be finished, and at a blessed close.

I. We have the full ruin and destruction of Antichrist and his Kingdom,
clearly prophesied, and in very express terms promised to the Church (2 Thessalonians.
2. 2, 8. Rev. 16. 10, and 17.) the accomplishment whereof we do yet according
to the Scripture wait for; which the God of truth, who cannot lie or repent,
shall in due time assuredly bring about, and which approaches when that solemn
cry shall be heard, Babylon is fallen! about which we would consider, --

1. That this judgment is already begun, and the first step thereof visible is
now clear; wherein men may see the event most exactly answer the prophecy. For
the Lord has begun to consume Antichrist by the breath of his mouth: and since
the first breaking out of the light, his Kingdom has been mouldering down
before the Word. Have not Nations fallen off, at the voice of the preached
Gospel? It is true, the Church wants not sore conflicts, even under the
Vials: and it is the Lord's way, to try his People with such various
uncertainties, that when things have been most promising, another providence
comes like a cross wave, which seems to drive them as far back, as once they
seemed to be forward. Yet it is sure, and should be beyond debate, that
Antichrist's overthrow is upon a present advance, and that work of the Lord for
his Church's deliverance is going forward. For if we believe salvation by
Christ upon the warrant of the word, should we not also with much assurance
believe that Antichrist's wound is deadly and incurable, which he has got by
the preaching of the Gospel, which all the Physicians of the earth shall never
help.

2. This is one of the greatest and most signal acts of the judgment of God on
his Church's enemies; one of the most eminent manifestations of his glory,
which he has reserved for the last times, wherein the appearance of his hand
and great power shall be very manifest; and we are to expect by this remarkable
stroke that way shall be made for that glorious house, which Christ is to have
for himself in the latter days, which shall be built upon Antichrist's ruins,
when that new bride, both of Jews and Gentiles, shall be prepared for the
marriage-supper of the Lamb.

3. Though we are to expect, on clear ground from the word, the Lord's eminent
appearing by his immediate hand in this great work, which shall be so
convincing in that day, and witness an extraordinary providence, that all
lookers-on must with fear and astonishment confess, that this is God's own
work: yet it is also clear, that he will therein make use of instruments,
fitted and chosen for that end, who shall be raised and acted forth with a more
than ordinary Spirit, to execute the vengeance of the Lord, even the judgment
written: amongst whom the feeble shall then be strong. Yea, we have ground to
expect, that of the Kings of the earth, and the race and successors of those
who in former times had given their power to the Beast, shall the Lord raise
up, to hate the whore, and make her desolate. O blessed are they, who shall
have a hand in so noble a work, to sack and destroy that accursed City, built
up with the blood of the Saints and martyrs of Jesus Christ.

4. We are not to bound the Lord, as to any particular time for accomplishing
this piece of his word: yet, we have clear ground to believe, that Babylon's
ruin makes haste, and the day of the Lord upon her is near; whose sword is
bathed in Heaven, and that the instruments of his vengeance are making ready.
One stroke upon that party is already past; Antichrist has begun to fall
before the word, and must fall further until that great stroke, which shall
destroy his seat and lay waste that land, be accomplished. Some promising
evidences of its near approach I would here point at. (1.) The many prayers of
the saints, which are now before the throne, and cannot sail of a return. Many
who wrestled often with the Lord on this account, though they are gone, yet are
their prayers on the file, and wait for this solemn manifestation of the
judgment of God: and the blood of the Saints does not cease to cry, yea, has
as loud a cry as ever. -- (2.) It is clear, that the preached Gospel now since
the light began to break forth, does ripen and help to make the harvest more
white, than many ages formerly. And truly, if we consider how long the word
has been sounding a retreat to that party, to come out of Babylon, and that
for these 150 years they have been still acting in opposition to so clear a
light, to such a solemn call, so many warnings, yea, to such convincing
discovery of the Lord's being against them in very remarkable providence, does
it not show, at what an height their sin this day is, and an obstinate
rejecting of cure? -- (3.) We cannot but see how that judgment which should be
poured forth on Antichrist under the vials, is in a great measure now verified
in the event. -- (4.) It is clear, and consonant to the Scripture, that the
Lord's work is now hastening in the latter days, providence in a swift motion
and making great advance, more quick changes in the case of the Church, both as
to storms and calms, and her trials now must not be so long as in former time.
Rom 9. 28. He will out short his work in righteousness; for a short work will
the Lord make in the earth. -- (5.) That Antichrist and his followers do this
day seem to be at such an advantage; the Lord's work as it were at a stand,
yea, rather going back. This late reviving of Antichristian Prelacy in Britain
and Ireland, with so visible a growth of Popery there, and so dark an hour upon
the reformed Churches abroad, I think, on very solid grounds, is a promising
evidence of the near approach of a further stroke on that party. For it is
clear, both from the word and God's ordinary way of procedure, how a sharp
storm is usually previous to some remarkable enlargement of the Church; a very
low ebb, before the turning of the tide; yea, that every step of her advance,
whereby she has gained ground on Antichrist, has still had some conflict and
wrestling going before: and thus the Lord, by suffering, does ripen his People
for such times of mercy. For which times, O let us pray and wait, when the
smoke of that accursed City shall ascend up to Heaven, and his People be made
to triumph in his praise, and sing that song, Hallelujah! Salvation, glory, and
honor to the Lord God, who has judged the great whore! Rejoice over her, thou
Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets: for God has avenged you upon her.

II. We have a clear prophecy about the incalling of the Jews, and their
conversion to Christ in the latter days, held forth by the prophets, and in the
New Testament very expressly mentioned; the fulfilling whereof the Church must
yet wait for, and long after, when God shall bring again the captivity of his
ancient People, and say to that valley of dry bones. Live! about which we would
consider, Isai. 11. 15. Romans 11. 24. Rev. 16. 12.

1. That this promise does not only concern particular persons, or a few, but
the body and generality of that people, is most clear from the Scripture, if
men would compare Isa. 11. 11. Zach. 12. 10. with Romans 11. 25. Where it is
undeniable, that their gathering must be as full and remarkable, as their
scattering: and as there is no nation so remote whither some of them are this
day driven, that shall not hinder the fulfilling of the promise; but as Isaiah
shows, the Lord shall then assemble the dispersed and outcasts, and bring
them back from the four corners of the earth, and furthest places thereof. Yea,
does not the Apostle expressly show, that it is all Israel, whereat this promise
points? For though they are enemies concerning the Gospel, yet are they
beloved for the fathers sakes, because of the Covenant which was made with
Abraham and his seed. And truly we have in this, ground also to expect
something further than their conversion; that in this day the Lord shall raise
up the tabernacle of David which is fallen, and plant them upon their own land,
Amos 9. 11, 15. Not only bring them to a visible Church State, but even
therewith some temporal restitution and recollection of them as a Nation: yea,
we may expect a return of the old blessing of that land's fruitfulness, which I
think is clearly held forth in that of Amos. 9 14. that the very hills shall
drop down sweet wine, and melt as it were in outward blessings on them.

2. That this promise has not yet had an accomplishment, is also clear from
the Word. For it must follow the rejection of that People, and should not take
place until the fullness of the gentiles be brought in: which harvest for many
ages after was not to be reaped. Yea, did not the Apostle hold this forth as a
mystery, a piece of the Scripture which the ancient Jewish Church could not
well comprehend, when it was pointed at Prophets, and even at that time was not
understood? Which surely could have been no mystery, if their conversion had
reached no further then the Apostles time; and it is known, how small a number
since of that People has yet been brought into Christ.

3. We have much ground from the Scripture, that this day, this great day of
Jezreel, shall be a very remarkable and solemn time: which will cause
astonishment to the Nations round about, and make a wonderful change on the
face of the earth; a time of God's eminent appearance for that People, when his
singular respect shall be as manifest, as formerly his great displeasure and
anger was; a time, on which many of the choicest mercies of the Church do
certainly wait, the return of many prayers, a large pouring forth of the
Spirit, even on the body of that People and on all ranks, not only the families
of David Nathan, and Levi, but also the families of Shimei, with a large
Dispensation of gifts; yea, such a time, wherein the converted of Israel shall
then see and understand how far the glory of the second Temple does exceed that
of the first, and shall be a very conspicuous part of Christ's universal
Kingdom, eminent for the power and purity of the ordinances, to which others
shall look as to a most choice and excellent pattern of a purely reformed and
glorious Church.

4. Beside the promise of him, who is not like man to lie, or the son of man,
to repent, there want not some very convincing providence, to confirm our
faith concerning this: if we consider how this People are still kept by
themselves, amidst all their scatterings not mixed or incorporated with other
Nations, which is most usual through long converse, that people of several parts
of the earth will unite and join in one. Is not their great increase also
remarkable? What great multitudes of them are in the eastern parts, yea,
through most of Asia, Africa, and in those places of Europe where the Christian
Church is? and all this time their land not possessed, but by a rabble of the
Turks, under whose yoke they groan. And though the genealogies of particular
families are at this day much lost, yet there is still so much sure and
evident, as to the series and genealogy of the Nation, that does difference
them from any other People.

5. It is true, the authority of the word should silence all our thoughts how
so great a thing shall be brought about: yet we may judge, that (as a mean)
this shall eminently contribute to the same, such a convincing stroke upon
Antichrist which must go before their conversion, wherein so manifest an
appearance of God, and the fulfilling of one of the greatest promises of the
New Testament, cannot but stare them in the face; and with this the taking away
of that stumbling block of idolatry, which has so long helped to harden them
against the profession of the Gospel.

I must shut up this with a sad regret that whilst we have so clear a promise,
there is no more tender respect, and further essay to promote the good of that
People. Who knows, what a blessing might attend the use of ordinary means?
since this is an unquestionable duty, and men know not, when they sow the seed,
whether this or that shall prosper, alas! that the usual deportment of
Christians, with whom they converse, does often further help to highten their
prejudice against Christianity; let us long and pray more for this day, a day
which shall bring so great a blessing with it to the gentiles.

III. There are many prophecies both in the Old and New Testament, that do
clearly point at a great flourishing and prosperity in the days of the Gospel:
which I humbly conceive, are not yet fully made out, but shall have a more
remarkable accomplishment before the close of time. Isaiah 65. 25. Isaiah 66.
12. Mich. 4. 1, 2.

I confess, the event will be the surest commentary; and until this appear, men
should be sober and cautious, that they darken not the counsel of God, and his
truth, with any wild fancy, and aim to be wise above that which is written: yet
I must think, that there are great things laid up in these promises for the
Church, that we cannot now well reach; yea, would scarce get believed, until
the appointed time unvail their meaning. I shall here but only touch how it may
appear these promises are not yet fully accomplished, and what with a safe
warrant we may expect in their accomplishment. As to the first, we would
consider these things, --

1. That these great promises, which hold forth so eminent an enlargement and
flourishing of the Church, do also point at some particular limited time; some
period and revolution of the Church's condition, which is not agreeable and
common to other times; until which these promises do not take place.

2. This promised flourishing concerns both Jews and Gentiles, and the word
does clearly point at some further increase of the gentile Church by the
calling of the Jews: which must have a peculiar respect to that solemn time of
Israel's restoration, and Antichrist's ruin; a time, on which the return of
many prayers, and the fulfilling of many promises in the behalf of the Church,
do surely wait. So that as Isaiah and other of the Prophets do put over this
great flourishing of the Church to the days of the Gospel, the Apostle Romans 11.
does point at a more precise time, wherein this in a larger measure shall be
made out.

3. We cannot find the Christian Church did ever enjoy so great an enlargement
and flourishing state as these promises seem to import. For persecution and
suffering has most been her lot, first from the Jews, next from her heathen
adversaries, and last from Antichrist, whose fall and ruin, we have ground to
expect, shall make room for so great an increase of the Church: for, how much
power Antichrist has, in so far is the Church kept under; yea, it is clear how
very short all her breathings have been.

4. It would appear, so solemn a time of the Churches flourishing, whereat the
Prophets did so often point, as it has an undoubted respect to the days of the
Gospel, so in its full accomplishment must answer to that remarkable day of
Satan's binding and the Saints Reign with Christ, when the Kingdoms of the
Earth become the Lord's; which we find does immediately preceed Satan's last
loosing, and his going forth to gather his broken forces, for that great
battle, which is to be very near the end.

I shall but add, we have ground to judge, the Lord will usher in that glorious
everlasting state of the Church, even by some preparative degrees here: the
latter times are there to be reckoned the more blessed, the more near they
approach to the dawning of glory.

Now, in the second place, I shall but point at some things, which with a safe
warrant we may understand and look after in the accomplishment of these
promises.

It is very clear, they hold forth a great enlargement to the universal Church,
both of Jews and Gentiles. Particular Churches may be in a sad withering
condition, whilst other parts do flourish: but these promises seem to point at
a day, which will concern the saints in all corners of the earth, who shall not
want their share with the rest of that blessed time. It may be also clear, some
more bright and hot sunshine of the Gospel is held forth; some such remarkable
springtide of the Spirit, that shall be as discernable, as the Churches low
ebb sometimes was; a day of the great power of God, his presence very manifest
among his people and with the ordinances, beyond former times; so that Ezekiel.
48. 35. The name of that place shall be called Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is
there. Yea, that in this day Christ's visible Kingdom, in a settled
Church State, shall more eminently flourish: and the flowing in of people and
nations with much fervor, who shall join themselves to the Lord, pure
ordinances, a more universal oneness amongst the worshippers of God, the walk
of Christians with a discernable luster of holiness, will be made to commend
the Gospel; Christ's goings full of Majesty, and the shout of a King which then
shall be heard among his People; the noise of such sad complaints and bitter
exercises from the spirit of bondage, not so much among the saints, as in
former times. And though we see no sure ground from the word, to expect such a
favorable time, wherein the Church militant shall not have trouble and
persecution from the World: yet there seems so much clearly imported in some
of these great promises, as point at a great calm, and more favorable gale of
outward prosperity, which the Church shall then have, yea, this in some longer
continuance than in former ages; a day, wherein the haters of the Lord shall
even be made to feign subjection, with much of the countenance and concurrence
of Magistrates, and the civil authority in behalf of the Church; yea, a time of
much holy fear amongst the people of God, and of much terror and aw upon his
enemies, to which the great works of the Lord in that time shall then
effectually contribute, and cause them to fear the Lord and his goodness in the
latter days.

() IV. There is a special prediction of Satan's binding up, or restraint, and
of some remarkable reign of the Church with Jesus Christ, held forth, Rev. 20.
2. The full accomplishment of which we on clear ground may judge, is not
already come: yet is so far now verified in the event, as may clearly witness
its meaning, and let us see how at this day it is taking place. I confess, this
seems one of the most dark and abstruse prophesies, we have in the Scripture;
on which there has been many strange thoughts and glosses held forth: but to
set down these various judgments of men on the truths of God, I humbly think,
may tend to a further darkning of the same, more than to any solid edification.
I shall only offer some things to be considered, which by undeniable
consequence from the Scripture seem most clear and obvious, and may only help
to the understanding this Prophecy, but that manifest correspondence which is
betwixt it and the event at this day.

(1.) There can be no debate, this solemn time of the Saints reign with Christ
concerns the militant condition of the Church, and must be expected here on the
earth, not in heaven. And therefore we find immediately after, there is a very
sore assault of the Devil held forth, who should occasion a new trial to the
Church; and he for a time let loose, to deceive the nations. -- (2.) Since the
Scripture is the best interpreter of it self, we must here understand
(comparing one place with another) this raising of the Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus Christ to reign with him, figuratively, and in such a sense as that is
Rev. 11. 11. must be understood; to wit, a rising of the witnesses in the same
spirit and power, and of such a party who should bear the same testimony. To
which also that in Mal. 4. 5. and Mat. 11. 14. about John's coming in the same
Spirit of Elijah, with which he did appear to the World, gives light. So that
we see how consonant and agreeable the Scripture is with it self. (3.) Is not
the meaning of the Spirit in this prophesy clear, that the greatest enlargement
of the Church, yea, and of the longest duration and continuance, that it should
have under the New Testament unto the second coming of Christ, is held forth in
the reign of the saints? So that it manifestly points at a more solemn time, a
more sweet refreshing interval, which shall be remarkable both in measure and
duration beyond all she formerly had: and shows, that there is no such happy
time else to go over the Church's head, till she be triumphant in heaven.
Therefore it is called, by way of eminence, the Church's reign, considered
comparatively with any other such change. (4.) Is it not very clear, that this
so remarkable time cannot be judged previous to Antichrist's coming, nor under
his advance and growth? Since, first, this points expressly at those who were
beheaded for the witness of Christ, and had not worshipped the beast and his
image, nor received his mark, who should thus be raised to reign with Christ.
-- (2.) We find that it does very immediately preceed that last assault the
Church shall have, upon Satan's loosing, to gather the nations to that great
battle, and so must concern these last times, when the Lord is pouring out his
vials upon the throne and Kingdom of the beast. It is strange, when the
Scripture is so plain, that some choice and excellent men, writing on this
prophesy, will have it contemporary with the Church's condition before
Antichrist's appearance: for it is sure if by the beast and his image and mark,
Antichrist must be understood, and if there be but one great assault mentioned
after this, which the Church militant shall have before the close of time, this
prophecy must now be fulfilling, and with no other time before this could
quadrate, according to the Scripture. -- (5.) Is it not clear, that this great
restraint of Satan is no such absolute binding, that will put the Church wholly
beyond trouble and reach of his assaults? No, this belongs to heaven, and is
there only to be expected. But the Scripture very evidently shows, this shall
be such a binding up of Satan, that he should not deceive the nations, nor have
that wonted power to darken the face of the Church by any great or universal
apostasy, during this time. And I am sure, it is undeniable, that since the
Church's raising from under Antichrist, Satan has been thus restrained: and by
all his violent assaults, he has not reached the full withdrawing of any one
nation, which was brought under the yoke of the Gospel; whatever may be said of
poor Bohemia, by a violent course of persecution so born down, that this once
famous Church is now scattered in other places where there are yet considerable
numbers, yea, it is not altogether without hope, that the great avenger of
blood will yet visit her cruel usage on that bloody Austrian family, and return
yet her captivity again, when it seems now furthest off and hopeless. -- (6.)
Must we not see, that this great sunshine, as it takes in Antichrist's fall,
has a special respect also to Israel's return and conversion? Which, according
to the Scripture, is one of the most solemn and flourishing times that the
Christian Church shall have, and therefore shall be to the gentiles as life
from the dead. Now, do but seriously judge what the Church's condition has
been through all the times of the New Testament, first under Heathens, and
after under the tyranny of Antichrist, and now how far providence does unfold
the meaning of this prophecy in the event, since the man of sin began to
decline; and I humbly judge, it may be easy to see, that at this day it is
clearly taking place, though this solemn reign be not yet advanced to its
greatest pitch, but will have a more remarkable period ere this prophecy be
fully made out. I shall but add, this resurrection mentioned in the prophecy,
must be in a spiritual sense understood, and can be no bodily raising of the
Saints; since it is so expressly there called the first resurrection, to
difference it from the second, and is held forth in an opposition to the first
death. ()

VI. We have a prophecy held forth, Rev. 16. 12. which compared with Rev. 9.
13. seems clearly to point at the fall and destruction of the Turkish Empire,
who have been these many ages so great a scourge to the Christian World. For
it is manifest, that this drying up of the river Euphrates must relate to the
very party, which we find in that 9 th Chap. raised up from about that river,
where the Turk has so considerable a part of his dominions. It is true, the
event will more clearly make this known: Yet these Things are undeniable, --

1. That such a Party was foretold by John, in that 9th Chapter and a solemn
warning given to the Church, of so dreadful a storm; the time also there
pointed forth, when Antichrist should be at a great height; yea, the
portr^icture of such an adversary most evidently held forth, such as indeed
they were found to be, a terrible cruel destroying party, and therefore are
said to have breast-plates of fire; their number also there held out to be a
very great multitude, which those huge armies usually brought by the Turk to
the field, can witness.

2. The cause why the Lord should raise up so dreadful an enemy, and thus let
them loose, is also expressly declared in that 9th Chap. 20th ver. that it was
in judgment, and for a plague on men, for Antichristian idolatry, which then
had so much overspread the earth; and it was no wonder, when so much of the
visible Church was turned almost brutish in their Religion, and from the pure
worship of God was carried after idols of gold and silver, the work of men's
hands, that so brutish and barbarous an adversary should be let out for a
scourge. I truly think, that as Antichrist, and the abominations of that party,
has been hitherto the let of success against the Turk; so we are not to expect
the prospering of any such design, and his fall and ruin, until the cause be
removed, for which the Lord did make use of this dreadful rod.

3. That such a party was raised up, according to the prophecy, yea, at the
appointed time thereof, is very clear, who like a mighty deluge did overthrow a
great part of the earth, and with strange prodigious success did overrun much
of Asia, some parts of Africa, and brake in on Europe, to give work to those
kings and great men, and be a scourge to them, who had given their power to
uphold the throne of the Beast.

4. There is also clear ground from the Scripture, that the Lord shall as
eminently appear in the fall and destruction of this adversary, as in the
raising of them up; and that by their fall, he is to make way for the
accomplishing of his promise, about the Church's further increase, his ancient
people, whereto this prophecy seems to have a particular respect. This we are
to look for, as one of the great works of the Lord, that is reserved for the
latter days, which shall no less show forth his power and glory, even the
drying up of that great Euphrates, than in the day that he divided the sea, and
made Jordan a dry channel for his people to go through. We are not to be
further positive about means and instruments, how such a thing shall be brought
about: it is enough, what the Lord has spoken; and the word that is gone out
of his mouth, shall not return empty.

VII. Now to close this, there is yet one great assault, which we find the
Church shall have before the end, and then her warfare will be near finished:
about which the Scripture is clear, that Satan for a little time must be let
loose, and that solemn and perfect victory, which the Church in the close of
time will get over all her adversaries, shall be ushered in with a very sharp
trial, and once again this ungodly World will show its rage, rally its broken
scattered forces, in a general muster ( Rev. 20. 8.) with as much fury as ever:
and then shall the Lord eminently appear, that by one full stroke he may for
ever decide that long continued war and feud betwixt the Church and her
enemies. A deliverance, which as it will be the last, so one of the greatest
that ever the Church had; the Lord thus finishing his work of providence, by so
stately and magnificent a close? And truly, after this, we know no more of
Canonick Scripture to be fulfilled, but the coming of the Lord, when the poor,
tossed, afflicted Church shall enter into a triumphant estate, above all the
violence and oppression of men. O blessed, and long looked for day of Christ's
return to judgment, when the dust of the Saints, that for some thousand years
past have been resting in hope, shall awake; and this earth and all the glory
thereof, like a poor vain show, disappear! O blessed and comfortable time, in
which the saints shall then fully know what Heaven is, which they have so often
admired at a distance! shall behold his face, in whose presence is fullness of
joy! and shall need no further confirmations of the truth of the word, when
once this great promise of the Lord's return is verified, a promise; wherein
all those precious truths, which concerned the Church in her journey, as so
many streams, shall empty themselves in this great deep! Then there is no more
to do, the work of the Gospel is finished, the redeemed all brought in, and the
Bride made ready to go forth and meet him, who shall fully satisfy and comfort
his People, according to the days of their former affliction, and be for ever
their exceeding great reward.

THE FIFTH ARGUMENT.
T Hat which not only is for the most part already accomplished, but is a thing
whereof we have so sure confirmations, yea, so great a pledge in our hand from
the Lord, that what yet remains shall be certainly fulfilled, must it not be
an undoubted truth? But the Scripture, as to those special predictions that are
not yet made out, is such, concerning which the Lord has given his People a
very large pledge and strong confirmations, now in these latter times, to
believe their certain accomplishment. Therefore, etc.

It is sure, that a part of the Scripture, some special prophecies, which do
concern the state of the Church in these last times, has not yet had an
accomplishment; which are already touched in the former argument, and are
indeed so great concerning truths, that may cause us to sit down, and wonder,
when we think these shall shortly come to pass! Yet such, whereof we may be
fully persuaded, if we consider, that they are held forth and promised by him
who is the God of truth, and the begun performance hereof now so manifest, yea,
what has been the Lord's way, and the eminent providence of these last times,
which may fully satisfy our spirits, that God's work is near to a close, and
the accomplishing of the whole Scripture now at hand.

I shall here point at some special grounds, whence the godly in these times
may be thoroughly confirmed about the truth and certain fulfi^lling of the
Scripture, and those prophesies thereof, that yet are not fulfilled: which we
should look on as a very convincing pledge in our hand of the same.

() I. Is not the being of the world, yea, the heavens and the earth which we
see, with the continued course of nature, given from the Lord, and held forth,
to his people, as a witness to his truth, and a sure pledge to confirm their
faith of its accomplishment? That when we look upon the heavens or the earth,
we may there read a visible seal of the certain performance of the whole
Scripture of God, which for that very end are set before our eyes. We have this
clear, Jer. 33. 20. that the Covenant with the day and the night is there given
to the Church to confirm that Covenant betwixt the Lord and his people. This
also is held forth, Jer. 31. 35. Thus says the Lord, who gives the sun for a
light by day, and the moon and stars by night, if these ordinances shall
depart, then may the seed of Israel cease and fail from being a nation. It is
also clear, Ps. 89. 2. That the faithfulness of God is established in the very
heavens; and these given as a special convincing pledge, to confirm the faith
of his people in the matter of his truth, and of the performance of his word:
for which, we will find in ver. 37 th of that Psalm the sun and moon given to
the Church as a witness. Is not the rainbow also, Genesis 9. (though not natural,
but an instituted sign, because there is no correspondence betwixt the sign,
and the thing signified) given as a visible sign of the Covenant of God, to
seal unto men the assurance of his word and promise?

I must think it strange, that we do not consider this world, and look on the
frame thereof with more astonishment, yea, that it is not a greater and more
mavelous thing in our eyes, if we would but think seriously, Whence it is,
and how i^ came to have a being! Let us suppose one were brought forth into the
light, from a dark place where he had never seen it before, and there let his
eyes wander a little upon the heavens and the earth, O what a dazzling and
amazing sight would that be! But it must be said, we look on these every day,
yet know not how to read or understand what is written thereon: Oh this great
universe is for the most part as (...) sealed book.

But for clearing of this truth, there are two things we should gravely
consider. (1.) Something which must be previously known and believed, that
those visible heavens and earth are the very work and product of this God,
whose word and promise we have in the Scripture, and have their being and
original from him: for otherwise there could be no reasoning from these, about
the truth of his word. (2.) We should also consider, what a convincing pledge
is here, for confirming our faith of the Scripture, and of the sure performance
of all that is yet remaining thereof to be accomplished.

As to the first, it might seem unnecessary so much as once to mention it,
since it is so little questioned, or under debate; but oh! it is too clear,
that many truths are easily admitted, which are not really believed. I know the
world would find it hard to shift so manifest a demonstration, that this
universe is the work and product of the great God, when there is in it so
bright a discovery of infinite power and wisdom. Truly it is strange, how men
could admit its being, who have denied its beginning, which not only by Faith
we understand, but is most evident from solid grounds of reason: And though men
are undone with implicit faith and a common assent to the greatest fundamental
truths, without any solid persuasion thereof, yet the greatest Atheists cannot
keep off the discovery of this, but by keeping at a distance from it. Which
truly Aristotle and others of those ancients did not so much deny the same, but
not knowing the Scripture they could not know how it should be. Thence Epicurus
and others of his followers (...) that they could not solve the Phenomenon of
nature, and shun unanswerable absurdities, if they admitted an eternity of the
world, did fall on such an irrational fancy, to avoid this, of the fortuitous
concourse of atoms; yea, some held an eternal praeexistence of the first
matter: which pitiful notions may show what sad case men are in, who grope
after the truth by the twilight of nature, and are strangers to the Scripture.
But I leave this, and shall only touch a little some most clear and satisfying
evidences of this truth, that the beginning and original of the world is not
more clear from the Scripture, then it is also demonstrable from solid
convincing grounds of reason. And truly a clear, discovery of this has a
further reach, than may be apprehended, to give the Atheism of men a deadly
stroke, and shake all its grounds. Now let these few things be seriously
considered, (1.) If you confess there is a Deity, that God blessed for ever is,
must you not necessarily admit a creation and beginning? since eternity is a
thing, that is only communicable to the first cause: and you cannot conceive
that the earth could produce it self; for to exist, and not to exist at the
same time, is a contradiction. And I am sure, they must shut their eyes, who do
not every where discern some witness of the glorious being of God. (2.) You
cannot deny, that there is such a thing as time; since there is no judging days
and years and ages to be infinite, or how one thing in a continued order should
go before another, without coming to some first and beginning. -- (3) Does not
this gradual advance of human knowledge in the earth and that further discovery
which arts and sciences have made, by a continued improvement of the same,
witness very clearly a beginning and original of the world? For ye could not
conceive a perpetual succession of mankind, with a constant essay after further
knowledge, with such a continued progress in experience, as an eternity
(supposed before this) would produce, and yet the most concerning arts and
sciences, yea, the choicest experiments and inventions we have in the world, to
be of so late a rise and date; such as the use of printing, and of the Mariners
compass by the lodestone, the use of guns, the improvement of minerals in
Medicine; yea, the very motion and convoy of the blood in man's body; which are
but of late discovery. (4.) May not so short a history which to this day we
have of the world, witness its late Original, and that it is of no eternal
duration? since the ancientest records of time, or of things past, do not
exceed some thousands of years. And could this be possibly conceived, that
infinite ages preceding (if such had been) should give no account nor leave a
remembrance to posterity, when these late ages holds so much forth? Yea, how
could it be, that it is but of late one part of the world is known, and
discovered to another part thereof? (5.) It is very manifest, from the known
records (...) have of past times; what has been the rise and increase of
nations; yea, how a great part of men have from a rude and savage estate been
brought into Society, and under laws and government; which shows, this world
must be of a short duration; which none could conceive, by admitting such a
supposal of it is eternal being. -- (6) It is sure, man is born and dies, and in
that ordinary way of generation mankind is still propagated: and is not here
the world's beginning very obvious? For you cannon judge, that men should beget
other eternity, without going back at last to some first man, who could not
beget himself. -- (7.) If eternity be preferable to time, can you judge the
excellentest things of the earth, such as man, and next unto him the beasts,
are perishing, and only these things which are inanimate, and the mass of the
earth whereon they tread, are of a perpetual duration? -- (8) It is manifest,
what an increase a few men (not to speak of other living creatures) may in an
ordinary way have, to people a vast country, even in some ages. Now is it not
thus clear, the world can be of no eternal duration? For, if you should this
way turn back on an infinite number of ages, and suppose that every age, should
but add and multiply to the race of man two or three, it would come at last to
this, the earth could not bear them: since we must thus suppose some infinite
increase, from an infinite continuance of the world, which no wars or consuming
strokes could in such a measure diminish. -- (9.) Can you conceive that should
be eternal, which is wholly made up of corruptible and perishing things? since
the things of the world have all their set times and seasons, wherein they
appear, and are quickly gone. In a word, must not men deny a dissolution of
this world, or an after-judgment and life to come, yea, the whole truth of
religion, if this great truth be not received and believed?

But having premised some few evidences, that may witness the original of the
world, yea that this mavelous frame, with the whole continued course of
nature, is the product of a divine power and wisdom: I shall here in the second
place, point at some few things, which may show how great a pledge this is, and
what a quieting ground it should be to the faith of the godly, that the
Scripture (...) certainly true, and must have an accomplishment; since from the
very being and beginning of the world, we may clearly reason to those things
which by undeniable consequence follow.

(1.) That the world now is, is a sure and confirming witness to its last
close, and of the accomplishment of that promise of its dissolution in the end
of time. We know, it is not long since there was no earth, no sun, moon or
stars. Now, upon no less security than that word, by which it was formed, we
must believe it shall ere long cease to be what now it is; and thus when we
look upon the world, and see such a thing before us, ought we not to read that
promise of its after dissolution, clearly written thereon before our eyes? --
(2.) It is a very clear consequence, that this God, can bring his word unto
performance, and his power therein cannot fail or fall short; yea, that his
counsel and purpose has no dependence on means or instruments, who did once
bring this world out of nothing, and said, Let there be heaven and an earth,
when there was none. O when we open the bible, and read the great promises
thereof, should we not have that impression on our souls, These are the true
and faithful sayings of God, and his word, with whom the doing thereof is as
easy as to say it; who without the concurrence of instruments, or any
coworkers, could bring this great creation forth! We truly so far mistake the
meaning of the heavens, and these great celestial bodies, with the mavelous
order that is there, when we cannot read the truth and faithfulness of God in
all his promises writ thereupon: for they are held forth to men as a confirming
pledge of the same; and this were indeed an excellent study and improvement of
Astrology. -- (3.) Since it is sure and undeniable, that this earth does hang
in the empty place, though men see not whereon it leans and rests, O what a
strange thing is it! Could the air bear up so vast and ponderous a body! But
herein is a mavelous divine power convincingly witnessed, which has so
established it, that it cannot be moved. Now, is not this his very word, that
bears up such a weight? And thence, with as clear ground, we may reason for
adventuring of the Church with its weight, and every Christian's burden,
whatever it may be, on the promise of this God, on whose word the great bulk of
the earth does this day lean. I must say, no mathematical demonstration does
follow by a clearer evidence, than this consequence from such premises is
undeniable. -- (4.) We see the Lord keeps covenant with the day and the night,
yea, that summer and winter do not fail before him, according to his promise:
and are not these a visible witness for God, that his truth and Covenant with
his Church shall not fail? For it is sure, the continued course of nature has
such an audible voice, if we could but listen thereto. -- (5.) Does not the
Lord clearly witness by such a strange contrariety that is amongst the
elements, and those different qualities, whereof he serves himself, in this
great frame and composure of the world, that this promise shall not fai^, but
it is easy for him to verify the same, in making all things work together,
were they never so cross and disagreeing among themselves, for an
accomplishment of his design? -- (6.) When we see the rage and violence of the
great Ocean bounded by a bank of sand; for which there could be no true reason
given, how such an impetuous and furious motion could be restrained, and the
sand be a bridle to the sea, if it were not to make out the faithfulness of
God, who by a perpetual decree has thus bounded it; O is there not thence a
visible confirmation of his truth! that he can also restrain the rage of man,
and turn it unto his praise, and for attaining this end, serve himself of most
improbable means. It was a notable saying of a grave Minister of Christ, when
he was upon the sea in a storm, O shall I fear (says he) the face of a tyrant,
that serve him who can restrain and tame the rage of this swelling sea! -- (7)
If we consider the earth and its original, and look aright on that so often
repeated discovery we have of the seed-time and harvest, and of the earth
bringing forth such innumerable kinds of vegetables in the spring, after a dead
winter, as out of their graves, may we not thence have a very clear confirming
seal of that great truth of the resurrection, and of the raising of the dust of
men's bodies, that is buried under the earth? I shall but say, does not God
thus give a continued wonder, and set the same before our eyes in the continued
course of nature, to assure us of his truth and promise, that it shall not
fail, though there were no appearance how in an ordinary way it could be
accomplished? ()

II. Ground, whence we may be thus confirmed in our faith is this; that not
only the most part of the Scripture is already proved and verified in the
event, but also Those truths, which of the whole Scripture are most strange and
mavelous, yea, would have much staggered our faith, if they were yet still in
a promise, are this day certainly accomplished. I shall but only instance in
the coming of the Messiah, which the Prophets of old foretold; that God should
be manifest in the flesh, and a virgin bring forth a son, whose name should be
Emmanuel, that was to dye and be cut off of out of the land of the living, not
for himself, but for the transgression of his People: is not this now surely
accomplished? Which, we may say, is the greatest wonder, the most astonishing
thing that ever was or shall be; and should fully silence our thoughts about
any other Scripture-truth, that is yet to be made out. For we know, that the
great business of redemption is put to a close; the ransom and price thereof
fully told down; now is the doctrine of the Gospel sealed and attested by
blood, even the blood of the Testator: it is now sure, the promised Messiah
has come, and this is he, who in the days of Pilate suffered at Jerusalem, in
whom all things which were written by the Prophets, where truly accomplished.
And is not this a great pledge, to assure us o^ the real making out of every
other promise? It is sure, he did dye, his blessed side was pierced with a
spear, and upon the cross he cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. O
here lies the greatest cause of wonder; not what does yet remain of the
Scripture, but that which is already fulfilled; not that Christ should come
again to judge the World, but that once he did come to the World, and become
man! For God to be found in the form of a servant, and die, this is beyond
expression wonderful: for the other must necessarily as a con^^^^ent follow,
that he who has redeemed the Church, and did pay her ransom, should see the
travel of (...) soul, and be satisfied: that, having made such a purchase, he
should also have possession, and finish the building, the foundation whereof
was his own blood. I confess, what we do yet expect according to the promise,
are great and astonishing truths, the full overthrow of Antichrist and his
Kingdom, that the dead bones of the Jewish Church should again live, but
specially Christ's return to judgment, who shall be revealed from heaven with
flaming fire, the sound of the trumpet, and voice of the Archangel: yet, how
great soever they are, and may seem hard for us to believe, O how small
comparatively are they with that which is already done and accomplished, the
Incarnation of the Son of God, a mystery hid from ages, wherein the Angel's
with wonder do look! Which, we may say, is unspeakably more great than to
create this World, and turn it again to nothing. It may be truly strange,
whilst we read these prophecies about Christ and his Kingdom, in so plain an
history, and profess that we believe he did die and rise again, we should have
such hesitation about the performance of any other Scripture promise. Is it not
at this day much more easy, to believe the Scripture and fulfilling thereof,
than it was of old for the Jewish Church before Christ's coming? And now may we
not with as much assurance wait for the second coming of the Lord, and a full
perfecting of his word, even from that which is already verified thereof, as we
are sure of the return of the sun after it is gone down, and of the breaking of
the day when once the night is past!

III. Ground, whence the godly in these times should be confirmed about the
full performance of that which is yet remaining of the Scripture, that it is
sure, yea, now nea^ at hand, is this, That Jesus Christ is come to action
against the Enemies of his Church and has taken the fields; that surely he is
now gone forth in the greatness of his strength, conquering, and to conquer.

This is a grave truth, which might give us very sweet refreshing thoughts in
so shaking a time, that whilst we have seen the Lord's appearing by a great and
outstretched hand for his people, have seen those terrible stirs and
concussions of the nations, have seen him strike through Kings in the day of
his wrath, and fill the places with the dead bodies of his adversaries, we may
also on clear Scripture-grounds conclude, that the Lord is now awaked as a
mighty man, and upon the fields; yea, that the war is surely begun against
Antichrist, and all the adversaries of his Church, which shall not cease until
the full victory be obtained. For indeed those providence which in these last
times should be very affrightning and terrible, when we go into the word, we
shall find they have a comfortable aspect on the Church, and do presage her
greater enlargement; as the tender buds and leaves of the fig tree are put
forth to show the summer's approach. Luke 21. 28. It is true, the Church is now
low, and the work of God meets with very sad interruptions, which are needful,
both for trial, and rebuke: But this also is sure, which none can deny, that
the Lord has eminently appeared, and done great things for his Church; yea, we
must say, he has by a confluence of very remarkable providence thus
condescended to strengthen his people's hands, to confirm such who are ready to
stagger, even as it were by crutches, about the greatness of these things which
are yet promised.

Now to clear this truth a little, we would consider, (1.) How it is very
consonant to the Scripture, and expressly held forth in the same, that in the
last times, and turn of the Church's case from Antichrist, the Lord will thus
appear, in his great strength, and set up his standard against his adversaries,
yea, will then in a special way call forth his people, to glorify him by an
active testimony. (2) That the Lord has thus begun to appear, according to his
word, is a truth that is also undeniable; and should much help to confirm our
faith, about the performance of that which further remains of the Scripture.

(1.) That the Lord will thus appear in the last times, this is manifest from
the word. To clear which observe, 1. Though the Church militant must not want
an adversary, and some persecution from the World, even in her best estate: Yet
we have a safe warrant to expect that the Lord will glorify himself in a
peculiar way in his people now in these latter days, by their doing and acting
for the truth, as in former ages his glory did most appear, during Antichrist's
Reign, in his Church's suffering; for then the faith and patience of his Saints
was to be witnessed in its season, Rev. 13. 10. And thus he would serve himself
of his people, and bring forth his glory, until that time of retribution, when
those who had killed with the sword, should be killed by the sword, and those
who led unto captivity, be so dealt with: which does also clearly promise some
special out pouring of the Spirit, for acting with these gifts of courage and
resolution, suitable to the service of the Church in the latter days. And truly
I think it is a great defect, we study not more the accomplishing of the
promises, and how to improve the same, for gifts, as well as grace, in order to
the several times and necessities of the Church.

2. It is very clear from the Scripture, that in the last days, when Christ is
to raise his Church from under the power and tyranny of Antichrist, he shall
then appear in a warlike posture. Which John had showed to him, Rev. 19. 13,
14. as one at the head of his forces, with his vesture dipped in blood, to show
when once the war is begun against his adversary, and this Lion of the tribe of
Judah begins to rouse himself up, what a terrible appearance he will have in
that undertaking. And it is clear, that the Lord has declared in this his
counsel and will, that his Son Christ should in the latter times take unto
himself his great power, and reign (Rev. 11. 17.) yea, cause the World to know
him to be Head of principalities and powers, as well as of the Church. For his
glory in this truth as a King, which former ages seemed in so great a measure
to darken, must then clearly shine forth. I truly think, men's appearing with
such violence and rage against so concerning a truth now in these days, does
promise some eminent appearance of the Lord therein, and that he shall yet more
solemnly assert the same before the World.

3. Does not the Scripture point at the last times, as that special time of
recompense for the controversy of Sion? to which the Lord has reserved a soemn
triumph of his justice, over all his Church's enemies; when he shall inquire
for the blood of his Saints, shed upon the earth since the days of Abel, at
Babylon's hand ( Rev. 18. 24.) that great adversary, who stands in law guilty,
and has served herself heir to all the violence and cruelty done in former
ages. For in her hand must that cup be found full, which the enemies of the
Church from the beginning have been filling up, and as so many rivers and
fountains has run into this great sea.

4. It is also clear, that in the last times, when the Lord shall bind up the
breach of his people, and heal the strol^ of their wound, who for so long a
time had been trampled under by Antichrist, he shall by some signal providence
roll away this reproach and scandal of meanness contempt, and persecution:
shall put some glory on his Church, proportionable to its former abasement;
yea, thus comfort her, according to the days wherein he had afflicted her, and
cause his people's uprising, in measure and kind, to answer their low and
suffering state from Antichrist, even in the last time when the Lord shall make
them appear with the face of a Lion, when the feeble shall be as David, and as
the Angel of the Lord, Zach. 12. 8. Which promise does clearly point at the
Church's raising, and delivery from Antichrist; upon the back whereof we find
the Prophet does foretell the last conversion, and incoming of Israel.

5. I shall only add what the Scripture does most expressly show, that the Lord
shall so gloriously appear in bringing his Church out of Babylon, and executing
his judgment on that adversary, as in the day when he brought his people out of
Egypt, and therefore shall they sing the song of Moses and the lamb, Rev. 15.
3. his great power and out stretched hand being no less discernable therein,
than if they had been standing with Israel at the red Sea, when they saw their
enemies lying dead upon the shore. Yea, have we not ground to believe, that the
Lord shall make himself very evidently known in raising instruments, and acting
them forth? Which has been already seen; and I am sure, the World must confess
what great things have been done by those of whom little was expected.

(2.) That the Lord has thus begun to appear, and make himself known to the
World in these last ages, according to his word, is a thing very easy to
demonstrate. For,

1. Is it not clear, how in these last times he has met his enemies upon their
high places, and in their greatest strength? that by a strong hand he did make
room for his truth, when both Law and force did withstand the same, and put the
marks of his wrath on such who would oppose the spreading of his Kingdom, so
that they have been as visible, as sometimes their rage and violence against
the Church was. Yea, since the Lord begun to lift up a standard for the truth,
and call forth his People to act, has it not been seen they have left their
ground more by underhand-treaties, and turning aside to carnal politic shifts,
than by open force and violence? Which the French Massacre, with other sad
instances can witness; for indeed the Church has still lost least by greatest
opposition.

2. Have we not seen by what dreadful shakings and alterations of the earth,
this late glorious reformation of the Church from Antichristianism has been
ushered in? Which have been more strange, and frequent, than in many ages
before. Has not the Lord caused the Nations to shake, and the earth to (...)
like a drunken man; to show men that though (...) suffered long in former times
of the World's (...), he will not so now bear with opposing his truth!

3. Have we not also seen the Lord's raising (...) fit for action, in these
last times; (...) heroic spirit, with some more than (...) of the same to
appear for his (...) may say, that many former ages could (...); in which the
Lord's helping his People to do great things, his suiting them with endowments
for the service and work of the time, has been most discernable! Was not that
excellent man the Admiral of France, with many others in that place, eminently
raised up, for the necessity of that time? And do we not find those Princes of
Orange, William, and Maurice, and Mauritius of Saxony, whom the Lord raised
against Charles the V. and caused him to flee-over the Alps? Yea, what
mavelous resolution and courage did attend the actings of the confederates of
the Low Countries? And in latter times do we not find G^llus King of Sweden,
Bernard Duke of Weymar, Lantsgrave of Hesse, with many others, eminently raised
to avenge the Lord's quarrel against that bloody house of Austria? Have we not
also seen very great instruments raised up in Britain and Ireland (who were
followed with wonderful success) to act for the truth against Antichristian
Prelacy? And truly we must say, the withdrawing in such a measure of that
spirit of courage and resolution, which once was so visibly let forth in the
first dawning of the Reformation, may sadly point at a great decay of zeal,
self-confidence, and unfaithfulness as to the improving opportunities. For the
Lord was with his People whilst they were with him, and did singly follow him
in his way: but alas, with their departing, it may be said their strength has
departed from them. However, the quarrel is clear for an oppressed People's
acting, upon so just, so necessary an account as the interest of Religion,
against the cruelty and violent encroachments of Antichrist, wherein, as the
Lord has eminently owned his People, so (I dare not question) he will yet
appear, and silence the adversaries of this truth, by such an argument, against
which they shall not debate.

4. That universal deluge of blood, which for the 100 years past has
overflowed much of Europe, can be a witness to this, that the Lord has taken
peace from men, who would not embrace the peace of the Gospel offered in these
last times, and given his enemies who had shed the blood of the saints, blood
to drink, in great measure. I am sure, poor Germany can prove this, which for
20 years together was a field of dead men; and France from the days of Henry
the II. to the establishment of Henry the IV. How long was the Low Countries
made a stage of war, where many a cruel Spaniard did fall under the sword of an
avenging God; besides the late bloody wars in Britain, and Ireland. And what
does this declare, but that Jesus Christ has taken the fields, and it will not
be now with the Kings of the earth, to oppress his Church, and withstand the
truth as in former times?

I shall but add, how wonderfully has the Lord appeared in delivering his
Church at the greatest extremity, has turned his enemies counsels and designs
upon themselves, brought about the great works of these last times by means so
unexpected and improbable, that we may say, what of his judgment is already
executed against Antichrist, has been no less mavelous than that (...) walls
should fall at the sound of a trumpet of (...)-horns; or a cake of barley bread
tumbling into the host of Mi^^i^n should smite and overthrow the same! Surely,
when we consider what the Lord has done, and how exactly that does answer the
Scripture, we may have much to confirm us about the further accomplishment of
his word; and be assured, that the term of his long suffering toward Babylon
is at an end, war is denounced, and the execution already begun, which must not
have a close until judgment be accomplished into victory.

IV. Ground, which may confirm the faith of the saints, and be as a pledge in
their hand of the full accomplishing of the Scripture, yea, that this is near,
is this, That the day is now turned, and that prophesied victory, which the
Church should have over Antichrist before the end, is not only begun, but in a
great measure advanced.

This is indeed a great confirmation, when we see so mavelous a crisis in the
Church's case, her recovery from so desperate and hopeless a disease already
begun, that it shall be further perfected. We are apt to wonder at the
greatness of those things yet promised, but why should we not also wonder at
that which God has already done for his Church, in our days? The Scripture
does show, that Antichrist's ruin must begin by the word: that this stroke
shall be gradual; and however that great work of God meet with much opposition,
yet it shall no more go back in the whole. And must we not say, in all this the
word is fulfilled; it has not hitherto failed the Church, but the event in
every circumstance is made to answer to the same?

Now to clear this, we would consider these two. First, that the Church's
victory over Antichrist is this day so far advanced. 2. How the Lord's very
immediate hand has been most discernable therein.

The first I need but name, whilst it is To manifest, what the Lord has
wrought for his Church. For we have seen Kingdoms and Nations subject
themselves to the truth: the kingdom of Antichrist grow dark, with the breaking
out of the light, and many of his followers made to gnash their teeth, being
scorched with the heat and power of the gospel; in how great a measure is that
interest now shaken, if we consider what the Lord has wrought, what a great
reformation has been in Britain and Ireland, through much of France, Germany,
Sweden, the Low Countries, Poland, Denmark, yea, even in Hungary, and
Transylvania! Sure this was a great work, which should be mavelous in our
eyes, how that Antichristian Empire, contrived with such wisdom, underpropt
with so great strength, whose commands not long since were received as Oracles,
with an awe and respect only due to God, has in such a measure begun to fall
before the Power of the word! O the righteous judgment of the Lord, which he
has showed forth upon that adversary, and should be a pledge to us of the
further manifestation thereof; an adversary, we may say, the greatest that ever
the Church had: whose little finger has been heavier than the loins of all who
went before, if we consider his cruelty over men's bodies, tyranny over their
consciences, with so long a continuance of that trial! in respect of whom it
may be said, Pharaoh was an easy task-master; Antiochus and the Roman Emperors
mild, who for near 1200 years did carry on a desperate and bloody war against
the Church.

The second which I would at some more length prosecute, is this, How the
Lord's hand and something of an extraordinary providence has been no less
discernable in this late raising of the Church, and her begun victory ever
Antichrist, than in the first planting of Christianity by the Apostles. This is
a truth, which to many may seem strange: but when seriously considered, if
prejudice do not darken men's judgment, will appear from sure and solid
grounds. Now to demonstrate this, I would here offer some very convincing
WITNESSES, which may help to strengthen the faith of the Godly, and give
Atheism some dash.

FIRST Witness to this truth, is that wonderful success which the Gospel in
these last times has had: wherein men must see the great power of God, and
efficacy of the Spirit, in some measure as manifest, as in the first rise of
the Christian Church, if we consider,

1. From what a small spark, so great a fire did break out, which in a short
time put Europe in a flame, and made so great a change therein, even Luther's
appearing against Texelius upon the account of his indulgencies. O but God's
time of working may be often contrary to our time of expecting!

2. What a swift progress did the gospel have? may we not say with wonder, Can
a nation be born at once! yet this we have seen, how many Nations and Cities in
one and the same age, yea, in less than 40 Years, were brought into subjection
to the truth; and those instruments whom scarce any durst own at first, made to
see great Princes with armies on the fields for the interests of Christ.

3. Have we not seen Religion propagated by martyrdom, no less than in the
primitive times; and men's essays to ruin the Church, helping it further to
grow? O what but a divine power could thus bring gold out of iron and clay,
bring a flourishing Church out of their ashes, and turn her poison to a
preservative! But alas, it is sad, that whilst men were burned for the truth
and reading the Scripture, then their affection did also burn in reading the
same, but now with our liberty there is so great a decay.

4. Must not the wise and politicians of the World confess, this late increase
of the Church is a thing a ^^ve their reach, most cross to all their rules
which they cannot see how in an ordinary way it could be bro't about.

5. Were not instruments most unlikely for so great a work, if we would judge
as men? That such a poor handful, as Luther, Zuinglius, Melanchton, Bucer, etc.
should go forth to confront that power, which then made the earth to tremble,
might it not seem as improbable, as the sending forth of some fishermen to
subdue the Nations?

6. It is known, they were none of the Rabbis of the time, whose repute and
fame might have purchased easy access, to their message: nay, they were loaded
with all the reproach, which their adversaries could devise, with novelty of
doctrine, deceit and falsehood in their dealing, represented to the World as
Monsters. Luther was forced to answer himself a printed relation of his death,
how he was carried away soul and body by the Devil.

7. Was not the message they carried, most opposite to men's carnal
inclinations, to these principles, they had sucked in from their infancy, to the
religion of their Fathers; yea, in a word, had no outward encouragements! The
whole World seemed to combine against them; Luther, at his first appearance
excommunicated by the Pope, prescribed by the Emperor: and good Melanchton was
often made to faint, when he thought on so great a storm of opposition: so that
without the convoy of an extraordinary power, nothing could have looked more
improbable.

SECOND Witness, that may let the World see a wonderful providence in this late
raising of the Church, is this, Those sharp assaults which the Church met with,
from a party, no less cruel and powerful, than any adversary which the Church
had in the primitive times. For I am sure, the World must confess, that no
ordinary means had wanted for an essay, to crush the gospel in its first
budding forth; that both counsel and force, the authority of Law, backed with
greatest rage and violence in its execution, yea, the Power of the Princes of
the earth, were put forth to the utmost, to withstand this great work of God in
these last ages. To clear this, I shall only point at some remarkable assaults
which did attend the dawning of the gospel, that may show something above
nature going along with it.

1. We find a Spanish Emperor, devoted to the Popish interest, and more
powerful than any who went before, brought in on Germany with the very first
breaking out of the light, which might seem a dreadful hindrance to the
Gospel's spreading.

2. The rise of the Boores, and Anabaptist party, whose being so gross, and
destructive to civil order, to the interests and proprieties of men, did look
like a sad incident, and a probable means to beg^t much prejudice against the
truth.

3. That sad overthrow of the Duke of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse, who were
such great patriots to the Church, did then threaten the very ruin of the
Protestant interest in Germany.

4. The Council of Trent, where the Popish party had all their politics on
foot in a strong combination, how to ruin the Church.

5. The Interim of Germany, a most subtle contrivance to divide, and thus
break the strength of the Protestants, was also a sore assault, a snare to
some, and cause of persecution to others.

6. That Spanish Inquisition, established through Spain, Italy, and the Low
Countries, a horrid cruel engine which did reach to pevent the smallest
glancings of the truth.

7. The French Massacre, where not only the Admiral, but most of the
considerable Protestants were through all France in a few days cut off. O would
not this seem an irrecoverable stroke! together with that Catholic league,
which did quickly follow upon the back thereof, a very strong and formidable
combination to root out the Protestant interest.

8. The taking away of Edward the sixth, of England, and establishing of a
cruel persecuter, Queen Mary, did indeed look like a stroke that should root
out the Church in that part, and destroy that famous plantation of the Gospel,
in its tender growth.

9. I must add, that which was as sore an assault to the Church as any, so
grievous a difference which with the first breaking out of the work of
Reformation did begin betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, about Christ's presence in
the Sacrament; yea, come to such an height and with so great heat and animosity
was followed, as in appearance would have wholly frustrated the work they were
about.

THIRD Witness to this truth is that wonderful patience and resolution of the
Saints, yea, with much cheerfulness in their greatest sufferings, which in
these late times did appear. Wherein the world must confess, that same
immediate support from Heaven, yea, the Lord's owning his People in a very
extraordinary way, was no less manifest, than in those primitive sufferings of
the Church from heathens. Sure, no past times, even in those bloody days of
Nero! Domitian, etc. can show more horrid, more strange engines of torment and
cruelty, than what in these last ages the Church did endure from the Popish
party: whose savage and barbarous usage of the poor flock of Christ, where ever
they had access, may witness a cruelty more than human. And as to the number,
are they not almost without reckoning, who in France, Germany, Britain, and the
Low Countries, beside other parts, were slain within this 150 years, for the
word of God, and the testimony of his truth? Now, as this is most manifest, it
is also known what a divine and an invincible spirit, with an astonishing
courage, and resolution, did appear in the carriage of the People of God, under
this sore persecution; how they triumphed over their oppressors, and did
cheerfully meet death in its most terrible shape; a thing which the Schools of
Socrates and Plate with all their rules could never reach: yea, should be
reckoned amongst the miracles of these latter days. About which we would
consider these things. --

1. That something more than nature, a spirit and resolution above the ordinary
rate of men, yea, some thing much above themselves, their own natural temper
and disposition, did in their most extreme sufferings often appear; and this
without the least shadow of affectation, and deceit. I am sure, the World in
these last ages, yea, the conscience of their persecutors, and of the greatest
Atheists, must witness this.

2. That many of the most soft and tender disposition, many women, whose
complexion would declare more weakness than others, yet in this late
Antichristian persecution did endure greatest torments, and by suffering
triumphed over the fury and rage of their adversaries; whereof we have many
instances upon record.

3. The World has been also witness, how serious and deliberate the Saints
were in this, that they made suffering their choice; which they could easily
have shunned, at the rate of yielding something in the truth: but ere they
would do this, or give the adversary such a bribe, they chose to embrace death,
and go to a stake for Christ, even when they wanted not most persuading offers
to turn them aside. For instance, I would here mention that excellent man in
Queen Mary's time, Julius Palmer, who not only had life, but preferment
offered, if he would recant; to which his answer was, that he had quitted his
living in two places for Christ, and now was ready to yield his life also on
that account. Likewise one William Hunter, whom Bishop Bonner did urge with
many offers to recant, told him, it must be by Scripture, and not persuasions
of that kind; for he reckoned all earthly things but dross and dung in respect
of Christ; and at the stake, when a pardon by the Sheriff was offered upon such
an account, did peremptorily reject the same. Antonius Riceto, a Venetian, who
condemned for the truth had a large offer to have his patrimony restored, which
was much mortgaged with debt, and made free, besides his life, if he would but
a little yield, and likewise had his son weeping on him for that cause, gave
this answer, he was resolved to lose both Children and estate for Christ. I
shall add what we have related of one Herwin, who suffered in the Low
countries, to whom the Magistrates made great entreaties with large promises to
recant, which he wholly slighted. Many more instances of this kind here might
be set down.

4. It is known, that such who were of great repute in the World, and had a
large share of outward things to tempt them, did in these last times most
cheerfully part with the same, and chose rather suffering for the truth. We may
instance those two great witnesses, John Frederick of Saxon and the Landtsgrave
of Hesse, who under that long imprisonment by Charles the 5 bare out many sharp
assaults, both by threatenings and offers, without yielding in the least to the
prejudice of the truth; yea, on this account did the Duke of Saxon forego his
estate and dignity. Annas Du Burg, counselor of the Parliament at Paris, of
great parts and repute, who before Henry the II. had an excellent speech in
Parliament, for the Protestant party, for which by him being imprisoned, did
forego all his honors and interests in the World (which otherways he might
have kept) and embraced death for Christ. The Prince of Condee at the massacre
of Paris, when the King expressly showed him he should within 3 days die, if he
did not renounce his Religion, told him, his estate and life were in his hand,
but ere he renounced the truth he would quit both. Charles de Zer^ton, a
Moravian Barron, of great interest and authority in that country, in the late
Bohemian persecution did quit all his estate and possession for the Gospel,
notwithstanding of many large offers and persuasions. We find also in England
the Duchess of Suffolk, a lady who lived in the fullness of the world and
pleasures thereof, yet in Queen Mary's time, did quit both estate and country
for the truth, and on that account did choose a very hard lot in other parts.

5. Is it not also known, how those who had been ready to faint, and to be
overcharged with discouragment, yet at death, in the extremity of their
suffering, did show a mavelous resolution and cheerfulness? A thing which no
Atheist can possibly answer, and shows God's very immediate support. Mr.
Glover, how sore was he cast down, and could feel no joy or comfort after much
wrestling; but no sooner did come in sight of the stake, but his soul was
filled with the joy of the Lord, and with his strength, which forced him to
clap his hands, and cry forth to a friend who knew his former damp, and
discouragement, Oh Austin, he is come, he is come! and thus cheerfully went to
death. Thomas Hudson, a choice Christian who suffered in Queen Mary's time,
when at the stake, did slip suddenly from under the chain, to the astonishment
of the People; yet not from fear of death, but from the want of feeling of
Christ, which made him full of heaviness: but after his turning aside, that he
had got his soul poured out to God, he returned as one raised from death to
life, crying out, Now I am strong, and do not care what man can do! and thus
with much joy did yield up his spirit. Likewise Annas du Burgh, whom we before
mentioned, being through fear and discouragement drawn to recant, had no rest
in his spirit until he retracted the same, and after did cheerfully undergo
death. With what mavelous resolution did that excellent man, Doctor Cranmer,
put his right hand to the fire when he came to the stake, and suffered it to
burn without shrinking, which (as he said) he would punish for subscribing a
recantation, which was so much thereafter his grief!

Last I must add, that mavelous joy and resolution, which the Saints in these
late times did in their greatest sufferings show, is very evident, and known to
the world; for their suffering was not in a corner, and we may say, has not
come short of the primitive Martyrs, but did witness the same spirit and power
accompanying them. I cannot pass this in a general, without giving some touch,
amidst such a multitude of convincing instances. Let us hear blessed Bradford
at the stake thus speak to his fellow-sufferer, Be of good comfort, for we
shall have this night a merry supper with the Lord. Latimer to Ridley, We shall
this day light such a candle in England, as I trust shall never be put out. Mr.
Sanders, I was in prison until I got into prison; and at the stake embracing,
cries, Welcome the cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life. Dr. Farrer, to a
gentleman who bemoaned his death, and the painfulness of it, If you see me once
stir in the fire, believe not my doctrine: as did after appear, for he stood
without moving in the the midst of the flame John Ardley, -- If every hair of
my head were a man, it should suffer death, in the faith I now stand in. --
Elizabeth Folks embracing the stake, cried, Farewell World, farewell faith and
hope, and welcome love, -- Robert Aguries son, when at Lile in the Low
countries he suffered with his father for the truth, in the year 1556. did cry
forth at the stake, Behold millions of Angels about us, and the heaven opened
to receive us! after he had sometime fixed his eyes on heaven: and when the
fire was kindled, says to his father, Yet (...) very little, and we shall enter
into the heavenly mansion. Mr. Tims, an English minister in Queen Mary's days,
thus writes to his friends, "I am going to the Bishops coal-house, but shall
not be long there before I be carried up to my brethren, who are gone to heaven
before me in a fiery chariot; follow you after me, where you shall find me
singing merrily at my journey's end, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath. --
Algerius, an Italian martyr thus writes from his prison a little before his
death, Who would believe that in this dungeon I should find a paradise so
pleasant! in a place of sorrow and death, tranquillity, and hope of life! where
others weep, I rejoice. O how easy and sweet is his yoke! And this he
subscribes from that delectable orchard of the Leoline prison. Guy de Bres, The
ringing of my chain has been sweet mus^^k in my cars; all my former discourses
were but as a blind man's of colors, in respect of my present feeling. O what
a precious comforter is a good conscience! The Lord Henry Otto, a Bohemian, who
suffered in the late persecution, said to the minister, I was troubled, but now
I feel a wonderful refreshment. O now I fear death no longer, I will dye with
joy; and on the scaffold cried out, behold, I see the heavens opened: pointing
with his hands at the place where others observed a certain brightness that did
dazzle their eyes; and thus died with great cheerfulness I shall but add the
last words of that holy and great Mr. Wishart, who thus spoke amidst the fire,
This flame does torment my body, but no whit abate my (...).

FOURTH Witness is, these great and remarkable judgments of God, which in these
last times have befallen the adversaries and (...) of the Church, who have been
most notorious for their opposition to the truth; therein we must say, a divine
hand has been so discernable, that ordinary observers could not pass the same
without a remark, but must acknowledge the righteous judgment of God, that it
comes not by guess and at an adventure, but does convincingly seal the word.

This is indeed a grave subject, wherein we should be very serious and sober;
for the judgments of God are a great depth, nor can we determine from events
but in so far as they answer to the word. It may sometime happen to wicked men
according to the work of the righteous; but on the other hand it is a sure
truth, that God is known by the judgment he executes, and in every age does
point out sin to the World by remarkable strokes, some great examples of
judgment, which as a beacon are set forth for men to observe. And truly we may
say, those remarkable instances of the judgment of God, since he begun to found
a retreat to his Church from Babylon, are far beyond other preceding ages. I
would be sparing to repeat what of this kind is published by others, but that
in speaking to this truth, I cannot pass it in a general, whilst there are so
many instances wherein the Lord has made himself known, and these such a
convincing seal and confirmation of the truth. And in the following relations,
I dare with confidence say, there is not any passage or matter of fact, here
set down without some clear and satisfying grounds as to the certainty thereof.

I shall first instance Charles the V. whose undertakings for many years were
followed with success, until once he set himself to persecute and oppress the
Church, and bathed his sword in the blood of the Protestants, with his cruel
and unjust usage of the Duke of Saxony; from which time his affairs begun
visibly to decline, he is forced to fly before Mauritius, and seek a retreat in
the furthe^^ confines of the empire, and after broken with melancholy and
discontent, like another Dioclesian, does resign his empire, and turn to a
private life.

Philip the II. of Spain, one of the greatest persecutors of the Church in
these last ages, whose work was to root out the Protestant Religion in his
dominions, and therefore set on foot that horrid engine of the Inquisition, yet
at last finds all his essays frustrated, and after the loss of many millions of
treasures, and of some 10000 lives by war yea, of a considerable part of the
Netherlands, and after the breaking his great Armado at sea against the English
by a very remarkable stroke from Heaven, is at last smitten of the Lord in his
body by a strange disease, or rather a confluence of diseases, which his
phisicians could neither understand, nor cure; his body falling out in grievous
boyls, whence (besides putrid matter) there did issue such abundance of Vermin,
that standers by could hardly cleanse, or endure the horrid smell thereof. And
he who had put so many of the Saints to cruel torments by the Inquisition, was
himself tormented, for 2 years together, with unexpressible pain and anguish.

Henry the II. of France, a most violent enemy to the Church, whilst he had
caused sentence of Annas De Burg to death, having solemnly protested in such
words, These eyes of mine shall see thee burnt; a little before the appointed
time of his execution, running in the lists with a spear against Count
Montgomery, it pierced through the eye, with such a wound, that in a short time
sent him to his grave, and (...) his expectation of seeing the death of that
excellent man. His son Charles the IX. that bloody persecutor, I shall mention
elsewhere how remarkably the judgment of God did pursue him.

Henry the III, who (whilst he was Duke of Anjou) did assist at that horrid
Counsel kept at St. Cloud, near Paris, where the Massacre was concluded, is
some years after stabbed to death by a Jacobin friar in that very chamber: a
thing which Du Serres does twice mention with a remark, as a mavelous
instance of the judgment of God.

The Duke of Guise, the great executioner of that Massacre, and his brother the
Cardinal, a special contriver of the same, are not long after killed by Henry
the III. at Blois, with whom they had often joined in Counsel, to root out the
Protestants; and which is very observable, by a specious show of friendship
were circumvented, and with solemn Oaths and promises as teacherously reached,
as the Admiral and Protestants by Charles the IX. were at Paris: and these two
who were his great Counselors, thus are dealt with, having blood measured out
to them for blood, and treachery, as they had dealt treacherously with the
Saints.

We find also the Duke of Aumale, who was a joint actor with the Duke of Guise
in that massacre, does a little after fall by a shot off the walls at the siege
of Rochel; which not only Du Serres but also Davilla, who was very popish, does
particularly relate; where we may see, what a bloody end the great contrivers
and actors of that horrid massacre had.

Henry the IV. a Prince of excellent parts and great natural accomplishments,
was followed with mavelous success, whilst he owned the truth: yet, after
many victories and the breaking of the Catholic League, turns popish, and
abjures the protestant Religion; but lo, within a little he is stabbed in the
mouth by a Jesuit. On which, a protestant Gentleman used this freedom with him,
Sir, you have denied God and his truth with your mouth, and he has given you
there a stroke; take heed you deny him not also with your heart, lest the next
stroke be there! Which as the French History shows, did accordingly fall out,
when he was stabbed by Ravilack; Du Serres his own Historiographer does show it
was through the very heart: and it was too evident, that sometime before his
death he had turned cordial and zealous for the popish interest.

Ferdinand the II. a great persecutor of the Church in Germany, who after his
victory over Frederick and the Bohemian States, made it his work to root out
the Church and Protestant Religion there, and turned that country unto a bloody
shambles; not sparing any rank, who would not abjure the truth: but a short
time after, we find the avenger of blood (in whose sight that of his Saints is
precious) pursues him, raises up the Swedes for an adversary, under whose
sword most of those cruel wretches, that were the Bohemian scourge, do fall,
turns Germany) and the Emperors countries into a field of blood; breaks
that great army, which for many years had given Law to Germany, so that (as
some historians mention) an army of 24000 Captains, because all old expert
soldiers, was broken in the plain fields with a huge slaughter; yea, the
violence and cruelty of the popish party was thus measured out to them, as they
had measured to the poor Church of Bohemia, and the Palatinat; and Ferdinand
the Emperor broken with breach upon breach, that men may see the judgment of
God pursuing a bloody persecutor.

Those barbarous cruel Irish, who of late carried on that horrid Massacre
there, sparing no Protestants, what ever was their age or rank, without
compassion to women or children, O how visibly did the judgment of the Lord
reach them, and for that savage blood shed give them blood to drink in great
measure! their chief leader Maeguier, Machune, and after Philomy Oneale taken,
publicly executed, most of them consumed by the sword, their spirits so
debased, that a few English or Scots Soldiers would have chased multitudes of
them; so that the world might see divine vengeance eminently pursuing them,
which in a few years did root out most of that cruel generation.

We have an observable instance also (...) of Sir James Hamiltone, natural
brother to the Earl of Arran who in King James the V. time was by the popish
Clergy promoted against such as were then suspected of favoring the Protestant
Religion, in which place he was most terrible and cruel against all he could
reach, yea, so violent that some of his near kinsmen were by him brought under
the lash of his power: But lo, when at his greatest height, whilst he is making
it his work to crush the Gospel in its budding forth, this is made the means of
his ruin, and by one of his friends whom he pursued on the account of Religion,
he is accused of treason, and notwithstanding of the solicitation of the Popish
clergy for him as their great Patriot, he is presently arraigned, beheaded and
quartered in the public street of Edinburg.

It is also known, what violent persecutors Cardinal Beaton and his successor
Bishop Hamilton were, who were no less conspicuous instances of the judgments
of the Lord in that time: also what befell one friar Cambel, who did bitterly
rail on that excellent man Mr. Patrick Hamilton when he was burnt at St.
Andrews, to whom Mr. Hamilton at the stake in great vehemence said, "Wicked
man, thou know the contrary, and have sometime professed the same, I appeal
thee to answer before the judgment seat of Christ." And within a few days after
(which in that time was well known) this friar fell sick, and in great horror
of conscience, as one mad, died.

There are indeed many such remarkable instances. It is known, how the judgment
of God did pursue those three great Apostates from the truth, Olivares
Chancellor of France, Latomus, and Francis Spira, who after they had quitted
their profession, and against their light denied the truth, died with great
horror of conscience, crying out to standers by, what a hell they found within
them! Du Serres does show, how that Chancellor of France, through the torment
and anguish of his mind, caused the very bed to shake under him (...) since
there are many examples of this kind already upon record, I do the more briefly
touch it; and shall only add some few which are worthy of a remark in our own
land ( Scotland) how visibly the Lord did pursue by his judgment some who had
deserted the truth, and turned opposers and persecutors thereof in their
promoting Antichristian Prelacy, contrary to their former profession and
engagements.

1. I shall instance Mr. Patrick Adamson, a Preacher once of great repute in
this land, but one whom ambition and private interest swayed more than the
interest of Christ, who insinuating himself in the King's favor, made it his
work to overturn the established government and discipline of the Church, until
he got himself settled Archbishop of St. Andrews, and Prelacy by his means
advanced, which the Church from her first Reformation from Popery had
disclaimed; yea, in this height of his power and grandeur, turned an avowed
persecutor of his brethren: at which time he used to boast of 3 things that he
said could not fail him, his riches, learning and the King's favor. But a
little after, as was then most known, he was by the righteous judgment of God
brought to this pass that his parts did so far wither and dry up, that in
seeking a blessing on his meat he could scarce speak a few words of Sense,
though once admired for his eloquence: as for his riches, he was forced to get
charity from those Ministers whom he before persecuted: and for the King's
favor, he was so abhorred by him, that as he himself professed when the stroke
of God brought him to some sense of his condition, he was sure the King did
care more for the worst of his dogs than for him. And thus in great misery he
died, cast off by the World whose favor he had only sought. His public
acknowledgement of his guilt and apostasy, and of the Lord's hand pursuing the
same, was by himself subscribed, before diverse eminent and worthy Ministers of
the Church, who did also by their subscription attest the same, and was
afterward printed.

It is also manifest, how the Lord in his judgment did pursue that wretched
man, his successor, Bishop Spotswood, who in a more subtle way did endeavor
the overturning the discipline and liberties of the Church, for setting up of
Prelacy, and by underhand-dealing got himself first thrust into Glasgow, and
after to be Archbishop of St. Andrews, yea, at last was chancellor of
Scotland, his eldest Son a Barron in Fife, and his second Son President of the
Session, his Daughter also married to Rosline then a considerable Barron. But
let us see where this ends, what an eminent example in all these respects of
the judgment of God, he was, and therein the prophecy of that great man Mr.
Welsh accomplished, who did foretell in a letter, whilst he was prisoner at
Blackness, that he should be as a stone cast out of a sling by the hand of God,
his name should rot, and a malediction on his posterity. And truly this is
known what become of him in the year 1638. How he was excommunicated by the
Church; did flee into England, where in great misery he died; his eldest Son,
Sir John Spotswood, was sometime brought to beg his bread, which is known to
many yet alive; his second Son, who was President of the Session, being taken
at the battle of Philip-hauch, was beheaded at St. Andrews, and his Oy young
Darzie beheaded at Edinburgh; and for his daughter who was married to Rosline
it is known, how quickly after, that estate was rooted out, and turned from
that race.

Mr. James Nicolsonne, one very eminent in his time for parts, and judgment in
the affairs of the Church, yea, once very zealous for the truth, and a great
opposer of Prelacy, when it first begun to assault the Church, but at last was
turned aside, by Court-insinuations gets the Bishopric of Dunkel; yea, turns
most forward to promote that interest. But lo! in a short time he is stricken
by the Lord with sickness, and great horror of conscience within, can get no
rest, his friends in vain endeavoring to comfort him; and when they would have
brought physicians, he told them, his disease was of another kind, for which
they could give no physic, which pressed him more then his sickness, that
against so much light and against his conscience he had opposed the truth, and
yielded up the liberties of the Kingdom of Christ, to please an earthly King:
and he charged his Children, that nothing which he had acquired since he was
Prelate, should go amongst the rest of his estate. And thus in great bitterness
and grief he died, whereupon his brother in Law Mr. David Lindsey, then a
witness, made some Verses in Latin.

S^l^tur frustra, conjunx, solantur amici,
Et medicum accersi, sedule quisque jubet.
Sed dare solamen nemo, dare nemo salutem,
To pr^ter p^terit, Rex Jacobe, mihi,
Que corpus gravat, atque animam, tantum exime mitr^
H^ic caput, hujus onus me premit, and perimit.
Mr. William Couper, sometime minister of Perth, one who witnessed much zeal
against Prelacy, both by preaching and writing; in a letter to Mr. George
Graham, who had writ to him entreating his charity toward his own conforming,
he has these words, -- Sir, for your self I never hated you, but the course
you are in I never loved: how dangerous is their estate, who cannot rise, but
with the fall of many who in Christ have entered the right way to the ministry;
closing these fountains, which God has opened? Doing in a matter of conscience
with doubting, turns men's lights to darkness; whence follows induration:
therefore I cannot stand with you, except to witness to God in my heart against
you. And thus shuts up his letter, Consider your self, where you was, and where
you now are, and quantulum sit illud propter quod nos reliquisti. This I set
down, to show what sometimes he was: yet shortly after, this man turns to a
Bishopric, was loathed by the Godly in that time, some of his old friends
brought his own sermons to him, and desired him to reconcile them with his
after-actings, which did visibly affright and disquiet him; and one day being
at pastime near to Leith, he was suddenly terrified with apprehension that he
saw armed men coming upon him: those who were with him, told him, there was no
such thing, it was only a dream; whereupon he became silent, and fell a
trembling; but after he went home, took bed and died in much anguish and
trouble of spirit, being observed to point often with his finger to the earth,
crying out these words, A fallen Star! a fallen Star! It was also known, how
for diverse years he had been seized upon with an Hypochondriack distemper,
apprehending he was all glass; whereupon worthy Mr. Simson of Sterling who had
sometimes been his familiar, hearing of his Court-advancement, had this line.
-- Aureus, hex! fragilem confregit mallous ur^^m.


A very convincing instance of the judgment of God in that time, was one Mr.
Andrew Foster, Minister at Dumfermling, who being sent Commissioner to the
Assembly at Glasgow 1610, and solemnly adjured, as be should answer to Jesus
Christ, by his brethren, not to consent to any alteration of the government of
the Church, yet notwithstanding voted for Prelacy, having got 50 Marks from the
Earl of (...) (who made use of that argument to break some of these wretches) a
small sum indeed to sell the cause of Christ, and by him very dear bought. For
after his return, he falls into sickness, and upon his recovery from that was
seized with horror of conscience, so that he run out of the pulpit whilst he
was going to preach, confessing he had sold Christ at that Assembly for money;
that being poor and having a numerous family, he had chosen rather to make
haste, than believe; and thus laid aside his ministry, requesting Mr. John
Murrey, who then was silenced by the Bishop, that for Christ's sake he would
take the charge of that place. After which he fell into a great distraction,
and became in some measure mad: and though he did something recover, yet died
in great infamy, poor, and drowned in debt, a very convincing example of the
judgment of God. This, old Mr. Row of Carnock, being then a minister in the
same Presbytery, sets down under his hand, which he most certainly knew.

I shall only add two remarkable instances of the Lord's judgment within these
few years, that should not be past without a remark.

The First relates to a considerable family in this country, who made it their
work to trouble and persecute the Minister of that Parish, an eminently holy
and faithful man; yea, upon the account of his faithfulness the old Lord of
that house out of malice does pursue him with a false libel before the Synod,
using all means he could to reproach his name, having it as his design, either
to get him broken and put out of the Parish, or at least to crush his spirit,
and weaken him in the exercise of the ministry; but does there meet with a
disappointment, the Lord clearing the innocence of his servant, and the malice
of the other, so that even such who other ways wanted not a prejudice at him,
were forced to acknowledge this; at which time that Gentleman, whilst he went
to the stable where his horses were, being then at the Synod upon that account,
is in the place stricken with sickness, forced to haste home and take bed, and
there seized with horror of conscience, which made him often cry, entreating most
earnestly for his Minister whom he had thus persecuted, and often had these
words, O to see his face, yea, told his friends that if he would not come to
him, they should carry him to his house; but his Lady out of malice did in a
most rude and violent way hinder the Minister's access to him, and thus that
poor Gentleman in great horror and anguish dies. After his death his Lady does
still pursue the quarrel, with no less malice, until she also falls sick, and
therewith had much terror upon her conscience; yea, did no less cry out for the
Minister, who then was providentially absent, so that she was put to cry, and
in that denied, which she did hinder to her poor husband; though at last, he
came to her before her death, to whom she with much bitterness confessed her
wrong. After this a young man their chaplain, who had been engaged by them to
appear as a witness against that godly man, was so terrified in his conscience,
that he could get no rest until he went to the next Synod, to acknowledge that
horrid sin in bearing false witness against his Minister; but being there kept
by some from a public appearance, he went to another part of the country,
where, it is certainly reported, he died distracted. Now last of all the young
Lord, who did succeed in that estate, would needs pursue the quarrel, and
finding more access, through the change of the time, did so endeavor with some
who were in power, that an order was past for banishing him out of that Parish:
and though he was then otherways staged, upon the account of the public cause
yet, it was known, the violent pursuit of that Gentleman was the main cause of
this sentence, which those who had hand in passing it, did themselves confess.
For he had solemnly sworn, that if he lived in that place, that man should not
be Minister there: but lo! a few days after, having returned to his house, and
boasting, how he had kept his word, and now got his Minister cast out of the
parish, he was suddenly struck by the Lord with an high fever, which plucked
him away in the very strength of his years. This I had related, as it is here
set down, from a grave Christian, the party himself being present, which he did
humbly decline to relate, though he could not but assent thereto.

The Second is one David Macbryar, who was a member of the late Parliament,
being one of the commissioners of the Burrowes, a man most notorious in the
country where he lived for a lewd and gross practice, but most remarkable and
known beyond others for his violence and rage against the Godly, as he showed
by his carriage, both in the Parliament, and afterward where he could have
access, did set himself to trouble and persecute such under that reproachful
name of Fanatics; but within some time thereafter, whilst we was forced to
retire by reason of debt, for fear of caption, he was found one day walking
alone, by one who was then come out of the North to that country, and had
ridden forth, to see if he could catch any of that party whom he judged was
then lurking, and supposing upon his rencounter that he was surely one of
these, would needs apprehend him, but he upon his resistance and struggling
against him was by him run through with a sword, and immediately killed on the
place, upon that very account, and persuasion, that he was a Fanatic, and
Rebel, as he then termed him. Thus he who had declared himself an enemy to the
people of God, whom he was wont in reproach to call Fanatics, was himself
under that very notion and upon that ground cut down by one of his own stamp
and principles. O was not this the finger of God, and a convincing proof of his
righteous judgment!

FIFTH Witness, which holds forth the Lord's eminent appearing, and something
of an extraordinary power, in the late raising and reformation of the Church
from Antichristianism, is this, that large measure of the Spirit, and
outpouring thereof, which did convincingly follow the Gospel and ministry of
the word in these last times; a truth which, we must say, has been manifest,
and by many solemn proofs thereof demonstrated, no less than in the first
planting of the christian Church.

It is undeniable, how great a witness to the truth, the Spirit and
down-pouring thereof is. For this is God's own seal, which is not put to a lie,
or falsehood. Thus he bears witness to his work in the hearts of his people, and
by this also the Lord does seal and attest the doctrine of the Church, and the
commission of his servants who publish the same; yea, at some special seasons,
as when the truth has least countenance or encouragement from without, times
of contradiction when men will not receive its testimony, and a strong current
of opposition is to the Gospel, then has this in a more full (...) measure
been discernable. Thus did the (...) own and confirm the Christian Religion
(...) the days of the Apostles, and for some follow (...), by so great a
downpouring of the Spirit, (...) visible and extraordinary effects thereof as
did then astonish the World, and force men to confess something above nature,
that this was surely the great work and power of God: and have we not also
cause to say, that thus the Lord has born a very solemn testimony to his
truth, the work of reformation, and doctrine of the reformed Churches, in these
late times? about which I dare appeal to observers, yea, the adversaries, to
their own conscience, if without shutting their eyes they could shift the
conviction of a convincing appearance of God, in the power and efficacy of the
Spirit, even in a more than ordinary way accompanying the word and ordinances;
power, which carried kingdoms and cities before it, yea, in a very short time
against the greatest violence and opposition. To clear this a little, I shall
point at some few remarkable Evidences, which might stare the grossest of men
in the face, and in some measure convince them of this truth.

1. It is evident, that mavelous conquest which the Gospel had in Germany, by
the ministry of Luther, Melanchton, Bucer, Martyr, Musculus, and a few others
of those excellent instruments, whom the Lord then sent forth. O was not this a
day of the Spirit, and the pouring forth thereof in a large measure, a day of
the gospel's triumph, not by might, or by power; yet such as before it the
World could not stand! cities and countries might then be said to be born at
once; the arm of the Lord revealed with the same, that men were either
scorched, or truly warmed and gained thereby. Did not that mavelous power and
efficacy of the Spirit also attend the ministry of Zuinglius, and
Oecolampadius, in Zuri^k, and Basil, when so through a reformation followed, to
the throwing down of Images, abolishing of the Mass by public authority,
notwithstanding of its long continuance; and all this in a short time! The
Spirit, and power of God did very eminently appear also, in those famous
plantations of the Gospel by the Ministry of Calvin, Farel, and Viret in
Geneva, L^usanna, and other adjacent Provinces. It is written in the life of
Viret, that at Lions, which was a great populous city, he preached in an open
place, where diverse thousands were converted to the truth; yea, some who came
by with no purpose to hear, only out of curiosity stepped in, were so wrought
and overcome with the power of the word, as for that time made them even
neglect their other business.

2. That great success, which did attend the ministry of Mr. Wishart in
Scotland, can also witness this truth: whence so mavelous a change did
quickly follow, in those places where he preached, through Angus, Lothian, and
the western parts; yea, how much the spirits of the people were then raised and
affected with the word. But this, being a thing so known from the histories of
that time, I only name.

3. Besides those which are more known, and upon public record, I must here
instance a very solemn and extraordinary outpouring of the SPIRIT, which about
the year 1625. and thereafter, was in the West of Scotland: whilst the
persecution of the Church there was hot from the prelatick party. This, by the
profane rabble of that time, was called the Stewarton Sickness: for in that
parish first, but after through much of that country, particularly at Irwine,
under the ministry of famous Mr. DICKSON it was most remarkable. Where it can
be said (which diverse Ministers and Christians yet alive can witness) that for
a considerable time, few Sabbaths did pass without some evidently converted,
and some convincing proofs of the power of God accompanying his word: yea, that
many were so choked and taken by the heart, that through TERROR (the SPIRIT
in such a measure convincing them of sin in hearing of the word they have been
made to FALL OVER and thus CARRIED OUT OF THE CHURCH, who after proved most
solid and lively Christians: and, as it was known, some of the most gross, who
used to mock at religion being engaged, upon the fame that went abroad (...)
such things, to go to some of those parts where the Gospel was then most
lively, have been effectual^, reached before their return, with a visibly
chan^^ following the same. And truly, this great springtide (which I may so
call) of the Gospel, was not of a short time, but for some YEARS continuance;
yea thus, like a spreading moor-burn, the power of Godliness did advance from
one place to another, which put a mavelous luster on these parts of the
country, the savor whereof brought many from other parts of the land to see
the truth of the same.

4. I must also mention that solemn Communion at the Kirk of the Shots, 20 June
1630. at which time there was so convincing an appearance of God, and
down-pouring of the SPIRIT, even in an extraordinary way, that did follow the
ordinances, especially that sermon on the Monday 21st June, with a strange
unusual MOTION on the hearers, who in a great multitude were there convened of
diverse ranks; that it was known (which I can speak on sure ground) near 500 had
at that time a discernable change wrought on them, of whom most proved lively
Christians afterward: it was the sowing of a seed through Clidesdeal, so as
many of most eminent Christians in that country, could date either their
conversion, or some remarkable confirmation in their case, from that day. And
truly this was the more remarkable, that one after much reluctance, by a
special and unexpected providence, was called to preach that sermon on the
Monday, which then was not usually practiced; and that night before, by most of
the Christians there, was spent in prayer; so that the Monday's work, as a
convincing return of Prayer might be discerned.

5. I shall here also instance that solemn and great Work of God, which was in
the Church of Ireland some years before the fall of prelacy, about the year
1628. and some years thereafter. Which, as many grave and solid Christians yet
alive can witness, who were there present, was a bright and hot sun shine of
the Gospel; yea, may with sobriety be said, to have been one of the largest
manifestations of the SPIRIT, and of the most solemn times of the (...) pouring
thereof, that almost since the days of the Apostles has been seen: where the
power of (...) did sensibly accompany the word with an (...) MOTION upon the
hearers. and a very great Tack as to the conversion of souls to Christ; the
goings of the Lord then full of Majesty, and the shout of a King was heard in
these solemn meetings of his people; that as a judicious old Christian who was
there present, did express it, he thought it was like a dazzling beam and ray of
God, with such an unusual brightness, as even forced by standers to an
astonishment; a very effectual door opened, with more than ordinary
enlargement, which the Ministers of Christ there did find in preaching the
word, whilst the People might be seen hearing the same in a melting frame, with
much tenderness of spirit. Surely this was the very power of God, a convincing
seal to the truth, and ministry of his Servants, who were then persecuted by
the Prelates; yea, a thing which (as it was known) had an awful impression, and
was a terror to their adversaries. I remember amongst other passages, what a
worthy Christian told me, how sometimes in hearing the word, such a power and
evidence of the Lord's presence was with it, that he has been forced to rise,
and look through the Church, and see what the people were doing; thinking, from
what he felt on his own spirit, it was a wonder how any could go away without
some change upon them. And then it was sweet and easy for Christians to come
30, 40 miles to these solemn Communions, which they had; and there continue,
from the time they came, until they returned, without wearying, or making use
of sleep, yea, but little either meat or drink, and as some of them professed,
did not feel the need thereof; but went away most fresh and vigorous, their
souls so filled with sense of God.

6. That was also a remarkable time, wherein the Lord did pour forth much of
the SPIRIT on his people in the year 1638, when this Nation did solemnly enter
in Covenant, which many yet alive at this day do know, how the spirits of men
were raised, and wrought on by the word, the ordinances lively, and longed
after: for then did the Nation own the Lord, and was visibly owned by him; much
Zeal and an enlarged heart did appear for the public cause; personal
reformation seriously set about; and then also was there a remarkable gale of
providence, that did attend the actings of his people, which did astonish their
adversaries, and forced many of them to feign subjection. Alas, how in our
night come on! For the Lord has in anger covered the face of the Daughter of
Zion with a dark cloud.

7. Must not we also say, since the land was engaged by Covenant to the Lord,
is these late times, what a solemn outpouring of the SPIRIT has been seen! A
large harvest, with much of the fruit of the Gospel discernable, which we may
say with a warrant, has been proved in the inbringing of thousands to Christ!
a part whereof now are in glory, and many yet live, who are a visible seal to
this truth: of whom, I am sure, some will not lose the remembrance of those
sweet refreshing times, which the land for several years did enjoy, of the
Gospel and of many solemn communions, where a large blessing with much of the
Spirit, and power of God, was felt accompanying the ordinances. If it were
expedient to set down circumstances, I could here point at many such remarkable
times and places, which would clearly demonstrate this.

Now, besides these more public and obvious proofs, it is known, what a great
testimony the experience of the godly in these late times could (...) to this
truth, what they have in a large measure felt of the power and refreshing
effusions of the SPIRIT within their soul; yea, how often after sorest
down-casting have been wonderfully raised above themselves, and filled with the
consolation of God, and joy unspeakable: this would indeed make a great volume,
to reckon over all these instances, even these whose experience in these last
ages could in a large measure witness this truth. Only, to shut this up, I
shall name these two. --

1. Mr. Welsh, and Mr. Forbes, two great witnesses of Christ in this land, when
they were prisoners, give this account of their case in a letter to Mr. James
Melvin, and his Uncle, then at London, which under the said Mr. Melvin's hand
is set down in a manuscript of his; their words are these, -- Dear Brethren, we
dare say by experience, and our God is witness we lie not, that unspeakable is
the joy, that is in a free and full testimony of Christ's royal authority,
unspeakable is the joy of suffering for his Kingdom. (For on that truth was
their suffering stated) We had never such joy and peace in preaching of it, as
we have found in suffering for the same: we spoke before in knowledge, we now
speak by experience, that the Kingdom of God consists in peace and joy. And in
an other letter, thus they say, Our joy has greatly abounded, since the last
day (Which was after passing sentence of death on them by assize at Linlithgow)
so that we cannot enough wonder at the riches of his free grace, that should
have vouchsafed such a gift upon us, to suffer for his Kingdom, in which there
is joy unspeakable and glorious; and we are rather in fear, that they (to with
the sufferings) be not continued, and so we be robbed of further consolation,
than that they should increase. Surely there is great consolation in suffering
for Christ: we do not express unto you the joy, which our God had caused to
abound in us.

2. I shall also mention that great Servant of Christ Mr. Rutherford, whose
Letters now published can witness what solemn days of the SPIRIT, and sensible
outpourings thereof, he often had in his experience; though books can tell but
little what he really felt, and enjoyed. I shall only set down some of his last
and dying expressions, which I had from those who were then present, and caused
the same to be writ down from his mouth, that may show how lovely he also was
in his death, and how well that did correspond with his former life. Some of
his words are these; I shall shine, I shall see him as he is, and all the fair
company with him, and shall have my large share; it is no easy thing to be a
Christian, but as for me I have got the victory, and Christ is holding forth
his arms to embrace me. I have had my fears, and faintings, as an other sinful
man, to be carried through creditably, but as sure as ever he spoke to me in
his word, his spirit witnessed to my heart, saying, Fear not, he had accepted
my suffering, and the out gate should not be matter of prayer, but of praise.
He said also, Thy word was found, and I did eat it, and it was to me the joy,
and rejoicing of my heart. And a little before his death after some fainting,
he says, Now I feel, I believe, I enjoy, I rejoice! and turning to Mr. Blair
then present, he said, I feed on manna, I have Angels food; my eyes shall see
my Redeemer, I know that he shall stand at the latter day on the earth, and I
shall be caught up in the clouds to meet him in the air. And afterward has
these words, I sleep in Christ, and when I awake, I shall be satisfied with his
likeness. O for arms to embrace him! and to one speaking about his painfulness
in the ministry; he cries out, I disclaim all; the port I would be in at, is
redemption and forgiveness of sins through his blood. And thus full of the
SPIRIT, yea, as it were, overcome with sensible enjoyment, he breathes out his
soul. His last words being, Glory, Glory, dwells in Emmanuel's land!

SIXTH Witness is that convincing appearance of an extraordinary and Apostolic
spirit on some of these instruments, whom the Lord raised up in these last
times, and those great endowments wherewith they were sent forth for the
service of the Church, and the overthrow of the kingdom of Antichrist: a truth
which, we must say, if not in such measure, yet has been no less evident, than
in those primitive times, when the Christian Church was planted.

It is clear, that extraordinary gifts and endowments have been given, forth to
the Church under the New Testament, for with the first dawning of the Gospel
there were both Apostles, and Prophets raised up. It cannot be also denied,
that since the Cannon of the Scripture was closed, yea, in these late ages,
there have been very extraordinary men given to the Church, who had special
revelations from the Lord, of his mind about things to come; which though we
should not now look for, yet wherein did the Lord remarkably condescend, when
some great piece of service, and necessity of the Church did more call for it.
And truly these were led in no other path than that of the Word; though they
had a more special discovery and immediate inbreathing of God's mind, as to the
application thereof in particular cases: neither did they press upon men's
conscience, to credit the same, but were most cautious, witnessing much humble
sobriety on that account.

It is known, what extraordinary instruments, how wonderfully called and
qualified, Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Wishart, and Knox were, whom God sent in
these latter days to grapple with Antichrist, and sound a retreat to his Church
from Babylon; likewise Melanthon, Beza, Bucer, and Martyr, with diverse in
England, such as Latimer, Ridley, Bradford, etc. who indeed were burning and
shining lights in their time, mighty in the Scripture, fervent in spirit, were
clothed with the power and authority of God, before which the World could not
stand. But besides these famous witnesses, of whose life we have something this
day on public record, I must here crave liberty to set down a few more, more
late instances of our own Church in Scotland, to confirm this truth; such as
are but little known to the World, nor any thing of their lives published,
which I think a great loss to after-generations; who, we may say (and this with
a warrant and in sobriety) were men truly extraordinary, eminently serviceable
in the work of the Lord, yea, of a Prophetic and Apostolic Spirit, and such
who through grace did not even come short of the first three; I mean not only
those before mentioned, but also some of those great lights, who were in the
first age of the Church after the ascension of Christ.

I. I shall instance Mr. John Welsh, whom the Lord called forth to the
ministry at Kirckcubright in Galloway, and afterward was transported to the
Church of Air, whom Mr. Rutherford in one of his books called that heavenly
Prophetical and Apostolic Man of God, and shows that from the witnesses of
his life, he had this account, that of every 24 hours he gave usually eight to
prayer, if other necessary and urgent duties did not hinder; yea, spent many
days and nights which he set apart, in fasting and prayer for the condition of
the Church, and the sufferings of the reformed Churches abroad. I can also add
this, from very sure information (and truly about any of these particulars, I
seriously study to have satisfying grounds of the certainty thereof) that it
was his usage even in the coldest winter-nights, to rise for prayer; and
oftimes his wife, who was an excellent woman, has risen to seek after him,
where he has been found lying on the ground weeping and wrestling with the
Lord; yea, sometimes he would have been much of the night alone in the Church
of Air on that account. One time especially his wise finding him overcharged
with grief, he told her, he had that to press him, which she had not, the souls
of 3000 to answer for, whilst he know not how it was with many of them. And an
other time whilst she found him alone, his spirit almost overcharged with
anguish and grief, upon her serious enquiry, said, that the times which were to
come on Scotland, were heavy and sad, though she should not see them, and this
for the contempt of the Gospel.

Whilst he was prisoner in the Blackness, in a letter to a Christian lady, he
gives this account, What large joy he had, to suffer for such a truth, that
Jesus Christ was a King, and had a visible Kingdom in the World, even his
Church, which was as free to keep its Courts, and exercise discipline by virtue
of an intrinsic power from Christ, as any Kingdom on the earth, for which he
was ready to lay down his life, yea, would rejoice to be offered up a sacrifice
on so glorious a truth. In the close of that letter, he does also forewarn,
that judgment was coming to Scotland, which should be blood, first by an
intestine sword, and then by the sword of a stranger, and that a great
sacrifice should be there, both of great men, and mean. The fulfilling whereof
has since been very sensible, and is known by many alive, who had that letter
long before the late troubles begun. Whilst he was thus prisoner, several
remarkable passages I have had confirmed by diverse worthy of credit, some of
whom showed me they had them from those who were most familiar with the persons
themselves; they are indeed strange, but we must also consider he was an
extraordinary man.

The first was this, that one night whilst he did expound the Scripture after
his supper, in the prison (as his custom was) whilst he with much power and
authority was pressing home the truth, one of the company who had some charge
in the Castle, fell a jearing; which Mr. Welsh observing, and looking earnestly
to him, did presently close the Bible, and cease, and a little after having a
drink in his hand, be says to a friend at the table before all that were
present, There is one so profane and gross, as to contemn and mock at the word
of the Lord, but ere a little God shall smite him with a remarkable stroke of
his judgment. Which accordingly fell out, to the astonishment of the company;
for that man did presently drop down to the ground, and died. A lady that was
then Popish, being present by reason of a friend of here is that was prisoner in
the castle, was so moved therewith that it proved an help to her
after-conversion.

The other passage is this, one John Steward, an eminent Christian, who lived
at Air, having come to visit Mr. Welsh in prison, found him in a more than
ordinary way troubled and sad, and upon his enquiry thereabout, he says,"
John, ye should not be here, go home to Air, for the plague of God is broken
out in that place, and cause Hugh Kennedy provest of that town (who was also a
very singular Christian) to convene the people to the streets, and pray
together; and the Lord shall hear Hugh Kennedy, and remove that stroke. This at
the first did something astonish the said John, and put him to question its
truth, having so lately come out of that place: but at his return found it so,
and accordingly in every thing it fell out as the man of God had showed.

After his banishment, to which the King did change the sentence of death past
upon him at Linlithgo, he in a very short time acquired the French tongue, with
such a facility therein, as was thought ^^range by those who knew it. Trochrig
in his commentary on the Ephesians, sets down this passage how being called to
preach at Salmur, a famous University, yea, one of the most learned auditories
in France, he did with such boldness and authority preach, as though he had
been before the meanest congregation: whereat Trochrig being astonished, could
not but on his acquaintance with him question him thereabout, whence he had
such confidence, and was so little moved, whilst he preached before strangers,
(...) and judicious an auditory, and in a strange tongue? To whom in a humble
way, as one more dejected, than lifted up, he gave that answer, When he
considered his being before the LORD, and that he was delivering his message,
he could not regard, either great or small, but all flesh did then go out of
his mind.

Whilst he was Minister at St. Jane de Angeli, a Protestant town in France,
where his Ministry was much blessed with success, the civil wars did break out,
where that city was twice besieged on the Protestant interest; during which
time these passages fell out most remarkable: one was, the town being sore
straited, and ready to be taken, the enemies having raised a battery, and by a
close approach had made a great breach in the wall, Mr. Welsh hearing thereof
(who had much encouraged the people, that their adversaries should nor then
prevail) went himself with the Canonier up the walls, and desired he would
charge such a piece of cannon, and shoot, for God should direct that shoe and
cause to prosper: which accordingly did, to astonishment of lookers-on,
dismount that battery, and the Lord so ordered things after, that the King did
parley on favorable terms with the city, and did only himself with his court
come in without doing any violence. Another mavelous passage was this; the
following Sabbath some of the godly in that place, fearing Mr. Welsh his
hazard, did seriously deal with him, that he would forbear to go forth, and
preach, the Court being there; from which he by no entreaty would be hindered,
but showed them he would adventure to preach the word to his People, and trust
the Lord with what concerned himself, being more grieved at their fear and
despondence: and that day had a very great auditory, both of friends, and
others who came upon the fame of such a man; but in time of sermon, a great man
of the Court with some of the King's own guard was sent to bring him forthwith
before the King, and whilst he was entering the Church, which had some
difficulty by reason of the multitude, Mr. Welsh did turn himself toward that
entry, and desired the people to give way to one of the great Piers of France,
that was coming in; but after whilst he was coming near the pulpit, to execute
his commission, by putting force on the Servant of Christ, for his desisting,
he did with great authority speak to him before all the people, and in the name
of his Master Jesus Christ charged him that he would not disturb the Worship of
God; wherewith that man was so affrighted, that he fell a shaking, yea was
forced to crutch down, and make no further trouble. -- A third passage no less
remarkable was upon the close of Sermon, whilst Mr. Welsh with much submission
went to the King, who was then greatly incensed, and with a threatening
countenance asked, What he was, and how he durst preach heresy so near his
person, and with such contumacy carry himself? To which, with due reverence
bowing himself, he did answer. I am, Sir, the Servant and Minister of Jesus
Christ, whose truth I preached this day, which if your Majesty rightly knew, ye
would have judged it your duty to have come your self, and heard: and for my
doctrine I did this day preach these 3 truths to your People. (1.) That man is
sullen, and by nature in a lost condition, yea, by his own power and abilities
is not able to help himself from that estate. (2.) That there is no salvation
or deliverance from wrath by our own merits, by Jesus Christ and his merit
alone. (3.) I did also preach this day the just liberties of the Kingdom of
France, that your Majesty owes obedience to Christ only, who is Head of the
Church; and that the Pope, as he is an enemy to Christ, and his truth, so also
to the Kings of the earth, whom he keeps under slavery to his usurped power.
Whereat the King for a time keeping silence, with great astonishment, turned to
some about him, and said, Surely this is a man of God! Yea, after did commune
with him, and with great respect dismissed him. The year following, whilst the
differences betwixt the King and Protestant party did grow, that city was again
besieged, taken, and in part sacked as Mr. Welsh did publicly foretell: at
which time, it is known, how the King past a solemn order, that none should in
the least wrong Mr. Welsh, or any thing that belonged to him, under highest
pains, and did after give a safe conduct to him, for transporting himself to
England, where he died; King James refusing his return to his own country,
though earnestly petitioned by his wife, for her husband's health.

During his sickness, he was so filled and overcome with the sensible enjoyment
of God, that he was sometime overheard in prayer, to have these words, Lord,
hold thy hand, it is enough! thy servant is a clay vessel, and can hold no more!

II. I shall also here instance Mr. Robert Bruce, who in a very extraordinary
way was called to the Ministry, having for a long time followed the study of
the Law, both in this country and in France, yea, had some ground to expect a
place amongst the Lord's of the (...) his father being then a considerable
Barron, who had many friends: but a more pressing and irresistible call from
God did otherwise determine.

Whilst he was in the Ministry at Edinburgh, he shined as a great light through
the whole land: the power and efficacy of the SPIRIT most sensibly accompanying
the word he preached, he was a terror to evil doers: and the authority of God
did so appear upon him and his carriage, with such a Majesty in his
countenance, as forced fear and respect from the greatest in the land, even
those who were most avowed haters of Godliness; yea, it was known, what an
awful impression King James had of him, and did once give him that testimony
before many, that he judged Mr. Bruce was worthy of the half of his Kingdom.

He was a man that had much inward exercise about his own personal case; had
been often assaulted about that great foundation of truth, if there was a God;
which cost him many days and nights wrestling, and when he has come up to the
pulpit, after being sometimes silent, which was his usual way, he would say, I
think it is a great matter to believe there is a God; telling the People, it
was an other thing to believe that, than they judged. But it was also known, by
his friends with whom he was familiar, what extraordinary confirmations he had
from the Lord therein, what near familiarity he did attain in his secret
converse with God: yea, truly some things, I have had from persons worthy of
credit thereabout, would seem so strange and mavelous, that I forbear to set
them down.

The great success of his Ministry at Edinburgh, Inverness, and other places
whither providence called him, is abundantly known. Whilst he was confined at
Inverness, that poor dark country was marvellously enlightened, many brought in
to Christ by his Ministry, and a seed sown in these places, which even to this
day is not wholly worn out. I shall here set down one passage of famous Mr.
Henderson, who at his first entry to the Ministry at Leuchars, was very
prelatick, and by the Bishop of St. Andrews brought in against the parish's
consent, so that on the day of his admission, the Church doors being shut by
the People, they were forced to break in by a window to get him entrance. But a
little after this, upon the report of a Communion, where Mr. Bruce was to help,
he would needs from a longing he had to hear and see such a man, go secretly
there; and placed himself in a dark part of the Church, where he might not be
known: when Mr. Bruce was come to the pulpit, he did for a considerable time
keep silence, as his manner was, which did some way astonish Mr. Henderson, but
much more when he heard the first words wherewith he begun, which were these,
He that comes not in by the door, but climbeth up another way, the same is a
thief and a robber. Which did by the Lord's blessing at the very present take
him by the heart, and had so great an impression on him, that it was the first
means of his conversion.

He was one that had the spirit of discerning in a great measure, did
prophetically speak of many things which afterward came to pass; yea, which I
had attested by sober and grave Christians, who were familiar with him, that
diverse persons distracted, and of those who were passed all hope of recovery in
the falling sickness, were brought to Mr. Bruce, and after prayer by him in
their behalf were fully recovered. This indeed may seem strange, but it is also
true; Mr. Bruce was a great wrestler, who had more than ordinary familiarity
with his Master.

A little before his death, when he was at Edinburgh, and through weakness kept
his chamber, there was a meeting of diverse godly Ministers at that time there,
on some special ground of the Church's concernment, who hearing he was in the
town came together, and gave him an account of the actings of those times, the
Prelates then designing the service book: after which Mr. Bruce prayed, and did
therein tell over again to the Lord the very substance of their discourse,
which was a sad representation of the case of the Church, at which time there
was such an extraordinary MOTION on all present, so sensible a downpouring of
the SPIRIT, that they could hardly contain themselves; yea, which was most
strange, even some unusual motion on these who were in other parts of the
house, not knowing the cause at that very instant. One Mr. Weemes of Lothaker
being then occasionally present, when he went away, said, O how strange a man
is this! for he knocked down the Spirit of God on us all. This he said because
Mr. Bruce did diverse times knock with his fingers on the table. I had this from
a worthy Christian Gentleman, in whose mother's house this was.

He was deeply affected with the naughtiness and prophanity of many Ministers
then in the Church, and the unsuitable carriage of others to so great a
calling; and did express much his fear, that the ministry of Scotland would
prove the greatest persecutors of the Gospel that it had. If there were a full
collection of those remarkable passages, which have been known to others in his
life, it would further witness what an extraordinary man that was. I shall only
shut this up with learned Didoclavius's testimony, in his Preface to his Altar
Damascenum: Robertus Brusius, Virgenere and virtue nobilis, majestate vultus
venerabilis, qui plura animarum millia Christo lucrifecit; cujus anima, st
ullius mortalium (absit verbo invidia) sedet in coel^sti^us: anima mea, cum
anima tua, Brust, si ex a^^ena ^ide esset pendendum.

III. Mr. Davidson, Minister of the Gospel at Salt-Prestoun, may be truly here
instanced as one of an extraordinary, prophetic Spirit, who was likewise
eminently zealous and faithful for his Master in a time of the Church's
defection; as Didoclavius in that forementioned preface terms him, Cato et
constans Cato sui temporis. He did then foresee Prelacies breaking in upon the
Church, when King James were pressing the setting up of Superintendents under a
very specious pretext, and was for that end himself present at the Assembly in
Dundee, having engaged many, alas too many! to consent thereto, but Mr.
Davidson with great boldness rose up, and warned the assembly of the hazard,
and told them he saw the knave Bishop, with his mitre, coming in under that
mask, yea, did solemnly in his own name, and name of the Church of Scotland,
enter a protestation against that step of defection, and their yielding up in
so far the liberties of the Church, to please men.

Whilst he was Minister at Salt-Prestoun, the building of a Church was by him
much endeavored, which he did advance much out of his own private interest; my
Lord Newbatle who then had a great interest in the Parish engaging to help it
forward: from which he after resiled, and thereby frustrated the work.
Whereupon Mr. Davidson told him, these walls that were then begun to be
builded, should stand as a witness against him, and that ere long God should
root out him and his estate out of that Parish, and he should not have a piece
of land in the same! which shortly after had a visible accomplishment. It was
very clear from many passages of his life, that the secret of the Lord was in
an extraordinary way with him. Some of those which have been transmitted from
them who particularly knew the same are indeed most worthy of a remark.

At a certain assembly of the Church, Mr. John Spotswood and Mr. James Law, who
were then entered into the ministry, were processed for some gross acts of
prophanity: where Mr. Davidson finding the assembly too easy to pass the same,
in regard of their parts and gifts, only with a rebuke, he did with much
vehemence press their deposition; and after being crossed therein, said, You
will needs spare these two men, whereat I am grieved, but the time is coming
when they shall trample upon your necks and upon the Church of Scotland. And it
is well known what an accomplishment this prediction had.

Being with Mr. Bruce one time at dinner, who was then in great favor with the
King, he had these words in giving thanks after meat. Lord, thy servant here is
now a great favorite of the Court, and in much respect: but he shall be within
a little as much persecuted as he is now in favor, and go down the streets,
when many who have him this day in esteem will not give him a salutation. Which
was very manifest afterward. And at another time, whilst Mr. Robert Bruce and
he were dining together in the house of one of the Magistrates of the town, who
was then a cordial friend to godly Ministers, he did also in his plain and free
way break forth with these words, whilst he was giving thanks, Lord, this good
man has respect for thy sake to thy servants, but he little knows that in a
short time he must carry us both, who are here to prison. Which words did much
trouble that honest man, though afterward it came most exactly to pass.

There is one more remarkable passage, which I should fear to set down, it is
so strange, but that I had the same confirmed by some worthy of credit, who
showed me, that from those that were present, and familiar with Mr. Davidson,
they had it related. A Gentleman nearly related to a great family of that
Parish but a most violent hater of piety, did upon that account beat a poor
honest man who lived there, having not the least shadow of a provocation, and
amongst other sore strokes gave one upon the back with these words, Take this
for Mr. Davidson's sake. After which the honest man was for a time forced to
keep his bed, and complained most of that stroke, which he gave him on the
back, as that which he felt more than all the rest; but the Sabbath following,
Mr. Davidson speaking in the close of his Sermon about the oppression of the
godly, and enmity which wicked men had to such, did very particularly touch
that late instance, saying, It was a sad time, a profane man would thus openly
adventure to vent his rage against those who were seekers of God in the place,
whilst be could have no cause but the very appearance of his image; and with
great authority said, He who has done this, were he the Lord, or the Laird's
brother, ere a few days pass, God shall give him a stroke, that all the
Monarchs of the earth dare not challenge. Which was then publicly known how in
the close of that week, standing before his door, he was struck dead with a
thunderbolt, and all his bones crushed.

A little before the death of this great Servant of Christ, having an
occasional recounter with Mr. John Ker, a young Gentleman who was lately come
from France, and had then no thoughts of the ministry, but was in a very
courtly dress, Mr. Davidson did in a solemn way charge him to cast off his
scarlet cloak, and lay aside his gilded rapper, and take him to his ^ook, For
you are the man, says he, who is to succeed (...) in the ministry at this
place. Which, so very (...) thing to that Gentleman for the present, (...) fell
out, he did immediately succeed him there, ^here he was for many years an holy
and faithful Minister of the Gospel. This last passage many yet alive, who had
the same from the said Mr. John Ker can witness.

IV. Mr. Patrick Simpson, who was once Minister of Cramond, and after
transported to Stirling, may be here also instanced, as a very extraordinary
man in the Church. In his youth he attained to great knowledge in the
languages, did much study Greek and Latin Authors; and gave this reason to such
who wondered he should spend so much time in reading those who were but pagans,
That he purposed to dedicate all these jewels which he borrowed from the
Egyptians, to the building of the house of the Lord. It is known, with what
zeal he did oppose himself to the corruptions of that time. In the year 1584,
whilst there was an express charge from the King, for acknowledging Mr. Patrick
Adamson Archbishop of St. Andrews, or else lose their maintenance, he did with
great vehemence appear against the same, though that man was his uncle upon the
mother's side; and some who seemed willing to subscribe thereto with such a
condition, according to the Word of God, he did gravely rebuke, showing them it
could be no salvo to their conscience, since it was repugnantia in adjecto, to
subscribe to any humane institution according to the word, when the word did
expressly condemn the same. It was also known, he refused the offer of a
Bishopric, and afterward of a yearly pension from the King, which he looked
on as a design only to bribe his conscience, which was more dear to him than
all the World. And when that assembly at Aberdeen was condemned by the State,
he did openly own and avow the same, and in a very solemn manner denounced the
wrath and judgment of God against these accusers and convicters of those
excellent men, at Linlithgow, who stood for the (...) of that assembly. That
notable paper and protestation, given in to the Parliament 1606 (where Prelacy
was further established) was by him penned, and out of his own hand given to
the Earl of Dumbar, subscribed by many Ministers of the Church, who were then
there on that account.

His life was most exemplary for piety, and faithfulness in serving his Master;
which did preach no less to that part of the country wherein he lived, than his
doctrine. One very remarkable passage of his life I do here adventure to set
down, having very satisfying grounds as to the certainty of it, from those who
knew the same, and had a particular relation of all its circumstances from a
grave Christian, who had it out of his own mouth, and likewise has it written
under old Mr. Row of Carnock's hand, who was his familiar intimate friend; it
is this. His Wife, Martha Barron, a gracious woman, the wife of his youth, with
whom he had lived in great love, fell sick, which proved her last sickness;
when she was first sore assaulted by the Devil, who pressed in upon her that
she should be given over to his hand; and after, it did resolve in a visible
distraction, which for a time grew upon her, so that most unlike to her former
way, she would have broke forth with dreadful and horrid expressions; it did
most appear on a Sabbath-morning, whilst Mr. Simpson was going to preach, and
whilst for a time he was forced with a heavy countenance to stand silent, he at
last kneeled down, and prayed, which she did no ways regard, but a little after
he turning to the company that were present, told them, he was sure that those
who now were witnesses of that sad hour, should yet see a gracious work of God
on this his Servant, and that the Devil's malice against that poor woman,
should have a shameful foil. Her distraction did still continue until the
Tuesday, which was the (...) of August, which morning at the very dawning of
(...) to his garden, and shut the door behind him, where for many hours he was
alone, but a godly woman who that night was with his wife, Helen Garner, wife
to one of the Bailyes of Stirling, being apprehensive of his hazard, through
his grief and fasting, could have no rest till she knew his case, and by some
help climbed up, and got into the garden, but on a near approach to that place,
where Mr. Simpson then was, she was terrified with an extraordinary noise,
which through fear made her fall to the ground: it seemed, as she related after
to others, it was like the noise of a great rushing of multitudes together, and
therewith such a melodious sound, as did make her know, it was something more
than humane, (...) turned to prayer, entreating the Lord would pardon her
rashness, which affection to his Servant, who had been the instrument, of her
good, had carried her to. And after, going forward, finds him lying upon the
ground; it was with much entreaty, that he did then reveal himself in that
particular, until she promised secrecy, not to speak it to others so long as he
lived but had his allowance if she should survive him: which promise she kept,
but after his death, did relate it to those from whom I have had this; he said,
O what am I, being dust and ashes, that the holy Ministering spirits should be
sent by the Lord to deliver a message to me! and showed he had a vision of
Angels, who did with an audible voice give him an answer from the Lord, of his
wife's condition, and coming over to his house, he said to all who were
present, Be of good comfort, for ere ten hours of this day, I am sure that
brand shall be plucked out of the fire. After which he went to prayer at his
wife's bedside, where for a time she lay quiet, but whilst he mentioned Jacob's
wrestling in prayer, she sits straight up in the bed, casting aside the
curtain, and says, Thou art this day Jacob, who have wrestled, and also
prevailed: and now God has made good his words, which he spoke this morning to
you; for I am plucked out of the hands of Satan, and he shall have us power
over me. Which interruption made him for a space silent, but after with great
melting of heart proceeded in prayer, and magnified the riches of God's love
toward him; and after prayer there was sweet and Christian embracements
betwixt them: yea, from that hour she did speak most Christianly and
comfortably, even to her death, which was on the Friday following, August 13.
1601. whose last words in the moment of her departure were with a loud voice,
Come, Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit.

After this, Mr Simpson lived several years, fervent and faithful in the work
of the Lord, and one who in private walk witnessed such mortification, that all
who knew him, might clearly see, his converse was little in the World. In March
1618. he said, Now shall this month put an end to all these things! And
accordingly, toward the close of it, was removed by death; at which time he
expressed much joy, blessing the Lord for his kindness, that he had not been
perverted by the sinful courses of these times; and might say, as the Lord
(...) Elijah in the wilderness, so in some respect he had dealt with him all
his life time. And having these words upon some of his books written, Remember,
O my soul, and never forget the 9 of August, what consolation the Lord gave
thee, and how he performed what he spoke, according to Zach. 3. 2. Is not this
a brand plucked out of the fire? upon which some of his friends speaking to him
about the fame, his answer was, Absit mihi gloriari in aliquo, nifi in Domino
D^o m^o!

Now, besides these great men, many others who at that time did shine as lights
in the Church, may be here also mentioned; who were indeed stars of the first
magnitude, eminently zealous and faithful, and their Ministry followed with
much of the power and authority of God. Such as Mr. Andrew Melvin, of whom it
might be said, he had the face of a lion in his master's cause, and feared not
to speak before Princes and great men, when the truth called for it. Likewise
his neveu, Mr. James Melvin that holy grave, and prudent Servant of Christ, Mr.
Andrew Dunkan, Mr. John Scrimger, Mr. Charles Fereme, Mr. James Balfure, etc.
One passage I shall here set down, worthy of a remark, of Mr. Andrew Melvin,
who being prisoner in the Tower, a Gentleman of his acquaintance, got access to
visit him, but found him in a sad deep muse, about the defection of many
Ministers in Scotland, and did deplore the state of the Church there, having
lately got an account of their way at that assembly at Glasgow 1610. where the
Earl of Dumbar had been active to corrupt diverse with money: this Gentleman,
desiring to know what word he had for his own country, got no answer; but upon
a second enquiry, he said, I have no word to send, but am heavily grieved, that
the glorious government of the Church of Scotland should be so defaced, and a
Popish tyrannical government set up, and thou Manderston (for out of that house
Dumbar was come, and he thus styled him) Have thou no other thing to do, but
carry down to Scotland such commissions, whereby the poor Church there is
wracked: the Lord shall be avenged upon thee, and thou shall never again go
down for all thy grandeur! Which words took such impression on that Gentleman,
that when he went forth, he desired some friends, who then waited to get a
business at court expedited by Dumbar's mediation, that they would in time put
their affairs to a close, for he was persuaded, the words of that servant of
Christ should not fall to the ground. And truly this did very quickly take
place, that Earl being suddenly struck by death, within a few months after, and
thus thrown down from the top of his grandeur, whilst he was busy, perfecting
that great house of his at Berwick, and had appointed a sumptuous feast for his
daughter's marriage, even then did his thoughts perish.

I shall here but add one instance more of one, whom we before-named, though
not a Minister, yet a great instrument for promoting the work of the Gospel in
the place where he lived; and one we may say, of an extraordinary spirit, Hugh
Kennedy, provost of Air: of whom I would mention these two passages, from sure
knowledge. One was this whilst the Merchant-Ship^ of that town were at sea,
amongst whom his son John, who was also a choice Christian, was at that time,
he did one night rise before the breaking of day, and came to the house of his
familiar friend John Steward, desiring he would rise and go along with him to
some room. Whereat the said John being exceedingly astonished, he says to him;
It is no time to linger, let us go pray, for my son with the rest of our
friends now at sea are at this hour on the very nick of perishing. And after
they had spent some time in prayer, he arose cheerfully and said, Now they are
safe! Within a little after, John Steward who had writ this down, with the day
and hour, at the return of the Ships did most particularly enquire, and found
how it did answer in all the circumstances, and in that very hour of that night
they were to appearance past hope of safety upon a very dangerous place, and by
an extraordinary unxpected providence then delivered.

The other is this, one day being for many hours alone in prayer, whilst some
of his Christian friends did wait long for him, at last with an unusual
cheerfulness he came forth, and upon their enquiry about his sta^, he told
them. It was no wonder, for he had that day got mercy to him, and all his And
truly it was very evident, that not one of his Children, but there was large
ground of charity, that they were truly godly.

Whilst he was dying, Mr. Ferguson a godly Minister says to him, You have
cause, Sir, to be assured that the Angels of God are now waiting at the stoups
of this bed to convoy your soul into Abraham's bosom. To whom his answer was; I
am sure thereof, and if the walls of this house could speak, they could tell
how many sweet days I have had in secret fellowship with God, and how familiar
he has been with my soul. -- I shall only add Mr. Welsh's testimony, in a
letter from France to this great man: his words were these, Happy is that city,
yea, happy is that Nation, that has a Hugh Kennedy in it! I have my self
certainly found the answers of his prayers from the Lord in my behalf.

() I. Reader, besides these more remarkable passages which in the perusal of
this treatise thou will find dropped apart, concerning the way of God with some
of his more eminently faithful Servants, I have in this place cast together
some few instances, which in the former impression were not hinted.

In the first place, thou may take notice of these two concerning that walker
with God, great Master Bruce, of whom some things have been spoken elsewhere:
and first, beside that blessed frame of spirit which appeared in the whole of
his converse, he endeavored more especially whenever he was to appear in
public as an Ambassador of Jesus Christ, to have his Spirit deeply impressed
with the Majesty of that God, of whom he was to speak, and of the high
importance it was to the souls of men, to have the mysteries of salvation
unfolded unto them, not with enticing words of man's wisdom but in
demonstration of the spirit and power; without which this preached Gospel,
though in it self the world of life, will never prove the power of God to
salvation. And therefore though he was known to take much pains in searching
the Scripture, that he might know the mind of the Spirit of God by comparing
spiritual things with spiritual, and in preparing apposite matter for the
edification of his hearers, which he durst not neglect, and wherein he durst
not be superficial, as knowing he was to speak of God, and afraid of the curse
threatened for doing of his work negligently; yet this was the least part of his
preparation-work, the main of his business lay in having his soul wrought up to
some sutableness of frame for preaching the unsearchable riches of Christ, and
making manifest the mystery of the Gospel as he ought, that so his Master by
his service might see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied. And knowing,
that the success of preaching depended wholly upon the presence of God
accompanying the dispensing of Ordinances, his manner was to be much in prayer
and supplication in private before his public appearances, pouring forth his
heart before God, and wrestling with him, not so much for assistance to the
messenger, as to the message One instance whereof take as follows: Being to
preach at a solemn occasion, he was long in coming to the congregation, some of
the people beginning to be weary, and others wondering at his stay, the bells
being long rung, and the time far spent, the Beadle was desired to go see what
the matter meant: who coming to his house, and finding his chamber door shut,
and hearing a sound, drew near and listening: overheard Mr. Bruce often with
much seriousness say, I protest I will not go, except thou go with me.
Whereupon the man supposing that some person had been with him, withdrew
without knocking at the ^^or who being asked at his return by a Gentleman the
cause of his delay, answered, he could not tell. (...) I suppose (said he)
there is some with Mr. (...), (...) is unwilling to come to Church, and be is
(...) and peremptory to have them come along, (...) ^verheard him protest most
seriously he would not go, if they went not with him. However a little after,
Mr. Bruce came accompanied with no man, but he came in the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel of Christ, and his speech and his preaching was in such
evidence and demonstration of the SPIRIT, that by the shining of his face and
that shower of divine influence, wherewith the word spoken was accompanied, it
was easy for the hearer to perceive that he had been in the mount with God, and
that he had indeed brought that God, whom he had met with in private, into his
mother's house, and into the chambers of her that conceived him. Nay, he
preached ordinarily with so much life and power, and the word spoken by him was
accompanied with such a manifest presence, that it was evident to the hearers
he was not alone a^ the work, but that in his strivings to persuade the things
which did belong to the Kingdom of God, and to present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, he labored thereunto striving according to his working which
wrought in him mightily. For though he was no Boanerges, as to his voice, being
of a slow and grave delivery, yet he spoke with so much authority and weight
(as becomes the Oracles of God) that some of the most stout-hearted of his
hearers were ordinarily made to tremble; and by having those doors, which
formerly had been bolted against Jesus Christ, as by an irresistible power
broke open, and the secrets of their heart made manifest, they went away under
convictions, and carrying with them undeniable proofs of Christ's speaking in
him, and that God was with him of a truth.

The other passage, which I present thee with, is concerning his death. Being
now aged and through infirmity of body confined to his chamber, where he was
frequently visited by his friends (to whom a conversation in Heaven and the
abundant grace of God in him had indeared him) and being asked by one of them,
How matters now stood betwixt (...) and his soul! he (with that severity of
soul, which is the effect of the love of God shed abroad in the heart, and tha^
plerophory, under which such walkers with God and workers of righteousness as
he was* are frequently taken off the stage) made this return, When I was a
young man, said he, I was diligent, and lived by faith in the Son of God, but
now I am old and am not able to do so much, yet he condescends to feed me with
lumps of sense.

And that morning before the Lord removed him (his sickness then being mostly a
weakness through age) he came to breakfast at his table; and having, as he
used, eaten one single egg, he said to his daughter, I think I am yet hungry,
ye may bring me another egg; but instantly thereafter falling into a deep
meditation, and after having mused a while, he said, Hold, daughter, hold; my
Master calls me! with these words his sight failed him. Whereupon he called for
the Bible; but finding his sight gone, he said, Cast up to me the eighth
Chapter to the Romans, and set m^ finger on these words, I am persuaded, that
neither death nor life, etc shall be able to separate me from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus my Lord. Now said he, is my finger upon them? when
they told him it was, without any more he said, Now God be with you, my
children. I have break fasted with you and shall sup with my Lord Jesus Christ
this night. And so gave up the (...) his eyes that he might see God. (...)
Champion for the truth, whom in his (...) to (...) for the Crown and interest
of Jesus Christ (...) not what (...) was ^o be daunted by the ^^ce and (...) of
the (...) by his (...) about the souls of others, and much pains and
seri^^^^ess about making his own calling and election sure, had an entrance
ministered unto him abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of his Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

II. In the next place, Reader, I shall in prosecution of my design, which is
thy edification, hint to thee some things concerning that burning and shining
Light Mr. John Welsh, whose name is so famous and savory for the great things
which God did by him and for him, that I shall much disappoint thy expectation,
if making mention of him, I should not acquaint thee with some thing rare and
extraordinary: and therefore, though it be beside my design to give thee the
full history of his or the rest of these great men's lives, yet that I may not
altogether frustrate thy expectation, take these few remarkable passages which
follow. As first, an eminently holy Minister, yet alive and deservedly of
esteem in the Church of Christ, told me from certain knowledge, that two men
coming with packs of cloth to the town of Air from a neighboring place, etc,
where there was yet no suspicion that the Lord's hand had smitten it with the
plague, which was then sore in the land, the sentry at the bridge held them
out, notwithstanding they had a pass, till the Magistrate came; who though he
could not disprove their pass, yet would not permit them to enter the ^own,
till he sent for Mr. Welsh: So the Baylie bids them dis-burden their beasts,
till he considered what was to be done: a little after, Mr. Welsh coming, the
Magistrate says to him, Sir, here are men come from such a place, we have heard
of no plague there; besides, they have a pass from known men, what shall we do?
Mr. Welsh made no answer, but uncovering his head, (...) the midst of the
company which then followed him, and having his eyes directed to Heaven (yet
speaking nothing) near half a quarter of an hour, at last said, Bailey, Cause
these men to put on their packs again and be gone; (...) God be in Heaven, the
plague of God is in these packs. These men returned and opened their pac^^ in
Comnock; and it was observed, that such contagion was therein, that all in that
village died, there was not a man left to bury the dead.

He was famous in his generation for the power he had in prevailing with God by
prayer and supplication: whereof take these following instances amongst the
many which might be given.

One is, that being on a certain night under an extraordinary pressure of
spirit to go and pour forth his heart to God, he left his wise in bed, and
going out to a garden, spent most of the night in that exercise (a thing so
ordinary to him that he used to say, he wondered how a Christian could lie a
bed all night, without rising to spend some of the night in prayer and praise!)
but his wife weary, at last went to seek for him, but missing him in his
ordinary place, went into other gardens, by such passages as she knew, at last
she heard a voice, and drawing near to it, could hear him speak a few words,
but with great force and fervency, mixed and accompanied with floods of tears;
which were these, O God, will thou not give me Scotland! O God, will thou not
give me Scotland! -- She being weary, and afraid to interrupt him, went home,
and heard not the close. At last he came home, and re-entring his bed, his wife
began to reprove his unmercifulness to his own body; then asked him, what it
was he was saying? for she told, she heard him. Well, said he, you had better
have been in your bed, but since ye heard, I tell you, I have endured a great
fight for Scotland this night, and hardly could I get a remnant reserved, yet
he will be gracious.

After this he arose another night, but went not out of doors, but in a chamber
he traveled and groaned so, as that his wife impatient did rise several times,
calling him to bed; but he waited his time: and when he came, she began a
modest expostulation with him for tarrying. Hold thy peace, said he, it will be
well with us; but I shall never preach another preaching in Air. -- And having
fallen asleep, before he awaked, the messenger was come, who by command carried
him prisoner to the Castle of Edinburgh.

When he was prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, the Lord Uchiltry was
Captain, whose sister was Mr. Welsh his mother in law, being John Knox's wife;
Yet being much taken up in King James his Court, he took not time to be so
comfortable to his cousin Welsh as he should: But being convinced of his own
unkindness, he caused Mr. Welsh to sup with him one night in the Castle, where
were also several other Gentlemen, and amongst them a Popish youth sat toward
the lower end of the table; Mr. Welsh being by the Captain set at the upper
end, entertained the company with grave and edifying discourse, which all
delighted to hear, save this young Papist, who with laughter and derision
labored to silence him, which was little regarded by Mr. Welsh. But after
supper, while the guests sat a little, this youth stood up at the lower end of
the table, and while Mr. Welsh proceeded from grave to gracious entertainment
of his company, the youth came to that height of insolence as with the finger
to point at him and with the face to make flouting grimaces, whereby he grieved
the holy Man, so as on a sudden he was forced to a silence. --

The whole company, who had heard him with delight, were silent with him.
Within a little, Mr. Welsh as moved by the Spirit of God, (...) for^^ (...)
these words: Gentlem^n, the Spirit of God is provided against us, and I (...)
entreat you (...) to be afraid to see what God shall do among you before you
rise from the table, for he will smite some one of you with death before you go
hence. All were silently astonished, waiting to see the issue with fear. And
while every man feared himself, except the insolent youth, he fell down dead
suddenly at the foot of the table, to show the power of God's jealousy against
the mockers of his Spirit and of the offers of his grace. This History with
variation of some circumstances, is set down before.

One day while Mr. Welsh looked out at his chamber-window in the Castle, he
happened to see the Captain, and called unto him, saying, God save you, my
lord! The Captain acknowledging his neglect, and asking for Mr. Welsh his
welfare, desired to know how he might serve him. In nothing, said Mr. Welsh, if
you be well, except you would carry my petition to his Majesty, entreating for
liberty to preach the Gospel. I willingly will, said the Captain, therefore
send it to me. Nay, said Mr. Welsh, I am your Kinsman, I love you so well as to
warn you not to take it in charge, except you resolve to deal truly in
delivering it and in getting me an answer. I shall bear the blame, said the
Captain, if I do it not. I beseech you, my lord, said the other, undertake not
unless you mind to do it, for the hazard is great. Well, Uchiltry takes it: but
not coming in an opportune season (for he came when the King was passionately
moved on another occasion) he thought not fit then to give it; and as at that
time he deferred, so thereafter he neglected, and at last quite forgot to
deliver it at all. For which his heart smiting him, ^e durst hardly be seen of
Mr. Welsh for three months. Yet conscience forget^ing as well as he, he came to
the same place where Mr. Welsh at first called him: And now Mr. Welsh asked,
how he did, and what was become of his petition? The Captain surprised
answered, I delivered it to his Majesty, but he was in a passion, and it seems
it has fallen by, for I have not gotten an answer. Nay, my lord, said Mr.
Welsh, you should not lie to God, and to me: I know you delivered it not, I am
sorry (my lord) for your lot, I warned you not to be false to God; and now I
tell you, God shall take your estate and honors in Scotland, and shall give
them to your neighbor, and this in your own time. -- This troubled the lord
Uchiltry, and came truly to pass: for he being the eldest son of the good Lord
Uchiltry, a reformer, was forced in his own time to quit all, and give both
estate and honors to James, the son of Captain James, the second brother, who
was the last of that house.

III. Concerning Master John Scrimger, Minister at Kinghorn. There was a godly
Woman under his charge, called -- who fell sick of a very lingering sickness,
and was all the while assaulted with strong temptations, apprehending she was a
castaway (yet had she not only given ground for charity, but her Christian
conversation for a long time had put the reality of the grace of God in her
beyond debate with the more discerning who knew her) Mr. Scrimger often visited
her, while in this deep exercise, conferred with her, prayed over her; but her
trouble remained notwithstanding, and the terrors of God still lodged with her.
When she drew near her dissolution, she became worse both in body and spirit;
and sent for Mr. Scrimger, who at that time took two of his elders with him,
and in their presence first endeavored to comfort her by exhortation and
conference, then he pra^ed, and seeing her the nearer her end seemingly the
worse, he made some of the elders to pray, and again he himself prayed. But
Satan still raged ^he more, and her soul the more removed from peace. Then he
sat in a muse a little space, and said, What Is this! our laying before her
grounds of comfort will not do it, conference will not do it, prayer will not
do it, we must use another remedy. Sure I am, this is a Daughter of Abraham;
sure I am, I am the Elder; sure I am, she has sent for me. And therefore in
name of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who sent him to redeem
sinners: in name of Jesus Christ, who obeyed the Father, and came to save us:
in name of the holy and blessed Spirit, our Q^ickner and Sanctifier, I the
Elder command thee a Daughter of Abraham, to be loosed from these bonds. And
immediately peace and joy succeeded.

An Example it is of God's power in that time, to make our hair stand, at the
force of faith and boldness of Spirit; rather than to be imitated by such as
wanting the ancient holiness would rather have a Spirit for miracles, than for
salvation.

IV. I shall here insert some special and edifying remarks of the life of that
great and worthy servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Robert Blair (well known to this
Church, it being but a few years since his death) who was deservedly numbered
among the first of those great and worthy instruments, whom the Lord raised up
amongst us for carrying on the late blessed reformation. Some of which I knew
from himself (though from much humble modesty he too much in these things
concealed himself, and shunned the setting down thereof under his own hand,
whereto he was much pressed) but the most of them I had from one of his special
intimate friends, and a grave and eminent Minister of this Church.

In his younger years, it was known, how much he outrun others in his studies,
and gave those who knew him ground to hope, what after was seen; the Lord was
pleased to call him by the Ministry of famous Trochrig, in whose hand (these
were his own words) did the Lord put the key that first opened his heart. Upon
his first coming forth to preach, he by a remarkable providence had Master
Bruce, whom you have formerly mentioned, to be his hearer; and as I heard
himself declare, it was his desire to have the judgment of so great a man upon
his discourse; whose censure, he said, he would never forget, it had been so
much blessed. Which was this, I found (says he) your Sermon very polished and
digested (which was indeed easy to one of his parts) but there is one thing I
did miss in it, to wit, the Spirit of God; I found not that. This grave Mr.
Blair did often speak to others, which then took a deep impression upon
himself, and helped him to see it was something else to be a minister of Jesus
Christ than to be a knowing and eloquent preacher. He was for diverse years
Regent in the college o^ Glasgow; where he made it his work, to train up those
under his charge in the study of godliness, as well as of humane learning: but
by reason of the prejudice of some who had power in that place, he could not
long stay. One passage whilst he was there, I did hear him relate: upon the
report of some sinful oath to be pressed upon the Masters of the college, he
inquired at a fellow-Regent of his, Mr. Gawin Forsyth, what he would do in that
matter? whose answer was, By my faith, I must live. To whom Mr. Blair said,
Sir, I will not swear by my faith, as you do; but truly I intend to live by my
faith. You may choose your own way; but I will adventure on the Lord. That
wretched man did continue, to whom the matter of an oath was a small thing,
after he was gone: but which is worthy of a remark, many years after, Mr.
Forsyth fell into such poverty, as forced his supplicating of the general
assembly of the Church for some relief, where worthy Mr. Blair was then made
choice of to preside as Moderator, and upon his appearance in that deplorable
case could not shun the observing o^ (...) ^^rmer passage, and upon his address
to him in private put him in mind thereof, though with great tenderness, as he
said, not in the least to upbraid him in his low condition, but to let him see
that he had been truly carried through by his faith, at which he formerly had
scoffed.

After his being put from the college, he went to visit his brother, then
Minister at Dumbarton, and confessed that by the way he could not forbear
singing, from joy in the remembrance of God's being with him, and helping him
to be instrumental in the good of the Youth, who had been under his inspection.
He went after to Ireland, having received a call from Bangor; and upon the
sight of land, his heart was so immediately made to exult within him for joy,
that ((...) said) he could scarce bear the same. Whilst he came near Bangor, he
had a stong^ impression born in upon him, that the Dean of Bangor was sick unto
death and should rise no more; which at first he rejected, as an unpertinent
suggestion; but going further on his way, it was with such power impressed upon
his spirit, as forced him to take notice of it. When he came to the place, he
found, the Dean was indeed lying sick, and though a most naughty man, made him
not only welcome upon his visit, but encouraged him to hold on in his way, and
told him he was to succeed him in that change; yea, he spoke so unlike himself,
and in a strain so different from what was usual unto him, that a Gentlewoman
standing by said to some* others, an Angel is speaking out of the Dean's bed to
Mr. Blair; thinking, it could not be such a man.

He had been once troubled with an appearing of the Devil, whilst he was a
Regent in the college; who, like a crooked boy that waited on him, stood up and
laughed him in the face, whilst he was serious in his chamber, and immediately
disappeared: but after, whilst he was at Bangor, there was one in that Parish,
who went to Scotland with horses to sell, and at a fair he met with a man who
at once was willing to buy them all; but pretending he had not all that money
at present, gave him bond until Mertimess: the poor man having no suspicion,
returns; and near that time, going homeward from Bangor one night, his Merchant
meets him, who was the Devil; now said he, you know my bargain, how I bought
you at such a place, and I am come as I promised to pay you the price. Bought
me, said the other trembling, you bought but my horses: nay, says the Devil, I
will let you known I bought your self, and to the poor man confounded with
fear, said, he must either kill some body, and the more excellent the person
were, the better it would be for him; else he would not free him, and
particularly charged him to kill Mr. Blair. The man overcome with terror, and
through the violence of that temptation, determined the thing, and went to Mr.
Blair's house with a dagger in his right hand hid beneath his cloak, and though
much confounded, was moving to get it out: but after Mr. Blair's speaking to
him, the poor man fell a trembling so extremely, that upon a further inquiry he
freely declared for what end he was come, and told he had labored to draw out
his dagger, but it would not come from the scabbard, though he knew not what
hindered it; for then, when he essayed to draw it forth again, it came out with
much ease. Master Blair blessing the Lord, exhorted him to chose him for his
refuge. He was after threatened and much terrified by the Devil, but nothing
more followed.

After some time in the Ministry at Bangor, he with others of his worthy
brethren was silenced by the bishop; and as he told himself, was in the Church
when the Bishop (one Eckline) did ^^^self intimate the sentence. Upon which,
Mr. Blair rose up publicly in the congregation, and with great Authority did
cite the Bishop to appear before the tribunal of Jesus Christ, to answer for
what he was doing, contrary to his own light and conscience, against those whom
he knew to be faithful Ministers of the gospel: whereupon the man was so
astonished, that he immediately cried out, I appeal from the tribunal of the
justice of God to the throne of his mercy! To whom Mr. Blair replies; Sir, your
appeal is rejected: for you know, what you are doing is directly against your
conscience, which has made you bear witness to us as the servants of Jesus
Christ. A few months after, the Bishop fell sick; and the physicians inquiring
about his case, he only could say, My conscience! and so died.

Whilst under restraint, he was by his brethren sent to England, to deal with
the King for their liberty. When he was on the road, he was taken with a mighty
^it of the stone, which made him lie upon his horse's neck, not being able to
hold up his back; which much disquieted him, as being a probable let upon such
an important business. And in this posture he turned to the Lord in prayer; but
immediately after, essaying if he could possibly lift up his back, he found to
his ^^^onishment, his tormenting pain quite gone, and perfect ease, nor did it
recur to him for two years after. A few days after, in the same journey, his
horse fell very lame; which did in some measure trouble him, having no
convenient access to provide himself of an other: and even upon this, did
address to the Lord by prayer, that in such a strait he might be helped, which
he graciously condescended to do, so that the horse was to his amazement
healed, and without the least halt did carry him to London.

Whilst he was there, he did essay what he could to accomplish his business,
but could have no (...) the King; yea, some who were his friends at (...)
assured him, he had no ground to hope in that matter: yet he resolved to
continue, and roll the business over on the Lord, for whose service he was only
importuning an open door. And one day having gone to Greenwitch, where the
court then was, being wearied with waiting without access, he retired into the
park to pray, where after much wrestling with the Lord, he was in a more than
ordinary way brought near, and had so clear a return, that he could not
withstand the assurance he got, that his way should be successful: but the
appearance thereof in an ordinary way being so small, pressed him to adventure
humbly the asking of a sign from the Lord; and immediately, after there being a
considerable wind that blew hard and made a noise among the bulrushes that grew
there, so great a calm did presently follow, that not the least plant of the
ground did any ways move or stir. He went thence to London, and within a few
days in a most strange way had his petition presented to the King, and
accepted; yea, in St. James's park was particularly called for, where the King
with his own hand did not only sign it, but wrote these words in the margin,
which he directed to the Deputy, Indulge the education of these Ministers, for
they are Scots-men.

When he was in England, he had a strange discovery of his wife (an excellent
gentlewoman) her dying, and that she was lying in such a bed, and a Christian
friend of his particular acquaintance beside her. When he come home, he found
his wife in health; but a little after, she fell sick and died in that same
bed, with that friend sitting by her, and with all those particular
circumstances. These are but a few of many great and remarkable passages in
that excellent man's life, who was himself as (...) an observer of providence
as any in the age he lived in: and this he had notably verified in himself,
which was an usual saying of his to (...), Observable things do follow them who
are given to observation.

V. This seems an eminent instance of the providence of God, and worthy to be
on record, that concerns the Lord of Raith, of a known and ancient family in
this country, who in the beginning of the reformation was a professed Papist;
but the Lord directing that great servant of his, Mr. Wishart, one night very
late to his house, who after some repulse from a servant got access to this
Gentleman, and told him, He was come with the offer of the Gospel of Christ to
him, and his family, if he would receive it; which was in that manner backed
with the authority of God, and his power on that Gentleman's conscience, that
he most kindly received Mr. Wishart, and told him, His offer was welcome. And a
little after, this visit was made so successful, upon Mr. Wishart's instructing
him and his family in the truth that they publicly professed the same; and
this worthy Gentleman evidenced his being truly taken by the heart. But
sometime after, upon a snare laid for him by Cardinal Beaton, he was seized
upon in the Lord of Grange his house, and thence carried prisoner to the
castle of Edinburgh, and so hotly pursued by this wretched man's rage, who then
was in his greatest power, that in a short time he was sentenced to die; his
Lady's being overwhelmed with grief, upon her husband's suffering and the
forfeiture of that estate, having five sons, besides some daughters, to
provide, did move him. But as one then much with God, he with much confidence
told her, having gotten this assurance from that God, for whom he suffered,
concerning his house and posterity, that she had no cause to be troubled: for,
as to her outward case, she should yet live to see the youngest of her sons in
a better (...) th^n he had been himself. Which most clearly fell ^ut, and is
well known to many in this time: his (...) s^n went to France, was there raised
to great honor, and upon his returning home, purchased a considerable estate,
and was made Lord Melvin; and which calls for a remark, bought a part of the
Cardinal's estate, the then great instrument of the present ruin of his house,
which continues to this day. His third son was Lord Tongland, as one of the
judges of the Session; and another of them Lord of Halhill; but, which was
most strange, the French King, (it seems moved from the great respect he had,
to that worthy Gentleman Sir Robert Melvin, the second son formerly mentioned)
did, upon some treaty with Scotland, press and procure the taking off the
forfeiture of that estate of Raith, whereby the eldest son was also restored.
And it is known to this day; in what a measure the Lord has graciously
witnessed his respect to that house and family, which now is enjoyed by my Ld.
Melvin, who, as he is by a continued succession the descent of that worthy
Gentleman, who thus suffered for the truth, so it is hoped he shall be found
walking in the steps of his truly renowned Ancestors, who walked with God, and
adhered to his truth, while forsaken and persecuted.

VI. I shall mention, among these late instances, a notable passage of an
excellent man, and deservedly of great repute in his time amongst the first
restorers of the Gospel and of learning in France, after the reformation, which
grave and famous Rivet sets down in a letter of his to his brother, and is
since his death printed in the French tongue; which relation I shall give to
those who have not access to that book, It is this. James Faber, native of a
steeple in Pi^^ardy, a most faithful and eminent Minister of the Gospel there,
did in the persecution of that time flee with others, and for security retired
to the Queen of Navarre, then in Albret in Gascoin^, who had him in high
esteem: on a certain day the Queen did advertise him, she purposed to come and
dine at his house, and for that end did invite some learned men, in whose
conference she took much delight: at dinner Faber became exceedingly sad, and
now and then fell out in bitter weeping; at which the Queen complained, and
inquiring the cause, why he weeped whilst she had come to be merry with him, he
in the end said, Most serene Queen, how can I be glad, or make others glad, who
am as wicked a man as the earth bears! And what is that wickedness, says she,
you have committed, who are known from your youth to have lived so holy? He
answered, I am now the age of an hundred years, free from the touch of any
woman, and remember not that I have committed what would burden my conscience,
or make me afraid to leave the world; except one sin, for which I am assured
propitiation is possible. And as she pressed him to tell it, whilst he could
scarce speak for abundance of tears, He said, How can I stand before the throne
of God? who having taught others in purity and sincerity the holy Evangel of
the Son of God, many of whom having followed my doctrine, have constantly
suffered a thousand torments, and death it self, and in the mean time I, an
unconstant Doctor, did flee; and though I had lived long enough, and should not
have feared death, but rather desired it, did yet withdraw, and thus cowardly
transgressed the command of my God! Whereupon the Queen, as she was most
eloquent, did by reason and example show him, this had befallen others of the
holy servants of God: and others there also, did add such considerations, as
that he became more cheerful, and said, there remains nothing, but that I go
from hence to God, and after I have now made my Testament, I have that
impression, I must delay no longer, knowing the Lord calls for me. After, he
fixed his eyes on the Queen, and says, Madam, I make you my heir: and to your
preacher, Gerard, I leave my Books: and my clothes, and other things I have, I
leave to the poor. Whereupon the Queen smiling, asked, What then Mr. Faber
shall I have? The care, said he, Madam, to distribute this to the poor. It is
well, said she; I solemnly profess, this Legacy is more acceptable to me, than
if the King, my Brother, had named me his heir. Thereafter they saw him more
joyful; then he said, I have need of some rest, be you merry and joyful, and in
the mean time adieu; and having spoke this, he turned him over on a bed that
was near; where, as they judged, he lay sleeping, but was indeed fallen a sleep
in the Lord, without the least sign of a previous indisposition: for when they
were about to awake him they found him to their admiration dead. Such was the
end of this personage undoubitably holy, which the Queen of Navarre did her
self relate to the Elector Frederick the second of Palatine, when he was sick
at Paris, in his return from Spain, from the Emperor Charles the fifth, and it
was communicated by a worthy Gentleman Hubertus Thomas, a counselor (...) ^he
said Frederick's, who was present at this relati^^ of the Queen's from whom
Rivet had it written by himself.

VII. I shall subjoin two passages worthy of observation, which concern a grave
and eminently godly Minister in the Church of Ireland, Mr. Andrew Steward,
Minister at Dunagor, which (together with some of those other remarkable
instances here mentioned) were transmitted unto me from his worthy Son Mr.
Andrew Steward, Minister of D^nachade; who both knew the certainty of them, and
was himself also a great observer of such confirmations of the truth; whom I
cannot mention without sorrow at the remembrance of the late (...) of so
eminent and useful a Minister of Jesus Christ.

The first is an instance and evidence of the power and prevalency of Prayer
with God. On a (...) after a communion where a great multitude being gathered,
and these of the choicest of that country, whilst as a Shepherd he was feeding
his flock in a large place (for the numerousness of the hearers imposed a
necessity upon him to preach in the field) an horrid black cloud, and fearful
to look on, hanged directly over their head, which to all present threatened a
strange pouring down of rain, whereby the exercise would have been interrupted;
yea, some drops were begun to fall: but Mr. Steward, then at great advantage in
his own spirit as to nearness with God, begged their leave to retire a little
from the place, and went to an other part for prayer, and while he prayed, it
was observably seen, that the cloud did remove half a mile off on the South
hand, and there fell down in such a mighty rain, that albeit it was the heat of
summer, the brooks so swelled, that some coming too late to sermon could not
have passage over; but where they were gathered, there was not one drop more.
So that he went on with a full gale to the close of the work, to the no small
advantage and conviction (...) his hearers.

The next concerns his death. Being called to the burial of that excellent man
of God, Mr. Jesiah Welsh, Son of that great man formerly mentioned, who was his
neighbour-Minister, be stood sometime at the grave, as a sad observer of such a
thing, and to some who were by, said, Who knows who will be next? But none
answering, he said to them, I know! and thus turned away, and went home to
Dunager on foot, and entering into the Church did bolt the doors, where he
tarried some two hours; and after, going to his house, he ^ell a sleep on his
bed with an excess of grief, whence he never in health rose again, but was
buried that day month. When his Wife returned, whom he had left with Mr.
Welsh's Widow, she inquired, what he had been doing? to whom he said, I have
been taking my leave of the Church of Dunagor; and I was there taking timber
and stones to witness, that in my short time I had labored to be faithful, and
that according to my light I have revealed the whole counsel of God to the
People. (How great a testimony of the conscience was this!) After fourteen
nights lying, Mr. Ridge a choice English Minister there came to visit him, and
said, I hope, Sir, you do not now rue that ye have been faithful. He answered,
I rue nothing, but that I was too long in beginning (he mean'd his resisting,
for several years, a call to the ministry, to which he had been much pressed)
and I will tell you a strange thing, which has helped me to be faithful. These
last seven years there has not one day passed me, without thoughts of death,
and renewed submission to it; yea, this made me neglect my body, which should
have served the Lord, as if it has been mire in the street; which now
troubles me. -- That night when he died, several godly and grave Christians
were with him; where for a long time he fell in a deep silence; which ended
with heavy groanings often reiterated: at last a Christian there desired to
know, what troubled him? but he refused to tell. At last being urged he said, I
shall tell you, My hair stands, to behold what I see coming on these Lands
(this was in the Year. 1634.) and being further pressed, he said, the bloody
wars of Germany shall never be balanced with the wars of these three Kingdoms.
What do you speak, Sir! said one of the company. To whom he answered, The dead
bodies of many thousands, who this day despise the glorious Gospel, shall lie
upon the earth as dung unburied. And whilst asked, what then shall be come of
us and our posterity? He lifted up his voice, and said, He that is for the
sword, to the sword; he that is for captivity, to captivity; and he that is for
famine, to famine: and God shall be avenged on these Lands. And whilst one
said, Is there no remedy? He cried thrice, No remedy, no remedy, no remedy!
Then he held his peace a little, and said, I tell you what must be; The broken
Covenant of Scotland must be renewed; the Formality of Ireland must be purged;
the prodigality of England removed; and the sons of Saul must be hung up before
the sun. By which last word, none knew what he mean'd. Some of his own Parish
being present, asked, What he would say to them? to whom he replied, Woe to
thee, Dunagor! for the nettles and the long grass shall be in greater plenty in
thee, than ever were people to hear the Word of God. This the forementioned
relater said, he was a witness to three years together after the late
rebellion. They asked, if he would have his children? he said, No he had done
with them. And whilst they mentioned one of his daughters, he desired to be
forborne, and said, She should see glorious days after all this! and then takes
his wife by the hand (who having but a fourth night lien in of child, crept out
of the bed to get and give a long farewell: to whom he said, Thou have in
faithfulness suffered many things with me in my pilgrimage, and now wherewith
shall I comfort thee, my love! (think, that he left her with four children,
much debt contracted whilst he resisted a call to the ministry, and but 30
Shillings Sterling then to do all with) A father to the fatherless, a judge to
the widow, is God in his holy habitation. As God is God, thou shall never want,
nor none of thine: but in all the sad days that are coming you shall be a
wonder of mercy in every place, whither you are carried, and not a hair of your
head shall fall. Which was to the conviction and edification of many fully
accomplished: which the forementioned relator does himself also attest, though
with much humble modesty, because of his near relation.

VIII. This passage also I must instance, of a remarkable providence to a grave
and to this day famous Christain in our country, John Steward, provost of Air;
who from his very young years did witness a respect to godliness. He had a
considerable estate left him by his Father: but having so great a weight and
impression on his spirit, of the distress and straightened condition of many good
people whom he knew in the country, and love to Jesus Christ and his truth
having got the command over him and all his interests, he did deliberatly call
them (as he had access) together in Edinburgh, and having spent some time in
prayer, took their solemn promise, not to reveal while he lived, what he was
going to do: he said, he knew in what straits many of them were, to hold up the
credit of the profession, and therefore he had brought a little money to lend
each of them; yet so as they should never offer to repay it, till he required
the same. This was not known until his death, that some of these found
themselves obliged to make it known. Some time after he had bestowed this
money, the plague having been sore in Air, and trade much decayed, he himself
fell under some straits, and some of the profane in that place begun to make
it their b^ast that Religion had made him poor, and his giving much to others
like a fool had made him now want himself: the profession and the credit of it
was always this godly man's darling, which made him quit the country at that
time; and borrowing a little money, he went over to France, that he might the
better conceal his strait. When he came to Rechel, the salt and other
commodities were become exceeding cheep, because there had been no trading of a
long time, on which he adventured to freight a ship, and load her upon credit:
he himself came over the nearest to England, and thence to Air, with
expectation of the ship's return. But after long waiting he was informed f^^
certain, that his ship was taken by the Turks; which became matter of great
exercise to him, (not because he knew not how to be abased, as well as how to
abound; but fearing lest the mouths of wicked men might so much the more on
this occasion be opened to reproach the profession) that for many days he kept
his chamber. At last a maid, who had heard amongst the people, that John
Steward's ship was arrived in the road, came running, and cried at the door,
that his ship was come: but he being at prayer, could not be moved from his
Master's company, till he was satisfied, and then went forth and saw it was a
truth. But as a further ground of present exercise to him, a worthy Christian
and great intimate of his, John Kennedy, who for joy had gone forth in a small
boat to the ship, was by the sudden falling down of a storm carried by the
ship, and in the judgment of all that looked on, he and the boat were swallowed
up; yea, the storm increased at that rate, that they feared the loss of the
ship also: which did so deeply affect this gracious man, that for three days he
could be seen by none, under the weight of a such trial. But at last, having
gone forth to visit the widow (as then supposed) whilst with that family they
were mutually witnessing grief, John Kennedy immediately comes in; who had not
been cast away, but by a strange providence the boat had been driven a far way
to another place of the coast. Here, at once many mercies did meet; he vended
the commodities of the ship; which having paid all his debt, returned him
twenty thousand marks more to himself. Thus was that bread, cast upon the
waters and to appearance lost, after many days returned; and this witnessed,
that by liberal devices the liberal man does stand. -- I must add a word upon
the death of this worthy man. Whilst then his friends came to see him, (...)
used this word, Be humble. And about his own case, he said, I go the way of all
flesh; and it may be some of you doubt nothing of my welbeing; (...), I
testify, that except when I slept, or was on business, I was not these ten
years without thoughts of God, so long as I could be in going from my house to
the cross: and yet I doubt my self, and am in great agony, yea, at the brink of
despair. But a day or two before he died, he turned his face to the wall, from
company, for two hours: and then Mr. John Fergusson came in, a great and godly
Minister of that place, who asked what he was doing? upon which he turned
himself, with these words, I have been fighting, and working out my salvation
with fear and trembling: and now I bless God, it is perfected, sealed,
confirmed; and all fears are gone!

It is a memorable instance, known yet to many in the north of Ireland, of a
choice and godly Gentlewoman, when the rebellion brake out there, who fled
with some other persons with her and three children, one of them upon the
breast: they had not gone far before they were striped naked by the Irish, who
to admiration spared their lives (it is like, thinking that the cold and hunger
would kill them.) Afterward going on, at the foot of a river which runs into
Locheach, others met them, and would have them cast into the river. But this
godly woman not dismayed, asked a little liberty to pray; and as she lay naked
on the frozen ground, got resolution, not to go on her own feet to such an
unjust death: upon which having called her, and she refusing, was dragged by
the heels along that rugged way to be cast in, with the rest of her company.
But she then turned, and on her knees says, You should (I am sure) be
Christians, and Men I see you are! In taking away our miserable lives, you do
us a pleasure: but know, that as we never wronged you, nor yours, you must
remember to dye also yourselves, and one day give an account of this cruelty,
to the Judge of heaven and earth. On which an irish priest then ^^esent, said,
Let us not take their lives; but we will put them into this Island of the lake.
A boat being at the river, all the eight naked and without meat are turned into
that Island: where after four days staying, some of the company died for hunger
and cold; but not this woman or any of her children, for she lived by faith,
upon the word of God and not by bread only. A day after, the two boys having
crept aside, found the hide of a beast, which had been killed, at the root of a
tree; which the mother and they endeavored to get cast over them, then lying
upon the snow. The next day a little boat goes by, unto whom she calls, for
God's sake to take her in: but they being Irish, would not. She desired a
little bread: they said they had none. Then she begs a coal of fire, which
(...) obtained; for she had seen smoke in the boat. And thus with some fallen
chips made a little fire: and the boys taking a piece of the hide, laid it on
the coals; and began to gnaw the leather: but without an exraordinary divine
support, what could this do? Thus they lived ten days without any visible means
of help: and that good woman professed, it was by faith and joy in God, that
she did live; nor had she any bread, but ice or snow; nor drink, except water:
but she thought, God put more substance into it, and found it as it were
clammy. The next day a boat carried her out, to the side of the Band water;
where she had yet been lost, but that she could not bear to see her children
die, in her sight: and though the two boys were young, and so starved, that
they had no strength, she pressed them to go out of her sight, under pretense
of their seeking some fire, and bid them bend their face to such a quarter,
where in that desolate country she knew they could have no fire; yet in such an
extreme lest room for God to work their safety. The poor children were not
able, and had not gone far before they saw two or three great dogs, eating a
man who had been (...); the children were afraid at the sight of the dogs (who
needed not fear any thing, but to live in such a condition) and one of them
came running and leaped upon one of the children without doing him the least
hurt, but fawned on them, and would run a little before, and then tarry 'till
the children came up, and so led them on to a house where smoke appeared, which
was an irish man's protected by the English in Antrum, by whose means they were
marvellously preserved, and the mother sent for and succored by a party from
Antrum. I would shut this passage up with something truly observable about this
gentlewoman's husband: who was a sweet-humoured Gentleman, and godly, and one
who used to frequent that famous Friday's meeting at Antrum before that
rebellion brake out; but being ensnared by some Arminians then in the bounds,
the worthy Ministers in that place, after some pains taken on him, could not
prevail. Mr. Blair being there, had this word to a friend, who told it to a
godly Minister in that place, from whom I had this passage, I am of opinion,
that this Gentleman shall either turn penitent, or mad, before many days. Which
fell out, for he fell so furiously mad, that they were driven to the necessity
of binding him; and thus for a year continued, though with some more sober
intervals, and then would bewail his case. At the end of the year, being very
furious, he was taught of the devil, [but by an ^ver-reaching providence of
God] to feign himself sober, and entreated his wise to be rid of the manacles
which was done; and at the break of day rising, he took the coverlet of the bed
about him, and went with resolution to drown himself in the river; but when he
was at the brink thereof, had this suggested to him, He was a fool to drown the
covering, for (...) might be useful, which made him go a little back, and lay
it down at the root of a tree, and then with full resolution went to throw
himself in: but this was suggested to him again at the very brink, Were it not
best to pray, before I die? On which he turned a little, and falls down to
prayer; but ere he had done, his wit and judgment was returned, with peace of
conscience, and assurance of pardon, in as large measure as ever he enjoyed
these in his life; and thus he returned in a sober frame to the astonishment of
his wife.

IX. There is a strange passage of Judgment, that amongst the memorable things
of the providence of God I think worthy of inserting; it concerns a Nobleman
in our own country (whose name, with respect to his house, I forbear to
mention) who for many years by blood and cruelty and oppression made himself a
terror in that place of the country where he lived. One day his second son, who
after succeeded to that house, by the death of his brother, found a letter
sealed and directed to his father, bearing the style of his house, and without
any suspicion whence it came, carried it up to his chamber: which that Lord
breaking open, found it of a strange style; for it had these words, I summon
you -- to appear before the tribunal of God, and there answer for your murders,
oppressions, etc. Subscribitur DIABOLUS, Upon which, he being enraged, drew his
sword, to have run his son through, supposing it a contrived business by him;
but he escaped, and was forced for many months to withdraw from the house.
However upon the intercession of friends, his father did condescend to admit
him again; but that very day, whilst they were met on this account, that
Nobleman washing his hands in his bedchamber (and one of his servants by) a
letter from the roof of that chamber drops down upon his hands, sealed and
directed as before, which being opened, had the very same words of the former
letter, with that dreadful subscription, DIABOLUS. After which, by immediate
stroke of the Lord's hand, he was struck with a remarkable infatuation, and
such an horror and fear upon his conscience, that upon the appearance of the
least boy he would have fled, and with howling sought to have sheltered himself
under a bed, and in this case shortly died; having been made a terror to
himself, and the meanest person able to quash him, who made it his work to be
terrible to others in his life. This (far from reflecting upon the house or
family) with respect to the holding forth the holy and righteous Judgment of
the Lord, I could not omit to insert the same, after some safe warrant, as to
the certainty thereof, from those I had ground to believe. ()

SEVENTH Witness to this truth, that the Lord has in so solemn and
extraordinary a way appeared for his Church in these last times, is this; Those
great and mavelous providence (which we may call Magnalia Dei) by which he
has witnessed his truth, and confirmed the same since the breaking out of the
Gospel in this late raising of the Church from Antichrist. For we may truly
say, there has not wanted a visible attestation from Heaven, and a convincing
testimony by some great works of the Lord, to his truth, as well as in the
primitive times of the Church.

We do here understand by such providence, those wherein man cannot but see
something above nature and natural causes, yea, above the ordinary way of (...)
Lord's working, which do evidently witness his great and immediate hand: some
whereof have (...) wonderful, which can be instanced in these late times, as
might truly be called miracles. It is true, this is not the Lord's usual way,
neither makes he use of such a solemn testimony, but on special and weighty
grounds; when the necessity of the Church calls for it; whilst he is about
some extraordinary piece of work; or when the Gospel comes first to a ^and
that has been long overspread with darkness; when ordinary means of conviction
are wanting; or in times of great opposition, when the commission of his
Servants needs some extraordinary seal; in such a time as that of Ahab's,
when the People are made to halt betwixt truth, and a false way. Thus we find,
the Lord did confirm the first breaking out of the Gospel, and make use of such
a mean to spread the Christian Church through the World: and should this seem
strange, that in so great a change of the Church's case now in the latter days,
when he was to raise her up, after so long a ruin and desolation, whilst
Antichristianism so many ages had overspread the face of the World, that he
should thus appear, and give some signal demonstration of his power in behalf
of his People, such as we have seen with our eyes, and our Fathers did tell us!

It is not miracles, or any extraordinary providence, on which men should
resolve their faith: nor do we here mention these, for laying stress, thereon
in believing the truth. No, the Protestant doctrine and cause does lean on a
stronger ground: it can with confidence appeal the adversary, to the Scripture,
those divine records, which they do not pretend to deny. This, even this is the
reason of our hope, which we offer to all that ask for the same* and there let
the God of truth, who has revealed his will and answers men by the written
word, be judge; and we shall demand no greater advantage or justice at the hand
of our enemies. We know, miracles cannot authorize a lie, or be a seal to any
thing repugnant to the Scripture. And truly those lying wonders, which have
been so frequent in the World, which the Apostle does foretell, that such an
engine the Devil will make use of, to turn men aside from the truth, besides
other marks of their falsehood, they have this one most discernable, that they
are the support and warrant of that which cannot stand with the Word: and
thence are the Popish miracles made use of, to confirm such tenets, which of
all their doctrine do most directly contradict the Scripture, as the merit of
works, purgatory, praying for the dead, etc. But as we will not boast of such,
as the authority or proof of our doctrine: so we judge it a grave and
concerning duty, to observe the wondrous works of the Lord in our times; yea,
to make a diligent search therein, that we may tell posterity some of these
great acts of our God, for his Church, in bringing her again from Babel.

I would desire to be very tender and cautious upon such a subject: for I judge
it horrid divinity, to make a lie for God. It is not the truth, but a false way
which requires such a help. And truly as to these following instances (which
are but a few of many that might be brought, if there were more serious
enquiry) I dare attest the Lord, the great witness, that I have not knowingly
set down here any thing false; yea, not without some diligent search, and
satisfying grounds about the certainty thereof. I judge it not necessary, to
repeat those which are so known already to the World from public records: and
therefore shall but briefly point at some of these, and add a few more
particular instances of this kind, which I may with some confidence bring to
the light, from clear evidences of the truth thereof.

I shall first mention that solemn testimony of Mr. Daynam in Queen Mary's
time, who in the midst of the fire, whilst his body was all in a flame, his
arms and legs half burnt, cried out to bystanders, O Papists ye look after
miracles: lo! here is one. I am now burning in this fire, but feel no more
pain, than if (...) bed of roses. O must not this be called a (...) an
extraordinary seal from the Lord to (...) wherein the World should consider,
this was the testimony of one, who was upon the borders of eternity what he did
declare before a great multitude; attested by Mr. Fox, that holy servant of
Christ, who in things of that kind so extraordinary was most cautious, and did
much search out the truth and certainty of what he sets down, and by him was
published, whilst many of that time who might have been present, were alive
yea, it is the more remarkable, the sharp combat that this Martyr had through
the terror of the fire a little before his death, fearing he should never be
able to endure the same.

What a remarkable providence was that at a town in the Low-Countrys, whilst
some of the Saints were put to death by the Popish party, and among these one
Michael Bomboutius, a Deacon of the reformed Church? Whilst they were going to
suffer, about midday, the Heavens being most clear, there came suddenly so
great a darknes^, and so horrible and unusual a tempest, which was only in that
place and above that city discerned, that men were generally shaken with fear,
thinking there should be a present dissolution of the World. Famous Voetius, in
that piece d^ s^g^is, does witness, that from diverse there present, even some
of them popish, he had this related to himself: and as he says, such a thing
Papists would have with greatest observation published, as the very finger of
God, if they had the same occasion.

At a town Alsa in West standers, whilst a godly man whom the Inquisition there
had pursued, was leading to the stake, and was by the way singing Psalms, the
Captain of th^se who guarded him, was so enraged that he caused presen^^ (...)
tongue be plucked out by the roots, but ^o! a few months after, this wretched
man has a Child born with his tongue hanging out a great way, which (...)
means could be (...) within his mouth! This, Doctor Hall being himself
afterward in that town, had showed him from some who were most considerable
there, as he sets down in his Epistles.

Charles the IX. of France, who was author of that horrid Massacre, where the
blood of many thousand Protestants at Paris and other parts was shed, did a
very little after die in the strength of his years, by an extraordinary
effusion of blood from all passages of his body, that as Du Serres and other
french writers of that time do show, he was made to wallow in his own blood
before his death. O was not this the very finger of God, a most convincing
stupendous piece of his judgment?

What an extraordinary providence was that, which is attested by diverse
witnesses thereto, in the late bloody Massacre of Ireland; a young woman, who
by the Irish was stripped almost naked, and after by one of them threatened, that
except she would give him her money, he would forthwith run her through; to which
she gravely answered, I know you cannot kill me, except God give you leave.
Whereupon he did three times with his sword run at her naked body, but could
not once pierce her skin; which did so confound this wretched man, that with a
kind of horror he went away, and ceased to trouble her further.

Did not God wonderfully appear in the raising of the late King of Sweden, with
that astonishing success, which did ateend him in breaking the power of the
house of Austria, whilst they were at so great an height, and had their hands
hot reeking in the blood of the Protestants through Bohemia, and other places of
Germany! O but the Lord's hand might be clearly seen in acting forth and
fitting that party of the Swedes, for such a piece of his service, even in a
more than ordinary way; who like that He-Geat, mentioned in Daniel, did come so
swiftly, that they touched not the ground, as it were; but like a mighty
Torrent bare down all before them.

The breaking of that great Spanish Armado in the Year 88. which had been 3
Years in contriving, did convincingly witness a divine hand opposing the same.
And how remarkable was that issue of all the Counsels, expense, and cruelty,
which Philip the second had made use of to bear down the rising of the Gospel
in the Netherlands! For it is notorious, that after many essays the loss of an
100 Millions of gold, with near 400000 Lives, the reckoning of all his gain and
purchase was only the loss of a considerable part of these countries, and
helping forward the establishment of the united Provinces. And truly we must
say the Lord did by his great and outstretched hand wonderfully appear in
raising that Commonwealth, so that they may date their flourishing in outward
interest from their owning of the interest of God. Religion did raise them, and
no People this day has more cause, and are under greater engagements, to be
zealous for the truth, and defense of the Protestant Cause.

The breaking of that formidable league of the Catholics in France, for
rooting out the Protestant Religion there, was very wonderful, how all their
Counsels and designs should resolve in their own ruin; so that the most
ordinary lookers on could not but see a divine hand counteracting the same.
Davila, though an adversary, in setting down that history, gives a large account
of this.

What a great appearance of the Lord's hand, yea, of an extraordinary
providence, was there in the throwing down of the Popish images and altars,
almost in one night, through much of the Netherlands, which for so many 100 years
had been made use of for Idolatry? O did not Satan thus fall as Lightning from
Heaven! it being very (...), how strange an impulse did carry out the People in
this over all difficulties or fear of hazard, what a wonderful consent and
agreement amongst places so remote, about one thing, and almost at one time;
how quickly also was it executed through these Provinces, almost in an instant!
The authors did never appear, nor any noise of their boasting thereabout; and
which was strange, the Magistrates of the cities having both power and will to
hinder, yet were so overruled and struck with astonishment, that they could not
resist. And as Famianus Strada, a great enemy to the truth, does show what fell
out in Antwerp, and other places, considering the greatness of the work, the
multitude, and height of those idolatrous monuments, it might have been enough
for many days, what was done in one night; and yet not any in the least
prejudiced or hurt thereby, which made him cry out, that sure this was the work
of the Devil, and his help eminently therein. But I do not wonder, to hear
these in such a manner blaspheme, whilst they are tormented with so clear a
discovery of God's hand against them.

Must we not here mention that great deliverance of the town of Leyden from the
Spaniard, with a special remark, whilst it was then manifest, if the enemy had
made use of Cannon in battering the walls, they could not have come short of
their design? In what an extraordinary way also were the winds combined to
raise the waters, in order to the town's relief, when they were at the utmost
extremity; yea, for driving the waters back again, when the town was once
delivered; and which was very mavelous, that the same night wherein the
Spaniard were forced to retire, a part of the walls fell down, which if it had
(...) out a little before, that city had been utterly (...). O was not this a
divine hand, which even the greatest Atheists, and such who judge things to
fall out by change, must confess?

What wonderful providence did attend the actings of that poor handful of
protestants in the Valleys of Piemont, for their necessary self-defence! Mr.
Fox, and other writers, give a clear account in setting down that horrid
persecution, which they endured in the year 1555. I shall here only touch some
passages mentioned by Mr. Morland, in his History; who upon the account of that
bloody Massacre, which was there within these few years, was then near that
place, and from sure knowledge and information does very gravely hold forth the
same. And truly they are providence so mavelous and astonishing, that men
cannot but see the Lord in an extraordinary way helping that poor People, his
acting forth a sew to do such exploits, beyond any thing that can be mentioned
of those great Heroes, whom the World in former years did admire; so that we
must say, as this was a convincing proof of the great power of God, put forth
for his People, when help in an ordinary way failed, it was also a solemn
testimony to their cause, and of the Lord's approbation of his People standing
for their own defense, against the cruelty and violence of a persecuting
Magistrate. We have there held forth, how after that bloody persecution, by an
order from the Duke of Savoy, a small number was in a remarkable way raised up,
and upon their first essay 7 or 8 under the conduct of that worthy Gentleman
Josua Gianavel (whom God made use of as a choice instrument, to help that poor
scattered rampant) was made to fight 300 soldiers, who were sent to exercise
further cruelty in that place, killing many of them, and pursuing the rest for
a considerable time. After, a party of 500 being sent by the Marquise of (...),
who then commanded the Duke of (...), were opposed by 11 of the Protestants,
and other 6 with slings: and after a short conflict, were forced to flee with a
considerable slaughter; the terror of the Lord upon the one, and a spirit of
courage and resolution in the other being very manifest. After these, there was
an other party sent forth of 700 soldiers, to seize on all the passages: upon
which about 17 Masters of families, whose hearts God had in signal manner
strengthened to the battle, for their poor brethren's preservation, resolved to
cast themselves upon the Lord for the success of their undertakings, and with
such mavelous boldness faced their adversaries, as put them in amazement, and
made them draw off, resolving to take another way; but were still pursued by
this little handful, who killed many without the loss of one man. At an another
time the Protestants there joining in a greater number, being 300 under the
conduct of the forementioned Captain Gianavel, were assaulted by 2500 of the
adversaries: but the Lord so ordered, that this little party getting the
advantage of the place, after some conflict did force then to retire, pursuing
them into the woods and steep rocks with great slaughter; and thus with a
mavelous courage in a continued fight for eight hours together, did drive the
enemy before them. Diverse other remarkable passages of this kind are more at
length mentioned in that History; which the Author, after most exact search and
enquiry, does solemnly attest. And truly it might be much cause for wonder (as
it is there observed) that through the Lord's eminent appearance, and his
blessing on his poor people's endeavors, for the interest of Religion, and
their own preservation, they did in a short time dispute the matter with such a
prosperous success, against all the forces, which the Duke of Savoy sent, that
their enemies at last began to fear what effect it might produce: and therefore
having no better game to play, were glad by a treaty of peace, to get the sword
out of their hands; however they pretended it as a complement, put on
neighboring Princes, who did interceed for the same.

Have we not also to reckon among the great works of the Lord in these last
times, Henry the VIII. of England, most violent in opposition to the truth, who
by the Pope was styled Defender of the Faith, upon that account, and for his
writing against Luther: and yet the same man shall be the instrument made use
of by the Lord, to throw down the Pope, and his power in his Dominions, and
give some beginning to a great Reformation of the Church there.

Vergerius, the Pope's Nuncio, for many years in Germany, whilst he is writing
against this truth, is even then converted, and forced to yield to the power of
the same, turns Protestant, and a zealous Preacher of the Gospel to his death.

Galeacaeus Carracciolus, an Italian Marquise, of great place and estate in the
World, was so taken by the heart with one word, hearing Peter Martyr, as made
him quit not only all his hopes of preferment, a most pleasant place as was in
the earth, and a great inheritance; but to withstand the most pressing
entreaties and insinuations of his friends, the weeping cries of his Lady and
Children, and go to a strange place quitting all, that he might preserve his
conscience, and enjoy fellowship with the Church. O what a solemn witness was
this to the truth, and of the conquering power of Christ!

And in a word, what a mavelous thing was it, that poor Luther, against whom
so much of the World was aloft with greatest rage and violence, should yet live
to an old age, and go to the grave in peace! And truly the spirit and
appearance of this great and first witness to the truth, might be a convincing
evidence, that the Lord was then about to raise up a people to himself, in whom
he would be glorified, by an active testimony, as well as by suffering.

Besides these instances, I would here mention some remarkable providence,
worthy indeed to be observed, though they are little known to the World: which,
we may say, do not only witness the power of God, but are a convincing seal to
his truth, and the Church's Reformation in these last times.

It is a remarkable passage, which worthy Mr. Forbes sets down under his hand,
whilst he was banished for the truth; whose words are these. In the year 1607.
being at Ruan in France, and meeting with Monsieur Figureus, that ancient and
famous divine, and then Pastor of the Reformed Church in that city, he had from
him this following relation. After the close of the Council of Trent in the
time of Pius the V. there was a consultation in Italy, by the Pope and
Cardinals, for an utter extirpation of the Reformed Churches in Europe: and to
this end every Prince, of the Romish Religion, had a certain part assigned
where this great project should be put in practice: The death of Pius the V.
hindered a present prosecuting of this design. And his successor Gregorins XIII.
did suffer it to lie dead, having no heart that way; and so until that time of
Clemens VIII. it was not revived; but then this bloody resolution was of new
ratified by him and his Cardinals, under their hands and seals. The only
difficulty was in this, to find a fit and trusty person, whom they should make
use of to the Princes of the Romish* Religion, for engaging them to subscribe
the said ordinance, and set about the execution thereof. At length a Gentleman
of good parts, near in blood to the Cardinal (...), is chosen; which to him was
a (...) of (...); for, unknown to them, he was (...) Religion. But this grief
in his countenance and carriage put his friends, who observed the same, to
strange tho'ts; and so much the more, that he did expressly declare to some of
those who asked thereabout, that what to them seemed a cause of rejoicing, was
to him a just occasion of grief. Yet at last finding his hazard, upon a bitter
challenge from the foresaid Cardinal who had heard thereof, he judged it his
wisdom to dissemble: showing him, his unsuitableness to so great an employment
could not but be ground of trouble and fear; and so was someway forced to
engage, getting his commissions, the decree of the Conclave, with letters to
the foresaid Princes, sealed and subscribed. But lo! whilst this poor Gentleman
is on his journey, having found ways to free himself of his servants and other
company, his spirit was in great perplexity betwixt these two grievous
temptations, either to be instrument of utter ruin to the truth and Churches of
Christ, or to forsake his country, inheritance and all he had in the World.
Upon which he resolved to retire himself out of the high way to an obscure
village, where for three days he gave himself to fasting and prayer for
direction and resolution from the Lord: and after this had his heart so
strengthened against the care of his worldly estate, that he resolved to forsake
all, and to reveal this bloody conspiracy to the Churches of Christ, and cast
himself on God's hand for his future state. So that he turned his face from
Spain, and took journey to France, and to Paris, where at that time remained
the sister of Henry the IV. a Religious Princess, afterward Duchess of
Lorraine, to whom the foresaid Monsieur Figureus was her preacher: and unto him
he made his address (though after diverse refusals of admission upon suspicion)
showing him the whole business, and delivered the sealed decree, with his
letters of commission for that effect; and did likewise show him (who was then
astonished at such a wonderful providence of God, in fostering some of his own
Children in the midst of Babylon, and that to so comfortable an use for his
Churches safety) that there were many others in Italy, yea, in Rome it self, of
the Reformed Religion, who had their secret meetings, and even Gregory the
XIII. before his advancement to the Papacy, was thoroughly clear thereabout in
his judgment, whereof he gave him diverse evidences. This foresaid relation did
so affect Mr. Forbes, that he showed his mavelous desire to see that man who
had done so worthy and gracious a work for the glory of God and good of his
Church; and by a recommendation from Monsieur Figureus, he did afterward go of
set purpose to that place, taking the first opportunity for Heidelberg, where
this Gentleman was then retired for his further security, and honorably
entertained by that Prince, where he shows that he saw him, and from his own
mouth received the assurance of this former narration, to his great
satisfaction and comfort. This is the very sum, which I have here set down and
truly transcribed off the orginal; which I had beside me, both written, and
subscribed, by Mr. Forbes his own hand.

A remarkable providence I shall also here set down which was attended with
some very convincing circumstances, at the Parliament 1621. at their bringing
in of Popish Ceremonies upon the Church, which was then a sad step of the
land's defection from the truth, contrary to their engagements; whilst the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ at that time did with greatest seriousness
and freedom obtest and warn those who were in power (alas! that now there is
little of such a Spirit appearing) that they would not, to please men, corrupt
the Worship of God: but the current being violent, it did at last resolve in a
Law. At which very time, whilst the King's Commissioner did rise from the
throne to ratify this woeful act, by the touch of the Scepter, even in this
moment of that ratification, the God of Heaven sent extraordinary lightnings,
with very unusual great claps of thunder, and these followed with a most
strange and extraordinary darkness, which both for the suddenness and greatness
of the same did astonish and affright all who were present; and after all so
violent a downpouring of rain, as made the streets to run like a river,
imprisoning the Lords within that house for an hour and an half. And truly as
we are not hereon to lay stress, or be peremptory in the application of
particular providence, yet this was so very convincing, as should not be
passed without a special remark; considering (first) how at that time many of
the choice Ministers of the Land were together near the town, at fasting and
prayer, bewailing before the Lord such an avowed defection from the truth --
(2.) That likewise this horrid tempest and darkness appeared to those who were
at some distance to be most directly above the town, the darkness overshadowing
that part only, and was not so in other places -- (3.) That they had, by the
instigation of the Prelates, guarded the entry to the Parliament that day, lest
any Ministers should have entered a protestation in behalf of the Church against
these Articles; and thus thought themselves secure from any opposition of that
kind: but whilst they least suspected, they are met with a more public and
visible witness from Heaven against the same. (4.) Which was also most strange,
upon the Monday following, whilst these acts were proclaimed, the Heavens did
in the same manner put on darkness, with a most fearful tempest of thunder,
lightning, and rain, which (...) all the time of their reading at the Cross.
And ^^^ly when the Lord thus doubled his warnings, it might cry aloud for men's
observation thereof.

The breaking of that journey to New England, which about the year 1636. was
seriously intended by some of the choice Ministers and Christians in Ireland;
who were then much persecuted by the Prelates, though not from any fear of their
own sufferings, but with a respect to a further liberty to serve the Lord in
the work of the Gospel, when that door was shut upon them in their own country.
This was truly a strange and remarkable providence, and their preservation in
some kind miraculous: about which these circumstances are worthy to be
observed. (1.) That whilst their vessel, amidst a tempestuous sea, and far from
any land, was like a riddle with so many lakes; yea, the rudder of the Ship
breaking, so that the Pilots were turned wholly hopeless, and could not see any
ground of safety in an ordinary way, a poor seaman by a remarkable providence,
whose company they had much shunned, was made the instrument of preserving the
whole vessel, with a mavelous dexterity fastening the rudder (which others
had given over) as one visibly sent by the Lord for that end. -- (2) The strong
persuasion that some of these worthy Ministers had of their safety, which with
great confidence they declared before the passengers; whilst the Master and
others were giving it over as a hopeless business, and seeing a convincing
necessity for a return, though it was very astonishing and bitter at the first
look, yet was afterward followed with a clear discovery from the Lord, as one
of them with much freedom did express his assurance to the rest of his
brethren, that since the Lord would not accept their service in America, they
should not want work and service, where he was sending them back by so
remarkable a providence: as within a short time was evident, the downfall of
the Prelates in Scotland and after in Ireland, falling out shortly upon the
back thereof. So that it may be said, this was a convincing presage thereof,
the Lord by a strong hand bringing back such choice and useful instruments, for
that great harvest, which did after follow: So that they could not but say, The
Lord did in a very mavelous and immediate way appear in that cross-wind and
storm; and thereby, as if with an audible voice, did witness his mind in such a
disappointment. -- (3) It was also most observable, that none of those, who on
the account of their consciences (that they might enjoy the purity of the
ordinances) went in that journey, were the worse, but had a safe return; only
some persons, who upon another account, expecting a fat soil and outward
advantage in that place, and had unexpectedly slipped into the vessel, did all
die upon the sea, save one, being 5 in number: and it was also wonderful, upon
their return, how the Lord as he had stayed the rage of the sea, did also still
the tumults of people; which they found by experience, so that it did evidently
give a dash, and became a terror to their adversaries.

I must here also set down a very singular and strange instance, we may say,
both of judgment and mercy, which was in this land not many years ago. A
Gentleman, whose style was Wastraw, a most bloody man, and otherways notorious
for profanity, but most in this, that it was his great work and pleasure, to
put difference betwixt men, and as it was at that time very easy to engage them
in blood, whilst he had thus stirred up a neighbour-Gentleman to kill another
in that place: finding him afterward sore troubled in mind thereabout, he told
him, more of that practice would be the best cure: for he himself had killed 6,
and that the first time he was much disquieted, but the longer he did continue,
it became the more easy. But one day, whilst he was on such an account riding
to a place, where two had appointed to decide a private quarrel by fighting,
his horse stumbles on the side of a steep rock, and he falls a great way down,
his sword falling out before him, yet without any hurt: and here by such a
strange piece of providence did the Lord st^p in, and break in upon his
conscience, so that he quits his journey, turns home with great trouble and
remorse; a most kindly change following thereon, and for some years after
witnessed much tenderness and repentance by his afterwalk, spent much time
alone mourning before his death. And that day he died, having no visible
appearance thereof to those who looked on, he was heard in his chamber at much
wrestling in prayer: and after long continuance, those of the house were forced
to break open the door, getting no answer after long knocking; they find him
dead in the room, but upon his knees in a prayer posture; and the whole blood
of his body, which from every passage thereof had issued out, flowing about him
on the floor; it being visible how all these passages were opened for that
effect. A most astonishing instance! declaring this to the World; though God
pardon the iniquity of his People, yet some sins he will not let pass without a
visible mark of his anger, but will take vengeance on their inventions.

What an observable passage is that also, known to many yet alive, about a
notorious robber in the south parts of this land, called John of the Score, who
for many years having driven that woeful trade; did one day rencounter a poor
man traveling with two horses, which he according to his custom takes away.
The poor countryman falling down on his knees, did earnestly beg, that for
Jesus Christ sake he would give the one again, for he had no more to maintain
his poor family, but what he could gain by them; but it was in vain. He
carries them home with him, leaving the poor man in that desolate condition:
but a little after, he turns dumpish and melancholy, could get no rest or
quiet, not knowing the cause but as he professed, that those words which the
poor man had spoke to him (though he was so great an Atheist, that he
understood not what he meant when he spoke of Christ) were lying like a heavy
weight upon his spirit; and whilst he was sought after for his robberies, he
desired his sons to shift for themselves, for he could not go out of the way,
there being a restraint upon him, and something within him that in a sort bound
him from going out of the way: and thus staid at his house until he was
apprehended, brought in to Edinburgh, and there put up in prison. Upon which a
godly Minister, Mr. Henry Blyth, with a Christian Gentleman William Cuningham,
Tutor of Bonitoun, who had sometimes known him, make a visit; holding forth to
him his miserable estate, and the hazard of his soul (for he was judged by the
Law to die) and amongst other words, showing him the necessity to flee to Jesus
Christ, he does suddenly break out with a cry, O what word is that! for it has
been my death: That is the word, that has lien upon my heart, since the poor
man spoke it to me; so that I had no power from that time to go out of the way.
And after being told what an one Christ was, without whom he could not be
saved, he cries; O will he ever look to me! and show mercy to one that for his
sake would not show mercy to that poor man, and give him back his horse! But
after further instruction, a most real and gracious change did appear upon him;
he gave most convincing evidences of the reality thereof; attained to great
assurance, before his death; and upon the scaffold, in the public streets
where he was executed, did speak so wonderfully of the Lord's dealing with him,
and with such knowledge and judgment, as left a conviction on all present, and
forced them to see a truth and reality in the grace of God.

Another notable instance of grace, with a very remarkable passage in his
condition, I shall here mention, one Patrick Mackelwrath, who lived in the West
of Scotland, whose heart the Lord in a remarkable way touched, and after his
conversion (as he showed to many of his Christian friends) was in such a frame,
so affected with anew World wherein he was entered, the discoveries of God and
of a life to come, that for some months together he did scarce ever sleep, but
was still taken up in wondering: His life was very remarkable for tenderness,
and near converse with God in his walk; and which was worthy to be noticed, one
day after a sharp trial, having his only son suddenly taken away by death, he
retired alone for several hours, and when he came forth, did look so
cheerfully, that to those who asked him the Reason thereof, and wondered at the
same in such a time, he told them, He had got that in his retirement with the
Lord, that to have it afterward renewed, he would be content to lose a son
every day! This one remarkable passage I would set down: it had been long his
burden, the want of memory, that he could retain almost nothing of what he
heard from the word, and bitterly complaining thereof to worthy Mr. James
English, Minister of Daly, his counsel to him was, when he heard any truth
which he desired to remember, to hold it up to the Lord, and desire him to keep
it for him, and give him it back according to his need; which accordingly this
blessed Man did with much seriousness practice: and on his deathbed, to his
Minister, and diverse Christians that were present, he did solemnly declare, how
wonderfully the Lord had answered, and condescended to him in that particular.
For as they knew how much formerly it had been his burden, the want of memory,
now the Lord had given him back all those truths that he had put in his
keeping: so that what for many years before he had heard, was now most clearly
bro't to his remembrance; which he witnessed by repeating many particular
truths, and notes of Sermons which at such and such times he had heard.

Now to shut up this, we have truly cause to say even from late experience,
since this dark night came upon the Church in these Nations, with so sharp a
storm of persecution, there have not wanted some very signal and convincing
providence, witnessing the Lord's appearance for his people and against their
enemies, which are worthy of a remark, and may let men see that there is One
higher than the highest, who rules in the Kingdoms of the Children of men. For
it is manifest, --

1. How eminently the Lord did appear in breaking that party, who had been the
great instruments both in Council and Action, to break the government of the
Church of Christ in this land, and lay so much of his vineyard waste and
desolate, and this in the height of their power and greatness, whilst they
seemed most firmly rooted. O how evident was a divine hand there, that this
Cabal, who made it their work to raise up Prelacy, and oppress the poor Church,
and like a violent tempest did carry all before 'em, in a moment when they
could have left expected, should be made to fall; yea, in so short a time be
turned out of their places and offices, who but a little before had turned out
so many of the faithful Ministers of Christ! and that great man, who put forth
his power and authority so much to turn many of the godly of the Land, both
Ministers and others, out of their houses and families; tossing them from place
to place, should thus be dealt with from the Lord, and recompensed with that
measure; being forced to quit his lodging once and again, yea, even to banish
himself out of the country, who had been the chief instrument to banish some of
the most choice servants of Christ! and this stroke also made to come upon them
from that hand whence they could have least expected, whose interest they
studied to promote in opposition to God's! I should desire to study sobriety
and ^ear in application of the judgments of God; but when the Lord does so
clearly reveal himself, and show forth such an evident resemblance betwixt men's
sin and their stroke, I think, it cries aloud for a serious observing thereof.

2. Should we pass without a remark, so solemn a witness from the Lord of his
respect to his People's sufferings in this late time? for it is known, with
what mavelous resolution and cheerfulness, those have been carried through,
who were called forth to resist unto the blood in their adherence to the truth;
witnessing to the conviction of lookers-on, even their greatest enemies,
something above Roman Gallantry, yea, something above nature, in that
stayedness and elevation of their Spirits. And as some of all ranks in the land
the Lord would have brought forth to ^eal and witness his truth, and the work
of Reformation: so it has been also clear, that none wanted a large measure of
support and strength for the trial, their suffering still giving a further dash
to their adversaries.

3. It is also manifest, and may be truly matter of wonder, by what a
mavelous providence so many suffering and desolate families have been carried
through without any obvious noise of their straits, now for these diverse years,
with such convincing cheerfulness; yea, the experience of many made to witness,
that they never less knew a strait, than since they were put from the ordinary
means of their support; and others who have been more sharply tried, could not
reckon any such plunging strait and difficulty, but have also found relief by
some remarkable providence occurring. I am very sure, amongst other advantages
yet of these times, this shall be one, a large Register of Experience, and
remarkable confirmations of the truth of the word and promise, which the goldly
have had under this sharp trial; that will be sweet matter for an
after-reckoning, and a greater gain than any loss their former sufferings did
occasion. Yea, have we not seen, what in an ordinary way looked as
irrecoverable, a stroke which a generation could not have made up, has been a
mean the Lord has choosed to promote his glory, and thereby declare himself to
be GOD? Has he not made us see, how easy it is for him to turn the sharpest
storm to the great advantage of his Church, that he can act in desperate cases,
above the skill both of Angels and men? And truly, though we should be brought
yet more low, even to the place of Dragons, this may uphold the shaking hearts
of his People, and be solid ground of confidence, that Christ's power and
faithfulness is this day engaged for his Church, and truth! He must increase,
his Kingdom is upon the rising hand, and shall yet have a more glorious
appearance in the World, whatever become of instruments; the reviving of his
work is not in the reverence of men. And since we know, the Lord has solemnly
declared war against Antichrist, and all who will oppose the spreading of the
Gospel in these last times, yea, has past his word to the Church for the fall
and ruin of that adversary, fall he must, though the dust of the earth should
rise for that end: and it is sure Prelacy must also wither, that has its life
and sap from that accursed root! They have this day a desperate cause in hand,
who do engage their power to support the throne of the Beast, for they run in
the way of the wrath and vengeance of the Lord, and shall surely involve
themselves in that ruin; though they were the greatest Princes of the earth. I
shall only add, we have much ground in these times to believe, that the Lord
shall yet appear, and make himself known in the earth, by as great and
convincing providence, both of Judgment and mercy, as in any former ages, and
thus vindicate his glory, and refute the Atheism of this generation, by such an
argument, as shall force iniquity to stop its mouth.

Now since this is sure, which none can deny, if they will but allow some
serious tho'ts thereabout, that the Scripture (...) not to the ground, for
God's way is perfect, and his word is tried, Ps. 18. 30. O is it not also sure,
and a conclusion well grounded, that He is a (...) to those who trust in him.
None needs fear to venture his interests through time, on the word; yea, if there
could be any thing greater than a Heaven or eternal salvation, the testimony of
the God of truth might be sufficient security for the same. It is a small
matter how this World does reel and stagger, or what be the changes of outward
things: That is enough, the promises of the Word shall certainly take place,
and the expectation of the Saints shall not make them ashamed.

An APPENDIX.
IT is sure, the demonstration of divine truth held forth in the Scripture, is
the greatest discovery, that ever came to the sons of men: which with a more
excellent light and greater luster, does inlighten those parts of the earth, on
which it shines, than the sun, in its noonday-brightness. This is the word of
life, even the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery; which most of the World, do
not understand, but flee from the same, as their plague and torment; but hereby
the followers of God know they are of the truth, and d^ assure their heart
before him. It should be matter of astonishment, if thus the Scripture were not
confirmed, to see what rage the breaking out of this light causes amongst men;
which now in the present time does in a strange manner appear, not against some
particular truth only, and the ^ppermost boughs, but by a remarkable assault
seems to strike at the root, the very being of truth and godliness. It may be
said, whilst superstition in times of greater ignorance, did overcloud and
darken the visible Church, Atheism has taken up its room, to wear this
generation out from under the aw of God, and weaken their assent to the truth:
for we see men every where making it their work, to load his way with reproach,
and put discredit on his faithfulness, who is the God of truth. As a witness
thereto is this small essay directed, and now again comes forth to the World
with an enlargment; Which I may say, was not intended, if there had not been a
pressing motive from the uncorrectedness of the first impression; and for this
I shall make no further Apology. But if a subject of so great an import, suffer
no prejudice from such an unfit pen, the favorable testimony of men, or their
censures, I should desire to look on (as they are indeed) at a distance, and
far below that solid peace of the soul, which in the acceptance of God is
alone to be found. What access it may have to many of this generation, I know
not, who are taking all advantage to strengthen their prejudice at the truth,
and unsettle others therein; it is like, such may pass their judgment thereon
at the first look, and throw it aside. But as a Minister of Jesus Christ, who
believes an appearing before the judge, and would desire mercy to be found
faithful in that day, being pressed in some measure, upon the horrid appearance
of the Atheism and blasphemy of the time, with that avowed indifferency now
within the visible Church, in these great interests of Religion and godliness,
I lay this witness to the truth at their door: and shall here offer a few
thoughts further on this subject, in some clear Inferences from that great
truth, the verification of the Scripture.

Inference I. Which we may see clear, is this, the great advantage a Christian
has for his establishment; that his security is indeed greater than his
interest, or any thing he has to adventure thereon: and sure, that is not
small; since the matter is of no less earnest (besides his concernments through
time) than an eternity, a Heaven, or the hazard of hell for ever. This must
require a solid and sure foundation, yea, we may judge, the furthest degree of
certainty, where the superstructure is so great: for it is not opinion, or a
probable conjecture, can be a suitable basis, to bear up that weight. But here,
to answer such an Interest, and give thorough quiet and repose to the soul, we
have the truth and testimony of God, with this great Witness thereto, that it
assuredly takes place, and not one syllable falls to the ground, without an
evident performance. There are two things, which, I am sure, men could not with
such ordinary thoughts consider, yea, nor think thereon without amazement, if
they made it not their choice, to keep at a distance. One is, that such a Thing
is in the World this day as the very Word of God, that is more sure than an
audible voice from Heaven, to declare his whole counsel, and hold forth unto
men the true way up toward that country; and does thus marvellously discover
itself, (1.) To come so low, down, even his word and testimony who speaks from
Heaven, that therewith it has a solemn appeal to men's sense and feeling about
its certainty. (2.) Which commends it self upon the nearest approach, and is
found the more invaluable and of the greater price, the more it is searched
into by an inquiry. (3.) That though clear and plain in it self, yet by a
supernatural light and evidence can only be known, which no humane sagacity nor
reason in its highest elevation, without this, can reach: but rises far above
the greatest capacity and endowments, of which by nature the most excellent
spirits of men can boast. In a word, when once it shines in upon the soul, does
then discernably stamp the very same image thereon, and begets such a
mavelous likeness (...) them, as may show the World this (...). But there is
a second, we may also (...) with astonishment, how great it is, to be a
Christian, and of what mavelous import that (...). I suppose, th^^e were but
one or two such, to be found in the World, who were certainly known ^o be
partakers of the divine nature, to have a real converse with God, and (by
experience) with the word; might not the report thereof give men a strange
alarm? yea, put them upon an impatient search and inquiry, to know if this be
sure, and what such a discovery means? O is it small to be the son of a King!
But the hope and claim of a Christian rises higher, and has another reach;
that such within a short time, whilst now in so mean a garb, shall be assuredly
entered into glory, in the immediate enjoyment of God, and of the fullness of
joy, among that triumphant society of the Angels, the Prophets, and Apostles,
and all those who are before the Throne, washed, and made white in the blood of
the Lamb, and thus continue through the ages of eternity; yea, in that very
instant of the soul's quitting the body, must admit so great a change, and
enter there, where Heaven only can make us know what Heaven is! It is surely a
strange sleep men are in, who in such concernments are not awaked to a further
inquiry. It were well, if some would but allow reason its true use (whilst they
travel betwixt the Poles, and can adventure to the furthest parts of the earth
to pursue that which they must so shortly forego) to judge seriously and bring
the thoughts of this near, what a greater interest, and at a more easy rate,
and of an unexpressibly greater value, than that gold and treasure which ever
came from the Indies, does offer itself! I say the professed Atheism of some
gives not more cause of wonder, than the strange stupidity of others, and that
common and easy way men have in giving an assent to divine truth: I do not
mean, from the want of evidence and perspicuity, but because of the greatness
of the things here held forth. This was not so strange, that we find two of the
Disciples of Christ at a stand, from joy and wondering, to credit his
resurrection, even whilst they saw it verified; so great was this in their
eyes. Now to this, I must further point at two or three things, which seriously
considered, may seem a strange contradiction to reason. (1.) how men can find a
pillow to rest on, who certainly know, their breath (for these few hours in in
the night) is not made sure; but if by a sudden arrest of death it should be
stopped, which is no strange thing in the World, they know not what is next; ^^t
every night, sleep at an adventure of being (...) the next day in an
irrecoverably lost estate! Yea is not here cause of wonder, that whilst we see
time make such swift dispatch, dying men can be in that measure estranged from
the thoughts of death; who so often may hear it sound, and the bell ringing for
others, yea, by previous assaults discern its approach on themselves, which
once come, then man goes off the stage, to return no more, nor shall he for all
the ages of eternity ever act that scene of life here over again. -- (2.) How
strange it is, that the supposal of the truth and certainty of the Scripture,
that such a thing may be, does not more alarm men, and mar their quiet; or that
they can so much as think of an eternal estate without trembling, whilst they
are at no solid determination in such a matter: yea, when the Scripture of God
does not only witness a Heaven and Immortality, but shows the World, there is
such a thing as the first fruits and earnest of it; whereof men here may be
fully assured. I would know, if such an Atheism is to be found, that puts the
Atheist beyond fear and doubting, even in his most professed confidence, and
scoffing at the truth: or can sufficiently salve that heart-aking and continued
hesitation he is under, that such a thing may be true. -- (3.) I shall add, it
is matter of wonder, men should admit the report and attestation of others,
about the truth and reality of godliness, who yet live strangers to it
themselves; yea, should be at some toil and pains, and come a length to be
almost Christians, without pursuing this in greater earnest.

Inference II. Which from the Scripture's accomplishment is clear, is this,
that there is a special debt on each Christian, on whose soul the truth and
faithfulness of God is sealed, to give in his seal thereto, and bear witness,
that God is true. Thus is there a mutual sealing; which is undeniably clear you
see (2 Cor. 1. 22.) the Lord's putting to his seal, which by all his people is
well known: and have you not also ( John 3. 33.) the Christian's seal and
witness most expressly held out and called for? This is indeed a duty, in which
(we may say) the meanest of the Saints bears his part, who has that witness
within himself, whereby he knows the certainty of the words of truth: which is
a great thing, that such on solid ground can say, He does not more clearly see
the truth, written in the Bible before him, than he knows and can read but by
an other character and engravening) this written within him; though none else
can read the same, but he who has it. I know, there is a debt to the least
Scripture-truth, which those who profess the same, do owe, when a witness and
confession is called for, and has thus special access, in a suffering time, to
set to his seal by a close adherence thereto. But we must say, this is
something else, that concerns the confirmed Christian, as a peculiar debt he
ows to the truth and faithfulness of his God (which his soul knows right well,
and has had often confirmed) to give unto him the glory of his faithfulness: We
find David ( Psalm 89. 1.) thus speaking, as one pressed upon such a duty. And
though some have a more special call and greater advantage to this than others;
yet we may say, the confirming and sealing of the truth is like a great and
public treasure, wherein the meanest Christian wants not access to cast in his
mite. Now for further clearing this, what the Christian's seal and attestation
of the truth means, and what access or advantage he has for acquitting himself
of such a debt, I would point a little at, in these few particulars. -- (1.) It
is clear, that he who believes, and receives the testimony of Jesus Christ,
does thus set to his seal, that he is true, and subscribes (as it were) the
truth and doctrine of the Gospel. John 3. 33. -- (2.) It is also clear, the
showing forth of the power of godliness, and the virtues of him who has called
him, is through the tract of a Christian's life, a living and visible witness
thereto. -- (3.) We may judge, the converted man upon that new and mavelous
discovery, he has got of the truth, upon his first entering into a Christian
state, when he has past that great step, and is as one come into another
World, has then a special call, and advantage for such a duty, that if it were
asked, What is the first service such owes to the truth? Is it not even this,
to commend by his seal and testimony to others, what God has so marvellously
commended to his soul? And thus needs not want access to let the World know,
who may wonder at such a change, that though once he was blind, he does now
see; and assuredly knows, the truth is the power of God to salvation, which he
no more believes upon the report and testimony of others, since now he sees it
with his own eyes. He then is to answer that call, Luke 22. When you are
converted, strengthen your brethren, -- (4.) When a Christian is confirmed,
upon some remarkable faint and staggering, and has got a new seal of the
faithfulness of God, is he not under some new debt, to restore with advantage
what he had taken from the credit of the truth, and give that good report and
witness thereto, which may obviate any reflection he might have caused by his
faint? Sure it is, the Christian's testimony has then this special advantage,
to confirm others in the way of the Lord, that his former fears and shakings
have been so discernable. Thus we see, Hezekiah after such a remarkable plunge
and fainting, comes in with his witness, Isai, 38. 15. What shall I say? He
has both spoken, and himself also has done it, etc. And David, Psalm 31. 22.
How concerned was he in such a duty, I said I am cast out of thy sight; Yet
thou heardest the voice of my supplication. -- (5.) When we see Atheism much
abound, and has a public appearance, when it is not a particular truth, but
the truth and faithfulness of God is challedged, we may judge, it then calls
and calls aloud to the godly man, for his appearance, even by some more obvious
testimony, than at other times, to so great an interest. Sure it is, when the
lot of a Christian is in such a time cast, and amongst a generation of mockers,
he will not want access and a special call, by a christianly grave and prudent
witness, to own the truth, as that which he is obliged to seal, though there
were none else; yea, we may think, this should be a call and incitement, where
zeal for Jesus Christ has got a command over his soul, as might burst his
tongue-strings, which before were tied, when the faithfulness of his God, which
he so often has proved, is by men brought in question: which to David was like a
sword that thurst him through, and he could not bear it when they said unto
him, Where is your God? -- (6.) Upon the close of some sharp and remarkable
trial, when the Christian after a storm comes safe to land, such a new
discovery he has of the truth and faithfulness of God, lays then a new debt on
him, to bear witness thereto. Is he not thus concerned, not to leave the cross
of Jesus Christ at a loss, which has left him at so great an advantage; or
part therewith without such a testimony, that may endear the way of the Lord to
others? Thus afflicted Job, after a long continued storm, comes in the close to
pay the truth's rent, by his seal and testimony thereto. Job. 42. I have heard
of thee, etc. I hope, this debt in a large measure shall be yet found on many
of this Generaration, when this storm is over, to press their spirits for
bearing such a testimony, that they thirsted not when he led them through the
deserts; But have often there been surprised with his immediate help, to
astonishment. Isai. 48. 21. -- (7.) Is not the experience of a Christian and
those grave remarks he has of the faithfulness of God, a special trust put
into his hand, and a piece of his talent, that calls for his seal, as a rent
which such owe to the truth; and should have some further reach, than his own
personal establishment? I must say as to this, none of the saints want their
peculiar engagements, which they may judge are upon them, even beyond others;
yea, such singular confirmations they have had of the way of the Lord, and often
with those astonishing circumstances, that to smother the same, without some
gain and advantage thence paid in to the truth, might be reckon (...) stealth
from the generation. We may judge, such a thing pressed David's soul for a
vent, Psalm 66. 16. And truly something of this practice, managed with humble
prudence, in a grave intercourse and communication of some special
confirmations of the truth, were a choice improvement of Christian Society and
fellowship. I confess, to manage this well, seems one of the most difficult
pieces of duty, a Christian owes to others; and I humbly judge, may be
mistaken, in its chief end by too much dwelling sometimes on the cases of a
Christian, and debating these, to which their light and judgment may give more
arise, than a present pressure and weight of the same; the multiplying of which
I have often looked on as a darkening the solid and plain way of Godliness, and
making it perplexed and thorny, which lies in little bounds, when well
understood. But we see what a special improvement of Christian fellowship is
held forth, Mal. 3. 16. for their mutual joy and establishment in the truth, in
a time when it was in question; what advantage there is to serve the Lord. I
should wish so excellent a means were more directed to this end: Nor should
this hinder such a duty, that there may be an empty show and counterfeit of
that also, and the shallowest brooks sometime make the greatest noise. -- (8.)
Here is a special call for the Christian's seal and witness to the truth, under
some remarkable exigence and strait, whilst thronged with manifold temptations,
then is he concerned by his appearance to show forth the faithfulness of God,
and his testimony thereto; that may let others know, who in such times will be
great observers of his way, that he is satisfied with God, and with the
security of his word, to rest on, when he has no resting place elsewhere; that
he thinks not his burden too great, to roll over on the promise; but has this
to say, in behalf of the truth, Persecuted, yet not forsaken; cast down, yet
not destroyed. You may see the Apostle paying such a debt on this account,
Having nothing, I possess all things. 2 Cor. 6. 10. -- (Lastly) I must say, a
call to this duty waits the Christian in a special manner at the close of his
day. Then, O then, is he concerned to acquit himself of that debt, by
commending the way of the Lord, and confirming others therein. Would it not be
a choice appendix to the Testament and last Will of a dying Christian, to seal
with his last breath the faithfulness of God; and then when his words are of
more weight than at other times, to bear this witness, that through the various
steps of his life he knows God is true, and hitherto has helped. It is sure,
the present day has its duty, and each remarkable time of one's life has some
proper work: But this, I must say, seems to fall in, as the last service of a
dying Christian to his generation, to deliver the truth off his hand, which he
had received and often proved, with his seal and testimony thereto: This were to
bequeath^ choice legacy to others.

It is not here understood, that particular rules can be given for the practice
of this duty: but Christian wisdom is profitable to direct, as occasion offers,
and the present case is circumstanced. But sure it is, each Christian is thus a
witness, and as it were judicially fisted in behalf of that Attribute of the
faithfulness of God, to attest by his seal, as a confirmatory sign thereof,
that God is true; and as there is an implicit seal by believing, there is
something more explicit then called for, in times which seem to evacuate the
promise, when the reality of godliness is so expressly impugned by the adversary
as fanaticism. And these things I shall further add; (1.) That through the whole
Scripture, we see in frequent instances, how much the saints have been thus
taken up, and in those times of the Church, when there was not such access
another way, to keep up a remembrance of the faithfulness of God, and transmit
a testimony thereto, we find a pillar and stone of witness erected, 1 Samuel 7.
12. -- (2) Thus has the Christian access, in the returns of thankfulness to
God; no mercy being so small, on which his faithfulness is not engraven, as we
find David often, and Jacob. Genesis 32. 10. And sure it is, the discovery of this
to an observing Christian has sometimes a greater joy and satisfaction
therewith, than the mercy in which it appears. I must say, it is a great de^ect
in that excellent duty when some testimony to the faithfulness of God is not
carried on therewith. -- (3) Has not the Christian an occasional call thereto,
whenever this lies in his way, to speak to its credit, and bear his witness? We
may see, the truth and faithfulness of God came never David's way, but we find
him speak honorably thereof, from the sense of his peculiar engagements. --
(4) There is no piece of a Christian's suffering stated on a particular truth,
but a confession is therewith called for of the faithfulness of God; thus to
bear witness before the world, that he is not offended, nor is ashamed of the
cross of Christ, because he knows whom he has (...); whilst others by choosing
sin, rather than affliction, do what in them lies to make God a liar.

Inference III. From the Scriptures accomplishment, is this, that as there is a
personal debt on the Christian, there is a public debt also on the Church, and
a special trust reposed on every age thereof, to seal the truth, and deliver
that great interest off its hand, to the ages to come, with a witness to the
faithfulness of God. The Scripture herein is clear; yea, we have it in an
express prophecy held forth ( Psalm 145. 4, 5, 6.) that one generation, in a
continued series, should seal the truth to another, and thus carry forward a
witness to the same. For each time has some peculiar rent, which it should pay
to the posterity, from a new addition of the great and remarkable works of the
Lord: and it is sure, the greater things he has witnessed, by his more eminent
appearance for the Church, in one age beyond another, do add to this debt, and
put some further engagements upon it, to record and transmit the works of the
Lord and the memory of his goodness to aftertimes. Now with respect to this
weighty truth, I would offer a few particulars (which this day, we may sadly
regret, are so much wanting) wherein some thing of this debt, that one age of
the Church owes to another, in behalf of the truth, may appear.

1. It may be judged a debt on the Church to posterity, to pursue that great
interest of the truth, by an adding further, for confirming of the faith of the
saints therein, from that discovery and peculiar advantages the present time
affords: and thus effectually endeavor to advance the repute and credit of the
truth, on solid demonstrative grounds of its certainty. This has the greater
call, when it is so much the work of the time and of not a few laboring
therein, to shake and unsettle men, as to this great foundation; yea, so much
written, that has a visible tendency to this end. One thing particularly
should be wished, that the public records of every age, as they concern the
Church, did carry therewith more clearly some history of the verification of
the truth, by transmitting those great and conspicuous remarks of the way of
God with the Church, to posterity; by which the Scripture then has been
signally confirmed: thus should one age declare its faithfulness to the next,
which were a choice piece of service, being gravely and with caution managed.

2. This debt does the Church owe to posterity, with respect to the truth, to
endeavor its transmitting purely, and without hurt and prejudice. For it is to
the Church, the Oracles of God are committed; and for that great trust, must
she in every time be responsible. But as to this, I must say, that article of
the truth of God, which is more sharply assaulted, and has endured greatest
opposition from the adverse party, makes this debt the greater, to deliver that
off her hand, with all care and circumspection, yea, with some peculiar
testimony thereto. It is true, there want not in every age some to appear upon
the truth's interest; yea, it is a duty lies at each Christian's door, when
called to give a confession of the same: but as no private appearance can
answer to a public record and monument, it is thence clear, that in a time of
great incroachment on the truth, when a remarkable breach is like to be made,
and the assault not from a private adversary, but a public formidable
combination of a party, some more solemn authoritative and united concurrence
is then called for, in the Church's testimony, for her exoneration; that with
such an advantage may witness to the ages to come, whereat their fathers left,
how they held out, and wrestled to keep their ground, in defense of the gospel.
This, we may say, is like the casting up of a Bank to guard against a further
breach, when the enemy comes in like a flood: and it is known, the confessions
of the Church in every age, with such a public testimony to the truth, whilst
followed with visible hazard and suffering, have been more effectually
subservient to the truth's conservation, than all the disputes of men. Thus did
they overcome (Rev. 12. 7.) by the blood of the lamb, and the word of their
testimony.

3. This special debt also is upon the Church, with a respect to posterity, to
contend for the truth once delivered to the Saints, and but once, since it can
admit no change or alteration to the second coming of the Lord. O how blessed a
debate and strife this is, though in such an interest resisting unto blood
should be called for! But whilst I mention this duty, it cannot be understood
with respect to that great interest of Religion only, or the weightier matters
of the Law, that are more fundamental, whilst under a professed zeal to these,
a latitude and indifferency in other concernments of the truth is sheltered. It
is indeed strange; though no strange thing in this time. But let me ask, can a
piece of truth held forth in the Scripture, be of that low value, to warrant
the quitting or yielding up of it if brought in debate; when one line of this
is of more inestimable worth, than the crowns and scepters of all the Monarchs
of the earth? Sure it is, the God of truth has prized it at another rate; who
declares Heaven and earth should rather fall, ere one tittle of his word
perish. And can those, in greater things be faithful, who are not thus in a
little? It is too clearly seen, how small a yielding makes a great breach.
Truths comparatively small may be great in their season, when they are the word
of his patience; yea, we may say, the lesser it seems, and of mean value with
many, it makes the Christian's adherence thereto a greater testimony. It is
clear, what a close concatenation there is amongst the truths of God, held
forth in the Scripture; that one part thereof cannot be struck at, without a
special prejudice to the whole: yea, it may be said, every corruption of the
truth has an aim at the very soul of Religion, by a direct tendency thereto.

4. It is a great duty the Church owes the posterity, for which this day there
seems a more than ordinary call, to study the transmitting of truth and
godliness, not in a naked form only, but in the life and power thereof. Sure it
is now too obvious, which gives ground both for grief and astonishment, that
through a large part of the reformed Church, and in those places where sometime
the truth has brightly shined, with much state and warmness; yea, where
religion in its purity is yet professedly countenanced, and the worship of God
owned, even there we may see the power and spirituality of this is a strange
and unknown thing: that by many within the Church and of some repute therein,
it might be questioned, Is there indeed a Holy Ghost, and an inward teaching of
the Spirit, which by its working and efficacious influences is known upon the
soul? Or, is there such a thing as real fellowship and converse with God, in
the secret and the more public duties of a Christian, that is assuredly found?
Oh what cause is there to fear, the shadow and form will be quickly gone, when
the power thereof is so great a mystery! I know, it is a sore challenge, and
may seem strange to some. I do here profess, it is not to reflect on any place,
or particular Church, more than another. But we may say, this want and decay is
too great and universal to be hid; and now the tide seems so far spent and go^e
back, yea to a small appearance of its return, and the Church of Christ at that
pass, that if the faithfulness of God were not surety, which stands good for
all, we might upon ordinary appearance judge, nothing else is left, but now To
your tents every man! that each one should shift for himself, and give over the
Church. But sure I am (I bless the Lord, without debate in this matter) upon a
better warrant than appearance, our safety is this day to keep by the vessel,
and not part interests with an afflicted and almost sinking Church; a public
Spirit may yet be found the choicest way to secure a private interest. Oh what
do we see! Is not almost every where men's hands upon their loins; and so
little inquiry in that extreme exigence, what point of duty can yet be essayed,
to get religion up again, which now is at so sore a backset! We might hope, a
great outcoming should be, where little is expected, even upon a small stirring
of duty. Some things, I am sure, are to be wished, that would be of singular
use to promote this interest: which I shall very briefly point at.

First, It should be wished, this great mean of Prayer, yet left to the Church,
were with more singleness and fervency improved, both by the Christian alone,
and in converse with others. This is well known, in the most dark and dismal
times of her condition, what mavelous help it has brought at an extremity,
when it has seemed in some manner ultimus conatus ecclesiae, and all other
things gone. O a spirit of prayer, what advantage has remarkably followed upon
this, to fetch the wind, yea, to get the vessel as it were put on float, when
it has been a low ebb with the Church! To hasten her delivery, and in the mean
time keep her wounds bleeding before the Lord! We may say, thus has the
meanest of the Saints access to do a great piece of service, even to the Church
universal, and the recovery again of the power of Godliness, that is now so far
gone.

2. With respect to this, it is to be wished, that a greater Correspondence
through the reformed Church were more effectually pursued; to know others case,
what eminent hazard appears to the truth, or sore trial and assault that some
particular Church may have beyond others; for witnessing mutual sympathy; for
communication of counsels; the obviating prejudices and mistakes; a grave
incitement and upstirring of others, to the duty of the time; and thus a
further concurrence endeavored, in promoting the great interest of the gospel.
Oh sad, that since the reformation brake up, so little of this has been
practiced! but now much more gone, that except by ordinary travelers, or
sometime public Gazzets, the great concernments of the neighboring Churches,
and the more remarkable occurrents of providence therein, are but little known.
I should account it a token for good, if something of a public Spirit, with
respect to such a mean, did more appear. We know not what advantage might
follow this essay.

3. This should be wished, and might be a notable and useful help, yea, of no
great difficulty (now whilst there is such plodding in Religion, by airy
notions, as if that great interest were the essay of men's wit and invention)
to study the translating of some of our choice English pieces, in other
languages, which do most nervously hold forth the truth of godliness, both in
its simplicity, and in the life and power thereof. Such as are most fit to put
men on an other scent, for bringing the naked speculation of truth down to that
more near feeling, and absolutely necessary soul-converse therewith; yea, such
as with greatest clearness might show the world something of the inestimable
advantage of that excellent study, how well godliness suits, and is a singular
help in every calling and condition of men, to make their way easy and
pleasant, amidst the plunges of their life: but especially, that may hold forth
the indispensable necessity thereof. It is sad to think in what a measure
excellent holiness is wounded, and darkened by so great a cloud of prejudice,
almost through the reformed Church, which is much pretended, upon the
extravagance and unsuitable practice of many professing the same, and yet so
little care to obviate and prevent this.

4. I must further add what, I am sure, is to be wished, when so small ground
seems of hope therein, and calls now for much prayer, to see a spiritual and
faithful Ministry, given to the Church; of whom it might be said; these are the
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, with their Master's authority impressed on them;
who in earnest do travel in birth, to have Christ formed in their hearers, and
preach with a feeling of that they speak, to themselves, as well as others;
such who truly watch for men's souls, with an awful impression of that, lest
their blood be required at their hands. How great a blessing should this be to
a decayed Church, and what a ground of hope were it of a recovery! For its seen
and clearly witnessed, that connection which is betwixt the Church's case, and
the ministry thereof. Was it not seen at the breaking out of the Gospel, and
the mavelous success it had in the beginning of the reformation after that
long darkness under Antichrist's reign, how choice and excellent a ministry was
then sent forth; yea, what a remarkable constellation of great lights did
appear, who did both burn and shine in their time. Oh! These are gone; and but
a few (comparatively with that time) of such a spirit now to be found: but this
sad remark we cannot shun, ^^at the greatest plague the christian world and
much of the reformed Church this day is under, is from the watchman; by whom
the truth, in its power, has been more wounded, than its most professed
adversaries. I know, there wants not such a horrid party in this time, who take
advantage to reflect on and decry that excellent office and appointment of
Jesus Christ for his Church, because of the abuse thereof; whom I dare not,
from the aw of God, answer in their dialect, which is only railing, and is all
their strength: but the Lord rebuke that evil spirit, now abroad in the world!
Whilst I speak to that great advantage, the Church and the power of religion
has by a faithful minstry, I must further add this, as a debt the present
generation owes to the posterity, to witness a particular care and respect to
such who are looking forth with some aim to this great calling; that in so
sadning a day these might be encouraged and stirred up (I mean where there is
some promising appearance) to follow their aim, and not faint, when
difficulties seem to grow in their way, and the sickle now taken out of the
hand of many faithful laborers; but especially for their taking along with
other studies that more excellent study, sanctification, which is so
indispensably necessary to make able ministers of the New Testament. Sure those
have now a special advantage to witness their love and respect to Jesus Christ,
who keep their face that way forward, when there seems no other incitement, but
the service of such a Master! They may have a mean appearance, and at this day
conflict with many difficulties, on whom great service may yet wait for the
Church of Christ.

Inference IV. It is a duty of special use, with respect to a right
understanding and distinct conception of the fulfilling of the Scripture, to
discern the times and inquire seriously thereabout: since it is clear, that in
particular ages and periods of time the Scripture must take place, and the
Prophecies thereof, which relate to each period of time, have their particular
and exact accomplishment therein. It is sure, this can be no matter of debate,
that such a duty is called for in so dark an hour upon the Church; yea, the
greater the darkness grows, it seems to have a more pressing call; when we see
the clouds gathering, that they are like to cover the face of the sky; the
Church universal so sore benighted, that she has almost lost her way amidst
these mists, and among the multitude of these bypath: for then it is not only
incumbent on the public watchmen, but we may say, concerns the godly every
where, to be on this account seers, to know the times, and what Israel ought to
do. Sure it is, no Christian wants his watchtower, where he may get up, by a
near converse with God in the Scripture, and thence as from a great height
consider the present time; yea, have a clear view of the most strange
perplexing occurrents thereof, how amidst these his work about the Church keeps
its way, and moves still forward, without losing of ground, and his truth does
convincingly take place.

Now with respect to this I shall here offer some thoughts, what in so
necessary a duty concerns the godly, and calls for their serious enquiry, for a
right discovery and understanding of the time; and shall shortly touch it in a
few particulars.

First, It is of great import to know from the Scripture, what of the night it
is, how far it seems to be spent, and now in what watch thereof the Church is
fallen, as to her present state. For thus we might know to what period of her
condition these great and remarkable things, which fall out in the World, do
relate. This, I confess, Would be a perplexed business, if the appearance of
things were our guide, and wanted that blessed conduct of the written word,
when the Church's way seems involved in so strange a labyrinth. One thing is
sure that the Lord has founded Zion. and is now building her up: which
mavelous work cannot halt, but in all ages is in a continued progress,
wherein the great builder, does lose no time. And from the Scripture these
things seem clear and manifest, --

1. That as the whole election must obtain, so now are there a great many of
that elect Church already entered into a triumphant condition, and are now got
safe on shore. There is this day a great and innumerable company of all
Nations, Tongues and Languages, that were of old committed to the Mediator's
trust, and to be brought forth under the times of the New Testament, who are
perfected and before the throne; after whom the Gospel did follow, and made
many a long step to bring them in from the furthest corners of the earth.

2. This also is clear, that the Church militant has now passed and is gone
through that long continued and most dismal trial, which under the times of the
Gospel and until the close of time was to go over her head, even that sore
bondage from Antichrist, and under his reign. It is true, this adversary does
not cease, nor give over the quarrel: for he wants not wrath, when his power is
abated; and this day we see him in a great stir, to raise up that accursed
interest, and set it in its own place, that has so remarkably been brought
down, and begun to fall before the Gospel. But a step further of that judgment
(which assuredly is not sleeping) will end the business. However this is now
manifest, that the Winter is past, and the Church's spring begun, yea, in a
large measure advanced; whose growth and tender blossom the cold nor storm
cannot blast, but must be subservient thereto, and hasten the summer's approach.

3. Upon this inquiry, where the Church now is? and in what, or what manner of
time, her present state seems to fall? I think there are clear and convincing
symptoms, by which some notable Crisis in her condition may be discerned: that
after many conflicts, and sore wrestling, since her victory begun over
Antichrist, this time of the Church seems to fall under that more remarkable
assault, which may be looked for from this adversary before the pouring out of
the fifth vial on his throne and seat; which, as the preludium of so great a
victory, may in some proportion thereto be more dreadful and sharp, for a time,
than any we have seen. I humbly judge, the Scripture points clearly at this,
which shows the wrestling condition of the Church, and a war continued betwixt
Antichrist and the Lamb, even in his falling state, ( Rev. 17. 14.) until that
last decision (which is made sure in the Church's favor) put him off the
field; For the Lamb shall overcome, and they that are on his side, who are
called, and chosen and faithful. And since it is thus, that the Church's
interest is advanced, by the renewed assaults of that adversary, should it be
strange, that the several steps of her rising have some conflict and opposition
proportioned thereto? Must she not be in pain and labor, as a woman in travel,
for her bringing forth? Yea, do not the sharpest showers both presage and
hasten the delivery? For this does the Scripture witness, which is written for
the ages to come, Micah 4, 13. Be in pain, O Daughter of Zion, and go forth
unto Babylon, for there shall thou be delivered. I must judge, so formidable an
approach of Antichrist this day, and the advantage he seems to have, with these
sore struglings of the Church of Christ, as in an extreme betwixt life and
death, do more promise, than threaten; and are a hopeful presage of a further
enlargement, and the bringing forth some great and important truth in its
season to a performance; yea, have a direct tendency, under the wonderful
conduct of the blessed disposer of these things, to help forward such a mercy.

4. This we may know from the Scripture, though now it seem a contradiction
both to sense and reason, that the Church's interest is on a present advance,
and at this day on the prevailing hand. It is true, under all the changes of
her condition, and through the whole time of the New Testament, this truth must
be made out ( Job. 3. 30.) that Jesus Christ in his Kingdom must increase, even
when choicest instruments wear out, and to appearance are in a most languishing
decay; that interest does then flourish as the Palmtree, the more it is
depressed; nor has the Church bounds set to its continued increase, until it
once come to the perfect day when the Kingdom shall be delivered up to the
Father, and all powers subdued and brought under the Mediator's feet. But this
rise and increase of the Church, which is here understood, on the falling of
Antichrist, I must say, has a further reach, and is in a more ^minent
conspicuous way pointed at in the Scripture, as that which waits on a more
solemn and remarkable period of the Church's state. It is true, such hours may
fall in, with some sad intervals, in which success and all advantage appears on
the adversaries side; for thus we find the Scripture point forth Antichrist's
ruin, and the progress of his judgment and down casting in the various steps
thereof, with a special resemblance to the Lord's way with Pharaoh; of whom he
appears to have been a type, such judicial strokes of induration on both, a
gradual procedure by one plague after another, with the same effect and
product, to give the Church a new assault, on any favorable interval; until
the great God make his power known, as once he did at the red Sea. For there we
may say, did the Lord first found a national Church, with a special type of the
great works and deliverances he would do for her in aftertimes, and by this
represent that mavelous stroke he is to bring on Antichrist. It is not
strange, to see the truth brought down to the grave, yea, as it were buried,
when even this thing, by the overruling providence of him who makes all things
work together for her good, is turned to her advantage, and tends to her rising
with a greater luster and brightness! Who could in an ordinary way judge the
reformed Church then upon an advance, in the French massacre, the Catholic
League there, and the Low Country persecution by Alva? Yet these were an
antecedent preparation to her further rise, which a little time made appear.

5. This further I shall add as to the present time of the Church, which from
the Scripture seems clear, that blessed and much longed for, and glorious day
of the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. (which, as the last period of
the full accomplishment of all that is written, will once for all and for ever
put a glorious close to the Church's warfare; the soldier's sword and helmet
shall then (...) aside, and give place to the victor's harp and crown, never to
be laid down again) hastes apace. O let him who writes, and him who reads,
say, even so! come, Lord Jesus, quickly. It is sure, that God who has
appointed man his time, and with whom is the number of his months and years,
has set time its glass also, and bounded the duration of this world, that it
cannot continue one minute more? And though the particular time falls not under
our inquiry, which the Majesty of God has concealed from the Angels: yet is
this clear, there are signs given of its near approach, which in their season
will be discernable, though little noticed by the world; it being in such a
lethargy, and men then so thronged with the cares of this life, that these
grave forewarnings will not rouse them up. But it is evident, such signs are
not given in vain: for therewith the Church has a call to discern wisely what
appearance there is of the approach of that day; yea, on such an account to
lift up their head with a solemn congratulation. O what a mavelous truth is
this, the serious thoughts of which might give men new subject for wonder each
day, that the time is hastening, when the Redeemer of the Church shall appear
in the clouds of heaven, in flaming fire, with an innumerable company of the
Angels; and now the dust of the Saints has not long to sleep, before they be
awaked, with that unspeakable sweet and ravishing sound of the last trumpet!
Faithful is he who has promised: yea, for further assurance, we have a solemn
oath thereto, by him who live's for ever and ever. It is long since John gave
this warning to the Church, Behold, he comes with clouds! and then did these
primitive Christians solace themselves on that ground. Some few evidences of
this day's approach with a safe warrant from the Scripture we may discern;
which as the blossoming of the spring does witness the Summer is now near. (1.)
If the whole days of the Gospel, since that glorious triumph of the Mediator in
his suffering for the Church and his resurrection, be upon the Scripture's
reckoning the last times, we must then judge, the night is far spent, and the
day at hand. -- (2.) If in the days of the seventh trumpet the mystery of God
shall be finished, is not this clear, that two ages are almost past since it
begun to blow, under which the interest of the gospel has a most remarkable
advance? (3.) If the last stroke and utter abolishing of Antichrist shall be by
the brightness of Christ's second coming (2 These. 2. 8.) is there not solid
ground thence to judge, this blessed day hastes, when his falling is so far
advanced? It is sure, we have seen his Kingdom in a great measure darkened, his
consuming and mouldring down by the breath of Christ's mouth in the preached
gospel: and now wait in hope for that more remarkable step of his judgment,
which the Scripture, I think, gives as a near sign of the coming of the Lord;
even such as the white sky and morning-brightness is to the watchman, of the
days being near. And thus, as we see the ruin and downfall of the man of sin
advance, there seems to be a proportional ground of certainty thence to
conclude the near approach of the day of Christ's second coming.

Second particular, which in our discerning the time calls for a serious
enquiry is this, what the present appearance and signs of the time seem to
point at. For these, as the pulse to the body, are of special use to give a
clear discovery of its temper and disposition but this is a prognostication,
that goes above the stars and all the rules of Astrology, which the Scripture
only can make us know. I confess, this day they seem sad, and every where look
with a threatening aspect on the Church. We see not now our signs, and those
tokens for good, which sometimes have appeared: but there are presages, if we
could gravely look thereon, that might cause us with astonishment to enquire,
What can such things portend, and when will be the end of these wonders? Some
sew I shall briefly point at, which concern this time; that if we be not much
asleep, might be very rousing, and make us regard the same with an awful and
humbling impression; for they truly threaten: Yet I must say, with a reference
to the Scripture, and upon an inquiry into that unerring record about their
meaning? -- First, we have a safe warrant from them to conclude, that whatever
may befall a particular Church, yet nothing thence can be concluded as
demonstrative of a mortal prejudice to the Church universal. For though this or
that particular Church may be cut off, and spued out of his mouth (as many have
and most of the particular Churches may this day meditate terror: If he spared
not the natural Branches, take heed left he also spare not thee, should sound
an alarm to each Church; those very things with highly aggravating
circumstances, being too obvious and easy to be found with them, for which he
casts others off) yet he must increase, and his Kingdom must be a coming
Kingdom: Yea, when he seems to lose ground in one place of the world, it is
made up with advantage by the enlargement of the same in another place; and
often out of the very ruins and dissipation of that Church which he casts off,
he carries materials to build him an house elsewhere. In which case we are,
instead of a querulous saying, Why is it thus? to adore and bless the glory of
the Lord from his place, to justify his proceedure, and be glad, that they to
whom he was not spoken of, shall see, and they who had not heard shall
understand. -- Secondly, we may also say with the same warrant, that even a
particular Church, which has very death-presaging symptoms, and scarce a token
for good, can by him who heals backslidings and loves freely, be recovered.
He can make dry bones to flourish as a green herb: for the issues from
spiritual death belong to him. He can make them who had fallen from their first
love, repent and do the first works; whereby the departing of the glory, and
the removing of the candlestick out of his place, shall be prevented. I am so
much the more pressed to touch this a little, because the very few serious, who
are yet left (or delivered from that spiritual sopor and stupidity, which has
seized on others) while they lay to heart the things which concern the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, are, upon the frightful aspect of affairs and on the
consideration of what they observe in the temper of men and tendency of things,
ready to cast away all confidence, and abandon themselves to a simple
despondency: they almost question, whether they ought to entertain any hope,
that we shall any more be called by that blessed name, Jehovah Shammah, the
Lord is there; seeing nothing apppears at present in the disposition of men, or
dispensation of God, which does not seem to portend a final departure.
Notwithstanding whereof I would desire such, as to beware lest in their
heartlessness they limit the holy one of Israel, and circumscribe the
sovereignty of grace within its just latitude and limits, so for their
establishment against such a despondency and for their excitement to a serious
wrestling with him in order to his abode with us, to consider these particulars.

First, We may call this one of the signs and presages of the time, that the
Devil is now so much aloft, and in a strange way bestirring himself against the
Church; to beget every where a prejudice at the truth, which this day by very
remarkable effects of his power may be seen. -- It is sure, he is a bad
neighbor; yet we must say, he endangers the Church most, when because he makes
no great noise he is least discerned. His being apparently quiet and still has
been found in experience more fatal to the flourishing and real success of the
gospel, than his rage; and in his feigned flight more prevalent, than in his
more furious assaults. But we have the Scripture to ask concerning this; which
makes these clear. [1] That his appearing with great wrath, shows his time to
be short, and that it will be no continued or lying storm, Rev. 12. 12. -- [2]
We thence know, his being let loose, with a more than usual liberty, to trouble
the Church, is previous to some great and remarkable restraint; which you may
read, Rev. 20.7, 8. where he is in a more special way let loose, but we find v.
10. his being chained up for ever follows. -- [3.] We may clearly see from the
Scripture the Devil much aloft, with a more remarkable stir and noise, when
some great thing from the Lord is to be brought forth for the Church. When the
set time, that solemn and blessed time, was now come of completing by that one
sacrifice for ever the work of redemption, so that this hour and power of
darkness did introduce an everlasting sunshine upon the Church: and Satan, by
pursuing the Prince of life unto the death, had a most fatal overthrow. For by
death he overcame him who had the power of death, that is, the devil: and by
being lifted up upon the cross, he spoiled principalities and powers,
triumphing openly over them; and thus dying, sung the victory, and said, It is
finished! whereby a victory over all enemies is eternally ensured to the
saints. Yea, is it not clear, what an hot alarm the Church may expect from him,
upon the approach of that great victory, and the decision of the last battle
betwixt Michael and the dragon? see Rev. 20. 9, 10. what an appearance he will
then have, and in what a manner will he bestir himself.

2. Is not this a present sign of the time, about which we may with some
astonishment inquire, what it does mean, and if it has any favorable aspect
on the Churches, That we see almost every where the most united and formidable
assault of the adversaries of the truth; and its special arm at the kingly
power and Supremacy of the Mediator, as Head over his Church: at which great
truth the opposition of this time seems most directly to be levelled; yea, we
may say, the Crown of Christ which becomes him alone to wear, and this piece of
his glory, is now betwixt Antichrist and the Princes of the Earth divided, each
contending for his share. Sure, this is too discernable: and at present the
adversary seems to prevail, even to a bearing down and bringing under of that
great interest of our blessed Master. But it is as sure there is no ground to
fear this (being well understood) which is a most hopeful and promising sign to
the Church: for we must thus reason from the Scripture; if Christ must reign
until all his enemies be brought in subjection, it is then sure, the greater
the opposition and assault be, the victory must be the greater. And if that be
not only prayed for, but a clear prophecy, That Jesus Christ will take unto
himself his great Power, and reign, must we not then expect he will take it,
yea, in a more eminent and conspicuous manner, when men are seeking, in the
height of their rebellion and rage against the Lord and his anointed, to seize
on his Scepter, and snatch it from him? And if this also be sure, and in the
volumn of that record of the Scripture written concerning him, that his Crown
must flourish on his own Head, shall not then his enemies be clothed with
shame? Yea, has not this truth a dreadful aspect on the crowns and Scepters of
many princes, who would rob the mediator of his?

3. Is it not a strange presage and sign of the time, that we now see most
hopeful and promising appearances for the Church's good, remarkably blasted;
things, which in an ordinary way look to be grounds of encouragement, made to
fail? We see human props almost every where removed, or broken; the truth
deserted by great men; yea, the families of such falling off this day from the
Lord, whose ancestors for a long time had been zealous for his interest. I
confess, this is a threatening appearance, by which many now seem to be shaken:
but I would humbly reason on Scripture-grounds, that it is no bad sign, but
has therewith some comfortable aspect on the Church; it being clear, (1.) That
such a connection is no strange thing in the bible, betwixt an extreme exigence
of the Church's case, and the Lord's eminent appearing for her relief. See
Isai. 30. 18. and 63. 5. Isa. 51. 20, 21, 22. Yea, I must say, it is hard to
find any great mercy and remarkable deliverance of the Church, but has at some
such backset surprised her. (2.) Is not such a disadvantage and forsaken case
expressly held forth as one of grace's opportunities of doing good to his
people? Read Jer. 30. 14, 15, etc. and you will see it; that when none is to
plead her cause, no healer, and Zion called an outcast, which no man seeks
after; thence does the Lord allow his people to be encouraged, and to take it
as a ground of hope, that he will by his own immediate hand appear. (3.) Is it
not from the word clear, that a people at such a disadvantage, and under most
visible weakness when in God's way, may be then made use of for greatest
service? They were in as sore distress, of whom ( Heb. 11. 34.) it is written,
Out of weakness they were made strong, etc. -- I shall further add; Can there
be cause, from the withdrawing of humane help and probable means of safety, to
fear the Church's ruin, when it falls under his hand, who by things most
destructive can serve his interest, and bring salvation at such a time, when
none but God could save! And why are those wonderful providence, that have so
often met the Church in a forsaken case, written before us in the Scripture? Is
it not for aftertimes, to witness to posterity, how the Church may be cast
down, but not destroyed; and though she fall, she cannot lie still, but must
arise? Hos. 6. 1, 2, 3. Nor have her adversaries any cause of triumph thence,
Micah 7. 8, 9, 10.

4. As to the present appearance of the time, is not this a threatening sign,
which has a very dreadful aspect on the Church, even that discernable loss and
disadvantage the best now seem to be at in their frame, and that under a
growing trial of the Church; and the great distemper many of these appear to be
in, whilst we may see much of that holy fear and tenderness, that did formerly
show it self amongst the godly, gone; corruption aloft; prejudice easily taken;
a Spirit of jealousy poured out; yea, very strange and unusual out-breakings in
offense and scandal. And oh! is there not here cause of fear, that the
righteous God be on a further departure from his people, and that his judgment
shall yet more hotly pursue such, until he have consumed this generation? On
which account if he should make us a generation of his wrath, we are called to
adore and justify the unspotted way of the Lord. Yet even as to this, I must
adventure with respect to sovereignty of grace (which is only like itself, and
infinitely above our thoughts) to offer some discovery, from the Scripture, of
what he has done in like cases. How marvellously has the gracious and long
suffering God interposed, and at such a sore extremity helped his Church? For
it is clear, (1) That when the Church has had no argument to make use of, no
confidence to plead, but broken and confounded under the sense of horrid guilt,
he ^^ds one in himself, Isai. 48. 9. For my name's sake will I defer my anger,
etc. -- (2.) We find the Covenant made use of by the Lord, to fist a judicial
proceedure against his people. Psalm 106. 44. Nevertheless he regarded their
affliction, when he heard their cry; and remembered for them his covenant. --
(3) We find the rage and violence of the adversary, and their taking advantage
to blaspheme, made use of as an argument by him to own his people, who had
otherwise for-faulted all the former grounds of confidence, Deuteronomy. 32. 26. --
(4.) We may read how sovereign Grace has thus marvellously stepped in, when
the rod did not humble, and smiting would not do the turn. I smote them, and
they went on frowardly in the way of their heart, Isai. 57. 17. Yet, says the
Lord, I will not thus quit them, there is one cure for all, I have seen their
ways, and will heal them. Such a discovery also have we thereof, when a
people's ruin is of themselves, and iniquity has brought them low. Hos. 13. 9.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self; but in me is thy help. Yea, has not
grace rescued those on whom their mercy must be forced, and while on a hot
chase in departing from God! Hos. 2. 7, 9. -- (5.) Have we not this choice
discovery of the Lord's way with his people held forth in the Scripture, that
whilst he works all their works for them, He will work these in them also,
Isai. 26. 12. I shall add, thus has the freedom of grace (O mavelous grace!)
shined forth in former ages of the Church. But they sadly mistake its meaning,
who are thus made secure, and not thereby led unto repentance.

5. This looks like one of the signs of our time, that there is a great ceasing
of the godly, yea the choice thereof, even by a more than usual dispatch: and
is not this a sad Scripture-presage of evil coming, when such are (as it were)
hastened away, that they may be hid in the grave, from a further storm? Yet
these things seem clear also, (1.) What a remarkable consumption did almost
wear out the Church in the wilderness, whilst even then there was a hastening
of her after-enlargement; and though a sore judgment yet the Church's mercy, in
a greater repair of that loss, was helped forward; yea, we find Moses and
Aaron, with many of those who had been most eminent instruments in Israel's
coming forth out of Egypt, taken away on a near approach of their entry into
Canaan. -- (2.) It is sure, some of the greatest promises of the Scripture,
waits on the Church, when brought to a very small remnant, Ezekiel. 6. 8, 9. Isai.
37. 31. -- (3.) Has not the Lord said in such a case, The consumption
determined shall overflow with righteousness? Isai. 10. 20. That the next tide
can bring in as many, with a mavelous increase, as these former consuming
strokes had taken away; yea is it not seen, with a wearing out of the godly,
and a declining of religion, in one part of the World, or of a country, where
many have been called, that it does break out remarkably in an other? And thus
the Gospel recovers that interest, which it seemed to have lost.

6. Does not the present appearance of the time, threaten, by very unusual
signs and presages, some sharp storm to come now upon the World? which in many
instances we may discern, that there is some remarkable work of judgment to be
brought forth, and a great break amongst the nations near. (Though the earth
seems this day in a strange measure quiet, yea so extraordinary a calm as is
now through the World, may it not be a presage of some great storm, which as
too clear and hot a sunshine foretells a break of the weather.) Sure it is,
there is a sound of great wrath and judgment, in the ears of many, who know
what is to discern the times. It is well, the Scripture is near; a
prognostication that can answer all the ages of the Church: and it is there we
should enquire, what such a sign does portend? We may not wish the evil day;
but on such an appearance of the time, that awful impression ( Hab. 3. 16.) is
called for, to be in a trembling frame, when God threatens and does thus utter
his voice: yet is it clear, that from these threatening signs there is a
comfortable sound of much good to the Church. For, (1.) We find days of
vengeance on the World, held forth as necessary for the accomplishing of the
Scripture, Luke 21. 22. and made subservient to the bringing forth some special
truth thereof unto a performance. -- 2. We find in times of greatest judgment,
the Church's interest then set apart and secured, with a large warrant to the
godly, not to fear; even whilst his garments are dyed with blood. Isa. 63. 1.
Ezekiel. 9. 4. Rev. 3. 10. -- (3) May we not see also the Church's inlargment, and
some of her greatest mercies, thus ushered in? which is clear, Isa. 63. 4.
Zeph. 3. 8. And O what a strange connection is there? That the putting the earth
in a flame, and overturning the nations, when the Lord, as a lion does rouse
himself up to the prey, should be the very rise to an accomplishing of some
great promises for the Church's advantage, yea, and as a preludum to the same!
Yet nothing more evident to such who understand the Scripture; and by such a
sign does the Lord speak comfortably to his people. We find a dreadful
Winter-storm on the World, pointed out as a springtime to the Church, and the
trees putting forth their blossom, as Luke 21. 25. It is clear, her deliverance
may be begun, and the storm then breaking, which may for a time put the Church
under greater difficulties than before; yea, cause the godly to mistake, and
tremble at the sight of their mercy, because of those things by which it is
ushered in, even when it is before their eyes. I shall add no more but this, It
is our great concernment, to fear him who guides all things, to whom alone the
determination of events does belong; and this is the wisdom of his people, not
to faint at the strange appearance of the time or the signs thereof, but to
know what is called for, and thence read personal duties, from the sad presages
of public judgments, and to pursue more nearness with God, and ensure a
retreat under his shadow until the indignation pass over. For behold, the Lord
comes out of his place to visit the inhabitants of the earth, and the earth
shall disclose her blood, and no more cover her slain. Isai, 26. 21.

A third particular, which concerns the godly with much circumspection to
notice and understand, in their discerning the time, is the peculiar snares and
hazards thereof. This is the Scripture character of the wise man, to discern
time and judgment, it being so often verified ( Eccles. 9. 12.) that in an evil
time the children of men are ensnared, when it falls suddenly upon them. Sure
it is, there are searching times, when the Christian's way is more difficult
and narrow (though each day has its snares, which in a special way waits
thereon) and then is it the wisdom of the prudent, to understand his way, and
know his ground, which the adversary by subtle and indiscernable approaches
will seek to draw him off; then is a quick sagacious discerning in the fear of
the Lord called for, to have their eyes in their head, and be in a watching
posture, when the net is closely spread under their feet. It is a sad remark,
too clearly verified often times on a people professing the truth, which is said
of Ephraim, Strangers have devoured their strength, and they knew it not; Yea,
their not discerning of the same proves a special cause of their further ruin.
And is it not written for the ages to come, in what a secure and sleeping
posture Sampson had his hair cut! He first lost his discerning of such a snare,
ere he lost his eyes. We find David (through many of the Psalms) in his
wrestlings with God, more solicitous for the preventing the snares of wicked
men, and a delivery thence, than from their rage and violence. There is a
feeling the pulse of the times, by which the present distemper and hazard of
the Church may be known, as well as of the body of man: and I must say, this
day in a special manner calls us to this grave study. I intend no further
application, but a very short touch at some things in general, which rightly
pursued in the godly man's serious study, may help to discern something of the
public snares of the time, and how they get advantage in their approach, for
these closely wait their season, for in vain is the net spread in the sight of
the bird.

First, It is clear, each time has its peculiar distemper and evils, that have
then a special power and prevalency therewith, the observing of which concerns
the godly, for their more watchful adverting to the snares of that time. For
then the temptation of the time goes therewith, as the present distemper
discovers itself, whither in a hot boiling fever, or in a dead lethargy; and
follows those evils, which are in that time most contagious, where the current
of the multitude runs, which is giving the godly the greatest assault, and seem
to be warmed under the favorable aspect and countenance of great men: yea,
those evils, which promise some outward advantage and security from trouble,
when the question is stated betwixt sin and suffering, it is there the present
snare does haunt, and there lies a special piece of the godly man's work, to
hold off and keep a distance from the least accession thereto; yea, I may say
next to the salvation of their soul, to be solicitous all along their way, to
have their garments kept from the smallest stain and spot thereof. A touch, a
small defilement from a public prevailing evil, being found to draw more deep
on the conscience, and with more difficulty do men recover and escape thence,
than from many other personal infirmities.

2. It is also clear, there is some piece of the truth of God, in each time of
the Church, that is more questioned and brought in debate, by which with
greater advantage and clearness we may know where a public snare does lie. For
here is its aim directed, to entangle and assault the godly man, where in a
special way he is called to his post, to contend for such an interest: and thus
it may be said, if one keep sight well of present duty, he will with more
facility find out the scent, on which the snare of the time is, how it directs
its motion to darken or cast an obstruction in the way of that duty.

3. We may thus discern a prevailing snare, and its getting ground, by that
tendency there is in a day of trial, to question and make new inquiry about
duties which were once clear and unquestionable, when their judgment was not
biased from any outward incitements. For this speaks men's finding a sad
invention to be rid of their conscience, by extenuating present controversies:
a design, which (in the righteous judgment of the Lord) is seldom set on foot
by any, but they too visibly thrive therein, for their further ruin, and get an
answer according to the idol of their heart. Thus Balaam, we have in divine
record as a dreadful instance, who tried that way, and therein was successful.
And is it not a known remark, that a hesitation and faint upon the heart, from
want of resolution to suffer for the truth, will not long want a scruple in the
head, to cause a debate thereabout; and then is it easy for a snare to enter. O
with what fear and tenderness should light be guarded; which, as the apple of
the eye, may by the least thing be hurt, but is not easily healed! Thus is it,
men do insensibly wear out from under those former Impressions they had upon
them of duty; and ere they are aware have their judgment by a judicial stroke
determined in that, which was before their desire. They know little that depth
of a man's heart, who are not jealous over a change on their judgment in an
hour of trial, when its tendency is, to spare themselves.

4. We may discern a public snare in it is approach, by that advantage the
adversary gets thereby to divide the godly, and those who appear for the truth,
amongst themselves. For then it is easy to enter by such a breach, and throw in
the bait in so muddy a water: it being too obvious, what an advantage a snare
has, where jealousy, with these bitter effects of private strife and
quarreling, turns men's eyes off the public hazard, and blunts that edge of
contending for the truth, in smiting one an other. I do not mean but there may
be a necessity often on the godly, to withstand their friends to their face, yea,
the eminentest in the Church, were it a Peter, (Gal. 2. 11.) when the truth is
concerned; but this should be with greatest caution and tenderness, to obviate
a breach, or quarrel which is like the breaking in of waters, whilst the
watching adversary waits his advantage in such a day of their halting. And it
is too sadly known, how small a wedg, that is driven with a tendency to that
end, makes way for the entry of a further snare; see 1 Cor. 11. 16. what a sad
connection there is betwixt a dividing time of the Church, and a further
departing from the truth. But we must always take heed, that we so pursue union
amongst our selves, as that Christ and his cause be not left alone.

5. A present snare may be seen by the sudden change of known adversaries, and
the friendly insinuations of those who were wont to threaten. That in such an
appearance there lies an ambush, and is but a change of weapons for a seen
advantage, sure this should be ground of fear, and a cautious advertence to be
much alone with God, that men may know the voice of the shepherd, lest they
follow after a stranger; it being more usual, to be stolen off their feet in a
calm, than blown down by a storm; it is hard to stand before the blandishments
of men, where that more endearing and sweet relish of peace with God is not
kept on the soul, which is a choice mean to make the ear deaf to the most
charming voice of the enchanter: often has it been seen, that adder's poison is
under their lips, whilst wrath is boiling in their heart ( Psalm 140) yea, that
the cruel man can change his countenance when it is fit to lay a snare, and
with Joah embrace them in their arms, whom they intend to smite under the fifth
rib.

6. May not thus a snare be seen in its approach, by that prevalence the fear
of man has over the time, and that unusual command it seems to have some times
over the spirits of men, even those whose former zeal and resolution for the
truth has in other trials with much advantage appeared? Here is indeed cause
to watch; for in the fear of man there is a snare (Prove. 29. 25.) which then
will take advantage to pursue, when it finds men in a flying posture, and
shrunk so far below their former appearance. We find the godly man has his
breast plate: but he has no piece of armor for his back, when he turns his
fac^ from resisting. It Is sad, when the adversary is taught to follow, by our
fainting: and that spirit which is in the World, seems to be upon the
ascendent, with a prevalence even over the spirits of the godly; yea, those
debased and made contemptible in their eyes, in whom the appearance of God and
his authority upon them at another time would have made the hearts of their
enemies to tremble. This is too obvious, in a humbling and judicial time of the
Church, until once that hour of her trial go over.

7. A public snare is then to be feared, and calls for a watching eye, by that
success which waits on a sinful course; especially when such a shine is of any
continuance. For then new queries will be started, strange reports spread, with
much subtle reflection on the way of the Lord, to make the godly question the
same. The Psalmist found it not easy to stand before this, which put him to
bring under debate his principles, and the advantage of his cause Ps. 73. 13.
And in such a trial does the adversary, by some continued observation, know how
to assault the followers of the truth, and attack them at their weakest: then
is it the scandal of the cross causes many to offend; then it is sore for such
to suffer, who know not the fellowship of the cross of Christ, which is a piece
of the greatest and most near fellowship with him upon the earth: Yea, then the
Church may run more hazard from some of her friends, then from the professed
adversary. For thus often is a prevailing snare helped forward: it cannot but be
a searching and hazardous time, when many are turning aside, and some of
understanding suffered to fall, who are ready to press their sin, as duty, on
others; for seldom do such fall off, but are found more stiring and active in
such a way to engage others, than they were while holding their former
integrity to pursue the truth's interest: thus we have seen it, so it is, let
us hear it and know it for our good

8. Thus a snare of the time may be discerned, by the tendency thereof to
corruption in the Church, and a producing still the same effects, what ever be
pretended, when by the hands of Esau, it discovers itself, though it have the
voice of Jacob. And does not the ruin of many, who have dashed on such a rock,
and have been thus taken, put a sad mark thereon? For it may be said, no snare
or subtle contrivance of the adversary awaits the godly in the present time,
but if men do not consent to shut their eyes, they may from the Scripture and
observation of the Church, see at others cost some discernable beacon set
thereon; what a sad tendency such a thing has still had, to a making shipwreck
of faith and a good conscience; how hard it is to dance about the fire and not
be burned, or stand in the way and counsels of ungodly men and not be ensnared.

9. It seems to threaten a snare, when enquiry about the duty of the time is
pursued without respect to the present case and circumstances thereof. For thus
a snare may wait in a thing at other times indifferent, the neglect whereof
under some special circumstances may be a quitting their duty; and the doing
also, or yielding to something in another case warrantable, at sometimes may
fall under a moral prohibition. As this, when a thing in its self indifferent,
Circa sacra et cultum Dei, is pressed by the Magistrate, as necessary by virtue
of his sole command, and to the subjecting the godly in things wherein they are
not subject and to the prejudice of an other jurisdiction; can there be an
enquiry about this in the general, without a particular application to the
complex case? It may be said a snare is then on the entry, when that
consideration of the Prophet is not much regarded in the present question, Is
this a time for such a thing? For the disciples to refresh themselves with
sleep, was a piece of innocent duty; but that they could not watch this one
hour with their Master in his sufferings, must needs vary the case; for it was
in so far a deserting him.

10. I shall further add, is not this a sad appearrance of some public snare
getting advantage, which is witnessed by a previous disposition, and that
prevalence private engagements to an outward interest has upon men's spirits?
For a snare enters not without a call, and finds within, its greatest strength
and advantage; yea a conformity to the World, with an insensible wearing out of
soul-tenderness, is too often known to have a tendency for conforming to an evil
course. For the motion is then down the hill; and there is cause to fear, the
snare will follow in there, and lie about that interest, which otherwise has
got the mastery over them. How many in embracing the World, have at the next
step fallen off from the truth? No weapon has been more made use of against
the Church, and has ruined more: so that it may be said, where other snares
have killed their thousands, this its ten thousands. I must say, such an
appearance in a time of the Church's trial is like the breaking forth of her
gray hairs; nor is it easy for those to stand, or resist, who are so far gone
backward, or keep their feet before a snare, where the truth cease to get a
command over their heart.

A fourth particular, which calls for a serious inquiry, from those who know
the time, and are wise to discern the same, is this, What can the righteous do?
when there is a growing darkness on the Church, and the very foundation like to
be shaken; yea, the hearts of many so far down, that they are like to lose
their hand therewith, in the matter of duty, and give over, as men astonished,
seeing this evil is from the Lord. It is no small thing, to manage well such a
time of the Church's trial, and in so sharp a storm there is need of much
balast: but we know, the Scripture of God is near, which stands good for his
people's conduct, to let them know how to steer their course in the darkest
night, and from that blessed record there is one thing clearly held forth to
answer such a time, which is a great duty; Let the righteous hold on his way,
and he who has clean hands wax stronger, and stronger, Job 17. 9. For it is
sure, they have cause and solid ground for this, though the earth should in a
more strange manner reel, and the pillars thereof seem to be dissolved: since
it is certain and true, --

(1.) That all is well, and nothing can fall wrong, whilst the foundation of
God, which is his eternal counsel held forth in the Scripture, abides sure.
Though other foundations be shaken, the godly man does then ly at a safe anchor,
which will not drive in a stormy day: his great interest is beyond hazard,
though more than an immortal soul were in that adventure: his heaven is sure,
whereof he cannot be beguiled, whilst things upon the earth seem most
uncertain: and must it not then be well with the Church, were it even sinking
in to the grave, since the Mediator will bring it up again? Men's evil eye
cannot hurt, nor their cursing blast that interest, which God ha^h blessed. For
it is then sure, there is no enchantment against Jacob, nor divination against
Israel.

(2.) Is not the truth, and the great interest of godliness, that to a
Christian, and in such a manner known to him, that it needs no testimony from
men, or incitement from example of others? For to these it commends itself, and
does witness its reality, though by all the generation amongst whom they live,
it should be cried down. It Is sure, to be a Christian indeed, requires this, to
know the truth, and be founded on such a ground, that can support and quiet the
soul in the greatest falling off of others, though none else were to walk in
that way; that if it were supposed, one serious Christian in such an age were
in the whole World, and thus left alone, there is so great a discovery and
certainly of the truth to be known upon the soul, as should oblige him to such
a declaration with Joshua, But as for me I will serve the Lord. O to see a
generation of men of such metal, who with resolute peremptoriness would
forsake all men, and follow the Lord, and serve him without company, if better
might not be; we might by the hand of such expect to be led through Jordan,
after our Moses's are dead, by whom we were led through the red sea: but alas,
where are they!

(3.) Have not those ground in the darkest time to be confirmed, who may see
cause to improve the most shaking things, which fall out in their day, for
their further establishment; and strengthen their hand in the way of the Lord,
by those dispensations at which many stumble? It is strange, to observe what a
challenge and upcast some have in their reflecting on the truth, on those
grounds which in their conscience they must admit to be a convincing witness
thereto. But having at some length elsewhere touched this, I shall but add
these few things more, which as evident grounds of establishment in the way of
the Lord, and for our further strengthening therein, should be improved, which
yet are an usual challenge by many against the same.

First, That the number seems so small, who follow the truth, and are found
serious in the study of Godliness, can be no ground to question this, without a
strange mistake; since men must either quit the Scripture, or admit, the way to
life is strait, and few enter therein: Yea, that the small convoy the truth
has in the World is an express verification of it. Is there the least warrant,
to make the suffrage of the multitude a test of the way of the Lord? But it is
sure, we can show them the contrary, that his followers are a select number,
chosen out of the World, the great bulk whereof is outlawed, and put out of the
intercession of the Mediator; else the Scripture could not be fulfilled. And is
not the falling of many from the truth a great seal thereto, no less than the
incoming of others? and that excellent way of holiness, the more discernably
known by such a character, that it is every where spoken against?

2. That so great contempt and reproach does this day attend the truth and
practice of Godliness, should prejudice none thereat: but be a further ground
of strengthening, to help the Christian to hold on his way; since it is nothing
else but what is foretold, and what the most excellent of the earth in their
time have met with, to be accounted the filth and off scouring of the World. In
no age has the truth wanted such an assault, and in no age has it wanted a
triumph over the same: Yea, has not the greatest reproacher sometime been
forced to give in his retractation, and make earnest of that which (...) he
scoffed at? When God comes near by a stroke of his judgment, then do the proud
change their style; and speak in another language, upon the awful appearance of
death. But this also does witness, what a mavelous thing Religion is, which
with those who know it, loses no weight, when under the greatest cloud of
detraction and contempt: For then is Christ still precious, and his way
desirable, unto those who believe.

3. That sentence is not speedily executed against an evil course, we see what
improvement the World makes thereof, to be more desperately wicked: but is not
this also a seal and confirmation of the truth? and a ground for establishment
in the way of the Lord, which verifies the Scripture, Eccles. 8. 11. And it is
there men may see, a short repreival from punishment is no pardon, or
acquittance, whilst sin runs on to an after-account; that judgment deferred,
when therewith a further hardening appears, does threaten more, than a quick
and present dispatch; and shows, the stroke will be the greater, when it comes.
Surely if this fell not out, whereof the World takes such advantage, it might
in so far put us to question the truth, of which one syllable must not fall to
the ground.

4. So great an abounding of prophanity and ungodliness within the Church, is
it not an undeniable seal to the verity of the Scriptures which thus takes
place, and should help the godly man to hold on his way; it being unanswerably
clear, there could be no darkness, if there were not such a thing as light; or
folly, if there were no wisdom: and is not excellent holiness thus evidently
made known in its opposite, to which there could be no contrariety, if it self
were not most real.

5. That the truth seems so much entangled in a confusion of contrary
doctrines, and we see it without ceasing pursued by error, and the assault of
those adversaries, who in every age are seeking to darken the same, can be no
ground of prejudice and shaking, without a strange mistake: but should
strengthen the godly in their way, and help them to wax stronger, who have the
Scripture thus so expressly fulfilled before their eyes. It is sure, the Lord
has made his way plain, nor does that blessed record give any ground to turn
aside unto crooked paths: for those are clouds of men's own creating, which
have such a tendency to darken the same. But we see truth in all ages waited on
by error, which (with any brighter discovery thereof) breaks out like a thick
fog; though these can never unite, no more than gold and clay can join
together: and it is clear, the notion of error were unconceivable, if the truth
had not a certainty and real being; nor does it conflict with such an
adversary, but for its further triumph. Oh if the solid persuasion of the
Scripture were in earnest pursued, and men's souls once brought under the power
and authority of the truth, as that which is the word and testimony of the
living God, it would prove a more effectual cure to so dreadful a distemper of
the Church, than all the disputes of the time; which are of special use also.
May not Atheism be found, upon a serious inquiry, the great rise of error, and
of men's bold adventuring to make the Scripture of God a sport of their
invention, to make it subservient to their interest, and run after such a
bias? And should it not be for a lamentation, that a humble serious inquiry
after the truth, under an awful impression of that GOD whose word it is, is
this day so rare a thing in the World?

Now this being so sharp (...) trial of the Church, and one of those things
whereat many pretend to be most shaken, though I have in an other part touched
it a little, I would add further some few remarks, how clear and express a
confirmation of the word even this is, which should more fix and establish
those who love the truth. (1.) It is manifest, that no error or corrupt
doctrine assaults the Church, but is in such a manner pointed forth, yea, by so
express an opposition thereto, in the Scripture, that we may see a prophetical
forewarning thereof, and of men's endeavor to corrupt and darken such a piece
of the truth. It is sure, the word is written and in a special way directed to
every time of the Church, and to all her after-trials and assaults is
peculiarly suited, by him who knew and did foresee what opposition his truth in
after-ages should meet with: and in this mavelous record men may clearly see
(if there were such a serious inquiry) that there is no poison or corruption in
doctrine, which infests the Church, but has its proper antidote there
provided. I must here as to one particular instance say, if I were not
persuaded of a determined species of government for the Church under the new
Testament (which is clear in the Scripture holding forth its constitution to be
Aristocratick, with a parity amongst the officers of Jesus Christ in the
administration of their power, and a subordination of the lesser parts to the
greater) I could not shun so clear a remark, of that express prohibition of any
disparity and Lordly prelacy in his house; yea, how manifestly the allseeing
God, when he was about to found the Christian Church, does point in such plain
terms at this, that we may there read a very direct prediction of that ruin and
prejudice, it would on this account sustain in aftertimes. I speak this on no
particular interest, or from bitterness and prejudice at the persons of any,
but have confidence to say, it is from the awe and persuasion of the truth.
Sure, on politic grounds and with respect to an outward interest, it is easy
to judge, that way wants not a persuading bait; if something greater were not
to preponderate, and a destroying hook did not wait thereon, which should make
the purchase too dear, at the rate of denying Jesus Christ in a piece of his
truth, when a confession thereof is called for before men. -- (2.) Do we not
see even in those things, which in that mavelous depth of error and delusion
on men's souls seem most strange, the Scripture thence most exactly comfirmed,
and in that power and energy which attends it, and is to many matter of
astonishment, may discern how these clouds are carried about with a tempest (2.
Pet. 2. 17.) and driven on by a judicial stroke. And though it is amazing to
see at what a rate many are this way turned mad, with a discernable bewitching
of their judgment, and a besotting into most strange and absurd extravagancies;
yea, how tenacious and violent in their way, when silenced with the clearest
discoveries of the truth: yet is not this also witnessed, there is a righteous
God giving up to strong delusion, in which Satan is let loose with a remarkable
power to deceive. 2. These. 2. 12. O how dreadful is that stroke which is
inflicted on the judgment and reason, which in some respect we may say is
greater than that which is on the affections! -- (3.) Find we not the Scripture
by a clear prophetical discovery points at that influence humane authority, and
the patrociny of such, who have a name and repute in the Church, should have on
the corrupting the doctrine thereof? And therefore does the Holy Ghost so
particularly guard against the same, and oppose the authority of the written
word to the highest pretenses of any party; that here an Apostle must not be
admitted, or have credit, to the truth's prejudice; not an Angel, yea, not a
voice from heaven, may oppose it self to this more sure testimony of God in his
word. -- (4.) Is it not here even in that great depth of error we see this
truth take place, deceiving and being deceived; how strangely these meet, and
by a mavelous stroke men's judgment made captive to their will, and their
deliberate acting to deceive others have the same effect on themselves. -- (5.)
Thus also is the Scripture made out, where we see how hard it is for men to
fix, in such a way; or find land, when they are once carried off the truth, and
do lanch out in that horrid gulf of error: but seducers wax worse and worse.

Inference. V. The truth of God revealed in the Scripture is in its import not
more mavelous and great, than we may say is clear and obvious in the evidence
of its verification: which has every where such a witness, that there can be
no escape from this discovery; but if men will not receive its testimony, they
must have it forced on them as their torment. For it is here invention does
fail, and politics are found too weak, to ward off some impression of that,
which with an awful appearance and authority does justify it self to the
conscience, without their consent; nor can this secure them from that lash of
inward tertor, which will make these tremble alone, when they seem to have
confidence before others; but this advantage the truth has of her adversaries,
that even Atheism must bear a witness thereto, and against it self; which if
men would but weigh in the balance of sober reason, it should appear a
sufficient antidote against its own poison, and a great seal to the Scripture,
which would want a special confirmation, if it wanted such an adversary. Now to
clear it a little more, and thus shut up what has been on this subject held
forth, I must in behalf of the glorious truth of God (which in all ages of the
Church did never want some discovery of its accomplishment) attest the
reproachers of this time, who are so much at work to challenge his unspotted
way, and call in question his faithfulness, to the weakening of the assent of
many thereto, and do appeal them to (...) tribunal which the great God has
placed in the conscience, if they can without doing violence thereto, and
putting out the eye of reason, withstand the clear evidences of divine truth,
and the certainty of its performance. About which these few things I shall here
add.

(1.) If it be the great prerogative of God, and to him alone belongs to
declare things from the beginning to the end, and hold forth the various and
most remarkable events, which should fall out with in time, with their proper
circumstances, yea, to discover the great revolutions of the world through all
the ages thereof, when second causes in their remotest tendency thereto could
not be discerned; is not this then clear and undeniably true of the Scripture?
-- (2.) As to sure and exact performance of the same, I must make that
challenge and attestation, which that great servant of the Lord Joshua did in
such a case ( Jos. 23. 14.) if any thing has hitherto failed, of all which the
Lord has spoken in the Scripture! or if men can instance, what special
prediction or promise (which to this day should have taken place in the season
thereof) has miscarried, or turned abortive; what truth wants its seal and
confirmation; yea, what step of providence can you point at, which does not
quadrate and marvellously accord with the word? I challenge an instance. But
this, I am sure, men must see, there are such things fall out in the event,
that are particularly foretold in the Scripture; so strange and mavelous,
that in an ordinary way none could have believed, which they now see with their
own eyes. -- (3.) Do you not see the written word as a bright lantern attend
the Church, from the very porch and entry of time, in all her journey; and
evidently point at the remarkable times and revolutions of her case, which have
now in a great part gone over her head? Yea, is it not demonstratively clear,
that the sun does not more truly shine on this terrestrial globe, than the
Scripture shines, and does illuminate the whole frame and structure of
Providence; and in all those strange parts which are acted in the world, most
certainly takes place; that there is none can walk at random, or by his own
counsel direct and steer his his course! But though it is mavelous, it is
sure also, that the innumerable millions of men, who are this day upon earth,
in all their various motions, are at present fulfilling the determined counsel
of God; and their actings (what ever they design therein) must be concentrick
with his great end, nor out of that bounds can they possibly move. -- (4.) I
must attest the world, if they do not see, this way of godliness, which seems
to day to be every where spoken against, to be that good and old way, in which
are the footsteps of the Saints to be found since the beginning; and that it is
no new light now broke out in the world: but it is clear, through all ages past
there has not wanted a continued succession of these, who in this reproached
way did serve the God of their fathers; and have sealed the truth, which now,
from one time to another, we find still delivered off their hands, to the
present generation. And I here challenge the greatest Atheists, to which of the
Saints can they turn, or whom can they instance of that blessed company, since
there was a Church in the earth, who could never contradict this, or bear an
other witness! -- (5.) Must you not confess, there is no such deep in the heart
of man, or so close and subtle a convoy of wickedness there, which is not found
out in the Scripture, and there pointed at; and that none can get themselves
hid, or get beyond the reach of this, in those things which they are sure the
observing world could never know: but the most secret haunts of their soul are
unvailed, which from their dearest friend they have concealed. -- (6.) Can this
demonstration of the Scripture, and so manifest a witness thereto be denied,
that whilst man is a free agent in his actions, and does therein act
spontaneously, he has notwithstanding of this in his own breast both a judge,
and accuser; which, though within him, does without his consent exercise a
power over him, and such an authority which he would, yet cannot decline? --
(7.) I dare attest the conscience of men, who are themselves strangers to the
way of God, if they can so far shut their eyes, but they must see that serious
godliness is a mavelous thing, and that there is something here above nature,
which by its effects on others, may show a divine Spirit and power; that,
wherever it comes, makes so great a change, and one to exceed an other most
discernably, though of the same parts; that suits and does accommodate it self
to the various conditions and employments of men; it puts a special honor on
the greatest Prince, and does instruct the wise and prudent, yet will it lodge
with the poorest artificer in his shop, or laboring man in the field! And does
it not also appear, that here must be a native motion unconstrained and from
inward principles, when on outward grounds there is not the least incitement;
which shows it is a living thing, that has its discernable languishing and
wearing out, and its more vigorous actings, as well as any living man! It is
strange, the report of this is not matter of astonishment; to bring men once to
question, if such an account as others give of this mavelous thing (
Religion) can be true; how it is here, the Christian's joy is sown by weeping,
and his tears the seed whence gladness of heart breaks forth; how sweet that
rest is, which is found in his work and labor; and with his sowing to the
spirit, the harvest then begins, in a present reaping; and his laying forth
himself, with a giving of the heart unto God, does enrich the giver by such a
gift: yea, that here men should differ so much when alone with God and brought
near him, from what they are at other times; and in those retirements of their
soul, have that discovery and conception of the truth, which is not to be found
in turning over the voluminous tractates of the greatest writers. -- (8.) If
men have any serious reflection, and do not shut up the bible, can they shun
this remark thereof? How well it answers the various successions of time, and
so mavelous a variety of things, that are so many ages distant from other;
yea, that all along there is a gradual discovery, and breaking out of the
gospel, in the several times of the Church; where it is easy to discern the
antiquity of this excellent record, and so great a distance of time betwixt the
penmen thereof, yet in its composure is one entire piece, so connex and closely
knit together, that men may see the same spirit in the whole, and in each part
thereof, moving and carrying forward one great design! -- (9.) I shall but
further add, if Religion has a being and reality, which men cannot lose the
sense of, and deny, without falling so far below reason, into the condition of
the beasts, must there not be a rule also? For it is easy to judge, in what a
strange and monstrous shape this would appear, were it left to the choice and
arbitrament of men. Now let the most professed Atheists turn their eyes through
the whole earth, and in a calm and sober composure of spirit but judge, if
there be any thing more absurd, and to astonishment irrational, than that face
and appearance, which religion has amongst those where this excellent rule of
the Scripture is not owned. Yea, could these subject themselves to such
extravagancies, and therein turn so mad, without a divine stroke on their
judgment and reason, which the righteous God, in verification of his word,
inflicts on such as do even shut their ears from the report of the truth, the
sound whereof goes forth through the earth! And here I challenge men, though
strangers themselves to serious religion, if at a distance it does not appear,
how great a difference there is betwixt those parts of the world, where the
gospel shines in its power, and the rest of the nations.

FINIS.

