The Necessity of holding fast the Truth represented in Three SERMONS on Rev.
iii. 3. Preached at New York, April 1742.

With an Appendix Relating to ERRORS lately vented by some Moravians in those
Parts.

To which are added, A Sermon on the Priestly-Office of Christ, And another, On
the Virtue of Charity.

T^er with A Sermon of a Dutch (...) on taking the little Foxes; faithful^
^anslated.

By GILBERT TENNENT, M. A. Minister of the Gospel at New-Brunswick, in
New Jersey.

Jude verse 3. Beloved, when I gave all Diligence to write unto you of the
common Salvation: It was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that
you should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queen Street, over
against the Prison. MDCCXLIII.

TO THE READER.
WHILE we grieve there should be Occasion given for the following Sermons and
Appendix, by the Arrival of the Moravian Brethren in these American Regions; of
whose emerging out of the Darkness and Errors of Popery we had heard with Joy
in Years past; yet we cannot but rejoice that God has animated his Servant, our
dear and honored Brother Mr. Tennent, to appear as he here does in Defense of
the great and important Doctrines of the Gospel, long since asserted in the
public Confessions of the reformed Churches of Great Britain, France and
Holland; and which have been from Time to Time vindicated in the Writings of
their most pious and learned Divines.

We heartily wish that the Honorable Count Zinzendorf, and the Brethren who
have attended him hither, had but given a due Attention to the Light of Gospel
Truth held forth to 'em in these united Declarations: But if they are covertly
or openly bringing in dangerous Heresies, subverting the Souls of our People;
they must not wonder if we freely withstand them to their Face, although they
come Strangers among us, and also with a Face of Meekness and Love.

We hope we have learnt the Apostolical Injunctions to us, on the one Hand and
on the other; and there is certainly a blessed and perfect Consistency between
them; Heb. xiii. 1, 2, 3. Titus i. 9, 10, 11, 13.
Let brotherly Love continue: Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers; but
remember them that are in Bonds as bound with them: -- Hold fast the faithful
Word as thou have been taught; that you may be able by sound Doctrine both to
exhort and convince. Gainsayers; for there are many unruly and vain Talkers and
Seducers, whose Mouths must be stopped from subverting whole Houses, teaching
Things which they ought not; -- wherefore rebuke them sharply that they may be
sound in the Faith.

May the LORD bless to these Brethren Strangers, and also to the more
immediately endangered Flocks in the Jersies and Pennsylvania, this Labor of
Love, and Effort of holy Zeal; for the Conviction of the One, and for the
Preservation of the other, from the wild and frightful Errors, which are here
testified against and refuted with the Fervor of One that has learnt to
contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and with the
Light of a wise Master Builder on the Foundation which CHRIST and his Apostles
have laid.

When this our dear BROTHER, whose Praise is in our Churches through the
Provinces, visited us at Boston two Years ago, and in the Spirit of the
Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD entered into his Labors here; it pleased GOD in a
wonderful Manner to crown his abundant Services with Success, in the Conviction
and (we trust) Conversion of many Souls: As therefore the Name of Mr. Tennent
is greatly endeared to us, so we beseech our ascended SAVIOR, the HEAD of the
Church, long to continue Him for a burning Light and extensive Blessing to our
Provinces; and in particular to use this faithful, judicious and seasonable
Endeavor of his Servant, for a Guard and Defense about his own sacred Truths
and his glorious Work in the Midst of us, which too many are ready to speak
evil of and oppose.

Boston, Dec. 22. 1742. Benjamin Colman. Thomas Prince. John Webb. William
Cooper. Thomas Foxcroft. Joshua Gee.


The Necessity of holding fast the Truth.
REVELATIONS III. 3. Remember therefore, how thou have heard, and received, and
hold fast.


VERY dear Friends and Brethren! You may remember that the Builders of the Wall
of Jerusalem, after the Babylonian Captivity, were obliged because of
Opposition, to carry a Sword in one Hand to protect, as well as a Trowel in the
other to build; and thus must Zion's Builders do, now in this Time of
Opposition, and Temptation. We are told in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Chap. 33.
that if the Watchman sees the Sword coming on a Land, blows the Trumpet, and
warns the People, however insuccessful his Labors may prove to some, he will
nevertheless deliver his own Soul: But that if he does not give seasonable
Warning, the Blood of those that perish will be required at the Watchman's Hand.

My dear Friends! to prevent unreasonable Prejudice against this Performance,
because of my opposing some Persons in it, who make a fair Show in the Flesh, I
may observe and assure you, that Conscience informed by the Word of God,
constrained me to do what I have done, in detecting and opposing the erroneous
Notions, of a pernicious new Sect of People, called Moravian Brethren, or
Hezenhouters, who have lately come from Germany into this Country. Love to God,
and his dear and precious Truths, which are secretly undermined by the
extraordinary sly concealing Arts of the Moravians, obliges me to speak out
expressly, in order, as far as it shall please the God of Truth to bless the
same, to give Check to the Spread of that Plague of Leprosy.

I stand here in this Desk in the Name of the great and dreadful God, and in
the Room of our Lord Jesus Christ, to sound the Alarm-Trumpet, and give fair
Warning to this dear Flock in particular, and to the Inhabitants of the Land in
general; by informing and assuring them, that a Spirit of Error and Delusion is
gone forth to deceive the World. He that has Ears to hear, let him hear. I
freely venture my Character, and am ready, God assisting, to sacrifice my
Liberty, and my Life, in Defense of the blessed Truths of the Reformation, and
in detecting the Erroneous.

If any out of a childish Credulity, or peevish Obstinacy, will not take the
Warning given; my Soul shall weep in secret Places for their Pride!

I cannot stand as an unconcerned Spectator, to behold the Moravian Tragedy; my
Heart bleeds within me to see the precious Truths of Christ opposed, slighted
and trodden under Foot, by our new Reformers; and that under a Pretext of
extraordinary Sanctity, Love and Meekness! My Soul, come not into their Secret;
unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be thou not united! It is enough to make a
Heart of Iron bleed, to see Foxes, little Foxes, slily creeping into God's
Vineyard, and spoiling the Vines, and tender Grapes, i. e. young Christians,
with Enthusiasm, Pride, Error, and Nonsense!

But I hasten to consider the Words of our Text, which is an important Counsel,
given by our Lord to the Church of Sardis, to reflect upon and call to Mind,
the Truths they had formerly heard, as well as the affectionate Dispositions
with which they heard them; and that they would use all proper Means to
preserve and retain them; a Counsel very proper for the perilous Times in which
we live. The Direction our Lord gave in Respect of hearing the Word elsewhere,
strengthens in my Opinion the aforesaid Explication; in one Place he says, Take
heed what ye hear, and in another, Take heed how ye hear; and indeed in the
Nature of Things the Manner of doing a Duty, supposes the Matter without which
it cannot exist.

In discoursing upon this Subject, I shall endeavor to speak to the following
Heads.

I. Show what Truths we should more particularly remember and hold fast. II.
Show what is supposed by and implied in our remembering them and holding of
them fast. III. Why we should remember them and hold them fast.
And then improve the whole.

I. One Head of Discourse, is to show, What Truths we should more particularly
remember and hold fast.

To what I would offer under this Head more directly, I would beg Leave to
premise a few Words, concerning the Nature and Kinds of Truth. Here I may
observe that Truth in it is general Nature, consists in Agreement, and is
threefold, viz. metaphisical, logical, and ethical; the first is the Agreement
between the Appearance of a Thing, and the Thing itself represented by it; the
second consists in the Agreement, between the Mind and the Thing it conceives
of; i. e. when the Mind conceives of any Thing, really as it is; the third
consists in an Agreement between our Words and Minds; i. e. when we speak what
we think; the first Truth is opposed to Paint and Varnish, the second to Error
and Falsehood, and the third to Lying; which consists in going against the Mind.

Now my dear Brethren! There are these Truths following more especially, which
ye should hold fast to the Death; namely,

1. The Doctrine of CONVICTION by the Law of God, whereby the Sinner is made
sensible of his Sin and Misery, before he obtain converting Grace; if we let
this precious Truth go with the Moravians; or in Compliance to a noted Person
among them, (who asserted in New-Brunswick, that Conviction is not necessary to
Conversion, but hurtful; and that the Presbyterian Doctrine, respecting
preaching of the Law is false) I say if we drop the Doctrine of Conviction; I
see no Ground of Hope, that ever a secure World will be alarmed. And truly
those supposed Conversions, which are not preceeded by a Work of the Law, are
either in general, strong Workings of the Fancy and Affections, moved in a
natural Way, as in Tragedies; or the common Workings of the Spirit as in time
Believers, and stony Ground Hearers, or a Delusion of Satan!

Does not Scripture and Reason hold forth the aforesaid precious Truth; our
Lord promised the Spirit to convince Men of Sin, of Righteousness and Judgment,
John 16.8, 9. He invites the Weary and Heavy-laden to come to him, and promises
them Rest, upon their so doing, Mat. 11.28. He farther informs us, that he came
not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. That the whole need no
Physician, but the Sick. Was not the Prodigal made to see first that he was
perishing, before he came to his Father? Luke 15. Have we not three thousand
Examples of this at one View? Acts 2.37. I might add the Example of the Jailer,
who said trembling, What must I do to be saved? Acts 16. and of Paul, who being
convinced in his Way to Damascus, said, Lord what would thou have me to do?

Now that the Law is the usual Mean of Conviction, appears from these following
Places of Scripture, Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage
again to fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Observe
here, that these Gentile Christians of the Roman Nation, had the Spirit of
Bondage first; and whence had they this, by the Preaching of the Gospel? no
surely, but of the Law. Hence the Apostle says, that by the Law is the
Knowledge of Sin, Romans 3.20. and that before the Law came he was alive, (i. e.
in his own Apprehension) but when the Law came, Sin revived and he died, Romans
7.9. i. e. when the Law was bro't powerfully home to his Heart by the Holy
Ghost, he saw his dead State; this is further confirmed, Gal. 2.19. For I through
the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God; i. e. I through the Law,
as an Instrument applied, am dead to the Law considered as a Covenant of Works;
or dead to all Dependence upon Law-Righteousness for Justification.

The Apostle proposes this Question, Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the
Law? he answers, that it was added because of Transgressions; i. e. it was
added as an Appendix to the Covenant of Grace, to convince Men of their
Transgressions. Hence the same Apostle says, Romans 5.20. Moreover the Law
entered that the Offense might abound; and indeed the Case is really so, the
Law as a Sword must enter our Consciences, before Sin will abound in our
Apprehension sensibly: Is the Law then against the Promise, (says the Apostle,
Romans 3.21.) God forbid. No the Law is good, if it be used lawfully, if it be
preached not as a Covenant of Works for Justification; but as a Mean to
convince Sinners of their Guilt and Misery, their Inability to fulfill it, and
so of their absolute Need of Christ, and the Mercies of the New Covenant through
him. And thus instead of opposing Christ and the Covenant of Grace, it is the
most effectual Mean of promoting our Esteem of and Compliance with both. The
Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by
Faith, Gal. 3.24. And that although Believers are now under a milder
Dispensation, of the Gospel, than the Jewish Church was; being freed from the
Yoke of the ceremonial Law entirely, and from the frequent and terrible
Inculcations of the moral. Hence is that of the Apostle, Heb. 12.18. We are not
come to the Mount that might be touched, and that burned with Fire. -- But to
Mount Zion the City of the living God.

The Gospel Church being come to her full Age, is treated as such, and has
more Knowledge of her Privileges than the Jewish, who was but in an infant
State; yet Unbelievers are in the same Condition now as then. Mark 16.16. John
3.36.

It would be no Privilege, but a great Loss to the Gospel Church, to be
deprived of this twofold Use of the Law; namely, to convince Sinners and direct
Saints. Do we make void the Law by Faith, says the Apostle; nay we establish
the Law.

Reason it self will instruct us, that until poor Souls be alarmed out of the
deep Sleep of Sin, they are not disposed to value Mercy through Christ much, nor
to desire after it, and labor for it, with due Earnestness and Importunity:
And until they feel a Work of the Law discovering and humbling of them, they
are neither disposed to bow before a sover^ God, nor to give him the Glory of
his Grace, both which are necessary Duties. To talk of using the Gospel as the
only or principal Mean of the Conviction of Sinners, is very ignorant and
foolish, and shows little Knowledge of divine Things; it is just like putting
the Plow before the Oxen. To offer a Remedy before the Disease and Danger is
opened, is but to please and deceive a wicked World, and make them sleep the
faster in their dangerous Security! Does not the Experience of good Men,
confirm this Truth of Conviction? Methinks dear Brethren! we should be willing
to part with the last Drop of Blood out of our Veins, before we part with it,
Remember therefore how thou have heard and hold fast.

2. Ye have heard FAITH explained, as consisting (principally) in our receiving
Christ Jesus, in all his Offices, and upon his own Terms; namely, those of
taking up the Cross, Self-denial, and following of him, and that with Humility,
Deliberation, Readiness, and Resolution. This the holy Scriptures expressly
assert, John 1.12. Col. 2.6. Mat. 16.24. Luke 14.28. Luke 19.5. 2 Timothy 3.12.
Hold fast this precious Truth, my dear Brethren! against the pernicious
Doctrine of the Moravians; who hold that Faith consists in a Persuasion that
our Sins are pardoned, and that Christ died for us; this Notion wants a
scriptural Foundation, and is contrary to Reason. Assurance is a Fruit of
Faith, and therefore it is distinct from its Nature, and so separable: The
Apostle Paul observes, Ephe. 1.13. that the Ephesian Christians were sealed
with the Holy Spirit of Promise, after they believed. Here you may see that
they had Faith before they attained to the comfortable Knowledge of it: The
Apostle John also speaks to the same Purpose, 1 John 5.13. These Things have I
written unto you, that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know*
that ye have eternal Life. It is also evident from the Nature of Things, that a
Thing must be before it be known to be.

If the Essence of Faith consisted in the aforesaid Persuasion, then the Loss
thereof would destroy the very Being of Faith, and so prove a false and
perverse Doctrine to be true, namely the falling away of the Saints. For we
find according to the holy Scriptures, that the Saints of God are exposed to
long Desertions, distressing Doubts and Fears, yea to Despair itself. Isa.
50.10. Who is among you, that fears the Lord, and obeys the Voice of his
Servant? and walks in Darkness, and sees no Light, let him trust in the Name
of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. See also the distressing Case of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. he refused to be comforted, remembered God and was
troubled. -- his Spirit was overwhelmed. And of Heman, Psalm. 88. I am as a Man
that has no Strength, like the slain that lie in the Grave, whom thou
remembrest no more; thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the
Deeps, thy Wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy
Waves. I hope you will not reject these Proofs, because they are produced out
of the Old Testament, after the Example of the Moravians. Truly if the Old
Testament be rejected, I can see no sufficient Reason, why the New should be
received; for the latter is but a Fulfillment of the former, and a
Superstructure built upon that Foundation; and if the Foundation is overset,
the whole Fabric is ruined. But to return,

If the Nature of Faith consists in the aforesaid Persuasion, then upon the
Supposition that universal Redemption is a false Doctrine, (which I shall
afterward prove) and that it is every Man's Duty to believe; it will follow
according to this Scheme, that some are obliged by the Command of God to
believe also, that Christ has died for them, when the Case is not so.

If there be such a Thing as Presumption, namely, a believing that our Sins are
forgiven, when they are not forgiven, (which I shall afterward prove) and that
this Presumption is sinful, then according to the Moravian Notion of Faith,
(which is the same with the Antinomians) God himself has obliged natural Men by
his own Precept, to commit Iniquity, which is a monstrous Blasphemy! In short
this Antinomian Moravian Faith, looks more like a strong Presumption, than the
Faith of God's Elect. In the Parable of the Sower, our Lord informs us, that
some Seed fell upon stony Places, and forthwith it sprung up, because it had no
Deepness of Earth; and in his Explication thereof, he says, but he that
received the Seed into stony Places, the same is he that hears the Word, and
anon with Joy receives it, yet he has not Root in himself. ( Mat. 13.) but
the good Ground is said to bring forth Fruit with Patience. Luke 8.15. The poor
Man that believed in the Gospel, cried with Tears, Lord I believe, help my
Unbelief. Our Savior reproved his Disciples sharply for the Weakness of their
Faith, for their Slowness to believe, Luke 24.25. Then he said unto them, O
Fools and slow of Heart to believe! True Faith is certainly opposed by our
corrupt Nature, and by Satan. Hence we are bid to fight the Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. and said to wrestle with Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6.12. True
Faith grows from small Beginnings to greater Strength; hence the Faith of the
Thessalonians is said to grow exceedingly, 2 These. 1.3. What then can we
reasonably suppose that Faith to be, which has no humbling Preparatives, no
after Conflicts and Troubles, and consists not in a receiving of Christ, or
entire resting upon him for Salvation? What is it but a sorry Mushroom of a
Night's Growth, unworthy of the Name of Faith.

In the mean Time, I will not pretend to limit Omnipotency; the great Lord of
the Universe may in his absolute Sovereignty, possibly in some few Instances
vouchsafe his Grace in an extraordinary Manner; but the general Course of his
Proceedings, if we believe the Scriptures is agreeable to the aforesaid
Representation. Possibly some few Persons have a full Assurance at their first
Closure with Christ; but that this is not general, is evident from what has
been already offered.

If it be urged in Favor of the Moravians, That if the aforesaid Notion of
Faith be a Mistake, it is but what many of great Note, among the first
Reformers maintained.

A. Supposing it were so, it would not alter the Nature of Error, because some
good Men were guilty of it. We are to follow the best of Men, no farther than
they follow Christ; will it excuse the horrible Crimes of Murder and Adultery,
because David was guilty of them?

But the Truth is, I know of none of the Divines properly called reformed, who
have maintained upon the Moravian Plan, that Faith consists in a Persuasion
that Christ died for us. If any of them have professed that Assurance was
included in the Nature of Faith, yet it ought to be considered that they did
not at the same Time hold universal Redemption; which much alters the Case, for
when a Person believes that Christ died for every one, it must needs be very
easy and natural to believe, that he died for him; for the Latter is
necessarily included in the Former: But it is not so easy to believe that
Christ died for us upon the Scheme of particular Redemption.

Besides some of the reformed Divines who have given into the aforesaid Notion
of Assurance, have distinguished it into different Degrees, and thereby
signified that it was not their Opinion, that all who believed had the highest
Degree of Assurance, which seems to be the Moravian Notion.

Not to say that it is more excusable that some in the Dawn of the Reformation,
through the Heat of Debate with the Papists, (who believe that Assurance is not
attainable) should be drawn into another Extreme, than that so long after the
Light of the Reformation had shone, in its meridian Glory, a new Sect who
profess a singular Sanctity should embrace the aforesaid pernicious Error;
which tends so much to distress many of the poor Saints of God, without just
Cause, who ought to be comforted, and so to embarress their Way to their
Father's Kingdom.

If it be again objected, That to say that Assurance is not included in the
Nature of Faith, or necessarily annexed to it, is to encourage Presumers.

A. No, by no Means! For though a Person may have true Faith, and not know that
he has it, yet he must needs know the Actings of his own Soul. Ordinarily he
can remember that he has been made sensible of his total Want of Faith, John
16.8, 9. his Inability to believe, as well as the Opposition made against his
Faith; his affecting Apprehension of Christ's All Sufficiency and Willin^ness
to save; and his Dependence upon Christ's Righteousness alone for Acceptance,
under a Sense of the Insufficiency of his own. He must also be sensible of some
Change wrought upon his Will, Affections, and Practice; though he may question
whether they be of a saving Kind.

Now if a Person imagines that he has Faith, and has not found the aforesaid
Experiences, he deceives himself. Such Persons as do rest securely upon this
Ground, viz. That Persons may have Faith and not know it, and neither press
after Assurance, nor bewail the Want of it, and are Strangers to the Experience
of a Work of the Law and Gospel upon their Hearts, are miserable Hypocrites!

I think that the Command of God to examine ourselves, and make our Calling and
Election sure, plainly supposes the Uncertainty of our Knowledge about them,
before the Use of these Means.

My dear Brethren! Let us hold fast this precious Truth, against all Opposition
whatsoever.

3. Ye have heard, that FAITH is the MEANS of JUSTIFICATION, and of absolute
NECESSITY to eternal Salvation. These Things, the Scriptures of Truth fully
assert, Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude that a Man is justified by Faith
without the Deeds of the Law; and Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be saved,
but he that believes not shall be damned. Let us hold fast these important
Truths, my dear Brethren! against the perilous and pernicious Doctrines of the
Antinomians and Moravians, namely, That those who are justified, are justified
from Eternity in the Sight of God, and actually from the Time of Christ's
Death, and that Faith is not necessary to Salvation.

Now because that eternal Justification, is the proton pseudos, the first and
fertile Falsehood of all the Antinomian Abominations, the fatal Fountain from
which those poisonous Streams do flow, which dishonor the Religion of Christ,
contradict its grand Design (which is Holiness,) and sap its very Foundations;
I think it needful to offer a few Considerations, to overset this Monster of
Impiety. And here let me observe, that the Doctrine of eternal Justification,
contradicts the holy Scriptures, which inform us that we are justified by
Faith. Romans 3.28.

Now if we are justified from Eternity, we are justified before Faith, (for
Faith is wrought in the Elect in Time, Ephesians. 1.13.) and then must not those
Scriptures, according to this Plan be false, which assert our Justification by
Faith? For is it possible fairly to reconcile a Justification from Eternity,
and a Justification in Time together, a Justification before Faith, and after
Faith together? I see not how it can be done, until Time and Eternity, before
and after, be proved the same.

The sacred Scriptures inform us, that all the Elect as well as others, are by
Nature Children of Wrath, under the Curse of the Law, under the Condemnation of
the Gospel, and guilty before God, Ephesians. 2.1. Gal. 3.10. John 3.18, 36. Romans
3.19. Now to say that those were justified from Eternity, is to assert the
greatest and most irreconcilable Contradictions: it is in Effect to say, that
the Elect are freed entirely from the Guilt of Sin, but are notwithstanding
under the full Weight of it; that they are cursed and blessed at the same Time;
under Wrath, and Heirs of the Promise; Children of God and of the Devil at the
same Instant; condemned and justified at once. Now can any living Man reconcile
those contradictory Propositions, without overthrowing the Nature of Things,
and blending Light with Darkness? Supposing this impossible Chimera to be true,
viz. That a Man should be in the aforesaid contrary States at one Time, and
bro't to the Confines of the Grave, where must his Soul go at its Exit? not to
Heaven, for he is under the Curse of the Law, the Condemnation of the Gospel;
not to Hell! for he is freed from the Guilt of Sin, and has a Title to eternal
Glory; where must it go then, but to the feigned Purgatory of the Papists? Do
not therefore wonder, that some of the Moravians, and Long-Beards, who are
their Brethren (in Respect of their Spirit and main Principles) should stumble
into the ridiculous Notion of turning Hell it self into a Purgatory, by
believing that the Torments of the Damned there, are but for a certain Space of
Time: However this Notion is so gross and scandalous, that some of the
Moravians are ashamed to own it.

This Fancy of turning Hell into a Purgatory, is worse than the Notion of the
Papists, because they believe the Eternity of Hell Torments as to some. -- It
oversets one of the principal Barriers against Vice and Incentives to Religion
and Virtue, it tends to disband the World, and open the Floodgates to all
Immorality and Anarchy.

It is vain for the Patrons of the aforesaid perilous Figment, to urge in
Defense thereof, this Plea, that the original Word for Eternity, signifies but
an Age, or some Ages, for the same Word is applied to God and to the Happiness
of the Blessed, and therefore they may from hence as justly argue, that the
Happiness of the Blessed, yea that the Being of God himself, shall last but for
a few Ages, which is damnable Blasphemy! In the 25th Chapter of Matthew and
last Verse, the Happiness of the Saved, and the Miseries of the Damned are set
in a direct Antithesis or Opposition, and the same original Word is applied to
both; therefore they may as well conclude, that the Former will be temporary as
the Latter.

It is notoriously derogatory to the Satisfaction of Christ, and to the
infinite Justice of God provoked by Sin, to imagine that Creatures can make
Atonement for it, and so pay the utmost F^thing. The Damned being covered with
Wrath, and unable either to bear the Load, or escape from under it, will be
filled with Rage and Blasphemy against God, and so will increase their Guilt
instead of atoning for it. But to return from this Digression.

The sacred Scriptures represent Justification, as an Act, or Sentence passed
in Time coming, therefore it cannot be from Eternity; see Gal. 3.8. The
Scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached
before the Gospel unto Abraham. See, Faith must be preached before the Heathens
Justification, how then could they be justified from Eternity, was Faith
preached from Eternity? Gal. 2.16. Even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that
we might be justified by the Faith of Christ. Romans 4.23, 24. Now it was not
written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but for us also, to
whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in him. Isa. 53.11. By his Knowledge
shall my righteous Servant justify many. Isa. 45.2, 5. In the Lord all the Seed
of Israel shall be justified. Romans 3.30. Seeing it is one God, who shall
justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith. The
Order in which our Justification is placed, is set in a strong Light, Romans
8.33. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he
called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
Excellent Mr. Flavel observes, That it is absurd to place Vocation before
Predestination, or Glorification before Justification; sure then (says he) it
must be absurd also, to place Justification before Vocation; the one as well as
the other, confounds and breaks the Scripture Order; you may as well say Men
shall be glorified that were never justified, as say they may be justified
before they believed or existed.

How irrational and unaccountable it is, to believe that any should be
justified from Eternity, will appear, if we consider a little the Nature of
Justification; which is an actual freeing of Persons from the Guilt of Sin, and
giving them a Right to Salvation.

Now how can any be freed from the Guilt of Sin from Eternity, unless we
suppose them actually guilty of Sin from Eternity. But how can Creatures act,
before they are, or exist? Every Creature is the Birth of Time, before he is
conceived in Time, he is subject to no Law; and where there is no Law, there is
no Transgression actual, and where there is no Transgression either actual or
virtual, there can be no Guilt; for that is an Obligation to endure Punishment
for Sin, through the Force and Virtue of the Threatenings annexed to the Breach of
the Law; and where there is neither Guilt, nor Sin, nor Punishment, there can
be no Justification, which is a Freedom therefrom.

To say that the Elect are justified from Eternity, is in Effect to say, that
nothing sinned from all Eternity, and that nothing was justified, which is
absurd! for the Elect before they exist are nothing in Respect of actual Sin.

If it be objected, that what has been said will oppose the D^rees of God. I
answer no, by no Means! for the Decree considers future Beings and future
Actions, Ephesians. 1.4. But Justification respects Persons present or existing, and
Actions past. It is a real or actual Change of the State, and respects a Sinner
as actually ungodly, Romans 4.5. But can that which is not, be really and
actually changed? Can a Person be ungodly before he is at all in Being? Besides
I see not how this Difficulty can be removed that lies in the Way of eternal
Justification, viz. It will suppose that the Sin of Mankind, and their
Justification from it, bore an equal Date; both being eternal, for in Eternity
there is no before or after. Now this is impossible in the Nature of Things,
that actual Freedom from Sin, should be parrallel in Duration with Sin itself,
for the latter in the Order of Nature and Time goes before the former.

It is very shocking to consider, what Dishonor this Doctrine of eternal
Justification, reflects upon our Lord Jesus Christ, and how it saps the very
Foundations of his Gospel.

It is a Branch of the Redeemer's Glory, that he has satisfied divine Justice
for his People's Sins, and paid their Debts by his Blood and Obedience. Gal.
3.13, 14. 2 Cor. 5.18 -- 21. Phil. 2.8. But according to the Plan of eternal
Justification, there was no Sin to be satisfied for, no Debt to pay; for can it
be supposed, that a Creature can sin before Eternity, or that after he is
justified from Sin, he is notwithstanding in Debt by it to divine Justice? this
would be a Justification, and no Justification! Well, if there be no Debt to
pay, Christ's Satisfaction is destroyed; for it is hereby rendered needless and
useless. And thus you see a Foundation Truth, namely the Satisfaction of Christ
destroyed, by this Antinomian Moravian Doctrine of eternal Justification!
Luther justly observed respecting Justification, That it was the Article of a
standing or falling Church; now when it is judged to be eternal, it is made
null and void as has been observed.

If the Elect are justified from Eternity, then how can our Lord be said to be
their Savior? seeing that according to this Scheme, they were never liable to
Destruction. If it be said, that the Elect were not justified till the Time of
Christ's Death, then what became of those that died before it? Could those be
saved who were not justified? How unjustifiable and uncharitable must it be, to
condemn to the Flames in Effect, all those that died before the Coming of our
Savior?

The Doctrine of eternal Justification renders Faith unnecessary, (in an
absolute Sense) for according to that, the Elect are justified before it. And
by the same Argument it strikes down the Foundations of Repentance, it
represents Sin as a mere Trifle, not worthy of our Fear or Sorrow, by
signifiing that God is at Peace with those that are under its Dominion! it
takes away all Arguments of Terror, by which a secure World should be alarmed,
and opens deadly Avenues to all Manner of Licenciousness; and thus it tears up
by the Roots all natural and revealed Religion!

If it be objected that Christ was a public Person, and therefore that what he
did and suffered, is to be looked upon as done and suffered by those he
represented.

A. As none are guilty of Adam's Sin, though he was a public Head of the
Covenant of Works, till united to him by a Participation of the same Nature
with him, so none are justified by the Righteousness of Christ the second Adam,
until by Faith they receive it, and are thereby united to him.

It will not avail to say, that because God's Nature and Love are unchangeable,
that therefore the Elect were justified from Eternity. A. It will not follow,
though God is not changeable, we are, and there is a manifest Difference between
God's Purposes and the Execution of them; the aforesaid Reasoning would
conclude the World and all the Creatures in it to be made from Eternity,
because there was a Purpose concerning their Production from Eternity. But this
is false, therefore the other is so, which is built upon the same Plan of
Reasoning. As to what the Scriptures say concerning the everlasting Love of God
to his Elect, I think that usual Distinction which is observed by sound
Divines, helps to remove the Difficulty, viz. That there is a Love of
Benevolence, and Complacence, the former signifies the gracious Purpose of God
toward his Elect, and the latter the Delight he takes in them when converted,
Cant. 2.14. it is only in the former Sense the Lord is said to love his Elect
before their Conversion. Besides it cannot be truly said of God that there is
any proper Passion in him. If any by the everlasting Love of God to his Elect,
imagine that the Guilt of Sin is removed from them actually, before they exist
or believe, which is the Point in Question, they expressly contradict both
Scripture and Reason. Joh. 3.18. Reason teaches that (non entis nulla sunt
accidentia) that which is not, cannot be either justified or condemned; where
there is no Guilt it cannot be removed.

Not to add that to set forth God's Love, as in every Respect the same to those
who are under the Dominion of Sin, and to those who are freed from it; is to
cross the Current of Scripture, which represents the blessed God as angry with
Sinners, and pleased with his sincere Servants through his Son. It also tends to
make us look upon Sin as a very Trifle, which we need not be much concerned
about any Way.

Behold my dear Brethren! what a dismal Foundation is here laid for all Manner
of Impiety, and that under the specious Umb^age of Gospel Knowledge and
Sanctity! These Passages of Scripture, viz. where Christ is said to be the Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World; and that God was reconciling the World
to himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them, 2 Cor. 5.19. and that Christ
has made Peace through the Blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. and Romans 5.9, 10. and
that the Grace of God in Christ was given us before the World began; can
consistently with the Current of Scripture, the Analogy of Faith, and Dictates
of right Reason, be supposed to mean no more than these Things following,
namely, (1) That there was a gracious Purpose in God from Eternity, to
vouchsafe Blessings on his People in Time. (2) That there was a sufficient
Foundation laid by the Sufferings and Obedience of Christ, for the actual
Reconciliation of the Elect to God in Time. (3) That there was and is a
Sufficiency of Grace treasured up in Christ as Mediator, Head of his Church,
and Fountain of Influence, to be communicated to the Elect upon their Closure
with him. Which in some Places of Scripture is represented by the Time past, to
show the Certainty of the Event. For the same Reason the Coming of our Lord to
Judgment is represented as present though it be future. Rev. 1.7.

If this Distinction be offered to paliate the Antinomian Doctrine, which I am
opposing, namely that the Elect are justified from Eternity as considered in
Christ, but not as considered in themselves: I answer, that it is impossible to
reconcile two contradictory Propositions, or to blend Light and Darkness
together: the plain English of the aforesaid Distinction is just this, that the
Elect in different Respects, are in contrary States at one Time, at once they
are both justified and condemned, this is in the Nature of Things impossible;
for if they are justified they cannot at the same Time be condemned, because
Justification is a Freedom from it: we may say with as great Reason that the
Elect (as considered in the Decree) were effectually called, sanctified, and
saved from Eternity actually, which is false and absurd, or that we our selves
in the aforesaid Respect, existed and acted from all Eternity, which you know
is ridiculous!

If it be again objected, That Things to come are present with God, that one
Day is with the Lord as a thousand Years -- therefore the Elect are justified
from Eternity, in the Sight of God: I deny the Consequence, for by this Way of
Reasoning the World would have been actually made from Eternity, in the Sight
of God; which is false. Jehovah who is all Eye, looks not on Things in a false
Light. If it be replied, that the Elect had a Representative from all Eternity,
but the World had none, and therefore that the Case is different; to answer
this I offer these two Things, (1.) That according to the Antinomian Moravian
Scheme of eternal Justification, there was no need of a Representative at all,
there being nothing to pay. And (2.) As to the World, it had all the
Representative it was capable of, and there was any Necessity for, namely the
Decree of God, that Pattern in the Mount, according to which, this spacious and
magnificent Structure was exactly formed.

Again may we not say, that Things past are present with God, as well as Things
to come. And hence may we not argue after the aforesaid Manner thus, viz. That
the World is still a creating in the Sight of God, that the Flood now covers
it, that the Cities of the Plain, viz. Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. are now a Fire,
that Israel is passing through the Red Sea, fighting with Og King of Bashan, and
Sihon King of Heshbon. What mad Work would it be to form our Prayers according
to this Scheme, namely, to pray for the Protection of Adam in the Garden, of
Noah in the Flood, of Lot in Sodom, and of Israel among their Enemies? May we
not conceive of a Debt's being fully paid by a Surety, and yet such a Plan laid
previous to it, that the Debtor shall have no actual Interest therein, or
actual Benefit thereby, until he be enabled to come up to such honorable
Terms, as shall express his Sense of the Benefit, and Gratitude to his
Benefactor.

4. Ye have heard, that unconverted Persons are under the LAW, and that the LAW
is a Rule of Life to Believers. And does not the Scripture say so? Romans 3.19.
Whatsoever the Law says, it says to those that are under the Law, that every
Mouth might be stopped, and the whole World become guilty before God. Here
observe, that some, yea that all are, while in a State of Nature, under the
Law, and guilty before God. Take Notice that the Apostle spoke these Words to
the Roman Gentiles, who enjoyed the Gospel Dispensation; and does not the same
Apostle tell the Galatians, Gal. 3.10. That every one is cursed, that
continues not in all Things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them. But why should the Apostle speak of the Law at all to the Galatian
Gentiles, if it belonged to none but the Jews, as the Moravians dream?

Does not the Apostle pronounce Peace upon those, who walk according to this
Rule, and has not our Savior assured us, that he came not to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it? Let us hold fast this precious Truth, my dear Brethren!
against the dangerous and detestable Doctrines of the Moravians, one of whom
asserted in New-Brunswick, that the unconverted Gentiles were not under the
Law, and that the Law was not a Rule of Life to Believers. O my dear Brethren,
do not these Notions tend to dreadful Security, and Licenciousness? for if
there be no Law, there is no Transgression. According to this Notion the vilest
Wickedness would be no Sin, and so there would be no Cause of Sorrow for it.
Seeing the moral Law is grounded upon the unalterable Natures, Relations, and
Reason of Things, and consequently invariably holy, just, and good; the
Transcript of the moral Excellencies of the divine Nature; and thus the very
Standard and Scale of Goodness, which is but a Conformity to the supreme Being.
It cannot therefore be changed. It must then be exceeding dishonorable to the
most high Jehovah, and wounding to the true Interests of his Kingdom, to speak
diminitively of his blessed Law! This, this, oversets the very Foundations of
Religion, and rends in Pieces all the Barriers between Virtue and Vice, this
leaves us without a Rule of Action, and so exposes us as an easy Prey to the
Wiles of enthusiastical Delusion. And how can it with Reason be supposed, that
natural Men should be freed from the Law, as a Covenant of Works, which they
have broken, until they be made sensible hereof, and comply with the Terms of
the new Covenant? Can a Person have any Interest in the Benefits of a
conditional Contract, until he complys with the Terms or Condition, upon which
a Right to the Benefits is suspended? Although there be no proper Conditions in
the Covenant of Grace, yet there are Terms, or Conditions improperly so called,
which have a suspending Virtue thus far, viz. that we have no Right to the
Blessings of the new Covenant, till we are enabled to comply with them. Until
Faith be formed in us, we are under Condemnation: it is true we have no Power
to believe of our selves, neither is there any Merit in any Act of ours, to
deserve a Blessing: But God who is absolute Sovereign of the World, and Lord of
his own Treasures, has been pleased to constitute this Method, for the
Conveyance of his Benefits; which reflects Honor upon his Wisdom. This
represents the State of Sinners in such a Dress of Terror, as has a Tendency to
affect and alarm them, and so prepare them for the dear Redeemer. This opens
the Aggravations of Sin, and in a Glass presents to our View its malignant
Nature and crimson Aggravations, in a strong and affecting Light; which nobly
tends to raise our Indignation against it: And this points to an unerring
Director of our Way, which is worthy of our Esteem and Reverence, and most
conscientious Observance!

If any should object, That some Passages of Paul's Epistles seem to speak
slightly of the Law, it ought to be considered, that some in his Day, as well
as in other Ages, depended upon the Works of the Law for Justification, Romans
10.2, 3. and some labored to introduce the Observation of the ceremonial Law.
These Things the Apostle opposes: in the Passages referred to, he speaks not of
the moral Law, absolutely and in it self considered, but respectively as
pointing to the aforesaid Abuse of it, which some were guilty of. If the
Apostle had spoke slightily of the more Law considered absolutely, he would
have contradicted himself, for elsewhere he gives it high and honorable
Epithets and Encomiums, by calling it holy, just and good.

Neither does he speak slightily of the Ceremonial considered in it self, as
introductory to a brighter Dispensation of the Gospel, for in that Respect it
was worthy of Esteem; but comparatively, as being obscure and inferior, when
compared with the more spiritual and more clear Dispensation of the Gospel
since the Coming of our Lord, and as unnecessary to be observed, after the
Advent of the Antitype.

If any do farther object, in Favor of the Antinomians and Moravians, that
Luther the famous Reformer in Germany, was of their Opinion respecting the Law,
as appears by many diminitive Expressions of his in Relation to it, in his
Explication of the Epistle to the Galatians, and elsewhere.

A. No, by no Means! Luther was far from being an Antinomian, he has wrote
expressly and pungently against their pestilent Notions. If it would not swell
this Essay to too great a Bulk, I would transcribe a Letter of his against
them, in which he stings them with a poignant Style and brands them with the
most contemptible Epithets. He expressly says, that they were one of the Blasts,
which the Devil had blown at him. He did by his Reasoning put to Silence one of
the Heads of that Party, who kept still during Luther's Life; but afterward
blazed abroad his own Shame. Where Luther speaks severely of the Law, it is
only in Respect of the following Abuse of it, namely, when Believers under
Temptation and inward Distress, apply it to their Terror and Condemnation. For
elsewhere he speaks honorably of it, asserts its Necessity, and describes its
Use, in preparing Persons for Christ, and in directing Believers. If any desire
more full Satisfaction about this, let them read that excellent Book of famous
Rutherford, entitled, A Survey of Antinomianism; where he has largely
vindicated Luther from the Aspersions of the Antinomians. It ought also to be
considered that Luther was a Man of strong Passions, and therefore whatever he
expressed, he set in a strong Light.

5. Ye have heard much of the Danger of PRESUMPTION, and our Inclination to it
naturally. This is agreeable to the Word of God. Solomon observes, that There is
a Way which seems right unto a Man, but the End thereof is the Way of Death.
Prove. 14.12. and 16.25; and elsewhere he says, There is that makes himself
rich, and yet is poor. The Prophet Jeremiah observes, That the Heart of Man is
deceitful, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. What our Lord
charges upon the Church of Laodicea, may be applied to the natural Disposition
of all Mankind; all are inclined by Nature to think themselves rich, and
increased with Goods, while in the mean Time they are poor, and miserable, and
blind, and naked. Rev. 3.17. If we were not inclined naturally to deceive our
selves, what Need would there be of so many Commands in Scripture, To examine
our selves, whether we be in the Faith; and that we be careful, that we don't
deceive ourselves: And what Need of such a Description of the uncomfortable and
dangerous State of the Deceived, as is mentioned, Isa. 44.20. He feeds upon
Ashes, a deceived Heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his Soul,
nor say is there not a Lie in my right Hand?

Does not the Ignorance of God, and our selves, which is natural to us, as well
as our native Arrogance, and immoderate Self-Love, dispose us to think better
of our selves, and our State toward God, than we have Reason? And if we think
our State is good, when it is bad, are we like to be distressed about its
Danger, and use earnest Labor for Deliverance? No surely! Danger unperceived
how great soever it be, will not excite to any valuable Purpose, our Fear,
Sorrow, or Labor. And may the Unconverted expect Mercy from God, without the
Use of those appointed Means? No surely! those that would obtain the heavenly
Inheritance, must strive to enter in at the strait Gate. Let us therefore hold
fast this precious Truth, my dear Brethren! against the corrupt Doctrine of the
Moravians, one of whom asserted in New-Brunswick, that there was no such Thing
as spiritual Presumption. Dear B^hren! how horrible is this Position, and
damning to the Souls of Men! can any Thing be invented of worse Tendency, to
delude the World!

6. Ye have heard that Redemption is PARTICULAR, or that Christ has not died
for every Child of Adam (Head for Head) but only for a certain Number. And thus
speaks the Scripture. Jesus tells us that he laid down his Life for his Sheep,
(in Contradistinction to the Goats) Joh. 10.14, 15. I am the good Shepherd, and
know my Sheep, and am known of mine. -- And I lay down my Life for my Sheep. By
the Term Sheep, it appears by the 14th Verse, we are to understand the Elect,
because they know Christ, and are known of him. This farther appears from these
following Scriptures, Joh. 10.26, 27, 28. Ye believe not because ye are not of
my Sheep, as I said unto you; my Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, and I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish. Our
Lord in those Verses informs us, that the Reason why some believed not on him;
was because they were not his Sheep: That is, were not eternally elected. He
also farther informs us, t^ all his Sheep are converted in Time, and saved
after (...) so that Conversion and Salvation extends, as far as the Death of
Christ.

Our Lord also assures us, that he prays not for the World, Joh. 17.6, 9. I
have manifested thy Name to the Men thou gave me out of the World, thine they
were, and thou gave them me: I pray for them, I pray not for the World, but
for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. Can you think that Jesus
would lay down his Life, his Blood, for those he would not spend his Breath in
Prayer for? Did not our dear Redeemer thank his Father, that he hid these
Things, (meaning the special Knowledge of the Things that concern Salvation)
from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed them to Babes, and that because it so
seemed good in his Sight. Math. 11.25, 26.

Although the Ransom that our Lord paid, by his Death and Obedience, was,
considered in it self, sufficient in Value, to have redeemed the whole World;
yet its Efficacy depended upon the Father's Destination, and the Redeemer's
Intention. He died (as I have observed) for his Sheep, the Goats being
excluded, Math. 25.32. -- He died for his People, Tit. 2.14. Mat. 1.21. For his
Church, Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 5.25. For his Children, Heb. 2.3, 14, 15. For his
Seed, Isai. 53.10. For those the Father gave him to be redeemed, Joh. 17.2.9.
Joh. 6.65. Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also, whom thou have given me
be with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory. Now we are told, that
him the Father always hears; if so, then Christ has died only for those that
are saved.

To suppose that Christ died for every Man (Head for Head) is attended with
many Absurdities, particularly with these following.

According to the universal Scheme, our Lord must have died for those that were
actually damned before his Death, which is ridiculous!

And seeing these Universalists, whether Jesuits, Socinians, Remonstrants,
Moravians, and all the Tribe of Enthusiasts, who sincerely hate the Doctrine of
particular Redemption; I say, seeing they own that the greater Part of Mankind
will be damned at last according to the Scriptures, which inform us, that
strait is the Gate and narrow the Way, which leads to Life, and few there be
that find it; that Christ's Flock is a little, little Flock, a few Jewels, a
Remnant, a few Berries, upon the uppermost Bows, (comparatively considered) I
say, seeing they own these Things, they are unavoidably led to this Dilemma,
namely, either to invalidate the Sufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction, or to
charge God the Father with Injustice, in requiring a double Satisfaction for
the same Offenses; once by Christ on the Cross, as their Surety and
Representative, and again of their own Persons in Hell. I see not how it is
possible, for any Universalist fairly to remove this Difficulty. Besides, it
appears to me, that Free Will is necessarily implied in the Doctrine of
universal Redemption; without this it cannot be held consistently, as may
appear thus;

If the Application of this supposed universal Redemption, be made only to
some, and that not of Works done by the Creature, but by Way of absolute
Sovereignty and pure Grace, as the Calvinists maintain according to the
Scriptures; For it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows Mercy; Then to what Purpose does the Doctrine of universal
Redemption signify, but to amuse; for it turns to the same Issue, with
particular Redemption upon this Plan; and allows no greater Privilege to
Mankind in the least Degree, only it is not consistent with itself, for it is a
Redemption and no Redemption. If Redemption be supposed to extend farther than
Election, and be of any avail to Mankind, then the turning Point must be the
Free Will of the Creature, and not the Will or Grace of God. This the Jesuits
and Arminians are sensible of, and therefore maintain the Doctrine of
Free Will, though falsely yet consistently with their Scheme. Yet they try to
cloak their foul Opinion with fair Language. For my own Part, I cannot but
suspect the Moravians or some of them at least, to be guilty here, viz. of
holding the Doctrine of Free Will, though they do disclaim it in Word, because
the Doctrine of universal Redemption leads so directly to it.

But in what strong Terms does the Word of God disclaim all Pretense to a
Free Will in Man, by assuring us that we are while in a State of Nature, dead
in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2.1. That we can neither do, nor will, nor think
Good, as of our selves, Phil. 2.13. 2 Cor. 3.5. That none can come to Christ,
except the Father draws them, Joh. 6.44. That God has Mercy upon whom he will
have Mercy. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows Mercy. Romans 9.15, 16.

If Christ died for the whole human Race Head for Head, it may be asked,
whether God the Father and our Lord Redeemer intended, they should be all saved
yea or not? If he did not intend it, then to what Purpose is the Death of
Christ, to all those who were not designed for Salvation? does not this look
like Mockery and Illusion. But if it be supposed, that God did intend the
Salvation of all the human Race by the Redeemer's Death; although but a few of
them attain the same; then will it not follow, that something like either
Ignorance, Weakness, and Changeableness, must be charged upon the Almighty.

If he intended the Salvation of all by the Redeemer's Death, and knew not in
the mean Time, that the most would not attain it; then is not the Knowledge of
the Almighty finite and imperfect. Now the Knowledge of God is not like the
Knowledge of Creatures, namely, something distinct from the Faculty receiving,
but his very Being, (for he is as the Schoolmen say justly, simplex actus, a
simple Act) then is his Being finite and imperfect, and so by Consequence he is
no God.

But if God knew, when he is supposed to have designed the Salvation of all,
that the most would never attain it, would not this be a great Weakness and
Vanity, to intend a Thing which he knew would never come to pass?

If the Lord intended the Salvation of all, must it not argue great Impotency,
and Dependence on Creatures, to fail of compassing his Designs? Must not
Jehovah upon this Plan, be almost as unhappy as any of his Creatures, because
of a continual Succession of Disappointments? And does it not suppose a Change
in his Being, when he is supposed to will the Salvation of a Creature at one
Time, and it is Damnation at another. For is not his Will himself or his Being?
If the Almighty were compounded of different Things, as Creatures are, some
Agent must exist before him, to make the Composition, and there might be a
Dissolution of it into it is constituent Parts. Now both these applied to the
Deity are blasphemous.

But does not the Scripture represent him, to be far from the Shadow of Change?
And don't Reason teach us, that if he changes he must change for the better or
worse, or into an equal State to what he was before; but either Way he must be
supposed imperfect, before or after the Change; and so no God: For the Idea of
a God essentially includes in it, the highest Perfection.

How can it be, that Christ should die for all, seeing the inseparable
Consequences and Benefits of his Death do not belong to all? our Adversaries
themselves being Judges. The Benefits I mean are such as the Freedom from
Condemnation, Romans 8.34. Reconciliation to God, Romans 5.10. Effectual Calling,
Ephesians. 1.13. Remission of Sins, Mat. 26.28. Sanctification, Joh. 17.19. The
Love of God, Joh. 15.13.

If it be objected, that in many Places of Scripture our Lord is said to die
for all. It may be replied,

(1) That our Lord is said in no Place to die for all, and singular, which is
the only Thing in Question.

(2) This Note of Universality, all, frequently in Scripture, excludes
Distinction, but not Exception. See Romans 10.11, 12. Gal. 3.26, 27, 28. Romans
11.32. He concluded all under Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all. Here
the Word all seems only to remove the Difference between Jews and Gentiles,
Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. Romans 3.29. and alludes to the Promise made of old to
Abraham, viz. that in him all the Families of the Earth should be blessed, Genesis
22.18. Whence he is called the Heir of the World, Romans 4.13. Which is
notwithstanding expressly restrained, Genesis 21.12. Romans 9.6, 7.

May the GOD of Truth succeed with his Blessing, what has been offered. I add
no more at present.

SERMON, II.
REV. III. 3. Remember therefore how thou have heard, and received, and hold
fast. --


MY dear Brethren! You may remember, that in treating upon this Subject, I
proposed the following Method, namely, 1. To show what Truths we should more
particularly remember and hold fast. 2. Show what is supposed by and implied in
our remembering them and holding of them fast. 3. Offer the Reasons Why we
should remember them and hold them fast. And then improve the whole.

In Pursuance of the Method aforesaid, I had gone no farther in the preceding
Sermon, than the first Head of Discourse; in treating upon which, the last
Truth which I mentioned, was that of particular Redemption. The last Objection
against the aforesaid Truth then observed, was that in many Places of Scripture
Christ is said to die for all. In Answer to this Objection, two Particulars
were then offered, which I shall not now resun^; but shall proceed to observe,

(3.) That the Word all does not constantly signify the Singulars of every Kind
b^ only the Kinds of Singulars. Rev. 5.9. Romans 14.2. Mat. 4.23. and 12.31.

(4.) Sometimes the Word all, signifies only a considerable Number: Thus all
Creatures are said to go into the Ark to Noah; whereas it was only some of
every Kind: Again we are told that all Men followed Christ, whereas it was only
some in Judea. We also read of all the World's being taxed in our Savior's
Time, whereas it was only the Roman Empire: Yea the Phrase every Man, is not
taken in a universal Sense always. See 1 Cor. 4.5. there it is said, that at
the Coming of our Lord, then shall every Man have Praise of God; whereas it
only intends every good Man.

If it be further objected, that Christ is frequently said to have died for the
World, Joh. 1.29. and for the whole World, 1 John 2.2.

The second Answer to the preceding Objection may with some Alteration be
easily applied here, ^iz. that by the World we are to understand whatever is
contradistinguish'd from the Jewish Church, namely the Gentiles. Romans 4.13. For
the Promise, that he should be the Heir of the World. Romans 11.12. Now if the
Fall of them be the Riches of the World, and the diminishing of them the Riches
of the Gentiles, how much more their Fullness? So that the Sense of the Places
objected, is that Christ did not only die for the Jews, but for the Gentiles.
And indeed this Doctrine of the Partition Wall's being broken down, was
somewhat difficult for the Jewish Church to receive at first, as appears by
Peter's Vision and Defense, before the Brethren at Jerusalem.

Some do object* that Place of Scripture, Heb. 10.29. that there Christ is said
to die for them, that trampled under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, whereby
they were sanctified, and called it an unholy Thing.

Ans. The Thing it self speaks, how ca^ one be sanctified really, and yet
trample under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, and so commit the unpardonable
Sin? Surely he that is born of God cannot sin in this wise, 1 John 5.18. But by
the Blood of the Covenant by which he was sanctified, the Apostle intends the
Son of God; he himself being Interpreter, Heb. 2.10, 11.

Some do object the following Places of Scripture, viz. that Christ is said to
die for them that perish. 1 Cor. 8. Romans 14.15.20.

Ans. The Apostle, as appears by the Context, in those Places referred to,
advises to avoid the Use of indifferent Things, such as Meat^ and Drinks,
least that our Brother should be offended and sin, and so if possible perish.
Mat. 24.24. or least that our Brother (for whom in a Judgment of Charity Christ
died) should sin, and perish.

Some object the following Place of Scripture, 2 Pet. 2.1. where Christ is said
to die for false Prophets, that denied him.

Ans. Some apply this to God the Father, because that the Word despotes, which
is translated Lord, is never applied to our Savior, but to God the Father,
Luke 2.29. Jude 4. It is farther observed, that the Word agoradzein signifies
not here to acquire by the Price of Blood, but to acquire simply, Isai. 55.1.
So that the Sense of the Place i^ that God Almighty brought the false Prophets
by the prea^ of the Word, to the external Communion of the Church, in which
they acknowledged God to be their Lord, and Governor. Others apply this Place
to Christ, and offer this Gloss upon it, viz. that Christ may be said in some
Sense to buy even those that perish; in as much as they enjoy the Forbearance
of God, and many other temporal and spiritual Benefits by the Death of Christ;
by an earnest Endeavor to improve which, they may have much Comfort in this
World, much Sin may be prevented here, and their Miseries lessened in the next
Life. Others put this Sense upon the Place, that some did deny the Lord Christ,
for whom in a Judgment of Charity he died.

Dr. Whitby charges the following Absurdity upon particular Redemption, viz.
that it is inconsistent with the Command to believe to the saving of the Soul.

Ans. This Objection is grounded upon a false Notion of Faith, as though it
consisted in a Belief, that Christ died for us in particular, which has before
been confuted. All to whom the Gospel comes, are obliged to believe in Christ,
that is, to receive him by a living Faith, Joh. 1.12. and this being done, and
not before, they are obliged hence, to conclude that Christ died for them. Some
there be who imagine, that the Doctrine of particular Redemption, is
inconsistent with preaching the Gospel; which is called a Door of Hope, a Day
of Grace; and that it is a mere mocking of Sinners to offer Salvation to them
upon this Plan. I will beg Leave to offer the Sum of Dr. Ridgeley's Answer,
"Here let it be considered, (says he) by a Day of Grace,

1. That we don't hereby intend, such a Dispensation in which all Men might
repent and believe, and so obtain Salvation by their own Power; this would be
to ascribe to Man, what is peculiar to God. Nor that God will give special
Grace to all that sit under the Gospel. As for the Hope of the Gospel, we
cannot understand any Thing else thereby, but that all without Distinction are
commanded and encouraged to wait on God, in his instituted Means of Grace, with
a Peradventure that he will be gracious; this being the ordinary Way in which
he works Grace. And if there be any Conviction of Sin, this gives farther
Ground of Hope.

2. As to preaching of the Gospel, the Doctrine of particular Redemption,
hinders not Christ's being offered to the Chief of Sinners: and the
Proclamation of Grace being made public, to all without Distinction. This will
appear if we consider what is done, when Christ is offered to Sinners, here let
it be observed.

1. That God has given us no Warrant to enter into his secret Determinations,
respecting the Event of Things: or to give any Person Ground to conclude, that
they are redeemed, and have a Warrant to apply to themselves the Promise of
Salvation, while in an unconverted Estate.

2. When Christ is said to be offered to Sinners, in the Preaching of the
Gospel, that which is intended thereby is his being set forth therein, as a
most desirable Object, and that he will certainly save all whom he effectually
calls, inasmuch as he has purchased Salvation for them.

3. It includes in it an informing of Sinners, that it is their indispensible
Duty and Interest to believe in Christ; and in Order thereto, that they are
commanded and encouraged to wait on him, for that Grace which can enable them
thereunto. And as a farther Encouragement to let them know, that there is a
certain Connection between Grace and Salvation: So that none who are enabled to
come to Christ by Faith, shall be rejected. This is the Preaching and Hope of
the Gospel, which is not in the least inconsistent with particular Redemption.

Thus far he.

As to that Method of preaching the Gospel, which some modern Enthusiasts are
guilty of; namely using Means to cure and comfort, by speaking much of Christ's
Sufferings, and his Love, before they try to convince of Sin, and Danger by the
Law; it serves only to amuse the Ignorant and Inconsiderate, and to prevent
their Conversion to God, by the natural and childish Working of their Passions,
moved by soft Expressions, which they are apt to depend upon in the Room of it.
It is a daubing with ^ntemper'd Mortar, a setting the Cart before the Oxen,
such a Kind of Preaching by soft Methods of Address, may make a Show upon weak
Minds, but is never like to do real Good.

To assert universal Redemption, and then to tell us, that Faith consists in a
Belief that Christ died for us in particular, has as dreadful a Tendency to
flatter and please a carnal World, to fix them in a miserable Security, and to
delude them to Damnation in Multitude^, as almost any Scheme that has ever
appeared on the Stage of the World. Every pious Bosom should beat with burning
Indignation against such a horrid Scene!

As to the preceding Objection, concerning the Day of Grace, the Door of Hope,
and Offers of Salvation, as though they were inconsistent with particular
Redemption; I shall beg Leave to offer one Particular more by Way of Retorsion,
thus, -- Is there not as great an apparent Inconsistency between the certain
Foreknowledge of God, and those Things now mentioned, as in the Case of
particular Redemption? If the Jesuits, Arminians, Remonstrants, and Moravians,
do not acknowledge God's infinite and certain Foreknowledge, do they not in
Effect deny his Being, for is not his Being and Knowledge the same? But if they
do own it, let them reconcile it with the Day of Grace, Offers of Mercy, etc.
and that will sufficiently answer the aforesaid Objection.

I may add to what has been before observed, this Particular, viz. That many of
God's Children know the Falsehood of universal Redemption, by their own
Experience; being at Times made sensible through the Operations of God's blessed
Spirit, of the transcendant Sweetness of distinguishing Grace! That which stirs
up the Spleen and Rancour of many natural Men, (because of their Blindness,
Pride, and Selfishness,) viz. That God should choose some and pass by others,
transports their Souls with humble Admiration, Love, and Gratitude; and in this
they imitate their dearest Lord, Mat. 11.25. O it is a doleful Spectacle to see
any grow indifferent and lukewarm about this precious, precious Truth, which
has been sealed to their Souls by the Holy Ghost, because of the fair
Appearances of some straggling Strangers.

To talk of holding particular Election and universal Redemption together, is
Nonsense and Jargon. To reconcile them is as impossible, as to make a Rope of
Sand. If this be the Moravian Simplicity, to believe Nonsense and
Contradiction, may the good God deliver my Soul from their detestable
Mysteries. Remember therefore how ye have heard and received, my dear Brethren!
and hold fast this precious and valuable Truth of particular Redemption,
against all false Apostles, and seducing Spirits, to the Death.

It is contrary to my intended Brevity, to speak any longer upon this Head; any
that would desire to see this Subject more fully handled, let them read
judicious Dr. Ridgeley's Discourse upon it, in his late Body of Divinity.

7. Ye have heard of the IMPERFECTION of the best of God's People on Earth. And
thus speaks the Scriptures of Truth, Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a just Man
upon Earth, who does Good and sins not, says Solomon. If thou Lord should
mark Iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 130.3. In many
Things we all offend, says the Apostle, J^. 3.2. If we say we have no Sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the Truth is not in us, says the Apostle John, ^ Joh.
1.8. All the Blunders of the Servants of God recorded in the old and new
Testament, are so many Proofs of this sad Truth! See the Examples of Abraham's
Equivocation, Sarah's Unbelief and Lying, Noah's Drunkenness, and Lott's
incestuous Uncleanness, Worldliness, and ill Manners in choosing the most
fertile Country, before the more honorable Person Abraham had his Choice;
Jacob's Deceitfulness in the Affair of the Birthright; and the Cruelty of a
Number of the Patriarchs in the Matter of Shechem. Moses his Unbelief and
Murmuring at the Waters of Meribah. Job's Impatience and cursing the Day of his
Birth. Jeremiah's Fall into the same Iniquities. Elijah's Murmuring under the
Juniper Tree. David's Murder and Adultery. Solomon's Uncleanness and Idolatry.
Jonah's Pride and Peevishness in the Affair of Nineveh. Peter's Denial of his
Master with Curses, and equivocating. And does not the blessed Apostle Paul
call himself a wretched Man, because of his indwelling Corruptions? Romans 7.

And indeed the Wisdom of God appears in suffering Corruptions to infest his
People, in this militant State, as the Amorites and other Heathen Nations did
his People Israel, who were as Goads in their Sides, and Thorns in their Eyes.
For hereby a necessary Occasion is presented for the Exercise of their various
Graces. Hereby they have continual Occasion for the deepest Humiliation, and
most painful Labor: Hereby their Esteem of Christ is heightened, and their
Self-Diffidence increased: Hereby their Affections are gradually weaned from
the Things of Time, and set upon more suitable, noble, undecaying, invariable,
and satisfactory Enjoyments: Hereby the frightful Gloom of Death is in a
Measure changed, to a believing Eye, and it puts on an Angel's Form; because
through this the devout Soul, pained and wearied with its incessant Corruptions,
wings its Way to God, to the Kingdom of the Blessed, where unmixed Light,
unallay'd Beauty, unstained Purity, and transcendant Love, have their perpetual
Residence.

If that Passage in the Epistle of John be objected, where it is said, that He
that is born of God sins not, neither can he sin.

Ans. If we take that Place in a Consistency with those before mentioned, (and
surely the Scripture is harmonious) it can intend no more than one or both of
these following Particulars, namely, (1.) That they cannot commit the
unpardonable Sin. Or (2.) That those who are born of God cannot go on
(ordinarily) in a Course of Sin against Light, because the Seed of God, i. e. a
divine Principle of Life is in them, and therefore disposes them to a contrary
Temper and Course.

But Paul the Apostle speaks of some that were perfect in his Time, Phil. 3.15.

Ans. Sometimes this Word only signifies Sincerity; thus it is said of Job,
that he was a perfect and upright Man: Here by the Figure Hendiadis, one Thing
is expressed by two Words. This Kind of Perfection every good Man has.
Sometimes this Word signifies a Perfection of Degrees, i. e. when all
Corruption is entirely rooted out of the Soul, and a Man is advanced to the
highest Degree of Goodness. This the Apostle Paul disclaims in the 12th Verse
of this Chapter, Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect,
but I follow after. Sometimes the Word perfect, signifies a greater Degree of
confirmed Goodness than many others have attained to: Hence the Apostle John
speaks of Babes, young Men, and Fathers in Christ. It is in this Sense that I
believe the aforesaid Text is to be taken; for while the Apostle rejects any
Pretense to a Perfection of Degrees, he acknowleges this comparative
Perfection, as in the Text before cited.

But are we not commanded to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect? and
does not this show that a Perfection of Degrees is attainable in this Life?

Ans. No, it does not; for the Command is not the Measure of our Ability, but
of our Duty. The blessed God indeed gave our first Parents, and us in them,
before the Breach of the Covenant of Works, an Ability to do what was required
of us; but they lost this for themselv^ ^d us, by Transgression. Hence we are
told that all have sinned and come short of the Glory of God. Now can it be
supposed with any Reason, that the Creatures Trespass should lessen the
Creator's Claim of Right to their Obedience; or that he should be obliged to
model his Laws, which are grounded upon the unalterable Nature of Things,
according to the Measure of their contracted Weakness? No surely. If a Person
should lend another a Sum of Money, and he should play the wilful Bankrupt with
it, might not full Payment be legally demanded, and in Case of Failure,
Imprisonment inflicted?

But though we cannot attain to a Perfection absolute and personal, yet through
divine Assistance, we may obtain gradual Advances in Grace and Holiness, and so
greater Nearness to it; and is not this a sufficient Incitement to religious
Labor? And through Faith in the Redeemer we may obtain an absolute imputed
Perfection. Hence Believers are said to be complete in him, and he is said to
be made to them Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, ^ Cor.
1.30.

Our insisting upon the Imperfection of the Saints, in public Discourses,
instead of being an Encouragement to Impiety, is a strong Inducement to
Holiness; for it serves to preserve Hope, which is the Spring of Motion, and
Fountain of Action, in the Bosoms of gracious Persons, who are deeply sensible
of their Defects. Those dear Mourners in Zion, are ready to be discouraged
sometimes, because of the Sight and Sense they have of their Corruptions: for
this they sometimes reject their State, and say in themselves, O! can it be
possible that such Corruption can consist with the Grace of God? O was there
ever on the Earth such a monstrous brutish Creature as I am! For this their
Hands hang down, and their Knees are feeble, for this (or on this Account) they
are in the utmost Agonies, sometimes can hardly swallow their Spittle, and
would choose Strangling and Death rather than Life. Now to preach up Perfection
to such poor humble Souls, who have a View of the spiritual Extent of the Law,
and especially to signify that Conversion consists therein, this adds
Affliction to the Afflicted: This makes those sorrowful whom God would have
made glad: This strengthens Satan's Temptations, whereby he labors to persuade
them that they have no Grace: This dispirits them in Obedience. Whereas the
contrary Doctrine builds up their Hope, and so excites their Admiration, their
Love, and their Contrition. O it melts their Hearts like Wax, and fills their
Souls with Amazement! to think that so great, so holy a God should take any
favorable Notice of such sinful, ungrateful, and backsliding Worms as they.
This, this fires and enflames their Souls with strong Emotions of affectionate
Love and Gratitude! O what shall I do for this gracious blessed God who is so
good to me? O the surprising Riches, and amazing Glories of his pure, pure
Grace! This strengthens the feeble Knees, and says to those of a fearful Heart,
be strong. This endears the blessed Jesus to their Souls, and makes them see
their absolute Need of him. And thus, my dear Brethren, it encourages and
excites to walk in the Ways of religious Obedience. Therefore let us hold fast
this precious Truth, against the detestable Doctrine of the Moravians, and
other Enthusiasts, who assert Perfection.

One of principal Note among the Moravians, spoke to this Purpose in
New-Brunswick, and two of that Sect, who were in Company with him, asserted
that they had been without Sin for several Years; both which Particulars you
may see in the annexed Appendix. Well then; shall we believe the Apostle John
or not, that they are Liars, and that the Truth is not in them? We think we may
safely apply to ourselves, what is said of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.2.
that we have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and found
them to be Liars.

For my own Part, I must declare to the World, that I think the Moravians, at
least some of them, are not so candid as to this Point, and many others, as the
Generality of other modern Enthusiasts, who own the Doctrine of Perfection
expressly and openly, while some of the Moravians labor to hide their Opinion,
and though they own it in Fact and Reality in other Words, yet some of them don't
like to own it in so many Words expressly. If they use this Art, to prevent the
Odium, which would justly come upon their Sect, by their false Doctrine; and to
impose upon the Ignorant and Credulous, and so to increase their Party, it is
exceeding base indeed. If this be their Simplicity, may the good Lord deliver
us from it!

8. Ye have heard that CONVERSION consists in the Infusion of a divine
Principle of Life. And thus speaks the Scripture, Ephesians. 2.1. Joh. 5.40. Joh.
10.16. Joh. 5.25. Let us hold fast this precious Truth, against the pernicious
Doctrine of the Moravians; one of principal Note among whom asserted in
New-Brunswick, that a Man was converted when he had an abiding Sense of his Sin
and Misery. At this Rate, Cain, Ahab, and Judas, were converted Persons. And in
the mean Time he condemned the State of David when he committed Adultery, of
Peter when he denied his Master, and of Paul as described in the 7th of the
Romans: What dreadful Work is this!

Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura columbas; this Censure approves the Ravens
and condemns the Doves. According to the aforesaid Notion, Men would be
converted first, and convinced afterward; which directly contradicts all that
has been said before concerning the Necessity of a preparatory Law-Work, and is
real Nonsense.

9. Ye have heard that the Guilt of Adam 's Sin is IMPUTED to all his
Offspring, Christ excepted; whose Conception was extraordinary and miraculous,
by the Power of the Holy Ghost. Hereby he was freed from the Stain of original
Transgression, which infects all those, who are propogated by natural
Generation.

Our Lord not descending from Adam, in a natural Way, was not numbered in him;
and for this Reason as well as on the Account of his being God-Man, he did not,
and I may say could not, break the Covenant of Nature. If he had broken the
first Covenant, he could not have been the Head of the second.

Our Lord was born, not by Virtue of that primitive Benediction. Genesis 1.28.
Grow and multiply: But by Virtue of that gracious Promise. Genesis 3.15. And I
will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed,
it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel.

Now that the Sin of Adam in eating the forbidden Fruit, is imputed to his
Posterity, is evident from the following Places of Scripture, Romans 5.^2, ^4,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, Wherefore as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and
Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Me^ for that all have sinned.
Nevertheless Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those that had not
sinned, after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, who is the Figure of him
that was to come. By the Offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation. Ephesians. 2.3. And were by Nature Children of Wrath even as others.
Whence is it that Jews and Gentiles should be by Nature Children of Wrath, or
have Wrath for their Inheritance, if there was no natural and common Guilt? Is
there not a plain Difference between Nature and Practice? Romans 3.19. Whatsoever
the Law says, it says to those that are under the Law, that every Mouth may be
stopped, and the whole World become guilty before God.

Now if Jews and Gentiles are by Nature Children of Wrath, and if all the World
be under the Law, and guilty before God, while in a State of Nature, then
Infants are guilty of original Sin, before they be capable to commit actual;
for they have the human Nature, and are a Part of the World: and indeed this
appears the more evident, from their Liableness to Death, which the Apostle
represents to be the Wages of Sin, and brought into the World thereby, Romans
6.23. Romans 5.12.

The Ground of the Imputation of Adam's Guilt to us, is not so much in the
Nature which we derive from him, (he could not communicate a better than he
had, and the second Adam has derived the humane Nature from our first Parents)
as in the Covenant made with him, and his Posterity after him, of which we have
an Account in the following Places of Scripture, Genesis 2.16, 17. In this
Covenant, the great God contracts with his Creature as with a Servant, by Way
of sovereign Empire; prescribing to him what Terms he pleased. In the
threatening of Death in Case of Disobedience, is doubtless implied a Promise of
Life in Case of Obedience; and hence it is expressly called a Covenant, Hos.
6.7. But they like Adam, have transgressed the Covenant.

That Adam's whole Posterity was involved in his Guilt, in eating of the
forbidden Fruit, and in the Miseries consequent thereupon, is written as with a
Sunbeam in that famous Scripture, Romans 5.12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. there Death
is said to pass upon all, and that because all had sinned.

Now it cannot be in Reason supposed, that they could sin actually and
personally before they had a Being, therefore it must be by Imputation.

Does not the universal Experience of all Adam's Posterity, loudly proclaim the
aforesaid Truth? If his Transgression was not imputed to them, whence should
spring their early Propensity or Inclination to Vice, before they have Time to
contract it by Practice and Example? Can a Stream flow without a Fountain, a
Branch grow without a Tree? Does not Mankind by some Kind of actual Imitation,
approve the original Trespass, and so transfer its Guilt upon themselves?
Whence should come that Train of Miseries, that Complication of Calamities,
that make all the Creation groan, and infest the whole humane Race, if the Sin
of Adam be not imputed?

How is it that tender Infants, before they become capable of actual Offenses,
should be exposed to Death it self, in its most hideous Form, and to all those
Diseases which are the Ushers of it? Will not the Judge of all the Earth do
right? Will the just God inflict capital Punishment where there is no
Transgression, either imputed or inherent? Does the Almighty afflict willingly,
or grieve the Children of Men? No surely! Shall the Wages of Sin be paid
without any Relation to the Work? Yea the Apostle asserts, 1 Cor. 15.22. That
in Adam all die. Now seeing that Death is the proper Wages of Sin, by divine
Ordination, it must be supposed that all sinned: but Persons not existing,
could not sin any other Way than by the Imputation of the first Transgression.

It is evident from the Parrallel drawn by the Apostle Paul, between the first
and second Adam, that the first was a public Person as well as the second; see
Romans 5. 1 Cor. 15. They are spoken of, as if there were but these two Persons
in the World, because they were Heads of different Covenants, viz. of Works,
and Grace; and Representatives of different Posterities, viz. natural and
spiritual. Yea Adam is expressly said to be the Figure of him that was to come.

The History of the first Man gives farther Confirmation to the aforesaid
Truth, where we read that all the Good and Evil that befell him, were ascribed
to him, as a public Person; who was to be the Example and Pledge of his
Posterity. Before the Fall the original Righteousness he possessed, and Empire
over the Creatures, as well as his Marriage and Blessing, respected all; and
after the Fall the Miseries which befell him, respected not only himself, but
all his Posterity.

Most certainly we sinned after the same Manner in Adam, as we are justified in
Christ; namely by Imputation: and if the first be denied, why not the latter?
and then the Foundation of the Gospel is overset, and nothing left in the Room
of it, but a System of moral Virtue. And it may be observed in Confirmation of
what has been now offered, that the Denial of original Sin imputed, naturally
leads to, and often issues in, the Denial of the Savior's imputed
Righteousness to Justification.

I cannot see any Unreasonableness in the Assertion, of the first Man's
representing his whole Race, seeing that the Benefits of his Obedience, if he
had stood, would have redounded to his Posterity, as really as if they had
personally kept the Covenant. Now by a Parity of Reason, it is but just that
they should be exposed to the Disadvantages of his Fall.

The Situation of Mankind in having one common Representative, was better than
if every Man had stood for himself, Head for Head: which appears thus; Adam had
not only as great a Capacity to stand, considered in a private Character, as
any other could be supposed to have, being made upright, as Solomon observes:
He had a perfect Knowledge of the divine Mind, so far as concerned his Duty and
Happiness; a universal Rectitude which spread through his whole Soul, and
governed all his Powers and Passions.

But besides this, he had the Consideration of thereby securing the Happiness
of his whole Offspring, to incite him to stand, and the Ruin of his whole Race
to deter him from the contrary: And are not these important Motives to generous
Minds? Now if every Man had stood for himself, without any public
Representative, they could not have had those Incentives to Perseverance in
Goodness, and consequently there would not have been such a great Probability
of their Standing. Besides Adam being newly formed, had a fresh Sense of
creating Goodness, which must needs offer additional Influence to his Love and
Obedience. By these Considerations it appears that Man's Condition in having a
federal Head, was better than if it had been otherwise.

God Almighty undoubtedly foresaw, that all Adam's Posterity, would have
yielded to the same satanical Temptation with him, had they been thereto
exposed; and therefore seeing that that was certainly future, it might possibly
in some Sense, be esteemed as committed.

Again, it is certain that the whole World of Mankind then existing, did sin,
and that thereby the Friendship of God with the whole World perished, and
consequently with their Posterity, seeing that Children are but Parts or Pieces
of their Parents.

It must be confessed that God is the Sovereign of the Universe, the great
Potter, and we but Clay in his Hands; that he has an absolute Right to do with
his own as he pleases.

It is indeed a mavelous Instance of divine Goodness and Condescension, that
the great Lord of the Universe, should stoop so low, as to enter into any
Covenant with his Creatures at all, and much more so when in the Manner before
related!

To have Representatives, is not unusual in civil Affairs. Do not Ambassadors
represent the Prince and Nation that sends them to a foreign State, and are not
their Speeches and Actions interpretatively the Speeches and Actions of all
their Constituents?

Do not Parents personate and oblige their Children unborn, by their civil
Transactions respecting them; and when they covenant for their Benefit, who
does or who justly can blame the Practice?

And seeing that to have a federal Head, or common Representative, by Way of
Covenant, was as has been observed, the best Situation that Man could be in,
respecting the primitive Covenant Transaction, if they had had their own
Choice, whom could they have chosen, that was so fit to occupy that Place, that
important Province, as him who was the Parent and Original of the whole humane
Race, and otherwise so qualified, as has been before hinted.

The Pelagians, Socinians, Jesuits, Arminians, Remomstrants, Moravians, and all
other Enthusiasts, so far as I know, do oppose the aforesaid momentuous Truth,
which has so direct and noble a Tendency to humble the Pride of Man, to make
him sensible of his Misery, and so to prepare him for the dear Redeemer. Some
of the Objections that are bro't by the aforesaid Adversaries, are such as
these following,

1. They say, we did not exist or consent, when our first Parents sinned.

Ans. Though we did not exist or consent actually, yet we did exist, consent, and
have sinned virtually, interpretatively, or in our Cause, in one Adam. Romans
5.12.

2. They say that it is unreasonable to imagine, that that Sin which was
pardoned in Adam, and so does not exist, should be imputed to his Offspring.

Ans. Though that first Sin does not exist physically, yet it does ethically, or
morally; the Pardon of Sin does not take away its Being, but only its binding
Power, from those to whom it is applied.

3. They object, that it is inconsistent with the Omniscience and Truth of God,
to reckon him to have sinned, who has not sinned, and with his Justice to
punish him.

Ans. It Is true, it is inconsistent with God's Omniscience, to reckon him to
have sinned actually, who has not sinned actually; but it is not inconsistent
with his Omniscience, to reckon him to have sinned virtually, or in the Cause,
who has not sinned actually, or in his own Person: Neither is it unjust to
punish him, who has only sinned virtually, as we see in the Case of Infants,
who feel the Force of Death. We may reasonably argue from Fact to Right in
Respect of God. We are sure that whatever he does he has a Right to do; for as
his Wisdom is infallible, so his Holiness is inviolable: He is a Rock, his Ways
are perfect, a God of Truth, and without Iniquity, just and right is he.

4. Christ denies that the Parents of the blind Man sinned.

Ans. That intends no more than this, viz. That neither his ow^ nor his Parents
Sin was the Cause procuring of that particular precise Calamity, with which he
was afflicted: But that the principal Design hereof, was that the Works of God
might be made manifest in him!

5. Some object this Saying of our Lord, concerning little Children, that of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Mar. 10.44. and it is elsewhere said, that they
are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and we are told that we must be like them.

Ans. They are not so by Nature, but by Grace in Christ who has received them.
Ephesians. 2.1, 3. It is only in Respect of Humility and Freedom from Malice, that
we are enjoined to imitate them; in Malice we should be Children, but in
Understanding Men.

6. Some object that Place in Ezekiel. 18.4, 20. where it is said, that the Son
shall not bear the Iniquities of the Father.

Ans. The Place speaks concerning the personal Sins of private Parents, that
these are not imputed to their Offspring if they make not themselves Partakers
of them, and not concerning the Transgression of our common Pa^nt, in whom all
sinned. Romans 5.12.

The Semi-pelagians, and Jesuits, do after a Sort acknowledge that there is such
a Thing as original Sin, but believe that it is wholly taken away by Baptism.
But the Ridiculousness of this will appear if we consider that Baptism is but
an outward Ordinance, which can be of no saving Service to us, unless the Thing
signified by this external Symbol, be conferred. Thus speaks the Apostle, Gal.
6.15. that neither Circumcision avails any Thing, nor Uncircumcision, but the
new Creature: And elsewhere he tells us, that Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God. Was not
Simon Magus baptized? and yet he remained in the Gall of Bitterness
notwithstanding. It is a vain Thing for any to depend on lying Words, saying,
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these; for without
Conversion there is no Salvation.

The Arminians and Moravians, imagine that the Guilt of original Sin is taken
away from all an^ ^gular, by the Death of Christ; and some to prove this, ^duce
that Place of Scripture, John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away
the Sin of the World.

Ans. It is true, Jesus Christ does take away the Sin of the World; by his
Blood he removes its Guilt, and by his Spirit its Dominion: but is it not
contrary to both Scripture and Reason to imagine, that Guilt should be taken
away before Faith? Romans 3 28. Joh. 3.36. Or that the Guilt of Sin should be
removed, and its Power remain? Surely those that are justified are also called.
Romans 8. Or that the Guilt of original Sin should be removed, and that of actual
remain? Are we not informed that the Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin?
Can any Sin be pardoned, till a Person be ingrafted into Christ, and hear his
Voice? And does not our Savior assure us, that to all such he gives eternal
Life, and that they shall never perish? Joh. 10. Then i^ the Guilt of original
Sin was removed from all, by Consequence all would be saved; but this is
contrary to many express Declarations of Scripture, which inform us, that
strait is the Gate, and narrow the Way that leads unto Life, and but few find
it.

To say that the Guilt of original Sin is removed, and that the Guilt of actual
remains; is in Effect to say, that a Person is at once half justified and half
condemned; in Christ, and without him; alive, and dead; Children of God, and of
the Devil, at the same Time: and pray where shall such mongrel Monsters go at
Death? Mr. Pool justly observes in his Synopsis, that the Word Sin in the Text
aforesaid, is put collectively or synechdochically, for all Sin; and that the
Word World, as before observed, intends both Jews and Gentiles. What can be the
Meaning of the aforesaid Notion, but to set fallen Man on his Legs again in his
own Conceit? and secretly to establish the darling Idol of Free Will, to the
Dishonor of Free Grace, and the Disparagement of the divine Sovereignty!

It is but to little Avail to acknowledge hereditary Corruption, and in the
mean Time to deny the Imputation of its Guilt; for then it is but an Infelicity
or Unhappiness, and no Fault. The Tendency of this seems to be only to amuse
Mankind, and not to humble them at all. Persons are apt to be more easily dec^d
with such sort of People; while they express in strong ^erms the Corruption of
Nature, one would think they were sound, as to the Doctrine of original Sin. I
was thus imposed upon my self by one of Note among the Moravians for a Time,
until I searched him more closely, and then I found him tardy; he possitively
denied the Imputation of the Guilt of the first Sin, and endeavored to baffle
all the Arguments I offered in Confirmation of it.

But pray how can those Moravians, and their Arminian Brethren, account for a
Conveyance of original Corruption, without any Imputation of Guilt? I know of
nothing in Scripture or Reason to support it; if they do let them produce it.

Now is it any Wonder that the Moravian Sect are easy, when such stupifying
damnable Doctrines are advanced among them? When we seriously consider the
gross Ignorance of a principal Person of their Party, as to many of the
fundamental and most important Doctrines of Christianity, viz. Conviction,
Conversion, Faith, Justification, etc. which we may reasonably suppose, has
Influence upon many of that Sect; together with their slighty Experiences, (for
the most Part) without a prepa^atory Work of the Law; and having generally, (so
far as I can learn) no Complaints about their Corruptions, and the Weakness of
their Faith: as also their schismatical, sly, inconsistent, and juggling
Practices, in proselyting Persons to their Party, and drawing them away from
the precious Truths and true Fold of Christ, to their detestable Jargon; It
will take a large Stretch of Charity, to conclude that there is the least
Measure of saving Grace in them, notwithstanding of all their great Appearances.

Once more, If it should be objected, (more generally) by any that favor the
Moravian Sect, as it has been done by Dr. Whitby, Whiston, and other Patrons of
Arminianism, that the peculiar Doctrines of Calvinism, were unknown in the
Church till the Time of Austin, which was in the latter End of the fourth and
Beginning of the fifth Century. I shall beg Leave to offer learned and pious
Dr. John Edwards's Answer to this Cavil, (in his Book upon the Defects of human
Learning,) which is as follows, viz.

St. Augustine, in his Book of the Good of Perseverance, Chap. 15. quotes some
Authors who were before him, for the Doctrine of Predestination; it is not to
be doubted, says he, but that they knew Predestination; and as for other
Points, which go along with Predestination, as original Sin, etc. this Father
produces the Testimony of Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Cyprian, Hilary, and others,
to confirm what he had said on those Heads.

Before the Time of infamous Pelagius, the Founder of those unhappy Principles,
from which as Fountains the tainted Streams of Arminianism have and do flow; we
have no Account of any Controversy among the Ancients, respecting those Points,
which were the Subjects of Debate between Austin and Pelagius. Probably this
was the Occasion, why some of the Fathers do not write so distinctly,
correctly, and consistently, about these Points, as after the Time of Austin.

But having the express Testimony of Scripture and Reason upon our Side, we
think it the best and surest Antiquity!

But I hasten to consider another Thing proposed, which was, II. To show what
is supposed by, and implied in, our remembering and holding fast the Truths of
Christ. And,

1. I think it naturally and necessarily supposes, our Liableness to forget and
loose Truths which we have once received, (and perhaps with sensible
Complacence) in Judgment, Affection and Practice. Through our Ignorance,
Corruption, Credulity, and the plausible Arts of Seducers, who lie in wait to
deceive, there be so many doleful Instances of this, in Writings both sacred
and profane, that it is needless to say any Thing farther in Confirmation of
it: Only this may be added, that the Command in our Text is grounded thereupon.
There would be no Need of enjoining us to remember and hold fast, if we were
not inclined naturally to let the precious Truths of Christ slip out of our
treacherous Memories, and to turn from them to Error and Vanity, in our corrupt
Affections!

Since we have fallen from the God of Truth by the Breach of the first
Covenant, Error is co-natural to us, our Hearts are a fit Soil to hatch and
cherish that Cockatrice, and because many Errors do either more openly or
covertly befriend Sin and Security, therefore we are naturally inclined to
receive them, and revolt from the Doctrines of Truth to them!

Besides the Devil who is the Father of Lies and Errors, has in our fallen
State an unhappy Access to our Souls, and if permitted, can easily represent
Things in such a false Light, as to raise a Prejudice in our Minds against
Truth; and so endanger our Apostasy therefrom. Hence Satan is justly called a
Spirit of Error, a seducing Spirit. But,

2. The Command in our Text supposes the dangerous Consequences of forgetting
the Truth, and letting it go, otherwise the contrary Duty would not be therein,
with so much Earnestness pressed.

When the Eye of the Body is blinded, one walks in continual Danger, and knows
not whither he goes; Persons may be then led any where to their Hurt; they may
be conducted contrary to their Expectation, to the Camp of their Enemies,
instead of Friends, as the Syrians to Damascus.

And how much more dreadful is it, when the Eye of the Soul is blinded, I mean
that leading Power, the Understanding! When false Teachers, by their bewitching
Charms, and juggling Arts, do blind Men's Minds, they may then triumph over
them, as the Philistines over poor Samson, when they had plucked out his Eyes.

As Truth has great Power to excite to Holiness, so Error to Sin, either open
or secret, of Heart or Practice. How strangely does it elate the Mind with
Pride, in Respect of Men's own Seize, and possess it with Prejudice
against the Sons of Truth! Error disconforms the Mind to the God of Truth, it
often turns Zeal into a wrong Channel, and separates chief Friends. Hereby
Churches and Families are torn in Pieces, with Breaches wide as the Sea. Some
otherwise valuable Persons being poisoned with Error, have made it their
Business to pull down with great Industry, that Good which they once labored
to build up. Error in the Mind is the Fountain from which springs Error in
Practice; and indeed the former is generally more difficultly cured than the
latter, because Persons have more Excuses for the one than the other. Mistakes
in Opinion are not so easy to be discerned, as in Practice. But,

3. The Command in our Text implies, that there are proper Means to be used to
prevent the aforesaid Evil, and Loss consequent upon it: Otherwise to what
valuable Purpose would the Command serve? Now the Means are such as these
following.

1. Humility. The God of Truth dwells with the Humble; whereas spiritual Pride
(more especially) is often the Forerunner of a Fall in Doctrine or Practice;
and indeed this Pride is sometimes much disguised with a Kind of Zeal, and
Appearance of Humility, which is perhaps undiscerned by the Person that has it.

But in my Opinion a Disposition to separate from a true Church, because many
of her Members are unconverted, and some are under Deadness, is a Sign of a
proud Spirit: Were not the Pharisees of old proud Separatists?

Our Lord allows the Wheat and Tares to grow together till Harvest. But some
rash Zealots are for parting them, or plucking them up directly, although they
thereby risque the Safety of the Wheat.

It is also an Instance of Pride to despise and sligh^ Ministers or People that
are unconverted, or supposed to be so. Is not the Language of such a Practice,
as the Prophet Isaiah describes it, Stand off, for I am holier than thou? Any
that are unconverted, are Objects of Pity, and not of Contempt; neither does
our Opinion of Men's inward States, which is an uncertain Thing, dissolve our
Obligation to express that Honor, which is due to their different Stations.

But on the contray those that walk humbly, walk safely, and none but they.

2. Earnest Labor, (by reading the Scriptures, Meditation on them, comparing
Scripture with Scripture, hearing the Word preached) in order to understand the
Truths of Christ more thoroughly, and in their Connection.

It is also exceeding necessary to be well acquainted with the Catechisms of
the reformed Churches, which give a summary View of the Principles of Religion;
and with those approved Books which do explain them. In particular, I would
earnestly recommend to your Perusal, Mr. Vincent's Explication of the
Assembly's Catechism, which is a most valuable precious Performance.

And here I must take Leave to observe, that the Practice of staying at Home,
rather than going to hear such Ministers, (sound in Principle and regular in
Practice) as are judged by some to be unconverted, is unscriptural and of
dangerous Tendency (in my Opinion,) for it hangs the whole Weight of the
public Worship of God, upon the uncertain Judgment of Men. Though unconverted
Ministers are not likely to do so much Good as others, yet seeing that many of
them, doubtless, do preach the same Word of God, which others do; why may not
the sovereign God, who permits them by his Providence to come into the
Ministry, bless his Word delivered by them, for the Good of Mankind?

Besides, the aforesaid Practice of staying at Home, etc. opens a Door to
Delusion by false Teachers, as well as to Confusions and Schisms in the Church
of God. People are naturally inclined to Extremes about Ministers, either to
make no Difference at all, or to make too much. Certainly the Corinthian
Disease is dangerous, when one says, he is of Paul, and another of Apollos.
Surely Ministers should neither be slighted, nor idolized!

I must declare to the World, that I dread the Tho'ts of Schisms and
Separations in the Church of God; because of the dismal Handle that is hereby
given to Seducers, to promote their erroneous Tenets; and also because of the
Dishonor that is hereby cast on God's Name, Ways and People: hereby wicked Men
are strengthened in their Prejudices against Religion; hereby Professors are
diverted from promoting God's Work, to personal trifling Controversies of no
Moment. Therefore when the Case so happens, that People are dissatisfied with
their Minister, and cannot get Edification by his Ministrations, after long and
impartial Labors to this End; it seems most advisable for them humbly and
peaceably (in a regular Manner) to seek to get an Assistant with him, if the
Place be able to support two; but if not, to ask Leave of their Pastor and
other Church Officers, to go where they are more edifyed: in the mean Time
laying aside all rash Censures. And should not Ministers also for Peace sake,
deny themselves, and consent to the reasonable Proposals of their People,
waving all exasperating Reflections upon their dissatisfyed People, and more
especially in their public Performances? O may the God of Peace, incline us to
study and pursue, the Things that are for Peace!

3d. Means, is humble importunate Supplication to almighty God, the God of
Truth, for Instruction in the Knowledge of Truth, and Establishment therein; and
that under a deep Sense of our Ignorance and Foolishness: If any Man lack
Wisdom let him ask it of God; who gives liberally and upbraids not. It is with
believing Expectations, that we should ask these Blessings from God: thereby
God is glorified, and engaged by Promise to help his People.

But the Time is elapsed, and I must add no more at present.

SERMON, III.
REV. III. 3. Remember therefore how thou have heard, and received, and hold
fast. --


SEEING the Truths of Christ are a most valuable and sacred Depositum,
transmitted to us through much Expense of Labor and of Blood; it would be base,
ignoble, and ungrateful in us to lose them, through sordid Negligence and
Indifferency; or to suffer them, through Cowardice, to be betrayed and undermined
by Impostors; without signifying our Sorrow for the Injury, and attempting to
make some Defense.

Forasmuch as the Church of Christ is begirt with numerous Enemies, of various
Forms; Enemies open and secret, who labor almost incessantly, either by Force
or Fraud, to corrupt her in her Principles, it is of the last Necessity, to be
constantly upon our Guard, and especially in a Time of public and epidemical
Infection; lest we be betrayed into the Labyrinths of Error and Mistake, by the
plausible Pretenses of Seducers.

To this End, it is exceeding needful to use those Means, which tend to our
common Security. In the last Sermon, under the second general Head proposed, I
made mention of three Means, which I judge proper to help us to retain the
Truths of Christ; to which I would now add, these following, namely, in the

4. Place, It is also exceeding necessary, to implore the God of all Grace,
that he would please of his infinite Mercy to give us to feel the special and
powerful Influence of Truth upon our Minds and Hearts, that so we may be
molded into the Image thereof, and thus transformed from Glory to Glory.

Although the bare doctrinal Knowledge of a true System of religious Principles,
be a valuable Privilege, in as much as it is a needful Preparative to that
which is of a saving Kind; yet it is dangerous and destructive, to rest
satisfied with it, without the Experience of its Power and Influence. Romans
2.17, -- 20.

A hearty and enduring Endeavor, with all Humility, to conform in Practice to
the Truths we know, is a necessary Mean to obtain Establishment in the Truth,
and farther Instruction. If any (says our Lord) does the Will of God, he shall
know of the Truth whither it be of God. Perseverance in the Acknowledgement of
the Truth, is God's free Gift, without which we cannot stand. Now if we are not
faithful in acting according to what we know, God's Spirit will be grieved, and
we are in Danger of being given up to a Spirit of Error and Delusion. Romans
1.21. 2 These. 1.10, 11, 12.

5. If we would hold fast the Truths of Christ, we must avoid unnecessary
Conversation with Persons grossly and fundamentally erroneous. Those that bring
not the Doctrine of Christ with them, we must not receive them into our Houses,
or bid them God Speed; for if we do we are Partakers of their evil Deeds. See 2
Epist. of Joh. 8.9, 10. Look to your selves therefore, that we lose not those
Things we have wrought. We are commanded to mark those that cause Divisions,
and to avoid them. Now Persons may be said to cause Divisions, when by false
Doctrine (and especially about important Points) they alienate the Affections
of good Men from each other, and break them into different Parties. Romans 16.17.
Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark those which cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have received, and avoid them; for they that
are such, serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own Belly, and by good Words and
fair Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the simple.

Our Lord directs us to pray that we may not be led into Temptation. Now if we
are fond of erroneous Strangers, and needlessly rush into their Conversation, do
we not contradict our Prayers by our Practice? There seems to be a bewitching
Power that sometimes attends (through the just Judgment of God) the Conversation
and Labors of false Teachers. How affectionately does the Apostle Paul speak
about this, to the erring Galatians, Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians! who has
bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth?

It is storied of the Labadists, an enthusiastical Sect that sometime since
appeared in Holland, but is now happily evanished, that such bewitching Charms
attended their Conversation, that few who conversed much with them escaped the
Infection; and therefore that the Reverend Messieurs Bracel and Coleman,
eminent Ministers who wrote against them, would not run the Risque of much
Conversation with them, especially in their Society.

6. In order to hold fast Christ's precious Truths, it is needful to wave a
positive Conclusion respecting the good State of Strangers, wh^ we have not
^ufficient Evidences for it, in respect of their Principles, Experiences, and
Practice. Rash judging either Way is certainly u^easonable and prejudicial;
when Persons do speedily, without sufficient Grounds, conclude Strangers, who
come among them, to be pious, and perhaps eminently so, because of their fair
Appearances in Behavior, without examining their Principles. By this rash
Method of proceeding, their Affections are apt to be unreasonably engaged in
their Favor; and these being inflamed, do give a secret wrong Bias to their
Judgment: and thus they lay themselves open to all Manner of Delusion: thus
they lay a dangerous Train to blow up their own sound Principles, before they
are aware. Their foolish Love makes them turn Advocates for Seducers: And in
the mean Time while they extol their apparent Piety to others, and put
favorable Glosses on their damnable Errors (by which they strengthen their
Party, and become Partakers with them in their Wickedness) they themselves by
Degrees drink them in. Some unhappy Effects of this Practice have appeared
already, and more probably will by and by follow (...) ^his fair Warning is not
taken.

7. It is necessary in order to hold fast the pre^ ^hs of Christ, to
distinguish between Men's States and ^s. Supposing Men's States toward God
were good, ^ould that make false Principles true? o^ should it induce us to
receive them? If good Men are doing that which is bad, should not they be
opposed, with a Zeal equal to the Importance of their Errors? Did not the
Apostle Paul withstand the Apostle Peter to the Face, because he was to be
blamed?

8. In order to hold fast the precious Truths of Christ, a godly Jealousy of
Strangers, who conceal their Principles, is but reasonable and necessary.
Hiding of religious Principles looks like a Consciousness of Guilt; it is so
far from scriptural Simplicity, that it looks like Trick and evil Design. On
the contrary, it is said of our Lord, that he spoke nothing in secret, i. e. he
used the most public Methods of communicating his Doctrines to the World. The
Coming of the Son of Man is represented by the Light's shining from the East to
the West; which is open and conspicuous. As Truth needs no Corners or lurking
Places, so it seeks them not; but is willing to be published on House-Tops,
that it may be known of all. But false Teachers are will not to use private
sculking Methods; they creep into Houses, and lead Captive silly Women; and
often by them their Husbands, and others are corrupted.

9. In order to preserve our selves and our Posterity from the Infection of
Error, I think it is needful to use (in our proper Spheres) all suitable Means
to obtain a godly, learned, and regular Ministry. In ordinary Cases, when any
of these Qualifications is wanting, the Churches Safety is endangered in a
greater or lesser Degree. Surely the Ministry should be committed to able, as
well as faithful Men; Men that are apt to teach, and able to divide the Word
aright, as well as convince Gainsayers, or stop their Mouths. When ignorant
Novices are admitted into the ministerial Order, they are apt to be puffed up,
to the Churches great Prejudice, as well as their own; and to spread Error,
when they know it not. To say, that these Qualifications may be ordinarily
attained without humane Learning, is notoriously enthusiastical and foolish.
For it is an Expectation of an End in ordinary Cases, without the Use of proper
Means tending thereto. Instead of trusting in God, this is a tempting of him.
He who acknowleges, that the Scriptures, which are the Rule of our Faith and
Practice, were originally written in other Tongues than are now Vulgar, must
have a weak Mind, an enthusiastical Heart, or a hard Forehead, if he denies the
Necessity of humane Learning. In short, either humane Learning is necessary, or
there must be Inspiration, to supply the want thereof. Do not therefore wonder
at the enthusiastical Talk of the Moravians, viz. That Persons must speak no
more in religious Matters, then God has wro't in their Hearts. This I take to
be Inspiration, in other Words; especially when it is considered in Connection
with their Advice against preparatory Studies. Methinks, it is in a manner
Self-evident, that all those who deny the Necessity of humane Learning, in
ordinary Cases, to prepare Persons for the Ministry, are Enthusiasts.

Whatsoever good Appearance, thrusting out ignorant Persons (how pious soever)
into the Ministry may have, yet it is a dangerous Practice, tending directly to
divide and corrupt the Church of God, and bring the Ministry thereof into
Contempt. Besides, when Persons intrude into the ministerial Work, without any
previous Trial and License, from those who by Virtue of their Office are
constituted Judges in such Cases, it is doubtless our Duty to discountenance
them, let them pretend what they will. None should take this Honor to himself;
but wait for God's Call and Appointment. If any irregularly assume the Posts of
Officers, in the State or Army, it turns all into Confusion; and thus it is in
the Church of God. Therefore all proper Care should be taken to prevent
Intrusions, which are pregnant with mischievous Consequences.

10. Another Mean to hold fast Christ's precious Truths, is to confer with our
spiritual Guides, about Points that are controverted; to hear patiently, and
consider calmly their Reasonings; and to take Care, that we do not entertain
unreasonable Prejudice against them. When the Spouse inquired where her Beloved
fed, and made his Flooks to rest at Noon, she was bid to go forth by the
Footsteps of the Flock, and feed her Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.

Now, we should frequently and feelingly reflect upon the Truths which we have
heard, and remember with what Affection we have heard them.

And it is our Duty to hold them fast, in the following Respects; namely,

1. In the Judgment and Assent of our Minds. We should esteem and approve of
them, and judge them worthy of all Acceptance; more valuable than the finest
Gold, and sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb; right, equal, holy, just, and
good; worthy of our Labor and Purchase; but not to be parted with at any Rate.
Hence is that Injunction, Prove. 23.23. Buy the Truth and sell it not.

2. We should hold fast the Truths of Christ in our Affections. As Truth should
be high in our Esteem, so our Affections should be fixed upon it. Hence the
Apostle prayed Night and Day for the Thessalonians, that they might be filled
with the Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding. The
Apostle John speaks of his loving an honorable Lady in the Truth, i. e.
because of the Truth; as he himself explains the Phrase in the following Verse,
namely the 2d Verse of his second Epistle.

3. We should hold fast the Truth in our Profession. If we will not confess
Christ before Men, he will not confess us before his heavenly Father. And
indeed if we will not profess the dear and precious Truths of the Redeemer, we
are not worthy to be called his Disciples. If we are ashamed of him and of his
Truths in the midst of a froward and adulterous Generation, of us will the Son
of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels.

4. We should hold fast the Truths of Christ in our Practice. Hence we are
commanded to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all Things. We should
walk as Lights in the World, that those who seek to accuse our good
Conversation in Christ may be ashamed. We should hold forth the Word of Truth
in our Practice, that thereby the Ignorance of foolish Men may be put to
Silence. O it is to be lamented, if possible with Tears of Blood! when the
Enemies of Truth get seeming Occasion of Reproach and Triumph, by Blunders in
the Lives of the Professors of it. O let us be careful that the Interests of
Truth suffer not, through our Misconduct! let us endeavor to remove Occasion
from those who seek Occasion!

By our Practice, we should show to the World our Abhorrence of Deceivers, and
fundamentally erroneous Persons, as we would do of Persons that have Plague
Sores upon them; unless it be to convince, reclaim, oppose and confute them. It
is an inconsistent, unjustifiable Weakness, to pretend to hate Error, and yet
court the Company of Schismatics, Enthusiasts, Seducers, and Heretics. No
Love to Persons should equal our Love to the dear and precious Truths of
Christ. Those Persons who dare presumptuously and needlessly rush into the
Company of Errorists, seem to have either little Love to Truth, or little Sense
of their own Weakness. I am apt to think that such Persons would take more Care
of their Bodies in a Time of Infection, than they do of their poor Souls. But I
proceed to consider the last Thing proposed, III. To show why we should hold
fast the Truths of Christ. And,

1. We ought to do so, because it is the Command of God, in the Text, which I
am now considering: And elsewhere, the Lord enjoins us by his sovereign
Authority, to hold fast the Form of sound Words, 2 Timothy 1.3. To contend
earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, Jud. 3. To
catch the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines, because the Vines have
tender Grapes, Cant. 2.15. To beware of false Prophets, and Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, Mat. 7.15. To beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, Math. 16.6.

2. Truth is the Foundation of all practical Goodness. It is the Mean (1) of
our Illumination: the Psalmist observed that God's Word was a Light to his Feet
and a Lamp to his Path. (2) of our Sanctification: Sanctify them through thy
Truth, thy Word is Truth. 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purifyed your Souls in
obeying the Truth, through the Spirit. (3) of our Consolation. Psalm. 119.50. This
is my Comfort in my Affliction, for thy Word has quickened me. The sweet Truths
of God's Word are the Fountain of our Comfort, and Foundation of our Hopes.
Persons do grow in Grace just as in the Knowledge of Truth; and hence we are bid
to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Whatever
Persons may imagine or pretend, in Respect of their Frames and Comforts, if
they grow more dark and ignorant as to the Knowledge of Truth, we have no Reason
to think, if they have any Grace, that they grow in it; but rather that they go
backward: and if their Errors be many and fundamental, its probable they are
under a Delusion of the Devil.

3. We should remember and hold fast the Truths of Christ, because of their
Author and Tendency. God the Father is the God of Truth: The Son of God is the
Way, the Truth and the Life: The holy Spirit is a Spirit of Truth: The Law of
God is Truth and Righteousness: The Gospel is a Gospel of Truth, it is styled
emphatically the Truth. The Children of God are Children of Truth; Children
that will not Lie: The Promises and Threatenings of the Word are true as Truth it
self; they are harmonious, firm and steadfast. Now the Tendency of Truth is to
conform us to the God of Truth, who is its Parent and great Original. And is
not this our highest Honor, and our greatest Interest?

4. Such as do not love the Truth, are in Danger of Delusion and Damnation. 2
These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all Power and Signs and lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the Love of the
Truth that they might be saved; and for this Cause God shall send them strong
Delusion, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be damned, who
believed not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness. Observe, my dear
Brethren, that when Satan the Father of Error and Lies, draws People from the
Truth, there is a Power attends his Workings, and that his Instruments carry on
the Affairs of his Kingdom with great Deceit.

5. We should hold fast the Truth, because it is a Fruit of the Spirit, Ephesians.
5.5. It is mentioned to the Reproach of some, that they made Ship-wreck of
Faith, and turned from the Truth to Fables, 1 Timothy 1.19. 1 Timothy 1.4, 6.

When Persons fall from the Truths of Christ, they show a childish Weakness and
Fickleness. Children are fond of new Things, of Things that look bright, though
they be of little Value; their Tinsels and Toys, are in their Opinion great
Riches. Thus young Novices in Christianity, who are just beginning the
Christian Course, ignorant in a great Measure as to Christian Principles, but
full of Affection and Self-conceit, when a Moravian comes among them, sets down
a while, and looks very harmless and innocent and sober, gives some Smiles, and
talks about the Blood of Christ, in their mystical Way; and of Love, Love! -- O
brave! How are they taken with it directly, as a Child with a Rattle! His very
simple loving Looks, make them think he is almost an Angel. O what a fine Man
is this! O the reformed Churches are not fit to be mentioned in the same Day
with this fine new Sect! They grow weary of the old stale Truths of the
Reformation, they want to change their Principles almost as fast as their
Almanacks; with the Athenians they must have something new.

Such who change their Principles for the worse, bring great Dishonor upon
God's Name, as well as Grief to his People, and Injury to his Kingdom. O it
causes the holy Name of God to be blasphemed, when Persons who are either
really or apparently religious, turn with every Blast, and soon suffer
themselves to be smiled out of their Religion! And those who are enabled of
pure Grace to adhere to the dear and precious Truths of Christ in a Time of
Temptation and Apostasy, O it covers their Faces with Shame, and fills their
Hearts with Grief, to behold those with whom they were will not to take sweet
Counsel, herding with Heretics and Enthusiasticks, and turning Fugitives from
the Truths and Camp of Christ! Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
Streets of Askelon, lest the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, the
Daughters of the Uncircumcised triumph, and say, thus would we have it? Saints
are hereby stumbled, and Sinners prejudiced, and the Ways of Zion mourn.

6. By holding fast the Truths of Christ, we shall prove that we are living
Members of the Church militant; which is called the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
1 Timothy 3.15. And elsewhere it is said concerning some, who lived in the
apostolic Times, that they went out from them, because they were not of them.
And hence it is said that Heresies must needs come, that those that are
approved may be made manifest. For indeed it shows a weak Head, or a false
Heart, or violent Temptations of the Devil, to be suddenly tossed about with
every Wind of Doctrine, by the Slight and Craftiness of those that lie in wait
to deceive. By speaking the Truth from our Hearts, we show our selves to be
Members of the Church triumphant. Psalm. 15.2. By cleaving to the Truths of God,
we show our selves to be guided by the Spirit of God; for he is promised to
lead the People of God into all Truth: And hence he is called the Spirit of
Truth, Joh. 14.17.

7. Methinks the Sufferings and Blood af the innumerable Army of Martyrs, in
Testimony to Truth, should inspire us with a holy Magnanimity and unshaken
Stedfastness of Resolution, to suffer the Loss of every Thing that is naturally
dear to us, rather than forsake the dear and precious Truths of the blessed
Jesus. Let us behold the Cloud of Witnesses, that have gone before us; those
heroic brave and gallant Souls, in Defense of precious, precious, precious
Truth, have swam through a Sea of Sorrows, of Sufferings, and of Blood, to their
Father's Kingdom. Away, away then with that accursed Indifferency, and
Lukewarmness, about Christ's precious Truths, which some do falsely call
Charity and Catholicism! Let us rise up and plead the Cause of Truth, and
defend it to our dying Breath. The more others do trample upon Truth, the more
let us esteem and value it; the more dear let it be to our very Souls. O let us
stoop down, and with the humblest Reverence, and most passionate affectionate
Affection, let us take this inestimably valuable Jewel out of the Dirt, and put
it in our inmost Bosoms!

REFLECTIONS.
From what has been said we should be induced to examine our selves, as to our
Respect to Truth, and the Influence it has upon us. It signifies little, my
Brethren, to profess Regard and Love to Holiness, while Truth, precious Truth
is slighted. It is a childish Weakness, to call it no worse; it is a beginning
at the wrong End of Religion; it is just as if a Man should show great Regard
to the Superstructure of a House, and neglect the Foundation. What signify fair
Shows of Love and Holiness, without Truth for their Foundation? They are only
Blinds to deceive the Simple, Rattles to please Children.

It is a plain Sign of an enthusiastical and deluding Spirit, to slight that
precious System of Truths, which we have laid before us, in a most plain
consistent and excellent Manner, in our Westminster-Confession of Faith, and
Catechisms; among which we see a strong Connection, and charming Harmony; and
in which, if we are not blinded with Ignorance or Prejudice, we may perceive a
transcendent Beauty, a direct Tendency to exalt all the Honors of the divine
Attributes, to humble the Pride of Man, and conform him to the Deity, in
universal Goodness and Holiness: There Vice, of every Kind and Form, is justly
represented in its own native Dress of Horror and Meanness: There sincere
Holiness is fixed upon it is proper and impregnable Basis; and opened in it is
vast Extent and attractive Magnificence, and encouraged with all proper
pertinent and powerful Incentives: There the Creatures Crown is cast at the
dear Redeemer's Feet, and all the Glory of it is Happiness, ascribed to the
Mediation of our great Immanuel: There the astonishing Beauties of the pure,
free, sovereign, rich, inexhaustible and glorious Grace of God, are unvailed,
in a consistency with the Creatures Duty; so as hereby to establish the
Interests of Virtue and Piety, upon the most prevailing and ingenuous Motives!
Now I say to slight such a blessed Self-consistent System of Principles, and in
the Room thereof, under a Pretense of Holiness in a superior Degree, to
introduce a Bundle of inconsistent Jargon, Contradictions, Nonsense, and
damnable Errors; Errors that affect the very Foundations of Religion, both in
Doctrine and Practice; -- is it not vile Enthusiasm, and detestable Delusion?

Certainly the Case of such who have known the Truths of Christ, and turn from
them to Vanity, Lies, and Nonsense, is more inexcusable, than of those who have
been breed up in Ignorance. O what a foolish Choice do they make, in bartering
away the finest Gold for the basest Dross? What unaccountable Ingratitude do
such express to the great and good God, for all the religious Privileges and
Means of Improvement they have had? They turn their Backs upon the unsullied
Snow, and sacred Sweets of Lebanon, and pursue after poisonous Streams and
muddy Waters.

To pretend to introduce into one Communion, all that have an Appearance of
Experience, Affection, and Piety, without searching into their main Principles,
without a Concurrence in them (as I have Reason to think the Moravians do) is
to build Babel over again, and promote the Confusion of Languages.

It cannot be reasonably expected, that such a confused Medley, such a
heterogeneous Mixture will stand long, for it has no solid Foundation to stand
upon. To pretend to promote Love and Union, by concealing our Principles and
lessening our Regard to Truth, is to do Evil that Good may come. Indeed it is
the direct Road to Division and Contention; and this the Event proves. To love
Persons in a general View as Christians, without due Respect had to their main
peculiar Principles, is an unreasonable childish Passion, more sit for Children
and Simpletons, than for Men of Understanding. For, as Solomon observes, the
simple Man believes every Word, Prove. 14.15. A pretended Union without a System
of Principles acknowledged, is rather a Confederacy, than a scriptural Union.
It is infinitely more candid, to let others freely know our Scheme of
Principles, that so they may judge of them; and in Things of smaller Moment, to
use Moderation and Forbearance; and to make no more Terms of Communion, than
Christ himself has fixed. Any other Union is neither rational, nor desirable,
and deserves not the Name of Union.

But the Moravian Concealment of their pernicious Principles, seems to be a
Fulfillment of St. Peter's Prophesy, concerning false Teachers, that they should
privily (or covertly) bring in damnable Heresies. Plutarch's Story of a Boy
that carried something under his Cloak, may be applied to them. The Boy was
asked by a Stranger, What it was he carried so closely under his Cloak? To whom
the Boy answered, you may well know, that it is something I don't intend you
shall know, by so carrying it. All Religion that is worth a reasonable Man's
Choice is gone, when Truth is gone. All that is left is childish Fancy,
enthusiastical Folly, and painted Pageantry.

For any Men to pretend to know certainly who are gracious, as one of the
Moravians did in my hearing, is to assume an incommunicable Prerogative of God:
and to run upon this false Plan in Church Matters, is to turn all into the
wildest Disorder and Confusion.

Methinks the Consideration of the Truths of God, may justly alarm the Secure
and Impenitent, and excite them to fly from Sin to God, and humble themselves
before him, and seek his Favor; seeing that all the Threats of God are pointed
at them like so many burning Thunderbolts, which the Truth of God will oblige
him to discharge at them, except Repentance intercept the falling Blow. All the
Examples of the divine Severity against the Impenitent, which are recorded in
both the Testaments, are shocking Momentos to a secure World!

But let all devout Souls, who have felt the proper Influence of Truth upon
their own Hearts and Practices, and still retain a Regard thereto, Rejoice. Go
on, my dear Brethren, in the blessed V^ of Truth, and ye shall receive a Crown
at last! The Consideration of God's blessed Truths may support you, in all
Manner of Distresses, whither it be by Persecution from open or covert Enemies,
or misguided Friends. The God of Truth, whose Cause you plead, will sooner or
later comfort your Hearts, and crown you with Protection, and Songs of
Deliverance.

It is true, Enthusiasts and Errorists themselves will talk of Persecution; but
it is not the Punishment, but the Cause that makes a Martyr. Those that suffer
for Error, suffer for Sin, and not for God. Blessed be Jehovah, that so many in
the Land, have a Regard to the dear and precious Truths of Christ! O may God
increase their Number, their Zeal, and their Love!

The Consideration of the Truths of Christ, yields sweet Support under
Temptation, Desertion, and every other Calamity. God is faithful who has
promised to relieve his People, and able also, as well as willing and gracious.
He has given many Examples of his Kindness this Way in Times past; yea, he has
confirmed the Truth of his Promises, by an Oath, that we might have strong
Consolation. The Truths of God are firmer than the Foundations of Mountains.
They are tried in the Fire seven Times. The Heavens and Earth may and shall
pass away, but the Truths of God shall stand steadfast to all Generations. We
may lean the Weight of our everlasting Salvation upon the Truth of the least
Promise of God. Indeed Brethren, it will never fail us.

He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear the Command of our Lord, viz. to
beware of false Prophets, who shall come unto you in Sheep's clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves. This Scripture (in my Opinion) is justly
applicable to the Moravian Brethren. They have a Sheep's Coat on, they seem to
be mighty mild, harmless and innocent in their Looks, but inwardly they hold
dividing dangerous^ Principles: You may know them by their Fruits, like Wolves
they cruelly scatter the poor Sheep of Christ, by their damnable Doctrines.
Beware, my dear Brethren, of the Leaven, the false infectious Doctrine of those
Moravians, who like the Pharisees of old, are proud Seperatists, make broad
Philacteries, and compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes. Some of which,
become sevenfold worse, if possible, than themselves.

Beware of the Depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24. Observe (says Mr. Henry) that these
Seducers, called their Doctrines Depths, Mysteries, persuading the People that
they had a deeper Insight into the Mysteries of Religion than others, but
Christ calls them Depths of Satan, a Mystery of Iniquity. To talk of increasing
Love to Christ, in uncouth Terms, respecting his Wounds, while Truth is
abandoned as a Fugitive, is ridiculous Giberish; for Christ is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life. To talk of a Simplicity, which consists in real Folly, in
believing Contradictions, in tamely yielding up Christ's precious Truths,
because of the superficial Appearances of seducing Strangers, is very
unaccountable: What is this Simplicity, but the detestable Doctrine of the
Roman Catholics, new vaump'd by the Moravians? who are as subtle a Sect of
People, and that under a Pretense of Simplicity, as has appeared on the Stage
of the World for many Years.

I cannot but think, and that from some particular Knowledge of the Conduct of
some of them, that they fall far short of many other Enthusiasts, in Candor and
Honesty. Watch therefore, my dear Brethren, stand fast in the Faith, quite you
like Men, be strong. O be not as Children tossed to and fro with every Wind of
Doctrine, by the Craftiness of those who lie in wait to deceive. Away with
those sorry Shows of Zeal, Piety and Meekness, which have not Truth and
Humility for their Foundation. May the God of Truth graciously baffle all the
crafty Schemes, and colored Intrigues, of all schismatical, enthusiastical and
deceitful Babel-builders! who under the Mask of Humility and Love, declare
their Pride and Enmity in separating from the Protestant reformed Churches, and
in despising and tearing of them in Pieces, as far and as fast as they can. Who
that has got the least Spark of Love to the God of Truth, can be altogether
tame and silent upon so mournful an Occasion, and patiently suffer the carved
Work of the Temple to be pulled down by proud Seperatists? Was not Meroz
cursed, because he did not come up to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty?
What, my Brethren, shall we through base Indifferency, let those dear and amiable
Truths, which have cost our Ancestors Blood, slip away by Moravian Hands? God
forbid! Let us awake, my Brethren, out of stupid Indolence, and sordid
Lukewarmness, and with humble, impregnable Fortitude, contend for the Faith
once delivered to the Saints!

But pray, why do any esteem this new upstart Moravian Sect? Is it,

1. For their Show of Meekness and Harmlessness? But may not Persons, under
this Guise, have cruel Designs and Dispositions? Don't our Lord tell us, that
Wolves shall come in Sheeps Clothing? And what is this Sheeps Clothing, but a
Covert of Meekness and Harmlessness? But what Evidence have we that the
Moravians are really meek, when we see them not exposed to Temptations? They
generally shun Debate, which would try their Meekness: but if any of them
happen to be tried a little, they show their Weakness as much as other People.
Besides, it ought to be considered, that there is a threefold Meekness, viz. 1.
Natural; springing from a natural Temper of a milder Mould. 2. Moral;
proceeding principally from selfish Considerations; these two are of little
Moment. And 3. There is a sinful Meekness; that is, when Persons are Lukewarm
about God's Truths, as the Moravians are. But while the Moravians cover
themselves with a Sheep-Skin, like cruel Wolves they scatter the poor Sheep of
Christ. Like Foxes they craftily and sneakingly creep into the Vineyard, and
spoil the tender Grapes with their detestable Delusions. How very different are
the Fruits of their coming into this Country, from the Reverend Mr.
WHITEFIELD'S? His plain and pungent Preaching of the Truths of the Reformation,
united generally the Hearts of good Men through the Land. But the Moravians
wherever they have any Influence, divide the People of God, and set them a
jangling.

How very different are these Men from the Spirit of Luther, whom they pretend
a Respect to. He was so zealous for Truth, that he expressed himself thus,
respecting it, viz. That Madness was better than Mildness in the Cause of God:
Rather, said he, let Heaven and Earth rush together, than one Crumb of Truth
should perish. Potius Caelum et Terra ruerent, quam una mica veritatis periret.
Or,

2. Is it because they smile generally, and appear loving? But, Brethren, is
not this Judas-like, to betray us with a Kiss? For while they show such Love,
they draw pious People into Error, and so set them a quarelling with one
another. If this be their Love, may the good Lord deliver us from it! Shall we
suffer them to smile us out of our Principles? Then I Am sure we are poorly
grounded in them. Away, away with such sordid Compliance!

3. Is it because they profess they are Catholic, or against all Sectarianism?
This is indeed a most subtle Devise: for while they talk so, they are busily
making a new Sect; and those that join with it, how ever ignorant, erroneous,
or dark in Experience they be, they are presently esteemed and caressed, while
all others who will not join with them, how knowing and experienced soever they
be in Christianity, are despised. Besides, as I am informed, they will join
with no Church but their own. Or,

4. Is it because of their Show of Humility, while in the mean Time they
undervalue all but themselves? Some of the Heads of that Party, have spoken
most reproachfully in New-Brunswick of all the Protestant reformed Churches.
One of them in my hearing compared them to Babel. Is this Humility, to imagine
themselves more advanced in Grace, than all the World besides? I Am sure, it is
of a different Stamp from that of the Apostle Paul, who looked upon himself to
be less than the least of all Saints. And those whom they proselyte, in the
midst of their ignorant Zeal, betray horrible Arrogance, in proudly disdaining
all the Churches of Christ when compared with their Sect.

5. Is it because they have the Appearance of great Mortification? I answer,
their Mortification is not agreeable to the Scriptures; because they are
ignorant of a preparatory Work of the Law. If we may believe Count Zinzendorf,
when they are converted in their Way, they are free from Complaints of Sin and
Struggles with it, and so get into a Sleep. What is this but the Fruit of
Blindness and Delusion? To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according thereto, it is because there is no Light in them. Or,

6. Is it because they say they have Communion with God, and in Consequence
hereof Joy and Sweetness? I answer; When we consider the Antinomian Principles
they hold, concerning Faith and Justification, as well as the proud Effects of
their pretended good Frames, and that under a Mask of Humility; as also their
denial of a Law-Work; We have great Reason to suspect their Communion to be but
a Delusion of the grand Enemy, and their Joys to be the Joys of Time-Believers,
and Stony-Ground Hearers. See Heb. 6.4. True Communion with God does certainly
humble the Soul. Isai. 6.4. Job 42.5, 6. It Is no new Thing for Antinomians and
Enthusiasts to talk of Joys and Comforts. The old Antinomians were will not to
commend their Principles to others by this, that they were an experienced Cure
to all Soul-Trouble. And it is true enough, they are a Cure, but a false one.

The Moravians, with their Brethren the Antinomians, and other Enthusiasts,
seem to forget both the Doctrine and Practice of Repentance. I don't remember
to find any thing of it in the Count's Sermons, neither can I perceive any
thing of it in their Practice. But why should they repent, while they pretend
to Perfection? No, no; they have got above that in their own Conceit. Now
seeing their Comforts don't come after the Exercise of Repentance for Sin, have
we not Reason to suspect them?

7. Is it because they travel and take great Pains? I answer, Did not the
Pharisees of old compass Sea and Land, to make one Proselyte; and when he was
made, was he not twofold more a Child of Hell than themselves? And do not
Jesuits, and many other Enthusiasts, travel still? But what Good do the
Moravians do by their traveling, unless it be good, to sow Tares, to corrupt
and divide religious People? Or what Good can reasonably be expected from
Persons, who reject the ^aw of God, and think it not their Duty to make
Application to unconverted Persons in a State of Security, either to alarm or
direct them. See the Count's Sermons, Pages 69, 70.

But they are denied to the World. Ans. So was Diogenes in his Time. So were
the false Teachers in Paul's Time, who tried to Reproach him. 2 Cor. 11.12. And
do not the begging Friars among the Papists, as also their Monks and Nuns, give
up all their worldly Goods? Peter seems to boast of their leaving all for
Christ, Mat. 19.27. But did not Judas do this, as well as the rest? Did not
Ananias and Saphira put the chief of their Estate into a common Treasury, for
the Maintenance of others? Acts 5. And this they did freely, for there was no
Necessity laid on them to sell their Possession. Acts 5.4.

Plato and Josephus relate of the Essenes, a superstitious Sect among the Jews,
not much better than the Pagans, that they contemned the World; they were not
only exceeding abstemious as to sensual Pleasures, but so far despised Riches,
that none was admitted into their Society till he had parted with all his
Possessions.

Yea, many of the Pagans contemned Wealth, particularly among the
Lacedaemonians. It is reported of Phocion, who was forty five Times chosen
Governor of Athens, and had thereby the greatest Opportunity to enrich
himself, that he lived in a State of voluntary Poverty: when Alexander offered
him a Donation of nineteen Thousand Pounds value, and besides his Choice of one
of the four Cities of Asia, for his constant Support, he refused both.
Epaminondas, the brave Theban General, in the midst of Opportunities to enrich
himself, lived so meanly, that he had but one Coat; so that when that was sent
to the Fullers, he was obliged to keep at Home till it was brought back. Many
more Instances of the like Nature, might be added; but these at present may
suffice.

But methinks, my dear Brethren; the Consideration of that glorious State,
which the Sons of Truth shall be introduced into, after a few Moments expire;
should invite them to be earnest in Defense thereof against all Seducers, and
patient in enduring their unjust Reproaches. After a few Moments more are
elapsed, the Children of Truth shall walk with God in White, in a Robe of
Honor, in a State of Blessedness. I say, they shall walk in the Galleries of
Paradise, and drink the Streams of Nectar and Ambrosia. There all Sighing and
Sorrow will for ever expire; and in Place thereof shall succeed the greatest,
sweetest, surest, most satisfactory, and sinless Joys. There Reproach, Error
and Contest will be for ever banished; and pure Truth, unfading. Honor, and
uninterrupted Rest, take Place thereof!

The Children of Truth (such who have experienced its Energy, and walked
according to its Direction) shall carry Crowns of Victory upon their Heads, and
Palms of Honor in their Hands!

There Impurity and Sin will not be so much as mentioned!

There the eternal God will be beheld, in all the dazzling Glory of his
Attributes, in all the shining Charms of his Word and Works!

There the dear Redeemer will be admired, and adored, by all the Hosts of
Heaven; while they attentively view his mediatorial orient transcendent
Excellency!

There the Understanding will be pleased, with the noblest Entertainments, of
the sublimest Knowledge, attained with Ease, and to the utmost Perfection!

There the pure Springs of Truth will be fully opened and run in liquid and
incessant Rivulets, through all the Paradise of God: The Understanding shall no
more be clouded with Ignorance, or tainted with Mistake!

There the Will shall be satisfied, with enjoying the supreme Good!

There the noble Soul of Man in all-its Powers, will be freed from its present
Clogs and Encumbrances, which obscure its Views, obstruct its Peace, and retard
its Motions!

There it will expand all its Wings, and embrace a Good suited to its spiritual
Nature, noble Original, vast Desires, and incessant Duration!

There the eternal God will be worshipped in the perfection of Beauty, without
Sin and without Uneasiness: No discording Sound shall ever be heard from the
Harps of those heavenly Choristers!

There the inferior Passions of the Soul, shall ever keep their proper
Channel, and observe due Degrees of Motion!

There the original Beauty, and ancient Harmony, that adorned the Soul, before
its fatal Fall from God, shall be restored to the highest Perfection; and that
which is in Part shall be done away.

There no Fear of any impending Evil or Calamity, shall ever perplex, disturb
or distress the pious Bosom: No, they shall be fully assured of the perpetual
Continuance of the divine Favor; a pleasing Calm and undisturbed Serenity,
shall still possess the Soul, without Murmur or Uneasiness!

There no erroneous Sentiments, no ungenerous Jealousies, shall stain the
Beauty, interrupt the Pleasure, or mar the Harmony of Society; neither of these
shall have any Access to, or Residence in that Seat of Truth and Purity, of
Love and Peace!

There Temptations shall come to a perpetual End; that envious and malignant
Spirit shall no more sully our Innocence, or disturb our Peace, by his
Temptations which will then cease for evermore: What amazing Sweetness, must
issue from the View of the divine Attributes? When the Vail which now
intercepts our Sight is removed, and they appear in their native Charms, their
opened Oriency and Luster! If the smallest Glimpse of one of the divine
Perfections, sometimes transports the Soul into Ecstasy and Ravishment, what
will the immediate uninterrupted and united View of them all, effect! O the
inexpressible Blessedness of the Glorified!

What endearing Sentiments of Soul must inspire the Children of Truth, while
they behold the enthroned Jesus arrayed with the brightest Majesty, and most
awful Glory; while they see the Signatures of his dying Love, and recount the
Labors of his Life, and Sorrows of his Soul for them!

O when they revolve in their Minds the humble and astonishing Stoop of
condescending Majesty, in the whole of our Lord's Humiliation, with the
gracious Design thereof, how deeply will it affect their Hearts, that he who
was the Sovereign of the World, should come in the Form of a Servant, that we
might be made the Sons of God; that he who was Rich should become Poor, that we
through his Poverty might be made Rich; that the Chastisement of our Peace was
laid upon him, that through his Stripes we might be healed!

There the Contrivance of the gracious Covenant will be perfectly laid open,
wherein the harmonious Display of God's venerable Attributes has appeared to
the Astonishment of the angelick Throng, who stoop down to behold the
unsearchable Depths of divine Grace in the Redemption of Mankind by the Blood
and Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ! Herein Wisdom devised a Way to satisfy
divine Justice, and yet save the guilty Criminals from merited Destruction. So
that Justice can demand no more, and Mercy is clothed with a Coat of Arras,
vested with stately Charms, and attractive Magnificence.

There the Works of Nature and Depths of Providence will be fully unfolded, to
the equal Astonishment and Delight of all the Inhabitants of Heaven. The secret
Springs, the strong Connection, and sweet Relation of Providence, with their
Conduciveness to compass one uniform noble Design, namely, the manifestative
Glory of God, and in subordination thereto, the special and enduring Good of
his People, will be discovered!

Here sometimes the great God makes Darkness his Pavilion, and hides the Face
of his Throne; his Footsteps are in the great Deep, and we cannot sound the
Depths of his providential Actings by the Line of our shallow Reason but the
End will crown the Scene, beautify the whole Piece, and magnify the Glory of
it is Author.

There will be no Objects of Misery, on Account of Error in Principle, or
Impiety in Practice, to invite our sympathetick Tears and Sorrows; no Allay of
Grief or Pain to disturb our incessant Felicity!

There our Father's Face will never be hid from us any more, by a gloomy
Desertion; but we shall without Interruption and Period, enjoy the bright
Meridian of his Love, which is better than Life it self!

There no Diversity of Sentiment shall mar the Sweets of social Worship, but
unallay'd Harmony and inimitable Beauty, shall ever adorn the Courts above, and
bless those calm Regions of Light, of Life, of Day!

But indeed all Words and Images of Thought, even of the boldest and most
exalted Kind, saint before the Paradise of God, and cannot convey sufficient
Ideas of it.

O may the great and gracious God, the God of Truth, direct us into the Paths
of Truth and Holiness, and keep us by his Grace in them here, until our
destined Time is elapsed, and then translate us into his own Kingdom of Glory
and Blessedness, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

AMEN!
APPENDIX.
I Think it necessary to annex an Account, of some of the Errors which Count
Zinzendorf not long since expressed in New-Brunswick: some of which I heard him
assert my self, and the rest were heard by Mr. Henerick Visher, a Person of
good Intelligence and Probity. The Count not giving Liberty for two to be
present with him at one Time, when Questions were asked about religious
Matters, there was no Room left for a joint Testimony to all the following
Articles.

The mischievous Effects of the Moravian Conversation, in some Places in this
Part of America, in corrupting religious Persons with false Notions of divine
Things, and in making unhappy Divisions among them; together with their
extraordinary Method of concealing (generally) their pernicious Principles, is
I think a sufficient Apology for the present Essay to discover them to the
World, in the Manner I have now taken. Now the Particulars are these following:

1. That it is not needful to preach the Law, but hurtful, under the Gospel
Dispensation.

2. That the Law is not a Rule of Life to a Believer.

3. That the Unconverted are not under the Law, under the Gospel Dispensation.

4. That the moral Law belongs only to the Jews.

5. That Conviction is not necessary to Conversion, but very hurtful: and that
the Presbyterian Doctrine respecting preaching of the Law, is false.

6. That those who are justified, are justified from Eternity in the Sight of
God, and actually at the Time of the Crucifixion of our Lord.

7. That Faith is not a Mean or Instrument of Justification.

8. That Faith is only a Mean of the comfortable enjoyment of Justification.

9. That Faith is not necessary to Justification or Salvation.

10. That the Nature of Faith consists in a Persuasion or Belief, that our Sins
are pardoned, and that Christ died for us. It being objected, that if the
Nature of Faith consists in the aforesaid Persuasion, then when it was gone,
Faith would be lost: He replied, 'That the Nature of Faith might be lost, but
not the Thing it self or Being of it.

11. That there is no such Thing as spiritual Presumption.

12. That no graceless Creatures had historical Faith, 'but the Devils.

13. That the Guilt of Adam's Sin was removed from all, by the Death of Christ;
that his Cross was the Period or End of it.

14. That a Man is converted as soon as he has an abiding Sense of his Sin and
Danger: for he asserted that the Sense aforesaid, flows from a Principle of
divine Life.

15. That the Conversion of the reformed Church, by a preparatory Law-Work, was
only a Delusion: and that there was none of the Moravian Brethren converted
that Way, that he knew of.

16. That the exercising of Reason in the Apprehension of any Danger, was not
necessary to Conversion; because he said it was done in the twinkling of an
Eye, without preceding Preparatives.

17. That a converted Person cannot sin against Light, and that if they sinned,
they though it what they did was good.

18. That David was unconverted when he committed Adultery; and Peter when he
denied his Master; and that Paul speaks of himself as unconverted, in the whole
seventh Chapter to the Romans: That he himself was a Sinner, and would be so to
Eternity, and that we shall need Christ as much then as now. The Count being
asked, whether a converted Person could Sin? He said, that he could if the Lord
Jesus left him, but that he was sure he would not.

19. That old Testament Instances might be brought for Illustration, but not
for Proof.

20. That Christ laid down his Life for all the Offspring of Adam: nevertheless
that there was a certain Election, but no Reprobation.

The aforesaid Particulars are not Consequences drawn from the Count's Words,
but his own express Declarations, and that for the most Part in answer to
Questions asked of him; several of which he reasoned a little upon.

Here I shall beg Leave to subjoin the Extract of a Letter from Mr. John
Stockers, Merchant of Amsterdam, (a Person of good Character) dated August
1741, to Mr. George Brinkerhoff Merchant of New York, relating to the Moravians
or Herenhouters, translated from the Dutch.

As to the Herenhouters, much might be said, beyond the Bounds of a Letter. The
pastoral Letter is a lively Representation of them. Mr. Kulencamp the Author of
that Letter, has wrote two other small Tracts against them; and also the
Reverend Mr. Knypers; and three Professors; viz. the Reverend Messieurs Honert,
Voget, and Gelders, have wrote against them.

I account them a mischievous People, worse than ever the Labadists appeared to
be, who were orthodox in the Point of Justification: but these People have a
Mixture of many Errors, I shall mention some of the chief.

That Man is Part of the divine Being.

They hold the Perfection of the Saints in this Life.

They believe that Saints may fall away; and likewise that one may be saved in
the Profession of the Pagan and Jewish-Religion.

They believe that all Men, yea and even the very Devils ill be saved.

Who will not be astonished at such Propositions, from Men who give themselves
out for absolved Christians, who are bought by the Price of the Blood of the
Lamb! and who are simple and harmless, while they are full of Subtlety, and
cherish a Complication of Errors.

They are also insincere and inconsistent with themselves, proposing that at
one Time, which at another Time they will deny; going about with Untruths;
having no Regard for the Truths and the written Word, pretending that they have
Christ within them, to be a living Bible; and such like Things as these.

Their Meetings are no more suffered amongst us, being neither instructive nor
profitable. They will read a Chapter out of the Bible, particularly out of the
new Testament; upon which they speak in some confused Manner; sing some of
their Hymns; and it may be they will pray, which has but little in it. See here
in brief something of them.

They were treated in a mild and in a friendly Manner, but would not suffer
themselves to be examined. Its true they don't belong to the reformed Church,
but they pretend to go between the Lutheran and the reformed Church, and that
they are neither of the one nor of the other, but that they come nearest the
Lutheran. The Lord be praised, they have not triumphed, for by that Means all
Religion would have been in Confusion, and the fundamental Truths taken away;
by which the Church must either stand or fall. Therefore away with such! Or as
the Apostle expresses it, from such turn away. Thus far with Respect to the
Herenhouters.

Mr. Samuel Finley, a Preacher of the Gospel, informs me, in a Letter from
Philadelphia, bearing Date, February 15. 1742.

That he had some Discourse with Count Zinzendorf by an Interpreter, (he
refusing to discourse with him in Latin, because he was a Presbyterian) the Sum
of which was as follows:

1. The Count being asked, whether the Apostle spoke of himself as unconverted,
through the whole seventh Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans? He answered in
English; Yes; doubtless as unconverted.

2. Respecting Perfection. The Count would seem to grant that true Christians
had Sin; and yet when I labored to prove this, he would again set up against
me: this was just the Case.

3. I inquired whether David was graceless when he committed Adultery? He
answered, Yes. And all the Distinction he used respecting this, was that there
was Grace in Store for David, but that he had not then received it.

4. I inquired about Justification, whether it was eternal? He answered yes.

5. I asked of what Use Faith was in Justification? He answered, that it was a
Manifestation of it.

6. I inquired, Whether one that had Justification manifested clearly to his
Conscience, could ever doubt of it? He answered, that he might afterward doubt
of it.

Lastly, I inquired, whether the Saints would have need of Faith to all
Eternity? He answered, Yes; and insisted on it: But by this Time it was nine of
the Clock at Night, and our Conversation ended.

Here I shall add some Extracts, out of a Moravian Book, thus Entitled; Sixteen
Discourses on the Redemption of Man by the Death of Christ, preached at Berlin,
by the right Reverend and most Illustrious Count Zinzendorf, Bishop of the
ancient Moravian Church, translated from the high Dutch, with a Dedication to
the Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy, giving some Account of the Moravian
Brethren. London Printed for James Hutton, 1740. This Book is prefaced and
signed by Ludovicus de Zinzendorf.

For the Reader's Ease, I will set the Count's Words in one Column, and my own
Remarks on them, in another.

Here the Count asserts, that the Saints are poor and needy in Heaven.

Here Perfection is asserted. It Is likewise supposed in this Paragraph, that
God is not the Author of that Holiness which is in his People.

Here Perfection is denied. A new Purgatory discovered. And Sin asserted to be
something material.

Perfection asserted.

Perfection.

Persons not rejected for Sin, but Unbelief: Here its insinuated, that Unbelief
is no Sin; and yet the Cause of Rejection.

Gross Impiety the directest Road to obtain Grace and Mercy.

Sin no Hindrance, and moral Virtue of no Service, to obtain Grace.

Free Will asserted.

Universal Salvation asserted.

Spiritual Sloth necessary in order to obtain Grace.

Enthusiasm encouraged, in a pretended waiting upon the Voice of God, without
the Use of Means.

Those no Witnesses of Christ, who urge the Use of Means, in order to obtain
Grace.

A preparatory Work ambiguously and slily denied.

The active Obedience of Christ excluded from being a Cause of Salvation. The
Moravians speak much of the Blood and Wounds of Christ, but as to his active
Obedience they are silent.

Christ a Propitiation for Sins after Death. Here the Salvation of the Damned,
is insinuated.

The actual Justification of all, from the Time of Christ's Death.

A preparatory Work unnecessary.

A preparatory Work necessary.

A preparatory Work, ordinarily, unnecessary.

Universal Salvation, expressly asserted.

Immediate Inspiration insinuated.

Holiness no Duty.

The Law the Cause of Sin.

Such whose Contest with Sin Paul speaks in the seventh of the Romans, no true
Christians.

Perfection attained by all true Christians.

A Conquest over Sin easy; for such as get their Necks out of the Collar of the
Law.

Free Will asserted.

To be a Minister of Christ, an easy Task.

Preparatory Studies, unnecessary for Ministers.

The Priests Lips must keep Knowledge; yet, teaching was no Part of their Office!

Inspiration ambiguously asserte.

The Use of Means necessary.

An Election at the Time of Christ's Death. Eternal Election incomplete.
Something besides the good Pleasure of God, the Cause of Election. Eternal
Justification insinuated.

That historical Faith is saving.

The Perfection of the Saints; or Christ's Imperfection asserted.

No Means to be used with the Unconverted, either to instruct or awaken 'em.
Natural Men can have no true Knowledge of our Savior.

Natural Men must not be condemned.

Ministers must not preach Terror.

Pagans free from the Curse seemingly insinuated.

All of the Threatenings and Exhortations of the New Testament, not applicable
to the present Times.

The Threatenings applicable to formal Christians only.

Original Corruption taken away by Baptism.

The falling away of the Saints.

Persons may be really sanctified, and yet not love the Lord Jesus Christ,
supposed by this Paragraph.

Full Assurance universally necessary to Salvation.

Assurance easy to be attained.

Those that want Assurance, under the Curse.

The Nature of Assurance, that it is no more than a common Conviction.

All pious Persons completely happy in this Life!

Universal Redemption asserted.

No Means must be used with the Unconverted, to convince them of their Misery.

The Law no Mean of Conviction under the Gospel.

The Blood of Christ the Mean of Conviction.

Convinced Persons are spiritually alive: and at the same Time condemned and
dead.

Persons lost, condemned, and that have no Part in the Kingdom of God, are
found, and converted; O horrible Jargon!

A Person under Conviction, is a Child of God.

The Savior pays a Ransom in Time, f^ People under Conviction. This
invalidates the Sufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction on the Cross.

Conviction necessary in order to receive Grace, and Benefit by the Gospel.
Sound Doctrine.

Universal Redemption asserted; and, Universal Salvation insinuated.

The Guilt of original Sin removed from all, by the Redeemer's Sufferings.

The popish Doctrine of the Sacraments conferring Grace, from the Work done.

The Saints falling from Grace insinuated.

A new Explication of original Sin; as mysterious as Jacob Bemy's, Tincture and
Turba.

Daily sinning surprising to the Moravians!

The Cause thereof is the Law of God!

The Gospel takes away the Force of the Law.

The Gospel turns the Soul from Ordinances, to the Heart, the Unction etc. This
looks like the Light within as a Guide.

'As often as there is 'Opportunity.

Mysterious Jargon!

Perfection again asserted.

Whoremongers and Murderers must believe that their Ransom is paid, and their
Wounds healed.

Presumption encouraged, as the Way to Salvation!

Perfection asserted in the most peremptory Manner.

Perfection asserted.

Free Will asserted.

The Conflict mentioned in the seventh of the Romans, belongs to Philosophers
and Pharisees.

An Insinuation against the Use of Reason and Pains in opposing of Sin.

Here the Man after God's own Heart is condemned, as a Servant of Sin, because
of his Desertion and Temptation!

To strive against Sin exceeding dangerous.

Moravian Perfection easy to be attained.

The horrible Mystery of the Moravian Gospel, is to cast God's holy Law behind
their Backs!

Moravian Converts quite free from Satan's Temptations!

The Moravian Life, no State of spitual War; but a Life of Quietism or Rest.

Moravian Converts spiritual Sleepers.

Young Converts, in a State of complete Happiness, and Rest.

Moravian Converts at their new Birth, Men in Christ.

It Is a Sign of no Grace, to think that Persons at their Conversion, are but
Babes in Grace; and do sin sometimes.

Moravian Converts past all Danger.

Moravian Converts free from Sin at their Conversion.

If Sin be not worth a Thought, what becomes of Repentance?

Moravian Mortification of Sin exceeding easy!

A Moravian Convert is once exposed to the Temptations of Satan, but obtains an
easy Conquest.

Perfection asserted.

A Difference between a Child of God, and a Soldier of Christ.

Sin easily conquered.

Sin not worth the Cast of the Eye, how then shall we mourn over it?

Imperfection asserted.

A physical Energy ascribed to Baptism, which may be lost.

The active Obedience of Christ past over in the Moravian Instructions.

The Use of Means rejected, and a Door opened to Licentiousness.

Here one that is spiritually alive, is said to be sensible of his lost State,
if he does not acknowledge etc.

Here it is supposed that one may be spiritually alive, and hear Christ's
Voice, and yet not acknowledge Christ to be his Lord and Master.

Wholesome Doctrine against Presumption.

The Law a Mean of Conviction sometime.

A little of the Truth must out sometimes.

Angelical Perfection ordinarily attained at Conversion in a Moment.

A good Thought at Death sufficient to obtain Happiness.

The Instance of the Thief not at all extraordinary.

Here Is large Encouragement to Sin and Impenitency.

Ministers may not use the civil Law, to acquire their Right.

Moravian Ministers not subject to the Law.

A Difference between Ministers and others, in respect of civil Rights asserted.

Ministers may neither demand or possess, their civil Rights, supposed by this
Paragraph.

Two sorts of Persons among the Moravians, who have no systematical Connection
of the revealed Word.

Two sorts of Moravian Converts, not led by the written Word.

The pious Actions of religious Men do not come from God, as the efficient, but
permissive Cause.

In the Moravian Judgment, it is a Dream of Moralists, to look upon Holiness to
be a Duty.

Free Will asserted.

Perfection and Perseverance therein asserted.

The first Part of this Paragraph is dark Doctrine.

Perfection asserted.

Increase of the Knowledge of Sin in one's self asserted.

If Sin be quite forgot, what becomes of Repentance?

Perfection asserted.

Moravians loose the Experience of Evil, by the disuse of it, and so become
ininnocent.

No spiritual War in good Men.

Perfection asserted.

Moravian Converts not completely happy, but perfectly freed from fleshly Lusts.

Some not capable of Grace. God's Call according to foreseen good Dispositions
in the Creature. God's Call depends upon the Creatures Will.

The perfect Holiness, and perfect Happiness, of all the Saints in this Life
asserted. The Word Fellow-Citizens alludes to Ephesians. 2.19.

No Duty but to believe.

Sincerity, Charity, Humility etc. no Duties, under the Gospel Dispensation!

We need not be sollicitous about any Thing, besides Faith, viz. Charity,
Chastity, Repentance!

Here a dismal Door is opened, to all Manner of Licentiousness!

Faith asserted to be the only Mean to effect Faith. Nonsense, and Gibberish!

To say that any Thing is a Mean to produce it self; supposes that it exists
before it has a being: which is impossible in the Nature of Things.

Preface, Pages 2 and 3. third. That the only Way to Salvation for all Mankind,
is that for the Merits of the sacrificed Lamb, they obtain Grace and Remission
of all their Sins, and remain his poor needy dependant Creatures in Time and
Eternity.

Preface, Pa. 3 and 4. That it is no wonder, that all those who know what Sin
is, and have obtained Permission not to Sin any m^e, refrain from Sin, and lead
a godly Life, --

Page 11. We cannot deny, that we still have Sin, 1 John 18. and that we shall
carry it to the Grave. Our very Nature and the whole Mass of Man is infected
with the Poison of the sinful Matter; the best Remedy against which is it is
Fermentation in the Grave, that thus our Savior may produce something better.

Page 12. For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. to dissolve and tear the System of Sin to
pieces, that in the Faithful Lust cannot be conceived, nor Sin bringing forth
Death, Jam. 1.15. Math. 5.28. but that Sin must be always kept under Foot and
in subjection, and so lose its Dominion and Power more and more, that it dare
not stir, or always expect a new Death. The faithful Believer dare not so much
as give Ear to Sin, much less to enter into any struggle with it.

Page 16. Faith does never give us Leave to Sin.

Page 16. This is the very Reason why so many Souls are lost, not because they
have sinned, but because of their Unbelief: But it is also true, that sinning
is not the Cause of Rejection according to the New Testament.

Page 17. The Wicked and Sinners have the first, the most and the nearest
Right, and obtain his Grace soonest and easiest.

Page 19. None for his little Good is better, and none for his many Enormities
worse.

Page 23. The Apostles recommend his Salvation in all their Words and Writings,
that every one may have a Right to it, if he will.

Page 23. For Jesus is the universal 'Restorer of all Mankind.

Page 29. He will do all by his Spirit, send a Fire upon the Earth, pour out
his Love into all Hearts, nay endow the Dead with the Breath of Life. Here one
must do nothing but quietly attend the Voice of the Lord.

Page 29. Our Savior himself must make the Beginning of such a Salvation. For
none of his Witnesses require of Men, that they should begin to help
themselves, but our Savior says, I will draw all Men after me; they shall only
suffer themselves to be delivered and reconciled.

Page 29. Wherefore it is not Gospel-like to prescribe Rules, Methods and
Dispositions, or require an Equality of Souls. We must leave all that to the
free Grace of our Redeemer, how he may and will lay hold of Souls.

Page 31. The original Cause of all Grace is only to be sought for in the Merit
and Satisfaction of Christ; he in his bloody Cross and Passion must be all in
all to us, and the only Cause of our Salvation.

Page 31. Wherefore he that understands the Mystery of the Cross and Wounds of
Christ, can never want Comfort and Relief, even though he were the greatest
Sinner, for Christ is the Propitiation for all Sins past and future to all
Eternity.

Page 31. On the Cross he made a Confession for all the World, when he said,
Father, forgive them. And when he cried out, it is finished, He gave Absolution
to all wicked Rebels.

Page 31. Upon this Consideration we need not be anxious, lest Souls should not
be humbled and contrite enough for their Sins.

Page 31. In receiving Grace, all must feel a certain Degree of Humiliation, as
much as our Savior sees necessary for them, to their new Creation.

Page 32. The ordinary Method of our Savior is not to prescribe Souls a long
Preparation and Form of Repentance, but, it costs him oftentimes but one Word,
and Grace is present and takes away all Sins.

Page 33, 34. The Name Jesus is his own proper Name, which he bears as our
Flesh and Blood, for the Benefit of all Men, be they ever so dead, sick, or
ever so miserable and sinful; by this his Name all can and shall obtain Life
and Salvation.

Page 36. The Count speaking of Elders or Ministers says, They dare speak
nothing, but what Christ works in them.

Page 41. The Count speaking of a Member of Christ says, Faith is his Duty,
and Holiness his Nature; and whereas other Men dispute with Sin, wrestle and
fight against it, and yet perhaps are overcome, according to the pathetick
Description of St. Paul, Romans 7. The Members of Christ are assured, that since
Death, the Wages of Sin, is under their Feet, all is yours, whether Life or
Death, 1 Cor. 3.22. Since they slipped their Necks out of the Collar of the Law,
that kept them in Bondage before, (but the Law is the Power of Sin) Sin must
with a Word be trod down to the Ground, and dare not rise till we please our
selves. Christians are Priests of God, who daily walk in their holy Apparel,
and lift up holy Hands without Wrath and Doubting: they endeavor to be well
settled, and to grow manly, they keep themselves unpolluted from all Things,
and purify themselves in the Blood of Christ, because they bear the Lord's
Vessels.

Page 42. He that has well learned this double Service of the Lord, who can
pray and sanctify himself unto the Lord, will never think it difficult to be a
Witness of the Lord. He need not study to find out Words, since the Heart is
full of the Thing itself. From this Priesthood-Office of the Christian's, some
will prove, that they can also teach. But that is not the closest Proof. It Is
true, the Priests Lips kept the Truth formerly; yet teaching was not their
proper Business.

Page 43. But they must declare no more than they themselves have experienced,
-- and about the most plain and easy Way to attain to that Experience.

Page 49. --, Chosen by Grace, not only at the Time when Christ died, which was
the Seal and finishing Stamp of our Election; but they were elected from the
Foundation of the World; yet all for the Sake of Christ the only begotten Son
of God, and for the Sake of their intimate Relation to him.

Page 57. For to believe as certainly that Christ has been a Man and suffered
Death for us, as one can say of any other Matter with Truth and Sincerity, that
one believes it: This is the true Means to save us at once. We want no more;
for the Gospel, or the History of Jesus, his Coming into the World, is the
Power of God unto Salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16.

Page 59. Wherefore we ought to look upon him, as our faithful High Priest, and
believe that in the Time of his sojourning upon Earth, he was made like unto us
in all Things, in Poverty and in all other Circumstances, his Children are in
at present.

Page 69, 70. For to tell Men who know nothing of Grace, nor have experienced
any thing of its Power and Efficacy, what they should do, and how they ought to
behave; that is as much to the Purpose, as if you should send a lame Man upon
an Errand, or engage a blind Man to give his Judgment about Things which
require a sharp Sight. He that will condemn natural Men, who neither have nor
can have the Lord Jesus in their Hearts, nor by their Distractions in many
other Things can have any true Notion of our Savior, meddles in an Affair that
does not at all belong to him. The Business of a Witness of Jesus is by no
Means to denounce Judgment, he must first know what Men he has to deal withal.

Page 69. But we ought to make a Difference between Men, that never heard any
Thing of Jesus, nor entered his Communion, and those who join in a Congregation
assembled in the Name of Jesus. It will never do, nor is it consistent with the
Meaning and Design of the Apostles to apply all Expressions, Exhortations and
Threatenings of theirs, indifferently to our present Times; or treat all People
in or out of the Christian Dispensation alike. They did not denounce their Bann
to People that did not belong to them.

Page 70. Wherefore, although the Threatening of the Apostle might not improperly
be applied to us Christians, who use the outward Form, and will not be excluded
from God's Family and the Church of Christ; yet I wave that, and only declare
to all, that it is apparent, the old Corruption we have by Nature, and which
should have been, nay may have been actually taken away by Baptism, according
to our Doctrine is yet present and returned again, is still pressing, nay will
press you down to Hell, as long as you are sensibly convinced, that you do not
love the Lord Jesus.

Page 72. And every Soul must be able to say with the utmost Cheerfulness, He
is my Lord.

Page 73. To know Jesus to be my Lord is no Matter of great Difficulty: and
because it is so easy; it is but then a greater Sign of a Soul's Depravity, of
it is Curse and of its spiritual Death, that cannot say; He is my Lord.

Page 73. For to have Jesus for my Lord, is nothing else but to be convinced in
my Soul, that he has shown me greater Faithfulness than I have experienced of
any Body else, in the whole World.

Page 81. But as soon as one knows in one's Heart, one is the Lord's entirely,
then those outward Things do no more disturb the Mind, but one is a happy Man.

Page 88. O how were it ^o be wished, that the Satisfaction, the Grace and the
Blood of Jesus Christ shed for them all, were once so truly present with and
applied to them, --

Page 90. As long as People pursue their sinful Course with Pleasure, and do
not see their Danger, one must have Patience with them; for they are not to be
persuaded to think themselves unhappy, and your Admonitions would avail them as
little as a serious Discourse would with a drunken Man.

Page 90, 91. They are convinced they cannot escape -- and as God did this in
the old Testament by the Law, so it is done a thousand Times more by the
Gospel. For instead of the Law, which formerly knocked on the Hearts with
Force, till it sound Entrance: -- we have now the prevailing Efficacy of the
Blood of Christ, --

Page 91. This Almighty Power of the Blood and Cross of Jesus, has this first
and blessed Effect, by which one sees that the Heart is no longer quite dead:
This convinces People that they are condemned, miserable, and have no true Life.

Page 92, 93. When the Voice of the Son of God enters the Heart once and says;
Thou art undone, and the Man remains convinced of his miserable Condition, then
is he no longer lost but found. A Soul which with an upright sincerity of
Heart, acknowleges and can say with Truth; I have no Part in the Kingdom of
God; I am condemned; the same is already to be looked upon as a Brother.

Page 93. All that a Soul feels in that State of her own Condemnation, is but a
delightful Scene of eternal Wisdom and Grace; whosoever sees a Soul in that
Condition, cannot but rejoice and think: O that poor Child, which is oppressed
and bowed down with the Weight of his Sins and his own Condemnation, the Lamb
is now certainly paying his Ransom for.

Page 93. As long as a Soul is not convinced, that she is dead and in a State
of Damnation, the preaching of Grace will be to no Purpose; and the glad
Tidings of the Gospel will have no Effect upon her.

Page 95. The Count speaking of the Redeemer's Sufferings and Abasure, says, --
That all his (was) with no other View, and to no other End, but to redeem the
whole Race of Men from Sin, Satan, Death and Hell; and to take away the Curse
from the whole Earth; and to restore eternal Righteousness which had been lost
by Sin. --

Page 112. There is something in all baptized Christians, that they can seldom
hear any Thing of Christ crucified, but they must be moved in some Degree; but
if it goes as it comes, they cannot excuse themselves like the G^landers,
Laplanders, or Hottentots, and say; We have understood or felt nothing of it.

Page 117. The Grave is that old Corruption, opposite to the Blood of Christ,
that abominable Lake of original Sin, natural Men do swim in, and Believers
wade through, as a Sea of Sorrow.

Pages 118, 119. Its an amazing Thing to see People not only sinning every Day,
but that they are not tired with it, -- but there is a secret Cause of it, --
if no Law were given in Commandments, the wicked Heart would remain as it is,
and the Transgressions would be less frequent. But since the Mind of Man is of
that Disposition, that when any Thing is forbid, which it had no Knowledge of
before, it gets presently an Inclination toward it; thus we may easily
apprehend the Truth of what St. Paul says; the Strength of Sin is the Law, 1
Cor. 15. But here the Power of the Gospel steps in, takes away the Force of the
Law, sets the Soul at Liberty, turns her Face from all the Ordinances to the
Heart, to the Unction, to the Sense of Grace from Time to Time, as often as there
is an Opportunity, and to the divine Nature, received from above in the
Remission of Sin. Here the laborious toil of sinning loses it is Strength and
Nourishment, faints away and dies. But from whence does all this proceed? --
Thanks be to the Blood of the Lamb.

Page 120. Ye Whoremongers and Thieves; ye Revengeful and Murderers; ye Liars,
and whosoever ye are; ye Fearful and Unbelieving, that hear and read this; will
ye be saved? Believe then, that Jesus has atoned and paid a Ransom for you all,
and that you may experience it this very Moment, and know that you have been
healed by his Wounds, and his Stripes. -- Take the Absolution, look upon him,
believe and rejoice, arise, gird your selves and run.

Page 121. In short; all turns to this, that after we have received Grace, we
live now, as we should have done before the Fall, unblemished and holy, only
more blessed and more sure.

Page 126. The Count, speaking of the Children of God, says -- These can
dispose themselves in such Manner, that by all their outward Affairs and
Transactions in and for God, their Heart is always above; --

Page 131. Such a continual Conflict St. Paul relates of himself, when he was a
great Philosopher and Teacher among the Pharisees, -- He gives a large Account
of it: whenever he had an Inclination to do Good, he could not, and was soon
overpowred by a contrary Principle, which captivated him to do what he would
not.

Page 132, 3. 'The Count speaking of those, who will subdue Sin by their own
Reason and Understanding, Convictions and Persuasions; by their own struggling
and striving against it; says, They are subject to all the Danger that can
befall a weak Creature, which will resist a stronger Power. They do but expose
themselves -- They are in the same Condition with David, when he says, the
Enemy has persecuted my Soul, he has smitten my Life down to the Ground. He
has laid me in the Darkness, as the Men that have been long dead. -- All this
proceeds from their being Servants of Sin; they are looked upon as Adulterers;
they have no Power to leave Sin their old Husband, and dare not live with
another.

Page 133. But he who knows the Salvation, which Jesus has purchased us with
his bloody Death on the Cross, who has abolished Death, and bro't Life and
Immortality to Light, that can have no more Dominion over us, because we are no
more under the Law, but under Grace; he understands the Mystery, how to get rid
of Sin in a most easy Manner without any Difficulty, Complaint, and Torment; so
that it must give Way, must fly and die; Satan who has it in his Hands, and
uses to lead Men according to his Pleasure, at last dare attack us no more.

Page 134. Thus when such a poor Soul, which has tired it self, and yet
effected nothing at all, comes to him (meaning our Savior) according to his
kind Invitation, the first Thing he does with us is; he puts upon Patience,
presents himself to us, and says, this Child shall be disturbed no more.

Page 135. -- But to whom our 'Saviour has just given Life, those 'he puts to
sleep, as it were, --

Page 135, 6. -- In Beginners his Love is so burning, so free and lively, that
those good Souls do not think without Reason, that they can hardly advance to a
higher Degree, or be ever happier in this World. It is true, none in the most
perfect Father's Estate can enjoy more Rest and Tranquillity from all his
Enemies.

Page 135, 6. It Is therefore Folly, and a Sign of no Experience at all, when
they say, that Man is not very far advanced, and is but a Beginner. For this
Reason he does this or that Sin, has this or that Frailty in him. A Beginner is
in his best State; a Beginner in the Kingdom of Christ; who but just has
received Grace and Remission, whom our Savior has but just laid upon his
Shoulders to carry him home with Joy, he lives in such Security, which no Man
can imagine; he is past all Danger, and can say with David; thou have lifted up
mine Head from the Gates of Death.

Page 137. Sin is the most miserable and mean Thing under the Sun; not worth
our Tho'ts; and if any Thing comes to put us in Mind of any past Sin, we must
treat it as the most contemptible Thing, and kill it as a Fly.

Page 137. A Though It may come flying, and there once may appear again somewhat of
the Seeds of Satan, of his Craft or Violence; but it is crushed immediately
under Foot.

Page 137. The Count speaking of a Soldier of Jesus Christ, says that he does
not so much as look upon Sin, nor thinks it worthy of one Cast of his Eyes. The
Faith of a Child of God, especially of a Soldier of Jesus Christ, is so active,
when he perceives Sin afar off upon such Occasions, where it usually insinuates
itself, that anointing is immediately ready to warn us; and this Intimation of
the Spirit is so powerful, that ever Sin can put it self in any Posture, it is
routed already by the faithful Believer.

Page 138. For Sin remains still in our Members, till we are going to the Grave.

Page 144. If we have any of the Virtue and Energy of Baptism, still left
within us, and do not live according to the Mind of our Redeemer, that will
condemn us.

Page 145. The Moment a Soul begins to live, and the Spirit of God overshadows
her, she hears the Voice of the Son of God, which speaks of nothing but the
Blood of Propitiation.

Page 145. Here one needn't go about to ransack one's Passions and Corruptions,
nor anxiously endeavor to mend one's self. For Grace overflows all our Sins,
they are all covered with the Blood of the Lamb.

Page 145. Whoever lives and has heard the Voice of the Son of God, he soon is
sensible of his being lost, if he does not acknowledge Jesus to be his Lord and
Master.

Page 153. When Souls are dead, and never yet heard the Voice of the Son of
God, they may be told too soon that they are the Reward of our Savior.

Page 153. This is sometimes our Savior's Business, by the Law, whereby we are
brought into Straights. He shows us our Misery, strips us of all our
Self-conceited Virtues and Merits, and convinces us that we are Sinners.

Page 155. The Lord, who would show us the Method of saving Souls, replied
immediately: Verily I say unto thee, to Day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
Through this Word the Thief was as pure as an Angel, and made immediately a
Companion of our blessed Redeemer; this may give People an Occasion to think,
that nothing more than a good Thought at the Point of Death was required to
give an Entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. And it looks very plausible; for
this Instance is not at all extraordinary, as many well meaning Teachers, to
prevent Mischief, endeavor to prove; and that such an Instance may happen but
once in an Age, or that this may be an Instance which happened only at the
Passion of our Lord. Yet these sorts of Conversion are not at all uncommon, but
happen frequently, when all Circumstances agree.

Page 163. In the 5th and 6th Chapter of St. Matthew, we find such Qualities
and Doctrines, as can in a strict Sense be applied to none but Disciples of
Jesus. e.g. whoever takes any Thing from you, do not demand it again, etc. if
this were to be applied to all in general, there would soon be an End of all
Constitutions and Possessions in the World. A Child of God that is not
particularly dedicated to the Care of Souls, must submit to all the civil Laws,
every one is obliged to observe.

Page 164. Disciples are a Sort of Outlaws. According to the inward
Disposition of Mind, all Christians agree. But in their outward Testimony they
are different. A Soldier of Christ must be ready every Hour to quit his Right,
his Convenience, and deny himself of, and give up every Thing, not only in the
Heart, but actually; whereas another may demand and possess his own in Peace.

Page 164, 5. But we will see what our Savior puts us upon in his Kingdom, and
what we may expect of him. Here our Savior has several Dispensations: one he
leads by his Understanding; another he visits with many spiritual
Dispensations; to the third he gives a systematical Connection of his revealed
Word. One does not choose his own Way, but our Savior accommodates himself to
our Capacity and Disposition. He that is endowed with a penetrating Judgment,
our Savior leads by that: He that wants this, and is of another Disposition,
the Savior leads through many Sensations and great Impressions of his Grace and
Love. -- The third sort, which keep close to the Word, are led by that;

Page 165. People think, he that serves our Savior shall be saved; but whoever
does not serve him, shall be damned. But the Lord of his free Grace, Mercy and
loving Condescension, gives us Leave and Permission to do Good, and to serve
him. To work God's Work is but mere Mercy to any Soul. Holiness is a Nature but
not a Duty, as Morality dreams of.

Page 166. He that has Grace, can be humble and poor in Spirit, and cannot be
otherwise.

Page 173. Righteousness is, when a Man drops and loses all his Right which he
has by Nature and Reason; and by Faith receives from our Savior that
Assurance, that all his future Expectations depend entirely upon his Grace and
Mercy.

Page 174. He that obtains the Righteousness in the Blood of Jesus Christ,
receives also Strength to subdue all the Evil, he knows in himself, and which
he must constantly study to find out more and more and to tread it under his
Feet, till at last, after he has long conversed with his Savior, he forgets
Sin quite, --

Page 175. Forasmuch as one lives to himself (autos ego) he is a Sinner; but he
that is justified never meddles with Sin, but acts always contrary to it, or if
it begins to stir, he stifles and conquers it presently. Now whoever begins to
lose the Experience of Evil by the disuse of it, he becomes an innocent Man in
Christ.

Page 176. But as soon as our Savior begins to instruct us, there is no Need
of many Arguments, but he does something in the Heart which is felt and kept
without Contradiction.

Page 178. Then we willingly leave off sinning any more, when our Savior has
once forgiven us all our former Sins.

'Page 180. The World dare not pretend to disturb our Happiness very long,
neither dare the Flesh show it self any more.

Page 188, 9. He awakens not only whole Nations and Countries, but also every
Soul in particular; provided he s^h that they are capable of Grace, and that
they will receive the gracious Call, he draws and calls them, let them be
in what Condition soever.

Page 192. I am now assured, that I have now the same unchangeable Right with
all my Fellow Citizens, to be as uninterruptedly holy as they, and as
incessantly happy as they.

Page 193. 'There is but one 'Duty, which is that of believing.

Page 194. The Business of every true Christian is to be sincere and faithful,
to exercise Charity, and to do every Thing from the Heart, -- But all these
Things being no Duties; for the Language in the new Testament says no more,
thou shall be humble, chaste, and industrious, liberal; but I am delivered by
the Blood of the Son of God, from Pride, Lust, Coveteousness and Laziness: I
dare be humble, chaste, content, and industrious: this Liberty being purchased
for me by the Blood of Jesus. We have no Need to be solicitous about any Thing
but only about Faith.

Page 194. Luther calls (Faith) a divine Work in the Soul, which changes and
makes us to be new born of God, Joh. 1.3. -- The Means by which this divine
Work is effected, is nothing else but Faith, the ordinary Way of the divine
Economy.

Two of the Count's Companions in Travel, namely Bishop Witsman's Wife, and the
Count's Daughter, declared at New-Brunswick, in the House of Mr. Derick
Schuyler, as follows; the first said, that she had neither sinned, nor doubted
in eighteen Years; and the latter said that she had not sinned in four Years.
These Things they said before diverse Witnesses of Distinction and Credit, who
can attest the same.

Mr. Spangenberg one of the first of the Moravian Missionaries into this Part
of the Country, who sowed the Seed of their dreadful Doctrine in New York, in a
Discourse with me opposed strenuously the Doctrine of original Sin imputed, and
labored to enervate all that I bro't in Confirmation of it.

He likewise called the Protestant Churches a Babel (their's excepted) or
compared them thereto. He likewise asserted (the first Time that he was here,)
the Salvation of the Damned, or that their Torments should be only for a Time;
and labored to maintain this horrible Position, against what I offered in
Opposition thereto. Indeed the last Time that I saw him, he seemed to be of a
different Opinion as to the last Particular: but I have seen and heard of so
much inconsistent Conduct in him and others of that Sect, that I can hardly
avoid a Jealousy of his Sincerity in that Matter: and seeing the Count
materially asserts it in his Sermons, as I have shown before, there is the more
Reason to believe him and others of that Party to be guilty.

Mr. Spangenberg declaimed in my hearing, more then once, against human
Learning, and looked upon it as a considerable Hindrance in the Acquisition of
divine Knowledge: He judged his Case to be unhappy because of his Learning,
which he said he found difficult to forget.

He run down human Reason, as if it were useless in Religion, and in the Room
thereof inculcated the Doctrine of Simplicity, which in their Sense of it, upon
mature and frequent Deliberation, I cannot but take to be real Folly and
implicit Faith, a believing of Nonsense, Contradictions, and mysterious
Gibberish. When they assert gross Contradictions, they tell us that we must
believe simply; that is, we must quit our Reason, and turn real Fools: we must
believe through thick and thin, Absurdities and Nonsense, and so turn Papists.
Let Simpletons, who seem willing to swallow any Thing, consider seriously and
seasonably the Injunction of God himself by Solomon, Prove. 1.22. How long ye
simple ones will ye love Simplicity? and the Scorners delight in their
Scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn you at my Reproof.

It is exceeding artful in the Moravians to inculcate this popish Doctrine, at
their first coming among a People especially; for when once they have drunk in
that, their Work is done; they may turn them into any Shape they will: Reason
and Argument are rendered useless; a Shadow of Plausibility is enough. Thus the
Moravians endeavor to use us, as the Philistines did Samson, first pull out
our Eyes, and lead us where they will in Triumph.

I might have taken Notice of more exceptionable Particulars in the Count's
Sermons; but what I have taken Notice of, are sufficient to convince all, that
are not blinded with Prejudice, or given up to satanical Delusion, that their
Principles are most detestable!

I expect that the Moravians will use Fox-like Shifts, to evade the Discovery
of their heretical and horrible Principles, by the preceding Letters and
Extracts, as they have done respecting what the Count said in New-Brunswick.
But Truth is great, and will prevail at last over Error and Artifice, and
baffle all the sly Tricks of Seducers, who lie in wait to deceive ignorant,
simple, and unstable Souls.

If any Person question my Candor, I advise them to get the Count's Book, and
read it themselves deliberately and impartially, and ask for Light from Heaven
to help them to distinguish between Truth and Error.

It is contrary to my intended Brevity, to enter upon a particular Confutation
of all the Errors contained in the Sermons; that would swell this Volumn to too
great a Bulk: and indeed many of the Errors are so absurd, that the bare
mentioning of them is Confutation enough, to Persons of Judgment that are freed
from a partial Bias.

What are the Count's Sermons but a bundle of Contradictions and Nonsense,
damnable Errors and Heresies, interspersed with Passages of Truth and Sense? In
them a preparatory Work by the Law of God is denied, Repentance excluded,
Perfection asserted eighteen Times, and denied twice; a new Purgatory invented,
as well as a new Election from the Time of Christ's Death! In them the great
Articles of Faith and Justification are dreadfully corrupted; historical Faith
is asserted to be saving; and all Persons are said to be justified from the
Time of Christ's Death; the active Obedience of Christ is excluded from bearing
any Part in our Justification and Salvation! In them Enthusiasm is asserted,
and recommended in diverse Instances; as well as all Use of Means with Sinners,
to instruct and alarm them, denied! In them all Manner of Wickedness is
encouraged, as the most direct Way to Conversion; all Virtue and religious Duty
unhinged and discouraged: according to them, no Means must be used by poor
Sinners to obtain Conversion! In them Sin is represented as a mere Triffle,
unworthy of our Fear or Grief! In them the Happiness of Heaven is destroyed, by
making the Saints to be poor and needy there! In them the faithful Ministers of
Christ are condemned for using Means with poor Sinners, to convince them of
their Misery, and bring them to Jesus! In them the preaching of Terror to the
unregerate is denied, which is so frequently inculcated in the Word of God, and
which was practiced by Christ himself and his Apostles! In them Christ's
Propitiation for Sins in Eternity, is asserted! In them universal Redemption,
and universal Salvation, are asserted; as well as Inspiration after the
apostolical Times! In them our Lord is represented, as paying a Ransom after
his Death for Persons under Conviction! which is not only contrary to express
Scripture ( Heb. 7.27. Heb. 9.26, 28.) but notoriously derogatory to the
Sufficiency of the Atonement of our Lord Jesus in his Life, and at his Death
for his Elect. In them the detestable Arminian Doctrines (...) Free Will, and
the final Apostasy of the Saints are inculcated; and thus the Pride of Sinners
is flattered, and the Foundation of the Saints Comforts shut up and sealed! In
them the Count urges the universal Necessity of Assurance on Pain of Death
eternal! And in the mean Time informs us, that Persons are spiritually alive
and dead at the same Time! He tells us that when the Spirit convinces Persons
they are lost, and have no Interest in the Kingdom of God, then they are found,
they are Brethren, they are Children of God! Now either two contradictory
Propositions can be both true at once, which is impossible in the Nature of
Things, or else the Count charges a Falsehood upon the Spirit of God. In them
the Doctrine of original Sin imputed is denied, and the popish Doctrine of the
Sacraments asserted! In them a good Though It at Death is represented a sufficient
to obtain Happiness! In them Sin is ^ed to be something material; and if so,
God must needs be the Author of it, for he has made all Substances! In them
God's holy Law is condemned, as the Cause of Sin: if so, then God himself is
the Cause of Sin, for he is the Author of the Law, and indeed it is but the
Image of his moral Excellencies! It is a vile Abuse of that Passage of the
Apostle Paul, (1 Cor. 15.56. The Strength of Sin is the Law,) to conclude from
hence that the Law is the Cause of Sin: The Meaning of the aforesaid Place is
elsewhere explained by the same Apostle, viz. Romans 7.1. For Sin taking Occasion
by the Commandment deceived me, and by it slew me. The obstinate Corruption of
our Nature, may unreasonably take Occasion, from the just Restraints of the
Commandment to rage the more; but that is not the Fault of the Law, but of our
corrupt Nature. Was then that which is good Death to me? says the Apostle! God
forbid! The Apostle rejects the Notion of the Law's being the Cause of his Sin,
with great Indignation; he shows that this cannot be, Verses 12, 13, 14.
Because the Law is holy, just and good: As if the Apostle should say, that
which is holy cannot be the Cause of it is contrary; for like produces like: But
Sin that it might appear Sin, working Death in me by that which is Good, that
Sin by the Commandment might appear exceeding sinful (...) for we know that the
Law is spiritual, but I am carnal. As if the Apostle should say, the Law is
good, spiritual, discovers Sin, and it is penal Consequences; hence by it is
said to be the Knowledge of Sin, and that it works Wrath: how therefore can it
be the Cause of Sin? No; it is the Corruption of Nature, which is the Cause of
actual Transgression: But I am carnal, sold under Sin. To turn from the moral
Law as a Rule of Life, is not the Way to Freedom from Sin, but to Death in Sin.

The Moravian Notion about the Law, is a Mystery of detestable Iniquity! And
indeed this seems to me to be the main Spring of their unreasonable,
anti-evangelical, and licentious Religion!

But I have not Time at present, to mention all the other Abominations of the
Count's Sermons!

And now having had a Taste of their Principles, let us proceed to a brief
Reflection, upon their Experience and Practice.

As to their Conversion, and after Experiences; the Conversion of the most of
them (if we credit the Count's Assertion, and we may reasonably suppose that he
knows pretty well the State of his own Sect,) is very slighty, it is without any
preparatory Law Work, done in a Moment. If they have received the aforesaid
Doctrines, have we not Reason to fear that their Conversion is but a strong
Flight of Imagination, or a satanical Delusion. And we have the more Reason for
the Fear aforesaid, when we consider how easy they are generally after their
supposed Conversion, without Fears, without Complaints of Sin, Strangers to the
spiritual War, Strangers to the Knowledge of their own Hearts, always in one
sort of Frame, or as it were put to sleep and happy, as the Count expresses it.
Did not the Seed sown on the stony Ground spring up quickly; but on the
contrary, did not the good Ground bring forth Fruit with Patience? Did not the
poor Man in the Gospel ^vail his Unbelief? And are we not commanded to fight
(...) Fight of Faith? If we will believe the Scriptures, does not their
Conversion and Experiences look like Presumption and Delusion? Their gross
Ignorance about the Nature of a true and saving Faith, adds awful Weight to
what has been now observed!

I wonder not at their Ease, when I consider what Sort of Faith passes for
saving among them; and seeing they lay so much Stress upon an historical or
temporary Faith, and reject the Law of God, by which is the Knowledge of Sin;
how can they be otherwise than easy? for without the Law Sin is dead, as to our
Apprehension and Feeling; i.e. we have no true Sight and Sense of the Evil and
Danger of Sin without the Law.

As to the Spirit of the Moravians; Do not a Number of them seem to be proud
under a Mask of Humility; while they look upon themselves and their Party, to
be more advanced in Grace, than Persons of any other Denomination? How will
such a Spirit accord with the Example of Paul, who looked upon himself to be
far less than the least of all Saints? and with the Command of God, that every
Man should esteem another better than himself?

Are not the Moravians many of them uncharitable and divisive in their Speech
and Practice, and that under a pretext of Charity and Catholicism? Witness Mr.
Spangenberg's comparing the Protestant Churches to a Babel, and the Count's
calling their Conversion by the Law a Delusion? (before mentioned;) Witness
their not being willing to join with any Protestant Body of Men, and yet their
receiving Persons of diverse Societies to their Fellowship, with little
Examination as to their Principles.

Do not those Things, together with their sending of their ignorant
Missionaries to gather separate Societies in Places, where there is a sound
Ministry, signify that their Design is not Catholic, whatever their Pretenses
be notwithstanding?

The Count's bitter and contemptuous Speeches in New-Brunswick, against the
Body of the reformed Churches, gives additional Evidence, to what I have now
observed.

And is there no^ much Enthusiasm in the Moravian Method of Management, in
these Instances following; viz. in neglecting Family Prayer; in sending out
Missionaries, without human Learning; and in their Preaching (ordinarily)
without Study, and without Prayer before or after, or both?

Besides, there is much cunning in their Practice, cloak'd with an Appearance
of Simplicity, as is evident from the following Particulars, in their Method of
propagating their Sect, viz.

1. They labor to be acquainted with others Principles, and accommodate
themselves so far to them in Discourse, as will not consist with Truth. A late
Instance of this appeared in one of the Moravian Party called Mr. Betener, who
in my hearing, expressly contradicted himself in the space of two or three
Minutes; a Person of Distinction being present. At first be asserted that pious
People could know others certainly, and offered somewhat in Confirmation of
that detestable Notion, in Answer to what was objected against it: but being
asked by another Person after this Manner; You don't think that a good Man can
know another infallibly? No, said he!

Besides, I have been informed by some Persons of Credit, that B. Witsman's
Wife has denied since what she asserted at New-Brunswick: for this, if she will
suffer the Matter to be examined, she may be proved a Liar.

Farther, I am credibly informed, that the Count has in the hearing of several
Persons, denied the Articles offered against him in the beginning of this
Appendix, which he expressed in New-Brunswick, as they now stand; and some of
them absolutely and entirely. I leave it to the impartial Reader to judge,
whether those Articles be not proved by the Extracts of his Sermons; and hence
to form what Opinion he thinks reasonable, of the Count's Veracity. The Count's
denying of them as they stand, seems to be an artful, but ungenerous Evasion.
What if it was so, that his Assertions were not put in the same Order in which
he delivered them? if his Expressions are not altered, or his Sense wronged,
and the Articles be put in a more natural Order, where is the Injury?

I might mention more Instances of other Moravians unsincere and inconsistent
Conduct; but these at present may suffice.

2. They hide any of their Principles, that they think will disgust. I though it it
something strange, in the Count's forbidding any Person to come into the Room
with me, the second Time I attempted to see him.

3. They speak slightly of the Use of good Books. This seems to be a crafty
Stratagem, to increase their Sect; for they may know, that all Books but their
own are against them, considering their Principles complexly. Now their
slighting the Use of good Books, has a Tendency to rob God's People, so far as
their Influence reaches, of a precious Mean of Instruction and Defense, and so
leaves them more exposed to the Stratagems of Seducers.

4. Do not some Moravians, slight human Reason and Learning? which (if used in
their proper Place) are good Bulwarks against their inconsistent Doctrine: and
in the Room thereof commend a Simplicity of dangerous Tendency, as has been
before observed? I know of no commendable Simplicity, but humility and
sincerity in the Use of proper Means; but to believe Contradictions is a
detestible Simplicity, and to expect in ordinary Cases Blessings from God,
without the Use of proper Means, instead of trusting in him, is to tempt him.

5. Do not the Moravians speak slightly of Confessions of Faith, and such like
regular and harmonious Systems of Christian Principles? and is not this
Political? for has it not a plain Tendency to prepare Persons to receive their
inconsistent Medley of Doctrines, which no human Understanding can harmonize.

6. Don't the Moravians begin with the Affections first? and is this fair
Dealing? Do they not endeavor to insinuate themselves into People's Affections
first, by Smiles and soft Discourses about the Love of Christ, and by a
seemingly innocent simple and loving Behavior? while in the mean Time they
carefully hide their Principles, until the Affections are catched, and then let
them out by Degrees. Should not they show their Principles first, before the
Affections are fired, that so People might judge of them with Calmness and
Impartiality?

7. Do not they take special Care to apply to young Persons, Females, and
ignorant People, who are full of Affection? And if any Persons of Distinction
are under any good Impressions, those shall be taken special Notice of be sure:
for poor ignorant young Creatures under their first Love, are easily led aside
by fair Shows. And there must be if they can, some Persons of Note and Figure
in every Place to grace their Sect, and gain Proselytes to it. Who do they
imitate in attacking the weaker Part of Man, viz. the Passions; and the weaker
Sex first; but the Devil the Father of Lies and Errors? Did not he deal thus
with our first Parents, and by the weaker Sex seduced Adam.

And don't they refuse generally to Reason upon Points in Religion, whereby one
might convince another, and leave People to be proselyted by Sight only. It is
politic in them indeed to wave Reasoning and shun Discovery, for their
Principles will bear neither. Let them but appear in their native Deformity,
and they will be abhorred? My Soul is grieved to see the childish Fickleness of
the Sons and Daughters of this Generation! who are tossed about with every Wind
of Doctrine; who are just smiled out of their Religion, without being able to
offer one solid Reason for their Change.

8. They endeavor to unhinge People as to their religious Principles, with
their confused Invectives against Bigotry.

Doubtless to be as zealous in Degree, for smaller Points in Religion as for
greater, is a criminal Bigotry; for Zeal should surely be proportioned to the
Weight of Things. Likewise to entertain uncharitable Thoughts of those who
differ from us, only in Circumstantials; or some few lesser Points of Faith:
and no doubt to made Circumstantials, Terms of Communion, is Bigotry with a
Witness. Also to endeavor rather principally to propagate a Sect by our Zeal,
than to promote the general Interests of Religion. But it is no Bigotry to hold
fast Christ's precious Truths in Affection and Practice, and to defend them
against all Opposers; for this is but the Command of God. And without this a
pretended Zeal for Holiness is of no Moment. And we find our Lord and his
Apostles used Sharpness in dealing with false Teachers, calling them Wolves,
Dogs, Serpents, Vipers!

Indeed to essay to impose our Opinion upon others, by Force and Violence, is
doubtless a detestable Bigotry; for every one has an equal Right to think for
himself, and Reason and Argument can only convince the Mind.

Certainly we should adhere inviolably to the Principles we have been
instructed in, until we find better, which we should be always ready to receive
upon proper Conviction; which is not to be attained by the Sight of the
Grimaces of Strangers, or by immediate Revelations or Enthusiasms, but by
Scripture, Reason and Argument. No doubt we should be always open to Light and
rational Conviction; but there is a vast Difference between this and a childish
Fickleness. Do not those act like Children and Fools, who part with good
Principles for bad?

I think it looks exceeding black in the Moravians to slight speculative
Knowledge, so as they do, which they call Head-Knowledge. It Is true, it is a
Sin to rest satisfied with it, without feeling its Power and Influence; but it
is not an appointed Mean to obtain what is saving; why else are the Unconverted
enjoined to search the Scriptures? Without Knowledge Solomon observes that the
Mind cannot be good; and he says that they are Fools who hate it. Is not
speculative Knowledge the same for Substance with that which is saving, only
destitute of its Influence upon Heart and Practice? The Moravians by this
Method of proceeding, are propagating another damnable Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, namely, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion.

The Moravians seem to be aware of this, viz. that Reason, Learning, sound
Confessions of Faith, and speculative Knowledge, do all of them oppose the
Spread of their perverse inconsistent Principles, and therefore they labor to
pull them down.

It is exceeding weak in the Moravians to bring in that Passage of Paul, 1 Cor.
2.2. For I determined to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified; as an Objection against seeking after Knowledge. We cannot
reasonably suppose, that the Apostle means any more by that Passage, than that
he made Christ the Center and Scope of his Knowledge. i. e. that all he knew
should have a Reference to Christ, either more direct or remote. And have not
all the Scriptures this Tendency to exalt Christ, to bring Sinners to Christ,
and to build them up in him? But to imagine that the Apostle should confine all
his Knowledge to the Passion of Christ, in any other Sense, is contrary to
Scripture and Reason. If so, why did he inculcate so many other Things in his
preaching, and that by immediate Inspiration? If the aforesaid Notion were
true, a great Part of the Bible would be useless. But were not these Things
written for our Learning? Why are we bid to search the Scriptures, if we must
not labor to understand them. The following Place of Scripture, Act. 20.20,
21. and how I have kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have
showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from House to House; testifying
to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ; may be a Help to explain the other. We can have no just
Notion of the Passion of Christ, without the other Doctrines of Religion.

Does it look like the Spirit of Christ, that the Moravians in their Practice
are so careless of the secure World? What avail their Pretenses to Love, while
they weaken the Foundation of it, viz. Truth? What signifies a childish
Affection, that is not grounded upon Truth and Reason?

Before I conclude, give me Leave to mention one Instance more, of the strange
unaccountable Doctrine of this new Moravian Sect.

Christopher Parleus, one of that Party, declared the following Particulars, at
the House of Mr. Samuel Hazard in Philadelphia, in Presence of himself and
Spouse, viz.

1. That he did not doubt, but that many who were not given to Christ or
elected, would in Time be brought to accept of the Savior.

2. That there were others who were charitable, and who did not get the Pardon
of their Sins in this World, would notwithstanding get their Pardon in the next
World: to prove which, he brought this Text; viz. Make to your selves Friends
of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting Habitatio

3. He also said, that God was or might be disappointed, in what he intended;
and when this was objected against, he explained himself thus, viz. that God
would not be finally disappointed of answering the End he intended, though he
might be disappointed of answering that End by the first or second Means, etc.
which he intended to answer it by.

4. He also said, that the Moravians did not look upon Family Prayer to be a
Duty.

Here I may add, that Mr. Theodorus Frelinghausa, heard the Count assert, the
second Article abovesaid. And moreover adds, that the Count asserted, that many
would be saved at the Day of Judgment, by the Intercession of the Saints, and
that he himself expected to save Thousands.

But I am tired with relating their Abominations. I must conclude by observing,
that their Principles tend to deceive Mankind, and fix the World in a fatal
Security: they are directly contrary to Scripture, Reason, Experience,
Antiquity, the Writings of the ablest and best Divines of the Protestant
Churches, to the Harmony of their Confessions of Faith, and to the Work of God.
O may the GOD of Truth save his People from all such Deceivers, and detestable
Delusions! Amen, Amen!

THE END.
TWO SERMONS Preached at New-Brunswick, In the Year 1741. ON The Priestly
Office of Christ. AND The Virtue of Charity.

By Gilbert Tennent, A. M. And Minister of the Gospel there.

Heb. 4.15. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities; but was in all Points tempted like as we are, yet
without Sin.

Heb. 13.1. Let brotherly Love continue.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queenstreet
over against the Prison. 1742.

The Priesthood of CHRIST considered.
HEB. III. 1. Wherefore holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly Calling,
consider the Apostle and high Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus.


THE Apostle having in the preceding Chapter, discoursed upon the priestly
Office of Christ, does in the beginning of this, exhort the believing Hebrews
to a due Consideration thereof.

In the Words before us, two Things require our Notice; namely, the Character
given to the believing Hebrews, and the Duty to which they are exhorted.

The Character is threefold, or contains three Encomiums. (1) The Apostle calls
them Brethren, partly to show his Condescension and Love to them; as also to
signify their Duty to each other, namely Love. Then, and never till then, do
Christians live like Brethren, when they exercise that Love to each other,
which hopes all Things, which suffers long and is kind, and is not easily
provoked, and seeks not her own Things. It is an astonishing Stoop of
Condescension, that Jesus Christ is not ashamed, to call his poor People
Brethren. (2) The Apostle calls the Hebrews holy; which they were not only by
Profession and Dedication, but by Principle and Practice. (3) They are said to
be Partakers of the heavenly Calling, i.e. they were effectually reclaimed from
Sin to Piety, by the special Call of God. Which is termed heavenly, because of
its Original, Tendency and Issue. The Original and Principle thereof, is the
Spirit of God from Heaven; the Mean whereby we are called, the Word of God, is
spiritual and heavenly; the Tendency and Issue of the Call is Heaven. The
general Course of the Affections of those who are called, is toward Heaven,
and there is their dwelling Place for ever.

In the Duty exhorted to, two Things may be observed, namely the Act and
Object, (1) The Act, consider: the original Word signifies to animadvert,
weigh, behold, observe, and that with Care and Diligence. (2) The Object,
Christ Jesus, the anointed Savior, represented by a twofold Character, namely
that of an Apostle and high Priest. The Word Apostle signifies one sent: the
Word high Priest signifies the Prince or Chief of those, whose proper Business
it is to manage Things sacred. Moses was properly an Apostle, or Ambassador,
and Aaron the chief Priest; but one JESUS has fulfilled the Part of both, and
that to Perfection. The Word Profession in this Text, (as I conceive) by a
Metonimy of the Adjunct, signifies the Religion we profess.

From the Words I observe the following Proposition, namely That it is the Duty
of all true Christians, to consider JESUS CHRIST, as the Apostle and high
Priest of their Profession.

In speaking to the aforesaid Proposition, I would observe the following Order;
namely, 1. Discourse upon the Apostolate, and Priesthood of Christ. 2. Show how
we should consider them. 3. Why. And then proceed to the Improvement of the
Subject.

The first General Head, is the Apostolate of our Lord.

An Apostle as was before observed, signifies One sent, a Messenger or
Ambassador. Here therefore let us transiently observe, in some Instances, the
Analogy between our Lord and such.

The Apostles were immediately sent by Christ, inspired with Wisdom to unvail
the Mysteries of Peace and Salvation, which had been long concealed, as well as
endowed with Power to perform miraculous Works in Confirmation of them.

Thus our Savior, who is the Wisdom and Power of God, came not of himself, but
the Father sent him, to declare glad Tidings to the Poor; -- and this Message
he confirmed not only by his Life, and Miracles, but by his Blood.

The Apostles were to take Care of the Churches; and in Pursuance hereof they
traveled unweariedly from Place to Place, preaching the Gospel, through good
Report and bad Report, till they had finished their Course, and then committed
themselves to him that judges righteously.

Thus our Lord the great Apostle, bore upon his blessed Bosom, the Weight of
the whole Church: in his humbled State, he traveled from Place to Place,
indefatigably preaching the Gospel, and doing Good; in the Face of all
Opposition, Contempt and Danger, 'till he had completed his Mediatorial Work,
and could say, Father it is finished, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit.

An Ambassador or Messenger of Peace from a Prince, is not only a Person of
Honor, Integrity, and Skill; who is concerned to negociate in Matters of
greatest Consequence, to the Weal or Woe of Nations, but is commissioned by the
Prince that sends him, whom in his Embassy he represents.

And is not our Lord a Person of the highest Renown and Dignity, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, possessed of a Retinue of innumerable Angels? The
faithful and true Witness, the wonderful Counselor? Has not this Apostle, this
Messenger of the Covenant, come from Heaven to Earth, with an Embassy of Peace
and Salvation, which unspeakably concerns our everlasting Weal? Him has God
the Father sealed, and by him is the Person of the Father represented. So that
he who honors the Son, honors the Father also.

A Messenger or Ambassador, is sometimes sent to put an End to War, that hereby
the dismal Consequences thereof, may be prevented: To this Purpose, he is to
make Proposals of Peace, on certain Terms, which he is vested with a Power to
ratify.

Has not our Lord by his Gospel, made Proposals of Peace and Pardon, to the
vilest Rebels, upon equal and honorable Terms, viz. of Faith and Repentance,
that hereby the unjust and unequal War, commenced against God by Adam's
Apostasy may be issued, and so the damning Consequences of Rebellion prevented;
and are not the aforesaid Proposals ratified by the Mediator's Blood?

A Messenger is apt to be grieved, when his Message is slighted, upon the
Foresight of the Calamities consequent hereupon, for when the Treaty of Peace
expires, a Scene of Desolation and Blood opens!

Thus when our compassionate Apostle, drew near to the City of Jerusalem, he
wept over it, saying, If thou had known in this thy Day, the Things that
concerned thy Peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes! O will it not be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of the Lord, than for those,
who ungratefully slight the gracious Offers of this Messenger of the Covenant,
this A^stle of our Profession!

When Ambassadors have faithfully delivered their Embassy, are they not at
their Return, received with Honor? Thus with what inexpressible Honors and
Acclamations of Joy, was our dear Lord received by the heavenly Hosts, when he
ascended up on high, and led Captivity Captive! Did not all the prostrate Ranks
of Saints and Seraphims, cast their Crowns at the Feet of our Immanuel on this
Occasion? who was set at the right Hand of the Majesty on high, clothed with
all the Ensigns of Power, Greatness and Glory!

But I proceed to Discourse upon the Priesthood of Christ, That our Lord is a
Priest, is evident from the Oath of God the Father, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has
sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of
Melchisedeck. Hence he is called our Ransom, Propitiation, Passover, and
Advocate with the Father.

And hence have we so many Types of his priestly Office. The common Levitical
Priests, were Figures of him; in their teaching of the People the Knowledge of
the Law, Mal. 2.7. In their sounding of the Trumpets, either as an Alarm to
War, or to assemble the People.

Thus our Lord sounds the Gospel Trumpet as an Alarm to spiritual War here, and
will make the Arch-Angel's Trumpet snake the Creation hereafter, to form the
last Grand Assize.

But the Priests were especially Figures of him, in offering Sacrifices for the
Sins of the People, and in judging of the Plague of Leprosy, and so pronouncing
them clean and unclean. If it had reached the Head, the Person was to be
pronounced unclean. So truly it is an awful Sign of a bad State, when Errors
about important Points of Doctrine corrupt the Judgment. As our Lord gave
himself a Sacrifice for Sin, so he is the final Judge of the Plague of every
Man's Heart.

Melchisedeck was doubtless a Type of our Lord, in his being called the King of
Righteousness and Peace. These represented the everlasting Righteousness and
Peace, which the Redeemer introduced, and procured by his Blood and Obedience.
Melchisedeck blessed Abram, and received Tyths of him, by which was doubtless
signified, the superior Excellency of the Priesthood of Christ, to the
Levitical. Melchisedeck had no Predecessor or Successor in his Office, and his
Age and Genealogy was designedly concealed, to signify the ineffable Generation
and eternal Duration of Christ, as also that he had no Rivals or Successors in
his priestly Office.

But the high Priest was an illustrious Type of Christ, in the following
Instances.

1. In Respect of his Call to his Office: He took not this Honor to himself,
but was called of God and consecrated by Imposition of Hands, Heb. 5.4. Numb.
8.10. Thus our Lord glorified not himself, Heb. 5.5. but was sealed or
commissioned by his Father, Joh. 6.27.

2. In his Unction for his Office: Lev. 8.12. and was not our Lord anointed
with the Oil of Gladness, above his Fellows?

3. In his peculiar Ornaments, namely his holy Crown, his Mitre, Girdle, and
Breast Plate: All which typified the transcendent Excellency of Christ's
Priesthood!

4. The high Priest's bearing the Names of the twelve Tribes on his
Breast Plate, when he appeared before God, seems to represent the affectionate
Remembrance our Lord has of his whole Church, when he intercedes for them with
his Father. The Urim and Thummim on the Breast Plate, signifying Light and
Integrity, was doubtless a Figure of the Sufficiency of Christ's Prophetical
Office, to answer all the Difficulties of his People.

5. The high Priest's yearly entrance into the Holy of Holies, and that not
without Blood, to make Atonement, doubtless prefigured our Lord's Entrance into
Heaven, as Mediator for us, in Virtue of his meritorious Blood, to make
Atonement for all his Elect, Heb. 10.12.

6. The high Priest's being without Blemish, and the Cleanness of his Robes,
Lev. 21. shadowed forth the unspotted Purity of our high Priest Christ Jesus,
who was holy, harmless, undefiled. --

7. As the high Priest only made Perfume, for burnt Offerings, so it is Christ
alone who by the Incense of his Merits, can perfume our Devotions, and render
them acceptable to God, Rev. 8.3.

8. The high Priest's Death, set the Manslayer free, who had fled to the City
of Refuge: and does not the Death of our great high Priest set all those guilty
Creatures free, who fly to him for Shelter? Isai. 32.1, 2.

Now the Necessity of the Priesthood of Christ, will appear by considering,

1. The Wrong that by Sin is offered to the divine Majesty: it being a Contempt
of his Authority, an undervaluing of his Mercy, and a Contrariety to all the
Perfections of his Nature, as well as Precepts of his Law.

2. There is a Necessity of making Satisfaction for the Wrong done by Sin,
because of the governing Justice, Wisdom, and Truth of God. Sin because of its
vile Nature, deserves Punishment; and it is contrary to the divine Wisdom to
dispense with it, without Satisfaction made; because this tends to destroy all
Government.

In order to Government there must be Laws, and that enforced by proper
Sanctions; but unless the Sanctions or Penalties be executed upon
Transgressors, they are but insignificant Scare-crows. But the Almighty is
obliged by his Truth, to inflict the Penalty of Death annexed to the Breach of
the first Covenant, either upon the Sinner himself, or a Surety in his Room and
Place. I add,

3. That there is an utter Inability in Man, to make Satisfaction to divine
Justice, either by doing or suffering. His Performances, through an inherent and
universal Depravity of Nature, are imperfect and due to God, on the Account of
Creation, Isai. 64.6. Now what is sinful it self can never make Satisfaction
for Sin. The Payment of Debt we owe as Creatures, can never pay another Debt,
which we owe as Transgressors. And if Man satisfies by Suffering, it must be by
such as is infinite, in Weight or Continuance, for less is not equal to the
Demerit of Sin, which is objectively infinite, and what is less than its
Demerit, a just God will not accept of. Now a Punishment infinite in Weight,
would crush a finite Creature to nothing; and if it be infinite in Continuance,
it will make it for ever miserable.

The Priesthood of Christ, is that Mediatorial Office of our Lord, whereby he
offers himself, as a propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin, interceeds for his People,
and blesses them.

The

1. Act of Christ's Priestly Office, is to offer Sacrifice for Sin (Heb.
5.3.10.14.) namely, such in which God might rest, and for which, he might be
reconciled to the Sinner. Here let it be considered, that the Person offering,
was the Mediator God-Man, according to both Natures. (2) The Sacrifice offered,
was himself, properly as to his human Nature; hence it is ascribed to his Body,
his Blood, his Soul. (3) The Altar was himself, considered as to his divine
Nature: for as from the Altar, springs the Value and Efficacy of the Sacrifice,
so on the Deity of Christ, the Dignity and Influence of his Death depends. (4)
The End of the Offering is Satisfaction; that by transferring the Guilt upon
the Sacrifice, the Sinner may be freed and thus reconciled to the divine
Majesty. This Offering our high Priest has at once finished by his Crucifixion,
Heb. 9.26. The

2. Act of Christ's Priesthood, is his Intercession with the Father for his
People. To intercede in general signifies to plead with one for another; and
this is twofold, either out of Charity as Brethren, or by Virtue of Office. The
latter is peculiar to our Lord, who by Virtue of his Office, pleads for his
People against all their Enemies, as well as for the Acceptance of their
Persons and Services, the Continuance of their Peace, and Satisfaction of their
Desires.

Of the Intercession of Christ, there are two Periods, the first of which was
when he was on Earth, Joh. 17. then did he with the greatest Humility and
Fervor, desire Blessings for his People; the second is in Heaven, which he
performs with the greatest Majesty.

(1.) By appearing before his Father for us, as the high Priest in the Holy of
Holies, with the Names of the twelve Tribes upon his Breast Plate.

(2.) By representing his Satisfaction and Merits, that on the Account thereof,
his People and their spiritual Sacrifices may be accepted in his Father's
Sight. Hence he is said to appear as the Lamb slain.

Now the Intercession of Christ is gracious, general, prevalent, perpetual. He
pleads without any Reward from us. He pleads for all his without Exception, and
him the Father always hears: Hence his Blood is said to speak better Things
than that of Abel; and that he lives for ever to make Intercession for his
People. The Holy Spirit does indeed interceed by his Operations in us, thereby
stirring up unutterable Groanings; but Christ without us by his Blood and
Obedience.

The

3. Act of Christ's priestly Office, is Benediction. Hence the Priests of old,
by divine Prescription, blessed their People; and Melchisedeck blessed Abram:
and hence we are informed, that in his Seed (which is our high Priest) all
Nations should be blessed, and thus the Blessing of Abraham is said to come
upon the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, (Gal. 3.14.) i. e. the same Blessing
which God conferred on Abraham, in Kind, on the Account of the blessed Seed,
which did descend lineally from him. Hence our Lord after his Resurrection,
blessed his Disciples, speaking Peace to them. And hence God the Father is said
to bless his People with all spiritual Blessings in him, Ephesians. 1.3.

Sometimes to bless signifies to Praise, and give Thanks; and thus we bless
God: sometimes to wish Prosperity; and thus Parents bless their Children,
Pastors their People, and each the other: Sometimes to separate to a religious
Use; and thus God blessed the Sabbath; and so the sacramental Elements, after
Consecration, may be said to be blessed. Once more, it signifies to confer
every Kind of Benefit which we need; in this Sense the Gentiles are said to be
blessed in Christ. And in this last Sense of the Word it is that our Lord as a
Priest blesses his People.

1. With all spiritual Blessings, namely Redemption, Justification,
Sanctification, Adoption, Covenant-Communion with him here, and eternal Glory
hereafter. And

2. With all such temporal Mercies as are for their best Good. Even these are
included in the Blessing of Abraham, which through Christ is derived on the
Gentiles. Godliness has the Promise of this Life, as well as that to come.

The

Second general Head of Discourse, is to show how we should consider Christ, as
our Apostle and high Priest.

1. We ought to consider him as such attentively, particularly, frequently;
often weighing in our Minds with Care, the absolute Necessity, the transcendent
Excellency, and unspeakable Use and Benefit, of his Apostleship and Priesthood.

2. We should consider our Lord as an Apostle and Priest affectionately, with
Wonder and Gratitude. O how amazing was the concordant Discord, the friendly
Contest, among the divine Attributes, about the Salvation of fallen Man!
Avenging Justice required of the Sinner eternal Condemnation for his Offense;
the Demands of Justice the Truth of God engaged to issue, and urged the
Execution of the primitive Threatening, Death of every Kind. On the contrary,
Grace and Mercy contended for the Sinner's Safety and Happiness, the Plea of
which was strengthened by the Glory that would redound to the divine Goodness
and Clemency hereby; which delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but rather
that he may turn and live. Here unsearchable and divine Wisdom interposed, and
offered to give Satisfaction to both the contending Parties thus; namely, in
ordering that Sin should be punished according to Justice, and yet the Sinner
be saved according to Mercy.

To this End divine Wisdom pointed to our high Priest, who by his Death and
Obedience should satisfy Justice, and save the Sinner; who is hence called the
Wisdom and Power of God, for in him divine Wisdom and Power have had a most
glorious Display* In him Grace and Truth have met together, and Righteousness
and Peace have kissed each other. O should not these Things fill us with
Amazment, when the Angels stoop down to behold this wondrous Scene! And should
not our Souls be inspired with the most passionate Gratitude, when we consider
the awful Majesty, unstained Purity, glorious Sovereignty, and inexhausted
All Sufficiency of that Jehovah, who gave such a high Priest to the World! --
As also the Character and Quality of the Person he gave: Not a Levitical,
Aaronical Priest, but One according to the Order of Melchisedeck: Not a
Stranger but a Son, an only begotten and eternal Son; who is able to save to
the uttermost all that come to the Father by him. Add to this, the Manner of
the Gift; the eternal Father gave his only Son, with the Solemnity of an Oath,
to signify the Immutability of his Counsel, as well as the superior Excellency
of the Priesthood of Christ, that hereby his People might have strong
Consolation.

But if we consider for whom, and for what, the Son of God was given to be a
Priest by his Father, it may increase our Admiration. Was it not for Worms,
Sinners, Enemies, as unworthy of his Love, as unable to requite it? And was not
this the Design of his Priesthood, that he might reconcile such, even such to
God, and vouchsafe all Blessings on them? O the amazing Heights and Depths of
the Love of God in Christ, which passes all Knowledge; herein is Love, not that
we loved him, but that he loved us, and gave his only begotten Son to be a
Propitiation for us.

And what Gratitude should fire our Bosoms, when we consider the Condescension
and Love of Christ, as an Apostle? When this Apostle trod our dusky Globe, then
was the legal Vail rent in twain, the Dayspring from on high did visit us, and
the Sun of Righteousness shone upon us. The Jewish Shades vanished and expired,
at the opening of the Gospel-Day, in the Charms of its meridian Beauty and
brightest Radiancy.

3. We should consider Christ as our Apostle and high Priest effectually, so as
to disclaim all Dependence upon our own Wisdom, and Righteousness, and with
Readiness and Reverence embrace him for Direction and Forgiveness; we should
continually depend upon him, and resign all our Affairs to his Conduct and
Disposal.

The

Third general Head is to show, why we should consider Christ as an Apostle and
high Priest.

1. The commanding Authority of God obliges us, which it is ungrateful
rebellious and exceeding perilous for us to dispute or disobey: Wherefore holy
Brethren, Partakers of the heavenly Calling, consider the Apostle and high
Priest of our Profession Christ Jesus.

2. Our Comfort and Interest should invite us: Christ is the Spring of
Sweetness, and Consolation; but without an attentive believing Consideration
upon him, how can we expect Comfort from him, which we so much need in our
present Pilgrimage? Christ is the Fountain and Treasury of all Fullness, not
only essentially as God, but by divine Constitution as Mediator, without
Communications from which, we can make no religious Progress. And can such be
expected, without considering him from whom they are derived?

3. Our Usefulness in the World does much depend upon our considering of
Christ. This, this is a proper Mean, to increase our Love to, and excite our
Joy in him; and these will doubtless incline to proportionable Labors for him.
But when Christ is neglected, our Joy faints, our Love languishes; and then no
wonder if our religious Labors are lessened.

The IMPROVEMENT of this Subject remains.
And

1. Hence we may learn the great, the gross Ignorance, which Sin brought
Mankind to, who needed an Apostle, such an Apostle, to instruct them; this was
so great, that unconverted Sinners are called Darkness it self, in the very
Abstract, Ephesians. 5.8.

2. Hence we may learn the Love of God the Father in sending such an Apostle,
to teach poor Sinners the Way to Blessedness; and to govern and establish the
Church.

And does not the Love of the Son of God appear conspicuous in this, that he
left the Glories of Paradise, and willingly became an Apostle, a
Fellow Servants, in order to instruct the Poor and Ignorant! Ye know the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became
poor, that we through his Poverty, might be made Rich.

From the Priesthood of Christ we may learn the sinfulness of Sin, which has so
alienated us from God, that a Priest, a Reconciler for us with him, became
absolutely necessary, and that not of the common Order. Such was the Guilt
which our Sins contracted, that neither the Blood of Bulls nor of Goats could
expiate it, nothing less than the Blood of the immaculate Lamb of God. Such was
the Stain which Sin bro't on all our sacred Services, that they became odious
to God; and thus an Intercessor was necessary, to perfume them with his
meritorious Righteousness; without which they cannot be accepted. Sin has
robbed us of every Blessing, of every Kind; so that a high Priest was necessary
to bless us, and to derive the Blessing of Abraham on us. Sin has so armed the
Law, the Justice, and Power of God against us, that nothing less than the
accursed Death and the Obedience of the Son of God, can reconcile us to him,
and screen us from deserved Vengeance. Is it not Sin that ^ast the Angels out
of Heaven, and Adam out of Paradise? Was it not this, that burnt the Cities of
the Plain by a fiery Shower, and buried the whole Earth by a Deluge of Water?
Is not this the bitter Source of the sable but numerous Train of Sorrows and
Calamities, which do inviron, infest and perplex us, in this thorny Maze? Well,
if Sin be so great an Evil, let us hate, bewail and shun it, and seek
Reconciliation by the Blood and Obedience of our high Priest.

But in the mean Time, it is highly necessary that we inquire, whether Christ
Jesus be our Apostle, our high Priest. To this Purpose let me ask you, in the
Presence of God, whether ever you have had the Law and Gospel opened to your
Minds with clearness, and set home on your Hearts with Power by this Apostle?

Has the Law discovered to you God's Majesty, Justice, Almightiness, as well as
your own Unbelief, Enmity against God, and other Iniquities in Heart and Life,
in their Number and Aggravations? Has the Law applied, discovered to you your
condemned lost State, and your utter want of Wisdom and Power to get out of it?
And has a near View of these Things, together with their dreadful Consequences
in another World, so distressed you that you could not rest; until the Gospel
opened a Door of Hope in Christ, until ye heard and felt the glad Tidings
thereof, accompanied with surprising Light, efficacious Energy, and overcoming
Sweetness, so that ye were made willing under a Sense of your Sin and
Nothingness, to venture your sick Souls by believing upon the Almighty Savior,
and him alone, having disclaimed all other Refuges?

The Apostle suggests some Things in our Text, which may help us to know,
whether Jesus Christ be our high Priest. Namely (1) That such Persons are holy,
i. e. the general Course of their Desires and Endeavors bends that Way from
love to God and his Law. (2) They are Brethren, they love each other, with that
Love which suffers long, and is kind. They love chiefly because of the Image of
God, and in Proportion thereto, and this Love is not confined to their own
Party. (3) They are Partakers of the heavenly Calling; i. e. they have heard
the Voice of God, by his Law and Gospel, so as to be raised hereby from a Death
in Sin, to a divine Life, to a Conformity to the Image of the Son of God, that
he might be the first born among many Brethren, and particularly such set their
Affections on Things above, ( Col. 3.1.) and are habitually in the prevailing
Temper of their Minds, Pilgrims and Strangers on this Earth. (4) They are of
the Christian Profession, and that not in Name only but Thing. Such are not
ashamed to confess Christ, and profess his Religion at all Times, and in all
Places.

Now to those who have experienced the aforesaid Particulars, the Subject I
have been discoursing on, offers great Consolation and Support. The Apostleship
of Christ opens a Spring of Sweetness to such as are oppressed with a Sense of
their Ignorance; who apprehend themselves to be as brute-Beasts, upon that
Account. Such may consider, that Christ as an Apostle, is a condescending
powerful Instructor, who makes the Heart of the rash to understand Judgment,
and the Tongue of the Stammerer to speak plain. He makes the Simple understand
Wisdom, and writes his Laws upon their Hearts, with indelible Characters, so
that they become his Epistle.

And does not the Priesthood of Christ open a comforting Scene to poor
Believers, under all the Variety of their Distresses, and that in it is several
Acts? As may appear thus.

When Sin urges, when the Law, Conscience, and Satan accuse; when we walk in
Darkness, and see no Light; when we are distressed with the Fears of private or
public Judgments here, and eternal Condemnation hereafter: In these, and in
all other Calamities, how sweet and supporting is it, to consider that we have
a high Priest, who has offered not the Blood of Bulls or of Goats, but himself,
his Soul, his Body, his Blood, to reconcile us to God; a Priest after the Order
of Melchisedeck, the King of Righteousness, and of Peace; the Son of God,
God-Man, yea God himself! A high Priest who has made full Satisfaction, in whom
his Father is well pleased; a high Priest who is able to save to the uttermost,
all that come to the Father by him: on him therefore let us lay the Burden of
our Guilt, as the Israelites did on the Scapegoat, and in him let us joy and
triumph, having no Confidence in the Flesh.

When we are almost discouraged, because of the Deadness, Wanderings, and other
Impurities of our Devotions; likewise when we are distressed with Fears of
falling away, it yields a great Support to consider upon the Intercession of
our high Priest with his Father for us, which is authoritative, continual,
prevailing, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am. Heb. 7.25. Seeing he ever lives, to make Intercession for
them. Joh. 11.42. And I knew that thou hear me always. Therefore let us
offer our Prayers believingly in his Name, and seek to have them perfumed with
the Incense of his Merit and Intercession: let us with humble Confidence,
commit our whole Case to be entirely manag^ by this gracious and faithful
Advocate.

When the Enemies of Zion molest reproach and curse us, for our Zeal and
Faithfulness to God, it is a Comfort to consider, upon the authoritative
Blessing of our great high Priest, which will take effectual Place,
notwithstanding all the Opposition of Earth and Hell. O how sweet are those
Words of our dear Lord, recorded Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when Men shall
revile y^, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you
falsely for my Sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad, for so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you! Surely the Blessing of Abraham has come on the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ: but to inherit this, we must take Care, that we be
the spiritual Seed of Abraham by a living Faith.

Let us be exhorted to hear the great Apostle of our Profession, seeing that
his Father has sent him, and commands us to hear him, Matthew. 17.5. This is my
beloved Son, hear ye him. Surely never Man spoke like him; how then shall we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12.25.

Let us therefore speedily accept of the Terms of Grace, which this Messenger
of the Covenant proposes to us; for surely we cannot maintain a War against
him. Shall Stubble contend with the devouring Flames? Have we an Arm like God;
or can we Thunder with a Voice like him Who can stand before his Indignation?
Who knows the Power of his Anger? He is wise in Heart, and mighty in Strength.
Who has hardened himself against him and prospered? He but touches the Hills,
and they smoke; yea the Mountains melt at his Presence! When he speaks, the
purest Seraph vails his Face, the Pillars of Heaven tremble, and the Earth's
Foundations shake, the Devils roar, and all Nature faints!

Consider, poor Sinners! how unjust and ungrateful your War against Heaven is.
Is not Jehovah Jesus your rightful Sovereign? Do not your Beings and all your
Benefits proceed from his Power and Kindness? Consider, the great God whom ye
have so much offended, is willing to be at Peace with you: He is waiting to be
gracious to you, and wants to be exalted that he may have Mercy on you! And O
how long have the Messenger of the Covenant and his Servants waited on you in
vain! O! consider, how sweet, how safe it is to be at Peace with God. O
consider, how strong the Lord is, to revenge your stupid Neglect! Consider poor
Sinners, that this is your Day of Visitation! Behold now is the accepted Time,
behold now is the Day of Salvation. A very uncommon Season it is at present, ye
know, my Brethren, in Respect of the effusion of the Holy Spirit upon the
Churches; especially in this American Wilderness! Take Care, my dear Brethren,
that ye ben't left behind to Wrath and Ruin, while so many are pressing into
the Kingdom of God. You have as precious Souls as others; you have the same
Encouragements, and are under at least equal Obligations; why therefore do ye
stand all Day idle, in the Marketplace? Consider poor Sinners! how low Christ
has stooped to purchase Peace for Rebels, and upon what easy Terms, and with
what Condescension and Importunity he proposes the same. Wherefore do ye spend
your Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which
satisfyeth not? Incline your Ear and come unto me, hear and your Souls shall
live, Isai. 55.2, 3.

And should not we be induced to perform the Offices we owe to our high Priest?
namely, Honor, Love, Obedience, Homage and Support.

We owe Honor to such a Priest, suitable to his Dignity: this Abraham
expressed to him in Melchisedeck.

Likewise Love is due to him as a Father, as a Priest; so faithful and
merciful, that he has given himself to us, and in himself all Blessings to us.

We should perform Obedience and Homage also to him, as to a kingly Priest, of
whom Melchisedeck was but a Type.

Another Duty is Support, (as it were in Tithes) ministered not to his Person,
but to his indigent Members and Messengers. Did the Israelites express such
Respect etc. to their common Priests? Did Abram so great a Patriarch give
Honor as to the greater, and Tyths to the Priest Melchisedeck? and shall we
refuse to perform what we owe to our high Priest, who is infinitely greater
than Melchisedeck?

Finally, dear Brethren, seeing it has pleased Almighty God to provide for us
such an All-sufficient and every Way suitable high Priest, whose Blood is
sufficient to remove our Guilt, and whose perfect Obedience to the Law is equal
to acquire for us a Right to eternal Blessedness, a Priest who is in both
Respect a hiding P^ from the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest; as Rivers of
Waters in a dry Place, and the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land: Let us
be entreated to hasten to him as our only Shelter and Security in every
impending Storm and Calamity. On this Blood and Obedience let us entirely rest.
May we be incited frequently to consider him in the whole of his Mediation
while we live, with Reverence, Love and Delight, that so we may live with him
eternally hereafter! Amen, Amen!

Charity Recommended.
1 COR. XIII. 2. And though I have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all
Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so that I could
remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing.


LOVE is certainly the brightest Emblem of the divine Nature, for God is Love;
and the greatest Ornament of the human. Love is the Sinew of civil Society, and
religious also, without which the Comforts and Profits of both, are either much
impaired or entirely lost. Love is the Substance of the Law, and the great
Scope of the glorious Gospel. All the pure Precepts of the one, and
condescending Directions of the other, tend to Love, and end in it. This is the
royal Law, Jam. 2.8. If ye fulfill the royal Law according to the Scripture,
thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well. The Bond of Perfection
and Badge of Christianity. By this our Lord observes, that his true Disciples
may be distinguished from vain Pretenders. Joh. 13.35. By this shall all Men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another. Love is the
noblest Image of the heavenly State: There all angry Debates and unhappy
Contentions are for ever banished: There the strongest Affection, and the
sweetest Concord, do for ever triumph: What unfailing Vigor and unfading Glory!

The Apostle plainly points out the vast Importance of this noble Grace, in the
Words immediately preceding our Text; where he observes, that the noblest
Seize of Knowledge and Eloquence, yea even of the Gift of Prophesying,
and miraculous Faith, without Charity or Love, as the Word may be well
rendered, would be no Evidences of his being a true Christian.

In discoursing upon this important Subject, I shall speak of the Nature,
Kinds, Ingredients, and Effects of Charity; and then proceed to the
Improvement. And

1. Charity may be more generally described thus, viz. that it is the
Propension or Inclination of the Heart or Will toward our Neighbor.

2. It may be thus distinguished, namely that it is either carnal, natural,
civil, or christian.

(1) Carnal is that sordid, shameful, and sinful Passion after forbidden
Embraces, which springs from lawless Lust. This, without Repentance intervene,
will plunge the Nocent in perpetual Ruin. This dishonours our Nature,
reproaches our Religion, and will damn our Souls. 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that
the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, etc.

(2) Natural, is a Regard which respects Children and Parents, which even the
Beasts have something of; for the want o^ which the Gentiles are reproved, Romans
1.31. Without Understanding, Covenant-breakers; without natural Affection,
implacable, unmerciful.

(3) Civil, is that Affection which is only grounded upon civil Causes; when
Men respect one another as Men, or as clothed with civil Offices, or for
Kindnesses received.

(4) Christian, is that whereby Christians are respected for their Christianity.

It is the two last Kinds of Charity that I intend to discourse upon.

In the Description which I gave of Charity, I observed, that it was the
Inclination of the Heart toward our Neighbor: Now by Neighbor is to be
understood every Man upon whom we can confer any Good. Luke 10.29, 37. But he,
willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus. And who is my Neighbor? And he
said, he that showed Mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou
likewise.

The Order of this Charity is such, that seeing God is the primary and
principal Object of Love, he is therefore the formal Reason of that Charity
which we owe to our Neighbor. Next therefore after God we are to love our
Selves, with that Charity which respects true Blessedness. By loving God with a
Love of Union, we immediately love our selves, with that Charity which intends
spiritual Blessedness; and others as it were secondarily, whom we would have
partake with us of that supreme Good. Now albeit none are to be excluded from
our Charity, yet it is not to be extended in a like Degree to all. It is true
indeed in Regard of the Good, which we should wish to our Neighbor, there is
no Imparity; because we should desire that the chief Good may be conferred on
all, as upon our selves; and that with the same Seriousness and Sincerity; yet
there should be a Difference in the Measure and Fruits of our Charity,
according to the Difference of Persons, and Occasions it is to be exercised
upon. Those that fear God are to be loved above others. Gal. 6.10. As we have
therefore Opportunity, let us do Good unto all Men, especially unto them who
are of the Household of Faith. A peculiar Regard is due to our Relations, above
Strangers; and that in Proportion to the Nearness of the Relation; which should
manifest it self according to the Nature of the Relation: If the Relation be
corporal, principally in outward Things; if spiritual, principally in spiritual
Things. The

Third general Head, is to speak of the Ingredients of Charity; which I think
are these four, viz. Esteem, Desire, Delight, Sorrow. And

1. Charity includes Esteem. A rational Affection follows our esteeming or
valuing any Person or Thing, for some real or supposed Excellency or Good we
conceive to be in them. That which has neither physical nor moral Good in it
or annexed to it, cannot be the Object of Esteem; and that which we have no
Esteem of, we can have no Charity for. Now though there be various Kinds and
Degrees of Excellency in our Fellow Creatures, for which a proportionable
Respect is due from us; yet there is none but who has such a Measure of Good
either natural or moral, as deserves our Esteem. The very worst of Men have
immortal Souls, endowed with the noble Powers of Reason and Reflection, by
which they resemble the infinite Knowledge, and spiritual Nature of the supreme
Being: for there is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
them Understanding; as Job observes. By this they are capable, through the
Assistance of divine Grace, to know and enjoy God. They are also our Brethren
by Nature, for God has made of one Blood all Nations. Upon these Accounts we
ought to esteem and value the very meanest of the rational Creation, because
they are the Workmanship of God, and bear his Similitude: There are also
additional Excellencies, to excite our Esteem for some, in whose Lives shine
many moral Virtues. Why therefore should we set at naught our Brethren? And as
to the People of God, they claim our Charity upon other Accounts: By
Regeneration they are adorned with the moral Image of God; by Adoption they are
admitted to the most valuable Privileges; hereby they become the Children of
God, and our Brethren by Grace, as well as Heirs of an inexpressibly rich and
everlasting Inheritance. Should we then have a light Esteem of any of those
Sons of God, because of accidental Differences? O no! What if some have not so
much natural Abilities or acquired Learning as some others? yet the meanest of
them has Wisdom to Salvation; and surely this is infinitely better than all the
Knowledge of the World. Oh! the compassionate Prophet of the Church of God,
makes the Simple to understand Wisdom; He causes the Heart of the rash to
understand Judgment! What if they are poor in this World, this also flows from
a Father's Love, and shall be made by the Power of God to increase their
spiritual and eternal Riches: Their moral Blemishes should excite our Pity and
Compassion. We are commanded to prefer others before our selves: and to this
End we should be careful to observe their Excellencies, while blind to our own.

2. Charity includes an unfeigned and earnest Desire, after our Neighbor's
Good, temporal, spiritual and eternal. Thus the Apostle John desired the
present Prosperity of his beloved Gaius, 3 Epist. 2 ver. Beloved, I wish above
all Things that thou may prosper and be in Health, even as thy Soul
prospers. Thus the Apostle Paul affectionately thirsted after the temporal
and eternal Weal, of the Philippians and Hebrews, Phil. 1.8, 9. For God is my
Record, how greatly I long after you all, in the Bowels of Jesus Christ. And
this I pray, that your Love may abound yet more and more, in Knowledge, and in
all Judgment. See also Romans 10.1. Brethren, my Heart's Desire and Prayer to God
for Israel is, that they may be saved. Now, though we should wish without
Disguise, that all the aforesaid Kinds of Good should be conferred upon our
Brethren, yet it ought to be with different Degrees of Intenseness, according
to their different Degrees of Necessity and Excellency. We should undoubtedly
be tender of their Characters and bodily Welfare; yet we should with greater
Vehemence desire for them more durable and valuable Enjoyments, namely those
that are spiritual and eternal. The aforesaid Desire after our Brethren's
Benefit, is by some called a Love of Benevolence.

3. Charity includes a Delight or Satisfaction in our Neighbor's Good, which
by some is called a Love of Complacence. Joy and Complacence naturally follow
the Fulfillment of our Desires, and that in Proportion to their Degrees of
Intenseness. The charitable Person (in the general Course of his Life) is so
far from envying his Neighbor's honorable Character, shining Gifts,
prosperous Successes, and increasing Graces, that he is really pleased
therewith according to their different Degrees of Importance. As one Member of
the Body sensibly feels the Pleasure another more immediately enjoys, and is
therewith delighted. But the Conversion of Sinners to the blessed God and their
progress in Goodness, is peculiarly pleasing to charitable and generous Souls!
O this makes them exult with joyous Triumphs, resembling the angelic Hosts; who
also rejoice upon the like Occasion! Luke 15.7, 10. I say unto you, that
likewise Joy shall be in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, more than over
ninety and nine just Persons that need no Repentance. Likewise I say unto you,
there is Joy in the Presence of the Angels of God, over one Sinner that
repents. Of this noble Temper was the blessed Apostle Paul: O how did the
Tho'ts of the Philippians Conversion, gladden his Heart with an enduring
Pleasure! Phil. 1.3, 4, 5. I thank my God upon every Remembrance of you, always
in every Prayer of mine for you all, making Request with Joy.

4. Charity includes a Sorrow for our Neighbor's Misery, Which some call a
Love of Condolence. Now this Sorrow is in some Measure suited or proportioned
to the Kind of Miseries, we behold them laboring under, as well as to the
Degrees of our Desire after their Welfare. It is the Duty, the Temper and
Practice of charitable Persons, not only to rejoice with those that rejoice,
but also to weep with those that weep, Romans 12.15. As one pained Member of the
Body afflicts the rest, so charitable Persons are passionately affected with
beholding others Misfortunes. The Sufferings of Persons in their Names, Bodies
and Estates, open the Springs of their Sorrow. This was the Practice of Job,
Chap. 30. 25. Did not I weep for him that was in Trouble? was not my Soul
grieved for the Poor? Of this Temper of Mind was the Psalmist also, and that
even toward his Enemies, Psalm. 35.12, 13, 14. They rewarded me Evil for Good,
to the spoiling of my Soul; but as for me, when they were sick, my clothing
was Sackcloth: I humbled my Soul with Fasting. -- I behaved my self as though he
had been my Friend; I bowed down heavily, as one that mourns for his Mother.
Hereto we may add the noble Example of the Apostle Paul's universal and
unwearied Sympathy, mentioned, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not (...)?
who is offended, and I burn not? As well as that of our Lord, Mat. 14.14. where
it is said, And Jesus went forth, and saw a great Multitude, and was moved with
Compassion toward them, and he healed their Sick. The original Word signifies
the tenderest and most compassionate Commotion, even in his very Bowels, upon
their Account. But that which especially excites the saddest Sorrows of
charitable Persons, is the Consideration of their Neighbor's spiritual
Miseries, and the Prospect of the eternal Pains, which are like to follow upon
them. O! it breaks their Hearts and makes their Bowels bleed, to behold their
poor Fellow Creatures in a State of Wrath and Course of Sin! Rivers of Waters
ran down the Psalmist's Eyes upon this Account, Psalm. 119.136. He beheld
Transgressors and was grieved, because they kept not God's Word, Ver. 158. The
Apostle Paul assures us in the most solemn Manner, that he had great Heaviness
and continual Sorrow in his Heart, on the Account of his unhappy obstinate and
ungrateful Countrymen, for whose Salvation he could be willing himself to be
accursed from Christ, if that could secure it, Romans 9.1, 2, 3. I say the Truth
in Christ, I lie not; my Conscience bearing me Witness in the holy Ghost, that
I have Heaviness and continual Sorrow in my Heart; for I could wish that my
self were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the
Flesh. The Love of our dear Redeemer was such as to incline him to be a Man of
Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, that he might atone for the Offenses of his
People: and in particular how afflicting are those Instances of our Savior's
compassionate Charity to the Souls of Sinners, which we find mentioned, Man
3.5. And when he had looked round about with Anger, being griev^ for the
Hardness of their Hearts, he says unto the M^n, ^ch forth thine Hand: And he
stretched it out (...) his H^ was restored whole as the other. And Lu^ 9.41.
And when he was come near he beheld the City, (...) wept over it. And how
endearing is the Love of the blessed God himself, whose Mercies are said to be
above all his other Works! The Apostle James observes concerning the blessed
God, that he is very pitiful and of tender Mercy, James 5.1^. (...) full of
Bowels. Hence we read of the sounding of his Bowels, and the turning of his
Heart, when his People provoke him to inflict Judgments, Isai. 63.15. Where is
thy Zeal, and thy Strength, the sounding of thy Bowels and of thy Mercies
toward me? Hos. 11.8. Mine Heart is turned within me, etc. And hence in
Imitation of the Charity of the great God, we are bid to be merciful, as our
heavenly Father is merciful; and to put on Bowels of Mercy, and to be tender
hearted. Ephesians. 4.32. And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

I proceed to the

Fourth General Head, which was to discourse of the Effects of Charity. And

1. Charity inclines to kind candid and favorable Sentiments of our
Neighbor's Person and Actions, so far as their Nature and Circumstances can in
Reason admit. It thinks no Evil; but on the contrary, hops all Things, and
believes all Things that are Good: It banishes all ill-natured Insinuations of
our Neighbor's Speeches, Actions, and Designs; and puts the fairest and most
favorable Sense upon them that can consist with Reason: instead of exposing
and aggravating real Weaknesses, without urgent Necessity; it rather hides and
extenuates them, and readily offers any Excuse or Apology that can be thought
pertinent to that generous and truly noble Purpose. O how generous and precious
is this Effect! and how subservient to the Peace, Weal and Comfort of Society!
But Lord, how contrary is the Practice of a great Part of this ill-natured and
unhappy World, who can hardly invent any Thing cruel enough (to their Mind)
under the Umbrage of their Neighbors real or supposed Miscarriages, to blacken
and ruin their Reputation.

2. Charity inclines to Mildness, Candor and Courtesy in Speech and Behavior.
It behaveth not it self unseemly; as the Apostle observes in this Chapter:
'It's Language is not cruel and clownish, but candid and courteous.' And
therefore, as the same Apostle observes, it is not easily provoked, but
suffers long, and endures all Things: It inclines us to possess our Souls in
Patience under injurious Treatment, and to restrain and bury our angry
Resentments. Hence we are informed, that many Waters cannot quench Love, nor
the Floods drown it, Cant. 8.7.^ And hence we are entreated, Ephesians. 4.2. to walk
with all Lowliness and Meekness, with Long-suffering, forbearing one another in
Love.

3. Charity makes it is Possessor ready upon all Occasions, to do his Neighbor
Good. Hence we are commanded, not to love in Word and Tongue (only) but in Deed
and Truth. Therefore the Apostle observes in the 6th Verse of this Chapter,
that Charity is kind; and truly so it is, to the Souls and Bodies of Men. And

(1) The charitable Person labors to do Good to his Neighbor's Soul, morally,
by proposing of Good to be performed by him with suitable Motives and
Directions, by which he may be brought to it, either by teaching if he is
ignorant, or comforting if afflicted, or by Reasoning and Reproof if he errs in
Principle or Practice, or by examining if he is ignorant of his spiritual
State, or by exhorting if he is slothful in doing Good, and especially by a
good Example exciting to do the like.

(2) The charitable Person endeavors to do Good to his Neighbor's Body,
physically, by such Acts of Kindness and Beneficence, as have a Tendency
thereto. Heb. 13.16. To do Good and communicate forget not, for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased. The charitable Person is liberal in his
Kindness, as the Sun of his Light and Influence; and when his outward Ability
fails, it is more than made up by the generous Sentiments and Wishes of his
Soul, as well as Endeavors of his Life, in pressing others to Beneficence.
True Charity will incline us to loose the Bands of Wickedness, undo the heavy
Burdens, and let the oppressed go free; to draw out our Soul to the hungry, and
satisfy the afflicted Soul, Isai. 58.6, 10.

Here let me mention for Illustration-sake a few Examples. And

(1) That of Job is memorable, Chap. 29.11, -- 17. (2) That of our Savior who
went about doing Good to the Souls and Bodies of Men. He instructed the
ignorant, comforted the sorrowful, healed the diseased, and fed the hungry; and
that sometimes at the Expense of Miracles. The Apostles also endeavored to
succor Men under outward Miseries; which appears by the Collection for the
poor Saints at Jerusalem, which they forwarded: But their Charity was
especially fixed upon Men's precious Souls; in which Respects though they
themselves were poor in Temporals, yet they made many rich in Spirituals, by
their unwearied Labors.

4. Charity prefers the public Good to a private Interest. Hence the Apostle
observes in the 5th Verse of this Chapter, that Charity seeks not her own
Things. i. e. neither only nor principally. Charity enlarges and ennobles the
Mind of Man, and reduces the whole World within the Compass of its Care, in
Comparison of which any Person's private Interest is as inconsiderable, as one
Man compared with the whole World. And as it is so in it self, thus it is also
in the Esteem of the truly charitable Person, whose noble Soul is sublimated by
generous Love, above the sordid Sphere of selfish Considerations, to desire and
seek with Sincerity, so far as he has Opportunity, and Capacity, the Good of
his whole Species. And this indeed is no more than what the great God requires
of us, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no Man seek his own: but every Man another's Wealth.
And Phil. 2.4. Look not every Man on his own Things, but every Man also on the
Things of others. And especially the public and valuable Interests of the
Church of God are very dear to charitable Persons. The Psalmist expresses his
Concern that Way, to the following Effect; If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my
right Hand forget her Cunning, if Jerusalem be not my chief Joy.

In order to promote our Neighbors Good, Charity inclines to Self-denial and
Condescension. To compass the spiritual and eternal Good of Mankind, the
charitable Apostles freely laid down their Honors and Interests, their
Liberties and Lives: They passed through Dishonor and evil Report, being
generally accounted the Filth of the World, and the Offscouring of all Things;
they were stripped of all the Ease and Emoluments of human Life; exposed to
Hunger and Nakedness, Scourging, Bonds and Imprisonments; and in the mean Time
covered with a Cloud of Reproach and Ignominy; in Perils, Travels, Labors and
Watchings, often; and at last exposed to cruel Deaths. And yet all this they
courageously undertook, and patiently endured, in order to spread the
Redeemer's Gospel, and save the Souls of Men from eternal Ruin. It is justly
observed concerning them, even under their many Troubles, that though they were
sorrowing, yet they were always rejoicing, and though they were poor, yet they
made many rich. The Apostle Paul shows the Greatness of his Condescension in
the following Places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 9.19. For though I be free from all
Men, yet have I made my self Servant unto all, that I might gain the more. To
the same noble Purpose he further observes in the same Chapter, That to the
Jews he became a Jew; and to those that were without Law, as without Law. And
in the last Verse of the aforesaid Chapter, he says, Even as I please all. Men
in all Things, not seeking mine own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they
may be saved. And this the Apostle prescribes as a Rule to others, Romans 15.1,
2. We then that are strong ought to bear the Infirmities of the Weak, and not
to please our selves. Let every one of us please his Neighbor for his Good to
Edification.

5. Charity inclines those that possess it to Humility* Hence it is said in the
4th Verse of this Chapter, that Charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up.
No! it is so far from this, that charitable Persons are willing to do the
meanest Offices, that may serve the Interests of their Friends. Charity
inclines the greatest Souls and noblest Beings, freely to serve their
Inferiors. It was this that inclined the Apostles to becomes the Slaves of
Men, as it were, in order to secure their everlasting Interests. It is this
that inclines the holy Angels, those Principalities and Powers, to minister to
the Saints of God, in this Wilderness, that they may guide and guard them to
Glory. 'Twas this that inclined the innocent honorable and eternal Son of God,
to leave his Father's Bosom, and stoop as low as Earth, by uniting it to his
Deity; hereby his divine Glory was for a Time obscured, and the Son of God
assumed the Form of a Servant, was made a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Grief; hereby he who was rich in all his Father's essential Excellencies,
became poor, that we through his Poverty might be rich. 'Twas Charity inclined
him to wash his Disciples Feet for our Example; and to lay down his precious
Life to purchase their Salvation. It Is Charity that inclines the great God
himself, who inhabiteth Eternity, to dwell in the humble Heart, ( Isai. 57.15.)
to humble himself to behold the Things that are done in Heaven and Earth; to
take such gracious and continual Care in preserving of, providing for, and
bearing with, such mean Dust as we!

Why therefore having such noble Examples, should we not serve one another by
Love? ( Gal. 5.13.) and condescend to Men of low Degree, in performing the
humblest Offices that may serve their Interest, or supply their Necessity!

Hence we may learn, 1. The Excellency of the Christian Religion; the Scope of
which is to inculcate that Virtue of Charity, which is as consonant to the
moral Perfections of the divine Nature, as it is conducive to promote the Good
of Society.

2. Seeing Charity is the great Character of true Christianity, without which
we can have no reasonable Claim thereto, 1 John 3.14, 15. He that hates his
Brother is a Murderer --. And Ver. 17. But whosoever has this World's Goods, and
sees his Brother have Need, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him;
how dwells the Love of God in him? 1 John 4.20. If a Man say, I love God, and
hates his Brother, he is a Liar --: We should be therefore invited to examine
our selves, whether we have the aforesaid Ingredients and Effects of Love, viz.
such Esteem, Desire, Delight, Sorrow; such favorable Sentiments of Mind,
Courtesy in Speech and Carriage, Beneficence and Kindness in Action; a
preferring of the public Good to our private Interests, Self-Denial and
Condescension in promoting it; and Humility. To these, for a further Discovery
of our State, I shall add a few more Characters of Christian Charity, by which
let us try our selves. And

1. True Charity to Man springs from the Love of God, and is exercised with a
Regard to his commanding Authority. Love to God, where it is special and
transcendent, will necessarily constrain us to love our Brethren.

2. It especially eyes the moral Image of God in Man, and is proportioned to
the Degrees it perceives thereof to (...) in them. Though the charitable Person
loves the wh^ rational Creation with a Love of Benevolence, and as Occasion
serves with a Love of Beneficence; yet he also respects pious Souls with a Love
of special Complacence. These are the excellent Ones of the Earth, in whom is
all his Delight: and as he loves all that are truly Good, whatever Denomination
they bear, peculiarly and sincerely; so according to the Degrees of their
Goodness, is his Esteem and Love increased.

3. True Charity will not only dispose to do our Neighbor Good in Temporals
and Spirituals, but also to bear with his Weaknesses. -- Those who can justly
apply to themselves these Signs of Christian Charity, may be comforted in this,
that their Love is an Evidence of their gracious State, and Communion with the
divine Majesty. 1 John 2.10. He that loves his Brother, abides in the Light,
-- And Chap. 4. 16. God is Love; and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God.
In the mean Time, it ought to be observed, that we have no sufficient Reason to
think Persons to be spiritually Good, unless they be sound in the main
doctrinal Principles of Religion: for surely Truth is the Foundation of real
Holiness, without which all Appearances of Piety, how great soever, may be
reasonably suspected. But alas, is there not Reason to lament it, if it were
possible with Tears of Blood, that the very contrary to what has been now
expressed, too generally prevails among some, who profess the same blessed
Truths of God.

I proceed to a Use of EXHORTATION.

O let us all be entreated to seek after the Truth, Increase, and Exercise of
this noble Grace of Love and Charity, in it is whole Extent and utmost Latitude;
and that for the following Considerations.

1. Because this Commandment we have from God, that he who loves him, should
love his Brother also. 1 John 4.21. Should not this have some Influence upon
us, who are his Creatures; who have derived our Beings from his Almighty Power,
and all our Blessings from his gracious Providence, and whose Lives and
Happiness depend on his Favor!

2. Such is the Excellency of Charity, that it is the very Sum and Fulfillment
of the Law of God, the very Soul and Spring of all the Duties we owe to our
Neighbor. So that not one of them can be genuine and acceptable, unless it
proceed from Charity. Gal. 5.14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one Word, even
in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Charity (says a learned
Writer) gives Worth Form and Life to all Virtues; so that without it no Action
is valuable in it self, or acceptable to God. Sever it from Courage, and what
is that but the Boldness and Fierceness of a Beast? from Meekness, and what is
that but the Softness of a Woman, or Weakness of a Child? from Courtesy, and
what is that but Affectation or Artifice? from Justice, and what is that, but
Humor or Policy? from Wisdom, and what is that but Craft and Subtilty? what
means Faith without it, but dry Opinion? what Hope, but blind Presumption?
what Alms-Doing, but ambitious Ostentation? what undergoing Martyrdom, but
Stiffness and Sturdiness of Resolution? What is Devotion, but glossing and
mocking with God? What is any Practice, how specious soever, in Appearance, or
materially Good, but an Issue of Self-conceit, or Self-will, of servile Fear,
or mercenary Design? Thus far he. But

3. Charity is of such absolute Necessity, that without it we must expect to
perish to all Eternity. 1 John 3.15.

4. Charity is just and reasonable; as may appear by the following Particulars,

(1) There is some Propensity to it arising from the very Frame of our Nature;
which appears from the Power that Tragedies have over our softer Passions: Our
Grief is somewhat moved whether we will or not, when we hear of awful
Accidents, that have befallen others, in which we our selves are not at all
concerned; and much more when we behold them conflicting with uncommon
Calamities! And no doubt the natural Desire we have after Society, is partly
owing to a Disposition, that is in all Mankind, to communicate Good to others.
Hence arises a Complacency of Mind upon our doing of Good to others, and an
Uneasiness from the contrary. The Apostle confirms what has been observed under
this Head, Romans 12.10. Be kindly affectioned ((...)) which supposes that there
is a natural Affection in Men, which it is our Duty to exercise and increase.

(2) Every one is inclined to desire and expect Love from others, as a Debt due
to them; and if it is not paid, they are apt to be offended. When we are under
Reproach, Misery and Want, we take it hard if Sympathy and Succor is refused.
This shows plainly that according to our own Judgment, we owe the like to
others in Extremity: for it is an unjustifiable Weakness to expect or desire
for our selves, what we deny to others, who have as good a Right to Kindness as
we. And this our blessed Lord himself confirms by that golden Rule of Love,
which he has given for our Direction, Mat. 7.12. Therefore all Things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this
is the Law and the Prophets. Than which nothing can be more equal and rational.

(3) All Men are Brethren and Representatives, Partakers of the same Nature,
Possessors of the same Powers and Faculties, liable to the same Accidents, and
subject to the same Laws. And is it not reasonable to show Kindness to our
Brethren, and to regard our own Pictures? and on the contrary most unnatural
and cruel to wrong either? But if we are true Christians, there are additional
Engagements upon us to exercise Charity to the People of God, seeing they are
with us Children of one Father, Possessors of the same divine Nature, Pilgrims
to the same Paradise, and Heirs to the same Inheritance, and thereby our
Brethren in the noblest Sense.

(4) Charity is an easy Duty, consisting chiefly in Good Will. Whence the
poorest Beggar is as able to perform it as the mightiest Monarch: Though his Hand
be not so full of Alms, his Heart may be as full of Love. This is what God
principally Respects, and what he will accept of when there is no Ability to
show other Succor. 'Twas on this Account the Widow's Mites were so highly
valued and honorably mentioned in sacred Writ. Love made them far outweigh all
the golden Donations of the great, rich and honorable. And we are assured b^
the true and faithful Witness, that even a Cup of cold Water flowing from this
noble Principle, will not be buried in Oblivion, or miss a gracious Reward.
Mat. 10.42. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little Ones a
Cup of cold Water only, in the Name of a Disciple, Verily I say unto you, he
shall in no wise lose his Reward. And indeed Charity is the surest and easiest
Way of performing all those Duties we owe to our Fellow Creatures. If we would
hasten through the Circle of Duty, let us Love, and all is done: Do we want to
serve God with Delight and Constancy, then let us Love. For that is the only
enduring Source of voluntary, spiritual and steady Obedience, other Motives are
mean and mercenary, and do but produce an unwilling ignoble and instable
Service. Effects must needs vary with their Cause: Now external slavish and
mercenary Motives to religious Action, are as inconstant as the Wind; and
therefore nothing that is stable can be expected from them. Do we want to be
prepared for Suffering? O! then let us Love, and we shall be willing to endure
any Thing for Christ; for many Waters cannot quench Love. Do we want to make
Progress in Holiness? O! then let us Love. That is the Sum of the Law, and Bond
of Perfection.

(5) Charity is pleasing to God, not only in that it conforms us to his moral
Excellency, but also because it is an Expression of our Love to him, when for
his Sake we show Kindness to his Friends and Servants; and this he informs us
he accepts of as done to himself, Mat. 25.34, 40. -- Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World.
And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, in as much
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it
unto me. And certainly the contrary Practice is a slighting of Christ.

6. Charity ennobles and perfects our Nature; adorns and beautifies our Souls,
it inlarges the Mind of Man, and fills it with great and generous Projects,
worthy of its Dignity and Design of being; it grasps the whole Universe in its
kind Embraces, and aims at a universal and immortal Good.

Charity likens us to the noblest Creatures the Angels of God, those glorious
Nobles of the Court of Heaven, who with incessant Delight labor to promote our
Good, and that without any Hopes of Recompense from us; yea, Charity likens
those that are possessed of it to the glorious God himself, who is the great
Original of all Good and Excellency; who though he be infinite in Purity and
Self-Sufficiency, and so incapable to receive any Benefit from his Creatures,
who are unworthy of his Notice, and whose Goodness extends not to him; does
notwithstanding freely vouchsafe innumerable and unwearied Benefits upon them,
and bear with their Affronts and Offenses. What is Charity but Goodness
extending its kind Influence to proper Objects without low and sneaking
Designs? Such is its amiable and venerable Majesty, that it cannot be beheld
without Admiration. Wit, Power and Grandeur, without this are mean and ignoble,
and what sordid Creatures, namely Pagans, Turks, and Devils possess.

On the contrary, Uncharitableness debases, degrades, and defiles the noble
Soul of Man, by making Self the Center of all his Pursuits; the Compass of all
his Cares and Projects is meanly contracted to that pitiful Point: the whole
Business of his Soul is to make Provisions for his Body, for this he acts like
the crafty Fox, or cruel Wolf, using either Fraud or Force to catch his Prey.
Again,

Charity is exceeding advantageous, in as much as it prevents Strife and
Contention, which flow from the contrary Disposition: and are not Peace and
Quiet desirable Things? It also has a natural Tendency to procure Friendship.
Love is a Kind of Loadstone, which draws Persons by a gentle Violence to love
us again; for who can withstand the Charms of a generous Charity, that have the
least Remains of Humanity left in them? Again,

Charity will sweeten every State of Life, and make them safe and profitable:
It will incline us to answer the Design of Prosperity by succouring the
Indigent, and yield Pleasure in so doing; but tempered with a View of our
Neighbor's Calamity. It also helps in Adversity, not only by the Sweets of the
divine Presence, and inclining us to submit to his sovereign Will, but by a
Complacency in others Successes. But Uncharitableness is the very Reverse.

Charity is indeed a sure, easy and safe Way, to the Possession of all good
Things. 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making
many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all Things. Does not your
Neighbor's Wealth enrich you, if you feel Content in his possessing it; and
his Honor advance you, if you feel a Complacence in it? Neither is this
Property only imaginary, but real; for how is Property in Things otherwise
considerable, but for the Content it brings? Again,

Charity frees our Souls from those gloomy Passions of Anger and Revenge, which
eclipse their Beauty, and disturb their Peace, and settles the Mind in a serene
Calm, and keeps the lower Passions in a pleasing Harmony. Gal. 5.22. The Fruit
of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace. If therefore we love our Selves, we must
love others, and do them Good. By Complacency we partake of their Pleasures and
Profits, whether they will or not; and by our Courtesy and Kindness, they will
be inclined, unless they be Monsters of Ingratitude, to help us in Extremity;
and to live in Peace and Amity with us. Furthermore, our Kindness to them is
like to engage their Prayers in our Favor; which if they are pious, are of
great Importance; for the fervent Prayers of the Righteous avail much. If the
Curses and Complaints of the oppressed do reach the Ears of God, Jam. 5.4.
Behold the Hire of the Laborers, which have reaped down your Fields, which is
of you kept back by Fraud, cries; and the Cries of them which have reaped, are
entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath, and pull down Vengeance upon
Oppressors: How much more will the Intercessions of the pious Poor, pierce the
Heavens, and bring down Blessings on the Charitable? But were no such
profitable Fruits following upon the Exercise of Charity, it is indeed eligible
for it is own sake: for it carries a Reward, a Heaven in it is Bosom, even that
Calm which in some Measure constitutes the Happiness of the glorified Saints
and Angels, and even of God himself! O then, let us endeavor to obtain and
increase this noble Grace! To this End, let us seriously consider the
Advantages that follow upon it, and the Disadvantages which attend the Neglect
thereof. Let us therefore exercise Love to God and Christ, and earnestly beg
this Grace of Love to our Brethren, and endeavor after it as far as we can.

But my very dear Brethren! Do not imagine that I have been by this Discourse,
inciting you to an unreasonable Charity; i. e. to look upon Persons to be truly
gracious, when they are unsound in the main Principles of Religion; and so to
respect them as such, because of their fair Show in the Flesh! No! no! This
would prove a great Snare to your Souls: For when the Affections are inflamed,
the Judgment is apt to be secretly biased in Favor of the Objects of our
Love. Though Charity hopes all Things, yet it is not stone-blind: We must examine
well Men's Principles, before we give a loose to our religious Passions toward
them. To be suspicious when we have Reason for it, is a godly Jealousy, and
very necessary for our own Security; especially in these perilous Times in
which we live. The Charity I have been inciting to, is such as consists with
our Regard to Truth, and to our own Preservation. It is a common saying, and a
very just one, That Charity should begin at Home. Love to our selves is made by
our Lord, the Rule of our Love to our Neighbor.

I conclude with the Exhortation of Paul, to the Ephesians, (Ephesians. 5.1, 2.) Be
ye therefore Followers of God as dear Children, and walk in Love, as Christ
also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice
to God, for a sweet smelling Savor.

THE END.
A SERMON By Abraham Hellenbroek. Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Rotterdam.

From CANTICLES Chap. II. Ver. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that
spoil the Vines: for our Vines have tender Grapes.

Being one of that Rev. Author's printed Discourses on the SONG of SOLOMON.

Published at Rotterdam, Anno 1717. Translated from the Dutch.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street.
1742.

Take us the Foxes, etc.
CANT. Chap. II. Ver. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the
Vines, for our Vines have tender Grapes.


IT is not enough, for one to bring Things into a good State, or Condition at
first, but we should also endeavor afterward carefully to preserve them
therein: Let a Man in temporal Matters, or civil Affairs, erect ever such
famous Edifices, plant ever such fine Gardens, and make other Things of curious
Workmanship, which with much Art, and great Pains are brought to admirable
Perfection, we shall observe, that the Esteem, that was entertained of the
Projector's Wisdom and Contrivance, will be much lessened, when these Things
are presently neglected, and no more Care or Pains are taken by him to preserve
them, against those Things that might annoy or spoil them. Howbeit God the all
wise Architect of the Universe takes no less Care to maintain, and preserve the
Works of his Hands, than he did in their first Formation: of which he gives us
daily Instances, by his watchful and providential Care, over the Works of
Nature, and in his Church he gives us no less Proofs of this; if ever he brings
his Church into a flourishing State, and makes her appear like a delightful
Garden, he takes Care and gives Orders concerning every Thing, that might cause
her Beauty to fade, or rob her of her Ornaments: Which makes the Prophet Isaiah
to speak of the Church as a Vineyard on a fruitful Hill, and planted with the
choicest Vine. It is very remarkable that the first Thing here mentioned of it,
is, And he fenced it, Isai. 5.1.2. and to what End the same was thus fenced
appears from the 5th Verse, because that Vineyard so beautifully planted might
not go to decay, or be trodden under Foot, eaten up or destroyed by wild
Beasts. Thus God takes Care to turn out of his Church whatever may prove
pernicious or hurtful, as well as to cherish and preserve whatever may perfect
and beautify her Form. This appears very emphatically in the Words of the Text:
The Bridegroom was before busy, in inviting his Bride, as it were into the
Country, in order to let her participate of all those Pleasures and Delights,
which the Season afforded; for it was told her before, that every Thing had a
goodly Appearance, and had put on a beautiful Form, and that every Thing now
was flourishing and adorned with all the Beauties, and Perfections of the
Spring-Season, shadowing forth the spiritual State of the Church, in a high
Degree of Perfection; in all Respects like a beautiful Paradise of Delight and
Happiness. But behold the Lord Jesus in the Words of the Text, is busy and full
of Care, that this beautiful Form and Appearance of Things in his Vineyard
should not be marred or hurt, but that great Diligence should be used to have
them preserved, and therefore he commands his Servants, to take these
destructive Foxes, and especially the young or little Foxes (which according to
the Account that Naturalists give us of them, are propagated in the Spring, and
if not catched, greatly multiply, and prove very pernicious) that they might
not hurt, or destroy the Beauties of this Vineyard, as before described; and at
the same Time, that the Bride might not be frightened, and disturbed in her
sweet Communion and Fellowship with the Bridegroom, and that what was pleasant
and delightful in this Vineyard, might not be lessened by the spoiling of the
Vines, and the Destruction of the tender Grapes. Thus the Words in more than
one Respect have a sweet Connection with what went before. Take us the Foxes,
the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender Grapes.

The Text then contains a tender Care which the Lord Jesus has for his Church,
and more especially for such Members of it, as are the weakest, that they may
not by wicked and pernicious Instruments, lose their Comeliness, but that they
should be duly watched over, and taken Care of.

Two Heads of Doctrine do naturally flow from these Words.

First, A Command, Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines.

Secondly, An Argument, For our Vines have tender Grapes.

Who it is that speaks here is somewhat obscure, but as to the Matter spoken
of, there is but little Difficulty. Some are of Opinion, that the Bride speaks
to the Bridegroom, and at the same time to his Bridemen and Fellows, considered
together; or together with the Father and the Holy Ghost; which should be
brought in and included by the Word ( us --) But the most take them to be the
Words of the Bridegroom, and I see no Reason to dissent from them. It is not
unlikely that what contains a Narrative of her Beloved's Answer as spoken by
her, ends at the 13th Verse, and that the Bridegroom begins his Speech to her
at the 14th Verse, and so is continued in this: And if it be taken that the
14th Verse should belong to said Narrative, or Christ's Call upon his Spouse,
as she relates it, yet this 15th Verse may properly be connected with it; and
then it will still appear to be the Words of the Bridegroom, related or spoken
by the Bride; and though she ends her Narrative at the 14th Verse, yet he may
very properly be taken and understood to speak here, for these following
Reasons. First, To relieve the Bride from new Fears, or Doubts, by giving
Command to his Servants, in her Presence, to take the Foxes, which might appear
frightful, and offensive, that so she might without any Scruple, or Doubt,
follow him toward the Country. 2dly, Because the Matter which is here given in
Charge, is peculiar to that tender Care, which the Lord Jesus exercises toward
his Church. 3dly, Because he has the greatest Prerogative, over those to whom
this Charge or Command is given. 4thly, As he is the Lord of the Vineyard, he
can do it with Authority: and therefore most eminently belongs to him. 5ly.
This further appears, because the Word (us) most certainly includes him, and it
is more fitting, that he should give Orders, than the Bride.

The Evil which the Bridegroom is here concerned about, he expresses by the
Name of Foxes, little Foxes, that spoil the Vines: The original Word is never
otherwise translated by our Interpreters than by the Word Fox or Foxes, Judges
15.4. Neh. 4 3. Psalm. 63.11. Lam. 5.18. Ezekiel. 13.4. From what this Word has
arisen, is very difficult to know: the learned Bochart observes, that by the
Chaldeans, the Syrians, and the Arabians, a Cough is expressed by a Word, that
agrees with this; and hence he concludes that the Foxes derive their Name,
because it is peculiar to them to cough; or because their Barking resembles a
harsh or hoarse Cough. He lays the whole stress of his Opinion, in this
Respect, upon a French Proverb, and on a certain Author, that has made some
Remarks upon it, and inasmuch as in the same Remarks, it is said, that the
Foxes are possessed with a great internal Heat of Body (and I add, that they
are exceeding Greedy, and of a rapacious Swiftness) I might with as much Ground
of Probability, suppose, the Word to be derived from an Arabian Word,
signifying in that Language (burning) -- However I leave that Matter as it is.

It is a Creature that was known, and very common in the Land of Canaan; which
seems plain from the Story of Samson, at least they were numerous toward the
Borders of the Phillistines Country, Judges 13.4. It is a wild Creature, and
therefore chiefly resorting in desert Places, Lam. 5.18. Ezekiel. 13.4. and that
they are Creatures that feed upon Flesh or Dead Corpse is plain from Psalm.
63.10. and Bochart observes the same: that they also fed and preyed upon
Fruits, and destroyed them, appears plain from the Words of the Text. It is
beyond all doubt, that by the Foxes here mentioned, is emblematically
signified, and understood, a certain Sort of Men. R. Solomon a Jew, understood
by these greater and lesser Foxes, the Egyptians, and their Children whom God
caused to be taken and swallowed up by the Billows of the Red Sea: And hence
according to his Notion they have derived their Name; I think but a very
slender reason, Aben Ezra, supposes by them is meant, the worshippers of the
golden Calf in the Wilderness, which according to him, did a great deal of
Damage to the young Vineyards of the Children of Israel. The Chaldee Paraphrase
makes them, to signify Amaleck, who was contriving to destroy Israel in the
Wilderness. Others understand by these Foxes, those Adversaries of the Jews,
who after their Return from the Babylonian Captivity, endeavored by Force, and
all Manner of Artifice, and by their Complaints to the Persian Monarchs, to
hinder and obstruct the rebuilding of the Temple, and the re-establishing of
the Jewesh State Ezra 4. Neh. 4.6. Some have understood them as intending
Herod, and his Ministry, who destroyed the innocent Children in that horrid
Murder at Bethlehem: Others again in a larger Sense, will make them to signify
all Manner of Sin; sinful Thoughts, and Affections, which lurk in the hidden
Corners, and Recesses of the deceitful Hearts of Men, and which prove very
troublesome to the tender Blossoms, and first Fruits of Grace in the Children of
God; this by Way of Allusion is something nearer to the Purpose.

But in Order to answer the Design of the Spirit of God, and the usual Way of
explaining such Kind of Emblems, it will be much better to conceive, and
understand by the Word Foxes, Men who are destructive Instruments of the
Church; that prove to be to the Church what Foxes are said to be to the
Vineyards. It is plain, that such Sort of Men are emblematically represented in
the Scriptures, and described by different Kinds of wild and brute Beasts. When
by them are signified such Men as prove destructive to the Church, through
Barbarities and bloody Perscutions, then they are generally called Lions,
Leopards, Bears, and wild Swine, and such like voracious Animals.

Some indeed have also thought that by Foxes, such kind of Persecutors are
intended, because that Tyrant Herod, was by our Lord compared to a Fox, Luke
13.32. But I think it is well observed by the famous Bochart, that Jesus did
not call him so, so much for his Cruelty as for his Subtilty and Deceitfulness,
of which he had given some Specimens. I therefore believe with most
Interpreters, that by Foxes is not so much intended, or to be understood open
and bloody Persecutors, as more close and hidden Injurers of the Church. 1st.
Because such most frequently appear, in the best and most peaceable State of
the Church, as I before hinted. 2dly, Because such are not so apt totally to
waste and destroy the Vineyards (which seems more peculiar to Tyrants, and more
voracious Creatures) but only in Part, which is plainly intimated by these
Foxes; who we see are mostly bent upon the Destruction of the young and tender
Grapes, while the Vineyard may still remain. 3dly, Because these are more
properly the Subjects, here to be catched and taken, by the Servants and
Ministers of the Bridegroom, and the Bride, which is not so much the Case in
respect of cruel and powerful Persecutors. 4thly, Because the particular
Denomination of Foxes, in respect of their Quality, more properly belongs to
them. Hence it is that in all Ages, such Men are more to be found within the
Church, who by their Artifice and Craft, have more secret Ways and Means, to do
Injury to Truth and Piety, and have proved dangerous, and hurtful to the
Children of God. Such were the false Prophets, and deceitful Teachers under the
old Testament Times, who were also compared to Foxes, Ezekiel. 13.3, 4. Thus says
the Lord God, Woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their own Spirit, and
have seen nothing. O Israel, thy Prophets are like the Foxes in the Deserts.
And afterward, all those false Scribes and Seducers of the People, all those
Sects of Pharisees, Sadducees, Esseens, and others, who after the return of the
Jewish Nation from the Babylonian Captivity, by Degrees grew up and multiplied,
and who by their false Doctrines and perverse Deportments had woefully perverted
truth, true Piety, and the Service of God, together with all those false
Apostles and false Brethren of the Jews, those vain and mistaken Philosophers
of the Heathens, who either by their Jewish, or heathenish Principles and
Doctrines, had perverted the Doctrines of Christian Liberty, and the Simplicity
of the Gospel, and all that Train of Heretics, Seducers, and Schismatics, who
from Time to Time have appeared in the Gospel Church; a Catalogue of which in
every Age we have recorded by the learned Spanheim in his Ecclesiastical
History. Certain it is that all such Kind of noxious, and destructive
Instruments in the Church, may very emphatically be compared to Foxes.

If any should be so inquisitive, as to desire a more or less certain
Description, of the Nature and Quality of Foxes, they may see what Naturalists
have said concerning them, as set forth at large by Gesnerus, Bochart, and
others. I shall but briefly mention a few of them.

First, Foxes are famous among the Herds of Animals for their great Cunning,
and Craft: for which Reason we before observed, the Lord Jesus called Herod a
Fox* Many Proverbs are taken and borrowed by the Ancients, from their Subtilty.
Many Instances of their Craft, and the common Comparison of crafty Men to
Foxes, are mentioned and recorded by the said Historians. It is also noted by
them that the Names of Foxes, are taken from their subtilness, especially among
the Grecians. Heretics, and such like Disturbers of the Church, are generally
Men of Wit and Ingenuity. It Is true, there have been some among them, Men of
weak Minds, and little Parts, and have been Broachers of very blunt Errors; but
then such have had but little Influence; but others were keen and cunning Wits,
ingenious Philosophers, who did oppose themselves to the mysterious and simple
Doctrines of the Gospel, with all the Force of Wit, and Eloquence which they
were Masters of; upon which account Tertullian often says De ingenio
professorum Sapientiae omnem haeresin anamari: Haeresis Philosophos et
Haereticorum Patriarchas esse: that all Heresy was animated by the Wit of the
Professors of Philosophy, that through an eager Desire after Wisdom Heresies
were broached, that Philosophers were the Patriarchs of all Heretics.

2dly, Foxes because of their Cunning and Sagacity, are of a treacherous, and
deceitful Practice, full of Devices, and of a seducing Behavior. Now not a
more natural, or proper Character, can be given of Heretics and false
Teachers; they are generally well furnished with cunning, evasive, and
dissimulating Tricks: St. Paul therefore calls them vain Talkers, and
Deceivers, Titus 1.10. who as it were juggle and bewitch the People, Gal. 3.1.
who subvert whole Families Tit, 1.11. seducing Spirits, 1 Timothy 4.1. deceitful
Workers, 2 Cor. 11.13. who by their slight and cunning Craftiness easily
deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. And if it please you I shall descend into further
Particulars, to show you the Analogy between the Foxes, and Seducers and false
Teachers.

First, Foxes, that they may the better conceal themselves, subsist not so much
above Ground, as in Holes and Caverns, under the Earth, and often these are
very deep. Luke 9.58. The Foxes have Holes etc. Heretics, and Seducers, always
endeavor to hide their Doctrines and Opinions, and keep them as secret as they
can. Certain it is, that they do not presently, and openly appear to the World,
but know how to hide themselves, under sly Shifts, and cunning Evasions. We
find therefore the Lord Jesus used it as an Argument, that no One might suspect
his Doctrine, John 18.20. I spoke openly to the World, I ever taught in the
Synagogues, and in the Temple whither the Jews always resort, and in secret
have I said nothing.

2dly, Their Holes have but a very straight and narrow Entrance; and it is
surprising how they can sques^, and stretch themselves out, to get into those
narrow Passages. Horace therefore makes mention of a certain Fox, that crept
through an exceeding narrow Crack; Forte per angustam tenuis Vulpecula rimam
etc. It is also peculiar to Heretics, and false Teachers, not to suffer their
secret Wiles to be searched into and discovered; they hide and beset themselves
and their Opinions, as artfully as they can; they speak of them, in such
equivocating and doubtful Terms, that one must search well, and make a very
narrow Inspection, if he shall discover their Fox-Holes; and little would he
think (if he penetrates so far) to find so much Deceit lurking behind the
Scene. St. Peter therefore speaks of them, as false Teachers, who shall privily
bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1.

3dly, Foxes, at Places where they chiefly resort, have most commonly, many
Ways, and Passages, to come out at; because if one should be stopped or closed
up they may have another to creep out at. Heretics, and false Teachers, also
have their Trenches, and here and there a back Door, that when they come to be
so close set, and have as it were their Mouths stopped, they may have some mean
Shift or Equivocation to help themselves withal.

4thly, It will appear from what has been already said, that Foxes are very
hard to be catched. False Teachers, those of them that are any thing crafty,
are hard to be discovered, and yet more difficult to be convinced.

5thly, Foxes that they may not be so easily ensnared seldom run right forward,
but run to one Side, and to the other Side, and cross Ways; from which some of
the Latins have derived the Name, Vulpes quasi Volipes. Heretics and Seducers
in like Manner, have forsaken the right Ways, and run into perverse and crooked
By-Roads; and thus the further they go on, the further they go a stray from the
right Ways of Truth.

6thly They have a sly Way of creeping into other Holes, and of turning other
Animals (it may be said) out of their rightful Possessions. So it is with
respect to false Teachers and Seducers, of whom St. Paul speaks: For of this
Sort are those which creep into Houses, 2 Timothy 3.6. And it may be generally
said of them, that they creep into settled Ministries and Congregations, and
turn out those that are orthodox amongst them, by their poisonous and
infectious Errors, and some Times (if such Means will not do, when they get the
upper Hand) by using Force and Violence.

7thly, Foxes know how to dissemble, and often show what they are not, in order
to cheat and decoy less harmless Creatures, and to make a Prey of them. If we
may give Credit to what Epiphanius says, they are wont to stretch themselves
out on the Earth, and lay as if they had no Life in them, that when the Fowls
of the Air perceiving them, may by lighting upon them, become their Prey; and
also as they in outward Appearance are not much unlike Dogs; some times they
venture to mingle themselves with those Dogs that are set to watch the Flock,
Job. 30.1. And that they know how to imitate the Barkings of those Watch-Dogs;
and by that Means decoy and ensnare the innocent Flock, which those Dogs are
set over. False Teachers and Seducers are wonderfully skilled in such Kind of
Tricks; they know how to appear outwardly very kind, friendly, and courteous,
as if they meant or intended no Harm; they appear to be very tender, candid,
and patient, full of Meekness and Love; and are mightily for Christian Liberty;
and by this Means entice the Simple, and steal into their Hearts and
Affections; and also they know how to imitate the good Watch-Dogs; to which
faithful Pastors may be compared in Contradistinction of what we read, Isaiah
56.10, 11. and Phil. 3.2. St. Paul says of the false Apostles and deceitful
Workers, that they are even as Satan transforming themselves into Angels of
Light.

Sometimes in the Church they bear the same Offices with the Faithful, and are
outwardly joined with them, and are very strict in all their Behavior; they
make a specious Show in the Performance of all the Duties of Morality and
Piety, equal to, and often beyond any others: As we may see in the Pharisees of
old, and more lately in the Novatians, Donatists, Pelageans, Jesuits,
Socinians, Quakers; and many others. These are the false Prophets in Sheeps
Clothing, but within are ravening Wolves, Mat. 7.15. They are very artful in
putting a fine Gloss upon their erroneous Principles and Doctrines, to make
them agreeable to natural Reason, and know how to cook and dress them up to the
particular Tastes of Men; They can not only varnish them with a Show of great
Wisdom, but also (as if they were sound) cloak them with holy Scripture, and
under the Umbrage of some Truths, which they still retain, mix and mingle their
pernicious Errors: They also speak like the true Watchmen, often not only with
much Eloquence, but under a Pretense of extraordinary Revelations; yea they can
speak the Language of true Divines. You shall hardly meet with a Heretic
without a good Stock of Literature, by Means whereof under ambiguous
Expressions, and mental Evasions, they hide themselves, even as Ireneus speaks
of them; "They (says he) speak the same Things, but believe otherways". Such
were the Subtilties of the Arians, which they showed after their Errors were
detected, and condemned at Bithany, when in a City in Thrace, of the same Name,
they drew up a false Creed, and put it into the Hands of the simpler Sort,
under the Name of the Nicene. Church History informs us, that it was common for
that Arch-Heretick Arius, to speak in the same Strain, and with the same
Language of the Faithful, but always had some mental Reserve, and couched under
a quite different Meaning. And at last, when by the Instigation of the Emperor
he was pressed upon to subscribe to the true Nicene Creed, it is observed that
he underwrote thus, As I have underwritten, so I do believe: Meaning at the
same time a certain Writing, which he then had under his Arm, and had prepared
before Hand and subscribed unto. Such are truly those Liars who by their
Hypocrisy do seduce, 1 Timothy 4.2. Who cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to
sound Doctrine; and by good Words and fair Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the
Simple, Romans 16.17, 18. Who give themselves out for Apostles and are not, but
are found Liars, Rev. 2.2. All the aforesaid Particulars, may be brought to
prove the cunning of Foxes, and their Analogy with such Heretics and Seducers,
and are the chief Things aimed at, in these emblematical Characters contained
in the Text: However we may add this further, that Foxes as they are wild
Creatures, have an inherent Savageness and Cruelty joined with their Cunning,
which appears plain from Psalm. 63.10. Heretics and Seducers if they cannot make
their Delusions take as they like, and they get the upper Hand, by getting the
Authority on their Side, they generally become cruel; then they cannot bear
those that are faithful; then they will fall upon them with all Kinds of
Aspersions, and false Accusations, and become their cruel Persecutors; then
they change their Shape, and become ravening Wolves, to whom in this Respect
they are compared, Matthew. 7.15. Grievous Wolves, Matthew. 20.29. Evil Beasts,
Tit. 1.12. What Mischiefs did not the false Prophets hatch against the true
Prophets, and those that held with them, under the Reigns of the Kings of
Judah? What Babarities and Cruelties were exercised against the Faithful, by
those Apostates among the Maccabees after their Return out of Captivity? How
bloody was the Rage of the Scribes, and Heads of the Jewish Church against the
blessed Jesus, against his Apostles, and the whole Body of the primitive
Christians? How many bitter Trials and Sufferings have the faithful Christians
undergone by Reason of the superior Strength of Heretics and Seducers, and
the Influence they have had with those in civil or regal Authority? All which
abundantly appears from the Testimonies of Scripture, both of the old and new
Testament, from the Books of the Maccabees, and Church Chronicles; and above
all, from the most terrible and barbarous Cruelties committed by the Arians in
diverse Persecutions under the Favor and Protection of the Emperors and
Empresses of Rome.

The Text further speaks of little Foxes: These seem to be more particularly
mentioned, not so much because easier catched than the older and more cunning,
as some have observed; neither because they are more swift and greedy, and
consequently more mischievous than the old, as others would have it, (of both
which I much doubt) but chiefly inasmuch as they are smaller, are not so easily
seen and discovered, and have every where an easier Access, and for that Reason
are more dangerous in doing Mischief, and therefore not to be neglected or
thought too little of: And more particularly it serves to instruct us, to be
watchful against all Manner of Evil in it is smallest Beginnings. Should we pass
by the little Foxes, they will become big ones in a little Time, and by their
Growth and Increase, will be able soon to overrun every Thing.

Now to answer the Design of the Text, when the Lord Jesus commands his
Servants to watch against the evil Workers and Corrupters of his Church, under
the Characters of little Foxes; it is not intended or spoken so much by Way of
Diminution, nor because by an affected Humility, they appear small (as some do
take it) but the Lord intends by it a second Sort of Injurers of his Church,
such whose Errors comparatively are not so great, and also such perhaps who
have not the greatest Party, and are not in most Esteem, or such who are yet as
it were hidden; and in this Respect much resemble little Foxes, who are low and
squat, and apt to sneak away; and are thus more apt to pass unobserved: Such
there have been in the primitive Churches, besides those Arch-Hereticks, and
such there have been in after Ages, even until now. These do not altogether
subvert the Existence of the Church, or pervert her in all the Fundamentals of
the Christian Faith, but nevertheless, can do a great deal of Mischief, both as
to the Truths and the Peace of the Church, and frequently prove Forerunners of
larger Foxes, which in Time wax strong; and therefore the Lord Jesus will not
have them excused, and by Consequence is not at all for Toleration in this
Point. He intends by it all Injurers of the Church in their first Appearance,
while they are yet young and small, for then they are not so cunning, and
altogether so mischievous, as they may be in process of Time; neither are their
Errors so gross, which generally in Time do increase, their Party not so
strong, and their Credit and Respect is less, and therefore never easier
stopped than while they are small.

Now the Lord here supposes (and it is also evident from all Experience) that
such Foxes both great and small have been, and will be in all Ages of the
Church. And with respect to their Mischeivousness he further adds, which (says
he) spoil the Vines. It is natural and peculiar to Foxes, to spoil the Vines
(whether we consider them as respecting whole Vineyards, or particular Vines,
is little to the Purpose; for the one includes the other, and it is true in
both Respects) by rooting at the Roots, taring down the Leaves, the Branches;
and particularly by destroying the Fruits. Hence perhaps it was that Samson's
Foxes, among other Things, fell foul of the Philistines Vineyards, Judge. 15.5.

Thus we have seen that Foxes, as before described, are naturally bent upon,
and actually do destroy the Vineyards, and spoil the Vines. The Church and the
People of God in Scripture are frequently compared to a Vineyard, Cant. 8.11,
12. Isai^. 3.4. Chap. 1.7. and 25.11.2. and in many other Places. When the Lord
Jesus here makes mention of Vines in the plural Number, particular Churches
seem plainly to be intimated, or Congregations which are as so many Vineyards,
and Believers as so many Vines scattered up and down within the Compass of
certain Cities or Countries, which are planted, and grow up together, bearing
Fruit under the special and peculiar Care of the Lord Jesus Christ, fenced
about by his Power, shone upon by the bright Beams of his Countenance, watered
by his Word and Spirit, and made fruitful by his peculiar Benediction. But
these are Things not at present to be enlarged upon.

But here take Notice, that Foxes both great and small are said to spoil the
Vines, which in the Original signifies as much as all Manner of Injury more or
less, or even to the utter Destruction of any Thing. See Ezra 6.12. Dan. 4.23.
Isai. 13.5. And here we may take it in its full Latitude for all false
Teachers, and Seducers, Heretics, and Schismatics etc. who spoil these
spiritual Vineyards in all the following Particulars.

First in the Truth: By the spreading of Lies, and propagated of false
Doctrines, which cannot be supported by the Word of God, whatever specious
Pretenses they may have notwithstanding; who turn People about by the Wind of
their Doctrine, and by their Cunning easily seduce, Ephesians. 4.14. St. Paul in this
Respect compares their Doctrine to a mortal Disease, which, says he, will eat
a^ ^th a Canker, 2 Timothy 2.17. This was manifest in the Arian Heresy, which like
a Flood overrun the Earth; and it seemed as if the whole World was tinctured
with Arianism.

Secondly, in Piety: When the Truths which are from God, and which are our
Directory and true Guide, be taken away, it will follow that Godliness and true
Piety must totally decay; by Contentions and Divisions, they may be led to
Disregard inward Frames and Experiences, and carried away from the most
essential and practical Things in the Christian Religion, and instead of
getting their Hearts strengthened by Grace, they will be carried about with
diverse and strange Doctrines, and take up with such Things which have not
profited them that have been occupied therein, Heb. 13.9. We see that Paul
considers these Things as Opposites that cannot be joined together: Refuse
profane and old Wives Fables, and exercise thy self rather unto Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7. This will yet further appear, when such Seducers lay such a
Foundation which has a natural Tendency to Sin, and opens a Door for carnal
Security, and Self-deceiving, or when they by their Lives and Examples seduce
into Sin. This St. Peter makes mention of, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. For when they speak
great swelling Words of Vanity, they allure through the Lusts of the Flesh,
through much Wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live in
Error; while they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the Servants of
Corruption. Of these Sort were all those which in the primitive Churches were
reckoned among the impure Gnostics, the Followers of Simon, Meander,
Saturnias, Basilides, Carpocrates, Valentius, and many others; every one of
which opened a Door to all Manner of Ungodliness. Thus God said of the
hypocritical Prophets in Judah, Jer. 23.14. I have seen also in the Prophets of
Jerusalem an horrible Thing, they commit Adultery and walk in Lies, they
strengthen also the Hands of the evil Doers, that none does return from his
Wickedness.

Thirdly, in the Worship of God: For when Truth and Piety decay, it generally
follows that the very Essence of Worship will be corrupted, the Spirit and
Purity of it will fail, Superstition and Will Worship will prevail: This may be
seen of the false Prophets of Israel, who seduced the People into Idolatry. And
in those Apostates among the ^accabees, who brought the Grecian Ethics into
God's Worship, and in the Sects of the Samaritans, Herodians, Pharisees,
Sadducees, and Esseens, who took the very Soul out of the instituted Worship of
God, which made it appear in every Respect like a mere Image without Life a Web
interwoven with Hypocrisy and human Inventions. This we have also seen in
Antichrist, who changed the whole Worship of God into Superstition,
Will Worship and Idolatry.

Fourthly, in Order, Unity, and Peace. We shall see that, that sweet Comeliness
and Beauty, will presently depart from the Lord's Vineyard: Even as Foxes do
turn every Thing upside down, mar and spoil the Order and Beauty of Vineyards;
so every Thing in the Church will be turned upside down, and brought into a
strange Confusion. Whenever these Church Foxes make their Appearance, all
Manner of Contentions, Disquietudes, and Divisions, Quarrels and Schisms, break
out; that mutual Love that subsisted before, is turned into Hatred. St. Paul
therefore describes them as such, which cause Divisions and Offenses contrary
to the Doctrine which they have learned, Romans 16.17. St. James observes it as a
Consequence of such a Wisdom which is not from above, but is (says he)
earthly, sensual, and devilish: for where Envying and Strife is, there is
Confusion, and every evil Work, Jam. 3.15, 16.

Fifthly, in Growth: For as Foxes by rooting up and taring off the Buds and
Branches of Vineyards, do vastly obstruct and hinder their Growth; so we may
observe, that as soon as ever false Doctrine and Heresy appear, the Growth and
Progress of the Church will soon meet with an uncommon Shock; the Growth of
young Converts will be exceedingly checked: These do not know by Reason of
these Contentions and Divisions that happen, what Course either to steer, or on
which Side to turn themselves; and on the other Hand many Branches that did
belong to her, will be quite torn off.

Sixthly, in her Fruit bearing. Whereas Foxes in Vineyards do Injury to the
Fruits in more than one Respect, they mar them in the Bud, as well as destroy
them when come to Maturity; even so by these Means in the Church, spiritual
Fruitfulness presently decays and withers away in such Congregations; the
goodly Fruits of Faith, Love, and Holiness, drop off, and they are swallowed up
with Uncharitableness and Disquietudes.

Seventhly, in her Bloom and Ornaments: For as Foxes in Vineyards do destroy
every Thing that is ornamental, by tearing down the Branches, Leaves, and
Fruits; even so it is with the most blooming and flourishing Church, when these
spiritual Foxes come into it; her Appearance and Aspect is often times so much
changed from what it was, that she hardly in any Respect looks like the same;
all her Splendour is departed, her Bloom and Beauty decayed, and all her Robes
are so rent and torn, that every Thing hangs as it were in Rags about her. Do
we not even behold this in the Times past, in so many beautiful Congregations
in the eastern Churches; which by Reason of Heresies among them, had almost
lost the very Essence and smallest Remains of true Christianity? And what
became of the Church when Antichrist overspread the same, is too well known to
need a Recital.

Eighthly, in her Strength and Security: Even as Foxes are wont to root at the
Roots of Vineyards, and cause them to totter and shake, so do these Heresies
cause every Thing to shake, by rooting up the Foundations upon which this
spiritual Vineyard is built, the Plants thereof are made loose, and begin to
shake; they begin to lean and incline to Lies; and some do totally fall down.
Thus St. Paul warns us against Men that should arise; as he says Act. 20.30.
Also of your own selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse Things, to draw away
Disciples after them: And as such that should be the Cause of some to depart
from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.5. Some that should depart from the Faith, giving Heed
to seducing Spirits. Yea, they will even tear up the Enclosure of the Lord's
Vineyard, and leave it destitute of all Security and Defense, by breaking
through all Church Discipline, or by getting in Favor with the secular Powers,
and drawing them over to their Party; which otherwise are a Defense and
Security to the Church. This has been seen in the false Prophets of old, in the
apostate Jews among the Maccabees, who were in Collusion with the Syrian
Monarchs; and in several other Heretics in the primitive Churches; and more
lately in the Bishops of Rome, the Remonstrants, and many others.

Ninthly and lastly. As a Consequence of what has been said, it brings endless
Ruin upon the Souls of Men that are seduced by them; no less than the Loss of
their eternal Salvation. This is certainly also an Evil or Mischief that they
bring upon the Lord's Vineyard. It Is not only a Heresy in Morals, but a Heresy
in Doctrines, which ruins the Souls of Men, and sinks them into eternal
Perdition: Even as St. Peter tells us of an eternal Destruction, that follows
and flows from Heresies, 2 Pet. 2. throughout that whole Chapter. Well may the
Lord therefore call them, Pastors that destroy and scatter the Sheep of his
Pasture, Jer. 23.1.

We see from what has been said, in how many Instances, and in Truth, that such
Foxes do spoil the Vines. And if we should let them go on in their Way without
control, we should quickly find the Truth of what was said of other Pastors,
Jer. 12.10. Many Pastors have destroyed my Vineyard, they have trodden my
Portion under Foot; they have made my pleasant Portion a desolate Wilderness.
Yea, we should quickly see that neither Vineyard nor Branch would be found.
This is therefore the Reason why the Lord Jesus will have his Vineyard
carefully watched over, and is the Reason why he commands his Servants, as in
the Words of the Text, Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the
Vines, for our Vines have tender Grapes.

There is a Diversity of Opinions, concerning the Persons to whom this Command
should be given: Some understand it to be the Angels; others, the civil Powers;
but the most, Pastors and Teachers: I incline rather to take the Command in a
larger Sense; i. e. to concern all those why stand in any near Relation to the
Bridegroom, over whom he exercises his peculiar Authority, and who are in any
Respect capable or qualified to take these Foxes.

As first, All Overseers of the Church in all Ages, and of all Stations and
Degrees; i. e. Prophets, Priests, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers;
to whom in Respect of their Offices, this Duty of taking the Foxes, most
eminently and peculiarly belongs.

2. This Duty includes and enjoins all particular Believers, when a fit
Opportunity presents, so far as they have Talents and Capacities to detect
those that are in Error, to oppose and endeavor to convince them: Looking
diligently, lest any Man fail of the Grace of God; lest any Root of Bitterness
springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled, Heb. 12.15.

Now of all these it is required to take these Foxes, these young Foxes: It
might as well be translated, to apprehend, to hold. Naturalists do observe,
that though Foxes can be taken, yet it is very difficult. Here in a spiritual
Sense, it also requires great Pains and Industry to take these Foxes. Jesus
Christ here gives Power and Command to do it; Take us the Foxes.

Now wherein the Matter of this Duty consists, is not very difficult to
conceive; generally, it consists in using all possible and necessary Means, to
prevent these Foxes from doing any Kind of Mischief to the Lord's Vineyard.

First, To pursue them into their intricate Wiles and Mazes, to detect and
apprehend them in their Subterfuges; to warn the Ignorant against them, and to
keep a careful Watch and Look-out against them. This is what St. Paul exhorts
unto, Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil Workers, beware of the
Concision. The Lord Jesus commends the Ephesians for this, Rev. 2.2. And thou
have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them
Liars. And this he also injoins when he says, Beware of false Prophets, which
come to you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, Matthew.
7.15. And to the same Purpose are all those faithful Exhortations which we
find, Act. 20.28, 29. Col. 2.8. and 1 John 4.1.

2. To attack them wherever we meet with them; fall upon them and oppose
them: much in such a Manner as we find Peter fell upon Simon the Sorcerer, Act.
8. and St. Paul upon Bar-Jesus on the Island of Salamis, Act. 13. Wherever he
found false Brethren, he presently faithfully and earnestly opposed them; which
plainly appears from the Acts of the Apostles, and from his Epistles. And this
was also the Charge which he gave to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.16. But shu^ profane and
vain Babblings, for they will increase unto more Ungodliness. And to Titus,
Wherefore, says he, Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith,
Tit. 1.13. And, 3.9. But avoid foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and
Contention^* and Strivings about the Law, for they are unprofitable and vain.

3. To confute them with Testimonies from the holy Scriptures, and sound
Reason, either in Writing, or by Word of ^th; and by these Means to take them
in their Errors, and to bring them ad ^minos, non Loqui, to have nothing to
gainsay. The Paul charges Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. Reprove, rebuke, exhort with
all Long-suffering and Doctrine; for the Time will come, when they will not
endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts, they shall heap to themselves
Teachers, having itching Ears. For which Reason he also further shows, that a
Bishop should be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the
Gainsayers, and to stop the Mouths of the unruly and vain Talkers, Tit. 1.9,
11. Thus did the Fathers in all Ages of the Church in which they lived, enter
into laudable and earnest Disputes, and with much Bravery confuted those that
were in Error; which may be seen in the Writings and Disputes of Ireneus
against the Gnostics and Valentinians; and of Tertullian against Marcion,
Hermogenes, Praxias, and Sabellianus; the same against the Valentinians, and
Gnostics; of Origin against Celsus and Marcion; of Athanasius, Hillary, Basil,
Ambrose, and Fulgentius, against the Arians; of Optatus, Milivitanus, against
the Donatists; of Jerome against Jovinian, Vigilantius, the Luciferians, and
Pelagians; of Serapio^ against the Manichees; of Augustine, besides what he
wrote against the Arians, Donatists, Manichees, and Pelagians, against
Priscillianists, and Origenists; of Cyrill of Alexandria against Nestor, and
the Anthropomorphites; and many others, of both earlier and later Times; which
Writings are yet in being, and may be seen.

4. We ought (if possible) to convince them of their Errors. Certainly, the
most happy Way of catching them, is to convince them, and cause them by this
Means to return from the Paths of Delusion, into the Bosom of the Church Such
was the happy taking of a cunning Fox, a very learned Philosopher (according to
what Sozomen tells of him) who in the Council of Nice, did vehemently and
impudently oppose the Doctrines of Faith; but the same was by a Member of that
Council (though otherwise not the most ingenious, yet honorable for his Age)
convinced, and immediately taken in the Net of the Gospel, and drawn by the
Cords of irresistible Grace into an effectual and sincere Repentance. Not much
unlike unto this, was what the same Author relates of another Philosopher, who
was chosen out of many others, as the ablest to enter into a Debate with
Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople, that he was so struck with the first Word
spoken by the Bishop, that he could not utter one Word.

5. We should, when all other Means fail, by ecclesiastical Methods (without
any Force or Restraint upon the Conscience, or Persecution) set Bounds to, and
hinder them from propagating their pernicious and destructive Errors.

6 and lastly, To cast them out of the Lord's Vineyard; namely, by
Excommunication. By this we declare them to be no more Brothers; and by it they
are cut off from Communion with the People of God. This is demanded by St. Paul
in Respect of those which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned; And avoid them, says he Romans 16.17. -- I would
they were even cut off, which trouble you, Gal. 5.12. -- A Man that is an
Heretic, after the first and second Admonition reject, Tit. 3.10. Even as Paul
himself did to Hymeneus and Alexander, whom he had delivered unto Satan, 1 Timothy
1.20. This was the Practice of the Fathers in the primitive Times: Hence it was
that so many Councils and Synods were summoned and convened, in which all Kinds
of Errors and false Doctrines were condemned, and those that were the Broachers
and Promoters of them cast out. The Truth of this is evident in the Instances,
of Samosatenus, by two Councils at Antioch held in the Years 262, and 270; of
the Arians, by the Nicene Council 325; of Macedonius by the Council at
Constantinople 381; of Nestor by the Council at Ephesus 431; of Butyches by the
Council at Chalcedon 451; and a Hundred besides.

Behold, thus we have seen the Duty the Lord Jesus requires of his Servants,
and how he commands these Foxes, to be taken, not only for himself, but also
for his Bride; implied in the Words, Take us: It serves to inform us,

1. That there is a mutual Fellowship subsisting between Jesus Christ and his
Church; that their Interest is in common, as betwixt Husband and Wife,
Bridegroom and Bride.

2. That what Service is done for the one, is also done for the other. Whoever
serves Jesus Christ, does at the same Time serve his Church and People.

3. That an Injury done to the one, is an Injury done to the other; and that
these Foxes are in both their Way, and therefore should be taken for the one as
well as for the other.

4. That Jesus Christ makes the Interest and Concern of the Church his own, and
reckons whatever is done to her, as if the same was done to himself. Matthew.
10.40. Whoever receives you, receives me. Zech. 2.8. For he that touches
you, touches the Apple of his Eye. Act. 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? And see Mar. 9.41. Matthew. 25.35, 45.

5. That Christ and the Spouse mutually take Delight and have a Complacency in
this; and so the Words, Take us the Foxes, will signify as much as take them
for Our Pleasure and Delight; even as great Personages sometimes make chasing
or hunting Matches for their Diversion.

6. This would be of great Service, and in a particular Manner conduce to
promote the Ease of the Bridegroom and of the Bride, that in as much as she was
to accompany him toward the Country, it would be necessary that these Foxes
should be first taken, and removed out of the Way. Now who would refuse to
promote the great Interest of this honorable Couple, by preventing the
Mischief that would accrue to their Vineyard? This methinks is a sufficient
Motive to take these Foxes; however if that should not be enough, the Lord
Jesus urges this further, and says (which often in the Hebrew is giving a
Reason, and is therefore with us well translated by the Word For) For our
Vines, (by which he also further shows and ascertains the mutual Property they
had in this Vineyard) have tender Grapes. The same original Words we find in
the 13th Verse of this Chapter: We may understand by it weak or tender
Christians, such either because they have not been long on the Way, or being
but small in Knowledge, weak in Faith, and other Christian Graces, like young
Children, (1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Heb. 5.12. 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 John 2.12.) or rather
because of the Weakness or Tenderness of the Habit of Grace in the Converted,
which may be taken for the Vines. Only here take Notice, that the Lord Jesus
uses this as an Excitement to take the Foxes.

First, We may take it generally, as if he should say; Our Vines are as tender
as temporal Vineyard, having tender Grapes; and then we might take it as if the
Translation run thus, For our Vines are as Vineyards having tender Grapes: That
is to say, the Fruits and Work of Grace in Believers, are as tender, can bear
as little, and are as easily marred, as the tender Grapes are in the Vineyards;
for which Reason it is the more necessary to take these Foxes, here represented
to be in these spiritual Vineyards; because they are always as noxious and
dangerous in the Church, as Foxes are in the temporal Vineyards having young
and tender Grapes.

Secondly, We might also take it with Restriction to some weak Christians with
tender Dispositions, which are always to be found in the Church, and that Jesus
Christ considers his Vineyard in this View; or more comprehensively for new
erected Congregations, Vineyards as it were in their Bloom, and just beginning
to Bud, filled with young Converts, or young Christians; emblematically
represented by the Spring-Season, every Thing being young and tender, and then
above all other Times, these Foxes would prove most destructive, and would
spoil and take away all the Hopes of Fruit. This is even the Case with Respect
to the Work of Grace in the People of God; for false Teachers and Seducers,
have not, nor cannot take so much hold of, and have so much Influence upon the
more experienced and established, as they can have upon the young unexperienced
and less established Believers, who by Reason of their Weakness cannot oppose
them, and want Capacity to distinguish these Foxes; hence it will follow, that
they are very easily seduced. It is therefore of the last Necessity, in as much
as the Lord's Vineyard was full of these small ones, to have these pernicious
Foxes taken, that their intended Mischief and Destruction to these Vines may be
prevented.

Thirdly, Furthermore, we may take it in this Sense, Take us the Foxes etc. for
our Vines have tender Grapes: Which is as much as to say, We have a beautiful
Prospect of much Fruit, and Hopes of a plentiful Harvest; the young Grapes
which appear, i. e. the Beginnings of Grace, give reasonable Expectation of a
further Growth to Perfection: Take therefore these Foxes, which may disappoint
our Hopes, and frustrate our Expectations, without any Delay; and by this Means
you will anticipate the Danger that threatens us in the Disappointment of our
Hope, and the Ruin of our Harvest. This is therefore a sufficient Motive for
you to hasten in the Work.

Fourthly, We may take it in Point of Time, that as in the Spring of the Year,
the Vineyards bud forth, and have tender Grapes, so the Foxes then also bring
forth their Young. So it is with the Church when she flourishes, and is in her
Bloom and Prosperity; then also Heretics, and Seducers, generally make their
Appearance; and therefore it is as much as if the Lord should say, Vigila! Take
Care! Now is the Season that Foxes bring forth their Young; and if ever there
be a Time to anticipate their Growth, and hinder their Increase, it is now when
they make their first Appearance: Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that
spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender Grapes.

Behold the Necessity of this Charge which Jesus has given concerning his
Vineyard; and it is a plain Evidence of that tender Care which he has for his
Church, and more especially for those that are the weakest of his People; a
Charge very necessary to be put in Execution at all Times; but if ever there
was a Time, that loudly called for this Duty, we may say it is NOW. Certainly
there have been in all Ages of the Church such mischievous FOXES to the Vines.
In the early Times of Christianity they were very numerous; they first sprang
from both Jews and Gentiles, when the Vineyard was full of tender Grapes, i. e.
full of young Converts, and many simple Ones: Then the Devil was exceeding busy
every where to raise up, and animate Foxes of all Sorts and Sizes; and though one
might observe some Difference in their Heads, yet it seems they could join
their wicked Tails together, and by the Firebrarnds of Contention, Heresy and
Schism, set Fire to the standing Corn of the Church of Christ. The erroneous
Opinions, and Relics of Knowledge, falsely so called, of the Jewish Rabbis,
and of the many Sects among the Heathen Philosophers, were carried over by
Proselytes into the Church; and these proved to be the Nests and Holes which
engendered many Foxes, and which spread over all the spiritual Vineyards from
East to West, till at last Antichrist gathered up these Fox-Skins, and tacked
them together, to make himself a Garment; and moreover, put on an Out-Coat of a
fierce Lyon-Skin, whereby he brought Desolation upon the whole Church.

And when at the Time of the Reformation, the pure Church had wrenched her self
again out of his Clutches, and the bright Day of Truth shone forth, we
presently beheld again in another Springtime, new Fox-Holes breaking out; and
it is hardly expressible what Number of Foxes, both great and small, have
appeared to spoil the New Vineyards of the Reformation: the Wounds the same has
received, by the numerous Sects, and Schisms, are not yet healed. What do I
say, healed! if ever there was a Time since the Creation, in which it might be
said the Church crawls with (...) Kinds of Foxes, we must confess it is even in
our Day. There scarce ever was an Error in ancient Times, but what is now raked
up again, and with the Addition of many new ones; no Opinions, though ever so
absurd, but what are broached, and some are influenced by them, and appear for
their Defense; so that without mentioning old Errors, we have new ones turned
out, Time after Time.

The Abuse, or ill Use, that was made of Philosophy, and natural Reason, was
that accursed Hole which the most of the Foxes crept out at, in the primitive
Church, and who wasted and trampled it under Foot; the same is now opened
afresh, and wider than ever, and out of it come a Swarm of Atheists, of
Libertines, and of Men whose Mouths speak Blasphemy, and teach Doctrines
against the Divinity and Authority of the holy Scriptures, against God himself
and many of his excellent Perfections, against his eternal Decrees, against the
deep Mysteries of the Gospel, and against almost an endless Number of the
fundamental Doctrines of Truth. The Books which daily fill the World with
Error, the hidden Holes and Corners, which hatch and breed Impostors the
Compilers of them, and by which Means their erroneous Opinions are spread, are
almost endless; great and little Foxes do spring out of it, both without and
within the Church. And if they are suffered to go on without Opposition, Truth
is not only threatened to be born down, but even with a total Subversion. And
have we not suffered Encroachment enough already? First, By what is past Truth
has received such a Wound, that in many Respects it is almost incurable; many
have embraced Lies instead of Truth, at least there is such a general
Lukewarmness, Coldness, and Indifferency, and in many Respects such a Want of
Love to Truth, which cannot be described. Secondly, True Piety in a great
Measure has lost her Luster and Tenderness; the inward Work of Grace in the
Soul, and the essential Power of true Godliness, is ridiculed, and by some
denied. Thirdly, The Worship of God is become like a mere Skeleton without a
Spirit, a ^rment of outward Professors, a mere Mode of the Times, and a Badge
of a fashionable Man, but the Life and Truth of it decays. Fourthly, Unity and
brotherly Love, that grand Mark of true Christianity, is sadly depressed;
Bitterness, Uncharitableness, Parties, and Schisms, have as it were rent the
Body of the Church to Pieces. Fifthly, By these Means the Growth and farther
Propagation of the Church, both within and without, is wonderfully checked.
Sixthly, Spiritual Fruitfulness is much retarded. Seventhly, The Bloom and
shining Beauties of the Church decay. Eighthly, She looses her Security and
Strength. Ninthly, Yea how many Souls may be lost by these Means, may be
guessed at, from the natural Consequences of Things, and the lamentable
Condition the Church is now fallen into.

And O! if there were but a Zeal to take these Foxes; but alas in this too
great a Slackness prevails.

First, Ecclesiastics are in many Respects too slack-handed in this; or
perhaps their Hearts are not enough united to the Truth. Church Discipline, by
which such Foxes should be taken, is often sadly neglected. It were to be
wished, that Presbyteries and Synods, made it more their principal and grand
Concern, to inquire into those Things, while they waste their Time about Things
of much lesser Moment; certainly we are often too careless and unwatchful
against pernicious Foxes: those who have a true Heart for Zion, are often
obliged to sit down and mourn in Silence because of this.

Secondly, Particular Professors have little or no Capacity, or they have no
Courage to oppose Foxes. What fine Disputants had we in former Congregations,
who dared to appear against Opposers, and closely to attack them; who were not
afraid to thrust forth their Hands into these Cockatrice-Holes; and who could
divert themselves over the Nests of those Vipers without Danger; and who dared
to approach and enter into their Assemblies, and Meetings, and publicly lay
hold of them in Debates! But this Zeal, and even such a Capacity, is mostly
gone, or rarely to be found: The old antiquated Meekness and Forbearance
toward the Remonstrants is now again revived; a Spirit of Lukewarmness and
Indifference begins to prevail in our Day; every one enjoys his Opinion freely,
without being so much as spoken against; and by this Means we suffer the Foxes
to gain Ground, to the apparent Ruin of the Lord's Vineyard. O! what a
mistaken, as well as sinful Practice is this? First, This is running counter to
the Command of Christ, who will have all Foxes to be taken, none excused, even
to the smallest. Indeed where we our selves are mis-used, in Charity we ought
to be condescending and bear much; but in no wise when God and his sacred
Truths are abused; in this Case we must not let one Claw of them escape.
Secondly, It is a most barbarous Kind of Clemency, as it is the Concern of
immortal Souls, and our Vineyards have so many tender Grapes. Surely one of
those will weigh down a thousand Foxes. Would you then spare the Foxes, and let
so many precious Souls be destroyed? O! woe, woe unto such a perverse Pity.
Thirdly, What will become of Truth? If you suffer them to go on at this Rate,
they will spoil the whole Vineyard, they will tear every Thing up by the Roots
in such a Manner that no Appearance of Truth will remain; and it may be the
Lord himself will come, and make her a Desolation by taking away her Fences,
and leaving her to be trampled under Foot, and ruined by wild Beasts; even as
it befell the Eastern Church, when from one Degree to another, they fell from
Truth, the Lord suffered her at last so to fall away, that there are no Remains
of her to be found.

O! that the whole Body of the Christian World were roused to look into this.
Men are in a deep Lethargy, a profound Sleep of Indifferency has seized upon
the Church: In the mean Time, the Enemy is busy, and is sowing of Tares among
the Wheat, Matthew. 13.25. And it is high Time to awake, before these Tares choke
the Wheat, and quite overcome it. Well then, in the first Place, don't think it
a strange Thing when you hear and see that there are Foxes in the Vineyard; it
has always been so, the Lord Jesus and his Apostles, have foretold this, 1 Cor.
11.10. For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are approved,
may be made manifest among you. Secondly, Be always upon your Guard, that you
may not be injured by Foxes; beware of their Persons, beware of their
Doctrines: This is the Lesson and Precept of Jesus Christ, Mark 13.22, 23. For
false Christ's, and false Prophets shall arise, and shall show Signs, and
Wonders, to seduce if it were possible, even the Elect: But take ye Heed,
behold I have foretold you all these Things. And St. Paul says, Let no Man
deceive you with vain Words, Ephesians. 5.6. Thirdly, To this End, don't content your
selves to remain tender Grapes, like weak and young Children; such as stand
thus loose are in great Danger, and more exposed to be seduced and ruined. This
St. Peter tells us, that false Teachers before all others, beguile unstable
Souls, 2 Pet. 2.14. And St. Paul speaks of such in the Church, which are but
Children, that they are tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine, by the Sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. And further shows, that the only Mean against this is, to
follow after Truth, that we may grow up into him in all Things which is the
Head: And so come unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the
Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13, 14, 15. Well, follow ye this Advice then, that
you may become Men and Fathers in Christ, that you may have your Senses
exercised, to discern both Good and Evil, Heb. 5.14. that you may not believe
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God: because many false
Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 John 4.1. Fourthly, Take heed that you
do not by a sluggish Patience, a sinful Carelessness, and a lukewarm
Indifferency, give Opportunity for Foxes to propagate and multiply in the
Vineyard; but be always justly apprehensive that Foxes are more mischievous to
the Church than Lions, and Heretics more destructive than Persecutors; for
under Persecutions the Church grows purer, and often flourishes and increases
the more: Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae; the Blood of the Martyrs is the
Seed of the Church; but through Heresy she always grows worse: they kill but
the Body, but these murder the Soul: therefore never condescend in the least in
this Matter. This was the Sin of the Church of Thyatira; and this was that
which Jesus had against her, that they suffered the Woman Jezebel, which called
herself a Prophetess, to teach and seduce his Servants, Rev. 2.20. Therefore be
ye not like unto them. Fifthly, On the contrary be diligent in your Duty; take
these Foxes which are in the Church.

First to this End, Overseers of the Church, Elders and Deacons, Presbyteries
and Synods, should all go Hand in Hand, above all Things to watch against the
Encroachments of Error. No Jarrings or Animosities concerning other Things,
should ever be in the Way of so great and necessary a Work. Though there were
some Difference in Judgment about lesser Matters, yet if they agreed in the
main and fundamental Points, then they should also agree in this grand Article,
with one Accord to watch against Foxes that creep in: It is for this End they
are set, as Overseers of the Vineyard; and for this End, the Care and watching
over Souls, is commended to them by Jesus Christ. O! be careful then, that you
do not betray this great Trust of your Master, in proving unfaithful to his
Vineyard; for if but one Fox should carry away a Soul as a Prey, the same he
will require at your Hands.

Secondly, Yea every Professor of the Church should seek to be faithful in this
Behalf. You are also commanded, Take us the Foxes. Endeavor therefore after
Ability for the Work: that you may distinguish Truth from Falsehood; and to
discover those that are in Error; and that you may be able to confute them and
stop their Mouths, endeavor after Courage and Confidence to perform this Duty.
You should not only have a Will to do, but Boldness to execute. Remember that
you have a high Commission, therefore fear no Man: He who has commanded you,
will stand by you. Be ye strong, and the Lord of the Vineyard shall be with you.

Behold, if after thou have done thy Duty, and there should be still Foxes
remaining, the Lord however will preserve his Vineyard; especially he will
watch over you young and tender Grapes. Foxes may attack you, but Jesus will
take Care of you; and he will in his own Time gather you as ripe and perfect
Grapes into his heavenly Barns: There, there no Foxes shall be permitted to
enter, nor any one that makes a Lie, Rev. 21. Though there remain some Tares
upon the Field of this World, the Time is coming, that the Son of Man shall
send forth other Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all Things
that offend, and all Tares; and bind them in Bundles, one with another, and
shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire; but ye that remain faithful to the End,
and all the Righteous, shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father! Who has Ears to hear, let him hear.

FINIS.

