The EXAMINER, OR Gilbert against Tennent.

Containing a Confutation of the Reverend Mr. GILBERT TENNENT and his
ADHERENTS: Extracted chiefly from his Own Writings, and formed upon his Own
Plan of comparing the MORAVIAN Principles, with the Standard of Orthodoxy, in
distinct Columns.

Together with some Strictures on the Preface to the Rev, Mr. TENNENT's Five
Sermons and Appendix lately published, and subscribed by Six Reverend Ministers
of BOSTON.

The whole being an Essay toward answering three important Queries, viz.

1. What is Truth in the present Religious Commotions in this Land? 2. What is
the shortest Method of finding the whole Truth? 3. Whether such as are given to
Change, ought not in Conscience to make their public Retractations, according
to St. Austin?
The whole Essay is submitted to the Judgment of Common Sense.

By Philalethes.

Mat. (...) Judge not, that ye be not judged.

Job 14.5, 6. Thou choosest the Tongue of the Crafty: Thine own Mouth
condemns Thee, and not I; yea thine own Lips testify against thee.

Luke 19.22. Out of thine own Mouth will I judge thee.

BOSTON; Printed for S. ELIOT, in Cornhill. 1743

N. B. If the Reader desires to see Mr. Tennent's Sermon at Nottingham on the
Danger of an unconverted Ministry fully answered; notwithstanding Mr.
Whitefield's high Commendation of it, as an excellent Piece, and as he judged
an unanswerable One let him consult the Querists, Part III. And, the
Examination and Refutation of Mr. G. Tennent's Remarks of the Protestation
presented to the Synod of Philadelphia, June 1. 1741. Per Order, etc.

THE EXAMINER, OR, Gilbert against Tennent.
WHEN I had read over Mr. G. Tennent's three first Sermons on Rev. 3*3.
representing the Necessity of holding fast the Truth, with the Appendix,
relating to the Moravian Errors, etc. I immediately reviewed and compared
therewith his famous Sermon preached at Nottingham upon the Danger of an
Unconverted Ministry, on Mark 1^ 44. And must confess it is as impossible to
reconcile them upon the Principles of Common Sense, as to unite the two Poles.

But then putting on that Charity which is not easily provoked, and hops all
Things, I endeavored to consider the three Sermons as a Retractation of the
Nottingham Sermon; That although he did not expressly retract it, yet I would
charitably cast it in this Light, for the sake of Catholic Unity, and because
it seems hard for an High Priest to confess his Errors even once a Year, though
he may love to be Father Confessor himself, and bring others to the Stool.

But upon Enquiry, it is to be suspected that Mr. Tennent never designed that
these three Sermons should superceed the other; but that they should consist
and travel together like good Companions. For it is plain that after Mr. T --
had preached these Sermons at N. York, in April 1742, his Sermon at Nottingham
receives a new Edition at Boston, from the second Edition printed at
Philadelphia; by which it appears that Mr. T. or his Friends, instead of
suppressing it, have been careful to propagate it, as his Masterpiece; and
indeed it is a Masterpiece of it is kind: And not only so, but I Am credibly
informed, that he has lately justified it, as containing the genuine Sentiments
of his Soul; and I Am apt to think he has spoken the Truth. And no wonder Mr. T.
will not abate one Jot or Tittle of it, since Mr. W -- d has judged it an
unanswerable Piece: for his Counsel it seems with many in these Days is, as if
a Man had enquired at the Oracle of GOD. The Querists, Part III, Page 5, take
Notice, that it has been observed that when it is Mr. Whitefield's turn to
speak, then Mr. G. Tennent is proclaimed the most able, most eminent Servant of
Christ, and all his Associates or Party, spiritual Men, and faithful Ministers
of Christ, etc. etc. And in the Examiner, Page 149, it is affirmed, that when
Mr. Whitefield preached a Sermon at Philadelphia, he told a numerous Audience,
that there were but few faithful Ministers of Christ in these Parts; and if he
must be plain and name them, it was the Tennents and their Adherents: The like
he did at Fog's Manor. On the other Hand, If their Turn comes to speak or
write, then Mr. Whitefield is proclaimed the most able, and most eminent
Servant of Christ. -- When there is such an Hue and Cry after Pharisees, we
would be glad to know, whether it would be safe for the other side to trumpet
one another Praises so loudly and highly as this side does, without being in
Danger of being taken up for Pharisees, and having the Crows Eggs cast in their
Teeth? because Christ says to those Pharisees that were offended at him for
healing a Man on the Sabbath, John 5, 44. How can ye believe, that receive
Honor one of another?




It is plain also, That Mr. T -- t's zealous Advocates here and elsewhere, have
by way of Charity, dispersed about the Country great Numbers of the last
Edition, tending to corrupt the Minds of People from the Simplicity which is in
Christ, and to promote that Confusion and separating Spirit which he himself
has been instrumental of raising in many of our Places; Which the Lord rebuke
in his Time. For many are fully persuaded that Mr. T -- t's Sermon and Practice
upon it, have sown the Seeds of all that Discord, Intrusion, Confusion,
Separation, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
etc. that have been springing up in so many of the Towns and Churches through the
Province for two Years past. Who has been so instrumental to hatch the
Cockatrice as himself, though at the same Time he could gravely advise others to
crush it in the Egg See his printed Letter to Mr. Dickinson.
. His Principiis obsta is given out too late in the Day: That is to say, After
Vows make Enquiry, instead of letting alone Contention before it be meddled with.

Whoever will take the Pains to consider the main Scope of Mr. Tennent's Sermon
at Nottingham, will find the Principles of it to be subversive of Gospel Order,
the public Ministry and public Means of Education; and what have we more?
What could touch the Apple of our Eye like this fatal Blow. It is a Blow at the
Root.

Take here by the Way, the Sentiments of the Synod in the Examination, etc.
Page 81, viz We look upon Mr. T -- 's printed Sermon preached at Nottingham to
be a notable Instance of their sowing Seeds of Division, and we charge him with
perverting Scripture, uncharitable rash Judging of the Body of the Clergy of
this Generation in the Lump, and encouraging Factions and Disorders therein;
and say we, This, This, This, and the like Speeches thereunto, filled the Minds
of many People against their stated Pastors, etc.

Furthermore, I cannot find any Room for rational Christian Charity to think
that Mr. T -- ever intended that his last Discourses should be interpreted as a
Retractation of his Sermon at Nottingham; and therefore as long as he holds two
Set of Principles as opposite to one another, as the heathenish Principles of
a good and an evil god, and until he makes a public and solemn Retractation of
that Sermon, it is but just and equal to set Gilbert against Tennent, and judge
him out of his own Mouth.

Moreover, Having reviewed the florid Preface to Mr. Tennent's late Discourses,
subscribed by Six Reverend Divines, of whose Opinion it is said much Use is made
in the Country, I stumbled at the Threshold again, when I could not find one
Word to help out my Charity toward reconciling Mr. T -- t with himself: But
they set it forth as an Epistle of Commendation of this their dear Brother and
his Works without any Exception.

They call his Performance, A Labor of Love and Effort of holy Zeal of One
that has learned to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints; and with the Light of a wise Master Builder, on the Foundation which
Christ and his Apostles have laid. The Metaphor would run as smoothly in the
Words of the great Apostle, A Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth.

They say further, When this our dear Brother, whose Praise is in the Churches
through the Provinces, visited us at Boston, two Years ago, and in the Spirit of
the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, entered into his Labors here; it pleased God in a
wonderful Manner to crown his abundant Services with Success, in the
Conviction, and (we trust) Conversion of many Souls: As therefore the Name of
Mr. Tennent is greatly endeared to us, so we beseech our ascended SAVIOR, the
Head of the Church long to continue him for a burning Light, and extensive
Blessing to our Provinces; and in particular to use this faithful, judicious,
and seasonable Endeavor of his Servant, for a Guard and Defense about his own
sacred Truths, and his glorious Work in the midst of us, which too many are
ready to speak evil of and oppose.

One must be clothed with Charity down to the Foot to think that these
Reverend Gentlemen had not seen Mr. Tennent's Sermon at Nottingham, etc. which
stands in direct Opposition to some Parts of his Doctrine and Conduct expressed
in these Sermons and elsewhere, as I shall demonstrate in parallel Lines.

If therefore they had well confidered and compared the one with the other, how
is it reconcilable with the Simplicity that is in CHRIST, to represent Mr. T
-- as such a burning Light, when his Spots are so conspicuous to the most
cursory Reader? -- One might expect that if Mr. Tennent had not the Ingenuity
to say, I Repent, that at least these Reverend Gentlemen would have attempted a
Reconciliation for him, if they think as Protestants generally do that
Infallibility may mistake.

Nay ought they not to have said publicly (as it is affirmed One of them said
in private Conversation) that Mr. T. was now come Right: I suppose he meant
Right about; which implies, that he had been Wrong. But it seems no Man dared
or cared to say unto him, Why do thou such Things? Such is the Danger of
having Men's Persons in Admiration, because of Advantage.

It seems, Such a prime Instrument of the Work that has been going on in the
American Provinces for the two last Years, must be judged infallible and
supported with the highest Encomiums of Six most Reverend Ministers, Dr. Colman
thus magnifies him to Mr. Whitefield, in a Letter published in the first Weekly
Paper printed at Glasgow, viz. We received him (Mr. Tennent) just as we did
you, as an Angel of Christ, etc. Likewise Mr. Cooper in a Letter printed in the
Weekly History, No. 2. calls him, Dear Mr. Tennent. He came (says he) in the
Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel indeed. He was with us several Months.
Many Thousands were awakened, and I believe many truly Converted. There is
quite another Face of Religion in this Town, as well as many Places in the
Country. Many Ministers as well as People greatly quickened. Blessed be GOD,
who put it into your Heart to move him to come; and inclined his Heart to come
and help us. See Mr. Whitefield's Remarks on the State of Religion in New
England.


I heartily wish he was more worthy for whom they have done this; and that they
themselves had not in this Labor of Love to their dear and honored Brother,
betrayed too great a liking of what is commonly called this Work.

These Reverend Gentlemen say, That this our dear Brother visited us at Boston
two Years ago, and in the Spirit of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, entered into his
Labors.

It Is true Mr. T -- visited these Parts about that Time, and the Visit was full
of Extraordinaries The Language of Mr. Tennent's Journey into New England was
plainly this, that no Man was like-minded, and capable to Water where Mr.
Whitefield had planted. His coming among us was really judged by many wise and
good Men, a barefaced Affront to the Body of the Clergy of this Generation.
: His Progress through this Province savored more of worldly Pomp and Grandeur,
than the Humility of the meek and lowly Jesus: He came eating and drinking,
galloping over the Country with his Congregatio de propaganda, etc. Magna
Comitante Caterva, with a Troop of 20 or 30 Horse, entering into other Men's
Labors, and devouring their Livings, having all Things in common.

He came -- in the Spirit of Mr. Whitefield indeed, when Proclamation was made
before him as Visitor or Vicar General, The Rev. Mr. T. designs to preach in
such a City or Church to Day, and to Morrow in another, and continue in a Third
and get Gain, without the least Regard to the stated Pastors of these Churches,
(...), nolens; pleading Extraordinaries for suspending Scripture-Rules.

He came in the Spirit of Mr. Whitefield, when he treated the Body of the
Ministry in this Province with so much Neglect and Contempt as he did See Mr.
Whitefield's Journal.
, not only in not suffering himself to hear any of them, no not in Boston it
self except once or twice; but also in cruelly censuring them in general and
raising Jealousies in the Minds of People of their Faithful Ministers even to
that Degree, as has ended in a Spirit of dreadful Separation in many Places.

But then are these Rev Messirs. of the the same Mind, Spirit and Judgment? Did
they come in the same Spirit when Mr. W -- d, in his Journal, Part 3d, Page 63,
says, "These bodily Convulsions, I believe come from the Devil; who, now the
Work of GOD is going on, wants to bring an evil Report upon it?" And seeing
nothing is more evident than that Mr. T. -- is the grand Instrument of
promoting those animal Convulsions into which many of our New-Converts have
fallen, and upon which great Stress is laid by many in the Work of Conversion.
Do not they take the Devils Part, who use Methods to further such sad
Appearances, and condemn them for Opposers of GOD's Work, who labor to
undeceive People about these Fits, by ascribing them to inferior Causes?

But is it not Matter of Fact when many of the Hearers of some Preachers fell
into Convulsion-like Fits and roared, that the usual Note of such Preachers
then was, Will any of you come to Christ? When at the same Time they pronounced
heavy Curses upon such as took not such Fits, as being hard-hearted Pharisees,
etc. See Examiner, P. 98.


Again, These Reverend Gentlemen, say, This our dear Brother entered into Mr.
Whitefield's Labors. That is in other Words, Mr. Whitefield planted and Mr.
Tennent watered; as if the Gospel had never been planted and watered in this
Wilderness before these Rev. Messirs introduced the Practice of itenerary
Preaching.

But pray will Mr. T. tell the World what great Success had Mr. W -- d or
himself, but where they had Opportunity to enter into other Men's Labors? And
who planted and watered Congregations for them to crow of their Success
therein? For in Maryland, Virginia and North Carolina, where Ministers are
comparatively scarce, what News of Mr. W -- 's great Success See P. 90.
.

These Reverend Gentlemen conclude their Preface by saying, We beseech our
ascended Savior, the Head of the Church in particular to use this faithful,
judicious and seasonable Endeavor of his Servant, for a Guard and Defense
about his own sacred Truths, and his glorious Work in the midst of us, which
too many are ready to speak evil of and oppose. I would charitably hope that
these Rev. Divines don't pretend by the last Paragraph to patronize and defend
all the Extraordinaries that have passed current for the Work of God, in this
Time of Strife of Tongues and Confusion of Babel; or to Brand all with the
black Character of Opposers of His Work, who are Enemies to Enthusiasm and
Delusion. There are many wild Disorders and Confusions in some of our Churches
at this Day which really resemble the Corinthian Disorders in the Times of the
Apostles. Necessity is therefore laid upon the faithful Ministers of CHRIST to
bear public and seasonable Testimony against them; and pity it is these Rev.
Gentlemen let slip so good an Opportunity as this to do it. But seeing they
refuse to give a differencing Account of the Work, it is well that one of the
Country Ministers has since faithfully done it to their Hand, in one of their
Pulpits. Mr. Ashley in his Sermon on CHARITY, preached in the Church in
Brattle-Street.


That the Reader may be able to form a right Judgment of the contending
Parties, let him resolve this plain Query, viz. Whether the Opposers of
Enthusiastic Pranks, set up under the Name of Reformations or Religion; or the
warm Admirers of and Contenders for such, deserve the Name of Opposers of God's
Work?

Upon the whole, I could find no other Key but that in the Sermon upon the
little Foxes in the End of Mr. Tennent's late Treatise, to let him out of the
Labyrinth into which he had plunged himself. Where it is said Page 8, 9. Foxes
have Holes. Foxes have most commonly many Ways and Passages to come out at,
because if one should be stopped or closed up, they may have another to creep out
at. -- Foxes are crafty, and know how to dissemble. -- Foxes that they may not
be so easily ensnared, seldom run right forward, but run to one Side, and to
the other Side and cross ways. -- They have a sly Way of creeping into other
Holes, and of turning other Animals, (it may be said) out of their rightful
Possessions, so it is with respect to -- for of this Sort are these which creep
into Houses, 2 Timothy 3.6. And it may be generally said of them, that they creep
into settled Ministries and Congregations, and turn out those that are Orthodox
amongst them, etc.

It is evident that Mr. T -- designed by translating this Sermon, that it
should be used as a Key to open the cunning, crafty Intreagues and Evasions of
the Moravians in propagating their wild and frightful Errors. See Page 65, 100.

Mr. T. must excuse me if I turn the same Key upon himself, to let him out of
many Inconsistencies and Contradictions charged upon him; I expect that he will
make use of Fox-like Shifts to evade the Discovery. -- Witness his second
Letter printed in the Pensylvania Gazette of Sept. 2.1742. Page 53. Of the
Necessity, etc. False Teachers are will not to use private sculking Methods; they
creep into Houses, and lead captive silly Women, and often by them their
Husbands, and others are corrupted.


I shall follow the same Method Mr. Tennent has taken with the Moravians; and
compare his Sermon preached at Nottingham, with his late Discourses and
Appendix, in distinct Columns; or, in other Words, set Gilbert against Tennent
for the Readers ease in finding out the Truth.

GILBERT.
Page 47. In my Opinion a disposition to separate from a true Church because
many of her Members are unconverted, and some are under deadness, is a sign of
a proud Spirit: Were not the Pharisees of old proud Separatists? See this
applied to the Moravians. in Page 63

They have a Sheep's Coat on, they seem to be mighty mild, harmless and
innocent in their Looks, but inwardly they hold dividing, dangerous Principles;
you may know them by their Fruits: Like Wolves they cruelly scatter the poor
Sheep of CHRIST, by their damnable Doctrines. Beware, my dear Brethren of the
Leaven -- of these Moravians, who like the Pharisees of old, are proud
Separatists, make broad Phylacteries, and compass Sea and Land to make
Proselytes.

Page 48. It is also an Instance of Pride, to despise and slight Ministers or
People, that are unconverted, or supposed to be so: Is not the Language of such
a Practice as the Prophet Isaiah describes it, Stand off, for I am holier than
Thou?

TENNENT.
Compare his Sermon at Notingham, Page 12. of the last Edition, under the 2d
Inference. We may learn that such who are contented under a dead Ministry, have
not in them the Temper of that Savior they profess. It Is an awful sign that
they are as blind as Moles, and as dead as Stones, without any spiritual taste
and relish.

And it is the Language of several Pages under his 4th Inference -- BE YE
SEPARATE. If the Ministry, says he, of natural Men be as it has been
represented; then it is both lawful and expedient to go from them to hear godly
Persons; yea, It is so far from being sinful to do this, that one who lives
under a pious Minister of lesser Gifts, after having honestly endeavored to
get Benefit by his Ministry, and yet gets little or none, but does find real
Benefit and more Benefit elsewhere; I say, he may lawfully go, and that
frequently, where he gets most good to his precious Soul, -- Let who will
oppose it. Page 19.

Alas! How could Mr. T. preach and print this after printing his Sermon at
Nottingham, without expressing deep Repentance for the hard contemptuous
Speeches, he has there poured out upon the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation? Does not this savor of Pride and Uncharitableness?

I shall beg leave here to lay before my Readers some of the reproachful
Language he has plentifully bestowed on the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation, as the Synod of Philadelphia has lately collected it to my Hand out
of the same Sermon See Examiner, Page 149.
. --

They are represented therein as Hirelings, Caterpillars, Letter-learned
Pharisees, Men that have the Craft of Foxes, and the Cruelty of Wolves,
plaistered Hypocrites, Varlets, the Seed of the Serpent, foolish Builders, whom
the Devil drives into the Ministry, dry-Nurses, dead Dogs that cannot bark;
blind Men, dead Men, Men possessed with the Devil, Rebels and Enemies to God,
Guides that are stone-blind and stone-dead, Children of Satan, that like their
Father may do good to Men's Souls by Chance-Medley, Daubers with untempered
Mortar, moral Negroes, Salt without savor, that stink in the Nostrils of God
and Man, Judas's whose chief Desire is to finger the Penny and to carry the
Bag, Hirelings, murderous Hypocrites, that are to take Care least we feel the
Force of a Halter in this World, or an aggravated Damnation in the next; subtle
selfish Hypocrites, that would not let one honest Man come into the Ministry if
they could help it, swarms of Locusts, Crowds of Pharisees, that have as
covetously, as cruelly crept into the Ministry in this adulterous Generation,
who as nearly resemble the Character of the old Pharisees, as one Crows Egg
does another, whose Hearers are as blind as Moles, and dead as Stones,
Successors of Nicodemus, blind Leaders of the Blind, Formalists, dead Drones,
Sons of Scaeva with a fine long String of Prayers Mr. T. whilst itinerating
among us was often harping upon this String, till a Rev. Gentleman put him to
silence by observing pertinently, that he had heard him but twice or thrice;
but found that he had got such a short String of Prayer by Heart, that he could
almost repeat it verbatim. -- It is probable this ingenious Gentleman was not
alone in this Remark, though no Body else might have the Courage to tell it with
such an honest Freedom.
, false Apostles, deceitful Workers, Ministers of Satan, etc.

The Rev. Gentlemen of that Synod, go on to observe; Are not these base and
uncharitable Reproaches unbecoming any Christian, much less a Minister of the
Gospel, both from the Pulpit and the Press?

GILBERT.
Page 48. And here I must take leave to observe, that the Practice of staying
at Home, rather than going to hear such Ministers (sound in Principle and
regular in Practice) as are judged by some to be unconverted, is unscriptural,
and of dangerous Tendency (in my Opinion) for it hangs the whole weight of the
public Worship of God upon the uncertain Judgment of Men. Though unconverted
Ministers are not likely to do so much good as others, yet seeing that many of
them doubtless, do preach the same Word of God, which others do; why may not
the sovereign God, who permits them by his Providence to come into the
Ministry, bless his Word delivered by them for the Good of Mankind?

Besides the aforesaid Practice of staying at Home, etc. opens a Door to
Delusion by false Teachers as well as to Confusions and Schisms in the Church
of God.

Page 49. I must declare to the World that I dread the Tho'ts of Schisms and
Separations in the Church of God, etc.

Page 53. In order to preserve our selves and our Posterity from the Infection
of Error, I think it is needful to use (in our proper Spheres) all suitable
Means to obtain a godly, learned and regular Ministry. -- When ignorant Novices
are admitted into the ministerial Order, they are apt to be puffed up to the
Churches great Prejudice, as well as their own; and to spread Error when they
know it not. --

To say, That these Qualifications may be ordinarily attained without humane
Learning, is notoriously enthusiastical and foolish, etc. -- In short either
humane Learning is necessary, or there must be Inspiration to supply the want
thereof.

Page 62, he says, For any Man to pretend to know certainly who are gracious,
as one of the Moravians did in my hearing, is to assume an incommunicable
Prerogative of God: And to run upon this false Plan in Church Matters, is to
turn all into the wildest Disorder and Confusion.

Page 66, Do any esteem this new upstart Moravian Sect because of their Show of
Humility, while in the mean Time they undervalue all but themselves?

Some of the Heads of that Party have spoken most reproachfully of
New-Brunswick, of all the Protestant Reformed Churches. One of them in my
hearing compared them to Babel. Is this Humility to imagine themselves more
advanced in Grace than all the World besides?

See Page also 103, of the Appendix.

TENNENT.
Page 8. Of his Sermon. at Nottingham, he scarce owns a Possibility of profiting
under an unconverted Ministry -- when he says, Is a dead Man fit to bring
others to Life? Sad Experience verifies the unprofitableness of the Ministry of
unconverted Men. Look into the Congregations of unconverted Ministers, and see
what a sad Security reigns there: Not a Soul convinced that can be heard of,
for many Years together. -- What if some Instances could be shown of
unconverted Ministers being Instrumental in convincing Persons of their lost
Estate? The Thing is very rare and extraordinary. And for what I know, as many
Instances might be given, of Satan's convincing Persons by his Temptations.
Indeed it is a kind of Chance-Medley, both in respect of his Father and his
Children, when any such Event happens; and is'nt this the Reason why a Work of
Conviction and Conversion has been so rarely heard of for a long Time in the
Churches, till of late, viz. That the Bulk of her spiritual Guides were
stone-blind and stone-dead?

Again, Page 20. I beseech you, my dear Brethren, to consider that there is no
probability of your getting Good by the Ministry of Pharisees. For they are no
Shepherds (no faithful Ones) in Christ's Account: They are as good as none, nay
worse than none upon some Accounts: For take them first and last, and they
generally do more Hurt than Good.

See the Note at the Asterism. This Declaration is much like that in 27th Page
of the aforesaid Examination, etc. where Mr. T. declares, As to what is
alleged of our encouraging the Flocks of our protesting Brethren to forsake
their Ministry, I know nothing of this; neither do I know any of our Number
that has. They Answer, It seems very strange to us, that Mr. T. of all the Men
alive, should have the Face to express himself thus after writing, preaching
and printing his Sermon at Nottingham. For did not his own Party understand
that Sermon an Encouragement to forsake our Ministry And have not their
Adherents at Nottingham and many other Places set up separate Meetings, in
compliance with said Sermon, and others of the same kind. Moreover they affirm,
Page 133, That the whole Country, knows that it is a notorious Falsehood, and
that he has encouraged them both from the Pulpit and the Press to forsake our
Ministry.




Page 11. of his Sermon at Nottingham, The most likely Method to stock the
Church with a faithful Ministry, (not learned) in the present Situation of
Things, the public Academies being so much corrupted and abused generally, is
to encourage private Schools or Seminaries of Learning, which are under the
Care of skilful and experienced Christians; in which those only should be
admitted, who upon strict Examination have in the Judgment of a reasonable
Charity, the plain Evidences of experimental Religion. -- This Method in my
Opinion, has a noble Tendency to build up the Church of God -- Don't think it
much if the Pharisees should be offended at such a Proposal, etc. Some of Mr.
Tennent's very good Friends have confessed that this Proposal has a very
friendly Aspect on his Father's Log-House. But it is generally thought if that
should be built up on the Ruin of our public Academies, neither Religion nor
Learning would be greatly served thereby. See the Examination, Page 13, 52.
.

The Querists pertinently observe, Page 10, Part 3d, That the Scope of the
whole Sermon at Nottingham, seems to imply, that Mr. T. would have Men believe
that they may know a converted from an unconverted Minister; or else would not
the main Part of the Fabric fall?

The Moravians speak out what is more artfully concealed by Mr. T. under the
Guise of a near Guess, a probable Knowledge, etc. of Men's State toward God,
by an Examination of Men's Principles, Experiences and Practice. Who made thee
a Judge of Men's inward Experience and secret-State? Mr. T. who leads a Party,
is charged publicly by the Synod, with having imbibed some uncouth Notions of
an inward Call into the Ministry; and of admitting Men into the Ministry upon a
Judgment so formed of their secret State, by their Declararation of inward
Experiences, which are inconsistent with all regular Trials for the Ministry in
a Gospel Way. See Examiner, Page 14. And Page 115, 116. Will Mr. T. tell us,
where God required it of ordinary Ministers or People to make positive
Judgments of the secret States of orderly Professors; or to set up a Court of
Inquisition, to pry into one another's secret State, any further than it
appears in their Profession and Practice?




Compare, Page 11, 12. of his Sermon at Nottingham, where he condemns the Body
of the Clergy of this Generation, as Swarms of Locusts, Crowds of Pharisees,
that have as covetously as cruelly crept into the Ministry in this adulterous
Generation; who as nearly resemble the Character given of the old Pharisees, as
one Crows Egg does another.

Again, Page 9. The Bulk of her spiritual Guides are stone-blind, and
stone-dead.

This reproachful Censure of the Body of the Clergy of the Protestant Reformed
Churches is abundantly confirmed by Mr. T's Reply to Mr. Dickinson's Proposal
for an Accommodation in behalf of himself, and Adherents; says he, We are
informed, that the Church of Scotland is in (...), degenerate State, many of
her Members corrupt in Principles, and more void of the Power of Religion; as
also that the Church of Ireland, (I mean the Presbyterian) is notoriously
corrupted -- They seem to be, as far as we hear, sunk into a deep and dreadful
Security.

We are informed that the Presbyterians in England have generally but little of
the Life of Religion among them; and that several of them are corrupted with
gross and damnable Errors. And by the best Information we can get, a dead
Formality, generally prevails too much in Boston, and many other Places of
New England. Indeed we are of Opinion that the Majority of Church Judicatories,
almost every where, are dead Formalists, if they have got that length; and
therefore we incline to make no more Application to Men in the Affair
aforesaid.

Where then is Wisdom and the Power of Godliness to be found? -- Why truly
among the little Brunswick-Party, that little Flock. The Generality of
Protestants are but dead Formalists at best; for so Mr. T -- proceeds to say,
--

-- We are assured, Gentlemen, That it is the Cause of GOD that We are engaged
in, and are therefore resolved to defend it till Death against all Opposers.
(...) Examination, etc. Page 9, 11, 12. The above Character given of the
Ministers of our Persuasion in England, Scotland, Ireland and New England,
agrees well with Mr. T -- 's pronouncing the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation, Judas's, hypocritical Varlets, etc. Mr. Tennent in his Sermon at
Nottingham appears a^ an Ish^^^l among the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation. See Exam. Page ^.


Where is Mr. T -- 's Charity to himself and his Party shown here? And yet this
is the Gentleman that has the Face to recommend the Virtue of Charity to others
in his Fifth Sermon, etc, viz.

That Charity which thinks no evil; surely then it will speak none. -- That
Charity which enclines to Mildness, Candor and Courtesy in Speech and
Behavior, it behaveth not it self unseemly. That Charity which prefers a
public Good to a private Interest, it seeks not her own Things. And that
Charity which enclines those that posses it to Humility, it vaunteth not it
self, is not puffed up. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self?

HAVING given the Reader a summary View of this Reverend Gentleman's
inconsistent Doctrine and Principles; I shall proceed to represent his Conduct
in the same Light; and to apply his own Words with respect to Mr. Spangenberg,
a Moravian Missionary ( Page 99, Appendix) I have seen and heard of so much
inconsistent Conduct in him and others of that Sect, that I can hardly avoid a
Jealousy of his Sincerity. And with respect to Count Zinzendorf he says ( Page
105,) I am credibly informed, that the Count has in the hearing of several
Persons denied the Articles offered against him in the Beginning of this
Appendix, which he expressed in New-Brunswick as they now stand, some of them
absolutely and entirely.

But why does this Gentleman deny to those Moravian Gentlemen the same Liberty
he takes himself; to say, and unsay Things as likes him? More especially
seeing he himself has had greater Advantages of coming to the Knowledge of the
Truth in a Protestant Country, than the Moravian's who have just emerged out of
the Darkness and Errors of Propery.

Mr. T. complains bitterly of Mr. Batener's contradicting himself in his
Hearing in the Space of Two or Three Minutes ( Page 104.) But let Mr. T. first
cast out the Beam out of his own Eye: For is it not as culpable for a leading
Divine of New-Brunswick to contradict himself often in the Space of Two or
Three Years, as for Mr. Betaner to do it once in the space of Two or Three
Minutes in his hearing. To believe Contradictions, is a detestable Simplicity;
Mr. T -- himself being judge.

Mr. Tennet's Reflections upon the Experience and Practice of Moravians, too
nearly resemble his own Conduct, and the Practice and Experience of his
Adherents to be passed over in Silence: And I wonder that a Gentleman of his
pretended Penetration should be so blind as not to see his own Image and
Likeness in the Mirror he has held up to the Moravians; or imagine that others
would not run the Comparison as follows:

The Conversion and after Experiences of the Moravians, compared with the
Manner of Conversion and after Experiences propagated by Mr. T -- and his Party.
Mr. T -- 's Reflections on the Conversions, etc. of the Moravians.
Page 103 of the Appendix.

The Conversion of the most of them, is very slighty, -- done in Moment. Have
we not reason to fear that their Conversion is but a strong Flight of
Imaginanation or a Satanical Delusion?

And we have the more Reason for the Fear aforesaid said when we consider how
easy they are generally after their supposed Conversion, without Fears, without
Complaints of Sin, etc. Did not the Seed sown on the stony-Ground spring up
quickly; but on the contrary, did not the good Ground bring forth Fruit with
Patience?

If we will believe the Scriptures, does not their Conversion and Experiences
look like Presumption and Delusion?

And in Page 8, he says, What is the Moravian Faith, but a sorry Mushroom of a
Nights growth, unworthy of the Name of Faith, etc.?

Page 66. -- Do any esteem this new upstart Moravian Sect, because they say
they have Communion with God, and in consequence hereof Joy and Sweetness. I
answer, when we consider the Antinomian Principles, they hold concerning Faith
and Justification, as well as the proud Effects of their pretended good Frames,
and that under a Mask of Humility, etc. we have good reason to suspect their
Communion to be but a Delusion of the grand Enemy, and their Joys to be the
Joys of time Believers, and stony-ground Hearers. True Communion with God does
certainly humble the Soul. Job 42.5, 6. It Is no new Thing for Antinomians and
Enthusiasts to talk of Joys and Comforts. But they are a false Cure to all
Soul-Troubles.

Applied to his own Party, etc.
If we are to judge the unsoundness of Conversion by the suddenness thereof,
have we not as much reason to fear that the Conversion of many among the N.
Brunswick Party, is as strong a Flight of Imagination, or a satanical Delusion
as that the Moravian Conversion is so?

Even such is the easy, quiet, happy State of Multitudes of the late Converts,
without Fear! without Complaints, etc. Why then should the State of the one be
better and safer than the other?

Yea, and all suchlike sudden and rapturous Conversions are equally
presumptuous and delusive: But as a sorry Mushroom of a Nights growth.

Every Reader of common Observation will find the Transition very easy from the
Moravians to many of the Converts now adays, who talk boldly of their high
Joys, and full Assurances, under a Mask of Humility; at the same Time trusting
in themselves that they are righteous, and despising others.

Let them not be highminded, but fear lest their Communion be but a Delusion,
and their Joys the Joys of the stony ground Hearers.

Mr. T -- 's Reflections on the Spirit of the Moravians compared with his own
Spirit, and that of his Adherents.
Appendix, Page 104. Are not the Moravians, many of them uncharitable and
divisive in their Speech and Practice, and that under a pretext of Charity and
Catholicism, witness Mr. Spangenberg's comparing the Protestant Churches to a
Babel, etc.

Witness their not being willing to join with any Protestant Body of Men, and
yet their receiving Persons of diverse Societies to their Fellowship, with
little Examination into their Principles.

Page 65. How very different are the Fruits of their coming into the Country
from the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's: His plain and pungent Preaching of the
Truths of the Reformation, united generally the Hearts of good Men through the
Land. But the Moravians wherever they have any Influence divide the People of
God, and and set them a jangling.

Page 67. Do any esteem the Moravians because they travel and take great Pains?
I answer, Did not the Pharisees of old compass Sea and Land to make one
Proselyte? And do not Jesuits and many other Enthufiasts travel still. But
what good do the Moravians do by their traveling unless it be good to sowTares
to corrupt and divide religious People?

Page 104, Do not those Things, together with their sending of their ignorant
Miffionaries to gather separate Societies in Places where there is a sound
Ministry signify, that their Design is not Catholic, whatever their Pretenses
be notwithstanding?

Again, he says, Page 54. Whatsoever good Appearance thrusting out ignorant
Persons (how pious soever) into the Ministry may Have, yet it is a dangerous
Practice tending directly to divide and corrupt the Church of God, and bring
the Ministry thereof into Contempt.

And are not Mr. T --, and many of his zealous Advocates, just like 'em?
witness his Sermon at Nottingham, which is as full of uncharitable and divisive
Principles and Speeches, as a Crows Egg is full of Meat.

Witness also Mr. T. -- and many of our late Zealots, Ministers and others, who
have been ready to censure and separate from all that differed in Sentiment
from them; but at the same Time, receiving into their Fellowship, and with
Charity eno', every one that pretended to be of their Way, pronouncing them
true Converts upon little Examination and Proof of a Work of Grace in them.

Has not the coming of the Rev. Messi. W -- d and T -- and their Successors,
into these Provinces divided the People of God, and see them a jangling, as
much as the Peregrination of the Moravians in Pensylvania has done there?

But it seems Mr. T. has felt the bad Effects of their uncharitable intrusive
Spirit near Home, which makes him complain and flinch as much as his
Neighbors, who felt the Weight of his rough Hands and heavy Fists.

Exactly true; And pray, What good do the Itinerants do by their Traveling
unless it be good to sow Tares to corrupt and divide religious People It is
commonly observed that wherever the Itinerants come, they sow Discord among
Brethren. The Itinerants may see the Examination, Page 81. When therefore
Itinerants are well known to have sown dividing Principles, and to be guilty of
divisive Practices; we judge that stated Minister's would have been out of the
Way of Duty, in inviting such to their Pulpits; and it is very observable that
such as have done so, have injured their People's, and their own Peace and
Comfort, more than those that have refused to do so.


Wherein does the Moravian Conduct differ from (...) of our Itinerants who have
raised such a Spirit of Jealousy and Separation in many of the Towns and
Churches through the Provinces when there is a sound Ministry, as discovers too
much a private Design of proseliting People to their own Party whatever their
Pretenses be notwithstanding.

Who but the Brunswick-Party thrust out Mr. Rowland in to the Ministry Page 69
of the Examination, etc. Upon the same Lay, that they ordained this One, they
might ordain one Hundred, if Opportunity offered: And was not this One very
deficient in many Parts of useful Learning required in our Directory? And was
not this One immediately thrust into the Bounds of a neighboring Presbytery,
without their Concurrence? and continued there in Opposition to and contempt of
their Determination, to the occasioning of a Breach and much Confusion, in a
Congregation in their Bounds? And what has his Practice to this Day been, but
a continued Course of intrusive Disorders? Besides that his Character has been
under a very dull Cloud, as to Immorality, etc.
, in Contempt of the Synod, after it was confessed on all Sides he was very
deficient in many Parts of useful Learning, though educated at the Log-House?

Who but Party-Zealots have ordained Evangelists and sent them forth to gather
Societies in Places where there is a sound Ministry, instead of sending them
into ungospelized Parts?

Who but Party Zealots have admitted into their Pulpits such Novices as D -- n
E -- s, S -- l T -- h -- r, L -- y -- r P -- ne, etc. tending to bring the
sacred Ministry into Contempt, and divide and corrupt the Church of God?

Mr. T -- 's Reflections on the Practice of the Moravians, compared with his
own Practice, and that of his Adberents.
Appendix, Page 106. Do not some Moravians slight humane Reason and Learning,
etc. Page 97. Mr. Spangenberg declaimed in my hearing more than once, against
humane Learning, etc.

Again, Page 108. I think it looks exceeding black in the Moravians to slight
speculative Knowledge, so as they do which they call Head-Knowledge.

Is not speculative Knowledge the same for Substance with that which 18 saving,
only destitute of it is Influence upon Heart and Practice?

Ibid. Don't the Moravians begin with the Affections first? And is this fair
Dealing?

Do they not endeavor to insinuate themselves into People's Affections first
by Smiles, etc. And in Page 65. Do any esteem the Moravian Sect because they
Smile generally and appear loving? But Brethren, is not this Judas-like to
betray us with a Kiss? For while they show such Love, they draw pious People
into Error, and so set them a quarreling with one another; shall we suffer them
to smile us out, of our Princples. Then I Am sure we are poorly grounded in
them.

Ibid. Do not they take special Care to apply to young Persons, Females and
ignorant People who are full of Affection?

Who do they imitate in attacking the weaker Part of Man, viz. the Passions?
and the weaker Sex first, but the Devil, the Father of Lies and Errors? Did not
he deal thus with our first Parents, and by the weaker Sex seduced Adam.

Page 107. And don't they refuse generally to reason upon Points in Religion
whereby one might convince another, and leave People to be proselyted by Sight
only? It is politic in them indeed to wave Reasoning, and shun Discovery, for
their Principles will bear neither. And in Page 65.

My Soul is grieved to see the childish Fickleness of the Sons and Daughters of
this Generation! who are tossed about with every Wind of Doctrine; who are
smiled out of their Religion, without being able to offer one solid Reason for
their Change.

See Page 58 Children are fond of new Things, of Things that look bright, though
they be of little Value: Thus, young Novices in Christianity, who are just
beginning the christian Course, ignorant in a great measure as to christian
Principles, but full of Affection and Self-Conceit; when a Moravian comes among
them, sets down a while, and looks very harmless and innocent and sober, gives
some Smiles, and talks about the Blood of Christ in their mystical Way, and of
Love; Love! O brave! O what a fine Man is this?

Has not Mr. T -- declaimed more publicly and fiercely against Learning than
the Moravians, when he pronounced his Anathema against the public Academies,
and poured Contempt upon a learned Clergy, calling them Letter-learned, etc.

Why then do we hear so much of the spiritual and mystical Sense of Scripture?
etc.

Pray, Has not this been the constant Practice of the Itinerants to address and
move the Passions first?

Is not Mr. T. the Primum Mobile, a principal Mover and Promoter of the
Passionate-Religion, now prevailing among so many? Is it not as unfair Dealing
in the Itinerants as in the Moravians?

Who can help smiling at this, that considers what is past and now is? --
Strange that Mr. T. should complain of the Moravian Smiles in religious
Matters! when it is notorious that he himself not only smiled, but laughed
heartily over his Converts, even while they were under a preparatory Work of
the Law. And his Followers have practiced upon him, and not been ashamed to
express their Joy at -- by loud Laughing, even in the solemn Assemblies. Is not
this ludere cum Sacris? an unjustifiable Practice in one, as well as another.

And is not this Practice exactly correspondent with the Practice of Mr. T --
and other heady Itinerants, which creep into Houses, and lead captive silly
Women?

It is evident to a Demonstration that they have had most Success among Females
and young ignorant People.

The whole Passage is so very applicable to the Itinerants in general, that I
should have taken it for a Representation (not to say Refutation) of their
Conduct if Mr. T -- had not taught me to apply it to the Moravians.

This Rev. Gentleman had forgot surely the Motto of his own Party, viz. Answer
him not a Word, when he wrote this, it is thought by some that their Strength
was herein.

Even so many judicious and serious Christians are grieved at the Heart to see
the childish Fickleness; of many Professors at this Day, who are as Children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines,
separating themselves, and having Men's Persons in Admiration; without being
able to offer one solid Reason for their Change.

It is a moving Argument and Proof that People, are not so well taught in this
Land as is pretended, but have now as much need as ever to have their Minds
instructed as well as their Passions moved.

The Image is very strong and lively.

Page 107. Certainly, says he, we should adhere inviolably to the Principles we
have been instructed in, until we find better, which we should be always-ready
to receive upon proper Conviction, which is not to be attained by the Sight of
the Grimaces of Strangers, or by immediate Revelations or Enthusiasms, but by
Scripture Reason and Argument." And in Page 52. "He directs in order to hold
fast Christ's precious Truth, it is needful to wave a positive Conclusion,
respecting the good State of Strangers, when we have not sufficient Evidences
for it, in respect of their Principles, Experiences, and Practice. Rash Judging
either Way is certainly unreasonable and prejudicial: When Persons do speedily,
without sufficient Grounds conclude Strangers, who come among them, to be
Pious, and perhaps eminently so because of their fair Appearances in Behavior,
without examining their Principles. By this rash Method of proceeding their
Affections are apt to be unreasonably engaged in their Favor; and these being
inflamed do give a secret wrong Bias to their Judgment, and thus they lay
themselves open to all manner of Delusion.

I am confident the impartial Reader is full convinced by this time that Mr.
Tennent has drawn his own Picture to the Life, by the Representation he has
given of the Principles and Practices of the Moravians, and that I have only
set the Mirror in such a position that He and his Adherents may see themselves
and be ashamed. But if they are blinded with Self-love, Admiration, Conceit,
Party-Zeal, and the like, and will not, or cannot see their own likeness. I
believe others have so much of a Spirit of discerning as to see that Mr. T --
and his Partisans as nearly resemble the Character here given of the Moravians
as one Crow's Egg does another (to use his own homely Comparison.)

The Reader may take this Examination as an help to discover what is Truth in
the late Religious Commotion in this Country, and he will find it to be just
that which the Opposers so called, are zealous to maintain, viz. the Order of
the Gospel, and the sacred Honors due to the holy Spirit of God. Strip this
Work of its Extraordinary's, and you will discern what is the Work of God, from
that which is added to it by Art and Man's device. Pray what is there
extraordinary on one side more that the other; but what is justly to be exploded,
viz. extraordinary Errors, Disorders, Intrusions, rash Censures, Clamours,
Exclamations, vain glorious Boastings, Fits, Pretense of Sights and Visions,
Roarings, Tremblings, etc. Compare Mr. T -- with himself, and shave off his
Extraordinary's (turning the edge of his own Weapon upon himself) and his
Strength will go from him, and he will be like any other Man; a Man Subject to
like Passions as we are. I cannot find but that the New-Brunswick Party are
fallible as other Men, and chargeable with as many Errors, Intrusions,
Contradictions, etc. as their Neighbors, whom they are ready to condemn as
Enemies of God's Work and Enemies of Religion merely for opposing their Errors
and real in Discretions:" Whereas the true Interest of Religion is doubtless
served by such Opposition.

I know of no shorter Method to open the Eyes of blind party-Zealots, and
convince them of the bad Tendency of extraordinary Self-Conceit, Dominion, rash
Judging, etc. than to bring them home to their own Doors, and turn these edge
Tools upon themselves; prove them now herewith, and you will find these
crucified Gentlemen have yet as much Sensation and are as ready to cry out of
Danger as any of their abused Neighbors.

The Moravians it seems treated Mr. Tennent in the same uncharitable,
censorious, imperious, divisive Manner in which he himself has treated the Body
of the Clergy of this Generation, and then the Spirit appears to him in a most
frightful Shape, and must be avoided. Now it is come upon thee, thou faintest:
And it touches thee, and thou art troubled.

It is generally though it that Mr. D -- pt's clamorous Preaching in Boston against
unconverted Ministers, especially at C -- p's Hill, tended more to open the
Mouths of some Reverend leading Ministers there, to forbid the madness of the
Prophet, than seven Men that can render a Reason. Therefore let the Clergy as
well as Laity bear one another's Burdens, and remember them that are in Bonds
as bound with them, and as being themselves also in the Body. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them.

In fine, I must earnestly advise Mr. Tennent to retract his famous Sermon at
Nottingham, and call in the several Editions of it, for 'till then it is as
impossible to reconcile Gilbert with Tennent as to mingle Light with Darkness,
a double minded Man is unstable in all his Ways: Nay, I think he ought in
Conscience to make a solemn Retractation of it and cry Peccavi, (and all such
Changlings with him.) For it is a mere Incendiary wherever it tracks abroad and
nothing but the Fire can purge and purify it.

If any Man's Work abide which he has built upon the true Foundation which is
Christ, he shall receive a Reward. If any Man's Work shall be burnt, he shall
suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by Fire.

PHILALETHES.


