THE Examiner, EXAMINED, OR GILBERT TENNENT, HARMONIOUS.

In Answer to a Pamphlet entitled, The EXAMINER, OR GILBERT against TENNENT
Being a Vindication of the Rev. GILBERT TENNENT and his Associates, together
with six Rev. Ministers of Boston, from the unjust Reflections cast upon them
by the Author of that Anonymous Pamphlet, together with some Remarks upon the
QUERIST'S, the third Part, and other of their Performances.

The Whole being an Essay to vindicate the late Glorious WORK of GOD'S Power
and Grace in these Lands, from the unreasonable Cavils and Exceptions of said
Pamphlet, and others of like Nature.

The whole Essay is submitted to the Decision of Truth and Common Sense.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause seems Just, but his Neighbor
comes and searches him.

Math. 7.1. Judge not, that ye be not Judged.

Job 14.5, 6. Thou choosest the Tongue of the Crafty; thine own Mouth
Condemns thee, not I; yea thine own Lips testify against thee.

Luke 19.22. Out of thine own Mouth will I Judge thee, thou wicked Servant.

Psalm. 120.3. What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee,
thou false Tongue.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of the Bible
in Second-Street. 1743.

Candid Reader,
The Reasons of the Prolixity of this Preformance are these, namely the
numerousness of the Charges mentioned by the Examiner, and the Necessity I was
under to cite many Paragraphs of my other Writings, in order with the greater
clearness, to remove his pretended Objections, of Self-contradiction. May the
good God bless this Essay for the good of his Church.

I remain thy Servant for Christ's sake. G. Tennent.

THE Exaimner, Examined, OR GILBERT TENNENT, HARMONIOUS.
IT is strange to think how the most generous and noble Actions, through the
Force of some Craft and Artifice, assisted with Prejudice and Falsehood, may be
represented in the darkest Dress, as if they were Vices of the most sordid kind.

Seeing I am called to speak in my own Defense, I hope the Reader will excuse
my saying as follows, Viz. That I never undertook any Thing with a deeper Sense
of my own Weakness, and a Sincerer Intention, to God's Glory and his Kingdoms
Good; then my Journey to New England: And never underwent such hardships by
Reason of the intense Cold, frequent Travel, and continual Labors as there. So
that I am like to feels the Effects thereof to my Death, having thereby
contracted a hardness of hearing, with other bodily Disorders. But that which
Comforts me under those Infirmitys is this, that the Eternal God was visibly
with me in that Journey, in sealing my Labors with surprising and manifold
Successes, (GLORY to his Name) in the Conviction and Conversion of many Sinners
to GOD; which some of the most eminent for Piety and Learning in New England,
have already born express Testimony to, and many Thousands more can.

But behold the Reward our Anonymous Author is pleased to confer unpon me, and
that under the guise of CHARITY, is ridicule, slander, and invective. What,
could not his Charity extend to speak one favorable Word of that Journey, for
which so many have with good Reason praised the blessed GOD? It seems not!
However, it is my Support and Solace under all that load of Calumny, that is
cast upon me by the Opposers of GOD'S WORK, that Faithfulness to God and
Success in his Service, will appear in their own proper Light another Day.

It is no new Thing for the Servants of God to be traduced and represented as
the Offscouring of the Earth. Neither is it unusual for his Work to be covered
with Scandal and Contempt, and ascribed to a bad Cause: And considering the
native Enmity of the Unregenerate against God and Goodness, and the Multitude
of such that are in the World of every Order, we needn't be surpised at such
Events.

If we will approve ourselves Disciples of CHRIST indeed, we must expect to
bear his Cross: And truly, according to the common Course of Things, the more
extensive Good we are enabled to do, we must expect to bear the more Reproach.
What though we be sound in Principle, Sincere in Heart, and Laborious in Life to
promote CHRIST'S Kingdom, yet with the Apostles and other primitive Servants of
God, we shall be looked upon as deceivers, disturbers of the Peace and
disorderly Persons. For as it was of old so it is now, He that was Born after
the Flesh, presecuted him that was Born after the Spirit. Did not Cain hate his
Brother Abel, because his own Deeds were Evil and his Brothers Righteous? And
has not our Lord told us, that We shall be hated, because we are not of the
World? It is true ungodly Persons in every Age, cover and color their sordid
Opposition to goodness and usefulness, with artful and plausible Apoligy's, to
prevent the Odium, that would otherwise justly fall upon their Character. They
pretend Disorders in Conduct, and Error in Principle, are the Grounds thereof;
but if so, why don't they exert their Zeal against such Evils, as well as
Impieties of the grossest Kind, which are flagrant in the Practice of some of
their Brethren? No, such Things, because of the Relation subsisting between
them, are past over with silence and negligence! While the Virtues of good Men,
are put in the Dress of the most crimson Impietys, and their minutest Foibles
agravated by the Force of Sophistry, into massy Mountains; as well as the most
False and invidious Charges invented and propogated, to destroy their
Characters and Usefulness at a Stroke! But the true Cause of all the mighty
Bustle, which is raised in every period of Time, against the Work and Servants
of God, is industriously concealed, and that is, the Native Enmity of natural
Men, of every Tribe and Order against God and Holiness.

Well, seeing the Case is so, we must therefore with Courage and Patience,
follow our dearest Lord, through good Report and bad Report, and consider him who
endured the Contradiction of Sinners against himself, least we be weary and
Faint in our Minds. The Communications of our Master's Love to us, and the
Consciousness of our own integrity, together with the believing Expectation of
that exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, which is set before us, does and
will sweeten all the Sorrows of our State of Pilgrimage! And therefore we may
Answer the calumnious Opposers as Chrysostom the threatening Message of the
Empress Eudoxia, that we fear nothing but Sin. (nil nisi peccatum timeo.)

I am not disturbed at the Author of this Pamphlet, for examining my Sentiments
and Conduct, if either of them upon an impartial Trial, be found censurable,
let them be condemned in the most open Manner. But I trust it will appear by
what follows, to every intelligent and impartial Reader, that the Method this
Gentleman has used in the Composure of his Examiner, is exceptionable and
partial. I hope I may say to the Glory of God, without the Imputation of vain
Boasting, that I am so indifferent for the most Part, respecting the Opinion of
the World, as to my Person and Performances, and so fully convinced of the
Vanity, both of the Praises and Censures, of the most of Mankind, that I should
have given myself no Trouble to oppose the numerous Falacies of this
Performance, had I not been convinced that it was my Duty to appear now in the
just Vindication of Gods Work and Servants, which are therein traduced.

The Examiner offers some Aspersions concerning my Journey to New England,
which I know in my Conscience to be False, which being personal I though it I was
under a greater Advantage to detect.

I am engaged in other Work for God, from which I am with some degree of
Reluctance diverted by thorny Controversy, but herein I must deny my self.

Candid Reader, I must beg leave to observe (en passent) that our Case of late
and at present, (in this Country) respecting the Promotion of vital Religion,
seems very much to resemble that of Nehemiah, and the other Builders of the
Wall of Jerusalem, in the Reign of Artaxerxes, who were much opposed and
somewhat interrupted in their Work, by the unreasonable Fury and low Arts of
Sanballat, and his Associates, who scoffed at, and raged against the Builders,
as well as raised false Reports respecting their Design and Conduct. It is
reported among the Heathen said they, and Gashmu says it, that thou and the
Jews think to rebel; for which cause thou buildest the Wall: They likewise
endeavored to ensnare them by Craft, and entered into a detestable Conspiracy
to stop the Progress of the Work! May we who are through pure Grace upon God's
Side, be enabled to follow Nehemiah's Example, in supplicating Heaven in this
Immergency, and we may hope for the finishing of the Wall, notwithstanding all
that the Opposers have done, or can do, and seeing we are encompassed with
Enemy's of various Forms, viz. The Profane, Formalists, Enthusiasts, and
Heretics, let us with those primitive Builders work in the Wall with one Hand,
and hold a Weapon in the other. See Neh. 1.2.4. and 6. chap.

But to come nearer to the Subject of our present Enquirys, I can safely
declare, that I have read this Examiner's Performance, as well as others of
like nature set out by my Opponents, with a willingness to be convinced of
Error in Principle or Practice, if I was guilty of either, and with a
Resolution to acknowledge them publicly, if I found the Case so. For I think
that Maxim is most just viz. fas est, et ab host doceri, It is lawful to be
instructed even by an Enemy. And a Confession of Errors in Judgment, or Evils
in Practice, is certainly a Debt we owe to Truth and Piety. But after the most
calm and impartial Enquirys I am capable of making, I have not met with
Conviction by their Arguments, or rather Reflections, unless it be of the
Falsehood and Injustice of their Charges, the badness of their Cause, and the
malignity of their Way of managing it.

In particular I leave it to the Readers Judgment, whether the Examiner has not
acted a disingenuous Part in his laboring to expose my Name to contempt, while
in the mean Time he conceals his own. Let him ask his own Conscience, whether
he has done in this, as he would be done by? Is this the Charity, which he says
he put on in his first Page, then truly it is a very selfish Stamp, for it both
begins and ends at home?

Here let me observe, that I cannot but admire that a Person of our Authors
Penetration, should make so gross a Blunder in the Choice of his Name, why
should he call himself Philalethes or a lover of Truth, while he makes it his
Business to confute his Name, by his Practice in this Performance, to which it
is prefixed? The repeated Falsehoods with which his labored Sheets are stuffed,
suit better, as I humbly conceive, a contrary Name and Character, namely
Misalethes, or a hater of Truth; but the best Apology I can make for our
Author, is that his Name is not proper but feigned, and that perhaps his Design
was better than his Performance, possibly he might be lead into some Mistakes,
by Misinformation, Inconsideration, or by the force of Prejudice and Passion.

But to proceed, the Examiner tells us in the Beginning of his Performance,
When I had read Mr. G. Tennent's three first Sermons, on Rev. 3.3. representing
the necessity of holding fast the Truth, with the Appendix, relating to the
Moravian Errors, etc. I immediately reviewed and compared them with his famous
Sermon preached at Notingham, upon the Danger of an unconverted Ministry, on
Mark 16.44. and must confess, it is as impossible to reconcile them upon
Principles of common Sense, as to unite the two Poles.

Ans. Were I of this Gentleman's Opinion, I would immediately retract, in the
most open Manner; but being persuaded that there is no impossibility in the
Matter. I shall therefore essay to show the Harmony that is between them, by
considering what our Author has said to the contrary.

It seems something odd, that immediately after the Examiner had put on as he
tells us ( Page 1.) Charity which is not easily provoked, and hops all
Things; that he should use such Terms of Contempt as these, viz. And because it
seems hard for a High Priest to confess his Errors once a Year, though he may
love to be Father Confessor himself, and bring others to the Stool. It seems by
what has been said, that the Cloak was not buttoned very close upon him;
whether this Gentleman be a Minister or not, which he disdainfully terms High
Priest, perhaps not only to give vent to his Prejudice, but the better to
conceal himself. I know not, but methinks he might have at present waved his
sarcastical Fleer about bringing others to the Stool, while this very Thing is,
at least in Pretense, the Business of his present Performance; which is like to
fail of Success, for the want of a just Foundation. But whether, when our
Author reads the just Charges that are offered against his Conduct, in the
following Pages, he will like to be brought to the Stool himself and make
public Retractations with Austin, according to his own Advice to me, page 31.
Time must discover?

As to the reprinting of my Notingham Sermon at Boston, I had no hand in it,
but if I had, I see no Reason that I should have to repent of such an Action. I
have not seen that Sermon for a considerable Time, before the other Day, but
hearing so many Outcries against it; I was induced to read it over and over,
with calmness to see if there was a Foundation for the mighty Opposition made
against it; but upon enquiry I could not but think that as to the Matter and
Substance of it, it was but the naked Truth, and such as, if fairly
represented, all its Adversaries will never be able to confute.

But why does this Author, bring in the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, upon this
Occasion; seeing that many Thousands have approved of the Sermon as well as he,
doubtless it was to expose him to contempt among the Ungodly; because that
Sermon has much irritated natural Ministers and People?

Since Mr. Whitefield (says he) has judged it an unanswerable Piece.

A. It appears to be so yet, notwithstanding what has been said against it. The
Querists in their third Part, which is levelled against this Sermon, express as
little regard to Truth, and Modesty, as to Religion and fair Reasoning; they
appear to be Men of a wild and luxuriant Turn of Thought, who are disposed to
deride and burlesque with profane irreverence, what is most sacred and
serious; and therefore what they offer in their Performance, hardly deserves
any Notice from such as are inclined to Truth, Sobriety, and Religion. And had
not the aforesaid gloomy Ingredients been frequent and flagrant in their
Writings, they would have been long since replied to. But it is an
uncomfortable Task to deal with Men that will hardly stick at any Thing. In
short the Querists Composure upon which the Examiner lays so great a Stress, in
his present Performance, is but a Voluminous Bundle of confident Impertinence,
and rude Billingsgate, wherein the true State of the Question is perverted. To
make this evident, I would observe that the two Particulars in the Sermon
against which their Reasonings would seem principally to turn, are these viz.
1. what I have said in the 7. page concerning natural Men, that they have no
Call of God to the ministerial Work, under the Gospel Dispensation. And 2. What
I have said from page 18. to 29. respecting Persons going statedly from hearing
one Minister to another, for greater good. What they have offered against me
concerning those Particulars, are the main Pillars of that Performance, which
if they be overset, the whole Fabric falls.

Here let the Reader observe, that the Plan I went upon in the Sermon, and
Assertion aforesaid, was this viz. that there is a two fold Call to the
Ministry, inward and outward the first consisting principally in, or rather
evidenced by the pious Dispositions, and Aims of the Person, and the latter in
his regular external Separation to the Ministerial Work. It is evident from the
Words of that Paragraph, that I meant the inward Call. -- The Words are these,
Is it not a Principal Part, of the ordinary Call of God to the ministerial
Work, to aim at the Glory of God, and in Subordination thereto, the good of
Souls; as their chief Marks, in their Undertaking that Work. I cannot be
reasonably supposed to mean the external Call, by the aforesaid Words, except I
was entirely void of common Sense, and so unable to distinguish between what is
outward and inward. But surely the Querists didn't take me to be non compos,
otherwise they have reflected upon their own Understandings, by writing so much
against me, and yet the Querists, have disingenuously applied them to the
outward Call, and so misrepresented my meaning, and the true State of the
Question, page 44. in their 5. Question, they signify, what they take to be the
Call of God to the Ministry, and say that it is some public and authoritative
Declaration, of Gods Will, etc. Which plainly shows that they mean the external
or outward Call only. And in the following Paragraph, they say in answer to my
Question in the Sermon, namely, Is it not a principal Part of the ordinary Call
of God to the Ministerial Work, to aim at Gods Glory, and in Subordination
thereto the Good of Souls? They answer, That it is no Part of Gods Call to the
Ministry, much less a principal Part of it.

A. It Is true, it is no Part of the external Call; here they endeavor to
represent me, as maintaining, that the aforesaid good Disposition, gives
Authority to exercise the Ministry; which was ever far from my Thoughts, and
which there is not one Word of in that Sermon, which they set themselves to
oppose. What I have said respecting the inward Call they apply to the outward
and thus they misrepresent, and misapply, what I have spoken, and so do not
reason against my Opinion chiefly but their own Misrepresentation.

That my Notingham Sermon was framed upon the Plan or Notion of a two fold
Call, will appear more clearly by comparing what has been already mentioned,
from the 7 page of that Sermon, with what is said page 31. where I obseve that
Pharisaick, or unconverted Ministers are no Shepherds, (no faithful Ones) in
CHRIST'S Account. There it is plainly intimated, that I owned them to be
Ministers, true and lawful ones in the sight of the Church, but not faithful
ones in the Account of CHRIST. Yea the Case is so plain, that the Querists
themselves do acknowledge it, page 55. in these Words, does it not seems that
the vulgar Distinction, between the outward and inward Call, the Call of God
and the Call of Man to the Ministry, is the Foundation of the above Mistake in
Mr. T.

But though the Querists deny the aforesaid Aim, etc. to be any Part of the Call
of God to the Ministry; yet they own it to be a Qualification requisite in the
Persons called, to render them fit, for the Work they are called to page 55.
quest 6. Whence then does this Confusion in which Mr. Tennent seems to labor,
arise? Does it not proceed from his jumbling and mixing many Things together,
which are of a quite different Nature and Order, as if they were one and the
same Thing? For does not he confound the authoritative Call, Commission or
Command of God, which is the divine Act, either immediately or mediately, with
the Qualifications requisite in the Persons called, to render them fit for the
Work they are called to, as if they were the self same Thing?

A. No! I have not confounded them, I have never said nor though it that any
Person, by reason of his good Dispositions or Aims, had Commission or
Authority, to exercise the ministerial Office. And do not the Querists
contradict themselves in this Charge? While they elsewhere own as I have
already observed, that the vulgar Distinction between the outward and inward
Call, was the Foundation of my Mistake. How could I distinguish them, and yet
confound them? But here let it be observed, that the Querists do own the
Unfitness of natural Men for the Ministerial Office, which was the principal
Thing I designed to prove in the Notingham Sermon. And what if I had given a
wrong Name, to what is acknowledged by themselves to be necessary, why would
they make me so great an Offender for a Word? Under this Consideration, what is
their Debate but a mere Logomachy?

It is true, I did not so fully and expressly explain my Proposition, in the 7.
page as I might have done, and this is all the Shadow for caviling upon the
Call to the Ministry, which the Querists, probably to answer some private
Design, have used all the Arts of Sophistry in improving; but it is plain to
any that read that Sermon with Attention, that in consequence of the aforesaid
Distinction of an outward and an inward Call, I distinguish between true and
faithful Ministers. See page 31. where it is said, there is no probability ( i.
e. as to many of them) of getting good, by the Ministry of Pharisees: For they
are no Shepherds (no faithful ones) in Christ's Account. Those that have an
outward Call only, may be said to be true Ministers in the Sight of the Church,
their Ministrations are valid, yea they may be said to be true Ministers in the
Sight of God in this Respect, namely, that they come into the Ministry
according to the Rules or Orders, which God has appointed in his Church; But
they cannot be said to be faithful Ones, seeing they have no Faith. -- If they
are not faithful in the Affairs of their own Souls, how can they be supposed to
be faithful in the Affairs of others?

Now when I say in that Sermon, that unconverted Men are not sent of God into
the Ministry, under the Gospel Dispensation, I mean these Things following,
viz. 1. that they are destitute of an Aim at Gods Glory above all, and other
pious Dispositions, without which they are not well qualified for the
Ministerial Work; and therefore (comparatively at least) are unlikely to do
much good in it. And 2. I do not find under the Gospel Dispensation, that
unconverted Men are moved or inclined by the Spirit of God to undertake the
ministerial Office, but by their own or by a worse Spirit. And 3. that Almighty
God does not require in his Word, nor approve of, unconverted Men taking upon
them the Ministry of the Gospel; these Things the Scriptures and Reasonings in
the Sermon plainly prove; and indeed such as oppose them, oppose the true
Interest of vital Godliness, which are not like to be well promoted without a
pious Ministry.

The anonymous Querists betray a bad Temper of Mind, in their laboring to
enervate, what I have said in the aforesaid Sermon, respecting the
Uncomfortableness of the Ministry of natural Men to gracious Souls; herein they
oppose the common Sense of the Faithful; and in their caviling at what is
offered in the Sermon, concerning the unprofitableness of the Ministry of
graceless Men, for the most Part; in respect of the Conviction and Conversion
of Sinners, they not only manifest an evil Disposition, but contradict the
plainest Testimony's of Scripture and Experience. These Things are so self
evident, that it is amazing to find professors of Religion opposing them.

Is not this the plain Tendency of the Querists reasoning upon this Head?
Namely, to encourage ungodly Men to take upon them the Ministry of the Gospel,
as well as to encourage People to an indifferency in their Choice of Ministers,
and are not both these Things fatal to the Church of God, should not Extremes
be avoided on every Hand?

That there is an outward and an inward Call to the Gospel Ministry, is
asserted by many Divines of principal Note, among the reformed Churches; to
this Effect spoke the Rev. Mess Durham and Bracle. Mr. Ross in his Pansebia
represents this to be the Opinion of all the Presbyterians; and indeed I
thought it had been so too, till I met with the Querists Performance, which is
done by Persons who are fond of that Name. I could wish for their own Sakes,
that they were as fond of the Thing signified by it, in this as well as in
other Particulars. But the Case is so plain, respecting the Distinction of an
outward and an inward Call to the Ministry, being held by many; That the
Querists themselves are forced to confess its Veracity. page 55. quest. 7. Does
it not seem, that the imbibing and improving the false though vulgar Distinction
between the outward and inward Call, the Call of God and the Call of Man to the
Ministry, is the Foundation of the above Mistake in Mr T? Here they own it to
be vulgar, or commonly received; and indeed so it is; for this is the Opinion
of the whole Church of Scotland, as appears from her Directory, which they and
we have adopted, as the Standard of our Proceedings and Sentiments, respecting
the Affairs of Church Government. Under the Head of Ordination, are these
Words, Which being considered by the Presbytery they shall proceed to enquire
touching the Grace of God in him, and whether he be of such holiness of Life,
as is requisite in a Minister of the Gospel, and to examine him, touching his
Learning and Sufficiency, and touching the Evidences of his calling to the Holy
Ministry; and in particular his fair and direct calling to that Place. Here it
is evident, that they assert a Call to the Ministry, before Ordination; and
therefore an inward Call. This is written as with a Sun Beam in those Words,
and therefore the Querists show either little acquaintance with their own
avowed Principles, or little regard to them, by denying it. And indeed hereby
they offer much Reason to suspect their Sincerity in the Ministry. Alas what
superficial Ministers must they be, who deny the inward Call, is it because
they have not it themselves, or is it to run down with the Cry of Error, Error,
such as think it necessary to hold the Presbyterian Principles contained in our
excellent Directory? If so their Case or Course is miserable. And do not the
Church of England in their Ordination Office, propose these Questions to the
Candidate, before Ordination, viz. Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by
the Holy Ghost to take upon you this Office and Administration? And are you
called according to the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Laws of this
Realm? This is so plain and positive to the Point in dispute, that there is no
need of any Addition to explain it. The Reader may herefrom easily perceive,
what sort of a Spirit the Querists are of, who labor to cast Contempt upon the
avowed Principles of the Body of the Protestant Churches, respecting this Point
under debate.

Now seeing I did not assert the Necessity of an extraordinary Call, in the
ordinary Times of the Gospel; consisting in Visions, and Voices and the like,
or that good Dispositions and Aims, were sufficient to constitute a Minister,
or give a Right to exercise that Office, without a regular external Separation
thereto, according to the Order of God, neither of which, I ever believed or
expressed; what necessity was there then for so long and warm a Dispute,
against our and their excellent Directory, unless it was to amuse the Ignorant,
and prejudice them against those whom they hated, and wanted to pull down?

But the Truth of the Case is this, some of these Men have been less esteemed,
by some of their Hearers, after the Work of God spread among them, than before;
and others whom they disliked have been esteemed above them; neither of which
they could brook, they have therefore taken up Arms against Gods Work and his
Servants, whom he has used in promoting it, and have endeavored by all Means,
(per fas nesasque) by Hook and Crook to slander and traduce both, in order to
amuse the ignorant Populace, they have raised the Hue and Cry of Error and
Disorder, against those whom they disdain, and have put their Wits upon the
Tenters, to find out Matter to support the Charge, partly by invidious and
false Glosses, upon the Writings of their Opponents, and by artfully magnifying
smaller Indiscretions in Conduct, and partly by either Inventing or Propagating
notorious Falsehoods concerning them.

That God, whose we are, and whom we serve, knows, that it was our Intention in
traveling to bring poor Sinners to CHRIST JESUS, as well as to build up Saints
in him, and not to divide Congregations, as they do falsely Charge us, it is
they that are the proper Causes of the Divisions among us, by their opposing
that blessed Work of Conviction and Conversion, that has not long since been
spreading in their Borders! Had they joined with us as they ought to have done,
in promoting that Work, and as they will wish one Day they had done, there
would have been no Divisions among us: But instead of this, they have used sly
and sophistical Methods, in abusing every seemingly or really exceptionable
Incident, to cast odious Colors upon the whole Work, they have likewise
opposed God's Work, by their false and dangerous Moravian Doctrine, about
Conviction. Witness, Mr. Thompsons detestable and inconsistent Performance,
entitled, The Doctrine of Convictions set in a clear Light; which diverse
Ministers of that schismatical Party, have expressed their Appobation of:
Hardly any thing can be invented, that has a more direct Tendency, to destroy
the common Operations of God's holy Spirit, and to keep Men from JESUS CHRIST,
than what Mr. Thomson has expressed in that Performance.

C. E. G. page 2.7. He says, First, as to these preparatory ungracious
Convictions, as I may call them, which are held to be so necessary, by way of
Preparation for Conversion. I apprehend that if their Nature and Tendency be
duly considered, it will appear, that all such Convictions, as are void of true
Grace, are so far from being necessary Preparatives for Conversion, that they,
are rather an Impediment to it. Page 28. That these common Convictions may be
sometimes succeeded with true Conversion, I do not deny, but when it is so, the
Conversion following cannot be justly reckoned the proper Effect of these
Convictions, although it may be occasioned by them, as it may be by the
Commission of some gross Sin, which deeply wounds the natural Conscience. Page
33.34. It is evident that whatever Convictions, may be raised in a Persons
Mind, which are void of the foregoing Marks of saving Conviction, or whatever
Fear or Terrors may follow or accompany such Convictions, can have no native
Tendency, to lead or prepare Persons for Conversion. What nearer to Conversion
is a Person, or better prepared for it, by his being convinced of Sin and
Guilt, while still his Heart, Love and Affections are under the reigning Power
of it? Nor is he humbly affected, with a Sense of its Vileness. How much was
Judas prepared for Conversion by his Convictions and Terrors? Yea such
ungracious Convictions tend rather to scare a Person from Christ, than draw him
unto him: page 39. From which it does plainly appear, that the Convictions
which are necessary to Conversion, are in Truth a Part of the Work it self, or
to speak more distinctly, nothing else, but that very Principle of Grace,
implanted in and by Conversion; putting forth it self in the Exercise of
Conviction, or Persuasion of the Person's natural sinful and miserable State,
according to the Word. The Heart and Conscience bearing Witness thereto. For
the Confutation of this nonsensical Moravian Notion, I would refer the Reader
to my Sermons against the Moravians page 3. 4. 5. and to the Rev. Mr.
Dickenson's ingenious Dialogues, wherein this Point is more largely discussed.

Our Opposers, as I am credibly informed, have done much Injury to Religion by
indistinct and unseasonable Discourses upon this Point, viz. That Persons may
have Grace and not know it. This was insisted upon at a Time, when Multitudes
were under Convictions, and the Consequence was, that many relapsed into their
former Security.

They have likewise, as has been observed, raised the Cry of Order, and set it
in such a Light, as has had a Tendency to blacken the Characters of some of
God's poor Servants, in the Opinion of some, and its probable that this was
their Design; this has likewise been a plausible Mean of obstructing God's Work
in the Land.

And indeed this is the Artifice and Trick which the Opposers of Religion have
used against God's faithful Servants of old. Elijah was charged by Ahab as a
Troubler of Israel, Paul represented as a Mover of Sedition, and our LORD
himself was faulted for not observing the Tradition of the Fathers. And thus
while our Opposers contend for what is comparatively but the tything of Mint,
and Annies, and Cummin, they neglect the weightier Matters of the Law.

But the 2d Particular, against which the Querists Reasonings (if they may be
so called) are principally directed, is respecting what I have said in the 18
and 19 page of the Nottingham Sermon in these Words, viz. If the Ministry of
natural Men be, as it has been represented, then it is both lawful and
expedient, to go from them to hear Godly Persons; yea it is so far from being
sinful to do this, that one who lives under a pious Minister of lesser Gifts,
after having honestly endeavored to get Benefit by his Ministry, and gets
little or none, but does find real Benefit, and more Benefit elsewhere, I say
he may lawfully go, and that frequently, where he gets most Good to his
precious Soul after regular Application to the Pastor where he lives for his
Consent, and proposing the Reasons thereof, when this is done in the Spirit of
Love and Meekness without contempt of any, as also without rash Anger or vain
Curiosity.

The Querists do most unjustly represent my Meaning, in the aforesaid
Paragraph, as appears from the 95 page of their Pamphlet, where they say, as to
the fourth Inference, which seems to have been the main scope of the
Performance, viz. To dissolve all relative Bonds and Ties between Pastor and
People, at least to proclaim them null and void, as to the People's Obligation
therefrom to attend upon the Administrations of their own fixed Pastors
statedly; so that if we take Mr. T. up right, his declared Judgment here is,
that People, after the Choice of a Minister to be their stated Pastor, are at
their free Liberty to absent themselves from his Ministry, as far and as often
as they, or any of them pleases, whether the Minister be godly or graceless.

Ans. What they have said is as contrary as any Thing can be, to my express
Declaration in the preceding Paragraph: If I thought, as the Querists suggest,
that People may absent themselves as far and as often as they please, I would
not have expressly guarded against it, by mentioning a previous regular
Application, and thus it is evident, that the Querists do not argue against my
Opinion fairly stated, but first misrepresent it, and then oppose with much
earnestness their own Figment, and therefore all their Reasonings on that Head
fall to the Ground.

Let my Opinion be fairly stated as it is in the Sermon, and this Exception
from that general Rule added, namely, that they should go where they get the
most Good statedly, after regular Application to the Minister, or Church
Session, whereto they belong, unless their particular Good endangers or
obstructs the general Good of the Society, whereto they have a Relation, in
this we ought doubtless to prefer the general before our particular Good, e. g.
it may so happen, that if a Person of great Importance and Influence in a
little Society should go statedly elsewhere, it would break the Society. This
and such like Cases we must deny ourselves.

As to going elsewhere after Application, -- I mean no more, and no less than
this, that we should pay all that Deference to Church Judicatories, which is
consistent with the Right of private Judgment, in Matters of Conscience. Any
who carry the Matter farther, as it seems the Querists do, by what I have
mentioned from them and others, pass under the specious Names of Order and
Government, they erect a Tyranny upon the Ruins of every Thing that is valuable
in human Nature. Now let my Opinion be stated as aforesaid, and I may bid
Defiance to the Querists and all of their Stamp to overthrow it.

But to set my Opinion in a more clear and distinct Light, I shall take leave
to mention the following Particulars, which are either expressed in, or plainly
deducible from, the 19 page of my Nottingham Sermon, viz.

1. Negatively, I do not assert or maintain, that Persons may or should go from
their own Churches to others at all, much less frequently, merely in order to
tickle an exorbitant Fancy, or for the sake of vain Curiosity, No! No! Upon the
contrary I believe, it is sinful to go from a more plain awakening Soul
searching and savoury Ministry, to a less plain, less awakening, less savoury
one, merely to get carnal Ease to a laboring Mind, or Gratification to a
Distempered Palate, by affected Bombast or gingle of Language, Nor

2. Do I profess or maintain, an irregular Secession to be lawful or laudable?
I mean that Persons should go frequently to other Churches, without Application
to their own Minister or Church Consistory, for Leave in this Affair, rendering
the Reasons of their Request. If their Reasons are not accounted valid, and the
Case be really so, they ought to desist, but if they are wronged, they should
appeal to a higher Judicatory; but if the Case should so happen, that after all
the Appeals they can make, and most humble and impartial Examination of the
Affair, they firmly believe they are wronged by the Church Judicatories, and
are Conscience bound in the Matter, they ought to judge for themselves, and act
according to their Consciences: For surely we are not bound to implicit Faith
in, and Obedience to, Church Rulers; No, we are only to be subject to them in
the Lord, as our excellent Westminster Confession of Faith instructs us. Nor

3. Do I approve of an angry Secession, or withdrawing, through Envy, Malice or
Contempt, from the hearing of our Parish Minister: For this is manifestly
opposed to the blessed Law of Love, which is the summary and compend of the
divine Precepts, and looks with a frowning Aspect upon the Interests of
Christianity: When People do withdraw, it ought to be in the Spirit of Meekness
with Humility and Love, avoiding unjust and invidious Reflections, and on the
contrary, as much as may be, consulting the just honor of the Minister, we
withdraw from. Nor

4. Do I approve of a hasty Secession, without considerable Trial, to get Good
under the Ministry of those we are related to: For that may be followed with
unhappy Consequences. Doubtless, Extremes on both Sides of the Question should
be avoided, as the People should not be enslaved on the one Hand, and brought
to the fatal Necessity of acting contrary to their Consciences, or deprived of
the most edifying Means: So the Honor, Comfort and Support of the Ministry,
and Safety of particular Societies, should be consulted and regarded on the
other. Nor

5. Do I approve of withdrawing from a Church, merely to avoid the just
Censures of it, for this tends to disanull its Government, and introduce
Confusion and Anarchy.

Here it must be confessed, that as Ministers are apt to be under the Influence
of a Partial Bias, when their Honor or Interest is or seems to be touched,
having like Passions with other Men; so the People are liable to the following
Extremes, namely, either to make no Difference at all among Ministers, or to
make too much: The former they are inclined to, while under the Power of a deep
Security, and the latter they are in great Danger of, when they are awakened,
and for some Time after their Conversion. Now both these Evils should be
opposed and corrected, for indeed both are very hurtful. Duty lies here (as
Philosophers say of Virtue in general) in a mediocrity or middle between those
Extremes. Ministers should neither be slighted or idolized. But positively what
I believe and profess in the present Case is,

1. That it is lawful for a Person, who lives under a Minister of lesser Gifts,
(even though really religious) that after having, with Simplicity and
Uprightness, used his utmost Endeavors, (so far as assisted by God) to gain
Benefit by his Ministry, and yet gets little or none, but does elsewhere get
Good, or more Good, (especially by one of the same Persuasion) after regular
Application, to go where he gets most Good to his Soul. And

2. Much more from a Christless Minister under the aforesaid Circumstances,
both lawful and expedient, after the Application before mentioned.

Here let the Reader observe, that the aforesaid more particular and distinct
Account, which I have now given of my Opinion, respecting that Point which the
Querists and Examiner principally oppose, is but a Transcript of what I had
written as my Sentiments upon this Subject many Years before the Nottingham
Sermon was preached.

If I should take the same trifling sophistical and voluminous Method's with
the Querists Performance, as they have done with my Sermon, the Book would
swell to a Quarto, if not a Folio Volumn perhaps, and this would be much for
Edification, woudn't it? It would be no hard Task to tell of 11 yea of 20
Maxims of selfish Policy, and false Doctrine, that seem to be at the Bottom of
their Arguings, but I have something of more Importance to manage. Why don't
these wondrous wise and learned Men, the Querists, and others of their Kidney,
take famous Dr. Voetius, one of the most eminent Lights of the Reformed
Churches to task, and confute his accurate Dissertation upon this Subject, in
his Book of Ecclesiastical Policy, page 68. quest. 17. and likewise in his Book
of Ascetic Theology, chap. 10. page 222. 3. There they may find their petty
Sophisms and unlearned Cavils fully baffled I would advise them to do it in
Latin for the Benefit of all the Churches: Such great Men shoudn't lie
concealed. If they take the same Method of quibbling and saying a great deal
beside the Point in Dispute, as they have done with me, they will be sure of
confuting him, in the Opinion of their graceless and Ignorant Admirers
especially. And after they have done this in order to complete a large Volumn
upon the Subject, they may likewise take to task, Hildersham, and Fener, two
learned and pious British Divines, who are also of my Sentiment. (see Hilder
Lectures page 271. and page 253 4.) and confute them too; which if they pursue
their usual Method, they may easily effect as aforesaid; they are such Dabsters
at disputing, or cavilling rather, that I question whether any Writing in the
World can stand them in their Way.

One Instance of which under the present Head I am discoursing upon, I shall
take leave to mention is, their making the Relation of a Minister to his
People, the same with that of a Husband to his Wife, in respect of their
Obligation to attend statedly upon his Ministry; see page 133.

Qu. II. Though we allow Men should seek the greater Good; yet we would ask,
Whether this greater Good be most likely to be obtained in the Way of God's
Appointment, and in the Use of regular and not irregular Means? Or whether the
Notion that stolen Bread is sweet, be a true or a false Notion? Or to use Mr.
T.'s own Phrase, Does not he act like a Fool, who forsakes his own chaste Wife,
in Hopes of getting more Pleasure in the Embraces of a Strumpet?

The Former agrees well with what they say, page 116. thus, Is it not some
Affront to say, in the open Parlour, that Doll is as good as my Lady; but must
she be better too?

That there is an Obligation upon the People to attend upon their Pastors
Ministrations statedly, I do not deny but affirm; but in the mean Time, I abhor
the Notion of the Querists, viz. That, that Obligation is equal to the Marriage
Contract: For if so, it will necessarily follow, that every Time the Minister
preaches to any besides his own People, he commits Adultery, and every Time the
People hear another, they likewise commit Adultery. At this Rate a Minister
would be no Minister, but in his own Parish, and every Time he Steps over the
Line, his Right to exercise his ministerial Office evanishes.

Besides, according to this Plan, the Presbyterian Churches, by maintaining the
Lawfulness of the transporting of Ministers from one Place to another, in order
to exercise their Pastoral Office there statedly, and that purely to promote
the greater Good of the Church; and their acting accordingly is a maintaining
and practicing of Adultery; and do not the Querists profess this very Doctrine,
while they assume the Presbyterian name, and have they not acted according to
it, in a public and social Manner not long since? Well then don't they
according to their own Plan of Reasoning avow and practice Adultery? Besides it
may be here observed, that the Querists have so far forsaken the Presbyterian
Plan of Government, that they have in this Point under debate, adobted the
ridiculous Notion of the rigid Independents and Brownists, what little Reason
have these Men to glory in the Presbyterian Name?

Seeing the Relation between Pastor and People is mutual, must not what they
Term a Breach of it be upon both Sides equally Criminal? If a Minister may go
from the People to whom he is related, and preach statedly to others, after a
regular Dismission, in order to do more Good to the Souls, of Men, why then
may not the People go statedly to get greater Good to their Souls, after the
aforesaid Application, shoudn't we be as careful to promote our own as another
Good? And pray why are not the Presbitery as capable to judge of Peoples
getting Good, as of the probability of a Ministers doing Good?

I have not Leisure nor Inclination, to offer any Remarks upon the Prophanity
of the Querists, their begging the Question in debate, and many other
Absurdities, which are contained in what I have but now cited from them. And
therefore I shall only take leave at present to add: That these Opposers of
God's Work, through their Selfishness, and the Heat of their Prejudice have
endeavored to confute virtually and consequentially their own professed
Opinion and Practice, as well as the Sentiments of the Presbyterian Churches
universally. What a Shame is it, that these Men should cast Scandalous
Reflections upon the Body of the reformed Churches, and labor to prove them
all to be guilty of Adultery as well as themselves?

Pray hasn't every ordained Minister, an habitual Relation to the whole visible
Church? And must not this be brought into Exercise as to particular Societies,
in a regular Manner, as the greater Good of the whole requires, is it not
contrary to common Sense, to immagine that seeing every Minister, has an
habitual Relation to, and is a Member of the whole visible Church, and is by
Conscience and Office obliged to promote the greater Good thereof, that his
actual Relation to any particular Branch of it, should continue any longer than
is consistent herewith? As the common Maxim is ex ungue Leonem, by the Claw the
Lion is known, So the Reader by this Instance may guess at the Temper of the
Querists, and their manner of trifling in Disputation. But enough of this

I return to our Examiners Performance, and beg his Pardon that I have
interupted by so long a Digression, my remarks upon it; and doing it the
Justice it deserves. But seeing it was only to pay some Complements, to a Work
of his dear Friends, which he has in so high Esteem; I hope he will have me
excused.

The Examiner says, page 4 That Mr. T's zealous Advocates here, and elsewhere,
have by Way of Charity, dispersed about the Country, great Numbers of the last
Edition, (meaning of the Notingham Sermon) tending to corrupt the Minds of
People, from the Simplicity which is in CHRIST, and to promote that Confusion
and seperating Spirit, which he himself has been instrumental in raising in
many Places.

Answ. What this Author Means, by the Simplicity "which is in CHIST, I cannot
tell, but sure I am that instead of corrupting Men's Minds, etc. it tends to
prevent their being corrupted, to inform them of the Danger of an ungodly
Ministry; and to direct Men to the best Means, has a direct Tendency to bring
them to CHRIST, and to the Simplicity that is in him. Both which Particulars
are the Substance and Scope of that Sermon, (which this Author opposes) and
therefore it was an act of true Charity in those whom he calls my Advocates, to
disperse them. But on the Contrary to excite People to an Indifferency in their
Choice of Ministers, or to encourage unconverted Men to come into the Ministry,
or to be offended at the odious Characters the Scriptures give them, or to
befriend them in their sordid Opposition to Gods Work and Servants, is a sinful
Simplicity, and horrid Cruelty! And that the Examiner is Guilty of all these
Things, either expressly or virtually, will appear I trust thy the following
Pages.

The Sermon rightly understood, has no tendency to promote Confusion and a
separating Spirit. If I had asserted, that a certain Knowledge of the States of
others was attainable, or that unconverted Ministers were never used as Means
of doing Good, or that it was a Sin to hear them, or that it was lawful to go
statedly from the hearing of that Minister whom we are under a Relation to, at
our Pleasure, there would be some Umbrage or Reason for the Charge; but seeing
I have said neither of these, but on the contrary asserted the necessity of
previous Application, etc. the Charge is without any real Foundation.

This Author farther adds, that I my self have been instrumental, of raising in
many of their Places, Confusion and a separating Spirit.

Ans. It is a notorious Falsehood, Thousands in N. England can witness that I
spoke seldom of the Ministry at all; not one Word came out of my Lips, in
Favor of separating from them. But if this Author means by Confusion and a
separating Spirit, a Scriptural and rational Distress of Soul for Sin, and a
Separation from it in Affection and Practice, he in that Sense speaks the
Truth, these Things I confess I was (through Grace) instrumental in raising, in
many of their Places.

But to confirm his awful Charge he adds this Invincible Argument viz. For many
are fully persuaded, that Mr. T's Sermon, and practice upon it, have sown the
Seeds of all the Discord, Intrusion, Confusion, Separaion, Hatred, Variance,
Emulation Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresys, etc. that have been springing up,
in so many of the Towns and Churches through the Province for two Years past.

Ans. A dreadful Indictment indeed if true, consisting of eleven Particulars,
and yet behold and wonder there is something left behind unexpress'd, for there
is an and cetera at the Heels of it! But it is my Comfort that his Libel is
false and ridiculous. Methinks if the Examiner has any remains of Conscience
left, it must needs make him uneasy and ashamed, that he has uttered eleven
Falsehoods at a Breath; but pray Sir, why didn't you favor us with the whole
Catalogue of Crimes, was you aware that you had already mentioned more than you
could prove, if so it was discreet in you not to proceed farther, but to make
an Et cetera supply the Place of Particulars. Terrible, and have I sown the
Seeds of Heresy and Treason too among you. Alack and alas a day? Why did n't
you charge me with Murder and Blasphemy also? For you had as much Reason for
these as for the others, aye Treason! Is this your Charity? do you want the
civil Sword to be drawn against me as a Rebel to the State for preaching Faith
and Repentance successfully? would you embrue your Hands in my Blood, that
traveled through the Winter Cold to do your Country Good? But pray Sir, where are
the Proofs of the aforesaid Charge? Why this, That many are fully persuaded,
that my Sermon and Practice upon it, have sown the Seeds, etc. as aforesaid.

Ans. And what if they be? It Is either through the Force of their Prejudice, or
by false Information. Many more in New England, know the unreasonableness and
falsehood of that Persuasion.

The Charge of my practicing upon the Sermon, supposes in my Apprehension, that
that Sermon was generally known by the People of New England, either before or
when I was among them, which is false; unless our Author takes preaching
Original Sin, Faith, Repentance, Justification by the Righteousness of CHRIST
alone, the Conviction of Sin, the New Birth, and the necessity of a holy Life,
to be sowing the Seeds of Discord, I am not guilty. Multitudes know that these
were the Doctrines which I principally preached upon in New England. I may add
likewise, that it is well known that there was no such Divisions in N. England
when I was in it, as have since happened. But supposing there had been, it
would not have proved the Charge of Confusion, much less of Heresy, except I
had spoken something that had a Tendency thereto. Would not it be unreasonable
to charge the Apostle Paul, with all the Tumults which sometimes attended his
Preaching of which it was not the Cause, but innocent Occasion only. Would the
Examiner Charge our Lord, with being the Author of Confusion, because he tells
us that he came not to send Peace, but fire and Division?

But our Author proceeds to repeat his Charge in the following invidious Terms,
viz. Who has been so Instrumental to hatch the Cockatrice, as himself, though at
the same Time he could gravely Advise others, to crush it in the Egg.

Answ. This would be very inconsistent if true, but in as much as it is False,
it must be laid at his own Door. I beseech the Examiner to consider seriously
the following Lines, in the 14. page of that Sermon he so much Dislikes. Mat.
23.13. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men, for ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer
those that are entering to go in Pharisee Teachers will with the utmost Hate,
oppose the very Work of Gods Spirit upon the Souls of Men, and Labor by all
Means to blacken it as well as the Instruments, which the Almighty improves to
promote the same, if it come near their Borders, and Interferes with their
Credit or Interest; thus did the Pharisees with our Savior. -- May Almighty
God incline our Author, to examine impartially, if this be not his Case and
Practice?

But the Examiner proceeds to say, Whoever will take Pains to consider the main
Scope of Mr. T's Sermon at Nottingham, will find the Principles of it,
subversive of Gospel Order, the public Ministry, and public Means of
Education; and what have we more? What could touch the Apple of our Eye, like
this fatal Blow? It is a Blow at the Root!

Ans. If the Charge was true, that Sermon would deserve the most speedy
Condemnation. But where is the Proof? Why the Examiners Assertion, or ipse
dixit: But will this suffice the Impartial, no surely! What cannot the Danger of
an unconverted Ministry be represented, and private Seminaries of Learning be
erected, especially where there are no public ones, without endangering the
public Ministry, and public Means of Education? Strange! What Notion then
must this Gentleman have of the Ministry? Does he think they are all
unconverted? If so, he is very uncharitable indeed! I Am sorry, it should touch
him so near as the Apple of his Eye, to have the Danger of an unconverted
Ministry set forth as in my Notingham Sermon; if he were not too nearly related
to them, methinks it wouldn't touch him in so tender a Part, but on the
contrary it would make him glad, to see their Picture so justly drawn, that so
they might see their Faces in that Glass, and be convinced and ashamed. If the
Sermon be a Blow at the Root, as our Author observes, it is at the Root, of an
ungodly Ministry, and is our Author sorry, that that Root of Bitterness should
be struck at? When I composed it, I expected it would be judged by that Tribe
it detected, as guilty of Scandalum Magnatum, as worthy of Bonds and of Death.
I supposed, it would be like rousing a Wasps Nest, and I have found it
according to my Expectation. The Opposers of God's Work, have dip't their
Tongues and Pens in Gall, and by their Malignant Invectives, have endeavored
to bury its Author in Ruins; but peradventure it may have a Resurrection to
their Terror and Shame. What Is the matter that these Men, can find nothing
agreeable in that Sermon, that so exactly describes the naked Truth, the very
Character Case and Pranks of the ungodly Clergy? Supposing some Things in it
were worded in too strong Terms, what then, should they condemn all for this,
and want to commit it to the Flames? Indeed I think this Method of Proceeding,
looks very suspicious and Points out who they are?

But the Examiner proceeds to produce the Sentiments of a Schismatical Party
whom he calls the Synod, wherein they condemn my Sermon preached at Notingham,
as a notable Instance of our sowing Seeds of Division, And we charge him say
they, with perverting Scripture, uncharitable rash judging the Body of the
Clergy of this Generation, in the Lump, and encouraging Factions and Disorders
therein!

Ans. Perhaps this Gentleman thinks to grace and strengthen his side of the
Question, by the Name of Synod. But I would have him to consider, that adhuc
sub judice lis est. The Point is in dispute, whether the Party he speaks of, be
the Synod of Phidelphia or not, I humbly conceive they will not be found so in
the Issue, being but a minor Party to those whom they condemn.

As to the Charge of Perverting Scripture in that Sermon, I deny it, I have
better Interpreters, than them on my Side, that justify the Sense I have given
of the Scriptures in that Sermon. The Scriptures produced answer the Design I
bro't them for. Namely, to show the Danger of an unconverted Ministry. And that
the Almighty does not approve of natural Men's taking upon them the Ministry in
the ordinary Time of the Gospel. It is they that have perverted my Meaning, and
so in consequence thereof, would Charge upon me a perverting of the Scripture.

As to what they call, uncharitable judging of the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation, I would ask them, what they think themselves? Do they Immagine,
that the greater Part of the Ministers of this Generation, are pious? Let them
speak out upon this Head. Are not the greatest part of the Clergy of this
Generation Papists, and is it uncharitable to say that such are unconverted?
And are not many of the Protestant Clergy very unsound in Principle, and unholy
in Life? And is there not a great Number of others, who have a Form but hate
the Power of Godliness? Have not many those Marks of Impiety that are mentioned
in that Sermon which they oppose?

Truly I must confess, that the more I have had to do with them, and perceived
the Malignant Opposition of some of them, against God's Work and Servants, the
more my Opinion has been strengthened respecting the greatness of the Number of
graceless Ministers. As to their Charge of sowing Seeds of Division.

I would answer them in these Words of the Notingham Sermon page 25 the proper
Cause of sinful Divisions, is that Enmity against God and Holiness, which is in
the Hearts of natural Men of every order, being stirred up by the Devil and
their own proud and selfish Lusts; and very often natural Men, who are the
proper Causes of the Divisions aforesaid, are wont to deal with God's Servants,
as Potiphars Wife did by Joseph, they lay all the Blame of their own Wickedness
at their Doors, and make a loud Cry. This is truly the present Case.

It is a Fruit of our Authors strong Prejudice, to represent me as holding in
my Notingham and Moravian Sermons, two Principles as opposite as the Heathen
Principles, of a good and evil God, as will appear I trust by the Sequel.

But to proceed, our Charitable Examiner, is offended at the Rev. Ministers of
Boston, for speaking honorably of my Person, and late Performance, respecting
the Moravians, it seems, as if he grudged that any should think or speak well
of me, where now is our Authors Charity, which he said he put on in his first
page dosn't it seem as if he had dropped the Cloak quite?

What if these Rev. Gentlemen, had seen the Notingham Sermon, as he suggests;
its like they woudn't have so dreadful an Idea of it, as our Author (what their
Opinion of the Sermon is I know not.) But on the Supposition, that one or more
of them were of Opinion, that there were some unguarded or exceptionable
Expressions in it, yet might they not consistent with the Simplicity that is in
CHRIST, forbear expressing this, when they were not called to it. They were not
prefacing the Notingham Sermon, but others, which this Author himself does not
object against; had they expressed a Commendation of these, together with a
Censure because of supposed Exceptions in another, would it not have tended to
mar the Usefulness of what they recommended, should not what a Person does
well, be commended, notwithstanding of his supposed or real Defects?

It must appear evident to every impartial Mind, that the Rev. Ministers of
Boston, have acted according to the Simplicity that is in CHRIST, by
recommending a Performance which was seasonable, and had some Tendency to
prevent, the Spread of Moravianism in this Land; and by giving the Author of it
that Honor, which they thought was just, in order to make the Performnace of
more Service.

But how to reconcile our Authors Conduct, in this Affair with the Simplicity
that is in CHRIST, I profess I am at a Loss? If he has any Love to the Truths
of God, which are now so much attacked in this Land, why does he come out with
such Virulence against me when I am appearing for them, and endeavoring as
well as I can to defend them. Why is he utterly silent, about what I have said
in Defense of the main Truths of the Gospel? Does Not it seem as if some
Moracian or Jesuit had hired his Pen, to attempt by Hook and Crook to render me
Ridiculous, that thus the Influence of my late Performance against them might
be frustrate?

This Author farther betrays the badness of his Cause, and Spirit, by deriding
those Rev. Gentlemen, who are above his Contempt, by insinuating that they
believed, some Person to be infallible in these Words.

If they think as Protestants generally do, that Infalibility may be mistaken.
-- But afterward, in the same Page, he grows more warm and confident, and
says, it seems that such a Prime Instrument of the Work, that has been going on
in the American Provinces, for the two last Years must be judged infallible,
and supported with the highest Encomiums of six most Rev. Ministers.

Ans. Why has this Author charged such a notorious Falsehood, upon these worthy
Gentlemen, namely, that they have judged me infallible, for the which he has
not the least Foundation; can they not commend what they judge to be Praise
Worthy in any, without supposing him to be Infallible? To what Lengths will
Men's Rage and Prejudice carry them?

And How false and ungenerous is it in our Author, to charge those Gentlemen in
the same page with having Men's Persons in Admiration, because of Advantage.
With a Relation to me; his Words are these,

But it seems no Man dared, or cared to say unto him, why do thou such
Things, such is the Danger of having Men's Persons in Admiration because of
Advantage.

I answer, What Advantage could these Gentlemen propose by a poor Stranger, who
was to be among them but a few Weeks, and probably never like to see their
Faces any more in this World? And who as our Author tells the Story, page 8.
Came with a great Troop of 20 or 30 Horse, entering into other Men's Labors,
and devouring their Livings. -- Ans. No, It was Love to Gods Work which this
Man despises, that excited their Esteem of an Instrument, whom it pleased the
Sovereign God to improve, in promoting of it! But if no Man's daring or caring
to say to me, why do thou such Things? would prove the Charge of having Men
in Admiration, because of Advantage; as our Author insinuates, then the present
Opposers of Gods Work in N. England, would be as guilty of it, as those whom
they now unjustly despise: For where is there one of them, that suggested to me
the least doubt of the Reality of it then? neither did I meet with the least
Opposition against the Doctrines of Grace, which I preached, except in one or
two small Towns. The Truth is, the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, was
attended with such Majesty and Power, as astonished and terrified those ungodly
Creatures, which were not converted: So that for a Time hardly any of them
durst move his Tongue, much less his Pen against it; but after a While the
Influences of the Divine Spirit being withdrawn, and some Stumbling Blocks
falling in the Way, obstinate Transgressors grow profanely bold in opposing
God's Work, and in traducing and contemning his Servants.

Observe Reader, how this Author discovers his Antipathy against the Work of
God, in the following Lines. I heartily wish (says he) he was more worthy, for
whom they have done this, and that they themselves had not in this Labor of
Love, to their dear and honored Brother, betrayed too great a Liking, of what
is commonly called this Work.

Ans. I join with this Author in the first part of his Petition, but have
Reason to doubt from his present Performance, that if it was answered, he would
like me less, if possible than he does! but as to the latter part of it, I must
declare my dissent, although I question not his Sincerity therein. But on the
contrary, I bless God who has excited those worthy and famous Ministers, to
appear as Witnesses to his Truths and Work, in a day of Degeneracy, Blasphemy
and Rebuke; this is their Honor, and will be their unspeakable Advantage in a
future World; whatever the Ignorant or Prejudiced may say to the contrary. The
World may see by this, what sort of a Person this Examiner is, who attempts to
wound my Character and Usefullness, namely, that he is one, who dislikes the
late Revival of Religion in this Land.

But the Examiner proceeds to observe, upon the PREFACE thus. These Rev.
Gentlemen say, This our dear Brother visited us at Boston two Years ago; and in
the Spirit of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, entered into his Labors. Upon which he
says, It Is true Mr. Tennent visited these Parts about that Time, and the Visit
was full of Extraordinaries, his progress through the Province, savored more of
worldly Pomp and Grandeur, than the Humility of the meek and lowly JESUS, he
came eating and dringink, gallopping over the Country with his Congregatio de
propoganda etc. magna comitante caterva, with a Troop of twenty or thirty
Horse, entering into other Men's Labors and devouring their Livings, having all
Things in common.

Ans. What Envy appears in this Representation? It Is true some Persons did of
their own mere Motion, without any Invitation of mine, accompany me in my
Travels, sometimes more, and sometimes less in Number; and for what I could
learn, with a Desire to receive Benefit to their Souls by my Preaching; and
what would our Author have me to do in such a Case? Would he have me to drive
them away? Why does he say that this savored more of worldly Pomp, than of the
Humility of the meek and lowly JESUS? Didn't Multitudes follow Christ, to
attend his itinerary Labors? And didn't he come eating and drinking? Would our
Author have me live without Victuals and Drink? Or would he have me starved to
Death? But perhaps the Emphasis of the Charge, consists in gallopping over the
Country. Really the Snow was so deep during a good Part of my Travels, that it
was no proper Season for gallopping. I don't remember for my Part, that I
gallop't any, but if I had, I don't see the Harm of it. Methinks our Author's
trifling in his Charges against me for the Want of proper Materials, turns to
my Commendation, and therefore his futile Reflections, contrary to his Design,
are proper Panegyric upon me, and a Satyr upon himself. O! but he says that I
entered into other Men's Labors.

Ans. Its true I preached in other Ministers Pulpits, but not without their
Consent, and where was the Harm of this? But he adds devouring their Livings.

Ans. It Is true, when I was invited by Ministers or others, to stay in their
Houses for a Night or so in my Pass, I generally complied, and partook of what
they set before me, and so did any that were pleased to travel with me. I defy
this Examiner to prove that I did either without Invitation; and where was the
Harm of complying as before? dosn't the Examiner remember the old Proverb,
volenti nulla fit injuria, to a willing Person no Injury is done. What does he
mean by devouring then? Does he intend that I, or any of my Companions in
Travel, eat or drank to excess? If he does let him prove it if he can? But here
I must beg leave to observe, with all due gratitude that much Kindness and
Respect, was shown me by many in N. England, in hospitable generous
Entertainments; and does our Author grudge and grumble at this? If it were not
too rude and uncivil, I would remember him of a coveteous Person, that long
since begrudged expensive Respect shown to our LORD. But it was not to his
Honor.

But the Examiner adds another Article of Charge, in this Paragraph, namely,
having all Things in common.

A. As before he had resembled me to the Papists in these Words, with his
Congregatio de propaganda etc. I suppose the word left out is Faith; so that
his Meaning is, that I went gallopping about with my Companions, to propagate
the Faith. What Faith? Does he insinuate the Roman Catholic, as his Form of
Expession seems to point to? This is exceeding invidious, does not this Author
know in his Conscience that the Doctrines of Faith which I preached in New
England, were no other than what is contained in the Westminster Confession of
Faith, and the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England? I say as before he
resembled me to the Papists, so here in the last Words of the Paragraph, to the
Levellers, by saying we had all Things in common. I will say no more to this
than that it is another notorious Falsehood, either of this Examiners Invention
or Publication.

The Examiner farther observes, in the next Paragraph, p. 8. He came in the
Spirit of Mr. Whitefield indeed, when Procalmation was made before him as
Visitor or Vicar General, The Rev. Mr. T. designs to preach in such a City or
Church today, and tomorrow in another, and continue in a Third and get Gain,
without the least Regard to the stated Pastors of the Churches, volens, nolens;
pleading Extraordinaries for suspending Scripture Rules.

A. This is an unfair Representation of the Case, I sent no such Word to any
one Place in N. England, that I would preach in their Churches or Towns,
whether the Pastors would or not. When I came to any Place, where there was a
settled Minister, I never preached without first apprizing him of my
Inclination, and if I was not prevented by his Invitation, asking his Leave,
and this I every where obtained, before I preached in any Place, excepting one,
where I came in the Evening, the Minister declined letting me preach in the
Meeting House that night, for Reasons which I thought were not relevant, and
being invited by some to preach that Night, in a private House, I complied, at
which the Minister of the Place was present, diverse People as I was informed,
had come to the Meeting House, expecting Sermon, and I thought it was a pity
they should be disappointed, without sufficient Cause, and here it should be
likewise observed, that the Minister did not forbid my preaching in a private
House, but on the contrary signified before several Persons, that if I came on
a Lecture Day, he would invite me to preach publicly; but thought that ringing
the Bell in the Night, might surprise the People, with an Alarm of Fire, and
that the People not having sufficient Warning there would not be a valuable
Convention. But the same Gentleman invited me to preach in his Pulpit the next
Day, and treated me with much Kindness and Courtesy.

As to what the Examiner says about getting Gain. It is exceeding invidious, I
neither needed, nor expected, nor desired any Thing for my Labors in N.
England, if our Author can prove any of these, let him do it as soon as he
pleases, was there any Collection made for me, in any one Place in N. England,
for near six Months that I traveled in it, and preached daily? Nor was there
any Thing given me, excepting in seven or eight Places in all N. England, and
that by some Gentlemen of their own accord, and was it a Fault in me to accept
of their Generosity? What I have now said is with no Design of reflecting upon
the Gentlmen of N. England, No, far be it from me, I hope ever to retain a
grateful Sense of their Kindness, but only to confute this ungenerous Cavil.

The next Article of Charge is, that I plead Extraordinaries for suspending
Scripture Rules. This Phrase the Examiner seems to have borrowed from his dear
Brethren by the Way, to which I answer, that it is altogether false! I had no
need of using any such Plea, for I don't know that any Scripture Rule was
suspended by my preaching in New England, however I must still assert that the
Plea is in some Cases lawful, whatever Contempt may be cast upon it by some. To
say that ordinary Rules, or Rules for ordinary Cases should not be suspended in
extraordinary Cases, is a bare faced contradicting of an ancient Maxim
consented to by the common Sense of Mankind, viz. That every general Rule
admits of Exceptions, unless it can be proved that ordinary and extraordinary
Cases are the same; which from the nature of Things is impossible, the Measures
in every thing cannot be proper in both, and to say the contrary is in other
Words to deny the lawfullness of the Reformation from Popery, in the Time of
Swinglius, Luther, and Calvin; and if we may not judge for our selves when these
extraordinary Cases happen, we are Slaves indeed of the most sordid kind, and
robbed of every Thing that is worth keeping of a Religious Nature. Hereby a
Church Tyrany is erected, and the hateful Romish Doctrines of implicit Faith
and blind Obedince, established. God forbid that we should cast away the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and suffer Men to lord it over our
Consciences, and enslave us with their plausible Pretext of Rule and Order!
Order, Order was the Cry of the Papists in the Beginning of the Reformation
from Popery, with a View to stop its Progress. The Text they trump'd up upon
every Occasion, as Doctor Voetius observes was Mat. 23.3. All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, omnia, omnia, all, all,
they must observe, all the holy Traditions of the Roman Catholic Church, all
the holy Cannons and Orders, or be cursed with Bell, Book and Candle Light as
disorderly and contemptuous Persons, Schismatics, Heretics, and what not? But
the blessed Reformers better understood the Scriptures and their Duty from
them, than to mind their selfish impertinet Cant, or to be scared from it by
their invidious and groundless Anathemas. And has not the Episcopal Church
excommunicated all that dissent from her, by her Cannons. Now all that make
them, (I mean the Cannons) will say that they are agreeable to the Scriptures.
And so Scripture Rules.

In the mean Time it must be observed, that we should with equal Care avoid
both Extremes, viz. TYRANNY upon the one hand, and the abuse of CHRISTIAN
LIBERTY upon the other, TRUTH and DUTY lie between both, as we should abhor
with a perfect Hatred the enslaving Schemes of High Church Bigots, so on the
contrary, we should equally abhor and avoid, the Plea of Extraordinaries,
except the Case be evidently so.

But the Examiner proceeds to say in the next Paragraph, page 8 He came in the
Spirit of Mr. Whitefield, when he treated the Body of the Ministry in this
Province, with so much Neglect and contempt as he did, not only in not
suffering himself to hear any of them, no not in Boston itself, except once or
twice.

Ans. This Charge is likewise a notorious Falsehood! I never treated the Body of
the Clergy in any Province of New England, with Neglect and Contempt. I have a
Witness in Heaven and in my own Bosom that my not hearing mnay of the Ministers
of New England, did not proceed from any Contempt of them. The Case was plainly
this, I was stirred up at that Time by the Almighty to uncommon Zeal and Love
for the Salvation of Mankind, so that unusual Labors became natural to me,
daily preaching was pleasant and desirable like the returns of my stated Meals.
I was therefore loath to neglect Opportunities of preaching, especially
considering my full Persuasion, that God was remarkably with me, and sealed my
Labors. The worthy and Rev. Ministers of Boston, perceiving that a divine
Blessing attended my Ministrations, did humbly and lovingly invite me to preach
frequently in that Metropolis, being willing and glad that Gods Work should be
carried on, by any one the Lord would please to send by; their condescending
Invitations I accepted with an affecting Sense of my own Unfitness and
Unworthiness, as the Searcher of all Hearts knows, as well as Admiration at the
Humility, the Candor and Couresie of these Rev. Gentlemen, which I hope I shall
ever bear thankful Remembrance of.

But the Examiner proceeds to say, but also in cruelly censuring them (meaning
the Ministers of the Province) in general, and raising Jealousies in the Minds
of People of their faithful Ministers, even to that Degree as has ended in a
Spirit of dreadful Separation in many Places.

Ans. This is likewise a notorious Falsehood. I did not censure the Ministry of
their Provinces in general, or raise Jealousies in the Minds of the People of
their faithful Ministers. I spoke but little of the Ministers at all in New
England, but never in the Manner our Author mentions, the Almighty knows that
it was far from the Thot's of my Heart, and far from the Speeches of my Lips,
to raise Jealousies in the Minds of People about their faithful Ministers. O
unmerciful Man! Who thus by repeated Falsehoods and Misrepresentations,
endeavoring to stab my Character and Labors in the Dark. And, through me, the
Work and Servants of the great God. What is your Name, I know not, but the God
of Truth and Righteousness knows you, and remember he will bring you to
Judgment, your false Glosses will be then removed. May God of his Mercy forgive
your Wickedness, and have Pity on your poor Soul for his Names sake. The Desire
of my Heart, and the Tendency of my Labors in New England was only to bring
poor Sinners to CHRIST, and to build up Saints in him. I profess to the World,
that my Esteem of the Ministry of N. England, was much increased by
acquaintance with them. I am fully persuaded that there is a considerable Body
of worthy and faithful Laborers, in that Part of the Lords Vineyard.

As to what our Author says, of the longness of my Journey to N. England; for
brevity's sake I shall refer to the Letter I printed in New England, respecting
the Occasion of my traveling that Way. And only add, that I had no Intention
to affront any Body by my Travels, I had no such Conception of the Journey as
our Author represents, otherwise I would not have undertaken it, neither was it
in my Heart to imagine that there was no Body like minded, or capable to water
where the Rev Mr. Whitefield had planted, as our Examiner observes. Pray why
may not one Minister preach in another's Place, by his Consent, without a
barefaced affront to him? And is not the Case the same as to many Places? To
think otherwise as I humbly conceive, is contrary to common Sense, and denotes
an odd Turn of Mind?

But let us attend to our Author, in his 9 page He goes on thus but then are
these Rev. Mess. of the same Mind, Spirit and Judgment, did they come in the
same Spirit, when Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, part 3d page 63. says, These
bodily Convulsions, I believe come from the Devil; who, now the Work of GOD is
going on, wants to bring an evil Report upon it? And seeing that nothing is
more evident, than that Mr. Tennent is the grand Instrument of promoting those
animal Convulsions, into which many of our new Converts have fallen, and upon
which so great a Stress is laid by many in the Work of Conversion.

Ans The Heat of our Authors Prejudice, has confused him much in this
Paragraph, he Shifts about this Way and that Way, in order to cast his Squibs
at Mr. Whitefield, the Boston Ministers, and my self. And first he gravely, but
impertinently, asks the Ministers of Boston, whether they are of the same Mind,
Spirit and Judgment with Mr. Whitefield? How childish is this, these Rev.
Gentlemen so far as I know, have never so much as insinuated, that they or I
were of his Judgment, in every circumstantial or minute Point; but both of us
may be justly said to be of, or in the same Spirit, when we agree with him in
the fundamental Doctrines of Religion, and are disposed to promote and
encourage the same vital Godliness with him. And this I believe was their
Meaning, in these Words of their Preface which our Examiner criticizes so much
upon. But his sarcastical enquiring of the Boston Ministers, whether they came
in the same Spirit? When Mr. Whitefield and C. as has been related, considered
in Connection with that Passage in the Preface, which he grumbles at, cannot
well be reconciled to that common Sense to which he appeals in his Title Page:
For the Rev. Ministers, whom our ill natured Author fleers at, were in Boston
at that Time he refers to. This was the Place of their fixed Residence. See the
Force of Prejudice, it will sometimes drive Men of Wit and Address, into
Impertinence and Nonsense, as well as Falsehood; in order to gratify its
Rancour. It Is like our Author is a Man of Sense, Sed aliquando bonus dormitat
Homerus, Sometimes Homer sleeps. His unhappy Prejudice is so strong, that it
seems sometimes to disturb his Judgment, so that he talks odly like a Man just
waked out of Sleep, who had been dreaming of some dreadful Events: Witness the
frightful Catalogue of Crimes, which he put in his Indictment against me,
before mentioned, namely, Discord, Intrusion, Confusion, Separation, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, etc. see page 5. And
here he is fond to bring in abruptly, a Passage of Mr. Whitefield's Journal,
about bodily Convulsions, which was not sufficiently guarded, that he might
offer some matter of Reflection and Triumph. However if the Affair be examined,
there will be found little Reason for either. The Rev. Mr. Whitefield has not
said that he believes, that all these bodily Convulsions came from the Devil,
and if he had, neither the Rev. Ministers of Boston (so far as I know) or my
self, have ever been of that Opinion These Things may be other ways accounted
for, consistent with the animal Economy. What if that dear Servant of God, Mr.
Whitefield had been mistaken in a circumstantial Point? Shall his Spirit, his
State and Temper of Mind, be condemned for this? Or the State and Temper of
others, because they agree not with him herein? Is this our Author's Charity,
which he talks so much of?

But the Examiner proceeds to say, And seeing nothing is more evident, than
that Mr. Tennent is the grand Instrument of promoting those animal Convulsions,
into which many of our new Converts have fallen, and upon which so great a
Stress is laid, by many in the Work of Conversion.

Ans. Nothing is more evident, than that this is a notorious Falsehood, viz.
That I am the grand Instrument of promoting those animal Convulsions. This
Calumny is invented by the Father of Lies, the Accuser of the Brethren, in
order to cast odious Colors, upon the Work of God, and me his Servant. All my
Congregation, and Multitudes more, can witness, that I never encouraged those
Things, but on the contrary, that I have from the first Beginnings of such
Appearances, in this Part of the Country (which was long since) endeavored in
the openest Manner to discourage and check them, yea sometimes to such Degree,
as has grieved several religious People. I have repeatedly done this before
many thousands of Hearers.

But our Author farther adds, That great Stress is laid upon these animal
Convulsions, by many in the Work of Conversion.

Ans. What does the Examiner mean by that Phrase in the Work of Conversion?
Does he think that Conviction strictly considered is gradual, then he is an
Arminian; and its no wonder he dislikes my Discourses against the Moravians,
and indeed this is the most natural and easy Sense of his Words. Or does he
speak of Conversion in a larger Sense as including the preparative of Order
viz. Conviction, as well as the Fruits thereof, and mean thus, that some depend
upon those bodily Convulsions as a Sign of Conversion. In the first Sense his
Charge cannot be true, because Conversion in that respect is instantaneous; and
though the latter may be true, yet I have great Reason to believe it to be false:
The Notion is absurd and ridiculous, contrary to common Sense, and therefore
improbable to be true. Besides I never met with one Man in any Part of America,
that was of that Opinion; or that acquainted me that he or they knew any one to
hold it. But if our Author only means by the aforesaid Phrase, that many
imagined those outward Convulsions, or the excess of Passion that occasioned
them, were in any respect Helps to Conversion, I will not undertake to be the
Patron of such: For I think it is an unreasonable and ridiculous Notion.
Possibly some few ignorant Persons, have been of this Opinion, but if so what
then? Shall their Folly be imputed to the whole Body? Or is it reasonable to
reflect upon the whole Work, because of the Weakness of some of the Subjects of
it? Some of the Opposers in diverse Parts of the World, have of late insisted
much upon this Topic, these bodily Convulsions being somewhat uncommon, and
surprising, they have harp'd much upon this plausible String; in order (as it
seems) to amuse and prejudice the People against the Work of God!

While the Woman the Church has been in Travail among us, the Dragon has speu'd
out Floods, Multitudes of Slanders and Calumnies, in order to destroy the Woman
and her Child. This is truly the Case, notwithstanding of all the artful
Colorings, and deceitful Blinds that are put upon it by crafty Men.

But the Examiner proceeds to say, Do they not take the Devils Part, who use
Methods to farther such sad Appearances, and condemn them for opposers of Gods
Work, who labor to undeceive People about these Fits, by ascribing them to an
inferior Cause?

Ans. If any do use unscriptural Methods, to further such Appearances I think
it is blame worthy, and have always been of this Mind; but I know of none who
condemn Persons, as Opposers of God's Work, merely for their laboring to
undeceive People about the aforesaid Fits, etc. Our Author with much Art and
Sophistry, misrepresents the true State of the Case, both ways, first by
insinuating that there are many Persons, who take Pains to promote animal
Convulsions, as their principal Aim; this I cannot think is true. Any that have
encouraged such Appearances, have had chiefly in their View the increasing and
fixing that Soul Concern, which preceeds Conversion in the Adult: And is
sometimes accompanied with such Appearances, because of a greater degree of
Distress which some endure in their Minds, which from the nearness of the Union
between Soul and Body, must needs have greater Influence upon it. If a sudden
View of some great temporal Imergent does sometimes Occasion the greatest
bodily Disorders Why then should it be though it strange, if Things of infinitely
greater Weight and Moment when viewed in equal Points of Light, do produce
equal Effects?

And on the other Hand, he would insinuate, as if the chief Cause why many are
condemned, as Opposers of the Work of God, is because they only endeavor, to
give Persons a just Notion about those bodily Commotions.

Ans. The Case is not so, we are glad that People have just Notions about such
Appearances, we know the Work of God is very distinct from them. But we charge
this Examiner, and others of his Stamp, with opposing of God's Work, because
they speak diminutively of it altogether, and use the aforesaid bodily
Commotions artfully, as an Engine to blacken the whole Work. This Charge sticks
so fast to the Examiner and others of his Brethren; that though they wash them
with Nitre and take much Soap, yet their Iniquity is marked before God.

And now we are prepared, to listen to what the Examiner offers in his next
Paragraph, which is as follows. But is it not Matter of Fact, when many of the
Hearers of some Preachers fall into Convulsion-like Fits, and roared, that the
usual Note of such Preachers then was, will any of you come to Christ? When at
the same Time they pronounced heavy Curses upon such, as took not such fits, as
being hard hearted Pharisees, etc.

Ans. As to the first Part of the Charge, some Persons of eminence in Religion
do think the Method therein arraigned is justifiable, but for my own Part, I
cannot see the expediency of it.

As to the latter Part of it, it is ambiguous, It is said they pronounced heavy
Curses upon such, as took not such Fits, as being hard hearted Pharisees.

Ans. If the Objector means all such, it is doubtless a false Charge: For it
has never been suggested, so far as I can learn, even by opposers, that any who
favored God's Work believed, that the Regenerate must undergo such bodily
Commotion; and can it be though it that any but mad Men would pronounce Curses upon
the Regenerate! But madness has not yet, that I remember been charged upon the
late awakening Preachers, (this way) If the Objector only means that some took
not, as his Phrase is, such (...), namely, the unconverted, then might not the
Preachers pronounce Curses upon such? The Objector didn't say that heavy Curses
were pronounced upon Persons, merely because they didn't take such Fits. But if
it be insinuated by the aforesaid Objection, that any of those Preachers who
have favored the late Reformation, were of Opinion that enduring of bodily
Commotions, was of absolute necessity to Conversion, it is a false invidious
Slander contrary to common Sense.

But the Examiner has not done with the Boston Ministers yet, he goes on to say
in his next Paragraph thus Again these Reverend Gentlemen say, this our dear
Brother, entered into Mr. Whitefield's Labor's, that is in other Words, Mr.
Whitefield planted and Mr. Tennent watered, as if the Gospel had never been
planted or watered in this Wilderness, before these Rev. Messieurs, introduced
the Practice of itinerary Preaching.

Ans. Admirable! That a Man of so much Charity as our Author pretends to, could
not find a more favorable Gloss upon that Passage, of the Rev. Ministers of
Boston, will not the Words bear this easy Sense, namely, that Mr. Whitefield
was used by the Almighty, as a Mean of reviving Religion remarkably in
New England, and that it pleased the Sovereign God, to use me also in carrying
on the same begun Work? Is it not contrary to common Sense, to which our Author
appeals in his Title Page, to imagine that the worthy Gentlemen meant
otherwise? It is very cross grained in the Examiner, to cast so much Dirt at
the Ministers of Boston, who are above his Disdain (and will be esteemed by the
Devout and Judicious whether he will or not) and that merely because they have
a favorable Opinion, of Mr. Whitefield and my self, and that blessed Work of
God, which we through pure Grace have been instrumental to promote. But me thinks
the Examiner had better be good Humored, for though he should fret himself never
so much while there is Piety in New England, there will not be wanting some,
among both the Clergy and Laity, who will think and speak honorably of that
Work, which he despises!

But I hasten to consider our Authors next Paragraph, and this he has though it
proper to borrow, from the Lucubrations of the malignant Opposers of Religion
this Way. The Words are these, but pray, will Mr. Tennent tell the World, what
Success had Mr. Whitefield or himself, but where they had Opportunity, to enter
into other Men's Labors, and who planted and watered Congregations for them,
to crow of their Succession: For in Maryland, Virginia and North Carolina,
where Ministers are comparatively scarce, what News Mr. of Whitefield's great
Success?

Ans. Doubtless our Author approved of this Passage, otherwise he would not
have borrowed it. Here let the Reader observe in these Words, a Testimony to
the great Success of Mr. Whitefield, and my self, extorted from the Pens of our
Enemies, and that even at a Time, when they were endeavoring to run us both
down, and the blessed Work of Conviction and Conversion which we have been
endeavoring to promote. This puts me in mind of an old Proverb, viz. magna est
veritas and prevalebit, i. e. great is the Truth and will prevail. But in the
mean Time set the Reader observe, that the aforesaid constrained Testimony, is
contrary to what these Men have said in other Parts of their Writing, one
Example of which, I shall only mention at present for brevity's sake, expressed
in their Examination of my Remarks page 107. 8. 9. thus We shall not be so rash
as to pretend to judge Matters before the Time, i. e. whether there be Truth in
the Account as to some Instances: For that is no Part of our Debate; for we
know but our Part of what is manifest. Secrets we leave to God, nor shall we
pretend to determine, whither there be such a Eutopia as Mr Tennent here
describes, somewhere in distant Parts; for we live at Home: But yet if Men will
allow us the Rights of private Judgment, we think it is but just we should be
allowed to suspend our Belief in the Point, till we hear some valid Proofs, or
else are invited to come and see: For a Partyman's Say so in one Ear, when
Experience contradicts it loudly in both, is too feeble to beget Faith. For
though we should grant that in Times of yore, when Men were all that is good and
desirable, subject to no Mistakes, and spoke no Falsehoods in their own or
their Friends Behalf, if ever there was such a Time; Men's, own verbal
Declarations for themselves, might pass for valid Proofs of their inward
Graces; and it might be counted a daring Piece of Presuming Boldness, to oppose
an Argument which depended upon such stable Maxims, which like the koinai
enoiai, are never to be denied, such as are, ask his fellow, whether he be a
Thief, etc. But since Pandora's Box is opened, our Savior has broke down this
Claim, by saying, If I bear witness of my Self, my Witness is not true. And
when Experience tells us, that in this Iron Age, a fluent Orator with his
orient Colors, will instantly fill the Wrinkles of the most furrowed Face, and
again deform the most beautiful Complexion, just as Mr Painter pleases, or as
good Will or ill Will prompts him. Seeing therefore we have not a large Stock
enough of Time and Candles to run through the Woods to find out Mr. Tennent's
Eutopia: For it is the Cry of many, and that in many different Places, that
solid Religion seems to loose Ground faster, and Vice and Debauchery seem to
gain more Ground in one Year, since this new Commotion, than they gain before
in Ten; and that among those who appear debauched there are more than a few of
those who were lately famous for their being Cryers, and Fallers, and
Pretenders to Convictions, etc. We hope therefore, that Mr. Tennent will in his
next tell us, where to find this fine Reformation, otherwise we despair of
coming at it. For when we ask some of Mr. Tennent's Party where it is? We are
told, it is in New England; and probably when inquired of in New England it is
here; and we are much mistaken, if Mr. Tennent's Elisian Fields be not a mere
Meseek, if not a Babel, in the Esteem of many as judicious as ever he was, or
is like to be. And we appeal to Mr. Tennent and his Party, whether they have
not been much disappointed in many Instances that have made as great Boastings
and as glaring Shows as any of the rest for a Time? And can Men rationally
expect, while they judge of Men's gracious States by their own Declarations and
vain Boastings, but that their Disappointments will multiply in Proportion with
their increase in number.

It is not my Business, at present, to expose the various Absurdities of this
Paragraph, only the Reader may plainly see, that it is full to the Purpose that
I brought it for. Yet I confess it is inconsistent with it self, for while
these Men pretend, that they will not be so rash as to pretend to judge Matters
before the time, i. e. whether there be Truth in the Account as to some
Instances, while they pretend to suspend their Belief in the Point, in the mean
Time, they call the late glorious revival of God's Work in the Land, of which I
had given some Account, in my Remarks upon their Protest, (to which they refer)
my Eutopia, (or Fiction) they prend to be at a Loss where to find it, they say
that Iniquity has gained more Ground in one Year, since this new Commotion,
than in ten before and that solid Religion looses Ground faster. They call it
my Elysian-Fields, (or vain Fancy and Notion) and reckon it to be a Mesech if
not a Babel. May God have Mercy upon those unhappy Men, that thus rise up in
Arms against God himself, by slandering the Work of his Holy Spirit.

And this Author that I am now more particularly considering, does hereby
contradict himself, compare what he adopts as aforesaid, with what he says page
30. Strip this Work of its Extraordinaries, and you will discern what is the
Work of God, from that which is added to it, by Art and Man's Device, pray what
is Extraordinary, on one Side more than 'tother? But what is justly to be
exploded, viz. Extraordinary Errors, Disorders, Intrusions, rash Censures,
clamorous Exclamations, vain glorious Boastings, Fits, pretense of Sights,
Visions, Roarings, Tremblings, etc.

These Words are likewise borrowed probably from the same dear Friends, -- If
our Author had been pleased to favor me with his proper Name, and Sir Name, I
might have set them in a real Opposition to each other, in different Collumns,
for his own Conviction and the Readers Edification; but not knowing his Name, I
cannot gratify him in that particular for the present; and perhaps our cautious
Author was afraid of this, and so prevented me, (by concealing his Name) of the
Opportunity and Pleasure of obliging him as aforesaid.

As to Mr. Whitefield's little Success, in the Places before mentioned, it may
be observed, that next to the Pleasure of a Sovereign God, who blows by his
Spirit where it lists; the Occasion thereof, was his short Stay in those
Places; but in St. George's near to Maryland, which was, as I am informed a
very Ignorant Place, where he made a longer Stop, his Labors were crowned with
remarkable Success.

But God forbid, that Mr. Whitefield, or my self, should rob the Ministers of
the Churches, of their just Honors. No doubt, a number of them, has been used
as Instruments of converting Sinners to God, and building up Saints and others
in Faith and Holiness, as well as of preparing Men for Conversion, by
instructing them in the Knowledge of divine Truths.

But to proceed, our Authors finishing Stroke, in Relation to the Boston
Ministers ( page 9. 10) is as follows We beseech our ascended Savior, the Head
of the Church in particular, to use this faithful, judicious, and seasonable
Endeavor of his Servant, for a Guard and Defense about his sacred Truths, and
his glorious Work in the Midst of us; which too many are ready to speak evil
of, and oppose. Upon which the Examiner observes as follows, viz. I would
charitably hope, that that these Rev. Divines don't pretend by the last
Paragraph, to patronize all the Extraordinaries, that they have passed current
for the Work of God, in this Time of Strife of Tongues, and Confusion of Babel,
or oppose all with the black Character of Opposers to his Work, who are Enemies
to Enthusiasm and Delusion.

Ans. Here Is a little Charity, exercised by the Examiner toward the Rev.
Ministers of Boston, and indeed but a little; for observe, how he speaks, I
would charitably hope, etc. Aye poor Man! He seems to be put hard to it about
them, to clear them, of what he calls Enthusiasm and Delusion. He exercises a
little Charity toward them, and indeed but a little, he would willingly hope,
but scarce can; his Charity is bro't just to the last Gasp as it were. But pray
don't these Rev. Gentlemen, understand what is Enthusiasm and Delusion as well
as he? What magnus Appollo is this Gentleman in his own Eyes? Here you may see,
the extent of his Charity and Humility. The aforesaid Ministers have shown,
what they take to be the Work of God, and what they mean to patronize; in their
Preface to the Rev. Mr. Jonathan Dickenson's excellent DIALOGUES; lately
printed at Boston; which are a rational and nervous Defense, of the late
revival of Religion in this Land. These Rev. Gentlemen show in the aforesaid
Preface, that they are against all real Enthusiasm and Disorders, but for that
scriptural and rational Conviction of Sin, and Conversion from it, to God in
Heart and Life, and Communion with God; which is falsely branded with the
odious Name of Enthusiasm, by the ignorant profane, and some dead dry
Formalists. From this it naturally follows who they judge to be Opposers of it.

But this Author proceeds to say, there are many wild Disorders and Confusions
in some of our Churches, at this Day; which really resemble the Corrinthian
Disorders, in the Times of the Apostles.

Ans. This is likely to be true, and the Case is much to be lamented! but are
not the proper Causes thereof, the Enmity, and Policy of Satan, and evil Men in
opposing the Power of Religion? This, this, is the real Cause! And the
Ignorance, Blunders, and real Imprudencies of some Friends to Religion, have
doubtless contibuted hereto; which is for a Lamentation! Now in order to a
Cure, the Cause should be removed.

The Examiner farther adds, Necessity is therefore laid upon the faithful
Ministers of Christ; to bear public and seasonable Testimony against them; and
pity those Rev. Gentlemen, let slip so good an Opportunity, as this to do it.

Ans. No doubt it is a Duty, to bear public Testimony against Disorders and
Confusions; and that of opposing God's Work, among the first of them: For that
is the proton pseudos, the first fatal Source of the other Abominations; and
this, these Rev. Gentlemen have done, as well as given their explicit
Suffrage, to the laboring Truths of God, in this Day of Degeneracy and Error.
But has our Author, when he had so good an Opportunity? No not a Word of that;
but he is grieved, that they have not reproved me, in their Preface, for
Disorders, Confusions, etc. "Pity it is says he." Poor Man! He seems to much
distressed on my Account, that I should escape Censure: Aye, well, has not he
out of the Abundance of his (pretended) Faithfullness, made up their (supposed)
Deficiencies, in that Point?

But, before I proceed to any other Matter, I must here beg, of the Rev. and
honored Ministers, who wrote that Preface; which this anonimous Author, has
drawn his Structures upon; as he calls them; that they would please to pardon
my Boldness, in offering any Thing in their Defense, who are blessed with much
superior Capacities, to baffle the Cavils of Opponents; but in as much as the
Examiner's Reflections, are intermixed with many Charges, against my Conduct in
New England; which consequently I may be supposed to have a more perfect
Knowledge of, than others. I thought it was necessary for me to speak to them.
What I have said in your just Defense, Rev. Sirs, I hope you will excuse, as a
Testimony of my Respect; but I hope it will not prevent your more elaborate
Confutation of the Examiner's Reflections, if you judge them worthy of your
Notice.

But I return to consider our Authors next Paragraph; which runs thus, viz.
that the Reader may be able to form a right Judgment, of the contending
Parties, let him resolve this plain Query? viz. whether the Opposers of
Enthusiastic Pranks set up under the Name of Reformation, or Religion, or the
warm Admirers of, and Contenders for such, deserve the Name of Opposers of
God's Work?

Ans. It is evident to any, that considers the Meaning of this Paragraph;
together with its Relation to the following one; that our Author attempts to
represent me to the World, as a Person, that sets up Enthusiastic Pranks;
under the Name of Reformation, or Religion; and my Friends as warm Admirers and
Contenders for such; than which nothing can be more false and unjust, what are
the Enthusiastic Pranks, that I have been setting up for Reformation? Here our
Author is silent, where he should be most particular. Pray have I not been
opposing real Enthusiasm (pro veribus) according to my Capacity, in this late
Performance, against the Meravians; which our Author has labored to cast
Dishonor upon, and render ineffectual, by representing it is Author as
inconsistent and ridiculous?

But as for himself, and those of his Sentiments, they forsooth are opposers of
enthusiastic Pranks, etc. Here the Examiner must excuse me, if I cannot believe
the Truth of what he says; for while he is opposing, as it were pro aris et
focis, the real Power of true Religion, apparent in the late revival of Piety
in this Land, under the false and feigned Character of enthusiastic Pranks, he
excuses real Enthusiasts, and casts contempt, (consequentially) upon a Book
calculated to give check under the Divine Influence, to the spread of their
Enthusiastical and erroneous Notions. See how our Author excuses, that
dangerous Party of Men page 20.

But, why does this Gentleman, deny to those Moravian Gentlemen, the same
Liberty he takes himself, to say and unsay Things as likes him? More
especially seeing he himself has had greater Advantages, of coming to the
Knowledge of the Truth, in a protestant Country than the Moravians, who have
just emerg'd out of the Darkness and Errors of Popery. And in the following
Paragraph, he makes some Apology, for Mr. Betners Contradiction.

Ans. O brave! And now let the Reader judge, if there ben't some Reason to
suspect our Author, to be a real Enthusiast, or pretty much inclining that Way,
notwithstanding of his vapouring Talk against enthusiastic Pranks. Now we have
need of the Columns again, to show our Author his Picture, but alas his Name we
know not. However I would beg leave, to remember him in the mean Time, of an
old Saying, for I find he understands Latin, viz. Turpe est doctori cum culpa
redarguit ipsum. i. e. It is mean for a Teacher, to be guilty himself of the
Faults he reproves in others.

And now we are prepared, to consider what our Author observes in his three
next Paragraphs ( page 10. 11.) and these are very warm in indeed! For thus he
speaks Upon the whole, I could find no other Key but that in the Sermon upon
the little Foxes in the End of Mr. Tennent's late Treatise, to let him out of
the Labyrinth into which he had plunged himself. Where it is said Page 8, 9.
Foxes have Holes. Foxes have most commonly many Ways and Passages to come out
at, because if one should be stopped or closed up, they may have another to
creep out at. -- Foxes that they may not be so easily ensnared, seldom run
right forward, but run to the one Side, and to the other Side and cross-ways --
They have a sly Way of creeping into others Holes, and of turning other Animals
(it may be said) out of their rightful Possessions, so it is with respect to --
for of this Sort are those which creep into Houses, 2 Timothy 3.6. And it may be
generally said of them, that they creep into settled Ministries and
Congregations, and turn out those that are Orthodox amongst them, etc.

It is evident that Mr. Tennent designed by translating this Sermon, that it
should be used as a Key to open the cunning, crafty Intreagues and Evasions of
the Moravians in propagating their wild and frightful Errors. see page 65, 100.

Mr. Tennent must excuse me if I turn the same Key upon himself, to let him out
of many Inconsistencies and Contradictions charged upon him, I expect that he
will make use of Fox like Shifts to evade the Discovery. -- Witness his second
Letter printed in the Pennsylvania Gazette of September, 2. 1742.

Ans. It seems if we may credit our Author, that he was puzzled, with my
(pretended) Inconsistencies, and Contradictions, etc. that he could find no
Key, but that of the Fox, to salve them by; which he is pleased with much
Complaisance, to turn upon me, well, in order to oblige our Author, I shall by
and by endeavor, to present him with another Key, as I humbly conceive better
suited to the Lock But in the mean Time, must beg leave to offer some few
Reflections upon the aforesaid Paragraph. Here then let us enquire, whether the
Characters of a Fox, as represented by Mr. Helenbrook, do realy belong to me,
or to the Examiner? The

1st. Of which is, that they have Holes, Mr. Helenbrook adds, Foxes that they
may the better conceal themselves, subsist not so much above Ground, as in
Holes and Caverns, under the Earth. -- Heretics and Seducers always endeavor
to hide their Doctrines, and Opinions, and keep them as secret as they can,
certain it is, that they don't presently and openly appear to the World, but
know how to hide themselves, under sly Shifts. Thus far he.

Now I appeal to the World, whether I have not acted a very contrary Part? I
have appeared openly upon the Stage of the World, and declared the Truths of
Christ freely and plainly, and in secret have I said nothing. I have fairly and
above board, ventured my Name and Character, in the Defense thereof, and of
vital Religion; who can with any justice say, that I have endeavored, to
conceal my Opinions or Name? But as for our Examiner, does he not Sculk in a
Hole, and Cavern as it were; and screne his Name behind the Curtain; while he
is laboring to destroy mine? and is he not very backward, as to the Discovery
of his Doctrines? It may be likewise here observed, that the Opposers of
Religion, while the bright Day of the Power of Divine Grace shined forth in the
late rivival of Piet, they like other noxious Animals of the Night, cautiously
and craftily kept their Holes, for Fear of the Worst, so that hardly any of
them dars't appear to oppose in open Day; but so soon as a Night of spiritual
Desertion came on, in respect of God's withdrawing the Influences of his
Spirit,; as well as of the Falls of some Professors; into erroneous Opinions,
imprudent Conduct, or bad Practices. I say, so soon as the Darkness came on,
what Crowds of Foxes came out of their Holes, and filled the Neighboring Air
with their bold Barkings, as if it would be always Night? But stay, may be a
gracious God may cause the Sun to break out with his salutary Rays, and
frighten the Foxes to their Holes again; which may God grant for Christ's sake
Amen, let all Christ's Sheep and Lambs, say Amen.

Another Character of Foxes, mentioned by the Examiner is, that they have many
Ways and Passages to come out at, etc. It depends upon our Author to prove,
wherein I have used Reserves, Backdoors, and Equivocations; which I am
conscious he will never be able to do, and therefore is a false Accuser: The
harmonious System of Truths, which I have, and do still believe, has laid me
under no Temptation, to use such mean Artifices.

But as to the Examiner, I will not undertake to clear him of these Things,
seeing he favors a Party of Men, that are famous for them, and does what has a
direct Tendency, to obstruct the Usefulness of a Book framed to hinder their
corrupt Influence. It is an old Saying that (Simile simili gaudet) like
rejoices in like. Do not Birds of a Feather-flock together?

The next Character of Foxes, is Craft and Deceit, which our Author gives no
proof of as to me, and which I am sure he cannot, and is therefore a false
Accuser. I may with justice apply to my Manner of Proceeding, what the Apstole
Paul says of himself, Phil. 3.3, 6. For our Exhortation was not of Deceit, nor
in Guile, even so we speak not as pleasing Men, but GOD, which tries our
Hearts: For neither at any Time, used we flattering Words, as ye know, nor a
Cloak of Coveteousness, God is Witness, not of Men sought we Glory. My
Nottingham Sermon, which the Examiner is so much displeased with, is a Proof of
this. If I had been a deceitful Flatterer, or Men pleaser, I would not have
used such Plainess and Acrimony, in that Sermon, as I knew according to the
common Course of Things, would expose me to much ill will, and Reproach from
the ungodly. But I shall leave it to the Reader to judge, whether this Examiner
has not used, much Craft and Deceit, in the false Charges I have already spoke
to, as well as in representing the State of the Case, with respect to the
Friends and Opposers of the late revival of Religion, while he endeavored to
tear down the Life of it with all his Might, and has not this a Tendency to
cheat and decoy less harmless Creatures, and make a Prey of them? As Mr.
Helenbrook observes, concerning the Foxes, page 9.

The next particular our Author mentions, page 11. is this, Foxes, that they
may not be so easily ensnared, seldom run right forward, etc.

Ans. I bless God, that I have the Testimony of my Conscience, that in
Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity; I have had my Conversation in the World. I
trust it will appear, by my Answers to this Gentleman's Objections; that this
Charge is without Foundation. But I believe it will be hard, if practicable, to
clear our Author of this Property of the Fox: For sometimes in this Pamphlet,
he professes Charity and blames me for the Want of it; and yet betrays a series
of the most virulent Malignity, in publishing notorious Falsehoods against me,
several of which have been already considered: In one Place page 9. he owns Mr.
Whitefield's, and my great Success, and page 24. he denies that we had any
Success at all, but page 30. he owns that we had some. As to the Moravians,
page 11. he speaks against them, in respect of their wild and frightful Errors,
page 20. he makes an Apology for them page 26 he acknowledges their unfair
Dealings; and yet the Tendency of his whole Performance, is to hinder the
Influence of that Book, which I wrote against them; from giving check to their
pestilent Notions. As to the Work of God, page 8. he shows his Regret, that the
Boston Ministers betrayed too great a likeing to it, and yet page 10 and 30. he
owns the Reality of it, in some degree; but in page 10. he again denies it all
together, under the Notion of Enthusiastic Pranks.

But I hasten to consider, the next Character; and that is a sly Way of
creeping into other Holes, and of turning other Animals; out of their rightful
Posessions; this the Accuser himself, as conscious of his Guilt, stops as it
were half way in the Application of, and no wonder, for the Charge is false and
slanderous. I have not slyly crept into the Congregations of orthodox
Ministers, and turned them out of their Possessions by poisonous Errors, as
Helenbrook Expresses it. I have been invited by them, to preach where I have
preached, and have never used sly Methods, to deprive them of their
Possessions. My late Letters that have been printed in New England, as well as
those Sermons, against the Moravians, will witness for me; that I have opposed
irregular withdrawing from the Ministry of Persons, sound in Principle, regular
in Life, and approves of Gods Work. What is this Authors Practice as to this, I
know not? For I cannot tell who he is, and am therefore under a Disadvantage, in
drawing his Character.

This Author asks my Excuse in a mannerly Way, while he turns the Key of the
Fox upon me. I answer, that his using this Method with me gives no uneasiness,
being conscious through pure Grace of my Integrity, I look upon his unjust
Reproaches, as an honor done to me, and expect they will be Pearls in my Crown
at last.

As to the Ground of our Author's Expectation, that I should use Fox like
Shifts, to evade the Discovery, page 11. namely, my second printed Letter in
the Pensylvania Gazette, Sep. 2. 1742. I must tell him, that it serves only to
manifest the Strength of his Prejudice. Through Divine Mercy, I am not afraid of
the brightest Light, but that this may appear the more plainly, I shall take
leave to insert the Letter here.

Mr. Franklin,
FORASMUCH as a Letter of mine to Mr. Dickinson, the last of February, together
with a Postscript, lately printed in the Boston weekly News-Paper, has
occasioned various Reflections; I have though it it not improper (being thereunto
excited by some Friends) to show my Intention in some Passages contained
therein, which are more liable to Misconstruction. I profess that when I wrote
the aforesaid Letter and Postscript, I had not the least Thought of their
Publication; neither have I at any Time consented thereto; and truly, the
Postscript was wrote in much Haste.

As to my Confession of Mismanagment in the Affair of Debate with the Synod, it
respected only the Defects which I conceived attended my Manner of Performing,
what I did then and do still look upon to be Duty. I was not then, nor have not
been since, convinced that the Matter or Substance of what I contended for was
Wrong, and the Words of the Letter considered in their Connection, will easily
bear this Sense.

As to the Postscript, although I question not Mr. Davenport's Piety and
Integrity, and hope that he has been an Instrument of special Good to diverse
Persons; yet I cannot approve of some of his Methods of Proceeding (according
to the Representation which many give of them) and, particularly, all the
Instances in the Postscript, are in my Opinion very exceptionable and of
hurtful Tendency.

It seems to me very unreasonable that any thing should be made a Term of
Communion which cannot certainly be known by the Church; and such doubtless,
are Men's gracious Experiences, the secret Recesses of the Heart, and Springs
of Action, are only open to the all penetrating Eye of God: Yet seeing a
probable Knowledge of Men's States toward God, may be attained by an
Examination of Men's Principles, Experiences and Practice, Ministers no doubt
ought to enquire into the State of their Flock, and deal faithfully and
discreetly with Persons in a private Way according as Things appear to them.

As to the Practice of setting up separate Meetings, upon the supposed
Unregeneracy of the Pastors of Places, it is, in my Judgment, of unhappy
Consequence to the Church's Peace and Purity, when the Ministers, supposed to
be unconverted, are sound in Principle, regular in Practice, and Favorers of
the Work of God.

But when Ministers conspire to blacken and oppose habitually the late
memorable Revival of God's Work in this Land, and brand the Whole of it with
Terms of the utmost Contempt and Ignominy; then; I see not how any that fear
God can sit contentedly under their Ministrations (if they persist as
aforesaid) without becoming accessory to their crimson Guilt.

Although there be no Probability of unconverted Ministers being near so
serviceable to the Salvation of Mankind, as Persons of another Character; yet,
doubtless, the sovereign God makes their Labors of some Use, at Times, for the
Instruction and Reformation of Mankind.

As to the Practice of openly exposing Ministers, sound in Doctrine, blameless
in Life, and Favorers of God's Work (who are supposed by some to be
unconverted) in public Discourses, in their own Pulpits, by calling of them by
their Names pronouncing Sentence against their internal State, and exhorting
their People to forsake their Ministry; this, I think is a very extraordinary
and unaccountable Method of Proceeding, without any Precedent, that I know of,
in Scripture, or Church History; it directly tends to tear the Body of Christ
in Pieces, and to procure a manifold and pregnant Injury to all the valuable
Interests of sincere Religion.

As to the Practice of sending out unlearned Men into the Ministry, in ordinary
Cases, upon the Supposition of their Piety, it has been always, and still is my
Sentiment concerning it, that it justly deserves the Character given it in the
Postscript.

Likewise, I cannot perceive either Decency or Expediency, in singing in the
Streets; but on the contrary, it seems to minister Occasion to the Adversaries
of Religion to revile and blaspheme.

In fine, although I freely own the absolute Necessity of suppernatural
Illumination and divine Energy, in order to the saving Instruction of Men's
Minds and Renovation of their Hearts; yet I cannot but disclaim all Pretense to
immediate Inspiration or objective Revelation, all following of immediate
Impulses without Consulting the Word of God, and the Dictates of right Reason,
as an enthusiastical and perilous Ignis fatuus, which may lead its delued
Votaries into the strangest Absurdities in Opinion, and most enormous Evils in
Practice.

G. TENNENT.
New-Brunswick, August 19. 1742. P. S. N. B. The Postscript of the Letter to
Mr. Dickinson, was occasioned by a Report of Mr. Davenport's extraordinary
Conduct, and had a direct Reference thereto. It may be also observed, that
there are several Words misprinted in the aforesaid Letter and Postscript, such
as Pickists, for Pietists; base, for Basis; of such, for to such; clear View,
for clearer View; the last Errata considerably alters the Sense.

G. T.




And now Sir, you must excuse me, in turning the Key of the Fox in his Hole, I
mean upon yourself Sir, and that from a better Foundation; it is you Sir, who
is destroying the Vines and tender Grapes, who is artfully and cruelly
aspersing Gods Work and Servants; and in the mean Time excusing Heretics,
Enthusiasts and Schismatics; may God forgive your Iniquity.

But the Examiner goes on to say, page 11. I shall follow the same Method Mr.
Tennent has taken with the Moravians, and compare his Sermon preached at
Nottingham, with his late Discourses and Appendix, in distinct Columns; or, in
other Words, set Gilbert against Tennent, for the Readers ease in finding out
the Truth.

Ans. Either the Examiner's Understanding, or his Veracity fails him here; I
have not taken the same Method, with the Moravians which he takes with me, in
setting Passages of any of their Writings, in a supposed Opposition to each
other, in Distinct Collumns. I have only set the COUNTS Words in one Collumn,
and some Observations of my own, upon the other: But its like this Author
wanted some Umbrage, true, or false, for his contemptuous Manner of treating me.

And now we are arrived at his Collumns, in which as he says We are to meet
with contradictions, as impossible to be reconciled, as to unite the Poles; and
with two set of Principles, as opposite to each other, as the Heathenish
Principles, of a good and evil God. Well, though the Time of working Miracles be
ceased, yet I Will put on a little Courage, and try to unite the Poles.

The first Instance, of pretended Contradiction is this, page 11. 12. borrowed
from the 47. page of my Mor. Sermon. The Words are these, In my Opinion a
Disposition to separate from a true Church, because many of her Members are
unconverted, and some are under Deadness, is a sign of a proud Spirit; were not
the Pharisees of old proud Separatists? See this applied to the Moravians, in
page 63.

Compare his Sermon at Nottingham, page 12. of the last Edition under the
second Inference, we may learn, that such who are contented under a dead
Ministry, have not in them, the Temper of that Savior, they profess, it is an
awful Sign, they are as blind as Moles, and as dead Stones, without any
spiritual Taste or Relish.

Well, where is the Contradiction? I suppose our Author thinks, it lies in
this; that in one of those Sermons, I say, that a Disposition to separate from
a true Church, etc. is a Sign of a true Spirit, and in the other, that such who
are contented under a dead Ministry, have not the Temper of that Savior they
profess. Here is scarce any Appearance of Contradiction, much less Reality.

But that my Meaning in the Moravian Sermon, may be the better understood, let
this Paragraph be added, which immediately follows, what was cited by the
Examiner, namely, Our Lord allows, the Wheat and Tares to grow together, 'till
Harvest; but some rash Zealots, are for parting them, or plucking them up
directly, although they thereby risquo the Safety of the Wheat. Therefore that
which I opposed in this Sermon, was such an uncharitable and irregular Breach
of Communion, from the visible Church, as the Labadists were guilty of formerly
in Holland; who pretended to form a perfect Church, as to its Members, i. e. to
admit none but sincere Persons to Communion. And this they though it they could
certainly know, and therefore made their Knowledge as to the internal State, a
Term of Communion. They so separated themselves from the Church of Holland, as
to make a new Sect. The aforesaid Paragraphs I wrote with a Design to give
Check as far as I could, to a censorious and divisive Temper, which I was
informed was like to obtain, and do much Mischief in New England, which gave me
great Uneasiness, for a long Time.

As to the Passage cited from my Nottingham Sermon, which is in the 18th page
of the first Edition (for I have not seen the others) the following Words of
the Paragraph, explain my Meaning fully, which are these, And alas is not this
the Case of Multitudes, if they can get one, who has the Name of a Minister,
with a Band, and a black Coat or Gown, to carry on a Sabbath Day among them,
though never so coldly and insuccessfully. If he is free from gross Crimes in
Practice, and takes good Care to keep at a due Distance from their Consciences,
and is never troubled about his Insuccessfulness. O think the poor Fools, that
is a fine Man indeed, our Minister is a prudent charitable Man, he is not
always harping upon Terror, and sounding Damnation in our Ears, like some rash
headed Preachers, who by their uncharitable Methods, are ready to put poor
People out of their Wits, or to run them into Despair: O! How terrible a Thing
is that Despair! Ay, our Minister honest Man, gives us good Caution against it.

Well, and is not this a real Truth, as well as what is said in the other
Paragraph? Does not our Author show, what sort of a Spirit, he is of, by
muttering against it?

The Passages of those two Sermons, cited by our Examiner don't respect the
same Thing, and therefore there cannot be a Contradiction in them. The one
relates to an irregular uncharitable Separation, from a Church, because of the
supposed or real Unregeneracy of some of her Members. The other relates to
Contentedness uner a dead carnal careless Ministry, who do not preach closely
to the Conscience, or endeavor to awake Sinners at all. And would our Author
have People to be contented under such a Ministry? O shame! If our Author
succeeds no better in his after Attempts, it wll cease to be a Miracle to unite
the Poles. The

2d. Instance, is borrowed from page 63. of my last Sermons, which for
Distinction's sake, I may call my Moravian Sermons, the Words are these, They
have a Sheeps Coat on, they seem to be mighty mild, harmless, and innocent in
their Looks; but inwardly they hold dividing dangerous Principles, like Wolves
they cruelly scatter the poor Sheep of Christ, by their damnable Doctrines:
Beware my dear Brethren, of the Leaven of these Moravians, who like the
Pharisees of old, make broad Philacterys, and compass Sea and Land to make
Proselytes.

The supposed opposite Instance, to what has been now mentioned is taken from
the 19 page of the Nottingham Sermon. The Words are these, If the Ministry of
natural Men, be as it has been represented, then it is both lawful and
expedient to go from them to hear godly Persons, yea it is so far from being
sinful to do this, that one who lives under a pious Minister, of lesser Gifts,
after having honestly endeavored to get Benefit by his Ministry and gets
little or none, but does find real Benefit, and more Benefit elsewhere, I say
he may lawfully go, and that frequently, where he gets most Good to his
precious Soul. -- let who will oppose it.

But before I proceed to show the Harmony of these Passages, I must more
generally observe; that our Author uses very unfair Methods, in order to make a
Contradiction between them e. g. in the Instance he produces, out of the
Nottingham Sermon; he leaves out of purpose, these following Lines of the
Paragraph, which fully clears up my Meaning, and free me from the false Charge
of dividing Doctrine, in which I suppose, our Author immagined, to show a
Contradiction, between this and the other Sermon. The Words left out are these,
After regular Application to the Pastor where he lives, for his Consent,
proposing the Reasons thereof, when this is done, in the Spirit of Love and
Meekness, without contempt of any, as also without rash Anger and vain
Curiosity. These Lines, our Author knew well enough would spoil his Boast of a
Contradiction, and therefore with more Art than Honesty, he left them out.

Another Piece of unfair Dealing, under this Charge; is this, instead of the
foregoing Words, which concluded the Paragraph in the Sermon, he skips like a
Fox from the 19 to the 30 page and takes a Scrap of a Sentence from thence,
which he adds to the other, namely, these Words, let who will oppose it, In
order to represent me, as speaking directly contrary, both to my Intention and
Expression. The Words cited in the 30 page I never intended, in any Sense
inconsistent, with the Explication of my Opinion in the 19 page at this rate of
proceeding, our Author might form Contradictions, in all Writings under the
Sun, yea in the very sacred Scriptures themselves! It is likewise I think
unfair in him, under this Charge, to put his own Words in in one of the
Collumns, in Opposition to mine: His Words are these, and it is the Language of
several Pages, under his 4th Inference, be ye separate.

Well, where is the Contradiction, between the Passages aforesaid, of these
Sermons? Because I assert, the Lawfulness, of a Peaceful charitable and
regular withdrawing from the Stated hearing of one Minister to another, of the
same denomination, when greater Good is got: Does this justify an irregular
uncharitable Separaration, from a true Church? And the making of a different
Sect? How triffling, and invidious is this Instance? And thus I trust the
Reader perceives, that the Poles again are united. We shall not be put to much
Difficulty, if our Author does not bring more weighty Objections. A

3d. Instance of pretended Contradiction, is borrowed page 48 of my Moravian
Sermon, where I speak thus It is also an Instance of Pride, to despise and
slight Ministers or People, that are unconverted or suprosed to be so, is it
not the Language of such a Practice, as the Prophet Isaiah describes it, stand
off for I am koliar than thou.

The supposed opposite Instance, to what has been mentioned, is as follows,
alas how could Mr T. -- preach and print this, after printing his Sermon at
Notingham, without expressing deep Repentance for the hard contemptuous
Speeches he has there poured upon the Body of the Clergy of this Generation?
Does not this savor of Pride, and Uncharitableness? I shall beg Leave here to
lay before my Readers, some of the reproachful Language, he has plentifully
bestowed upon the Body of the Clergy, of this Generation; as the Synod of
Philadelphia, has lately collected it to my Hand, out of the same Sermon. ( see
Examine. page 149) they are represented herein, as Hirelings, Caterpillars,
letter learned Pharisees, Men that have the Craft of Foxes, and cruelty of
Wolves, plastered Hypocrites, Varlets, the Seed of the Serpent, foolish
Builders, whom the Devil drives into the Ministry, dry Nurses, dead Dogs that
cannot Bark, blind Men, dead Men, Men possessed with the Devil, Rebels, Enemies
to God, Guides that are stone-blind, and stone dead, Children of Satan, that
like their Father, may do Good to Men's Souls by chance medly, Daubers with
untemper'd Mortar; moral Negroes, Salt without savor, that stink in the
Nostrils of God and Men, Judasses, whose chief Desire is to finger the Penny,
and carry the Bag, Hirelings, murderous Hypocrites, that are to take Care,
least we feel the Force of a Halter in this World, or an aggravated Damnation
in the next, subtle selfish Hypocrites, that would not let an honest Man come
into the Ministry, if they could help it, Swarms of Locusts crowds of
Pharisees, that have as covetously as cruelly crept into the Ministry, in this
Adulterous Generation, who as nearly remsemble the Character given of the
Pharisees, as one crows Egg does another, whose Hearers are as blind as Moles,
as dead as stones. Successors of Nicodemus, blind leaders of the blind
Formalists, dead Drones, Sons of Sceva, with a fine long string of Prayers,
false Apostels, deceitful Workers, Ministers of Satan etc.

The pretended Contradiction, between the aforesaid Passages, I conceive to be
this, that in one of the Sermons, I say that it is an Instance of Pride, to
slight Ministers or People, that are unconverted, etc. And in the other I am
said to have given them such hard terms as have been expressed, and therefore
slight them. I Answer, by denying the Consequence. It is no evidence either of
Pride, or Uncharitableness, to give unconverted Ministers their proper Titles,
and Characters; for if so, our Lord himself must be guilty of the aforesaid
Crimes; for he gave them hard Terms or Names also. See Mat. 23. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, because ye build the Tombs of the Prophets,
and garnish the Sepulchers of the Righteous, and say if we had been in the Days
of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the Blood of the
Prophets, ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the Damnation
of Hell? Mat. 23 27.28. We unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye
are like whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of dead Bones, and of all Uncleaness: Even so ye also appear
righteous to Men, but ye are within, full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity. Matt.
23:16.17.19. We unto you ye blind Guides, ye Fools and Blind; ye Fools and
Blind; ye Fools and Blind. Verse 24. Ye blind Guides, which strain at a Gnat,
and swallow a Camel. Have not false Teachers, the Characters of Wolves, Dogs
and Foxes, given them by the Spirit of God, in the Word? Act 20.29. Phil. 3:
Cant: 2:15. Are they not likewise called, Wells without Water? 2. Peter 2 17.
Clouds without Rain, Jud. 1^. Deceivers. 2 John 3.7. And are not many
unconverted Ministers false Teachers! Are not the habitual Opposers of Gods
Work, such with a witness who Teach that to be Enthusiasm and Delusion, in
which the Finger of God evidently appears? And who inclucate new Doctrines
respecting a call to the Ministry, and the Conviction of Sin, etc.

Pray why may not the same ignominious Epithets be given to unconverted
Ministers, as to unconverted Men of another Station? does their Station
sanctify their Hearts, no surely! See then how the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures stigmatizes the wicked, they are termed Captives, Is. 61.1. Rebels,
Rom 8.7. Bondslaves, Acts. 8.23. Sluggards, Pro. 6.9. Blind Men, Mat 23.26.
thou Blind Pharisee, Fools, Ps. 14.1. Dead Men, Ephe. 2.1. Madmen, Eccles. 9.3.
Luke 15.17.

They are compared to Bulls, Ps. 22.12. to Lions, Ps. 57.4. to Foxes, Luke
12.32. to Goats, Matt. 25.33. to Dogs, Rev. 22.15. to Swine, Matt. 7.6. to
Tares, Matt. 13 38. to Chaff, to Thorns, Jos. 22.13.

And are not Men said, to be of their Father the Devil? John 8.44. to be
possessed by the Devil, Luke 11.21. Yea is not that wicked Minister Judas,
called a Devil expressly? John 6.7.

Of all human Creatures wicked Ministers, who habitually oppose the very Work
of Gods Spirit, and mask their Enmity with Religious Pretenses, are the Worst,
especially if this is done against Conviction and with Malice, ascribing it to
a bad Cause! This as I humbly conceive, is the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
which shall not find forgiveness in this Life, or that to come. This was the
Sin of the Pharisees, those orderly Hypocrites; against which the Zeal of our
Lord, the meek Lamb of God burned and sparkled with so great Flame! as has been
already expressed.

Now Reader observe, what though I have given unconverted Ministers bad Names;
yet seeing they deserve them, it is no more but an Act of Justice in one
respect; but under another Consideration it is an Act of Love to God and Man,
or rather a sigh thereof: It manifests Love to God, while in faithfulness to
him we risque our Reputation, in detecting and opposing his Enemies, and
especially when they are dishonouring his Name and Work, and endeavoring to
destroy his Kingdom: Besides, Love to Man is hereby discovered, in showing to
ungodly Ministers, their own dreadful Picture: For this has a Tendency to
awaken and humble them, and turn them to God. I have no Prejudice against any
of them upon the Face of the Earth, though they have labored to destroy my
Character and Usefulness.

I would to God, I could do them Good by Night or Day: My Heart within pities
them; neither have I used harsh Epithets out of Indignation to their Persons,
but their Ways, as I have observed in the Preface to this Notingham Sermon, in
these Words. So far as I know my Heart it is Grief for the Injurys that have
been done to the Church of God by natural Ministers, that has extorted such
Acrimony from my Pen. The Opposition that some, this Way, have made against the
Work of God in this Land, their murdering the Convictions of diverse Persons,
their thrusting out, as I am credibly informed, unexperienced loose Men into
the Ministry, and their opposing the coming in of Pious Candidates into the
Church, has long distressed my Soul, and filled me with Sorrow and Indignation
both.

And by representing the just Characters of the ungodly Clergy, Love is hereby
expressed to Mankind, in warning them of their Danger, and exciting them, to
their Duty, in chosing of, and applying to the best Means. Our Author doubtless
knows that the Meaning of the Word Charity (agape) is Love.

Neither does it Savor of Pride, to give ungodly Ministers such Names as suit
their Case and Course: For this is out to follow the Example that our Lord
Jesus, and the Eternal Spirit have set before us, as well as diverse of Gods
faithful Servants of Old, such as Jeremiah, Paul, etc. And thus the pretended
Contradiction is removed

But to make this Case appear the more Plain, I shall take leave to observe,
how unfairly our Author and his Friends have treated me, under this 3d
Instance. For 1st. he puts his own Words in one of the Collumns over against
mine, it should have been my own Words and not his; for his Business was,
according to his Proposal, not to show a difference between him and me, for
that probably is wide enough, but between me and myself. A 2d unfair Method our
Author uses here, is his citing after his own Words, a Collection of Words,
picked up here and there out of the Notingham Sermon by my Opponents; he ought
to have cited my own Words, in complete Sentences in the Order I put them, and
not broken shreads marshald by my Enemies, in such a Shape as might appear most
formidable, in order to render me odious among graceless Creatures, who are
very fond of a blind Charity, upon a selfish Account, namely, to save their
Bakon. A 3d. Instance of unfair Dealing in our Author under this Head, is his
asserting that I bestow reproachful Language, upon the Body of the Clergy of
this Generation, his manner of Expression, together with his Artful concealing
of the Word unconverted, plainly intimates that I, according to his
Representation, charged the Body of the Clergy of this Generation, with the
aforesaid Epithets, absolutely and directly, which is False and Sophistical, I
have charged unconverted Ministers with them directly and absolutely; but as to
the Body of the Clergy, the Charge comes in against them indirectly and
hipothetically, on Account of my Opinion about their State. I cannot but still
think that the greater Part of the Clergy is unconverted, and that for Reasons
mentioned in that Sermon. Strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads
to Life, and few there be that find it, not many Wise, not many Noble, are
called, the Harvest truly is Plentious, but the Laborers are few. Saint
Chrisostom has expressed his Tho'ts of the Paucity of fatihful Ministers, in a
much stronger Light than I have done, for he though it that Scarce any Ministers at
all would be saved.

Graceless Persons have a general Superficial groundless Notion concerning
others Goodness, before they themselves are awakned and made to feel the
Difficulties of Religion: But then their way of thinking of Christianity, is
altered in this Point, they neither weigh others nor themselves in such light
Scales as they were wont to do before.

But let it be here observed, that I do not pretend to a like certainty, as to
both these Points, namely; charging the aforesaid Epithets upon unconverted
Ministers, and the Knowledge of the greatness of their Number, the first is of
undoubted certainty from the Word of God and right Reason; but the other is
only highly probable. As to this Point I should be glad to be mistaken in my
Opinion, but I am persuaded it is too true. But,

4thly. Another unfair Method of our Author and his Friends under this Head,
is, their asserting that I charge all the particular Epithets they mention upon
the Body of the Clergy of this Generation; which is false, and cannot be proved
from the Sermon: Indeed I believe they are all applicable to some of them; but
they are not applicable to all of them. In several Paragraphs of the Sermon are
limited Words, which clear me from the aforesaid Charge. In page 12. are these
Words, many Ministers, page 19. many Pharisee Teachers, have got a long String
of Prayer. And in the same page the Word generally is likewise used, namely,
take them first and last, and they generally do more Hurt than Good.

It would be contrary to common Sense, to apply that Character of
Letter-learned to all, for some are ignorant. Or that of plastered Hypocrites
to all, for some declare their Sin as Sodom, and refused to be ashamed. Or that
of false Apostles, deceitful Workers, and Ministers of Satan to all, I have
applied that Scripture, which contain these Epithets only to such of them, as
rise up in Arms against the Life of Piety, when it comes near their Borders,
and consult, combine, and contrive against it in their Conclaves, as a common
Enemy; and who with Art, Rhetoric, and Appearances of Piety, varnish their
Opposition against the Kingdom of CHRIST; and who imitate the Apostles of
CHRIST, as the Magicians did the Works of Moses.

Neither are these following Characters universal in respect of the ungodly
Ministry. Namely, the Craft of Foxes and cruelty of Wolves, for some of them
are doubtless as weak as their Neighbors, though diverse of them it must be
confessed are wiser in their Generation, than the Children of Light; and some
are good tempered, and are not roused to Arms by the near Approach of vital
Religion. Nor are these Words following, to be applied universally to every
graceless Minister, namely, that they would not let a faithful Man come into
the Ministry, if they could help it! No its chiefly those of them that have
their natural Enmity roused, and whetted, by the searching nearness of Gods
Work to them, as well by the faithful Dealings, and holy Living of godly
Ministers, by which they are detected and condemned; that are so cautious to
keep pious Men out of the Ministry, upon selfish Accounts, namely, to prevent a
Trouble to themselves, and the Loss of their Credit among the People.

But as to the rest of the Characters, which our Examiner's Friends, have with
so much Care collected, they belong to all unconverted Ministers, either
absolutely, or comparatively, properly or figuratively, and for the Proof of
this, I appeal to the Scriptures and common Sense.

I might add to what I have said, were it necessary, that diverse of the
Epithets and Censures charged upon unconverted Ministers, in the Nottingham
Sermon are borrowed, from the Writings of Calvinistical Divines, famous for
their Learning and Piety, such as Messrs. Hildersham, Pool, Burgess, Baxter,
Brackle, Fenner Besides what are expressly scriptural, so that the Censure the
Querist's labors to cast upon me, rather falls directly upon those Worthies of
the Christian Church.

Indeed I have heard People, of Piety and good Sense observe, upon this Popular
Paragraph, that the Gentlemen who had put it together, in its present Form, had
taken a pretty deal of Pains, to draw their own Picture: But whether the main
Strokes, of this unhandsome Draft, do exactly suit those Men, I will not at
present determine, but leave to their farther Enquiry's. But in the mean Time,
I would ask them, whether a Consciousness of Guilt, made them apply to
themselves in particular, what I only spoke in general, without Application to
any, Their Words are these murderous Hypocrites, that are to take Care, least
we feel the Force of a Halter etc. If they find themselves guilty, they
shoudn't take such Characters ill, but humble themselves before God, for their
Wickedness in murdering the Convictions of poor Sinners, and repent! A

5th. Instance of unfair Dealing, under the aforesaid Charge, is this, that
while they are pretending to give an Account of my Representation, of the
Characters of unconverted Ministers, they slyly and sophistically bring in
their Hearers. The Words they cite are these, Whose Hearers are as blind as
Moles, and as dead as Stones. What then are the People that hear the ungodly
Clergy, Ministers too? O strange! by bringing in this broken Scrap of a
Sentence of my Sermon; they would seem to insinuate, that it is my Opinion,
that all the stated Hearers of unconverted Ministers, are blind as Moles and
dead as Stones, which is false. In that Paragraph, from whence this Scrap is
taken, I there explain my self, that it is such who content themselves, with a
cold, careless, general unawakening Ministry; who are blind, etc. One may
perceive without the help of Spectacles, that their Politic Design, in
bringing the aforesaid Scrap Head and Shoulders, was to alarm the angry
Resentments of the People against me, and my Rev. Brethren through me who are
cordial in God's Cause.

But I must here observe in the mean Time, that I think it somewhat odd, that
those dear Brethren of the Examiner, should have left out one important Branch,
of the Characters of many graceless Ministers, which is mentioned page 6. of
the Notingham Sermon in these Words. It may be farther observed that the
Pharisee Teachers in CHRIST'S Time, were great Biggots to small Matters in
Religion, Mat. 23 23. Woe unto you, Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye
pay Tyth of Mint, Annis, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier Matters of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith? Was it, because it plainly discovers the
Vanity of their thread bare cant and cry, about Order, Order, Order; while they
are laboring with both Hands, to tear down Gods Work and Servants. If so, they
are more cautious, than candid.

Another particular, that I would just mention here, is the altering of the
Word faithful-Man to Honest-Man. If this Gentleman or his Friends have done
this of Purpose, it is very base. The Passage I referred to, is page 17 of the
Nottingham Sermon, where it is said, in the first Edition, That if they could
help it, they woudn't let a faithful Man come into the Ministry. But in the
Examiner's Performance, I find the Words are, Honest Man, which a Person may
be, and yet entirely graceless.

But though I hope by this Time, the Reader is satisfied, that there is no
Contradiction in my Writings under this third Instance, yet I believe, it will
be difficult, to vindicate our Author from what he charges upon me therein,
which is Uncharitableness e. g. is it not uncharitable in our Author? When he
has no sufficient Foundation from my Words related by him, to charge me with
the Evils before mentioned? Dosn't this look like an assuming of the
incommunicable Prerogative of God, who alone is Kerdiognostos. For him to judge
as aforesaid, without any Foundation from my Words, yea contrary to them; (as
appears from the Preface to the Nottingham Sermon where I solemnly declare the
Reason, why I used such Acrimony) is not this rash judging with a Witness, and
does it not savor of Uncharitableness? Alas! How could our Author print this,
after printing an Account of his Charity, in the first page of his Performance?

Is it not likewise uncharitable in our Author, to appear so much in Defense of
ungodly Ministers, many of whom, do so much harm to the Church of God. Why is
the Apple of his Eye touched? And why does he sigh so heavily alas, when they
are painted in their own Colors?

I may add, does not it seem as if the Examiner himself judged the Body of the
Ministry of this Generation, to be unconverted? If it be observed, that after
he cites my Words in the 48 page of my Moravian Sermon before related, he says,
I shall beg leave to lay before my Readers, some of the Reproachful Language he
has plentifully bestowed, upon the Body of the Clergy of this Generation. I had
spoken those Things or Charactes of unconverted Ministers, and behold he applys
them to the Body of the Clergy of this Generation; I leave it to the Reader to
judge, whether our Author, and his dear Friends, be consistent with themselves
herein.

As to what is mentioned in the Margin about some Rev. Gentleman's putting me
to silence, by observing that he had heard me twice or thrice, but found that
he had got such a short String of Prayer by heart, that he could almost repeat
it verbatim.

Ans. It is false, I know nothing of it, those that are used to hear me
frequently, can witness that I am far from using the same Words often, unless
it be the LORDS Prayer that the Objector means, that indeed I use frequently.
Perhaps the Examiner and his Friends take this in Dudgeon, if they do, I cannot
help it, for my Part I think it is a very laudable Practice, I don't know what
better Order or Words we can use in Acts of Religious Worship, than those our
Lord has taught us?

But that which I spoke against, was the long Strings of lifeless, sapless,
spiritless formal, Prayer, which some are generally guilty of, who tire their
Audience with their long and dead Acts of Devotion, and who seem not to strive
after the Breathings of the Spirit; but whatever the Frame of their Souls be,
their Words are much the same, and their Prayers of an equal Length. I have had
credible Information of a Minister in Boston, now a no better Friend of God's
Work, than our Author; who about 17 or 18 Years agone was then a Candidate for
the Ministry, and famed among some, for the Neatness and Elegancy of his
Prayers; whose Prayers were generally an Hour long, and in many Times upon
Trial by the Watch did not vary scarce a Minute under or over. Perhaps our
Author will say, that this is orderly, I shall not at present dispute the Point
with him, but only observe, that such Exactness in this Particular, does not
suit me, I do not care to be so strait laced. I proceed to the

4th Instance of supposed Contradiction, contained in his 14, 15, and 16.
pages, which is cited from page 48 of my Moravian Sermon thus, And here I must
take leave to observe, that the Practice of staying at home, rather than their
going to hear such Ministers, (sound in Principle and regular in Practice) as
are judged by some to be unconverted, is unscriptural and of dangerous
Tendency, in my Opinion; for it hangs the whole Weight of the public Worship
of God upon the uncertain Judgment of Men, though unconverted Ministers are not
likely to do so much Good, as others, yet seeing that many of them doubtless do
preach the same Word of God, which others do, why may not the Soverign God who
permits them by his Providence to come into the Ministry, bless the Word
delivered by them for the Good of Mankind?

Besides, the aforesaid Practice of staying at Home, etc. opens a Door to
Delusion by false Teachers, as well as to Confusion and Schism in the Church of
God.

Page 49. I must declare to the World, that I dread the tho'ts of Schism, and
Separation in the Church of God, etc.

Now the supposed opposite Instance, to what has been mentioned, in the
preceding Paragraph, is taken from page 8. of the Nottingham Sermon which is
introduced thus, he scarce owns a possibility of profiting under an unconverted
Ministry, when he says, is a dead Man fit to bring others to Life? Sad
experience verifies the unprofitableness of the Ministry of unconverted Men.
Look into the Congregations of unconverted Ministers, and see what a sad
Security reigns there, not a Soul convinced that can be heard of for many Years
together! What if some Instances could be shown, of unconverted Ministers,
being instrumental in convincing Persons of their lost State, the Thing is very
rare and extraordinary, and for what I know, as many Instances might be given
of Satan's convincing Persons by his Temptations, it is a kind of Chance Medly
between the Father and his Children, when any such Event happens. And is not
this the Reason why a Work of Conviction and Conversion has been so rarely
heard of for a long Time, in the Churches, viz. that the Bulk of her spiritual
Guides, are stone blind and stone dead.

Again page 20. I beseech you my dear Brethren to consider, that there is no
probability of your getting Good by the Ministry of Pharisees, for they are no
Shepherds, (no faithful ones) in CHRIST'S Account, they are as good as none,
nay worse than none upon some Accounts, for take them first and last, and they
generally do more Hurt than Good. See the Note at the Asterism *

* This Declaration, is much like that in the 27 page of the aforesaid
Examination, etc. Where Mr Tennent declares, as to what is alleged of our
encouraging, the Flocks of our protesting Brethren to forsake their Ministry. I
know nothing of this, neither do I know any of our Number that has. They
answer, it seems very strange to us, that Mr. T. of all Men alive should have
the Face to express himself thus, after writing, preaching and printing his
Sermon at Nottingham; for did not his own Party understand that Sermon, as an
Encouragement to forsake our Ministry, and have not their Adherents at
Nottingham, and many other Places, set up separate Meetings in compliance with
said Sermon, and others of the same Kind? Moreover they affirm, that the whole
Country knows, that it is a notorious Falsehood, and that he has encouraged
them, both from the Pulpit and Press to forsake their Ministry.

Here let the Reader observe, that the Examiner according to his Custom, uses
unfair Methods, in representing my Words, in order to make a Contradiction. For,

1. He of Purpose leaves out such Sentences, as serve to explain my Meaning,
and show a Harmony in my Writings e. g. what our Author cites, from the 49 page
of my Moravian Sermon, is but a little Piece of a Sentence, broken off from a
large Paragraph, more than two Thirds whereof are left out. The whole Paragraph
runs thus I must declare to the World, that I dread the Tho'ts of Schisms and
Separations in the Church of God (this was all our Author cited, now the Words
immediately following are,) because of the dismal Handle, that is thereby given
to Seducers, to promote their erroneous Tenets; as also because of the
Dishonor that is hereby cast upon God's Name, Ways, and People. Hereby wicked
Men are strengthened in their Prujudices against Religion; hereby Professors are
diverted from promoting Gods Work to personal Controversies of no Moment.
therefore when the Case so happens, that People are disatisfied with their
Minister, and cannot get Edification by his Ministrations, after long and
impartial Labors. To this End it seems most advisable for them, humbly and
peaceably (in a regular Manner) to seek to get an Assistant with him, if the
Place be able to support two; but if not, to ask Leave of their Pastor, and
other Church Officers, to go where they are more edifyed; in the mean Time
laying aside all rash Censures. And should not Ministers also for Peace sake
deny themselves, and consent to the reasonable Proposals of their People?
waving all exasperating Reflections upon their disatisfy'd People, and more
especially in their public Performances. O! may the God of Peace incline us to
study, and pursue the Things that are for Peace. Now I leave it to the Reader
to judge if the remaining Part of the aforesaid Paragraph, does not fully
explain my Meaning, and show a harmony in my Writings, and whether it was not
unjust in our Author to leave in out? And,

2dly. As to the Instance taken out of the Notingham Sermon; our Author deals
unfairly also, the first Words he mentions, namely these, Is a dead Man fit to
bring others to Life? is a Sentence taken out of the Middle of a large
Paragraph, which you may find chiefly in the 11 page the rest of which is
wholly omitted. To the aforesaid Sentence, our Author joins six Lines taken out
of the beginning of another Paragraph in the 12 page without giving the least
Notice of this to the Reader, and leaves out all the Rest, of a large
Paragraph, and then adds another Paragraph in the 31st page (of the first
Edition) and there takes a little and leaves the rest. What Writings can stand
before such partial Proceeding? But

3dly. Another unjust Method of our Author is this, in order to oppose the
Declaration I have made in the 43d page of my Moravian Sermon, namely of my
dreading the tho'ts of Shisms, and Separation in the Church of God. He dosn't
bring my Words only, which he ought to have done, but refers to, and cites the
Words of my Enemies; who oppose the Work of God in this Part of the Country:
What, does their differing from me show a Difference between me and myself?
which our Author was to prove. Are then they myself? if so, our Author has
proved his Point, otherwise not. Alas! what sorry shuffling is here? The
Examiner seems to be aware of this, and therefore he does not put their Words
in the opposite Collumn to mine, which would be too bare Faced and too easily
discovered; but sets an Asterism there, referring to them, and gives his reader
a Hint to see the note at the Asterism; and thus he leaves a Blank in the
Column, and cites their Words in the Margin. What sneaking petty Sophistry is
this? It would not only have looked better to have set them in the Collumn, but
have shown a little more Honesty in our Author. But enough of this.

In Answer to what this Gentleman cites, from the Writings of my Opponents, in
contradiction to another Declaration of mine, before related, (which is
mentioned in my Remarks, on their Protest; which Declaration, harmonizes with
that in the Moravian Sermon.) I shall only say at Present, that I affirmed
nothing therein but the very Truth; however strange they may pretend it is to
them. And that I hope the Almighty will always give me Boldness to express,
whoever oppose it, either to gratify their Spleen, or guard their Credit and
worldly Interest.

Neither does the Notingham Sermon oppose the Declaration aforesaid, for it
only asserts a regular withdrawing, from the stated hearing of one Minister to
another (in ordinary Cases) for greater Edification, in the General, without
particular Application to any. The Notingham Sermon as to the Substance of it,
upon that Head they refer to (and others also) I had wrote as my Opinion and
preached, a matter of ten Years before I ever was at Notingham.

I am not accountable for any Sense that Persons may put upon my Words, for
which they have no Foundation in them. The Sermon gave no more Encouragement to
leave their Ministry than my own, on Condition it was as it should be, and if
it was not how could I help that? It is true indeed, diverse Persons after they
were awakned, declared that they could not find any Relish under the Ministry
of some of their Number, nor get any Benefit by it, and were therefore disposed
to go else where, where they did get Good to all Appearance. And that which
strengthened the Aversion of many godly Persons to their Ministrations, was
their slighting of Gods Work, together with the Instruments Jehovah was pleased
to use in promoting of it. And here give me Leave to propose this Querie to Mr.
Thomson and his Asociates, whether it was because that such as were convinced
of Sin, had generally a less Esteem of his Ministrations, and of some of the
rest of his Party, that he and some (at least) of them, have so fiercely
opposed the blessed Opperations of the Holy Ghost, in alarming and convincing a
secure World of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment? If so is not it selfish and
sordid with a Witness, and a blow at the Root of Piety? For my own Part I must
say, That I humbly conceive that to be the Secret of the Story of their
Opposition, the Bottom of the Mystery, the true Spring of their Malignant
contending against vital Godliness, the False and ungenerous Methods, as well
as long Continuance of their Opposition to the Work of God, under so much
Advantage of Light and Evidence in favor of it, together with their dangerous
Errors before mentioned, frees me from the just Imputation of Rash judging in
thinking, as I have expressed.

As to what they say of, our Adherents setting up separate Meetings at
Nothingham and many other Places, in compliance with said Sermon, and others of
the same Kind. This is False; there is not a Word in that Sermon that
encourages separate Meetings from any Ministry, merely because they are
unconverted. No, the very contrary is expressed page 15. in these Words. Dear
Sirs, we should most earnestly pray for them, that the Compassionate Savior
may preserve them by his Mighty Power through Faith unto Salvation, support their
sinking Spirits under the melancholy Uneasiness of a dead Ministry, sanctify
and sweeten to them, the dry Morsels they get under such blind Men, when they
have none better to repair to. No, it was their bitter Opposition to the Power
of Religion, that gave Rise to separate Meetings, together with their irregular
and unjust attempt, to cast us out of Synodical Communion; neither have I or
any of my Brethren that I know of, ever preached any Sermon of that kind they
Mention.

Their affirming that the whole Country knows, that it is (meaning my
Declaration aforesaid) a notorious Falsehood: And that I have encouraged People
from the Pulpit and Press, to forsake their Ministry, is a dreadful Instance
of effronted Impiety. O shame! What sort of Men are these? Who not only assert
an egregious Falsehood, but appeal to the whole Country to prove it. To
confront their Charge, I do appeal to the numerous Multitudes, where ever I
have preached the Gospel of CHRIST, if what they have alleged be not a
groundless and crimson Calumny, which those Enemies of the Power of Religion,
do impute to me? It is the Necessity of their wretched Cause, that urges those
unhappy Men, to take such sinful and scandalous Methods, in order to cloak
their Horrible Wickedness, in opposing Gods Work, which has been the real Cause
of the Divisions subsisting among us; which they without Foundation ascribe to
me.

Neither does what I have said, page 29. of my Remarks, on their Protest,
contradict what I have now alleged. The Words are these No doubt there is a
Relation, between a Pastor and his People, but the Design of this being to
promote their Good, we think it unreasonable, that it should subsist to the
Prejudice of that which it is designed to procure, however in ordinary Cases, we
think it to be the Peoples Duty, to make regular Application to their Pastors
to go where they get the greatest Benefit.

But when Ministers conspire to oppose, the Work and faithful Servants of God,
in the most open and flagrant Manner, we see no Harm in this Case, in using an
extraordinary Method.

Here observe; that the aforesaid Remarks, were composed and published after
Things were brought to the utmost crisis and Confusion among us; by their
strange and unaccountable Conduct: And after a Rupture was forced between them
and us, by their Protest; and therefore nothing I have said therein could
possibly be even the Occasion of either.

As to that of extraordinary Cases, I have spoken to it before, and therefore
shall not now add, excepting this, that if Ministers conspiring to oppose the
Work and Servants of God, as aforesaid, -- be not an extraordinary Case, I know
not what is,

But to return from this digression, to the 4th Instance of supposed
Contradiction, in my Sermons, which I was discoursing upon: I shall just take
leave to add, to what has been already observed, these (...) particulars
following, namely.

1. That the Occasions upon which they were written, were different. The
Passages referred to in the Moravian Sermon were occasioned by reports of a
separating Disposition obtaining in New England: I was informed that some were
separating from the Ministry of such as were sound in Principle, regular in
Life, and approvers of God's Work; and that some stayed at Home, rather than
they would hear such, merely because they judged them unconverted! This
distressed me in Mind much* and to this Case the forecited Paragraphs, in the
48 and 49 pages of my Moravian Sermon, directly refer.

But the Nottingham Sermon was occasioned by the View I had of the Danger of
unconverted Ministers in general, and the Mischief that I was credibly
informed, some of them had done to the Souls of Men in particular, especially
of late!

Again, let it further be observed, that in both those Sermons, I acknowledge
these Things following.

1st. That unconverted Ministers might be instrumental in doing Good. And

2dly. That they should be heard, when we have no better. See Nottingham
Sermon, page 15.

3dly. I assert in both, That we should not leave their Ministry in ordinary
Cases, without regular Application.

Therefore the only appearance of Contradiction is this, that in the Moravian
Sermon I seemed to speak more favorably of unconverted Ministers doing Good;
then in the Instances our Author alleges or cites from the Nottingham Sermon.

But to remove this apparent Difficulty, let it be considered, that it is only
of such of them as preach sound Doctrine, are regular in Life, and favor God's
Work, that I have spoken so mildly of in the Moravian Sermon, and not of all.
And that in the Nottingham Sermon, in the Pages referred to by our Author,
there are exceptions admitted, as may appear by these Words. "p. 11. the
Ministry of natural Men is for the most Part unprofitable, and page 31. for
take them first and last, and they generally do more hurt than Good.

It is certain that unconverted Ministers are of different Sorts. For,

1st. Some of them are unsound in Fundamentals, these every one must
acknowledge, are not likely do do good, but much hurt.

2dly. Some are Profane in Practice, these are not likely to do Good, but Hurt.

3dly. Some are malignant Opposers of God's Work, these are not likely to do
good but much Hurt,

4thly. Some are quite Secure, unacquainted with Conviction, and the Similiar
Workings of the Spirit of God, now there is no Probability that such will do
Good, in respect of the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, though they may be
means of Instructing Persons in the Knowledge of some doctrinal Points of
Religion, which is doubtless Good in its Place and necessary.

5thly. Some are under Conviction, and the Similiar Workings of the Spirit,
sound in Doctrine, and favorers of God's Work. There is indeed some
Probability, that such will be means of awaking and converting Sinners.

Besides it may be farther observed, that when in the Nottingham Sermon I have
spoke diminitively of the usefulness of unconverted Ministers, it was chiefly
in respect of Conviction and Conversion. See p. 13.

Now although what I have offered does fully remove the Appearance of
Contradiction, objected by our Author; yet because one of the Passages he
cites, from the 13th. p. of the Notingham Sermon about Satan's Temptations, and
Chance Medly, as before related, has been frequently used and much triumphed in
by opposers this Way, I have thought it necessary to signify my meaning, more
fully in those Expressions. And,

1st I do not, nor never did intend by these Expressions, to put the
Temptations of Satan in respect of Tendency, to convince, upon a par with the
Preaching of an unconverted Minister, when he preaches sound Doctrine,
according to the Scriptures; No! God forbid, I abhor the thought! But

2dly. The Particulars therefore, that I there insist upon, are these namely,
that the Instances of Conviction, by the Ministry of unconverted Men, are (for
the General) very rare and Extraordinary, and so they are as appears from what
has been said before. And 2dly I do not positively assert, that as many are
convinced by Satan's Temptations, as by the preaching of unconverted Ministers,
I only say for what I know the Number may be equal. I have met with some
myself, that have been awakned, by the Temptations of the Enemy; which gave me
some Room to say, what I have said. But whither the Number be equal I will not
assert, however I may safely say, that I don't know certainly but it may; if
others do, let them declare it and prove their Assertion if they can, but as
for myself, I must profess Ignorance in this Point. And,

3dly. As to that of chance medly, between the Father and his Children, I mean
no more but this, viz. That when Persons happen to be convinced by Satan's
Temptations, he dosn't intend it; and that it is so also, with many unconverted
Ministers.

For Illustrations sake, I shall beg leave to tell a Story or two. I remember
to have heard of a graceless Minister, that was once preaching in Britain, and
it happned that a Gentlewomans Maid was convinced by his Sermon, (who
understood as little of the Nature and Necessity of Conviction as the Minister)
and therefore she came to the Minister, and told him in a frett, that he had
spoiled her Maid by his preaching, for the Maid was so distressed that she
coud'nt work. He told her, that he was very sorry for it, and that he intended
no such Thing. Now Sir, was not this chance medly? The good natured Minister
intended no Harm to the Girl, (as he recon'd it) but it fell out something
unluckily to him, poor Man!

Another such Instance, as I have been credibly informed, has hapend lately in
Holand. A certain Minister not long since, was raising against some pious
Ministers in the Neighborhood; because they brought People into distress by
their Preaching: And in the mean Time, one came and told him, That a particular
Person was brought into distress by his preaching, which surpised him, (as
well it might) and soon stopped his Mouth, poor Gentleman! How could he help it?
For Accidents will sometimes happen, whatever care be taken to prevent them.

I might come nearer home, and tell you a short Story, that has happened not
long agone, in this part of the Country, as I have been informed by diverse
Persons; which take as follows, A certain Preacher took up one of Mr.
Whitefield's Sermons, and read it in a Family where he was well acquainted,
(the Heads of which had a considerable Respect for him) by reading the Sermon
aforesaid, the Man and Woman were convinced; who had afterward less regard for
him, when their Minds were enlightened then before, the Preacher came
afterward to the House, and expressed his uneasiness at what had happened, as
to their being brought under Trouble by the Sermon.

I should be glad that Mr. Thomson for his own sake, as well as on the Account
of the poor Souls, he deludes with his false and dangerous Doctrine about
Conviction before related, might meet with some such Instances of chance-medly
in his Ministrations. Perhaps it might stop his Mouth, and check his Pen, from
uttering such sophistical and unjust reflections, against the Convincing
Operations of God's holy Spirit. I proceed to the,

5th, Instance of supposed contradiction, which is as follows, Moravian Sermon,
p. 53 in order to preserve our selves, and our Posterity, from the Infection of
Error, I think it is needful to use (in our proper Spheres) all suitable Means,
to obtain a godly learned and regular Ministry; when ignorant Novices are
admitted into the Ministerial order, they are apt to be puffed up to the
Churches great Prejudice, as well as their own, and to spread Error when they
know it not.

To say that these Qualifications may be ordinarily attained, without human
Learning is notoriously Enthusiastical, and Foolish. In short human learning is
necessary, or there must be Inspiration to supply the want thereof.

The supposed opposite, is drawn from the 11 p. of the Notingham Sermon; which
runs thus, viz. The most likely Method to stock the Church, with a faithful
Ministry, (not learned) in the present Situation of Things, the public
Academy's being so much corrupted and abused generally, is to encourage private
Schools, or Seminarys of learning, which are under the Care of skilful and
experienced Christians, in which those only should be admitted, who upon strict
Examination, have in the Judgment of a reasonable Charity, the plain Evidences
of experimental Religion. This Method has in my Opinion a noble Tendency, to
build up the Church of God, don't think it much if the Pharisees be offended at
such a proposal, etc. To what has been mentioned, the Examiner anexes some
Lines of a Writing of the Opposers in Pensylvania, which runs thus,

Some of Mr. Tennents very good Friends have confessed, that this Proposal has
a friendly aspect on his Fathers Log-House: But it is generally though it, if that
should be built upon the ruin of our public Academy's, neither Religion nor
learning would be greatly served thereby. See the Examition page 13. 52.

Here it will be only necessary to remove, what our Author has added, and to
add what he has left our, and then the Contradiction evanishes. And,

1st. The Examiner adds to what he cites from the Notingham Sermon these Words
of his own, in a Parenthesis, in Italick Characters, namely (not learned) so
that the Sentence runs thus, viz. The most likely "Method to Stock the Church,
with a faithful, "(nor learned Ministry) here indeed if the Parenthesis is
included, as our Author doubtless designed, by inserting of it, it is a real
Contradiction, for faithfullness is opposed to learning, but it is entirely of
our Authors making: if he Thinks that Faithfulness and Learning cannot consist
together, I pity him, but beg to be excused from concuring in so detestable a
Notion. No Conjunction is more amiable in its self, and useful to the Church of
God, then of those habits or Qualities, which our Author labors to set at an
unfriendly Distance.

2dly. The Examiner leaves out the following Sentence, viz. Pious and
experienced Youths, who have a good natural capacity, and great desires, after
the Ministerial Work from good Motives, might be sought for, and found up and
down the Country; and put to private Schools of the Prophets, especially in
such Places where the Public, ones are not. Here let the Reader observe, that
what our Author cited, was immediately before and after this Sentence, and yet
it was left out, which must be of Purpose; what unjust Treatment is this? And
yet the Examiner professes Charity, and now let the Reader judge, if we don't
need the Collums again, after this Union of the Poles.

As to what our Author borrows from the opposers, this way. I think it only
needful to say, briefly as follows, viz. What it the Proposal had a favorable
Aspect upon the Log-House, where is the Harm of it? May Not Persons be taught as
well in a Log-House as in a Stone or Brick-House? in the mean Time every Eye
may see, that the Proposal respects not one House more than another, where both
Piety and Learning are regarded. The Insinuation of building the Log House upon
the ruin of public Academys, is Invidious and without Foundation, as appears
from what has been already mentioned; the Distance between this private School
and any public Academys, is so great that their is no danger of its
interferring with them.

Whatever contempt these Men, from whom our Author borrows the aforesaid
Passage, are pleased to cast upon the School, under my honored Fathers
Tuition; yet Multitudes of Pious People in this Land can witness, that diverse
who have come out of it, have been eminently successful in propogating the
truly noble Interests of vital Christianity; as the Design of its Instruction,
was to introduce more faithful Ministers into the Church, that thereby
experimental and pactical Religion, might, together with human learning, be
promoted, so it has pleased a gracious God, (adored be his Name) to crown with
auspicious Smiles, the humble Essays, that have been made to serve his Glory
and his Church. The,

6th, Instance comes now to be considered, (p. 17) which is taken from Moravian
Sermon p. 62. For any Men to pretend to know certainly, who are gracious, as
one of the Moravian's did in my hearing, is to assume an incommunicable
Prerogative of God, and to run upon this Plan in Church Matters, is to turn all
into the wildest Confusion and Disorder.

The supposed opposite to what has been mentioned is this, The Querists
pertinently observe, p. 10. part 3. That the Scope of the whole Sermon at
Notingham, seems to imply that Mr. Tennent would have Men to believe, that they
may know a converted from an unconverted Minister, or else would not the main
Part of the Fabric fall?

Here let the Reader observe how our charitable Author deals with me again,
viz. instead of my Words he sets the Querists Words in one of the Collums, viz.
Their Judgment of the Scope of the Notingham Sermon, that Men may know, etc. I
answer, well what then, so they may know fallibly and probably a converted from
an unconverted Minister, and thus the Fabric of the Sermon is supported,
without any unfriendly Opposition to the other Column; except our Author makes
fallible and infallible Knowledge to be the same, which will prove a herculian
Labor.

But the Examiner proceeds to say thus, The Moravians speak out what is more
artfully concealed by Mr. Tennent, under the Guise of a near Guess, a probable
Knowledge, etc. of Men's State toward God, by an Examination of Men's
Principles, Experience, and Practice. Who made thee a Judge of Men's inward
Experiences and secret State.

A. Well, said Mr. Examiner, you are realy in a fair Way to commence Moravian,
if you are not one already. The Moravians speak out, what I artfully conceal
you say, so, so, they are then in your Opinion candid and open, but I reserved
and Hypocritical; well, I see you are still as charitable to me as you was,
just when you put on the Cloak, in the beginning of your worthy Performance. I
see you are no Changeling in respect of your sort of Charity! I am obliged to
you Mr. Examiner, for the largeness of your Love to me. You ask who has made me
a judge of Men's inward Experiences and secret State?

Ans. I pretend not to judge of Men's Experiences and State, immediately or
infallibly, but only mediately and fallibly, by the outward Signs of Speech and
Action; and this our Savor allows of, when he tells us, that the Tree is known
by its Fruit. And is not the Church of Ephesus commended for trying those that
said they were Apostles, and were nor, and for finding or discovering them to
be Liars Rev. 2. And is not the Shepherd more particularly bid to know the
State of his Flock. Prove. 27.23. How can we love the Brethren in particular,
except we judge them to be such? The Truth is, a Judgment of one kind or other,
concerning the States of those with whom we converse, we cannot avoid; and
therefore it is our Wisdom to use Caution in forming of it: And one Thing,
among others, that helps a judicious Christian much in this Affair, is Persons
relating what the Lord has done for their Souls, or their Experiences of a
Work of the Law and Gospel upon their Hearts: If their Experiences be agreeable
to the Holy Scriptures, and they be also Sound in the main Doctrines of
Religion, and both be confirmed by a holy Conversation, then should we judge
charitably of their State, otherwise we have not Reason for it. What though some
should be sound in Principle, and regular in Life, yet if, according to their
own Account, they are utterly Ignorant of the due influence of the Law and
Gospel upon their Hearts, or of Conviction of Sin, Communion with God, and a
heavenly habitual Bias of Heart, we have Reason to think that their regular
Practice is but a dead Form. And doubtless great Caution should be used in
expressing our Opinion concerning others States toward God, least by rash
judging, we strengthen the Presumptuous and discourage the Sincere-Hearted,
hurt their Characters and hender their usefulness in the World! Our Judgment of
a Persons bad State, should not be expressed, except there be some sufficient
Cause for it, and some valuable End can be answered by it. The contrary
Practice tends to Confusion and Discord.

But in the mean Time may I crave leave to ask our Author this Question, viz.
Who made him a Judge of my secret Thoughts? Is it not inconsistent in the
Examiner to find fault with my judging of the present States of Men toward God
by outward Signs, while in the mean time he judges my Tho'ts or State without
them, yea contrary to them? For dosn't he in effect say, I am of the Moravian
Opinion, as to judging, though I say the contrary, and conceal my Opinion under
the guise of a near Guess? -- Dosn't he herein assume God's unalianable
Prerogative?

But the Examiner proceeds to to cite a Passage from the Writings of our
Opposers in Pennsylvania, page 115, 116. which runs thus, Will Mr. Tennent tell
us where God required it of Ordinary Ministers, or People, to make positive
Judgment of the secret States of orderly Professors, or to set up a Court of
Inquisition to pry into one another secret State, any farther than it appears
in their Profession and Practice?

Ans. Besides what has been already observed upon the Point of Juding, for
Brevity's sake, I shall only add, that I have professed no more than what our
excellent Directory inculcates, under the Head of Ordination of Ministers, in
these Words, which being considered by the Presbettery, they are to proceed to
enquire touching the Grace of God in him, and whether he be of such Holiness of
Life as is requisite in a Minister of the Gospel.

I think seeing those Gentlemen profess so great a regard to the Church of
Scotland, and have adopted her Directory in this, as well as other Points, they
should have forbore comparing her with the Church of Rome, upon the Account of
enquiring into Men's secret States, or as our excellent Directory better
expresses it, touching the Grace of God that is in them, invidiously terming it
setting up a Court of Inquisition, hereby alluding to the Spanish Inquisition:
It Is a pity that these Men don't endeavor to be better acquainted with their
professed Principles! Its strange that they will neither act according to
themselves, or suffer us to do so without Reproach? Why are they so fond of
appropriating the Presbyterian Name to themselves, While they take so much
Pains to confute Presbyterian Principles? They would act a more consistent
Part, if they either renounced their Practice or Profession.

Their opposing all enquiries into Men's secret State, as they term it, gives
Reason to suspect their want of experimental Religion, as well as
unfaithfulness in the ministerial Work! Those who have Christian Experience,
are so far from thinking that the relating thereof is like a Spanish Engine of
torture, that they take gaeat Pleasure, with the Psalmist of old, in telling to
those that fear God, what the Lord has done for their Souls; and in rendering a
Reason of the Hope that is within them, to every one that asks a Question --
What a superficial sort of Ministers must those be who oppose all enenquiries
into the State of their Flock? for without this, how can they speak suitably in
a particular Manner, to the various Cases of their Hearers? For Ministers to
try to convince or comfort Persons in their private Discourse, before an
Enquiry into their State, is like a Physician's giving Doses of Physic at
random, without enquiring into the Nature of the Disease that the Patient
labors under. Whether such a Practice dosn't tend to kill rather than cure
People, let the Reader judge.

I shall only add at present, to what has been said under this Head, this
Sentece from my Nottingham Sermon, which I think is just, though some, for their
own Ends, despise it, namely, "That Thieves flee "a Search, least their stolen
Goods should be discovered. See John 3.19, 20, 21. And this is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World and Men loved Darkness rather
then Light, because their Deeds were Evil; for every one that does Evil,
hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, least his Deeds should be
reproved. But he that loves Truth comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be
made Manifest that they are wrought in God.

I hasten to the 7th Instance of pretended Contradiction, p. 18. which is
borrowed from Moravian Sermon p. 66. Do any esteem this new upstart Moravian
Sect because of their show of Humility, while in the mean time they undervalue
all but themselves?

Some of the Heads of that Party have spoken reproachfully at New-Brunswick, of
all the Protestant reformed Churches. One of them, in my hearing compared them
to Babel: Is this Humility to imagine themselves more advanced in Grace, then
all the World besides?

The supposed opposite Instance, is taken from the Nottingham Sermon p. 11. 12.
where he says, I condemn the Body of the Clergy of this Generation, as swarms
of Locusts, crowds of Pharisees, that have as covetously as cruelly crept into
the Ministry, in this adulterous Generation; who as nearly resemble the
Character given of the old Pharisees, as one Crows Egg does another.

Again p. 9. the Bulk of her spiritual Guides, are stone Blind and stone Dead.

This reproachful Censure of the Body of the Clergy of the Protestant reformed
Churches, is abundantly confirmed by Mr. Ts reply to Mr. Dickinson's Proposal
for an Accommodation in Behalf of himself and adherents, says he, We are
informed, that the Church of Scotland is in a very declining, degenerate State,
many of her Members corrupt in Principles, and more void of the Power of
Religion; as also that the Church of Ireland (I mean the Presbyterian) is
notoriously corrupted. They seem to be, as far as we hear, sunk into a deep and
dreadful Security.

We are informed that the Presbyterians in England have generally but little of
the Life of Religion among them; and that several of them are corrupted with
gross and damnable Errors. And by the best Information we can get, a dead
Formality generally prevails too much in Boston, and many other Places of
New England. Indeed we are of Opinion that the Majority of Church-Judicatories,
almost every where, are dead Formalists, if they have got that length; and
therefore we incline to make no more Application to Men in the Affair
aforesaid.

Where then is Wisdom and the Power of Godliness to be found? Why truly among
the little Brunswick Party, that little Flock. The Generality of Protestants
are but dead Formalists at best; for so Mr, T. proceeds to say, We are assured,
Gentlemen, That it is the Cause of GOD that We are engaged in, and therefore
resolved to defend it till Death against all Opposers. See Examinaiion, etc.
Page 9, 11, 12 The above Character given of the Ministers of our Persuasion in
England, Scotland, Ireland and New England, agrees well with Mr. T's
pronouncing the Body of the Clergy of this Generation, Judas's, hypocritical
Varlets, etc, *

* Mr. Tennent in his Sermon at Nottingham, appears as an Ishmael among the
Body of the Clergy of this Generation.

Where is Mr. T's Charity to himself and his Party shown here? and yet this is
the Gentleman that has the Face to recommend the Virtue of Charity to others in
his fifth Sermon, etc. viz. That Charity which thinks no Evil: surely then it
will speak none. That Charity which inclines to Mildness, Candor and Courtese
in Speech and Behavior, it behaveth itself not unseemly. That Charity which
prefers a public Good to a private Interest, it seeks not her own Things.
And that Charity that inclines those that possess it to Humility, it vaunteth
not itself, is not puffed up. Thou that teach another, teach thou not
thyself?

Well we have had a long Story, but where is the Contradiction? Why I have
faulted the Moravians for their undervaluing all but themselves, and speaking
reproachfully of all the Protestant reformed Churches. And this our Author
labors to make me Guilty of, by mustering up again the thread bare Story of
Names, which has been before considered; but what a poor Proof is this? Both
the Passages cited do not respect the same thing, and therefore there cannot be
a Contradiction in them. The one respects the Protestant reformed Churches in
particular; and the other the unconverted Clergy in General, of all forts of
Christian Societies. If our Author believes that the Clergy is the Church, as
it would seem he does, by pretending a Contradiction in those Passages, then he
is a Papist (at least in that Point) but if he thinks that the unconverted
Clergy of all the Churches in general, are the Protestant reformed Churches in
particular, (which is necessary to make out the Charge against me) then he has
lost Common Sense: And if he thinks that the Body of the Clergy of all
Denominations are Unconverted, (as it would seem by his charging directly upon
the Body of the Clergy, those Epithets which I charged directly upon the
Unconverted, and but indirectly and hypothetically upon the Body of the Clergy
of this Generation) I say, if the Case be so, the Examiner does himself what he
finds fault with in me.

But be that as it will, our Author represents my Mind unfairly, while he trys
to make his Reader believe that I Charge the aforesaid Characters upon the Body
of the Clergy directly, and carefully leaves out the Word Unconverted (as it
would seem) least the Reader should form a just Notion of my Sentiments.

And when our Author mentions some part of my reply to the Rev. Mr. Dickenson's
Proposals, he artfully turns what I had said in the Nottingham Sermon against
unconverted Ministers of every Church in general, to the Body of the Clergy of
the reformed Churches in particular, which tends to heighten the Charge,
without a just Ground, against that Sermon, as if I had intended in it, only
the unconverted Ministers of the reformed Churches, strictly so called, which
is really false. The Expressions in the Sermon are indefinite and general, and
therefore cannot, without a force upon them, be restricted, as our Author
suggests. I mention in the Sermon the Badges of different Kinds of Clergymen,
namely, not only Bands and Black Coats, but Gowns, ( See p. 18.) which shows
that I had in View the Clergy of different Churches in the Composure of it.

Well and what do I say in the aforesaid Reply, but relate a credible Account,
which we have had of the declinging State of Religion in general, among the
Presbyterians in England, Scotland, Ireland and New England; and was not the
Relation true at that Time? If not, let the Examiner favor us with a juster
Account of the Matter, and we shall be obliged to him. I should be exceeding
glad to be mistaken on that side of the Question. I say what is there in the
reply, but the aforesaid Relation, excepting that Passage of the Majority of
the Church Judicatory's being dead Formalists, etc. But it should be observed,
that the following qualifying and limiting Terms are added to it, namely, that
it is not represented as a Matter of absolute Certainly, but of Opinion only;
and that the Words almost every where, are added thereto. Our mentioning this,
after the aforesaid Relation of what we had been informed of, shows that it was
bottomed thereupon, in some Measure.

Our Author next adds, several Lines of his own in the middle of the Paragraph
he cites from me, which has a tendency to mar my meaning. But what is it that
he is so eager to utter, why this silly Satyr, namely, Where then is Wisdom and
the Power of Godliness to be found? Why truly among the little Brunswick Party,
that little Flock. The Generality of Protestants are but dead Formalists, at
best, etc.

Ans. Why does the Examiner, without any Foundation, insinuate, that I confine
Wisdom and the Power of Godliness to my self and Brethren, or prefer ourselves
to other faithful Ministers of the reformed Churches, when there is not a Word
of this Tendency in all our writings; God forbid, that we should entertain such
an unreasonable and detestable Opinion of ourselves; no we desire, as we have
great Reason, to prefer others before ourselves in Love, and do judge of
ourselves, (and are willing to be though it so of others) less then the least of
all Saints.

Neither will the Foundation our Author goes upon in the Insinuation aforesaid,
bear the Stress he lays upon it. What if we had said, That the generality of
Protestants are but dead Formalists at best. Will nor the Scripture support
such an Assertion, while they inform us, That many are called and few chosen,
That Strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads to Life, and that few
find it, That many shall seek to enter in and shall not be able. And dons't the
Parable of the Sower give farther Light and Force to this Argument? For
therein, but one in four received the Word aright. Dosn't the Examiners
offering the aforesaid particular, as an Objection against us, betray gross
Ignorance of the Scriptures, and look like an utter unacquaintedness with
experimental Religion?

Our Author adds another Paragraph of his own to this Effect. Where is Mr.
Tennent's Charity to himself and his Party shown here? and this is the
Gentleman, that has the Face to recommend Charity to others in his 5th Sermon.

Ans. I see no uncharitableness in asserting that to be the Cause of God, which
we were then and are still endeavoring to promote; namely, experimental and
practical Religion, and in a resolute opposing of two Acts made by a Majority
of the Synod, which we were and are still persuaded had a Tendency to obstruct
the same, though doubtless they appeared to others of our Brethren (some of whom
we believe are heartily engaged in promoting experimental Piety) in another
Light. These Acts which I have mentioned in my Remarks upon their protest, gave
rise to the uneasinesses which subsist among us. Our reasonings against which,
mentioned in the aforesaid Remarks, our opposers have not though it proper yet to
make any particular reply to.

I still approve of the Description of Charity, which our Author cites from my
Moravian Sermon: And am persuaded that I have acted according to it, in setting
forth the Danger of an ungodly Ministry; but this I have spoke upon before, and
therefore must not insist here.

Only I must beg leave to ask our Author, who professes so much Charity, how he
can reconcile therewith his manifold unjust dealing with me, and his
patronizing the ungodly Ministry, his grumbling and taking it ill that they
should have their just Characters? while in the mean Time he favors heretical
Moravians, and other Shismaticks this way, and adopts their invidious Character
of me, viz. That I appear in my Notingham Sermon, as Ishmael among the Body of
the Clergy of this Generation. -- While in the mean Time he slights and opposes
those pious Ministers in general, who have been instrumental in promoting the
late Reformation. To oppose and detect ungodly Ministers, does it not look more
like the Practice of Jeremiah and Micajah, then of Ishmael? And now Sir, I beg
you wont take it amiss, if in the Conclusion of this Paragraph, I return your
Question, thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self?

Having now considered our Authors Charges as to pretended Inconsistencies in
Doctine, let us proceed to examine his Comparison of the Conversion, and after
Experiencies said to be propogated by Mr. T. and his Party; and this our Author
is pleased to introduce, with an Apoligy for Count Zinzendorff and Mr.
Betener's contradicting of themselves, p. 20. He asks, Why I deny to those
Moravian Gentlemen, the Liberty I take to my self to say and unsay Things as it
likes me.

Answ. I have never taken such a Liberty, and I hope never shall, and as our
Author has not nor cannot prove his malignant Charge, it is slanderous cruel
Calumny, which may God of his infinite Mercy forgive.

And now we come to our Authors Charge, p. 21. which is as follows, quoted from
p. 103 of the Apendix.

The Conversion of the most of them, is very slighty, done in a Moment; have we
not reason to fear their Conversion is but a strong flight of Imagination, a
Satanical Delusion?

And we have more reason for the Fear aforesaid, when we consider how easy
they are generally, after their supposed Conversion, without Fears, without
complaints of Sin, etc. did not the Seed sown on the stony Ground, spring up
quickly; but on the Contrary, did not the good Ground bring forth fruit with
Patience?

If we will believe the Scriptures, does not their Conversion and after
Experiencies, look like Presumption and Delusion?

In the opposite Collumn are these Words, If we are to judge of the unsoundness
of Conversion, by the Suddainness thereof, have we not as much Reason to fear,
that the Conversion of many among the N. Brunswick Party, is a strong flight of
Imagination, or a Satanical Delusion?

Even such is the easy, quiet, happy State of Multitudes of the late Converts,
without fear, without Complaints, etc. Why then should the State of the one, be
better and safer then that of the other?

Answ. It is invidious in our Author still to keep up the contemptuous title
Page over the Heads of his Collumns; while in the mean Time he puts his own
Words in one of them, and not mine; but to pass this.

I beg leave to observe that our Author is very partial and defective in his
Representation of the Reasons of my Fears, respecting the Moravian Conversion,
he picks up a piece of a Sentence here and there, and leaves out the chief
Part; to make this appear I will cite the whole Paragraphs he refers to, and
they are these. --

As to their Conversion and after Experiencies, the Conversion of the most of
them (if we credit the Count's Assertion, and we may reasonably suppose that he
knows pretty well the State of his own Sect) is very slighty, its without any
Preparatory Law Work, done in a Moment. If they have received the aforesaid
Doctrines, have we not Reason to fear that their Conversion is but a strong
flight of Imagination, or a Satanical Delusion. And we have the more Reason for
the Fear aforesaid, when we consider how Easy they are generally after their
supposed Conversion, without Fears, without Complaints of Sin, Strangers to the
Spiritual War, Stangers to the Knowledge of their own Hearts, always in one
sort of Frame, or as it were put to Sleep and happy, as the Count expresses it.
did not the Seed sown on the Stony Ground spring up quickly? but on the
Contrary, did not the good Ground bring forth Fruit with Patience? did not the
poor Man in the Gosple bewail his unbelief? And are we not commanded to fight
the Fight of Faith? If we will believe the Scriptures, does not their
Conversion and Experiences look like Presumption and Delusion? Their Ignorance
about the Nature of a true and saving Faith, adds awful weight to what has been
now observed.

Here the Reader may easily perceive, that what I have said respecting the
Suddainness of their Con-Conversion, is joined in the same Sentence with their
want of a Preparatory law Work, upon which the principle Stress is laid. --

Besides what I have said of their Ease after Conversion, is joined with the
Account of their being Strangers to the spiritual War, and the Knowledge of
their own Hearts; my Fears respecting their Conversion, are likewise bottomed
upon the Supposition of their receiving or embracing the dreadful Doctrines
contained in the Apendix, particularly upon their asserting historical Faith to
be saving, and their rejecting of God's Law.

Dosn't our Author know in his Conscience, that these things cannot be justly
charged upon us, God knows that we abhor them. What a wicked and shameless
Part does the Examiner then Act, in his partial deceitful Application? And how
unreasonable is his Query from thence, viz. Why then should the State of the
one be better and safer than the other? Has our Author then no regard to the
precious Doctrines of Christianity which the Moravians oppose? Has he no
respect for the Law of God, and a preparative Work of it?

As to what our Author says concerning Multitudes of the late Converts, being
in an easy, quiet and happy State without Fear.

Ans. That some are deceived respecting their State toward God, who have been
under good Impressions during the late revival of Religion in this Land, I
doubt not. This is but a usual Event, and therefore no way disparages God's
Work, Presumption flows from the Sophistry of Satan, who blinds the Eyes of
those that believe not, and from the Corruption of Men's Hearts, which are
deceitful and desperately wicked. It cannot be therefore charged upon
Ministers, except they preach Doctrines that tend thereto; which we defy the
Examiner to prove upon us. If our Doctrines had been of a presumptious
Tendency, is it probable that so many Thousands would have been alarmed by
them, out of their Security? And therefore the Examiner is guilty of a
notorious falsehood, when he says, p. 21. That such a Conversion and
Experiencies as he describes, was propogated by me and my Party. Whereas the
Almighty knows and many of his People, among whom we have labored, that it has
been our Principle endeavor to sap the Foundations of a False hope.

Our Author must excuse me if I cannot so easily credit his Assertion, as to the
multitudes of the late Converts being without Fear, etc. he has so often failed
in his Charges against me, that I cannot but Question his Veracity, especially
when he is prejudiced, as he certainly is against the late revival of Religion,
see p. 24. What good do the Itenerants do by "their Traveling, unless it be to
sow Tares to "corrupt and devide religious People?

Here the Examiner absolutely denis, that any good was done by Itinerary
preachers. And yet he owns p. 27. That some were brought under a preparatory
Work of the Law by my Ministry (who am doubtless intended us one of them) in
these Words, It notioious that he himself not only smiled but laughed heartily
over his Converts, while they were under a preparatory Work of the Law. Now the
Examiner must either acknowledge that it is doing no good to bring
(instrumentaly) secure sinners under a preparatory Work of the Law, or confess
his Contradiction. Besides a Contradiction to the aforesaid passage is implied,
in his Words that I am now considering: For while he says, That Multitudes of
the late Converts are without Fear, this plainly supposes that some of them are
not. And so that there has been some good done by the Itinerary Preachers, who
have been used as Principle Instruments in promoting the late Conversions. And
indeed this, the Examiner in some sort confesses in relation to my self, while
he calls me a Principal mover and promoter of the passionate Religion now
prevailing among so many, p. 26.

It is not probable that our Author would converse with so many of the late
Converts as he talks of, considering his present Prejudice, and therefore his
knowledge must come by the Information of others, who its like were as much
prejudiced as himself. I belive I have had an opportunity of conversing with
more of them then our Author, by Reason of my Travels. And I must declare to
the Glory of divine Grace, that I have met with Multitudes, who in the Judgment
of a Scriptural and reasonable Charity, had the plain Signatures of a special
Work of God upon their Souls.

The principal Members of the Presbytery of New York, have the last Year in
their Protest, given their solemn sufferage to the reality of the late revival
of Religion in this Land, and this Year both our Presbyteries viz. of
New-Brunswick and New Castle, have given a unanimous Declaration in behalf of
God's Work, which has been sweetly spreading among us lately. Blessed be
Jehovah for it.

And now let us proceed to our Authors, 22d. p. and here he observes that I say
in p. 8. of my Moravian Sermon thus. What is the Moravian Faith, but a sorry
mushroom, of a nights growth unworthy of the name of Faith.

Upon the opposite Collumn to which the Examiner inserts these Words of his
own. Yea and all such like sudden Conversions, are equally Presumptuous and
Delusive, but as a sorry mushroom of a Nights Growth.

Here let the reader observe, that the Examiner wrongs me in not representing
my true Sense and Meaning. He only cites a short Conclusion, which I drew from
certain Premises, in which my Opinion was explained without mentioning the
Premises themselves, E. G. He has (as it seems) purposly left out the following
Lines, which do immediately go before what he related, and fully show my
meaning, namely, What then can we reasonably suppose that Faith to be, which
has no humbling Preparatives, no after Conflicts and Troubles, and consist not
in a receiving of CHRIST, and resting upon him for Salvation? And then follow
the Words he has cited.

The reader may easily see, how partial and unjust his comparison is, and
therefore Inconclusive, whatever sudden Conversions there be, attended with
the aforesaid Characters; we reject them and believe them to be but sorry
Mushrooms; but we dare not reject Conversions merely because of their
Suddainness, if these Persons have had humbling Preparatives, have been enabled
to receive CHRIST, and rest upon him for Salvation; have after conflicts, and a
general free bent of Heart, and Practice Godward and Heavenward.

And this we have the fullest Evidence, that the Nature of such Things can
admit of, is the Case of many who have been, during the late glorious revival
of Religion, brought from a State of Nature to a State of Grace in this Land.
We dare not presume to bound Omnipotence, or set limits to the Operations of an
infinitely sovereign God, in his bringing fallen Creatures to an interest in
his Love. His Spirit blows when and where he lists.

And indeed I cannot but think the Examiner is profanely bold in doing so, in
those Lines of his which I but just now mentioned. At this rate of proceeding
the most of the Conversions in the Apostolic Times, must be condemned as
Mushrooms, for was not the Conversion of the three Thousand as well as of Paul,
Zacheus and Lydia, sudden?

And what though sudden Conversions be followed with Raptures, if they have the
Antecedents, Concommitants and Effects, before mentioned, they should not be
rejected on the Account of them. For are we not told, That the Kingdom of God
consists in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost? And didn't some in
the primitive Times receive the Word with Joy, yea rejoice with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory, and what can be greater than this?

If Persons after much sorrow and uneasiness, upon their meeting with some
unexpected and important temporal Good, have been so overcome with Joy and
Rapture, that they have fainted away; is it any wonder that divine Things
should affect as much, which are of infinitely greater Weight and Consequence,
when they are beheld by that Faith which is the Substance of Things not seen,
and the Evidence of things hoped for. Certainly the greater Distress Persons
are in before they receive Comfort, through a sight of God's Justice and
Holiness, as well as of their own Vileness, together with the Fears of
impending Vengeance, the more in Proportion they are wont to be affected with a
Sense of pardoning Mercy.

I remember to have heard in the famous Story of Massianello the Neapolitan,
that during his Regency, some poor Man that had received certain valuable
temporal Presents, was so transported therewith, that he cried out frequently
in the open Street, before a great Concourse of People, all this is mine, all
this is mine. And when some Body present desired him to be still, telling him
that such behavior was unseemly, he replied, That he needn't wonder that he
cried out so, but rather that he didn't take up Stones and throw at him He was
so mad for Joy.

If Archimedes when he had found out some Mathematical Demonstration, was so
transported with it, that he cried out, Eureca, Eureca, I have found, I have
found. Is it strange that some of softer and stronger Passions, who after a
view of their forlorn State, upon finding the Pearl of great Price; should be
so transported with a Sense of God's imerited and immense Goodness, as that
they coud'nt refrain crying out with the Spouse in the Song of Songs. I have
found him whom my Soul loves.

I have heard of one who was condemned to be hanged for some notorious Crime,
in consequence of which after Imprisonment, he was carried to the Gallows; but
behold a Pardon being brought to him, while he was within view of the awful
Instrument of Execution, overcame him with such an excess of joy, as made him
expire in Death. What I have said elsewhere concerning the Souls near union to
the Body, and its consequent Influence upon it, is applicable here.

And now before I proceed farther, I must just observe, that the Examiner has
wronged me in the Application aforesaid, by insinuating that I spoke against
sudden Conversions, or joyous Raptures altogether, whereas I only spoke
against such, as had not suitable Antecedents, Concommitants and Effects, as
was before observed.

He has likewise offended against the Generation of God's Children, by
condemning all of them that have been converted suddenly. Let the Examiner
seriously consider the following Place of Scripture, Matt. 18.6. He that
offends one of those little ones who believe in me, it were better for him that
a Millstone was hung about his Neck and he cast into the midst of the Sea.

Our Author in his next Paragraph mentions what I say p. 66. of my Moravian
Sermon. -- Thus do any esteem this new upstart Moravian Sect, because they say
they have Communion with God, and in Consequence hereof Joy and Sweetness. I
answer when we consider the Antinornian Principles they hold concerning Faith
and Justification, as well as the proud Effects of their pretended Good Frames,
and that under a Mask of Humility, etc. we have good Reason to suspect their
Communion to be but a Delusion of the grand Enemy, and their Joys to be the
Joys of Time Believers, and stony Ground Hearers. True Communion with God does
certainly humble the Soul, Job 42.5.6. It Is no new Thing for Antinomians and
Enthusiasts, to talk of Joys and Comforts but they are a false cure to all Soul
Troubles.

In the opposite Collumn he mentions the following Words of his own, viz. every
reader of common Observation, will find the Transition very easy, from the
Moravians to many of the Converts now a Days, who talk boldly of their high
Joys and full Assurances, under a mask of Humility, and at the same Time
trusting in themselves, that they are Righteous and despising others.

Let them not be high minded but fear, least their Communion be but a Delusion,
and their Joys the Joys of stony Ground Hearers.

By comparing those Paragraphs, every Eye may see the Examiners Partiality, in
applying what I have said concerning the Joys of the Maravians, to many of the
late Converts, for in his Comparison, he omits one of the principle Reasons of
my suspecting the Moravian Joys, namely their Antinomian Principles, concerning
Faith and Justification, he indeed mentions proud Effects, namely trusting in
themselves and despising others, and if the Case be truly and habitually so
with any, it is an awful sign of Delusion.

But perhaps our Author, has termed a reasonable rejoicing in the Assurance of
God's Love, a modest and seasonable discoursing thereof to others, together
with a faithful Endeavor to detect and awaken secure Hypocrites, and dry
Formalists, a talking boldly of their high Joys, and trusting in themselves and
despising of others, because of his strong Prejudice and repeated Partiality.
In the mean Time I woudn't be understood to signify, as if I believed that all
who recond themselves Converted, or were esteemed so by others, during the late
revival of Religion were really so: No not at all, neither is this any
disparagement to the Work of God. For thus it was in the Apostolic Times.

But to conclude, what I would offer upon this Head of Conversion and
Experience, I must observe that the Examiner is most unjust in asserting in the
Title thereof, that I and those whom he calls my Party, propogate such a manner
of Conversion and after Experience, as he relates in the opposite Collumn to my
Words. I challenge him to prove his false and cruel Charge, wherein have I or
any that join with me propogated a Conversion consisting in Imagination or
Satanical Delusion, or such an Easy State after Conversion, as is without
fear, without Complaints, or a Mushroom Faith, false Joy, spiritual Pride, and
self Confidence. These very Sermons which the Examiner labors to cast dirt
upon, (consequentially) evidence the Contrary, as well as all the Sermons I
have published to the World, particularly that Book entitled the Presumer
detected, which was directly calculated to unhinge delusive Hopes and Joys.
Neither is there one of my Reverend Brethren that can be justly charged with
those Things, some of them have proved the Contrary by their printed
Discourses, and all that know the rest, know the Charges against them to be
false. What if some be deceived under our Preaching, seeing that the Doctrines
we preach and our distinct manner of handling them, has no Tendency that Way,
but the very contrary; our Author can no more justly charge us herewith then
the Apostles, with all the presumptuous Hopes of their Hearers. Why does our
Author unjustly charge upon us, the Crimes of the Devil and the ungodly, who
are under his Influence, while we detest them in our Hearts, and endeavor to
detect and oppose them by our Speech and Practice.

And now we are prepared to consider another part of the Examiners Performance,
which he entitles thus, Mr. T's Reflections on the Spirit of the Moravians,
compared with his own Spirit and of his Adherents.

The Passages of mine which he cites, are Appendix, Moravian Sermon, p. 104.
the Words are these, Are not the Moravians, many of them, uncharitable and
divisive in their Speech and Practice, and that under a pretext of Charity and
Catholicism. Witness Mr. SPANGENBERG'S comparing the Protestant Churches to a
Babel, etc.

Witness their not being willing to join with any Protestant Body of Men, and
yet their receiving Persons of diverse Societys to their Fellowship, with little
Examination into their Principles.

On the opposite Collumn to what has been mentioned, he speaks thus And are not
Mr. T. and many of his zealous Advocates just like them? Witness his Sermon at
Nottingham, which is as full of uncharitable and divisive Principles and
Speeches, as a Crows Egg is full of Meat.

Witness also Mr. T. and many of our late Zealots, Ministers and others, who
have been ready to censure and separate from all that differed in Sentiment
from them, but at the same Time receiving into their Fellowship, and with
Charity eno', every one that pretended to be of their Way, pronouncing them
true Converts upon little Examination, and proof of a Work of Grace in them.

Here let the reader note, that what the Examiner objects, respecting
(pretended) uncharitableness and dividing Principles in the Notingham Sermon,
has been before largely considered, and therefore I shall not now resume what
has been said. But supposing I had been under some mistakes in that Sermon, I
see no Justice in his charging them upon my Brethren, except he proves their
Consent thereto which he has not so much as attempted.

But in Answer to his next Charge against me, namely a readiness to censure and
separate, from all that differed from me in Sentiment. I shall mention a
Paragraph of our Apology offered to the Consideration of the Synod, some
Considerable Time before the Rupture happened, which runs thus. To conclude we
profess a hearty Charity for those Gentlemen who are on the other Side of the
Question in this Debate, doubtless Things appear to them in another Light, we
have only in the Course of our Reasonings, labored to expose the Absurdity of
an Opinion which we think prejudicial to the Interests of the Saviors Kingdom,
and if we are herein mistaken, we are willing to be convinced by Scripture and
Reason. But whether we get Conviction or not by our Brethrens Arguments we
believe that the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace may be preserved,
notwithstanding a diversity of Sentiment in lesser Things, if moderate Councils
be followed, and that mutual forbearance be allowed, which the Gospel of CHRIST
requires. See remarks upon a Protesttation, page 68. The aforesaid Apology was
signed by diverse Ministers of our Number. The same Thing in Substance I have
likewise expressed in the 19 p. of the Remarks aforesaid, thus: But though we did
Protest against what we apprehended (after deliberate enquirys) to be wrong in
our Brethrens Conduct, a practice not unusual in judicatorys of our
Denomination, yet we were far from carrying Matters to the present Crisis,
which our Brethren have done by their Protest, namely, to exclude our
dissenting Brethren, from Communion upon that Account. And p. 9. are these
Words.

The Truth is, though we differed in Sentiments from our Brethren, in respect of
some Acts or Cannons they had made, yet we designed no Separation from them
upon that Account, we though it that mutual Forbearance would be the best Expedient
in the Case aforesaid. As we desired liberty of acting according to our
Consciences, in the controverted Affair, so we were far from a desire of
imposing our Judgment upon our Brethren, or imagining that there was a
necessity of Separation, upon the Account of the aforesaid diversity of
Sentiment.

Now what regard can it be resonably supposed the Examiner has either to Truth
or Charity, when he asserts an absolute Falsehood, while he had our solemn
public mutual Declaration in his Hands to convince him thereof.

And here let me farther observe, that in Pursuance of the aforesaid
Declaration, we kept Synodical Communion with them, until they after an
illegal, unpresidented and unjust Manner, violently and abruptly broke
communion with us by a Protest without allowing us Liberty to speak in our own
Defense, before the Protest was signed, though it was again and again desired.
See now Mr. Examiner your partiality in favoring such Schismatics, and in
condemning the Innocent with their Crimes, and be at last ashamed of your
unaccountable Conduct.

If some who have favored the late Reformation in New England, have been
tinged with a separating Spirit, or Disposition to abandon abruptly the
Ministry of any that were sound in Principle, blameless in Practice, and
favorers of God's Work, as it has been reported, it deserves Censure, and
calls aloud for Lamentation*

But why do you Sir impute their Faults to me? when you know in your
Conscience, that I have opposed such Separations there, as appears by the
Sermons which you so much contemn, (as aforesaid) and my Letter to the Rev. Mr.
JONATHAN DICKINSON, and the other which was wrote to explain it more fully
(which you Censure) Pray Sir consider whether you are not very inconsistent
with yourself in this Point, inasmuch as while you Censure me, without
Foundation, as being of a divisive Spirit, you try by many Methods to cast
dishonor upon my Essays against it, and favor those that are guilty of it?

As to what you say in the latter Part of your Paragraph, of my receiving into
Fellowship, with Charity enough, every one that pretend to be of our way,
pronouncing them true Converts upon little Examination and Proof of a Work of
Grace in them.

I would observe that you Contradict yourself in two particulars, 1st In
blaming me for excessive Charity; when in diverse other Places in your
Performance, you Blame me for the Contrary, See p. 13. And 2d. In Blaming me
for Examining too little concerning a Work of Grace in Persons; while you Blame
me elsewhere, viz. page 17. for attempting to do any such Thing at all; your
Words are, Who made thee a Judge of Men's inward Experience and secret State.
After which you adopt the Querists Words, who compare it to the Spanish
Inquisition. -- But perhaps you will say in Answer to the first Particular,
that it was only a Party Charity you faulted me for, and charged me with. To
which I reply, that the Accusation is false. My Soul abhors the sordid
Meanesless and contracted Views of Biggotry and Party Zeal! I have a Witness in
Heaven and many upon Earth, that my chief Desire and Labors have been (since
Almighty God has of his free Mercy given me the saving Knowledge of himself) to
promote vital Religion, and not any Party whatsoever. And I have likewise great
Reason to believe that this is the Temper and Disposition of all the Ministers
that join with me in these Parts. There is one indeed, who is I hope a pious
Man, Mr. ALEXANDER CRAIGHEAD, by Name, who was formerly in a State of Union
with us, but having more Zeal and Positiveness than Knowledge and Judgment, has
Schismatically broken Communion with us, and adopt'd the rigid Cameronian
Scheme. He is indeed ringed with an uncharitable and party Spirit, to the
prejudice of real Religion in some Places this Way May the Almighty forgive him
and rectify his Judgment. His late and present censorious Temper and divisive
Conduct, we utterly detest and disclaim.

I think the Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD's Observation, in one of his Letters
concerning the Covenanting Scheme, is very just and true, viz. That it is two
narrow a Foundation to build any great Superstructure upon. And on the contrary
I cannot but highly approve of the catholic, generous and noble Sentiments of
the very Rev. Dr. BATES and Mr. HOW, who observe a just Medium between two
dangerous Extremes of a rigorous Severity upon the one Hand, and a perilous
Laxness on the other.

And I am likewise far from approving of diverse Particulars which are Charged
upon Mr. DAVENPORT'S Conduct; one of which is, as the Report goes, That after
he has examined Ministers about the State of their Souls, he has publicly in
the open Congregation declared his Opinion concerning their bad State, and
exhorted their Hearers to leave them. My Abhorrence of this Practice I have
expressed in a Letter to Mr. DICKINSON, which has been made Public, to which I
refer the Reader. And the late Story about Burning diverse valuable Books at New
London in Connecticut, is likewise exceeding Scandalous and Ridiculous, and
deserves to be detested by all Mankind (but I am glad that I can now, upon a
certain Foundation, inform the Public, that Mr Davenport appears to be deeply
sensible of his criminal Conduct in that Affair.)

It is likely that Mr. DAVENPORT and Mr. CRAIGHEAD, by their imprudent Conduct,
have been accessory to the creating and fomenting of Divisions in several Parts
of this Country, which is much to be lamented: And while I am constrained, by
the Regard I have to the Honor of God and interest of his Kingdom, to bear a
public Testimony against the exceptionable Conduct of these Ministers before
mentioned, in the mean Time I declare, that I cannot but love their Persons,
and believe that in the simplicity of their Hearts they have gone astray. I
likewise acknowledge, to the Glory of God's Sovereign Grace, that I have Reason
to believe, that both of them have been Instruments of doing remarkable Service
to many Souls.

But why does our Examiner unjustly Charge the Misconduct of either of those
Gentlemen upon us, who have never encouraged it? But on the Contrary our Author
must need know in his Conscience, that I have expressly opposed the Misconduct
of one of them, in my printed Sermons and Letters.

The next Particular the Examiner mentions, is borrowed from p. 65 of my
Moravian Sermon, which is thus expressed, How very different are the Fruits of
their coming into the Country from the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD's? His plain and
pungent Preaching the Truths of the Reformation, united generally the Hearts of
good Men through the Land. But the Moravians wherever they have any Influence
divide the People of God, and set them a jangling. See p. 23. 24

In the opposite Collumn to which, the Examiner mentions these Words of his
own, namely, Has not the coming of the Rev. Messirs. W. and T. and their
Successors, into these Provinces divided the People of God, and set them a
Jangling, as much as the Preregrination of the Moravians in Pennsylvania has
done there?

But it seems Mr. T. has felt the bad Effects of their uncharitable intrusive
Spirit near home, which makes him complain and flinch as much as his
Neighbors, who felt the Weight of his rough Hands and heavy Fists.

Answ. The Examiner's Application of the aforesaid Instance to Mr. WHITEFIELD
and me, is unjust and untrue which many Thousands in N. England can witness:
When Mr. WHITEFIELD and I left N. England there was no such divisions and
janglings as have since happened, but on the contrary Unity and Love seemed
generally to obtain among the People of God.

Here observe the Sophistical low Art of our Author, in joining Mr. WHITEFIELD
and me, with those whom he calls our Successors in their Provinces, that so he
might charge upon us the imprudent Conduct of some of them; which we detest.

As to what the Examiner adds, respecting my feeling the bad Effects of the
Moravian uncharitable and intrusive Spirit near home, and that that made me
complain and flinch.

I answer that though I have seen bad Effects thereof upon some; yet through Mercy
I have no Reason to flinch and complain, because of any bad Effects of it upon
the Society which I am related to. For not one of them has been carried away
with the Delusion entirely that I know of.

I am through Grace concious to my self, what ever our Author has uncharitably
and ungenerously insinuated to the Contrary, that no private view has
influenced my Zeal against the Moravians, but a sincere regard to the Truths
and Power of Religion, which they are opposing and undermining; neither have
any of my Neighbors just cause of complaining of my rough Hands and heavy
Fists, (as you are pleased with much Complaisance to word the Matter) in
respect of Uncharitableness and Intrusion, as is suggested. I have not preached
in any of their Places without Invitation, or condemned any of them without
Cause.

The Examiner next cites my Words from Moravian Sermon p. 67. which are these,
Do any esteem the Moravians because they travel and take great Pains. I answer
did not the Pharisees of old compass Sea and Land to make proselytes and do not
Jesuits and many other Enthusiasts travel still. But what good do the Moravians
do by their traveling unless it be good to sow Tares, to corrupt and divide
religious People.

In the opposite Column, we have the following words of the Examiner. Exactly
true; and pray, what good do the Itinerants do by their Traveling, unless it be
good to sow Tares, to corrupt and divide religious People? After the aforesaid
Words our Author refers by an Asterism to a Charge of our Opponents this Way,
in their Examination, p. 81. respecting the pretended dividing Principles and
Practices of Itinerants; but in as much as nothing is offered to support the
Charge but their Affirmation, I see no need of any farther reply at present,
then what has been before given to the like in these Sheets.

But I cannot pass over in Silence, our Authors Judgment concerning the Success
of Itinerants, namely, that it is nothing but sowing Tares, corrupting and
dividing religious People; as is this as an uncharitable and false Charge, so
it argues our Examiner to be inconsistent with himself, for he has else where
acknowledged the Contrary, (See p. 9. 21. 30.) as has been observed before.

The Examiner in his 24. p. proceeds to cite from my Moravian Sermon, p. 104.
the following Words, Do not those Things together with their sending their
ignorant Missionaries, to gather separate Societys in Places, where there is a
sound Ministry, signify that their Design is not Catholic, whatever their
pretenses be notwithstanding? Again he borrows from Moravian Sermon p. 54.
these Words. Whatever good Appearances thrusting out ignorant Persons (how
pious soever) into the Ministry may have, yet it is a dangerous Practice,
tending directly to divide and corrupt the Church of God, and bring the
Ministry thereof into contempt.

In the opposite Collumn he says thus. Who but the Brunswick Party thrust out
Mr. ROWLAND into the Ministry, in Contempt of the Synod, after it was confessed
on all Sides he was very deficient in many Parts of useful Learning, though
educated at the Log-House? Who but Party-Zealots have ordained Evangelists and
sent them forth to gather Societys in Places where there is a sound Ministry,
instead of sending them into ungospelized Parts? In this Paragraph our Author
refers by an Asterism; to a Charge of our Opponents in their Examination p. 69.
which runs thus. Upon the same Lay that they ordained this One, they might
ordain one Hundred, if Opportunity offered: And was not this One very deficient
in many Parts of useful Learning required by our Directory? And was not this
One immediately thurst into the Bounds of a neighboring Presbytery, without
their Concurrence; and continued there, in Opposition to and contempt of their
Determination, to the occasioning of a Breach and much Confusion in a
Congregation in their Bounds? And what has his Practice to this Day been, but
a continued Course of intrusive Disorders? Besides that his Character has been
under a very dull Cloud, as to Immorality, etc.

Who but Party Zealots have admitted into their Pulpits such Novices as D -- n
E -- s, S -- i T -- h -- r, L -- y -- r P -- ne, etc. tending to bring the
sacred Ministry into Contempt, and divide and corrupt the Church of God?

I answer the Examiners Charge in the Negative. We have sent no Ignorant
Missinories to gather separate Societies, where there was a sound Ministry. The
Case is truly thus, all that we have Licensed or Ordained for the Holy
Ministry, were furnished with a competent Measure of human Learning, agreeable
to our Directory. Indeed we have not ordained every one to a fixed Charge for
this Reason, because the Congregations that depend upon us for Supplies, are so
numerous, and our Number of Candidates so small, that we cannot supply them all
at present with a settled Ministry, as we desire and intend (God willing) The
People, in the mean time, urge us with almost incessant Importunities for some
Supplies, in respect of Preaching, and likewise want to have Baptism
administered to their Children; and it should likewise be observed, that those
Congregations are, many of them, far distant from each other. Now we knew of no
better Method to remedy the present distressing Exigence, than that of
Ordaining some ad ministerium vagum, -- or to preach about in diverse Places for
a while, and Baptize, until we could get the Places supplied with a settled
Ministry, or until the Persons so ordained would themselves incline to accept
of a fixed Charge, which Inclination we do not check or Discourage. And I think
this Practice of ordaining, as aforesaid, has not been without Presidents in
the reformed Churches.

But the Accusation of sending any into Places where there is a sound Ministry,
to gather separate Societies, is a Calumny. Some of our Opponents have
discovered more unsoundness in their Writings of late, then we though it formerly
they had been tainted with. We had some Charges against some of their Number,
which we wanted to have examined, and judicially tried, while a Union subsisted
between us, (and without a View to the judicial decision of which, we can
neither come into a State of Union with them, or continue in it) which we have
not broken. But after they in an unjust Manner had broken it, (as before
related) and by their Opposition to GOD's WORK and Servants, grieved the Hearts
of his People and allienated their Affections from them, so that they could not
Profit under their Ministry, or with freedom of Conscience attend upon it,
least they should encourage them in their evil Course, and so be partakers in
their Guilt, and be liable to the penal issues of it. I say, when those poor
oppressed People again and again Supplicated us for Relief, in the most moving
and pathetick Strains! how could we deny them, except we had Bowels of Brass
and Adamant?

The Examiners Charge in relation to Mr. ROWLAND is unjust. Mr. ROWLAND was
neither Licensed or Ordained by us, in Contempt of the Synod, but in compliance
with the Dictates of our own Consciences. And We, who have had him under
Examination, did and do look upon him to be sufficiently Qualified for the
Gospel Ministry, both in respect of Learning and Gracious Accomplishments,
agreeable to our Directory.

As to what is added, of his beeng thrust into the Bounds of a Neighboring
Presbytery, without their Concurrence, and continued there in Opposition to,
and in contempt of their Determination.

Answ. It is a wrong Representation of the Matter; he was Invited by a Body of
Religious People, who conscientiously dissented from those Acts or Laws, which
were made by a Majority of the Synod, which occasioned the Debate between us
and them, and he himself likewise scrupled the Laws aforesaid. In consequence
of which the Majority of the Synod had publicly warned all the People of their
Bounds against Hearing of Mr. ROWLAND, because he had been licensed by us,
notwithstanding of their Cannon.

The People declined applying to that Presbytery in whose Bounds they were,
because of the Case aforesaid, and other Objections they had against their
Conduct; and not being able to get a Minister elsewhere, they importuned Mr.
ROWLAND to supply them, with which he, at last, complied, not out of Contempt,
but Conscience toward God, in order to relieve a pious, opposed and oppressed
People! which, through the divine Blessing, was to all appearance a Mean of
saving Good to many precious Souls there, in their Conviction and Conversion to
God.

As to what they say farther under this Head, viz. That his Practice has been
to this Day, a course of intrusive Disorders.

I answer to this Charge Ignoramus, we want Proof. To what has been said, they
add, that his Character has been under a very dull Gloud as to immorality.

Here I must beg leave to observe, that it is an awful sign in our Opposers to
endeavor to cast Contempt upon the Character of one, whose faithful Labors
for God, has been Crowned with remarkable and distinguished Successes, and to
join with the Profane in Persecuting of him. May God forgive their impiety.
But let them know to their shame, that the dull Cloud which, they say, covered
his Character, is now, by the kind Providence of God, cleared up, and that his
Inocence shines as the Light, and his Judgment as the Noonday! We wish with
all our Hearts, that all their Candidates were Qualified like him, in respect
of Grace and Learning, and that they themselves, who are so wise in their own
Eyes, understood Divinity as well as him, whom they despise, or that all of
them together could show so much Success of their Labors.

Who the Examiner means in his next Paragraph that have, as he says, admitted
Novices into their Pulpits, I know not; neither do I know the Names be intends
by those letters of them which he sets down, and therefore I cannot answer
particularly to that Charge; but this I can say in general, that we have been
as careful as we could, to keep Novices out of our Pulpits, least contempt
should thereby come on the Ministry, and other injuries to the Chruch of GOD.

And now we are arrived at another head of our Authors Performance, p. 26.
entitled, Mr. T's Reflections on the Practice of the Moravians compared with
his own Practice and that of his Adherents.

The first Passage he cites from my Writings, is Appendix, p. 106. which is
this, Do not some Moravians slight human Reason and Learning? etc. p. 97. Mr.
SPANGENBERG declaimed in my hearing, more than once, against human learning,
etc In the opposite Collumn to which he says thus. Has not Mr. T. declaimed
more publicly, and fiercely aginst Learning, then the Moravians, when he
pronounced his Anathema against the public Academys, and poured contempt upon
a learned Clergy, calling them Letter Learned. etc.

Answ. I have neiter declaimed publicly nor privately against Learning, but in
favor of it. Nor pronounced any Anathema against public Universities. I only
said that they are generally corrupt; I meant in respect of religious
Principles and Practice, and are they not? Can our Author say the Contrary? I
spoke according to the best Information I had, but should be glad to find it a
mistake.

Besides I spoke of private School to be erected, especially where there were
no Public ones; which manifests that I had some regard to them.

And the Method I proposed to be observed in private Schools respecting the
Examination of Intrants as to their Piety, is different from what is observed
in public ones; and in my Opinion is of noble Tendency to serve the Church of
God. For then there would be a greater Probability of the Youths being
preserved from the aforesaid Corruptions, as well as of their greater advances
in Religion by the help of mutual Conversation, about experimental Piety.

How inconsistent is our Authors Charge that I should declaim against Learning,
while in the mean Time I propose amd encourage Schools for that very end; and
more fiercely then the Moravians too. O Strange! Well I see though the Examiner
has no Charity for me, or my express Declarations; yet he has for the Moravians
without any in their favor.

But the Examiner adds, that I poured contempt upon a learned Clergy, calling
them Letter Learned, etc.

Ans. I didn't design in the Use of those Words our Author mentions, any
contempt upon the learning of Ministers, but only to signify my dislike at
Persons coming into the Ministry, that have no other Qualifications but human
Learning. As the Words of the Sermon to which he refers, considered in their
Connection do manifest. See Notingham Sermon, p. 1. 2. The Sentence runs thus:
Why, had the People then no Teachers, O Yes, they had heaps of Pharisee
Teachers, that came out, no doubt, after they had been the usual Time at the
Feet of Gamaliel, and according to the Acts, Cannons and Traditions of the
Jewish Church. And is our Author offended with me for that, would he have me to
encourage graceless Men though learned, to come into the Ministry? Let him speak
out, that we may hear his Mind upon this important Point. The Examiner's next
Citation is from Moravian Sermon. p. 108. the Words are these. I think it looks
exceeding black in the Moravians, to slight speculative Knowledge, so as they
do, which they call Head-Knowledge. Is not speculative Knowledge the same for
Substance with what is saving, only destitute of its Influence upon Heart and
Practice? Ibid. Don't the Moravians begin with the Affections first? And is
this fair Dealing?

In the opposite Column to which the Examiner speaks thus, viz. Why then do we
hear so much of the spiritual and mystical Sense of Scripture? etc.

Pray, Has not this been the constant Practice of the Itinerants to address and
move the Passions first?

Is not Mr. T. the Primium Mobile, a principal Mover and Promoter of the
Passionate-Religion, now prevailing among so many? Is it not as unfair Dealing
in the Itinerants as in the Moravians?

Ans. Has our Author heard much or little from, me, of the spiritual and
mystical Sense of Scripture, if so let him declare it in his next. It seems by
this Passage that the Examiner would represent us, as a Tribe of Allegorists
and enthusiastic Mysticks; but we point blank deny the Charge, and demand his
Proof. Our Author, as appears by the large Blanks in his Columns, seems to grow
faint under the Weight of his task, and no wonder indeed. Its pity that a
Gentleman of his genius should undertake such a bad Cause, as puts him
unavoidably to such difficulties for the want of proper Materials. But I
proceed to his Question, in answer to which I can truly say, that so far as I
know, such as our Author terms Itinerants, their Method (in general) has been
first to inform Men's Judgments, about the most important Points of Religion,
and to endeavor to apply them in a close distinguishing and pathetical Manner,
to the Consciences and Affections of their hearers, so as to have a Tendency to
alarm their Fear and incite their Love.

As to what is farther added against me in particular, viz. "That I am the
Primum Mobile, a principal mover and promoter of the Passionate-Religion, now
prevailing among so many.

Answ. Observe Reader, the Examiner acknowledges than an affectionate Religion,
now prevails among many; well here is another Testimony from his own Pen in
favor of the late Reformation. In the mean Time I utterly disclaim what he
ascribes to me in these Words, Primum Mobile or first mover. This is an honor
which belongs to no mere Man. I am fully persuaded upon the most certain
Foundation, that it is the holy Spirit of God, who was the first Mover of what
he calls the passionate Religion; and this the Effects thereof, in the Change
that has been wrought upon the Governing Tempers of the Minds and general
Course of the Lives of Multitudes, do incontestibly prove, to all that are not
blinded with unaccountable prejudice. Can it with any shadow of Reason be
supposed that Satan would so far fight against his own Interest, as to rouse
Multitudes of Sinners out of the Sleep of sinful Security, and excite them to
importunate Enquiries, and incessant Importunities after Salvation by JESUS
CHRIST? And that he would, if he could, change men's Minds and Practice as
before observed. No surely! by the same Method of caviling, by which some
Labor to condemn the late revival of Religion in this Land, they may condemn
that Work of God which was in the Apostolic Age. --

But if our Author means no more, than that I have been a principal Promoter
under God, of the passionate Religion, he does me much honor, though probably
not with design. I have been indeed endeavoring to promote a Religion which
includes both Judgment, Passion and Practice in it. And blessed be God he has
given Success to my attempts. Passion without Knowledge and Judgment in
Religion, is certainly but vain Fancy, and Knowledge and Judgment without some
degree of Passion, is but dead dry Formality. My own Conscience and multitudes
of Mankind can witness for me, that it has been always my endeavor in the
Course of my Ministry first to inform Men's minds before I addressed their
Consciences and Passions, which I cannot but think is the only proper Method of
dealing with intelligent Creatures. Certainly Passion is of no farther use in
Religion, then it is under the Guidance of a well informed Judgment, but thus
far it is of excellent use. It is absurd to suppose that God has given us
Passions to be only employed about terrene trifles.

Let us now proceed to the 27 p. where our Author quotes the following Words
from my Moravian Sermon. Do they not endeavor to insinuate themselves into
Peoples Affections first, by Smiles etc. And in p. 65. Do any esteem the
Moravian Sect, because they smile generally and appear loving; but Brethren is
not this Judas like to betray us with a kiss; for while they show such Love,
they draw pious People into Errors, and so set them a quarelling with one
another, shall we suffer them to smile us out of our Principles, then I Am sure
we are poorly grounded in them.

Ibid. Do not they take special care to apply to young Persons, Females and
Ignorant People who are full of Affection?

Who do they imitate in attacking the weaker Part of Man, viz. the Passions,
and the weaker Sex first, but the Devil, the Father of Lies and Errors? Did not
he deal thus with our first Parents, and by the weaker Sex seduced Adam?

Upon the opposite Column we have these Words of our Examiner, viz. Who can
help smiling at this, that considers what is past and now is. -- Strange that
Mr. T. should complain of the Moravian Smiles in religious Matter! When it is
notorious, that he himself not only smiled but laughed heartily over his
Converts, even while they were under a preparatory Work of the Law, and his
followers have practiced upon him, and not been ashamed to express their Joy
at, -- by loud laughing even in the Solemn Assemblies. Is not this ludere cum
Sacris,? an unjustifiable Practice in one as well as another.

And is not this Practice exactly correspondent with the Practice of Mr. T. and
other heady Itinerants, which creep into Houses and have had most Success among
Females and young ignorant People.

The whole Passage is so very applicable to Itinerants in general, That I
should have taken it for a Representation, (not to say Refutation of their
Conduct) if Mr. T. had not taught me to apply it to the Moravians.

Answ. Here let the Reader observe, that the Examiner misrepresents my meaning,
and has left out a pretty deal that serves to explain it; he says, I complain
of the Moravian Smiles in religious Matters: But this is a false Charge, it is
only their abuse of them that I complain of, and not the mere Use of them in
religious Matters; namely, their trying to insinuate themselves into Peoples
Affection by them, through shows of Love, and so to draw them into Error, while
in the mean Time they conceal their Principles, until the Affections are fixed.

If the Heart is filled with Love and Joy, it will naturally make the face
Serene. And have I smiled and laughed heratily over my Converts, (or People
wro't upon by my Ministry) while under a preparatory Work of the Law: Well, and
where is the Harm of it, it showed that I was glad that poor sinsiers were in a
likely way to come to Christ: And would our Author have me to be sorry upon
such an Occasion? God forbid! I would rather immitate the Example of our Lord,
who though a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, yet rejoiced in Spirit at
such an event, viz. When Satan fell as Lightning from Heaven.

And here let it be noticed, by the by, that I am Honored with another
Testimony from our Examiner, to the Success of my Ministry, for it seems, even
according to his own acknowledgment, that some were brought under a Work of the
Law by my Labors.

As to laughing loud in Religious Assemblies, if any have been guilty of it, I
will not undertake to be their Patron, in that I think it is undecent and of
bad Report. But to show the Examiner's unfair dealing un-this Head of Charge, I
will cite the whole Paragraph he refers to, See Moravian Sermon page 106. the
Words are these, viz. Don't the Moravians begin with the Affections first? and
is this fair Dealing? Do they not endeavor to insinuate themselves into
Peoples Affections first, by Smiles and soft Discourses about the Love of
CHRIST, and by a seemingly innocent, simple and loving Behavior, while in the
mean Time they carefully hide their Principles until the Affections are
caught, and then let them out by Degrees? Should not they show their
Principles first, before the Affections are fixed, that so People might judge
of them with calmness and impartiality?

As to the next particular of Charge, viz. Creeping into Houses, etc. I answer
that his Application is unjust and untrue: Neither I nor any of my Brethren
have crept into Houses, etc. Instead of sculking and underhand Methods, we have
declared our religious Sentiments freely on all proper Occasions, and in the
openest Manner possible, before the greatest concourses of learned and
unlearned Men that ever America has seen of a Religious kind.

Neither has our Success, through divine Grace, been confined to Females and young
ignorant People, but has extended to Persons of almost every age, order and
condition of Life, learned and unlearned, rich and poor, old and young,
honorable and ignoble, male and female, though in the mean time we look upon the
Conversion of Females and ignorant Persons, to be a Matter of infinite
Importance, and do glorify God upon the Account thereof.

And here let the Reader observe another Testimony to our Success from the Pen
of an Opposer, and that even when he is trying to run us and it down, and that
expressly contrary to what he has said page 24. in these Words, And pray what
good do the Itinerants do by their Traveling, unless it be good to sow Tares,
to corrupt and divide religious People.

But we proceed to his 28 page where he quotes the following Words from my
Moravian Sermon, p. 107. And don't they refuse generally to reason upon Points
in Religion, whereby one might convince another, and leave People to be
proselyted by sight only! It is politic in them indeed to wave Reasoning and
to shun Discovery, for their Principles will bear neither.

In the opposite Column the Examiner speaks thus, viz. This Rev. Gentleman had
forgot surely the Motto of his own Party, viz. Answer him not a Word, when he
whote this, it is thought by some that their Strength was herein.

Answ. I cannot be said to forget that which I never knew. The controversal
Writings that some of us have make public, do declare to the World, that what
has been now said is not our Motto, and I hope these Sheets will convince the
Examiner that it is not mine.

But it seems indeed that our Author was of Opinion, that Answer him not a
Word, was our Motto, otherwise how could he run such Lengths as he has done in
his Performance.

The next Passage that the Examiner quotes from my Moravian Sermon is p. 65.
the Words are these, My Soul is greived to see the childish Fickleness of the
Sons and Daughters of this Generation, who are tossed about with every Wind of
Doctrine; who are smiled out of their Religion, without being able to offer one
solid Reason for their Change.

Upon the opposite Column to which, he says, Even so many judicious and serious
Christians are grieved at the Heart to see the childish Fickelness of many
Professors at this Day, who are as Children tossed to and fro, and carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines, separating themselves and having
Men's Persons in Admiration; without being able to offer one solid Reason for
their Change.

Answ. How unjust and unreasonable is the Examiners Application of the
aforesaid Paragraph to me, and such as join with me, as it is evident he does,
from the general Title of this Head of Charges before related. Wherein have I
in particular been carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, or separated
myself, having Men's Persons in Admiration? It is true indeed I cannot give a
solid Reason for my Change, because I have suffered none. Will this Author tell
us how I have been smiled out of my Religion?

Pray does the Examiner mean by Strange Doctrines the Doctrines of Grace,
namely of original Sin, Justification by the righteousness of Christ alone, the
New Birth, the Perseverance of the Saints, are these Strange to him? If so I Am
sorry for it: But I Am sure they are not so to the reformed Churches, as appears
by the harmony of their Confessions of Faith. Now these are the Doctrines that
ourselves and hearers have been chiefly affected with, and influenced by. And
is the Examiner sorry for that, then he himself is an object of Pity, and so
are those whom he calls judicious and serious Christians, if they join with him
therein.

As to the Accusation of having Men's Persons in Admiration, I hope I may say in
behalf of my self and Brethren, that the chief Reasons why we admire Persons
are their Goodness and Usefulness to the Church of God, and that it is our
desire and endeavor in the general, to proportion our esteem to the Degrees
thereof. As to the Charge of Separation it has been before answered.

But our Examiner in the mean Time seems to be realy guilty of what he without
Foundation charges upon us, in as much as by this Performance he seems to
admire those, who oppose the Power of Religion this Way, and who hold, some of
them, these Strange Doctrines, viz. That Conviction is not necessary to
Conversion. That there is no inward call to the Ministry, and the Notion of the
rigid Independants and Brownists, respecting the Peoples Relation to their
Pastor, viz. that it is equal to that of a Marriage Contract: And who have
separated themselves. -- And thus our Author appears to be guilty of admiring
of Persons in the worst Sense. -- The next Passage our Author quotes from
Moravian Sermon, is p. 58. Children are fond of new Things, that look bright
though of little Value: Thus Novices in Christianity who are just beginning the
Christian Course, ignorant in a great Measure, as to Christian Principles, but
full of Affection and self Conceit, when a Moravian comes among them, sitts
down a while, and look very Harmless, Innocent and Sober, gives some smiles,
and talks about the Blood of Christ, in their Mystical Way, and of Love, Love.
O brave, O what a fine Man is this!

In the opposite Column we have these Words of the Examiner, viz. It is a
moving Argument, and Proof that People are not so well taught in this Land as
is pretended, but have now as much need as ever to have their Minds instructed
as well as their Passions moved. -- The Image is very Strong and lively.

Answ. The Examiners applying to us, the Moravians Mystical Way of talking
about the Blood of Christ, is so false and trifling that it deserves no Answer:
Our Author was exceedingly straightened here, for the want of Matter, and well he
might if he has any remains of Conscience in him.

But the Examiner proceeds to quote a Paragraph from my Moravian Sermon p. 107.
which runs thus. Certainly we should adhere inviolably to the Principles we
have been instructed in, until we find better, which we should be always ready
to receive upon proper Conviction, which is not to be attained by a sight of
the Grimaces of Strangers or by immediate Revelations or Enthusiasms, but by
Scripture, Reason and Argument. And p. 52. I direct to hold fast CHRIST'S
precious Truth, thus. It is needful to wave a positive Conclusion respecting
the Good State of Strangers, when we have not sufficient Evidences for it in
respect of their Principles, Experiences and Practice. Rash judging either Way
is certainly unreasonable and prejudicial, when Persons do speedily without
sufficient Reason, conclude Strangers who come among them to be Pious and
perhaps eminently so, because of their fair Appearances in Behavior, without
examining their Principles; by this rash Method of proceeding their Affections
are apt to be unreasonably engaged in their Favor, and these being inflamed do
give a secret wrong By ass to their Judgment, and thus they lay themselves open
to all Manner of Delusion.

After which the Examiner observes as follows, viz. I am confident the
impartial Reader is fully convinced by this time, that Mr. Tennent has drawn
his own Picture to the Life, by the Representation he has given of the
Principles and Practices of the Moravians, and that I have only set the Mirror
in such a Position that He and his Adherents may see themselves, and be
ashamed. But if they are blinded with Self-love, Admiration, Conceit,
Party-Zeal, and the like, and will not, or cannot see their own Likeness; I
believe others have so much of a Spirit of discerning, as to see that M. T -- t
and his Partisans as nearly resemble the Character here given of the Moravians,
as one Crow's Egg does another (to use his own homely Comparison.)

Answ. If the Reader had no other Representation of the Case, then that Partial
one which the Examiner has given in his Performance, he might probably be
enduced to think hard of me, and that I was inconsistent with my self; for though
there be little regard to Truth and Candor in our Authors Composure, yet
several Strokes in it are managed with much Art and apparent Plausibility. I
cannot but think that the Examiner is a Gentlemen of Wit and Address, otherwise
he could not have managed so well so bad a Cause as he has done, but it is Pity
his Talents are not turned into another Channel, that might better serve the
Interests of Truth and Religion, as well as his own Reputation.

The Mirror our Author has set before the Reader, is but some broken Pieces set
in a wrong Situation, which serve only to deceive the Mind with false Images of
Persons and Things.

It is true I am ashamed, when I read his Performance, but not for my Self but
him. On the contrary I think I am honored, when traduced for the Sake of Truth
and Piety.

The Conclusion of the aforesaid Paragraph is as false as ever any thing was
true, namely, That I and my Partisans (as he is pleased to term my dear and
reverend Brethren) as nearly resemble the Character here given of the
Moravians, as one Crow's Egg does another. If the whole Paragraph be
considered, it will appear that in this Sentence the Examiner has a Refference,
to all that he had cited from my Sermons respecting the Moravians. Here observe
this Gentleman is Positive that the Similitude is as exact as any Thing can be,
but under the particular Heads of Charge in several of his Columns, the
judicious Reader may perceive, that sometimes he varies in the Application,
leaves out some things altogether, and alters others to suit his Design; and in
some Places he is Indistinct and General and speaks but a very little, leaving
large Blanks (and perhaps it would have been more to his Credit if it had been
all a Blank.) How inconsistent are these Things?

He says if we are so blinded, etc. that we will not or cannot see our own
Likeness. He believes others have so much of a Spirit of discerning, as to see
the Resemblance is as exact as that of one Crow's Egg to another.

Answ. A true Spirit of discerning will perceive as much Difference between the
two, (if I may be allowed to use another homely Simile) as between an Apple and
an Oyster, or rather as between black and white. To apprehend as he does,
requires not right discerning or true distinguishing, but a Perversion of the
Sight, either through a defect of the optic Organs, or by this false Mirror he
presents.

However if the Examiner will not be offended, I will beg leave to use the
homely Words, be complains of, once more in the following Manner, viz. That I
am apt to think that by this Time the impartial Reader may perceive as great a
resemblance between the Examiner and the Opposers of God's Work here, in diverse
Particulars, as between one Crow's Egg and another.

But I hasten to consider the next Paragraph in his 30th. p. which runs thus.
The Reader may take this Examination as an Help to discover what is Truth in
the late Religious Commotion in this Country, and he will find it to be just
that which the Opposers, so called, are zealous to maintain, viz. the Order of
the Gospel, and the sacred Honors due to the holy Spirit of God. Strip this
Work of its Extraordinaries, and you will discern what is the Work of God, from
that which is added to it by Art and Man's Device. Pray what is there
Extraordinary on one side more than the other, but what is justly to be exploded,
viz. extraordinary Errors, Disorders, Intrusions, rash Censures, Clamorous
Exclamations, vainglorious Boastings, Fits, Pretense of Sights and Visions,
Roarings, Tremblings, etc. Compare Mr. T -- with himself, and shave off his
Extraordinaries (turning the Edge of his own Weapon on himself) and his
Strength will go from him, and he will be like any other Man; a Man subject to
like Passions as we are. I cannot find but that the New-Brunswick Party are
fallible as other Men, and chargeable with as many Errors, Intrusions,
Contradictions, etc. as their Neighbors, whom they are ready to condemn as
Enemies of God's Work and Enemies of Religion merely for opposing their Errors
and real Indiscretions: Whereas the true Interest of Religion is doubtless
served by such Opposition.

I know no shorter Method to open the Eyes of blind Party-Zealots, and convince
them of the bad Tendency of extraordinary Self-Conceit, Dominion, rash Judging,
etc. than to bring them home to their own Doors, and turn these Edge-Tools upon
themselves; prove them now herewith, and you will find these crucified
Gentlemen have yet as much Sensation and are as ready to cry out of Danger as
any of their abused Neighbors.

The Moravians it seems treated Mr. Tennent in the same uncharitable,
censorious, imperious, divisive Manner in which he himself has treated the Body
of the Clergy of this Generation, and then the Spirit appears to him in a most
frightful Shape, and must be avoided. Now it is come upon thee, thou faintest:
And it touches thee, and thou art troubled.

In Answer to what has been said, let me briefly observe, that if any Body
wants to entertain prejudice against the late glorious revival of Religion in
this Land, or an unjust Notion of the greatness of it, the Examiner's
Performance may be some help that Way in respect of some Strokes that are in it.

However it should be remarked for the Honor of the late revival of Piety,
that while our Author is industriously painting it in a Sable dress, he is
constrained to confess in this Paragraph that there was some reality in it,
which he terms the Order of the Gospel and the sacred Honors due to the holy
Spirit of God.

And while the Examiner proposes this Question viz, What is extraordinary upon
one side more than another? He hereby allows an equality of Success in
preaching as to Success, between the Friends and Opposers of the late
Reformation of Religion, then by an unavoidable consequence, our Author must
either deny that they had any Success at all, (which I suppose he would be loath
to do) or acknowledge ours, I see not how he can get clear of this Dilemma.

But in the mean Time while he owns some reality in it he puts a bear Skin over
it, and talks of something added to it by Art and Man's Devise, and then
repeats his thread bare Catalogue of frightful Things, extraordinary Errors,
etc. etc. etc. which has been before considered. It Is true indeed the Bear Skin
he mentions is added to the late Work, by Art and Man's Devise. Let it be
stripped of those false Colors, and then it will appear in its own native
Beauty: And unless he deals with it as its story'd of the Tyrant Procrustes,
who cut off Men's Legs to make them of an equal Length, he cannot bring the
Success of Itinerants down to a Level, with that of Opposers.

If the Opposers had been Zealous to maintain the honors of the holy Spirit
there would be no Debate subsisting among us respecting the late Reformation.
But pray why does the Examiner put the Order of the Gospel (so called) before
the sacred Honors due to the holy Spirit. By this unreasonable Precedence it
seems that our Author perferrs Externals before the Life of Piety, which is
sinful and Scandalous: But because the Examiner and his Brethen talk of Order
(usque adravim) so much, I will beg Leave to cite a Passage upon this Head,
from the Works of excellent and judicious Mr. FLAVEL, in his Husbandry
spirituliz'd Volum 2. p. 307. of the 4th Edition, upon an excellent but
irregular Tree. Seeing a Tree grow somewhat Irregular in a very neat Orchard, I
told the Owner it was Pity that Tree should stand there, and that if it were
mine I would root it up, and thereby reduce the Orchard to exact uniformity. It
was replied to this purpose, That he rather regarded the Fruit then the Form;
and that this slight inconveniency was abundantly preponderated by a more
considerable Advantage. This Tree, said he, which you would root up has
yielded me more Fruit then many of those Trees, which have nothing else to
commend them but their regular Situation. I could not but yield to the Reason
of this Answer; and could wish it had been spoken so loud that all our
uniformity Men had heard it, who will not stick to root up many Hundred of the
best bearers in the Lords Orchard, because they stand not in an exact order
with other more conformable, but less beneficial Trees, who do perdere
Substantiam propter Accidentia, destroy the Fruit to preserve the Form.

"Not much unlike such foolish Men are those,

"That strive for Shadows and their Substance loose.

As to the Examiners complisance to me, in proposing the use of the Rasor, I
would beg Leave to assure him, that I neither have, or ever had, such a
monstrous Beard of Extraordinaries, as he talks of.

But I must make bold to tell the Examiner, that he has got a very long Beard,
the Hairs of Falsehood and Prejudice stick out so long upon it, that it is
undecent, I would advise him therefore to be shaven as soon as may be for his
own Credit and Comfort.

As to that of turning the Edge of my Weapon upon my self, the Examiner has
tried artfully and industriously the Method he proposes, but I am not sensible
that the Effect he mentions has been the Issue of it, viz. That my Strength is
gone from me.

The New-Brunswick Party (as he calls them) have never pretended to
infallibility, -- and as to his Charge of Errors and intrusions, etc. it has
been before considered. But while our Author asserts that the New-Brunswick
Party, are chargeable with as many Errors, Intrusions, Contradictions, etc. as
their Neighbors. Seeing that he believes the aforesaid Accusations are realy
applicable to us, dosn't he declare by the same Breath, that his Dear Brethren
the Opposers here, are equally guilty of them in his Opinion, and if so why
does he so partially prefer them before us? as appears from diverse Passages of
his Performance, and particularly from the following Paragraph in which the
Examiner calls us blind Party Zealots.

Answ. We are obliged to our Author for his kind Compliments, but are humbly of
Opinion, that it is proper for him to enquire whether there be not Reason to
apply them nearer home?

But methinks our Authors advice in respect of proving us, etc. as before
expressed -- and saying you will find these crucified Gentlemen have as much
Sensation and are as ready to cry out of Danger as any of their Neighbors,
somewhat resembles Satan's Proposal concerning Job. Job 1.9.10.11. then Satan
answered the Lord and said, does Job fear God for naught, have thou not made a
Hedge about him -- but put forth thine Hand now and touch all that he has, and
he will curse thee to thy Face. But the Examiner knows that after a most
formidable Trial, when even Heaven it self lowr'd, and Earth and Hell combined
in a cruel Confederacy against him; when the most distressing and gloomy Train
of complicated Calamities of of various Forms, rold upon him in a thick and
incessant Succession, his gallant noble Soul preserved its integrity and stood
firm as an impregnable Rock amidst the boisterous Billows, which with
unfriendly Violence in vain essayed to disturb its repose and Security. In a
Word, the Issue proved, God himself being Judge, that the Accuser of the
Brethren was not able to maintain his envious Charge.

I can with integrity of Heart assure our Author that I do not cry out of
Danger, on the Account of any Treatment I have received of the Moravians, but
because of the Hurt they are doing to the Church of God. I am through Mercy so
far from fainting upon that Account that it dosn't create the least uneasiness
in me. --

O but the old Story comes over again, that I have treated the Body of the
Clergy of this Generation in an uncharitable Manner, etc. Why didn't he say
unconverted Ministers, for sure that is the Case, O No! that woudn't Answer his
and his Friends Purpose, for then the nakedness and naughtiness of their Cause
in defending the ungodly Ministry, would be open to every Eye, and therefore
they give it an artful turn, in order to hide its filthy Face from the common
People, and harp often upon this plausibly String, that I treat uncharitably
and censoriously the Body of the Clergy, the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation: Why what is the Matter, do I speak a Word against converted
Ministers in the Notingham Sermon, no not a Word. What need they then take in
such great Dudgeon what I speak against ungodly Ministers in general. Except
they be such themselves they shoudn't apply it, but if the Caracters mentioned
in the Sermon suit their Case and Course, in its main Strokes pretty exactly,
why then indeed they ought to apply it, but kindly, and humbly pray for
converting Grace. To use our Authors Words, when the Notingham Sermon touches
them why do they faint and cry out of Danger? Indeed if they find themselves
graceless and cry out of the Danger of their own present State, I shou'dn't
find fault with them upon that Account; but for them to cry out of Danger in
Relation to the Church of God, because the unonverted Clergy are plainly spoke
against, is very preposterous.

What would they have me do, should I speak well of graceless Ministers, when
some of them especially, are the Bane of Religion, the Pest of the Church, and
Burden of the Creation? In this I must beg to be excused.

Our Authors last Paragraphs are spent in censuring Mr. DAVENPORTS Clamorous
preaching in Boston, against unconverted Ministers, and in an earnest Advice to
me to retract the Notingham Sermon.

As to the Manner of Mr. DAVENPORT'S preaching in Boston against unconverted
Ministers, not having heard him there, not having a full and certain
Information on both Sides, I shall say nothing to it.

But in regard to our Authors Advice to retract the Notingham Sermon, I must
beg to be excused until I see some Reason for it. The Examiner calls that
Sermon an Incendiary, and adjudges it to the fire, hard Words, hard Sentence
indeed, why is there no good in it at all, or would he burn the Good with what
he calls bad, and is this equitable? I humbly conceive our Author is mistaken
when he says, that the Notingham Sermon causes Contentions: No, the true Cause
is graceless Ministers opposing of it. Me thinks it would be more to their
Credit prudently to let it alone upon their own Account, for when they keep
muttering, growling and scolding at it, it does but give People Ground to
suspect they are of that unhappy Tribe and Party themselves, which is therein
detected and censured.

And to conclude Sir, I beg leave to return your Compliment, so far as to
advise you to consider, if your present Performance, which is filled with so
many unjust Invectives against God's Work and Servants, dosn't deserve a hard
Fate, but I am not so earnest for your burning it, as your repenting over your
Impiety in the Composure of it,

I am Sir, your real Friend, though unknown, G. TENNENT.
Philadelphia, July the 11th, 1743. Pride goes before Destruction, and a
haughty Spirit before a Fall. Prove. 16.18. Nihil unquam tam impar sibi. Hor.
Niteris iucassum Christi Submergere Navine
Fluctuat at nunquam mergitur illa rates
P.S. That Passage which is mentioned p. 121 of Mr. Davenports misconduct at
New London, has been added long since the Composure of this Performance.



ERRATA.
FOR feels, page 3. line 15. read feel. For en passent, p. 6. l. 20. r. en
passant. f. C. E. G. p. 17. l. 36. r. E. G. f. this, p. 21. l. 8. r. in this.
f. pass under, p. 21. l. 17. r. under. f its Author, p. 32. l. 3. r. it and
it is Author. f. proper Panegyric, p. 38. l. 17. r. a proper Panegyric. f.
bear, p. 43. l. 14. r. bear a. f. and C. p. 45. l. 20. r. etc. f. Succession,
p. 51. l. 14. r. Success in. f. gives no, p. 93. l. 30. r. gives me no. f.
others, p. 69. l. 3. r. other. f. within, p. 75. l. 12. r. within me. f.
refused, p. 78 l. 1. r. refuse. f. well, p. 78. l. 27. r. well as. f.
Charactes, p. 81. l. 32. 33. r. Characters f. is not it, p. 87. l. 37. r. is it
not. for frees, p. 88. l. 9. r. free. f. hender, p: 98. l. 30. r. hinder. f.
gaet, p. 100. l. 9. r. great. f. Scripture, p. 105 l. 13. r. Scriptures. f.
consist, p. 111. l. 37. r. consists f. heard, p. 113. l. 13. r. read. f. School
p. 128. l. 35. r. Schools. f. absurd, p. 132. l. 5. r. absurd.


