AN INTRODUCTION to the Study of PHILOSOPHY Exhibiting a General View of all
the ARTS and SCIENCES, for the Use of PVPILS.

With a CATALOGUE of some of the most valuable Authors necessary to be read in
order to instruct them in a thorough Knowledge of each of them.

By a GENTLEMAN Educated at Yale-College.

O Vitae Philosophia Dux! O Virtutum Indagatrix, Expultrixque Vitiorum! Unus
Dies been and ex preceptis tuis actus, peccanti Immortalitati est anteponendus!
-- Cic. Tusc. Quaest. li. 5, --

Quod si cuique Scientiae provincia sua tribuatur, Limits assignentur,
principia and Objecta accurate distinguantur, quae ad singulas pertinent,
tractare licuerit, majore, tum facilitate, tum perspicuitate.

D. Berk. De Mot. The Second Edition enlarged; the first having been published
at London in the Republic of Letters for May, in the Year 1731. Art. XXX^^^

N. London, Printed and Sold by T. GRE^^^

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHAT I aim at in this small Tract, is, to be a little useful to Young
Gentlemen that are to be introduced into the Knowledge of the Sciences, (to whom
they at first appear like a mere Wilderness,) by setting before them a General
View of the whole System of Learning, as it were in Miniature; wherein they may
at once behold, not only the Objects, Boundaries, Ends and Uses of each of the
Sciences; but at the same time, their Foundation in the nature of things; the
natural Order wherein they lie; and their several Relations, Connexions and
Dependences, both with respect one to another, and to the General End, viz. Our
Happiness, which is pursued through them all.

This seems to me as useful in the Instruction of young Beginners in the Study
of the Sciences, as it is in teaching Geography, to exhibit first of all a
general Map of the whole Terraqueous Globe, in order to a more particular
Description of the several Countries and Kingdoms in the following Maps: And
likewise in teaching Astronomy, to give first a general Delineation of the
whole System of the world, in order to account for the Phenomenon of the
several particular Planets in the following Schemes. -- For as in the Natural
World. one cannot have a just Notion of any particular Country, without
considering it is Situation in relation to the whole Globe, nor of any
particular Globe, without considering it is Situation with respect to the whole
System: So neither in the Intellectual World, (if I may so call it, I can one
have a just Notion of any particular Science without considering it as it
stands related to the whole System of Learning, and to the general End pursued
through the whole. -- I have therefore drawn up this General View of Philosophy
for the use of young Students, that whatever Subject they are upon in the
Course of their Studies, they may know to which Science it belongs, and what
relation it bears to the whole System; which may, perhaps, be of some use to
direct and methodize their Thoughts and enlarge their Minds: And thus to open
to them at once a prospect of the whole Compass of their Business, may also
engage them to a more earnest and industrious Application in the pursuit of
their Studies for the accomplishment of it.

Not that I would be understood to think this the proper Order in which the
Sciences are to be taught. -- There are many obvious Reasons that render it
highly Convenient to begin the Instruction of youth with the Languages and the
Mathematics (which are themselves indeed a kind of Language;) for these are
both of them a necessary Furniture in order to the attainment of any
considerable Perfection in the other parts of Learning. -- And besides, the
Languages are best suited to their lively Imaginations, most easily retained by
their young Memories, and most obvious to their little Understandings: And the
Mathematics are very useful to inure them to thinking, to possess them of a
Habit of close Application, and by that means ripen their Minds to a fixed and
strong attention to the Objects about which they are employed. -- It is best
therefore that they should be long inured to these parts of Learning, before
they proceed to the sublimer Studies of Logic and Natural and Moral Philosophy.

And, perhaps it was for this Reason that Grammar, Oratory, History and Poetry
and the Mathematics have not been commonly accounted parts of Philosophy, but
rather Instructions introductory thereunto; namely, because they were chiefly
the Studies about which Youth were generally employed among the Ancients Vid.
Quin^til, Li. 1.^ 10. and Plato De Rep. l. 7. and Epinon.
; and accordingly the Term Philosophy has been appropriated to Logic and
Metaphysics, Physics and Astronomy, and Pneumatology, Morality and Politics --
I thought however it would be most convenient for my present purpose to deduce
them from those general Heads of Philosophy to which they may be referred, and
to make them, if not parts, at least Appendages to those parts of Philosophy on
which they are founded, and with which they have a natural and necessary
Connection. For whether they are properly parts of Philosophy or not, it is not
worth the while to dispute; though I believe it was never doubted but that they
are accomplishments that are essential to the Character of a complete
Philosopher.

However, as I said, It is necessary to begin the Instruction of Youth with the
Languages and Mathematics. -- These should all along while they are at the
Schools be taught together: The Languages and Classics as their Business, and
the easiest and plainest things in the Mathematics as their Diversion: -- And
when young Lads have been long exercised at the Schools in the Latin and Greek
Languages and Classics, and consequently in the first Rudiments of Grammar,
Oratory, History and Poetry, and likewise of Arithmetic, Geometry, Music and
Geography; (both because these Studies are, as I said, most suitable to their
juvenile Capacities, and at the same time necessary to render the other parts
of Learning more easy, intelligible and delightful;) they may then proceed at
the Colleges with the greater Expedition and Delight, in perfecting themselves
in these Studies: (For the Classics and Mathematics should indeed never be laid
aside;) and at the same time go on successively in the several Studies of
Metaphysics, Logic and Criticism, and Mechanics, Physic and Astronomy, and
Pneunmology, Theology, Ethics and Politics, together with the Holy Scriptures,
all in the Order wherein they here lie before them.

A General View OF PHILOSOPHY: OR AN INTRODUCTION to the Study of the ARTS and
SCIENCES.
The INTRODUCTION.
PHILOSOPHY is the Study of true Wisdom, or the Study of Truth and Right, in
order to the attainment of true Happiness. -- Or it may be defined. The pursuit
of true Happiness in the Knowledge of things as being what they really are, and
in acting or practicing according to that Knowledge.

True Wisdom consists in discovering the best Ends, and the fittest Means in
order to the Attainment of them, and in Vigorously pursuing those best Ends by
the fittest Means. -- Now the great End that above all things concerns us, is,
that we he truly Happy in the whole of our Nature and Duration; -- And our true
Happiness consists in that Pleasure which attends the Contemplation of all
things that come within the Compass of our Knowledge and especially such as
concern us, as being what they really are, and the Regulation or Government of
all our Actions according thereunto: i. e. according to the Truth of things and
the Laws of right Reason founded thereon. -- And since this is the great End
ultimately pursued through all the Arts and Sciences, they must be considered
as the means to our true Happiness.

For in order that we may be completely happy, it is necessary that all the
Powers of our Souls, our Understandings, Wills and Affections, be united with
their proper Objects which are Truth and Good: And in order to this, that they
be duly instructed and directed in all their Exertions, -- To accomplish this,
therefore, is the whole Business of Philosophy, which comprehends the whole
System of the Arts and Sciences.

So that in order the better to understand wherein our true Happiness consists,
and the means to it, it is necessary to explain what we mean by Truth and Good.
-- And in order to this, Truth must be distinguished into Natural and
Intellectual, and Good, into Natural and Practical.

Natural Truth, which might rather be called Real Truth or the Truth of things,
is nothing else but the Reality of their Existence, as being what in fact they
are, and so situated and related as to constitute One entire Whole or System,
as in fact they do. -- And Intellectual Truth is the Knowledge of things as
being what they really are, their Existence, together with all their Relations,
Connexions and Dependencies among themselves and with regard to the Whole.

Natural Good is either of Things or Persons. The Natural Good of Things is
their Fitness or Suitableness to answer their several Ends as they constitute
one entire System conspiring to the -- Order, Harmony, Beauty and Usefulness of
the whole, so as to render it, in the best manner, subservient to the Pleasure
and Happiness of the Sensitive and Rational Nature. -- The Natural Good of
persons is their Pleasure or Happiness, and the means, whether Things or
Actions necessary to promote it. As on the other hand, Pain or Uneasiness with
the means that procure it are Natural Evil.

Now in as much as we consist of a twofold Nature, Sensitive and Rational, each
of which have their distinct pleasures and pains, there must be two sorts of
Good, viz. Sensible and Rational or Spiritual Good. Those things or Actions
which procure and promote the Comfort and Pleasure, or remove the Pain or
Uneasiness of the Sensitive or Animal Nature, are it is Sensible Good; and those
which procure and promote the Pleasure and Happiness or remove the Pains and
Miseries of the Rational or Spiritual Nature are it is Spiritual Good.

And since we are made for a twofold State, Temporal and Eternal; what tends to
promote our Well-being and Happiness in this World is a Temporal Good; -- And
what tends to promote our Future and Everlasting Happiness is an Eternal Good.

Practical Good consists in our choosing and doing what tends to promote our
Well being and Happiness. -- And this is of two Kinds, correspondent to the
foregoing Heads of Sensible and Spiritual Good, viz. Secular and Moral.

By Secular Good, (if I may use such a Term) I mean, that which consists in the
Practice of those several Arts and Businesses that tend to promote our outward
and sensible Wellbeing in this Life, or the temporal Comfort and Pleasure of
our Animal and Sensitive Nature.

And Moral Good consists in our choosing or refusing, and embracing or rejecting
either Things or Actions according as they do or do not tend to make our
Rational or Moral Nature, in the whole ultimately happy, i. e. in Time and to
all Eternity. -- And contrary to this is Moral Evil.

And lastly, These several Kinds of Good, are either Private or Public,
according as they relate either to one Person singly considered, or considered
in relation to the whole System, whether Moral or Political.

From these Distinctions of Truth and Good it appears that our true Happiness
consists in both Contemplation and Practice: in the Contemplation of Truth, and
in the practice of that which is Good or Right: Or which is the same thing, in
Knowledge and Virtue: In the Knowledge of all things that come within the Reach
of our Understandings as being what they really are, and in always choosing and
doing whatsoever Truth and Right Reason dictate as necessary to be chosen and
done in order to our true Happiness, in the whole of o^^ Nature and Duration,
i.e. as comprehending both Sensible and Spiritual, and both Private and Public
Well being.

He therefore that is furnished with all Kinds of Knowledge and Virtue, both
Private and Public is truly a Philosopher, as being not only happy himself; but
also at the same time Qualified in the best manner to do good and deserve well
of Mankind. For since to know things as being what they really are, is to
consider them in all their Relations as constituting one entire System or
Whole; it must follow from what has been said, that it is necessary to the
Character o^ Definition of a true Philosopher, That he thoroughly understands,
not only his own Personal Good, but also wherein the Public Good, or the Good
of the Whole consists, (with which his own is indeed in the Nature of things,
always connected and coincident,) and that in all his Conduct he firmly and
steadily adheres to it, and ever acts with a sincere, Zealous and disinterested
View at promoting it.

Now there are two General Heads to which all Beings or Things that come within
the Reach of our Powers may be referred, and which constitute the entire Great
System of the Universe, viz Bodies and Spirits.

By Bodies we mean the extended, Solid Beings that we perceive by our Senses,
and as such, are merely passive and inert; i. e. utterly destitute even of the
least degree of Perception or Activity. Such are all sensible Things, as
consisting of certain fixed Combinations of sensible Qualities, such as
Extension, Figure, Solidity, Motion or Rest, Colors, Sounds, Tastes, Smells,
Heat or Cold, Hardness or Softness, etc. In short, Whatsoever we perceive by
our Senses. -- And the Whole System of Bodies or Sensible things is what we
mean by Universal Nature, and is called the Sensible, the Corporeal or Natural
World; the same being Subsisted, acted and adjusted by an Infinitely Wise and
Powerful Mind.

And by Spirits are meant such perceiving, intelligent and active Beings as we
are conscious we our selves are having the powers of Reflecting, Thinking,
Reasoning, Understanding, Willing, Loving, Choosing and Acting, etc. And the
whole System of Spirits or Intelligent Beings, as being endowed with
Understanding, Counsel, Design and Liberty of Acting, and therefore capable of
Moral Agency, and under the Conduct and Moral Government of the DEITY, (the
same Infinite Mind, who is the Supreme Father, King and Lord of all,) is called
the Intelligent, Spiritual or Moral World. So that the whole of our Knowledge
and Activity relates either to the Natural or Moral World, and the one as
fitted to the other. --

But though the Order wherein we at first acquire the Knowledge of things in our
Childhood, is to begin with the Notices -- of Sensible Objects which make the
first Impressions upon us, and then by degrees we proceed to reflect, and from
what we perceive in Others and are conscious of within our selves, we gain some
Notion of spiritual Beings; Yet in order to improve our Selves both in Knowledge
and Virtue by the Study of Philosophy; In as much as it is by our Spirits or
Minds that we are at all capable of either Contemplation or Practice; and
seeing they are liable to Error in Contemplation as well as to irregularity and
Viciousness in Practice, (in both which consists our greatest depravity and
Misery;) It is therefore necessary that we begin with them: And first learn to
know and cultivate our Intellectual or Rational powers, that we may be under
the better Advantage to secure our selves from Error and to find out and know
the Truth, whether in Theory or Practice, and wherein our true Good consists --
And then we shall be well Qualified to proceed with Success and Delight in the
Discovery and Contemplation of all the Truths that we are capable of
discovering both in the Natural and Moral World, in the Knowledge of which
consists one great part of our Happiness. -- And the Truths which we discover
in the Natural World will lead us to many Arts and Practices greatly conducive
to the Convenience and Comfort of our Lives in this present State: -- And
lastly, The Truths that relate to the Moral World will direct us to our Chief
Good; to hate and avoid Vice and love and practice Virtue; i. e. to choose and
act on all Occasions in such a manner as will render us truly and completely
Happy both here and for ever: This therefore is the Order wherein Philosophy
proceeds.

I. First, then, we begin with our Selves and learn to know and cultivate our
Understanding and Reason, with which, (we being made for Society,) our speech
is necessarily connected, that in the right use of these Rational powers and
Faculties we may, upon every Subject, both in the Natural and Moral World, be
enabled the better to discover the Truth and communicate it one to another. --
And this may be called Rational philosophy.

II. Secondly, Being thus furnished we go forth and contemplate the Natural
World, and learn all the Truths that can be discovered and known by us
concerning Sensible and Corporeal Things, in the Knowledge of which consists a
great part of our Happiness; especially, since from these we evidently
demonstrate the Being, Wisdom, Power and Goodness of GOD who is our chief Good,
and in them do most clearly behold Him creating, actuating, providing for, and
governing all things: And do moreover learn from them many very useful Arts and
Practices greatly conducing to the Comfort of our Lives in this World. And this
is called, Natural philosophy.

III. And lastly, We return home again to our selves, and contemplate the Moral
World, and learn all the Truths that we can come to the Knowledge of, relating
to Spiritual and Intelligent Beings such as are our own Souls, and those about
us, and other Created Spirits, and even GOD himself the Original and Father of
all; in the Knowledge of which Truths, another and yet greater part of our
Happiness consists: especially seeing from these, we happily discover our true
and supreme Good, and deduce the most certain and infallible Rules by which we
should be always affected, act and conduct our selves, and in conformity to
which we shall be truly and completely happy, not only in this World, but also
for ever in the World to come* And this (in a little larger sense of the word
than it has been commonly used in,) may be called Moral Philosophy.

These are the three great Provinces of the Intellectual World, toto Caelo
different and distinct one from another as Mr. Lock justly calls them in his
Hum. Und. Cap. ult. And after this manner Plato was wont to divide his
Philosophy, as Tully tells us in his Acad. Quaest. l. 1 and Tusc Quaest. l. 5.
-- So that, from what has been said, it is plain, that the whole of our
Happiness, and consequently the whole of Philosophy consists in the Cultivation
and Improvement of our Rational powers and Faculties, and in the Contemplation
of things as being what they really are, both in the Natural and Moral World:
in reducing to Practice whatever we discover to be useful for the Comfort and
Convenience of Life; and especially in behaving our selves as it becomes
Reasonable and Immortal Creatures and Moral Agents, so Situated and Related as
we are and with a View of being everlastingly happy.

O^ this business of the partition of the Sciences, may perhaps be more
distinctly explained after this manner. -- Our true Perfection and Happiness
consists in Acting according to Right for the attainment of true Good or what
is suitable to our Nature and promotes our Wellbeing in the whole; And in order
to this, in Thinking according to Truth, which is that by which our Actions
must be regulated that they may be right.

I. First therefore, as a necessary means to that great End, we learn the Rules
and Means of cultivating and improving our Rational powers of Thinking and
Speaking, that we may find the Truth our selves, and convey it in the best
manner to each other. -- And this is Rational Philosophy.

II. And then secondly, As that which is the great End to be pursued in all our
Inquiries, we learn to exert our Active powers according to Truth and Right for
the attainment of true Good and Happiness. -- And there are two sorts of Good
to be attained in order to our complete Happiness, correspondent to the two
great Systems above mentioned, (the Sensible and Moral World, about which our
Perceptive and Active Powers are employed,) viz. Sensible and Temporal Good,
and Moral or Spiritual and Eternal Good.

I. First. For the Attainment of Sensible and Temporal Good and Happiness, by
the practice of those secular Arts that relate to the Sensible or Natural
World, the Knowledge of those Truths that relate to the Natural World is
necessary: And in this kind of Knowledge and practice consists Natural
Philosophy.

II. And, secondly, For the attaining of Moral and Political, and Spiritual and
Eternal Good and Happiness, by the practice of those Moral and Political Arts
that relate to the Spiritual or Moral World, the Knowledge of the Truths that
relate to the Moral World is necessary: and in this kind of Knowledge and
Practice consists Moral philosophy.

So that Philosophy comprehends all the Disciplines, (as they are used to be
called,) whether Arts or Sciences: For a Discipline in general, is a System of
Instructions whereby any Subject upon which we treat is clearly explained, and
every thing relating to it is taught in the most instructive manner, whether it
be speculative or practical. --

If it be merely Speculative, the End of which is the Discovery of Truth only,
it is called a Science, which has usually been defined, Disciplina Theoretica.
-- But if it relates directly to practice or something to be done, it is called
an Art, which is defined Disciplina practica. -- Though indeed every System of
Instructions, may be called a Science, inasmuch as it consists in the
Contemplation and Knowledge of its Subject; and those are properly Arts, which
are immediately concerned in the regulation of Practice.

CHAP. I. Of Rational Philosophy. But to be a little particular on each of the
abovementioned general Heads.
1. RATIONAL PHILOSOPHY, (as an Introduction to the two other Parts of it,)
teaches us by what Rules and Means to cultivate and improve our Rational powers
of Thinking and Speaking in Logic, and in Grammar and Rhetoric.

1. LOGIC, or the Art of Thinking, leads us into our own minds and gives us an
exact Knowledge of our Intellectual powers with their Objects and the Signs we
make use of to enlarge our Knowledge and communicate our Thoughts, and to excite
and direct our exertions: and prescribes such general Rules and Means as may be
useful to secure us from Error in all our Inquiries, and to lead us to the
Knowledge of Truth, whether in searching and discovering it our selves or
explaining and proving it to others. --

To the first part of this Science which relates to the simple Apprehension of
Objects, I refer Ontology, or the Doctrine of the general Affections common to
all Beings, which has been commonly called Metaphysics or Philosophia prima;
For, as I take it, this Doctrine is nothing else but the Definition of certain
general Terms, with several necessary Distinctions and Axioms or first
Principles, all which being necessary in order to think, speak and reason
clearly and distinctly upon any particular Subject to which they are applied;
it therefore seems properly to belong to the Subject and End of Logic: Whereof
the second part treats of Judgments and the various Kinds of Propositions and
Degrees of Assent; and the third of Reasoning Syllogism and Method. -- This
Science has also been sometimes called Dialectic.

2. GRAMMAR, or the Art of Speaking teaches us, according to the peculiar Idiom
of each Language, how to express what we Know, and communicate the Sense of our
own minds both in Words and Sentences to the Understandings of those with whom
we Converse.

3. RHETORIC, or the Art of Persuading, teaches us to adorn and beautify our
Speech -- with certain elegant Turns of Expression called Tropes and Figures,
and to m^ use of them in such a manner as may render it the more instructive to
the Mind, and strongly affecting to the Imagination and Passions. --

And these general Rules and Ornaments of Speech are common to several kinds of
Speaking and Writing, viz. Oratory, History, and Poetry.

(1) ORATORY, (strictly so called,) consists in readily Inventing, aptly
Disposing, and decently Uttering, all such arguments of Discourse and means of
Insinuation and Persuasion as any Subject or Audience are capable of.

(2) HISTORY is a just, methodical and elegant Narration of true matters of
Fa^t with their Circumstances of Persons, Time and place, for preserving the
Memory of them among Mankind, that they may be Examples for the Benefit of
Posterity.

(3) POETRY is a polite lively and beautiful Description of either Persons,
Things or Facts, whether real or imaginary, with an Elevation and Dignity of
Thought, and a kind of Enthusiasm of the Soul, attended with the Advantages of
Numbers and Harmony and every kind of Ornament that Language is capable of: by
means of which it Brightens and Enlivens the Imagination, raises and kindles
the Passions and possesses and engages the whole Soul, while it fills it with
the most profitable Instructions, attended with the most exquisite Pleasure and
Delight.

And lastly the Art of Criticism, (which relates to all these,) consists in
having a true sense of the meaning and force of Words and Phrases and a just
Notion of the genuine Beauties and Excellencies of any Performance, whether in
Oratory, History or Poetry; and in being able to make a good Judgment of
Authors according to their several Genius's and peculiar Style and manner of
Writing, so as to distinguish what is Natural and Genuine, from what is
Counterfeit and Supposititious. -- To this belongs Philology and Classical
Learning. -- And these are the several Heads of Rational Philosophy.

CHAP. II Of Natural Philosophy.
II NATURAL PHILOSOPHY instructs us in the Knowledge of the Natural World, i. e.
the great System of Bodies, or extended solid Beings, and explains the Laws of
Nature and the established Connection of Corporeal or Sensible things, which are
called the Phenomenon of Nature, and from thence, as I have said, it teaches us
many useful Practices, very much conducing to the Benefit and Comfort of our
Lives. -- So that it is partly speculative and partly practical. -- The first
teaches us the Knowledge of the Works of Nature, which in Truth are the Works of
GOD; and the second instructs us in the Knowledge of the Works of men, who being
in some measure acquainted with the Laws of Nature, do from them learn to
employ themselves on the Works of GOD, for the attaining of certain beneficial
Ends, which contribute to their Sensible and Temporal Good, or the Comfort and
Pleasure of their Lives in this World -- The Works of Nature or rather of the
GOD of Nature are called Natural, which he has designed and fitted to engage
(...) employ the Activity of men; and the Works of Art produced by men, (who
from the Knowledge of the Laws of Nature, do prescribe Laws to themselves,) are
called Artificial, by which they secure themselves from things hurtful, and
furnish themselves with many Advantages and Accommodations. -- But I shall here
only just mention under each Head the chief Arts or Practices founded on the
Theory of Nature, not taking Notice of the Mechanical Arts, which most of them,
depend also on some part of the Knowledge of Nature.

This part of Philosophy is moreover called Somatology or the Doctrine of
Bodies, which alone are the proper Objects of it -- It is not therefore the
Business of this Science to search after, or treat of Efficient Causes. For
Bodies being merely passive and inert, i. e. utterly destitute of any Principle
of Force or Activity within themselves, they therefore cannot produce any
Effect at all from any Agency of their own; so that one Body cannot be properly
said to be the Cause of Motion or of any other Change in another Body. -- It
therefore belongs to this part of Philosophy, only by diligent Observations and
accurate Experiments, to find out the Truth of Sensible Things as they really
and in fact are in the Natural World, and by the Help of Mathematical Reasoning
to investigate those fixed and established Laws, according to which they are
constantly Connected one with another. -- And these being thus found and
demonstrated here; The next part of Philosophy, viz Pneumatology will inquire
after the true efficient Cause of all these Phenomenon, and evidently
demonstrate it to be an Omnipresent, Omnipotent and Infinitely Wise and
Benevolent Spirit. Vid. D. ^er. D^. Mot.

In Natural philosophy, first the general Affections of Bodies and their
sensible Qualities are treated of in this Order: Quantity, (i. e. Number and
Extension,) Figure, Solidity, Density, Rarity and Fluidity, Motion and Rest,
Gravity or Attraction and Elasticity; Light and Colors, Sounds, Sapors and
Odors, Heat and Cold with the Other Tangible Qualities: And then secondly, all
the various particular Combinations of them, both in Heaven and Earth: Hence
the parts of it are, Mathematics and Mechanics, and Physics and Astronomy.

1. The more General parts of Natural Philosophy are Mathematics and Mechanics,
which treat of Quantity, Bodies and Motion in general, and are to be applied in
the Explication of particular phenomenon in Physics and Astronomy.

(1) MATHEMATICS explain the Nature and Properties of Quantity in general, both
Discrete and Continued, i e. Number and Magnitude, and therefore comprehends
the Arts both of Numbering and Measuring, viz. Arithmetic and Geometry, with
the Arts belonging to them, viz Algebra, Trigonometry, Geodasie, Stereometry,
and the Doctrine of the Conic Sections and Flu^cions, and of the Sphaere and
Cylinder.

This Science, as I apprehend, ought to be accounted a part of Natural
philosophy; because Extension and Figure are some of the primary and most
obvious Affections or Properties of Bodies, and those without the previous
Knowledge of which, the rest cannot well be explained Nor can they be explained
without conceiving of Extension as consisting of various parts, and
consequently without Numbering: They therefore, with Number, seem of right to
belong to the Science which treats of the Nature of Bodies, or at least, to be
necessary pracognita thereto, and ought by all means to be well understood
before we proceed to the other parts of Natural philosophy. For which Reason,
Plato is said to have set up this remarkable Admonition over the Door of his
Academy, OUDEIS AGEOMETRETOS EISITO. i. e. Let no body that is Unskilled in
Geometry enter here. v. Diog. Laert. -- It is therefore necessary, as I have
said, that Young men be early initiated in the Study of the Mathematics, even
while they are at School, at the same time that they are learning the Languages
and Classics.

(2) MECHANICS explain the Nature and Properties of Bodies in general, whether
at rest or in motion, and investigate and demonstrate the Laws of Nature,
according to which any Bodies either rest or are any how moved. -- To which
purpose this Science treats particularly of a Vacuum, and of the Solidity and
Divisibility of Bodies, of the Cohesion of their Parts, of Density and Rarity,
of Hardness, Softness, Fluidity and Elasticity: And then it treats of Motion
and it is Affections, viz. Space, Time and Velocity, and of it is various Kinds
or Directions: And lastly of those Forces, (as they are called, on which the
several Quantities and Directions of motion depend; such as, Inertia,
Percussion, Attraction, Repulsion, Elasticity, and the Resistance of Fluids;
for on these depend the chief phanomena of Nature both Celestial and
Terrestrial. v. Sr. Isaac Newtons Principia, especially in his Preface. -- To
this Head are referred, Statics, Hydrostatics and pneumatics.

2. The more special parts of Natural Philosophy are Physics and Astronomy,
wherein the various Phenomena in Heaven and Earth are more particularly
explained and accounted for.

(1) PHYSICS, (as I here understand the word,) relate only to this Earth with
it is Furniture; for which reason, this Science might more properly be called
Geology, especially since the word Physics is frequently takes to signify the
same with Natural Philosophy in general. -- But however it be called, this
Science treats concerning the other sensible Qualities more peculiar to this
our Mansion, or as perceived by us, viz. Light, Colors, Sounds, Sapors,
Odours, Heat, Cold, Moisture Dryness, Firmness and Liquidity, etc. and then
explains the particular phenomenon in all the various Tribes of sensible Beings
belonging to this Terraqueous Globe with its Atmosphere: particularly the
Elements with all sorts of Bodies belonging to them, whether Inanimate, as
Stones, Minerals, Meteors, etc. or Animate, as Plants or Animals. -- To this
Head therefore belong a great number of particular Sciences and Arts, such as
Geography and Navigation, Optics and Music, Lithology, Metallology and
Meteorology, Agriculture, Gardening and Botany, Anatomy, Surgery, Medicine
and Chemistry.

(2) ASTRONOMY (which may also be called Cosmography or Ouranology) is that
Science wherein (passing off from this Globe of Earth, into the vast and
boundless Ether,) we contemplate the System of the Universe, and describe and
account for the various phenomenon of the Heavens and Stars. -- In the first or
spherical part whereof we consider the Heavens as a great Sphere, and the
apparent motions of the great Bodies thereof as the measures of Time; to which
therefore belong Chronology and Gnomon^^ or ^. And the other part is a
particular Theory of the true System of the world; of the fixed Stars, and
particularly our Sun with his noble and splendid Chorus of Planets, Satellits
and Comets. -- With regard to all which it determines their Diurnal and Annual
Revolutions; their Distances, Magnitudes, Figures and Densities; their
Stations, Retrogradations and Eclipses; together with the Laws of their
motions, both in the Tides of their Fluids and their annual Revolutions as they
roll round the Sun or their Primaries in their Elliptical Orbits and
Trajectories. -- These are the general Partitions of Natural philosophy, to
which all the various parts of it may be referred. And the particular Facts and
Observations under each Head are related in Natural History.

CHAP. III. Of Moral Philosophy.
III. MORAL PHILOSOPHY instructs us in the Knowledge of the Moral World, i. e.
the great System of Spirits or intelligent active Beings, and teaches all the
Truths that can be known by us concerning rational Creatures and moral Agents,
such as are our own Souls and other orders of created Spirits, a^ also
concerning GOD the Almighty Creator Father and Lord of all: from which Truths
we find wherein consists our true and chief Good, and learn how to be affected
toward every Object, and to choose act and conduct our selves in every Relation
in such a manner as will render us in some good measure happy here, and
completely and forever happy hereafter.

I thus define Moral philosophy in a larger sense than is usual, comprehending
under it, not only the Knowledge of Behavior or moral practice, which Tully
defines Rerum fugiendarum expetendarumque Scientia, but also the Doctrine of
Spirits which truly belongs to it, and is indeed the Foundation of it: for the
Knowledge of our Duty and what we must hate and avoid or choose and embrace in
order to Happiness, is so necessarily connected with the Knowledge of the nature
of Spirits, that it cannot be understood or explained without it. v. Woll. Rel.
of Not.

So that there are two parts of Moral philosophy; the one Speculative the other
Practical; The first teaches all the Truths that can be known of the moral
World; the second from them deduces the Rules of our Duty.

1. The Speculative part of Moral philosophy, which is called PNEUMATOLOGY,
teaches all that we can know concerning Spirits, both those that are Created
and GOD the Creator of them This has been wont, (though improperly,) to be
treated of as the second part of Metaphysics. -- And

(1) As to Created spirits, we know from our selves, that they are intelligent
and active Beings, as having the powers of Perceiving, Imagining and
Remembering, of Thinking or Understanding and Willing, and of freely Choosing,
Refusing and Acting or Exerting themselves, according as they either love,
hate, hope, fear, or are any otherwise affected: For of all there Perceptions
and Exertions, Passions or Actions, we are conscious to our selves. -- All
these Faculties therefore are here particularly explained, and from thence it
appears that Spirits only can properly be said to be Efficient Causes, as
having alone an internal Principle of Activity or of variously exerting and
determining themselves according to Design, Counsel or free Choice, and
therefore they also alone are capable of moral Agency and moral Government. --
Particularly,

[1] This Science treats of the Nature, Powers and Operations of our Rational
Souls, and of their Immortality and Future State of Existence. And this may be
called PSICHOLOGY.

[2] It inquires as far as we are able concerning the Existence, Nature, Powers
and Operations of other perceptive or Intelligent Active Creatures besides or
Superior to us, whether Good or Evil. And this is called DAEMONOLOGY.

(2) This Science proceeds, by Analogy from what Powers and Perfections we find
in our selves (removing all Defects and Limitations,) to explain what we are
capable of Knowing concerning the Being, Nature, Attributes and Operations of
GOD, the Supreme, All wise and Almighty Spirit who has made, preserves and
Governs all things, both in the Natural and Moral World; being here discovered
to be the immediate Efficient and Author of all the phenomenon of Nature, in
whose Eternal, All comprehending Mind are the Archetypes of our Ideas, and who
is the Great Original and Father of our Spirits, and consequently our chief
Good; and our Supreme King and Moral Governor, and therefore infinitely Wise,
Just and Benevolent in all his Conduct toward us; to whom we must give an
Account of all our Actions, and by whom we shall be most righteously and
equitably dealt with hereafter, and be either Rewarded or Punished, in exact
proportion, according as our Behavior shall be found to have been good or bad
in this Life. And this part of Pneumatology is called THEOLOGY.

2. The Practical part of Moral philosophy, from the Truths discovered
concerning GOD and Created Spirits in the Speculative part of it, infers the
Rules of our Duty and Behavior, and teaches us so to live and conduct our
selves upon all Occasions as will render us truly Happy both here and for ever.
-- And here Mankind must be considered in a twofold Capacity; viz either as a
Moral System in general, or as subsisting in particular Society's.

(1) That which respects mankind as a Moral System in general, is called ETHICS
or Morality, which is defined, The Art of Living happily by the practice of
Virtue, which consists in that force and stability of Soul whereby we do firmly
persist in choosing and doing whatever Truth and Right Reason dictate as
necessary to be chosen and done in order to our true Happiness, in spite of
all Temptations to the Contrary.

This I have called Moral Good, which is here to be considered, not only as
founded in the Truth and Nature of things, but also as being the Will and Law
of GOD concerning us, and consequently what we are Obliged to do in Obedience
to his Will and from a sense of Duty to him* For we are here to consider our
selves as a Moral System acting under the Eye of Almighty GOD and Accountable
to Him as our Supreme King and Moral Governor, whose Will and Law it therefore
is, that we should thus behave our selves, because he would have us happy. For
being perfectly Happy himself and Self sufficient to his own Happiness, He
could have (no Selfish Views,) no other View in Creating and Governing the
Moral World, than that it might be, in the whole, a happy System: -- Since
therefore He would have us Happy, it must be his Will (...) Law that we should
conform all our Tempers and Behavior to Truth and Right Reason, because such a
Conduct. is, in the Nature of things necessary to our true Happiness.

So that there are two things to be here Considered, viz. The Criterion of
Right and Wrong, and the Obligation we are under to practice the One and avoid
the Other. -- The Criterion of Right and Wrong, is the Truth and Nature of
things or their Fitness in the whole to promote our True Happiness. -- And the
Obligation we are under to practice accordingly is two fold, Internal and
Natural or External and Moral. The Internal and Natural Obligation we are under
to the practice of Virtue is that great Law of our Nature, whereby we are
Obliged to seek our own Preservation and Happiness. -- And the External and
Moral Obligation is the Consideration that it is the Will and Law of a Superior
to whom we are Accountable. -- And this is either Political or Religious -- The
Political Obligation is the Consideration that it is the Public Will, or the
Law of the Society to which we belong. -- And the Religious Obligation, which
is here especially to be regarded, is the Consideration that it is the Will and
Law of GOD concerning us, to whom we are Accountable for all our Behavior.

ETHICS, therefore, or true Morality consists in the Practice of whatsoever is
necessary to our Happiness in Obedience to the Will of GOD: And consequently it
must prescribe all the Rules of upright and virtuous Behavior in all the
Relations wherein we stand, whether with regard to GOD, our Selves, or our
Neighbor.

[1] With regard to our Selves. That we live answerably to the Dignity of our
Rational and Immortal Nature, by governing our Reason, and our Appetites and
Passions, whether Concupiscible or Irascible, according to the Rules of
Prudence, Temperance and Fortitude, etc.

[2] With respect to GOD, our Creator, Preserver and Governor; That we
Contemplate and Love Him above all things; Trust in his Infinite Wisdom, Power
and Goodness; Resign our Selves entirely to his holy Will and Pleasure; Worship
his Adorable Majesty, and Imitate all his Moral Perfections, according to the
Precepts of true Religion and Piety. And

[3] With respect to our Neighbors; i. e. Other created Spirits like our
selves, all being considered as a System of Rational Creatures, equally related
to GOD as our common Father and Lord, and to one another as Brethren and Fellow
servants; That we Love them as our selves, and render to every one his Due;
That we do no wrong to any one, but that we speak the Truth, and do all that is
Just and Right and Faithful, and all that is Friendly, Kind and Merciful to
every one, as we have opportunity, according to the Laws of Justice and Charity
in all the various Branches of them. -- And in all these consists the highest
Perfection and Happiness of the Rational Nature considered as a Moral System in
general. But,

(2) In as much as Mankind cannot well Subsist in this World, without being
United and Compacted into particular Society's, nor such Societies without
Government; On this last Head therefore are founded the Arts of Government,
which provide for the Well-being and Happiness of Mankind both Temporal and
Spiritual, considered as Collected into particular Societies; Such as,

[1] Families, which may be called Natural Society's, as being founded in
Nature, and they are the Original and Foundation of all other Societies. And
this is called OECONOMICS.

[2] Kingdoms or Civil Governments, which are Political Societies as being
founded in Compact, respecting things Temporal and Spiritual, and this is
called POLITICS, both Civil and Ecclesiastical: Which, being the Arts that
provide for the Public Good and Happiness of Mankind in the Whole, with regard
both to their Sensible and Temporal, and to their Spiritual and Eternal
Interests, do in effect comprehend and sum up the whole of Philosophy, or at
least suppose the Knowledge, of all the other parts of it as finally centering
in this. -- And the particular Examples and Facts in the Moral World under each
of these Heads are related in Biography, and Civil and Ecclesiastical History.
And thus much for Moral Philosophy. --

BUT lastly, Because this last part of Philosophy, (especially the Doctrine of
Spirits and Morality) is of the greatest Importance to us; GOD has therefore of
his great Goodness, given us, relating to these, a particular and express
Revelation of his Mind and Will, confirmed by undoubted Miracles, and taught us
how we who have by our Sins grievously Offended Him, and fallen below the
Original Dignity of our Nature, may again be Restored to his Image and Favor,
through the Mediation of his Blessed SON JESUS CHRIST, and by the Assistance of
his Holy SPIRIT.

To this Head therefore belongs the CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY, (as the ancient
Fathers called it Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, etc.
,) which is only Moral philosophy, and particularly Theology and Ethics more
clearly Revealed to us, and Improved by the further Discovery of sundry
Doctrines and Duties, in a Language accommodated to the low and weak Capacities
of the general Rate and Bulk of Mankind, relating to those things that concern
the Method of our Recovery and the Terms of our Acceptance wherein our mere
natural unassisted Reason did not suffice to Instruct and Ascertain us.

This DIVINE REVELATION therefore being given us, not to gratify our
Curiosity, by filling our Heads with meet Speculative Notions, but to make us
practically Wise and Good, and to secure to us GOD's Favor in a Method
consistent with the Honor and Authority of his Laws and Government, ought to
be most humbly, gladly and gratefully Embraced, and seriously and diligently
made use of as such, for our Instruction and Reformation, on all Occasions and
to all Purposes, with regard either to Faith or Practice, wherein soever GOD is
graciously Pleased to hold forth any Light or Assistance to us, in Order that
we may be Qualified for, and Entitled to an Interest in his Favor, both in
Time and to all Eternity.

This whole Draught may be beheld in one View in the following Table.

THE TABLE.
I. Rational, which teaches us to cultivate our Rational Powers, viz. 1. Reason
in Logic, to which are referred Ontology or Metaphysics, and Dialectic.

2. Speech in Grammar and Rhetoric to which are referred Oratory, History and
Poetry, and to all of 'em the art of Criticism

PHILOSOPHY is the study of Truth and Wisdom in the pursuit of true Happiness.
II. Natural, which teaches the knowledge of the Natural World, and the Practices
thereon depending, being therefore partly Speculative, and partly Practical,
and is, 1 Genesis which treats of Quantity Bodies and Motion in General, in
Mathemat. and Mechan.

2. Special, which explains and accounts for all the particular phenomenon both
in heaven and earth in all the parts of Phisics and Astronomy.

And it is divided into three parts; III. Moral, which teaches the Knowledge of
the Moral World and the practices thereon depending, being partly Natural and
partly Revealed, and is, 1 Speculative, which contemplates the nature of
Created spirits, and of GOD, the Creator and Lord of all things, in
Pneumatology and Theol.

2. practical, which teaches the Practice of what is necessary to our complete
happiness both here and for ever, in Ethics, oeconomics and politics both Civil
and Ecclesiastical.



A CATALOGUE of some of the most valuable Authors on each part of Philosophy,
proper to be read by the Students.
I. In Rational Philosophy.
1. ON Logic and Metaphysics, read Art Cogitands, Le Clerk, Watts, Lock,
Crousar Medicina Mentis by Welsteed, Ld. Bacon, Lock's Conduct of the
Understanding. --

2. On Grammar, besides the usual Grammars, read. The Oxford Grammar,
Ruddiman's, Clarke's Vossius, Whettenhalls and Busby's Greek Grammars,
Bennet's, Schikard's and Buxtorf's Hebrew Grammars, and Brightland's English
and Boyer's French Grammar.

3. On Rhetoric, read, the Art of Speaking, Smith, Farnaby, Quintilian,
Longinus, Dionysius Halicarnas. Tully's Orator, and His and Demosthenes 's
Orations. A. Bp. of Cambray on Eloquence.

4. On History, read, Hearn's Ductor Historicus, Eutropius, Florus, Cornelius
Nepos, Justin, Caesar, Tacitus, Suetonius, Salust, Livy, Xenophon, Herodotus,
Polybius, Lucian Plutarch, Thucidides, Diogenes Laertius and other Historians,
and Biographers, Strauchius's Chronology, and Cellarius's Geography, and
Gordons and Molls Geography.

5. On Poetry, read Temple, Addison, Roseommon, Phaedrus, Ovid, Vergil, Horace,
Martial Terence, Seneca, Juvenal and Persius Lucan, Lucretius, Hesiod etc.
Poetae minores, Homer, Sophocles, Euripides, Pindar, and of Moderns,
Shakespeare, Milcon, Dryden, Pope, Swift, Thomson, Gay, Young, etc. English
Poets and Boyleau, Cambrays Telemachus, etc.

6 On the Art of Criticism, read Le'Clerk's Ars Critica, Pope's Art of
Criticism, Rollin's Bell Letters and History, Rapins Critical Works, Felton and
Blackwall on the Classics, Blackwalls Sacred Classics, read also K^nnets Roman
and Potters Greek Antiquities, and To^k's Pantheon or King's heathen gods.

II. In Natural Philosophy.
1 ON Mathematics read, Ward's Young Mathematicians Guide, Euclids Elements, by
De Chales, Borrow or Taquet, Wells's Young Gentleman's Mathematics, or Sturmies
Mathesis Juvenilis, or Ozanams Cursus Math. Harris or Cunn's Trigonometry, Dela
Hire's or Steels or Hospital's Conic Sections, Sr. Isaac Newton's universal
Arithmetic. T. Cassels Mathematics.

2. On Mechanics, read Keil's Introductio ad veram Physicam, Gravesands
Mathematical Elements etc. Desaguliers, Sr. Isaac Newtons Principia, or
Whistons Mathematical Philosophy, or Pembertons view etc.

3 On Physics, read for general Systems, Rohault, L^'Clerk's Physica. Du
Harnei's Philosophia Burgundia, Reginault's Philosophical Conversations,
Spectacle de la Nature.

4. On Particular parts, read Esquire Boyle's Works abridg'd by Shaw, Philosophical
Transactions by Lothrop. -- On the Earth Burnet's Tellur. Theor. Sacr.
Whiston's New Theory, Woodward's Not. Hist. On Optics, Newton's Optics and
Praelect. Opt. -- On Plants, Grew, Bradley Hale's veg. stat. -- On Animals,
Dionis, Keil, Cowper, and Chesselden's Anatomy, Borelli de mot. Anim. -- On
Medicine, Hippocrates, Galen, Sydenham, Quincey, Shaw, Fuller, Clifton, Friend,
Morgan's principles of Medicine. -- On Chemistry, Boerhaave.

5. On Astronomy, Gassendus, Watts, Wells's, Keil, Whistons Astronomical Lect.
Dr Gregorys Elements, etc.

6. On all Parts read Harris's Lexicon Tech: and Chambers's Cyclopaedia. --

III. In Moral Philosophy.
1. ON Pneumatology, read Le'Clerks, Pneumatologia, Locks, Hum. Und. passim,
Wallastons Rel. Not. Clarks Letters to Dodwell and Leibnictz, Malbranch, Des
Carts Metaph. Norris's Ideal World, Bp. Berkleys New Theory of Vision,
Principles of Human Knowledge, Dialogues and Tract. De motu. Bp. Browne's
Procedure and Extent of Hum. Und. and Divine Analogy, Shaftsbury's
Philosophical Rhapsody, Watts's Philosophical Essays.

2. On Physico-Theology, read, Derhams Astro -- and Physico-Theology, Ray's
Wisdom of God in the Creation, Cheyn's Philosophical Principles of Religion,
Whiston's Astronomical Principles of Religion, Newentyte, Bently and other
Boyles Lectures.

3 On Natural Religion, read, Wilkins's Natural Religion, Wallaston, Clarke's
Demonstration, etc. Cudworth's Intellectual System, and Foundation of Morality,
Cumberland's Law of Nature.

4 On Ethics, read, Moor, Whitby, Tully, Seneca, Epictetus, M. Antoninus,
Hierocles, Boethius, Aristotle, Plato. -- On Christian Morals, read,
Kettlewell's Measures of Christian Obedience, -- Whole Duty of Man and his
Works.

5 On the Evidences of Christianity, read, all the ancient Apologists, Justin
Martyr, Athenagoras, Origon cont. Cells. Clemens Alex Tertullian, St. Cyprian,
Lactanius, Minutius Felix, Eusebius, etc. Fathers of the Four first Centuries,
And of the Moderns, Grotius, De Ver. Christ. Rel. Stilling fleat's Origines,
Jenkins Reasonableness of Christianity, Clarke's, Kidder's Demonstration of the
Messiah, Sykes, Chandler, Smallbrook, Conybear, Foster, Bp Berkley's Minute
Phil. Chapman's Eusebius, Roger's Eight Sermons, Bp Butler's Analogy.

6 On the Scriptures, read the Originals and Polyglott, London and Pool's Crit.
Grotius, Hammond, Patrick and Lowth, and Whitby on the N Test. Clarke and P^le,
Henry and Burket and Collyers Sacred Interpreter.

7 On the Creed, Articles and Bodies of Divinity, read, Sr. Peter King,
Pearson, Barrow, Burnet, Limbrook, Scot's Christian Life, Fides or Stackhouse's
Body of Divinity.

8 On the Arian and Socinian Controversy, read Ball, Lesley, Clarke, Jackson,
Waterland, Bennet, Burnet, Watt's, etc.

9 On the Arminian Controversy, read, Turretine, Edwards, Whitby on the Five
Points, Clagget on the Operations of the Spirit.

10 On the Episcopalian Controversy, read, Calamy and Hoadly, Sr. Peter King,
and Slater's Original Draught, A. Bp. Potter on Church Government, Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Polity and Bennet's London Cases. On Popery read Chillingworth.

11 On Antiquities, read, Josephus, Usher's, Sr. Isaac Newtons and Bedford's
Chronology, Shuckford's and Dr. Prideaux's Connection. Bingham's Origines
Ecclesiasticae, Cave's Prim. Christ. Historia Literaria and Lives of the
Fathers.

12 On Politics, Civil, read, Plato, Aristotle, Grotius Puffendorf, Justinian's
Institutions, Wood's Institutes. -- Ecclesiastical, read Johnson's Vade Mecum,
Bp Gibson's Codex

13 Histories, read, Sr. Walter Raleigh abridg'd and continued, Rollin's Hist.
of the ancient Nations, Echard's Roman and Ecclesiastical Histories, Dupin's
and Eusebius dit. Rapin's History of England, Ld. Clarindon's History of the
Rebellion.

14. Sermons, read Sanderson's, Tailor, Barrow, Bull, Tillotson, Sharp, Kidder,
Dr. Sherlock, Bp. Sherlock, Maynard, Lucas, Atterbury, Wake, Moss, Stanhope,
Trapp, Johnson, Watts, etc.

15 On Cases of Conscience, read Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium, and Sanderson's
Praelectiones. --

THE END.

