Mr. LOCK ON TOLERATION.

A LETTER Concerning TOLERATION.

By John Lock, Gent.

The THIRD EDITION.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, next to the
Prison. 1743.

TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Letter concerning Toleration, first Printed in Latin this very
Year, 1690.
in Holland, has already been Translated both into Dutch and French. So general
and speedy an Approbation may therefore bespeak its favorable Reception in
England. I think indeed there is no Nation under Heaven, in which so much has
already been said upon that Subject, as Ours. But yet certainly there is no
People that stand in more need of having something further both said and done
amongst them, in this Point, than We do.

Our Government has not only bee^ partial in Matters of Religion; but those
also who have suffered under that Partiality, and have therefore endeavored by
their Writings to vindicate their own Rights and Liberties, have for the most
part done it upon narrow Principles, suited only to the Interests of their own
Sects.

This narrowness of Spirit on all sides has undoubtedly been the principal
Occasion of our Miseries and Conf^sions. But whatever have been the Occasion,
it is now high time to seek for a through Cure. We have need of more generous
Remedies than what have yet been made use of in our Distemper. It is neither
Declarations of Indulgence, nor Acts of Comprehension, such as have yet been
practiced or projected amongst us, that can do the Work. The first will but
palliate, the second increase our Evil.

Absolute Liberty, Just and True Liberty, Equal and Impartial Liberty, is the
thing that we stand in need of. Now though this has indeed been much talked of, I
doubt it has not been much understood; I am sure not at all practiced, either
by our Governors toward the People, in general, or by any dissenting Parties
of the People toward one another.

I cannot therefore but hope that this Discourse, which treats of that Subject,
however briefly, yet more exactly than any we have yet seen, demonstrating both
the Equitableness and Practicableness of the thing, will be esteemed highly
seasonable, by all Men that have Souls large enough to prefer the true Interest
of the Public before that of a Party.

It is for the use of such as are already so spirited, or to inspire that
Spirit into those that are not, that I have Translated it into our Language.

But the thing it self is so short, that it will not bear a longer Preface. I
leave it therefore to the Consideration of my Countrymen, and heartily wish
they may make the use of it that it appears to be designed for.

A LETTER CONCERNING TOLERATION.
Honored Sir,
SINCE you are pleased to inquire what are my Thoughts about the mutual
Toleration of Christians in their different Professions of Religion, I must
needs answer you freely, That I esteem that Toleration to be the chief
Characteristical Mark of the True Church. For whatsoever some People boast of
the Antiquity of Places and Names, or of the Pomp of their Ou^^ard Worship;
Other^ of the Reformation of (...) Discipline; (...) the Orthodoxy of then
(...); (for every one is Orthodox to himself:) these things, and all others of
this nature, are much rather Marks of Men striving for Power and Empire over
one another, than of the Church of Christ. Let any one have never so true a
Claim to all these things, yet if he be destitute of Charity, Meekness, and
Goodwill in general toward all Mankind, even to those that are not Christians,
he is certainly yet short of being a true Christian himself. Luke 22.25. The
Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, said our Savior to his
Disciples, but ye shall not be so. The Business of True Religion is quite
another thing. It is not instituted in order to the erecting of an external
Pomp, nor to the obtaining of Ecclesiastical Dominion, nor to the exercising of
Compulsive Force; but to the regulating of Men's Lives according to the Rules of
Virtue and Piety. Whosoever will list himself under the Banner of Christ, must
in the first place, and above all things, make War upon his own Lusts and
Vices. It is in vain for any Man to usurp the Name of Christian, without
Holiness of Life, Purity of Manners, and Benignity and Meekness of Spirit.

Thou when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, (Luke 22.32.) said our
Lord to Peter. It would indeed be very hard for one that appears careless about
his own Salvation, to persuade me that he were extremely concerned for mine.
For it is impossible that those should sincerely and heartily apply themselves
to make other People Christians, who have not really embraced the Christian
Religion in their own Hearts. If the Gospel and the Apostl^s may be credited,
no Man can be a Christian without Charity, and without that Faith which works,
not by Force, but by Love. Now I appeal to the Consciences of those that
persecute, torment, destroy, and kill other Men upon pretense of Religion,
whether they do it out of Friendship and Kindness toward them, or no: And I
shall then indeed, and not till then, beli^ve they do ^o, when I shall see
those fiery Z^alots correcting, in the same manner, their Friends and familiar
Acquaintance, for the manifest Sins ^^ey commit against the Precepts of the
Gospel; when I shall see them pros^cute with Fire and Sword the Members of
their own Communion that are tainted with enormous Vices, and without Amendment
are in danger of eternal Perdition; and when I shall see them thus express
their Love and Desire of the Salvation of their Souls, by the infliction of
Torments, and exercise of all manner of Cruelties. For if it be out of a
Principle of Charity, as they pretend, and Love to Men's Souls, that they
deprive them of their Estates, maim them with corporal Punishments, starve and
torment them in (...) Prisons, and in the end even take away their Lives; I
say, if all this be done merely to make Men Christians, and procure their
Salvation, Why then do they suffer Whoredom, Fraud, Malice, and such like
Enormities; (Romans 1.) which (according to the Apo^tle) manifestly relish of
Heathenish Corruption, to predominate so much and abound amongst their Flocks
and People? These, and such like things, are certainly more contrary to the
Glory of God, to the Purity of the Church, and to the Salvation of Souls, than
any conscientious Dissent from Ecclesiastical Decisions, or Separation from
Public Worship, whilst accompanied with Innocence of Life. Why then does this
burning Zeal for Go^, for the Church, and for the Salvation of Souls; burning,
I say, literally, with Fire and Faggot; pass by those moral Vices and
Wickednesses, without any Chastisement, which are acknowledged by all Men to be
diametrically opposite to the Profession of Christianity; and bend all its
Nerves either to the introducing of Ceremonies, or to the establishment of
Opinions, which for the most part are about nice and intricate Matters, that
exceed the Capacity of ordinary Understandings? Which of the Parties contending
about these things is in the right, which of them is guilty of Schism or
Heresy; whether those that domineer or those that suffer; will then at last be
manifest, when the Cause of their Separation comes to be judged of. He
certainly that follows Christ, embraces his Doctrine, and bears his Yoke, though
he forsake both Father and Mother, separate from the Public Assembly and
Ceremonies of his Country, or whomsoever, or whatsoever else he relinquishes,
will not then be judged an Heretic.

Now, though the Divisions that are amongst Sects should be allowed to be never
so obstructive of the Salvation of Souls; yet nevertheless Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, and such like things,
cannot be denied to be Works of the Flesh; concerning which the Apostle has
expressly declared, that they who do them shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
Whosoever therefore is sincerely sollicitous about the Kingdom of God, and
thinks it his Duty to endeavor the Enlargement of it amongst Men, ought to
apply himself with no less care and industry to the rooting out of these
Immoralities, than to the Extirpation of Sects. But if any one do otherwise,
and whilst he is cruel and implacable toward those that differ from him in
Opinion, he be indulgent to such Iniquities and Immoralities as are unbecoming
the Name of a Christian, let such a one talk never so much of the Church, he
plainly demonstrates by his Actions, that it is another Kingdom he aims at, and
not the Advancement of the Kingdom of God.

That any Man should think fit to cause another Man, whose Salvation he
heartily desires, to expire in Torments, and that even in an unconverted
estate; would, I confess, seem very strange to me; and, I think, to any other
also. But no body, surely, will ever believe that such a Carriage can proceed
from Charity, Love, or Good Will. If any one maintain that Men ought to be
compelled by Fire and Sword to profess certain Doctrines, and conform to this
or that exterior Worship, without any regard had unto their Morals; if any one
endeavor to convert those that are Erroneous unto the Faith, by forcing them
to profess things that they do not believe, and allowing them to practice
things that the Gospel does not permit; it cannot be doubted indeed but such a
one is desirous to have a numerous Assembly joined in the same Profession with
himself: But that he principally intends by those means to compose a truly
Christian Church, is altogether incredible. It is not therefore to be wondered
at, if those who do not really contend for the Advancement of the true
Religion, and of the Church of Christ, make use of Arms that do not belong to
the Christian Warfare. If, like the Captain of our Salvation, they sincerely
desired the Good of Souls, they would tread in the Steps, and follow the
perfect Example of that Prince of Peace; who sent out his Soldiers to the
subduing of Nations, and gathering them into his Church, not armed with the
Sword, or other Instruments of Force, but prepared with the Gospel of Peace,
and with the Exemplary Holiness of their Conversation. This was his Method.
Though if Infidels were to be converted by force, if those that are either blind
or obstinate were to be drawn off from their Errors by Armed Soldiers, we know
very well that it was much more easy for Him to do it, with Armies of Heavenly
Legions, than for any Son of the Church, how potent soever, with all his
Dragoons.

The Toleration of those that differ from others in Matters of Religion, is so
agreeable to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to the genuine Reason of Mankind,
that it seems monstrous for Men to be so blind, as not to perceive the
Necessity and Advantage of it, in so clear a Light. I will not here tax the
Pride and Ambition of some, the Passion and uncharitable Zeal of others. These
are Faults from which Humane Affairs can perhaps scarce ever be perfectly
freed; but yet such as no body will bear the plain Imputation of, without
covering them with some specious Color; and so pretend to Commendation, whilst
they are carried away by their own irregular Passions. But however, that some
may not color their spirit of Persecution and unchristian Cruelty, with a
Pretense of Care of the Public Weal, and Observation of the Laws; and that
others, under pretense of Religion, may not seek Impunity for their Libertinism
and Licentiousness; in a word, that none may impose either upon himself or
others, by the Pr^tences of Loyalty and Obedience to the Prince, or of
Tenderness and Sincerity in the Worship of God; I esteem it above all things
necessary to distinguish exactly the Business of Civil Government from that of
Religion, and to settle the just Bounds that lie between the one and the other.
If this be not done, there can be no end put to the Controversies that will be
always a^ising, between those that have, or at least pret^nd to have, on the
one side, a Concernment for the Interest of Men's Souls, and on the other side,
a Care of the Commonwealth.

The Commonwealth seems to me to be a Society of Men constituted only for the
procuring, pres^rving, and advancing of their own Civil Inter^sts.

Civil Interests I call Life, Liberty, Health, and Indolency of Body; and the
Possession of outward things, such as Money, Lands, Houses, Furniture, and the
like.

It is the Duty of the Civil Magistrate, by the impartial Execution of equal
Laws, to secure unto all the People in general, and to every one of his
Subjects in particular, the just Possession of these things belonging to this
Life. If any one presume to violate the Laws of Public Justice and Equity,
established for the Preservation of these things, his Presumption is to be
checked by the fear of Punishment, consisting in the Deprivation or Diminution
of those Civil Interests, or Goods, which otherwise he might and ought to
enjoy. But seeing no Man does willingly suffer himself to be punished by the
Deprivation of any part of his Goods, and much less of his Liberty or Life,
therefore is the Magistrate armed with the Force and Strength of all his
Subjects, in order to the punishment of those that violate any other Man's
Rights.

Now that the whole Jurisdiction of the Magistrate reaches only to these civil
Concernments* and that all Civil Power, Right, and Dominion, is bounded and
confined to the only care of promoting these things; and that it neither can
nor ought in any manner to be extended to the Salvation of Souls; these
following Considerations seem unto me abundantly to demonstrate.

First, Because the Care of Souls is not committed to the Civil Magistrate any
more than to other Men. It is not committed unto him, I say, by God; because it
appears not that God has ever given any such Authority to one Man over another,
as to compel any one to his Religion. Nor can any such Power be vested in the
Magistrate by the Consent of the People; because no man can so far abandon the
care of his own Salvation, as blindly to leave it to the choice of any other,
whether Prince or Subject, to prescribe to him what Faith or Worship he shall
embrace. For no Man can, if he would, conform his Faith to the Dictates, of
another. All the Life and Power of true Religion consists in the inward and
full persuasion of the mind: And Faith is not Faith without believing. Whatever
Profession we make, to whatever outward Worship we conform, if we are not fully
satisfied in our mind that the one is true, and the other well pleasing unto
God; such Profession and such Practic^, far from being any furtherance, are
indeed great Obstacles to our S^lvation. For in this manner, i^^^ead of
expiating other Sins by the exercise of Religion; I say, in offering thus unto
God Almighty such a Worship as we esteem to be dis^l^a^i^g unto him, we add
unto the number of ^ur other sins those also of Hypocrisy, and Cont^mpt of his
Di^ine Majesty.

In the second place. The care of Souls cannot belong to the Civil Magistrate,
because his Power (...) only in outward force: But tr^e and (...) R^ligi^n
consis^^ in the inward persw^sion of the Mind; without which nothing can be
acceptable to God. And such is the nature of the Understanding, that it cannot
be compelled to the belief of any thing by outward Force. Confiscation of
Estate, Imprisonment, Torments, nothing of that Nature can have any such
Efficacy as to make Men change the inward Judgment that they have framed of
things.

It may indeed be alleged, that the Magistrate may make use of Arguments, and
thereby draw the Heterodox into the way of Truth, and procure their Salvation.
I grant it. But this is common to him with other Men In teaching, instructing,
and redressing the Erroneous by Reason, he may certainly do what becomes any
good Man to do. Magistracy does not oblige him to put off either Humanity or
Christianity. But it is one thing to persuade, another to command: One thing to
press with Argument, another with Penalties. This the Civil Power alone has a
Right to do: to the other Good Will is Authority enough. Ev^ry Man has
Commission to a^monish, exhort, convince another of Error; an^ by reasoning to
draw him into Truth. But to give Laws, receive Obedience, and compel with the
Sword, belongs to none but the Magistrate. And upon this ground I affirm, that
the Magistrate's Power ^xt^nds not to the ^stablishing of any Articles of
Faith, or Forms of Worship, by the force of his Laws. For Laws are of no force
at all without Penalties, and Penalties in this case (...) absolutely
imp^rtinent; because they are not prop^r to convince the mind. Neither the
Pro^^ssion of any Articles of Faith, nor the Conformity to any outward Form of
Worship (as has already been said) can be available to the Salvation of Souls;
unless the Truth of the one, and the acceptableness of the other unto God, be
thoroughly believed by those that so profess and p^actise. But P^nalties are no
ways capable to produce such Belief. It is only Light and Evidence that can
work a change in Men's Opinions. And that Light can in no manner proceed from
corporal Sufferings, or any other outward Penalties.

In the third place. The care of the Salvation of Men's Souls cannot belong to
the Magistrate; because, though the rigor of Laws and the force of Penalties
were capable to convince and change Men's minds, yet would not that help at all
to the Salvation of their Souls. For there being but one Truth, one way to
heaven; what hopes is there that more Men would be led into it, if they h^^ no
^^^er Rule to follow but the Religion of the Court; and were put under a
necessity to quit the Light of their own Reason; to oppose the Dictates of
their own Consciences; and blindly to resign up themselves to the Will of their
Gov^rnors, and to the Religion, which eith^^ Ignoran^^, Ambition, or
Superstition had c^anc^^ to est^blish in the Countries where they were born? In
the variety and contradiction of Opi^ions in Religion, wher^in the Princes of
the World are a^ much divided as in their Secular Inter^sts, the narrow way
would be much straitn^d. One Country alone would b^ in the right, and all the
rest of the World would be put under an Obligation of following their Princes
in the ways that lead to Destruction. And that which heightens the absurdity,
and very ill suits the Notion of a Deity, Men would owe their eternal Happiness
or Misery to the places of their Nativity.

These Considerations, to omit many others that might have been urged to the
same purpose, seem unto me sufficient to conclude that all the Power of Civil
Government relates only to Men's Civil Interests; is confined to the care of the
things of this World; and has nothing to do with the World to come.

Let us now consider what a Church is. A Church then I take to be a voluntary
Society of Men, joining themselves together of their own accord, in order to
the public worshipping of God, in such a manner as they judge acceptable to
him, and effectual to the Salvation of their Souls.

I say it is a free and voluntary Society. No body is born a Member of any
Church. Otherwise the Religion of Parents would descend unto Children, by the
same right of Inheritance as their Temporal Estates, and every one would hold
his Faith by the same Tenure he does his Lands; than which nothing can be
imagined more absurd. Thus therefore that matter stands. No M^n by nature is
bound unto any particular Church or Sect, but every one joins himself
voluntarily to that Society in which he believes he has found that Profession
and Worship which is truly acceptable unto God. The hopes of Salvation, as it
was the only cause of his entrance into that Communion, so it can be the only
reason of his stay there. For if afterward he discover any thing either
erroneous in the Doctrine or incongruous in the Worship of that Society to
which he has joined himself; Why should it not be as free for him to go out, as
it was to enter? No Member of a Religious Society can be tied with any other
Bonds but what proceed from the certain expectation of eternal Life. A Church
then is a Society of Members voluntarily uniting to this end.

It follows now that we consider what is the Power of this Church, and unto
what Laws it is subject.

Forasmuch as no Society, how free soever, or upon whatsoever slight occasion
instituted, (whether of Philosophers for Learning, of Merchants for Commerce,
or of men of leisure for mutual Conversation and Discourse,) No Church or
Company, I say, can in the least subsist and hold together but will presently
dissolve and break to pieces, unless it be regulated by some Laws, and the
Members all consent to observe some Order. Place, and time of meeting must be
agreed on. Rules for admitting and excluding Members must be established.
Distinction of Officers, and putting things into a regular Course, and such
like, cannot be omitted. But since the joining together of several Members into
this Church-Society, as has already been demonstrated, is absolutely free and
spontaneous, it necessarily follows, that the Right of making its Laws can
belong to none but the Society it self; or at least (which is the same thing)
to those whom the Society by common consent has authorized thereunto.

Some perhaps may object, that no such Society can be said to be a true Church,
unless it have in it a Bishop, or Presbyter, with Ruling Authority derived from
the very Apostles, and continued down unto the present times by an
uninterrupted Succession.

To these I answer. In the first place, Let them show me the Edict by which
Christ has imposed that Law upon his Church. And let not any man think me
impertinent, if in a thing of this consequence, I require that the Terms of
that Edict be very express and positive. For the Promise he has made us, Mat.
18.20. that wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will
be in the midst of them, seems to imply the contrary. Whether such an Assembly
want any thing necessary to a true Church, pray do you consider. Certain I am,
that nothing can be there wanting unto the Salvation of Souls; Which is
sufficient to our purpose.

Next, Pray observe how great have always been the Divisions amongst even those
who lay so much stress upon the Divine Institution, and continued Succession of
a certain Order of Rulers in the Church. Now their very Dissension unavoidably
puts us upon a necessity of delib^rating, and consequently allows a Liberty of
choosing that which upon consideration we prefer.

And in ^he last place, I consent that these men have a Rul^r of their Church,
established by such a long S^ri^s of Succession as they judge necessary;
p^ovid^^ I may have liberty at the same time to join my self to that Society,
in which I am persuaded those things are to be found which are necessary to
(...) ^^^va^ion of my Soul. In this manner Ec^l^si^^tic^l Liberty will be
preserved on all sides, ^^d no man will have a Legi^lator impose^ upon him, ^ut
whom himself has chosen.

But ^in^ m^n (...) so sollicitous about the ^rue (...), I would only ask them,
here by ^he way, i^ it (...) not more agre^^ble to the Chu^^h of Christ, to
make the ^onditions of her Communion cons^st in such things, and such things
only, as the H^ly Spirit has in the Holy Scriptures declared, in ^x^r^s^ Words,
to be necessary to Salvation; I ask, I say, whether this be not more agreeable
to the church of Christ, than for men to impose their own Inventions and
Interpr^^ations upon others, as if they were of Divine Authority; and to
establish by Ecclesiastical Laws, as absolutely nec^ssary to the Profession of
Christianity, such things as the Holy Scriptures do either not mention, or at
least not expressly command. Whosoever requires those things in order to
Eccl^si^stical Communion, which Christ does not req^^re in ord^r to life
Eternal; he may perhaps indeed constitute a Society accommodated to his own
Opinion, and his own Advantage; but how that can be called the Church of
Christ, which is establish^d upon Laws that are not his, and which excludes
such Persons from its Communion as he will one day receive into the Kingdom of
Heaven, I understand not. But this being not a proper place to enquire into the
marks of the true Church, I will only mind those that contend so earnestly f^r
the Decrees of their own Society, and that cry out continually the Church, the
Church, with as much noise, and perhaps upon the same Principle, as the
Ephesian Silversmiths did for their Diana; this, I say, I desire to mind them
of, That the Gospel frequently declares that the true Disciples of Christ must
suffer Persecution; but that the Chuch of Christ should persecute others, and
f^rce others by Fire and Sword, to embrace her Faith and Doctrine, I could
never yet find in any of the Books of the New Testament.

The end of a Religious Society (as has already been said) is the Public
Worship of God, and by means thereof the acquisition of Eternal Life. All
Discipline ought therefore to tend to that End, and all Ecclesiastical Laws to
be thereunto confined. Nothing ought, nor can be transacted in this Society,
relating to the Possession of Civil and Worldly Goods. No Force is here to be
made use of, upon any occasion whatsoever. For Force belongs wholly to the
Civil Magistrate, and the Possession of all outward Goods is subject to his
Jurisdiction.

But it may be asked, By what means then shall Ecclesiastical Laws be
established, if they must be thus destitute of all compulsive Power? I answer,
They must be established, by means suitable to the Nature of such Things,
whereof the external Profession and Observation, if not proceeding from a
through Conviction and Approbation of the Mind, is altogether useless and
unprofitable. The Arms by which the Members of this Society are to be kept
within their Duty, are Exhortations, Admonitions, and Advices. If by these
means the Offenders will not be reclaimed, and the Erroneous convinced, there
remains nothing farther to be done, but that such stubborn and obstinate
Persons, who give no ground to hope for their Reformation, should be cast out
and separated from the Society. This is the last and utmost Force of
Ecclesiastical Authority. No other Punishment can thereby be inflicted, than
that the relation ceasing between the Body and the Member which is cut off, the
Person so condemned ceases to be a part of that Church.

These things being thus determined, let us inquire in the next place, how far
the Duty of Toleration extends; and what is required from every one by it.

And first, I hold, That no Church is bound by the Duty of Toleration to retain
any such Person in her Bosom, as after Admonition, continues obstinately to
offend against the Laws of the Society. For these being the Condition of
Communion, and the Bond of the Society; If the Breach of them were permitted
without any Animadversion, the Society would immediately be thereby dissolved.
But nevertheless, in all such Cases, care is to be taken that the Sentence of
Excommunication, and the Execution thereof, carry with it no rough usage of
Word or Action, whereby the ejected Person may any wise be damnified in Body or
Estate. For all Force (as has often been said) belongs only to the Magistrate;
nor ought any private Persons, at any time, to use Force, unless it be in
Self-defence against unjust Violence. Excommunication neither does, nor can
deprive the excommunicated Person of any of those Civil Goods that he formerly
possessed. All those things belong to the Civil Government, and are under the
Magistrate's Protection. The whole Force of Excommunication consists only in
this, that the Resolution of the Society in that respect being declared, the
Union that was between the Body and some Member comes thereby to be dissolved;
and that Relation ceasing, the participation of some certain things, which the
Society communicated to its Members, and unto which no Man has any Civil Right,
comes also to cease. For there is no Civil Injury done unto the excommunicated
Person, by the Church-Minister's refusing him that Bread and Wine, in the
Celebration of the Lord's Supper, which was not bought with his, but other men's
Money.

Secondly, No private Person has any Right, in any manner, to prejudice another
Person in his Civil Enjoyments, because he is of another Church or Religion.
All the Rights and Franchises that belong to him as a Man, or as a Denison, are
inviolably to be Preserved to him These are not the Business of Religion. No
Violence nor Injury is to be offered him, whether he be Christian or Pagan.
Nay, we must not content our selves with the narrow Measures of bare Justice.
Charity, Bounty and Liberality must be added to it. This the Gospel enjoins;
this Reason directs; and this that natural Fellowship we are born into requires
of us. If any man err from the right way, it is his own Misfortune, no Injury
to thee: Nor therefore art thou to punish him in the things of this Life,
because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.

What I say concerning the mutual Toleration of private Persons differing from
one another in Religion, I understand also of particular Churches; which stand
as it were in the same relation to each other as private Persons among
themselves; nor has any one of them any manner of Jurisdiction over any other,
no not ev^n when the Civil Magistrate (as it sometimes happens) comes to be of
this or the other Communion. For the Civil Government can give no new Right to
the Chu^^h, nor the Church to the Civil Government. So that whither the
Magistrate join himself to any Church, or separate from it, the Church remains
always as it was before, a free and voluntary Society. It neither acquires the
Power of the Sword by the Magistrate's coming to it, nor does it lose the Right
of Instruction and Excommunication by his going from it. This is the
fundamental and immutable Right of a spontaneous Society; that it has power to
remove any of its Members who transgress the Rules of its Institution. But it
cannot, by the accession of any new Members, acquire any Right of Jurisdiction
over those that are not joined with it. And therefore Peace, Equity and
Friendship, are always mutually to be observed by particular Churches, in the
same manner as by private Persons, without any pretense of Superiority or
Jurisdiction over one another.

That the thing may be made yet clearer by an Example; Let us suppose two
Churches, the one of Arminians, the other of Calvinists, residing in the City
of Constantinople; Will any one say, that either of these Churches has Right to
deprive the Members of the other of their Estates and Liberty, (as we see
practiced elsewhere) because of their differing from it in some Doctrines or
Ceremonies; whilst the Turks in the mean while silently stand by, and laugh to
see with what inhumane Cruelty Chris^ians thus rage against Christians? But if
one of th^se Churches has this Power of treating the other ill, I ask which of
them it is to whom that Power belongs, and by what Right? It will be answered
undoubtedly, That it is the Orthodox Church which has the Right of Authority
over the Erroneous or Her^tical. This is in great and specious words, to say
just nothing at all. For every Church is orthodox to it self; to others,
Erroneous or Heretical. Whatsoever any Church believes, it believes to be true;
and the contrary thereunto it pronounces to be Error. So that the Controversy
between these Churches about the Truth of their Doctrines, and the Purity of
their Worship, is on both sides equal; nor is there any Judge, either at
Constantinople, or elsewhere upon Earth, by whose Sentence it can be
determined. The Decision of that Question belongs only to the Supreme Judge of
all men, to whom also alone belongs the Punishment of the Erroneous. In the
mean while, let those men consider how hainously they sin; Who, adding
Injustice, if not to their Error yet certainly to their Pride, do rashly and
arrogantly take upon them to misuse the Servants of another Master, who are not
at all accountable to them.

Nay further, If it could be manifest which of these two dissenting Churches
were in the right way, there would not accrue thereby to the Orthodox any Right
of destroying the other. For Churches have neither any Jurisdiction in worldly
Matters, nor are Fire and Sword any proper Instruments wherewith to convince
men's Minds of Error, and inform them of the Truth. Let us suppose,
nevertheless, that the Civil Magistrate inclined to savor one of them, and to
put his Sword into their Hands; that (by his consent) they might chastise the
Dissenters as they pleased. Will any man say, that any Right can be derived
unto a Christian Church over its Brethren, from a Turkish Emperor? An Infidel,
who has himself no Authority to punish Christians for the Articles of their
Faith, cannot confer such an Authority upon any Society of Christians, nor give
unto them a Right, which he has not himself. This would be the Case at
Constantinople. And the Reason of the t^ing is the same in any Christian
Kingdom. The Civil Power is the same in every place; nor can that Power, in the
Hands of a Christian Prince, confer any greater Authority upon the Church, than
in the Hands of a Heathen; which is to say, just none at all.

Nevertheless, it is worthy to be observed, and lamented, that the most violent
of these Defenders of the Truth, the Opposers of Errors, the Exclaimers against
Schism, do hardly ever let loose this their Zeal for God, with which they are
so warmed and inflamed, unless where they have the Civil Magistrate on their
side. But so soon as ever Court-favour has given them the better end of the
Staff, and they begin to feel themselves the stronger, then presently Peace and
charity are to be laid aside; otherwise, they are religiously to be observed.
Where they have not the Power to carry on Persecution, and to b^come Masters,
there they desire to live upon fair Terms, and preach up Toleration. When they
are not strengthened with the Civil Power, then they can bear most patiently and
unmovedly the Contagion of Idolatry, Superstition and Heresy in their
Neighborhood; of which, in other Occasions, the I^t^rest of Religion makes
them to be extream^y apprehensive. They do not forwardly attack those Errors
which are in fashion at Court, or are cou^tenanced by the Government. Here they
ca^ ^e content to spare their Arguments; ^^^ch yet (with their l^av^) is the
only right Method of propagating Truth; which has no such way of prevailing, as
when strong Arguments and good Reason are joined with the softness of Civility
and good Usage.

No body therefore, in fine, neither single Persons, nor Churches, nay, nor
even Commonwealths, have any just Title to invade the Civil Rights and Worldly
Goods of each other upon pretense of Religion. Those that are of another
Opinion, would do well to consider with themselves how pernicious a Seed of
Discord and War, how powerful a Provocation to endless Hatreds, Rapines, and
Slaughters, they thereby furnish unto M^^kind. No P^ace and Security, no not so
much as common Fri^ndship, can ^ver be establ^sh^d or preserved amongst M^n, so
long as this Opinion prevail^, That Dominion is sounded in ^race, and that
Religion is to be propagated by force of Arms.

In the third Place: Let us see what the Duty of Tol^ra^ion r^quires from those
who are distinguished from the rest of M^nkind, (from the ^aity, as they please
to call us) by some Eccl^s^^stical Charact^r and Office; whither they be
Bishops, Priests, Presbyt^^^, Ministers, or how^ver else dignified or
distinguished. It is not my Business to enquire here into the Original of the
Power or Dignity of the Clergy. This only I say, That whence-soever their
Authority be sprung, since it is Ecclesiastical, it ought to be confined within
the Bounds of the Church, nor can it in any manner be extended to Civil
Affairs; because the Church it self is a thing absolutely separate and distinct
from the Commonwealth. The Boundaries on both sides are fixed and immovable. He
jumbles Heaven and Earth together, the things most remote and opposite, who
mixes these Societies; which are in their Original, End, Business, and in every
thing, perfectly distinct, and infinitely different from each other. No man
therefore, with whatsoever Ecclesiastical Office he be dignified, can deprive
another man, that is not of his Church and Faith, either of Liberty, or of any
part of his Worldly Goods, upon the account of that difference which is between
them in Religion. For whatever is not lawful to the whole Church, cannot, by
any Ecclesiastical Right, become lawful to any of its Members.

But this is not all. It is not enough that Ecclesiastical Men abstain from
Violence and Rapine, and all manner of Persecution. He that pretends to be a
Successor of the Apostles, and takes upon him the Office of Teaching, is
obliged also to admonish his Hearers of the Duties of Peace and Good will
toward all men; as well toward the Erroneous, as the Orthodox; toward those
that differ from them in Faith and Worship, as well as toward those that agree
with them therein. And he ought industriously to exhort all men, whether
private Persons or Magistrates, (if any such there be in his Church) to
Charity, Meekness and Toleration; and diligently endeavor to allay and temper
all that Heat and unreasonable Averseness of Mind, which either any man's fiery
Zeal for his own Sect, or the Craft of others, has kindled against Dissenters.
I will not undertake to represent how happy and how great would be the Fruit,
both in Church and State, if the Pulpits every where sounded with this Doctrine
of Peace and Toleration; lest I should seem to reflect too severely upon those
Men whose Dignity I desire not to detract from, nor would have it diminished
either by others or themselves. But this I say, That thus it ought to be. And
if any one that professes himself to be a Minister of the Word of God, a
Preacher of the Gospel of Peace, teach otherwise; he either understands not, or
neglects the Business of his Calling, and shall one day give account thereof
unto the Prince of Peace. If Christians are to be admonished that they abstain
from all manner of Revenge, even after repeated Provocations and multiplied
Injuries; how much more ought they who suffer nothing, who have had no harm
done them forbear Violence, and abstain from all manner of ill usage toward
those from whom they have received none. This Caution and Temper they ought
certainly to use toward those who mind only their own Business, and are
sollicitous for nothing but that (whatever men think of them) they may worship
God in that manner which they are persuaded is acceptable to him, and in which
they have the strongest hopes of Eternal Salvation. In private domestic
Affairs, in the management of Estates, in the conservation of Bodily Health,
every man may consider what suits his own convenience, and follow what course
he likes best. No man complains of the ill management of his Neighbor's
Affairs. No man is angry with another for an Error committed in sowing his
Land, or in marrying hi^ Daughter. No body corrects a Spend-thrift for
consuming his Substance in Taverns. Let any man pull down, or build, or make
whatsoever Expenses he pleases; no body murmurs, no body controuls him; he has
his Lib^rty. Bu^ if any man do not frequent the Church; if he do not there
conform his Behavior exactly to the accustomed Ceremonies, or if he bri^gs not
his Children to be initiated in the Sacred Mysteries of this or the other
Congregation; this immediately causes an Uproar; and the Neighborhood is
filled with noise and clamor. Every one is ready to be the Avenger of so great
a Crime. And the Zealots hardly have patience to refrain from Violence and
Rapine so long till the Cause be heard, and the poor man be, according to Form,
condemned to the loss of Liberty, Goods, or Life. Oh that our Ecclesiastical
Orators, of every Sect, would apply th^ms^lves with all the strength of
Arguments that they are able, to the confounding of men's Errors! But let them
spare their Persons. Let them not supply their wants of Reasons with the
Instruments of Force, which belong to another Jurisdiction, and po ill become a
Church man's Hands. Let them not call in the Magistrate's Authority to the aid
of their Eloquence or Learning; lest, perhaps, whilst they pretend only Love
for the Truth, this their intemperate Zeal, breathing nothing but Fire and
Sword, betray their Ambition; and s^ew that what they desire is Temporal
Dominion. For it will be v^ry diff^cult to pe^suade men of Sense, that he, who
with dry Ey^s, and sati^faction of (...), can deliver his Brother unto the
Executioner, to be burnt alive, do^s sincerely and heartily concern himself to
save that Brother from the Flames of Hell in the world to come.

In the last pl^^e, ^et us now cons^^^r what is the Magistrate's Du^y in the
Busin^ss of T^leration; which ce^tainly is very consid^rable.

We have already proved, That the Care of Souls do^s not belong to the
Magistrate. Not a Magisterical Care, I mean, (if I may so call it) which
consists in pre^^ribing by Laws, and compelling by Punishments. But a
charitable Care, which consists in teaching, admonishing, and persuading,
cannot be denied unto any man. The Care therefore of every man's Soul belongs
unto himself, and is to be left unto himself. But what if he neglect the Care
of his Soul? I answer, What if he neglect the Care of his Health, or of his
Estate; which things are nearlier related to the Government of the Magistrate
than the other? Will the Magistrate provide by an express Law, That such a one
shall not become poor or sick? Laws provide, as much as is possible: That the
Goods and Health of Subjects be not injured by the Fraud or Violence of others;
they do not guard them from the Negligence or ill husbandry of the Poss^ssors
themselves. No Man can be forced to be Rich or Healthful whether he will or no.
Nay, God himself will not save men against their wills. Let us suppose,
however, that some Prince were desirous to force his Subjects to accumulate
Riches, or to preserve the Health and Strength of their Bodies. Shall it be
provided by Law, that they must consult none but Roman Physicians; and shall
every one be bound to live according to their Prescriptions? What, shall no
Potion, no Broth be taken, but what is prepared either in the Vatican, suppose,
or in a Geneva Shop? Or, to make these Subjects rich, shall they all be obliged
by Law to become Merchants, or Musicians? Or, shall every one turn Victualler,
or Smith; because th^^ are some that maintain their Families plentifully, and
grow rich in those Professions? But it may be said; There are a thousand ways
to Wealth, but only one way to Heaven. It Is well said indeed, especially by
those that plead for compelling men into this or the other Way. For if there
were several ways that lead thither, there would not be so much as a pretense
left for Compulsion. But now if I be marching on with my utmost vigor, in that
way which, according to the Sacred Geography, leads straight to Jerusalem; Why
am I beaten and ill used by othere, because, perhaps, I wear not Buskins;
because my Hair is not of the right Cut; because perhaps I have not been dipped
in the right Fashion; because I eat Flesh upon the Road, or some other Food
which agrees with my stomach; because I avoid certain By-ways, which seem unto
me to lead into Briars or Precipices; because amongst the several Paths that
are in the same Road, I choose that to walk in which seems to be the streightest
and cleanest; because I avoid to keep company with some Travelers that are
less grave, and others that are more sour than they ought to be; or in sine,
because I follow a Guide that either is, or is not clothed in White, and
crowned with a Mitre? Certainly, if we consider right, we shall find that for
the most part they are such frivolous things as these, that (without any
prejudice to Religion, or the Salvationof Souls, if not accompanied with
Superstition or Hyprocrisie) might either be observed or omitted; I say they
are such like things as these, which breed implacable Enmities amongst
Christian Brethren, who are all agreed in the substantial and truly fundamental
part of Religion.

But let us grant unto these Zealots, who condemn all things that are not of
their Mode, that from these Circumstances arise different Ends. What shall we
conclude from thence? There is only one of these which is the true way to
Eternal Happiness. But in this great variety of ways that men follow, it is
still doubted which is this right one. Now neither the care of the
Commonwealth, nor the Right of enacting Laws, does discover this way that
leads to Heaven more certainly to the Magistrate, than every private man's
Search and Study discovers it unto himself. I have a weak Body, sunk under a
languishing Disease, for which (I suppose) there is one only Remedy, but that
unknown: Does it therefore belong unto the Magistrate to prescribe me a Remedy;
because there is but one, and because it is unknown? Because there is but one
way for me to escape Death, will it therefore be safe for me to do whatsoever
the Magistrate ordains? Those things that every man ought sincerely to enquire
into himself, and by Meditation, Study, Search, and his own Endeavors, attain
the knowledge of, cannot be looked upon as the peculiar Possession of any one
sort of Men. Princes indeed are born su perior unto other Men in Power, but in
Nature equal. Neither the Right, nor the Art of Ruling, does necessarily carry
along with it the certain Knowledge of other things; and least of all of the
true Religion. For if it were so, how could it come to pass that the Lords of
the Earth should differ so vastly as they do in Religious Matters? But let us
grant that it is probable the way to Eternal Life may be better known by a
Prince than by his Subjects; or at least, that in this incertitude of things,
the safest and most commodious way for private Persons is to follow his
Dictates. You will say, what then? If he should bid you follow Merchandise for
your Livelihood, would you decline that Course for fear it should not succeed?
I answer: I would turn Merchant upon the Princes Command, because in case I
should have ill success in Trade, he is abundantly able to make up my Loss some
other way. If it be true, as he pretends, that he desires I should thrive and
grow rich, he can set me up again when unsuccessful Voyages have broke me. But
this is not the Case in the things that regard the Life to come. If there I
take a wrong Course, if in that respect I am once undone; it is not in the
Magistrates Power to repair my Loss, to ease my Suffering; or to restore me in
any measure, much less entirely, to a good Estate. What Security can be given
for the Kingdom of Heaven?

Perhaps some will say that they do not suppose this infallible Judgment, that
all Men are bound to follow in the Affairs of Religion to be in the the Civil
Magistrate, but in the Church. What the Church has determined, that the Civil
Magistrate orders to be observed; and he provides by his Authority that no body
shall either act or believe, in the business of Religion, otherwise than the
Church teaches. So that the Judgment of those things is in the Church. The
Magistrate himself yields Obedience thereunto, and requires the like Obedience
from others. I answer; Who se^s not how frequently the Name of the Church which
was so venerable in the time of the Apostles, has been made use of to throw
Dust in Peoples Eyes, in following Ages? But however, in the present case it
helps us not. The one only narrow way which leads to Heaven is not better known
to the Magistrate than to private persons; and therefore I cannot safely take
him for my Guide, who may probably be as ignorant of the way as my self, and
who certainly is less concerned for my Salvation than I my self am. Amongst so
many Kings of the Jews, how many of them were there whom any Israelite, thus
blindly following, had not fallen into Idolatry, and thereby into Destruction?
Yet nevertheless, you bid me be of good courage, and tell me that all is now
safe and secure, because the Magistrate does not now enjoin the observance of
his own Decrees in matters of Religion, but only the Decrees of the Church. Of
what Church I beseech you? Of that certainly which likes him best. As if he
that compels me by Laws and Penalties to enter into this or the other Church,
did not interpose his own Judgment in the matter. What difference is there
whether he lead me himself, or deliver me over to be led by others? I depend
both ways upon his Will: and it is he that determines both ways of my eternal
State. Would an Israelite, that had worshipped Baal upon the Command of his
King, have been in any better condition, because some body had told him that
the King ordered nothing in Religion upon his own Head, nor commanded any thing
to be done by his Subjects in Divine Worship, but what was approved by the
Counsel of Priests, and declared to be of Divine Right by the Doctors of their
Church? If the Religion of any Church become therefore true and saving, because
the Heads of that Sect, the Prelates and Priests, and those of that Tribe, do
all of them, with all their might, extol and praise it; what Religion can ever
be accounted erroneous, false and destructive? I am doubtful concerning the
Doctrine of the Socinians, I am suspicious of the way of Worship practiced by
the Papists, or Lutherans? Will it be ever a jot the safer for me to join
either unto the one or the other of those Churches, upon the Magistrates
Command; because he commands nothing in Religion but by the Authority and
Counsel of the Doctors of that Church?

But to speak the truth, we must acknowledge that the Church (if a Convention
of Clergymen, making Canons, must be called by that Name) is for the most part
more apt to be influenced by the Court, than the Court by the Church. How the
Church was under the Vicissitude of Orthodox and Arrian Emperors, is very well
known. Or if those things be too remote; The English History affords us fresher
Examples, in the Reigns of Henry the 8 th, Edward the 6 th, Mary, and
Elizabeth, how easily and smoothly the Clergy changed their Decrees, their
Articles of Faith, their Form of Worship, every thing, according to the
inclination of those Kings and Queens. Yet were those Kings and Queens of such
different minds, in point of Religion, and enjoined thereupon such different
things, that no man in his Wits (I had almost said none but an Atheist) will
pr^sume to say that any sincere and upright Worshipp^r of God could, with a
safe Conscience, obey their several Decrees. To conclude, It is the same thing
whether a King that prescribes Laws to another man's Religion, pretend to do it
by his own Judgment, or by the Ecclesiastical Authority and Advice of others.
The Decisions of Churchmen, whose Differences and Disputes are sufficiently
known, cannot be any sounder, or safer, than his. Nor can a^l their Suffrages
joined together add any new strength unto the Civil Power* Though this also must
be taken notice of, that Princes seldom have any regard to the Suffrages of
Ecclesiastics that are not Favorers of their own Faith and way of Worship.

But after all, The Principal Consideration, and which absolutely determines
this Controversy, is this. Although the Magistrates Opinion in Religion be
sound, and the way that he appoints be truly Evang^lical, yet if I be not
thoroughly persuaded thereof in my own mind, there will be no safety for me in
following it. No way whatsoever that I shall walk in, against the Dictates of
my Conscience, will ever bring me to the Mansions of the Blessed. I may grow
rich by an Art that I take not delight in; I may be cured of some Dis^ase by
Remedies that I have not Faith in; but I cannot be saved by a Religion that I
distrust, and by a Worship that I abhor. It is in vain for an Unbeliever to
take up the outward show of another Man's Prof^ssion. Faith only, and inward
Sincerity, are the things that procure acceptance with God. The most likely and
most approv^^ Rem^dy can have no effect upon the Patient, if his Stomach reject
it as soon as taken. And y^u will in vain ^ram a Medicine down a si^k M ^ns
Throat, which hi^ parti^ular Constitution w^^l (...) into ^^ison. In a word.
Whats^^v^r may ^e ^ou^tful in Religion, yet this at l^ast is c^^t^in, that no
Religion, which I believe not to be true, can be either true or profitable unto
me. In vain therefore do Princes compel their Subjects to come into their
Church Communion, under pretense of saving their Souls. If they believe, they
will come of their own accord? if they believe not, their coming will nothing
avail them. How great soever, in fine, may be the pretense of Good Will and
Charity, and concern for the Salvation of Men's Souls; Men cannot be forced to
be saved whether they will or no. And therefore, when all is done, they must be
left to their own Consciences.

Having thus at length freed Men from all Dominion over one another in matters
of Religion, let us now consider what they are to do. All men know and
acknowledge that God ought to be publicly worshipped. Why otherwise do they
compel one another unto the public Assemblies? Men therefore constituted in
this liberty are to enter into some Religious Society; that they may meet
together, not only for mutual Edification, but to own to the World that they
worship God, and offer unto his divine Majesty such service as they themselves
are not ashamed of, and such as they think not unworthy of him, nor
unacceptable to him; and finally that by the purity of Doctrine, Holin^ss of
Life, and decent Form of Worship, they may d^aw others unto the love of the
true Religion; and perform such other things in Religion as cannot be done by
each priva^e Man apart.

These Religi^us Socie^ies I call Churches, and t^es^ I say the Magistrate
^ugh^ to tol^ra^e. For the bu^in^s^ of these Ass^mblies of the People is
no^^i^g (...) what i^ la^^^l for ^v^ry Man in particular to take care of; I
mean the Salvation of their Souls. Nor in this case is there any difference
between the National Church, and other separated Congregations. But as in every
Church there are two things especially to be considered; the outward Form and
Rites of Worship; And the Doctrines and Articles of Faith; These things must be
handled each distinctly; that so the whole matter of Toleration may the more
clearly be understood.

Concerning outward Worship, (I say, in the first place) that the Magistrate
has no Power to enforce by Law, either in his own Church, or much less in
another, the use of any Rites or Ceremonies whatsoever in the Worship of God.
And this, not only because these Churches are free Societies; but because
whatsoever is practiced in the Worship of God, is only so far justifiable as it
is believed by those that practice it to be acceptable unto him. Whatsoever is
not done with that Assurance of Faith, is neither well in it self, nor can it
be acceptable to God. To impose such things therefore upon any People, contrary
to their own Judgment, is in effect to command them to offend God; Which,
considering that the end of all Religion is to please him, and that Liberty is
essentially necessary to that End, appears to be absurd beyond expression.

But perhaps it may be concluded from hence, that I deny unto the Magistrate
all manner of Power about Indifferent things; which if it be not granted, the
whole Subject matter of Lawmaking is taken away. No, I readily grant that
Indifferent Things, and perhaps none but such are subjected to the Legislative
Power. But it does not therefore follow, that the Magistrate may ordain
whatsoever he pleases concerning any thing that is indifferent. The Public
Good is the Rule and measure of all Law-making. If a thing be not useful to the
Commonwealth, though it be never so indifferent, it may not presently be
established by Law.

But further: Things never so indifferent in their own nature, when they are
brought into the Church and Worship of God, are removed out of the reach of the
Magistrate's Jurisdiction; because in that use they have no connection at all
with Civil Affairs. The only business of the Church is the Salvation of Souls:
And it no ways concerns the Common wealth, or any Member of it, that this, or
the other Ceremony be there made use of. Neither the use, nor the Omission of
any Ceremonies, in those Religious Assemblies, does either advantage or
prejudice the Life, Liberty or Estate of any Man. For Example: Let it be
granted, that the washing of an Infant with Water is in it self an indifferent
thing. Let it be granted also, that if the Magistrate understand such washing
to be profitable to the curing or preventing of any Disease that Children are
subject unto, and esteem the matter weighty enough to be taken care of by a
Law, in that case he may order it to be done. But will any one therefore say,
that a Magistrate has the same Right to ordain, by Law, that all Children shall
be baptized by Priests, in the sacred Font, in order to the Purification of
their Souls? The extreme difference of these two Cases is visible to every one
at first sight. Or let us apply the last Case to the Child of a Jew, and the
thing will speak it self. For what hinders but a Christian Magistrate may have
Subjects that are Jews? Now if we acknowledge that such an Injury may not be
done unto a Jew, as to compel him, against his own Opinion, to practice in his
Religion a thing that is in its nature indifferent; how can we maintain that
any thing of this kind may be done to a Christian?

Again: Things in their own nature indifferent cannot, by any human Authority,
be made any part of the Worship of God; for this very reason; because they are
indifferent. For since indifferent things are not capble, by any Virtue of
their own, to propitiate the Deity; no human Power or Authority can confer on
them so much Dignity, and Excellency, as to enable them to do it. In the common
Affairs of Life, that use of indifferent things which God has not forbidden, is
free and lawful: And therefore in those things human Authority has place. But
it is not so in matters of Religion. Things indifferent are not otherwise
lawful in the Worship of God than as they are instituted by God himself; and as
he, by some positive command, has ordained them to be made a part of that
Worship which he will vouchsafe to accept of at the hands of poor sinful Men.
Nor when an incensed Deity shall ask us, ( Who has required these, or such like
things at your hands?) will it be enough to answer him, that the Magistrate
commanded them. If Civil Jurisdiction extended thus far, what might not
lawfully be introduced into Religion? What hodge-podge of Ceremonies, what
superstitious Inventions, built upon the Magistrate's Authority, might not
(against Conscience) be imposed upon the Worshippers of God? For the greatest
part of these Ceremonies and Superstitions consists in the Religious Use of
such things as are in their own nature indifferent: Nor are they sinful upon
any other account than because God is not the Author of them. The sprinkling of
Water, and the use of Bread and Wine, are both in their own nature, and in the
ordinary occasions of Life, altogether indifferent. Will any Man therefore say
that these things could have been introduced into Religion, and made a part of
Divine Worship, if not by Divine Institution? If any Human Authority or Civil
Power could have done this; why might it not also enjoin the eating of Fish,
and drinking of Ale, in the Holy Banquet, as a part of Divine Worship? Why not
the sprinkling of the Blood of Beasts in Churches and Expiations by Water or
Fire, and abundance more of this kind? But these things, how indifferent soever
they be in common uses, when they come to be annexed unto Divine Worship,
without Divine Authority, they are as abominable to God, as the Sacrifice of a
Dog. And why a Dog so abominable? What difference is there between a Dog and a
Goat, in respect of the Divine Nature, equally and infinicely distant from all
Affinity with Matter; unless it be that God required the use of the one in his
Worship, and not of the other? We see therefore that indifferent things, how
much soever they be under the Power of the Civil Magistrate, yet cannot upon
that pretense be introduced into Religion, and imposed upon Religious
Ass^mblies; because in the Worship of God they wholly cease to be indifferent.
He that worships God does it with design to plea^e him, and procure his Favor.
But that cannot be done by him, who, upon the command of another, offers unto
God that which he knows will be displeasing to him, because not commanded by
himself. This is not to please God, or appease his Wrath, but willingly and
knowingly to provoke him, by a manifest Contempt; Which is a thing absolutely
repugnant to the nature and end of Worship.

But it will here be asked: If nothing belonging to Divine Worship be left to
human Discretion, how is it then that Churches themselves have the Power of
ordering any thing about the Time and Place of Worship, and the like? To this I
answer; That in Religious Worship we must distinguish between what is part of
the Worship it self, and what is but a Circumstance. That is a part of the
Worship which is believed to be appointed by God, and to be well-pleasing to
him; and therefore that is necessary. Circumstances are such things which, though
in general they cannot be separated from Worship, yet the particular instances
or modifications of them are not determined; and therefore they are
indifferent. Of this sort are the Time and Place of Worship, the Habit and
Posture of him that worships. These are Circumstances, and perf^ctly
indifferent where God has not given any express Command about them. For
example: Amongst the Jews the Time and Place of their Worship, and the Habits
of those that officiated in it, were not mere Circumstances, but a part of the
Worship it self; in which if any thing were defective, or different from the
Institution, they could not hope that it wo^l^ be accepted by God. But these,
to Christians under the liberty of the Gospel, are mere Circumstances of
Worship, which the Prudence of every Church may bring into such use as shall be
judged most subservient to the end of Order, Decency, and Edification. Though
even under the Gospel also, those who believe the First, or the Seventh Day, to
be set apart by God, and consecrated still to his Worship; to them that portion
of Time is not a simple Circumstance, but a real Part of Divine Worship, which
can neither be changed nor neglected.

In the nex^ place: As the Magistrate has no Power to impose by his Laws, the
use of any Rites and Ceremonies in any Church; so neither has he any Power to
forbid the use of such Rites and Ceremonies as are already received, approved,
and practiced by any Church. Because if he did so, he would destroy the Church
it self; the end of whose Institution is only to worship God with freedom,
after its own manner.

You will say, by this Rule, if some Congregations should have a mind to
sacrifice Infants or (as the Primitive Christians were falsely accused)
lustfully pollute themselves in promiscuous Uncleanness, or practice any other
such heinous Enormities, is the Magistrate obliged to tolerate them, because
they are committed in a Religious Assembly? I answer, No. These things are nor
lawful in the ordinary course of life, nor in any private house; and therefore
neither are they so in the Worship of God, or in any Religious Meeting. But
indeed if any People congregated upon account of Religion, should be desirous
to sacrifice a Calf, I d^ny that That ought to be prohibited by a Law.
Melibaeus, whose Calf it is, may lawfully kill his own Calf at home, and burn
any part of it that he thinks fit. For no Injury is thereby done to any one, no
Prejudice to another man's Goods. And for the same reason he may kill his Calf
also in a Religious Meeting. Whether the doing so be well-pleasing to God, or
no, it is their part to consider that do it. The part of the Magistrate is only
to take care that the Commonwealth receive no prejudice, and that there be no
Inju^y done to any man, either in Life or Estate. And thus what may be spent on
a Feast may be spent on a Sacrifice. But if peradventure such were the state of
things, that the Interest of the Commonwealth required all slaughter of Beasts
should be forborne for some while, in order to the increasing of the Stock of
Cattle, that had been destroyed by some extraordinary Murrain; Who sees not
that the Magistrate in such a case, may forbid all his Subjects to ^ill any
Calves for any use whatsoever? Only it is to be observed, that in this case the
Law is not made about a Religious, but a Political matter; n^r is the
Sacrifice, but the Slaughter of Calves thereby prohibited.

By this we see what difference there is between the Church and the
Commonwealth. Whatsoever is lawful in the Commonwealth, cannot be prohibited
by the Magistrate in the Church. Whatsoever is permitted unto any one of his
Subjects for their ordinary use, neither can, nor ought to be forbidden by him
to any Sect of People for their Religious Uses. If any man may lawfully take
Bread or Wine, either sitting or kneeling, in his own house, the Law ought not
to abridge him of the same Liberty in his Religious Worship; though in the Church
the use of Bread and Wine be very different, and be there applied to the
Mysteries of Faith, and Rites of Divine Worship. But those things that are
prejudicial to the Common weal of a People in their ordinary use, and are
therefore forbidden by Laws, those things ought not to be permitted to Churches
in their Sacred Rites. Only the Magistrate ought always to be very careful,
that he do not misuse his Authority, to the oppression of any Church, under
pretense of public Good.

It may be said; What if a Church be Idolatr^us, is that also to be tolerated
by the Magistrate? In answer, I ask; What Power can be given to the Magistrate
for ^^e Suppression of an Idolatrous Church, which may not, in time and place,
be made use of to the ruin of an Orthodox one? For it ^u^t be remembered that
the Civil Power is the sin^e every where, and the Religion of ^very Prince is
Orthodox to himself. If therefore such a Power be granted unto the Civil
Magistrate in Spirituals, as that at Geneva (for Example) he may extirpate, by
Violence and Blood, the Religion which is there reputed Idolatrous; by the same
Rule another Magistrate, in some neighboring Country, may oppress the Reformed
Religion; and, in India, the Christian. The Civil Power can either change every
thing in Religion, according to the Prince's pleasure, or it can change
nothing. If it be once permitted to introduce any thing into Religion, by the
means of Laws and Penalties, there can be no ^ounds put to it; but it will in
the same manner be lawful to alter every thing, according to that Rule of Truth
which the Magistrate has framed unto himself. No man whatsoever ought therefore
to be deprived of his Terrestrial Enjoyments, upon account of his Religion. Not
even Americans, subjected unto a Christian Prince, are to be punished either in
Body or Goods, for not embracing our Faith and Worship. If they are persuaded
that they please God in observing the Rites of their own Country, and that they
shall obtain Happiness by that means, they are to be left unto God and
themselves. Let us trace this matter to the bottom. Thus it is. An
inconsiderable and weak number of Christians, destitute of every thing, arrive
in a Pagan Country. These Foreigners beseech the Inhabitants, by the bowels of
Humanity, that they would succor them with the necessaries of Life. Those
necessaries are given them; Habitations are granted; and they all join
together, and grow up into one Body of People. The Christian Religion by this
means takes root in that Country, and spreads it self; but does not suddenly
grow the strongest. While things are in this Condition, Peace, Friendship,
Faith, and equal Justice, are preserved amongst them. At length the Magistrate
becomes a Christian, and by that means their Party becomes the most powerful.
Then immediately all Compacts are to be broken, all Civil Rights to be
violated, that Idolatry may be extirpated; And unless these innocent Paga^^,
strict Observers of the Rules of Equity and of the Law of Nature, and no ways
offending against the Laws of the Society, I say unless they will forsake their
ancient Religion, and embrace a new and strange one, they are to be turned out
of the Lands and Possessions of their Forefathers, and perhaps deprived of Life
it self. Then at last it appears what Zeal for the Church, joined with the
desire of Dominion, is capable to produce; and how easily the pretense of
Religion, and of the care of Souls, serves for a Cloak to Covetousness, Rapine
and Ambition.

Now whosoever maintains that Idolatry is to be rooted out of any place by
Laws, Punishments, Fire, and Sword, may apply this Story to himself. For the
reason of the thing is equal, both in America and Europe. And neither Pagans
there, nor any Dissenting Christians here, can with any right be deprived of
their worldly Goods, by the predominating Faction of a Court-Church: nor are
any Civil Rights to be either changed or violated upon account of Religion in
(...) place more than another.

But Idolatry (say some) is a Sin, and therefore not to be tolerated. If they
said, it were therefore to be avoided; the Inference were good. But it does not
follow, that because it is a Sin, it ought therefore to be punished by the
Magistrate. For it does not belong unto the Magistrate to make use of his Sword
in Punishing every thing, indifferently, that he takes to be a Sin against God.
Covetousness, Uncharitableness, Idleness, and many other things are sins, by
the consent of all m^n, which yet no man ever said were to be pu^ished by the
Magistrate The reason is, because they are not prejudicial to other men's
Right^, nor do they break the public Peace of (...). Nay, even the Sins of
Lying, and Perju^y, are no where punishable ^y Laws; unl^ss (...), in which the
r^al Turpitude of the t^i^g, and the Off^nce against God, are not co^s^^^r^d,
but only the Inju^y done unto men's Neighbors, and to the Commonwealth. And
what if in another Country, to a Mahumetan, or a Pagan Prince, the Christian
Religion seem false and offensive to God; may not the Christians, for the same
reason, and after the same manner, be extirpated there?

But it may be urged further, That by the Law of Moses, Idolaters were to be
rooted out. True indeed, by the Law of Moses: But that is not obligatory to us
Christians. No body pretends that every thing generally, enjoined by the Law of
Moses, ought to be practiced by Christians. But there is nothing more frivolous
than that common distinction of Moral, Judicial and Ceremonial Law, which men
ordinarily make use of. For no positive Law, whatsoever, can oblige any People,
but those to whom it is given. Hear O Israel; sufficiently restrains the
Obligation of the Law of Moses only to that People: And this Consideration
alone is Answer enough unto those that urge the Authority of the Law of Moses;
for the inflicting of Capital Punishments upon Idolaters. But however, I will
examine this Argument a little more particularly.

The Case of Idolaters, in respect of the Jewish Commonwealth, falls under a
double Consideration. The first is, of those who, being initiated in the
Mosaical Rites, and made Citizens of that Commonwealth, did afterward
apostatize from the Worship of the God of Israel. These were proceeded against
as Traitors and Rebels, guilty of no less than High Treason. For the
Commonwealth of the Jews, different in that from all others, was an absolute
Theocracy; nor was there or could there be, any difference between that
Commonwealth and the Church. The Laws established there concerning the Worship
of one Invisible Deity, were the civil Laws of that People, and a part of their
Political Government; in which God himself was the Legislator. Now if any one
can show me where there is a Commonwealth, at this time, constituted upon that
Foundation, I will acknowledge that the Ecclesiastical Laws do there
unavoidably become a part of the Civil; and that the Subjects of that
Government both may, and ought to be kept in strict conformity with that
Church, by the Civil Power. But there is absolutely no such thing, under the
Gospel, as a Christian Commonwealth. There are, indeed, many Cities and
Kingdoms that have embraced the Faith of Christ; but they have retained their
ancient Form of Government; with which the Law of Christ has not at all
meddled. He, indeed, has taught men how, by Faith and good Works, they may
attain Eternal Life. But he instituted no Commonwealth. He prescribed unto his
Followers no new and peculiar Form of Government; Nor put he the Sword into any
Magistrate's Hand, with Commission to make use of it in forcing men to forsake
their former Religion, and receive his.

Secondly, Foreigners, and such as were Strangers to the Commonwealth of
Israel, were not compelled by force to observe the Rites of the Mosaical Law.
But, on the contrary, in the very same place, where it is ordered, that an
Israelite, that was an Idolater, should be put to death, there it is provided,
that Strangers should not be vexed nor oppressed. Exodus 22.20, 21. I confess,
that the Seven Nations, that possessed the Land which was promised to the
Israelites, were utterly to be cut off. But this was not singly because they
were Idolaters. For, if that had been the Reason; Why were the Moabites, and
other Nations to be spared? No, the Reason is this. God being in a peculiar
manner the King of the Jews, he could not suffer the Adoration of any other
Deity, (which was properly an Act of High Treason against himself) in the Land
of Canaan, which was his Kingdom. For such a manifest Revolt could no ways
consist with his Dominion which was perfectly Political, in that Country. All
Idolatry was therefore to be rooted out of the Bounds of his King^om; because
it was an acknowledgment of another God; that is to say, another King; against
the Laws of Empire. The Inhabitants were also to be driven out, that the entire
possession of the Land might be given to the Israelites. And for the like
Reason, the Emims, and the Horims were driven out of their Countries, by the
Children of Esau and Loi; and their Lands, upon the same grounds, given by God
to the Invaders. Deuteronomy. 2. But though all Idolatry was thus rooted out of the
Land of Canaan, yet every Idolater was not brought to Execution. The whole
Family of Rahab, the whole Nation of the Gibeonites, articled with Joshua, and
were allowed by Treaty: and there were many Captives amongst the Jews, who were
Idolaters. David and Solomon subdued many Countries without the Confines of the
Land of Promise, and carried their Conquests as far as Euphrates. Amongst so
many Captives taken so many Nations reduced under their Obedience, we find not
one man forced into the Jewish Religion, and the Worship of the True God; and
punished for Idolatry; though all of them were certainly guilty of it. If any
one indeed, becoming a Proselyte, desired to be made a Denison of their
Commonwealth, he was obliged to submit unto their Laws; that is, to embrace
their Religion. But this he did willingly, on his own accord, not by
constraint. He did not unwillingly submit, to show his Obedience; But he sought
and solicited for it, as a Privilege; And as soon as he was admitted, he
became subject to the Laws of the Commonwealth; by which all Idolatry was
forbidden within the Borders of the Land of Canaan. But that Law (as I have
said) did not reach to any of those Regions, however subjected unto the Jews,
that were situated without those Bounds.

Thus far concerning outward Worship. Let us now consider Articles of Faith.

The Articles of Religion are some of them Practical, and some Speculative.
Now, though both sorts consist in the Knowledge of Truth, yet these terminate
simply in the Understanding, Those in^^uence the Will and Manners. Speculative
Opinions, therefore, and Articles of Faith (as they are called) which are
required only to be believed, cannot be imposed on any Church by the Law of the
Land. For it is absurd that things should be enjoined by Laws, which are not in
men's power to perform. And to believe this or that to be true, does not depend
upon our Will. But of this enough has been said already. But (will some say)
let men at least profess that they believe. A sweet Religion indeed, that
obliges men to dissemble, and tell Lies both to God and Man, for the Salvation
of their Souls! If the Magistrate thinks to save men thus, he seems to
understand little of the way of Salvation. And if he does it not in order to
save them; Why is he so sollicitous about the Articles of Faith as to enact
them by a Law?

Further, The Magistrate ought not to forbid the Preaching or Professing of any
Speculative Opinions in any Church, because they have no manner of relation to
the Civil Rights of the Subjects. If a Roman Catholic believe that to be
really the Body of Christ, which another man calls Bread, he does no injury
thereby to his Neighbor. If a Jew do not believe the New Testament to be the
Word of God, he does not thereby alter any thing in men's Civil Rights. If a
Heathen doubt of both Testaments, he is not therefore to be punished as a
pernicious Citizen. The Power of the Magistrate, and the Estates of the People,
may be equally secure, whether any man believe these things or no. I readily
grant, that these Opinions are false and absurd. But the business of Laws is
not to provide for the Truth of Opinions, but for the Safety and Security of
the Commonwealth, and of every particular man's Goods and Person. And so it
ought to be. For Truth certainly would do well enough, if she were once left to
shift for her Self. She seldom has received, and I fear never will receive,
much Assistance from the Power of Great men; to whom she is but rarely known,
and more rarely welcome. She is not taught by Laws, nor has she any need of
Force to procure her entrance into the minds of men. Errors indeed prevail by
the as^^stance of forr^ign and borrowed Succors. But if Truth makes not her
^ay into the Understanding by her own Light, she will be but the weaker for any
borrowed force Violence can add to her. Thus much for Speculative Opinions. Let
us now proceed to Practical ones.

A Good Life, in which consists not the least part of Religion and true Piety,
concerns also the Civil Government; and in it lies the safety both of Men's
Souls, and of the Commonwealth. Moral Actions belong therefore to the
Jurisdiction both of the outward and inward Court; both of the Civil and
Domestic Governor; I mean, both of the Magistrate and Conscience. Here
therefore is great danger, least one of these Jurisdictions entrench upon the
other, and Discord arise between the Keeper of the public Peace, and the
Overseers of Souls. But if what has been already said concerning the Limits of
both those Governments be rightly considered, it will easily remove all
difficulty in this matter.

Every man has an Immortal Soul, capable of Eternal Happiness or Misery; whose
Happiness depending upon his believing and doing those things in this Life,
which are necessary to the obtaining of Gods Favor, and are presc^ibed by God
to that end; it follows from thence, 1 st, That the observance of th^se things
is the highest Obligation that li^s upon Mankind, and that our utmost Care,
Application, and Diligence, ought to b^ exercis^d in the S^arch and Performance
of them; Because there is nothing in thi^ World that is of any consid^ration in
comparison with Eternity. 2 dly, That seeing one Man does not violate the Right
of another, by his Erroneous Opinions, and undue manner of Worship, nor i^ his
Per^ition any p^ejudice to another Man's Affai^s; therefore the care of each
Man's Salvation belongs only to himself. But I would not have this understood,
as if I meant hereby to condemn all charitable Admonitions, and affectionate
Endeavors to reduce Men from Errors; which are indeed the greatest Duty of a
Christian. Any one may employ as many Exhortations and Arguments as he pleases,
toward the promoting of another man's Salvation. But all Force and Compulsion
are to be forborne. Nothing is to be done imperiously. No body is obliged in
that matter to yield Obedience unto the Admonitions or Injunctions of another,
further than he himself is persuaded. Every man, in that, has the supreme and
absolute Authority of judging for himself. And the Reason is, because no body
else is concerned in it, nor can receive a^^ prejudice from his Conduct therein.

But besides their Souls, which are Immortal, Men have also their Temporal
Lives here upon Earth; the State whereof being frail and fleeting, and the
duration uncertain; they have n^ed of several outward Conveniences to the
support thereof, which are to be procured or preserv^d by Pains and Industry.
For those things that are necessary to the comfortable support of our Lives,
are not the spontaneous Products of Nature, nor do offer themselves sit and
prepared for our use. This part therefore draws on another care, and
necessarily gives another Imploym^nt. But the pravity of Mankind being such,
that they had rather injuriously prey upon the Fruits of other Men's Labou^s,
than take pains to provi^e for themselves; the n^c^ssity of (...) Men in the
Possession of what hone^t indu^try (...) already acquired; a^^ also of
preserving their Liberty and Strength, whereby they may acquire what they
further want; obliges M^n to enter into Society with one another; that ^y
mutual Assistance, and joi^t ^orce, they may secure unto each other their
Proprieties, in the things that contribute to the Comfort and Happiness of this
Life; leaving in the mean while to every Man the care of his own Eternal
Happiness, the attainment whereof can neither be facilitated by another Man's
Industry, nor can the loss of it turn to another Man's Prejudice, nor the hope
of it be forced from him by any external Violence. But forasmuch as Men thus
entering into Societies, grounded upon their mutual Compacts of Assistance, for
the Defense of their Temporal Goods, may nevertheless be deprived of them,
either by the Rapine and Fraud of their Fellow Citizens, or by the hostile
Violence of Foreigners; the Remedy of this Evil consists in Arms, Riches, and
Multitude of Citizens; the Remedy of the other in Laws; and the Care of all
things relating both to the one and the other, is committed by the Society to
the Civil Magistrate. This is the Orginal, this is the ^se and these are the
Bounds of the Legislative (which is the Supreme) Power, in every ^^mmonwealth.
I mean, that Provision may be made for the Security of each Man's private
Po^^^^^ions; for the Peace, Riches, and public Commodities of the whole
People; and, as much as possible, for the Increase of their inward Strength,
against Foreign I^vasions.

These things be^^g thus explained, it is easy to understand t^ w^^t and the
Legislative Power ought to be directed, and by what Measures regulated; and
that is the Temporal Good and outward Prosperity of the Society, which is the
sole Reason of Men's entering into Society, and the only thing they seek and aim
at in it. And it is also evident what Liberty remains to Men in reference to
their eternal Salvation; and that is, that every one should do what he in his
Conscience is persuaded to be acceptable to the Almighty, on whose good
pleasure and acceptance depends his eternal Happiness. For Obedience is due in
the first place to God, and afterward to the Laws.

But some may ask, What if the Magistrate should enjoin any thing by his
Authority that appears unlawful to the Conscience of a private Person? I
answer, That if Government be faithfully administered, and the Counsels of the
Magistrate be indeed directed to the public Good, this will seldom happen. But
if perhaps it do so fall out; I say, that such a private Person is to abstain
from the Action that he judges unlawful; and he is to undergo the Punishment,
which it is not unlawful for him to bear For the private Judgment of any Person
concerning a Law enacted in Political Matters, for the public Good, does not
take away the Obligation of that Law, nor deserve a Dispensation. But if the
Law indeed be concerning things that lie not within the Verge of the
Magistrate's Authority; (as for Example, that the People, or any Party amongst
them, should be compelled to embrace a strange Religion, and join in the
Worship and Ceremonies of another Church,) men are not in these cases obliged
by that Law, against their Consciences. For the Political Society is instituted
for no other end but only to secure every man's Possession of the things of this
life. The care of each man's Soul, and of the things of Heaven, which neither
does belong to the Commonwealth, nor can be subjected to it, is left entirely
to every man's self. Thus the safeguard of men's lives, and of the things that
belong unto this life, is the business of the Commonwealth; and the preserving
of those things unto their Owners is the Duty of the Magistrate. And therefore
the Magistrate cannot take away these worldly things from this man, or party,
and give them to that; nor change Propriety amongst Fellow Subjects, (no not
even by a Law) for a cause that has no relation to the end of Civil Government;
I mean, for their Religion; which whether it be true or false, does no
prejudice to the worldly concerns of their Fellow Subjects, which are the
things that only belong unto the care of the Commonwealth.

But what if the Magistrate believe such a Law as this to be for the public
Good? I answer: As the private Judgment of any particular Person, if erroneous,
does not exempt him from the obligation of Law, so the private Judgment (as I
may call it) of the Magistrate does not give him any new Right of imposing Laws
upon his Subjects; which neither was in the Constitution of the Government
granted him, nor ever was in the power of the People to grant; and least of
all, if he make it his business to enrich and advance his Followers and
Fellow-sectaries, with the Spoils of others. But what if the Magistrate believe
that he has a Right to make such Laws, and that they are for the public Good;
and his Subjects believe the contrary? Who shall be Judge between them? I
answer, God alone. For there is no Judge upon earth between the Supreme
Magistrate and the People. God, I say, is the only Judge in this case, who will
retribute unto every one at the last day according to his Deserts; that is,
according to his sincerity and uprightness, in endeavoring to promote Piety,
and the public Weal and Peace of Mankind. But what shall be done in the mean
while? I answer: The principal and chief care of every one ought to be of his
own Soul first, and in the next place of the public Peace: though yet there are
very few will think it is Peace there, were they see all laid waste.

There are two sorts of Contests amongst Men, the one managed by Law, the other
by Force; and these are of that nature, that where the one ends, the other
always begins. But it is not my business to inquire into the Power of the
Magistrate in the different Constitutions of Nations. I only know what usually
happens where Controversies arise, without a Judge to determine them. You will
say then the Magistrate being the stronger will have his Will, and carry his
point. Without doubt. But the Question is not here concerning the doubtfulness
of the Event, but the Rule of Right.

But to come to particulars. I say, First, No Opinions contrary to human
Society, or to those moral Rules which are necessary to the preservation of
Civil Society, are to be tolerated by the Magistrate. But of these indeed
Examples in any Church are rare. For no Sect can easily arrive to such a degree
of madness, as that it should think fit to teach, for Doctrines of Religion,
such things as manifestly undermine the Foundations of Society, and are
therefore condemned by the Judgment of all Mankind: because their own Interest,
Peace, Reputation, every Thing, would be thereby endangered.

Another more secret Evil, but more dangerous to the Commonwealth, is, when men
arrogate to themselves, and to those of their own Sect, some peculiar
Prerogative, covered over with a specious show of deceitful words, but in
effect opposite to the Civil Right of the Community. For Example. We cannot
find any Sect that teaches expressly, and openly, that Men are not obliged to
keep their Promise; that Princes may be dethroned by those that differ from
them in Religion; or that the Dominion of all things belongs only to
themselves. For these things, proposed thus nakedly and plainly, would soon
draw on them the Eye and Hand of the Magistrate, and awaken all the care of the
Commonwealth to a watchfulness against the spreading of so dangerous an Evil.
But nevertheless, we find those that say the same things, in other words. What
else do they mean, who teach that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics? Their
meaning, forsooth, is that the privilege of breaking Faith belongs unto
themselves: For they declare all that are not of their Communion to be
Heretics, or at least may declare them so whenever they think fit. What can
be the meaning of their asserting that Kings excommunicated forfeit their
Crowns and Kingdoms? It i^ ^vi^ent that they thereby arrogate unto t^ems^lves
the Power of deposing Kings: because they challenge the Power of
Excommunication, as the peculiar Right of their Hierrarchy. That Dominion is
founded in Grace, is also an Assertion by which those that maintain it do
plainly lay claim to the possession of all things. For they are not so wanting
to themselves as not to believe, or at least as not to profess, themselves to
be the truly pious and faithful. These therefore, and the like, who attribute
unto the Faithful, Religious and Orthodox; that is, in plain terms, unto
themselves; any peculiar Privilege or Power above other Mortals, in Civil
Concernments; or who, upon pretense of Religion, do challenge any manner of
Authority over such as are not associated with them in their Ecclesiastical
Communion; I say these have no right to be tolerated by the Magistrate; as
neither those that will not own and teach the Duty of tolerating All men in
matters of mere Religion. For what do all these and the like Doctrines
signify, but that those Men may, and are ready upon any occasion to seize the
Government, and possess themselves of the Estates and Fortunes of their
Fellow Subjects; and that they only ask leave to be tolerated by the Magistrate
so long, until they find themselves strong enough to effect it?

Again; That Church can have no right to be tolerated by the Magistrate, which
is cons^ituted upon such a bottom, that all those who enter into it, do
th^reby, ipso facto, deliver th^ms^lves up to the Protection and Service of
another P^i^ce. For by this means the Magistrate would give way to the settling
of a foreign Juris^iction in his own Country, and suffer his own ^^o^le ^o be
listed, as it were, for Soldiers against hi^ own Government. Nordoes the
frivolous and fallacious distinction between the Court and the Church afford
any remedy to this Inconvenience; especially when both the one and the other
are equally subject to the absolute Authority of the same Person; who has not
only power to persuade the Members of his Church to whatsoever he lists,
(either as purely Religious, or as in order thereunto) but can also enjoin it
them on pain of Eternal Fire. It is ridiculous for any one to profess himself
to be a Mahumetan only in his Religion, but in every thing else a faithful
Subject to a Christian Magistrate, whilst at the same time he acknowledges
himself bound to yield blind obedience to the Mufti of Constantinople; who
himself is entirely obedient to the Ottoman Emperor, and frames the feigned
Oracles of that Religion according to his pleasure. But this Mahumetan living
amongst Christians, would yet more apparently renounce their Government, if he
acknowledged the same Person to be Head of his Church who is the Supreme
Magistrate in the State.

Lastly, Those are not at all to be tolerated who deny the Being of a God.
Promises, Covenants, and Oaths, which are the Bonds of Humane Society, can have
no hold upon an Atheist. The taking away of God, though but even in thought,
dissolves all. Besides also, those that by their Atheism undermine and destroy
all Religion, can have no pretense of Religion whereupon to challenge the
Privilege of a Toleration. As for other Practical Opinions, though not
absolutely free from all Error, yet if they do not tend to establish Domination
over others, or Civil Impunit^ to the Church in which they are taught, there
can be no Reason why they should not be tolerated.

It remains that I say something concerning those Assemblies, which being
vulgarly called, and perhaps having sometimes been Conventicles, and Nurseries
of Factions and Seditions, are though it to afford the strongest matter of
Objection against this Doctrine of Toleration. But this has not happened by any
thing peculiar unto the Genius of such Assemblies, but by the unhappy
Circumstances of an oppressed or illsetled Liberty. These Accusations would
soon cease, if the Law of Toleration were once so settled, that all Churches
were obliged to lay down Toleration as the Foundation of their own Liberty; and
teach that Liberty of Conscience is every man's natural Right, equally belonging
to Dissenters as to themselves; and that no body ought to be compelled in
matters of Religion, either by Law or Force. The Establishment of this one
thing would take away all ground of Complaints and Tumults upon account of
Conscience. And these Causes of Discontents and Animosities being once removed,
there would remain nothing in these Assemblies that were not more peaceable,
and less apt to produce Disturbance of State, than in any other Meetings
whatsoever. But let us examine particularly the Heads of these Accusations.

You Will say, That Assemblies and Mee^ings endanger the Public Peace, and
threaten the Commonwealth. I answer: If this be so, Why are there daily such
numerous Meetings in Markets, and Courts of Judicature? Why are Crowds upon the
Exchange, and a Concourse of People in Cities suffered? You Will reply; These are
Civil Assemblies; but those that we object against are Ecclesiastical. I
answer: It Is a likely thing indeed, that such Assemblies as are altogether
remote from Civil Affairs, should be most apt to embroyl them. O, but Civil
Assemblies are composed of men that differ from one another in matters of
Religion, were in effect a Conspiracy against the Commonwealth; or as if men
would not be so much the more warmly unanimous in Religion, the less liberty
they had of Assembling. But it will be urged still, That Civil Assemblies are
open, and free for any one to enter into; whereas Religious Conventicles are
more private, and thereby give opportunity to Clandestine Machinations. I
answer, That this is not strictly true: For many Civil Assemblies are not open
to every one. And if some Religious Me^tings be private, Who are they (I
bese^ch you) that are to be blamed for it? those that desire, or those that
forbid their being public? Again; You Will say, That Religious Communion does
exceedingly unite men's Minds and Affections to one another, and is therefore
the more dangerous. But if this be so, Why is not the Magistrate afraid of his
own Church; and why does he not forbid their Assemblies, as things dangerous to
his Government? You Will say, Because he himself is a Part, and even the Head of
them. As if he were not also a Part of the Commonwealth, and the Head of the
whole People.

Let us therefore deal plainly. The Magistrate is afraid of other Churches, but
not of his own; because he is kind and favorable to the one, but severe and
cruel to the other. These he treats like Children, and indulges them even to
Wantonness: Those he uses as Slaves; and how blamelesly soever they demean
themselves, recompenses them no otherwise than by Galleys, Prisons,
Confiscations, and Death. These he cherishes and defends: Those he continually
scourges and oppresses. Let him turn the Tables: Or let those Dissenters enjoy
but the same Privileges in Civils as his other Subjects, and he will quickly
find that these Religious Meetings will be no longer dangerous. For if men
enter into Seditious Conspiracies, it is not Religion that inspires them to it
in their Meetings; but their Sufferings and Oppressions that make them willing
to ease themselves. Just and Moderate Governments are every where quiet, every
where safe. But Oppression raises Ferments, and makes Men struggle to cast off
an uneasy and tyrannical Yoke. I know that Seditions are very frequently
raised, upon pr^t^nce of Religion. But it is as true that, for Religion,
Subjects are frequently ill treated, and live miserably. Believe me, the Stirs
that are made proceed not from any peculiar Temper of this or that Church or
Religious Society; but from the common Disposition of all Mankind, who when
they groan under any heavy Burden, endeavor naturally to shake off the Yoke
that galls their Necks. Suppose this Business of Religion were let alone, and
that there were some other Distinction made between men and men, upon account
of their different Complexions, Shapes and Features; so that those who have
black Hair (for Example) or gray Eyes, should not enjoy the same Privileges as
other Citizens; that they should not be permitted either to buy or sell, or
live by their Callings; that Parents should not have the Government and
Education of their own Children; that they should either be excluded from the
Benefit of the Laws, or meet with partial Judges; can it be doubted but these
Persons, thus distinguished from others by the Color of their Hair and Eyes,
and united together by one common Persecution, would be as dangerous to the
Magistrate, as any others that had associated themselves merely upon the
account of Religion. Some enter into Company for Trade and Profit: Others, for
want of Business, have their Clubs for Clarret: Neighbourhoods joins some, and
Religion others. But there is one only Thing which gathers People into
Seditious Commotions, and that is Oppression.

You Will say; What, will you have People mee^ at Divine Service against the
Magistrates Will? I answer; Why, I pray, against his Will? Is it not both
lawful and necessary that they should meet? Against his Will, do you say?
That Is what I complain of. That is the very Root of all the Mischief. Why are
Assemblies less sufferable in a Church than in a Theater or Market? Those that
meet the^e are not either more vicious, or more turbulent, than those that meet
elsewhere. The Business in that is, that they are ill used, and therefore
therefore they are not to be suffered. Take away the Partiality that is used
toward them in matters of common Right; change the Laws; take away the
Penalties unto which they are subjected; and all things will immediately become
safe and peaceable. Nay, those that are averse to the Religion of the
Magistrate, will think themselves so much the more bound to maintain the Peace
of the Commonwealth, as their Condition is better in that Place than elsewhere;
And all the several separate Congregations, like so many Guardians of the
public Peace, will watch one another, that nothing may be innovated or changed
in the Form of the Government: Because they can hope for nothing better than
what they already enjoy; that is, an equal Condition with their
Fellow Subjects, under a just and moderate Government. Now if that Church,
which agrees in Religion with the Prince, be esteemed the chief Support of any
Civil Government, and that for no other other Reason (as has already been
shown) than because the Prince is kind, and the Laws are favorable to it; how
much greater will be the Security of a Government, where all good Subjects, of
whatsoever Church they be, without any Distinction upon account of Religion,
enjoying the same Favor of the Prince, and the same Benefit of the Laws, shall
become the common Support and Guard of it; and where none will have any
occasion to fear the Seve^^y of the Laws, but those that do Injuries to their
Neighbors, and offend against the Civil Peace?

That we may draw toward a Conclusion. The Sum of all we drive at is, That
every Man may enjoy the same Rights that are granted to others. Is it permitted
to worship God in the Roman manner? Let it be permitted to do it in the Geneva
Form also. Is it permitted to speak Latin in the Market-pla^^? Let those that
have a mind to it, be permitted to do it also in the Church. Is it lawful for
any man in his own House, to kneel, stand, sit, or use any other Posture; an^
to cloth himself in White or Black, in short or in long Garments? Let it not
be made unlawful to eat Bread, drink Wine, or wash with Water, in the Church.
In a Word: Whatsoever things are left free by Law in the common occasions of
Life, let them remain free unto every Church in Divine Worship. Let no Man's
Life, or Body, or House, or Estate, suffer any manner of Prejudice upon these
Accounts. Can you allow of the Presbyterian Discipline? Why should not the
Episcopal also have what they like? Ecclesiastical Authority, whether it be
administered by the Hands, of a single Person, or many, is every where the same;
and neither has any Jurisdiction in things Civil, nor any manner of Power of
Compulsion, nor any thing at all to do with Riches and Revenues.

Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and Sermons, are justified by daily experience, and
public Allowance. These are allowed to People of some one Persuasion: Why not
to all? If any thing pass in a Religious Meeting seditiously, and contrary to
the Public Peace, it is to be punished in the same manner, and no otherwise,
than as if it had happened in a Fair or Ma^ket. These Meetings ought not to be
Sanctuaries for Factious and Flagitious Fellows; Nor ought it to be less lawful
for Men to meet in Churches than in Halls; Nor ar^ one part of the Subjects to
be esteemed m^re blamea^le, for their meeting together, tha^ others. Ev^ry ^^e
is to be accountable for h^^ own Actions; and no man is to be laid under a
Suspicion or Odium, for the Fault of another. Those that are Seditious,
Murderers, Thieves, Robbers, Adulterers, Slanderers, etc. of whatsoever Church,
whether National, or not, ought to be punished and suppressed. But those whose
Doctrine is peaceable, and whose Manners are pure and blameless, ought to be
upon equal Terms with their Fellow Subjects. Thus if solemn Assemblies,
Observations of Festivals, Public Worship, be permitted to any one sort of
Professors; all these things ought to be permitted to the Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, Arminians, Quakers, and others, with the same
Liberty. Nay if we may openly speak the Truth and as becomes one Man to
another; neither Pagan, nor Mahumetan, nor Jew, ought to be excluded from the
Civil Rights of the Commonwealth, because of his Religion. The Gospel commands
no such thing. The Church, which judges not those that are without, (2 Cor.
5.12, 13.) wants it not. And the commonwealth, which embraces indifferently all
men that are honest, peaceable, and industrious, requires it not. Shall we
suffer a Pagan to deal and trade with us, and shall we not suffer him to pray
unto, and worship God? If we allow the Jews to have private Houses and
Dwellings amongst us, Why should we not allow them to have Synagogues? Is their
Doctrine more false, their Worship more abominable, or is the Civil Peace more
endangered, by their meeting in public, than in their private Houses? But if
these things may be granted to Jews and Pagans, surely the Condition of any
Christians ought not to be worse than theirs in a Christian Commonwealth.

You Will say, perhaps, Yes, it ought to be: Because they are more inclinable to
Factions, Tumults, and Civil Wars. I answer: Is this the fault of the Christian
Religion? If it be so, truly the Christian Religion is the worst of all
Religions, and ought neither to be embraced by any particular Person, nor
tolerated by any Commonwealth. For if this be the Genius, this the Nature of
the Christian Religion, to be turbulent, and destructive to the Civil Peace;
that Church it self which the Magistrate indulges will not always be innocent.
But far be it from us to say any such thing of that Religion, which carries the
greatest opposition to Covetousness, Ambition, Discord, Contention, and all
manner of inordinate Desires* and is the most mod^st and peaceable Religion
that ever was. We must therefore seek another Cause of those Evils that are
charged upon Religion. And if we consider right, we shall find it to consist
wholly in the Subject that I am treating of. It is not the Diversity of
Opinions, (which cannot be avoided) but the Refusal of Toleration to those that
are of different Opinions, (which might have been granted) that has produced
all the Bustles and Wars that have been in the Christian World, upon account of
Religion. The Heads and Leaders of the Church, moved by Avarice and insatiable
desire of Dominion, making use of the immoderate Ambition of Magistrates, and
the credulous Superstition of the giddy Multitude, have incensed and animated
them against those that dissent from themselves; by preaching unto them,
contrary to the Laws of the Gospel, and to the Precepts of Charity, That
Schismatics and Heretics are to be outed of their Possessions, and destroyed.
And thus have they mixed together, and confounded two things that are in
themselves most different, the Church and the Commonwealth. Now as it is very
difficult for men patiently to suffer themselves to be stripped of the Goods,
which they have got by their honest Industry; and contrary to all the Laws of
Equity, both Humane and Divine, to be delivered up for a Prey to other men's
Violence and Rapine; especially when they are otherwise altogether blameless,
and that the Occasion for which they are thus treated, does not at all belong
to the Jurisdiction of the Magistrate, but entirely to the Conscience of every
particular man, for the Conduct of which he is accountable to God only; What
else can be expected, but that these men, growing weary of the Evils under
which they labor, should in the end think it lawful for them to resist Force
with Force, and to defend their natural Rights (which are not forfeitable upon
account of Religion) with Arms as well as they can? That this has been hitherto
the ordinary course of things, is abundantly evident in History: And that it
will continue to be so hereafter, is but too apparent in Reason. It cannot
indeed be otherwise, so long as the Principle of Persecution for Religion shall
pervail, as it has done hitherto, with Magistrate and People; and so long as
those that ought to be the Preachers of Peace and Concord, shall continue, with
all their Art and Strength, to excite men to Arms, and sound the Trumpet of
War. But that Magistrates should thus suffer these Incendiaries, and Disturbers
of the Public Peace, might justly be wondered at; if it did not appear that
they have been invited by them unto a Participation of the Spoil, and have
therefore thought fit to make use of their Covetousness and Pride, as Means
whereby to increase their own Power. For who does not see that these Good Men
are indeed more Ministers of the Government, than Ministers of the Gospel; and
that by flattering the Ambition, and favoring the Dominion of Princes and Men
in Authority, they endeavor with all their might to promote that Tyranny in
the Commonwealth, which otherwise they should not be able to establish in the
Church? This is the unhappy Agreement that we see between the Church and State.
Whereas if each of them would contain it self within its own Bounds, the one
attending to the worldly welfare of the Common wealth, the other to the
Salv^tion of Souls, it is impossible that any Discord should ever have happened
between them. Sed, pudet haec opprobria, etc. God Almighty grant, I beseech
him, that the Gospel of Peace may at length be Preached, and that Civil
Magistrates growing more careful to conform their own Consciences to the Law of
God, and less solicitous about the binding of other men's Consciences by Humane
Laws, may, like Fathers of their Country, direct all their Counsels and
Endeavors to promote universally the Civil Welfare of all their Children;
except only of such as are arrogant, ungovernable, and injurious to their
Brethren; and that all Ecclesiastical men, who boast thems^lv^s to be the
Successors of the Apostles, walking peaceably and mod^stly in the Apostles
steps, without intermedling with State Affairs, may apply themselves wholly to
promote the Salvation of Souls. Farewell.

POSTSCRIPT.
PErhaps it may not be amiss to add a few things concerning Heresy and Schism.
A Turk is not, nor can be, either Heretic, or Schismatic to a Christian: and
if any man fall off from the Christian Faith to Mahumetism, he does not thereby
become a Heretic or Schismatic, but an Apostate, and an Infidel. This no body
doubts of. And by this it appears that men of different Religions cannot be
Heretics or Schismatics to one another.

We are to enquire therefore, what men are of the same Religion. Concerning
which it is manifest that those who have one and the same Rule of Faith and
Worship, are of the same Religion; and those who have not the same Rule of
Faith and Worship, are of different Religions. For since all things that belong
unto that Religion, are contained in that Rule, it follows necessarily, that
those who agree in one Rule, are of one and the same Religion: and vice versa.
Thus Turks and Christians are of different Religions; because these take the
Holy Scriptures to be the Rule of their Religion, and those the Alcoran. And
for the same reason, there may be different Religions also even amongst
Christians. The Papists and the Lutherans, though both of them profess Faith in
Christ, and are therefore called Christians, yet are not both of the same
Religion because These acknowledge nothing but the Holy Scriptures to be the
Rule and Foundation of their Religion; Those take in also Traditions and the
Decrees of Popes, and of all these together make the Rule of their Religion.
And thus the Christians of St. John (as they are called) and the Christians of
Geneva, are of different Religions; because These also take only the
Scriptures; and Those, I know not what Traditions, for the Rule of their
Religion.

This being settled, it follows; First, that Heresy is a Separation made in
Ecclesiastical Communion between men of the same Religion, for some Opinions no
way contained in the Rule it self. And Secondly That amongst those who
acknowledge nothing but the Holy Scriptures to be their Rule of Faith, Heresy
is a Separation made in their Christian Communion, for Opinions not contained
in the express words of Scripture. Now this Separation may be made in a twofold
manner.

1. When the greater part, or (by the Magistrate's Patronage) the stronger
part, of the Church separates it self from others, by excluding them out of her
Communion, because they will not profess their Belief of certain Opinions which
are not to be found in the express words of Scripture, For it is not the
paucity of those that are separated, nor the Authority of the Magistrate, that
can make any man guilty of Heresy. But he only is an Heretic who divides the
Church into parts, introduces Names and Marks of Distinction, and voluntarily
makes a Separation because of such Opinions.

2. When any one separates himself from the Communion of a Church, because that
Church does not publicly profess some certain Opinions which the Holy
Scriptures do not expressly teach.

Both these are Heretics: because they err in Fundamentals, and they err
obstinately against Knowledge. For when they have determined the Holy
Scriptures to be the only Foundation of Faith; they nevertheless lay down
certain Propositions as fundamental, which are not in the Scripture; and
because others will not acknowledge these additional Opinions of theirs, nor
build upon them as if they were necessary and fundamental, they therefore make
a Separation in the Church; either by withdrawing themselves from the others,
or expelling the others from them. Nor does it signify any thing for them to
say that their Confessions and Symboles are agreeable to Scripture, and to the
Analogy of Faith. For if they be conceived in the express words of Scripture,
there ca^ ^e no question about them; because those are acknowledged by all
Christians to be of Divine Inspiration, and therefore fundamental. But if they
say that the Articles which they require to be professed are Consequences
deduced from the Scripture; it is undoubtedly well done of them to believe and
profess such things as seem unto them so agreeable to the Rule of Faith; But it
would be very ill done to obtrude those things upon others, unto whom they do
not seem to be the indubitable Doctrines of the Scripture. And to make a
Separation for such things as these, which neither are nor can be fundamental,
is to become Heretics* For I do not think there is any man arrived to that
degree of madness, as that he dare give out his Consequences and
Interpretations of Scripture as Divine Inspirations, and compare the Articles
of Faith that he has framed according to his own Fancy with the Authority of
the Scripture. I know there are some Propositions so evidently agreeable to
Scripture, that no body can deny them to be drawn from thence; but about those
therefore there can be no difference. This only I say, that however clearly we
may think this or the other Doctrine to be deduced from Scripture, we ought not
therefore to impose it upon others, as a necessary Article of Faith, because we
believe it to be agreeable to the Rule of Faith; unless we would be content
also that other Doctrines should be imposed upon us in the same manner; and
that we should be compelled to receive and profess all the different and
contradictory Opinions of Lutherans, Calvinists, Remonstrants, Anabaptists, an^
other Sects, which the Contrivers of Symbols, Systems and Confessions, are
accu^^tomed to deliver unto their Followers as genuine and necessary Deductions
from the Holy Scripture. I cannot but wonder at the extravagant arrogance of
those Men who think that they themselves can explain things necessary to
Salvation more clearly than the Holy Ghost, the Eternal and Infinite Wisdom of
God.

Thus much concerning Heresy; which word in common use is applied only to the
Doctrinal part of Religion. Let us now consider Schism, which is a Crime near
akin to it. For both those words seem unto me to signify an ill-grounded
Separation in Ecclesiastical Communion, made about things not necessary. But
since Use, which is the Supreme Law in matter of Language, has determined that
Heresy relates to Errors in Faith and Schism to those in Worship or
Discipline, we must consider them under that Distinction.

Schism then, for the same reasons that have already been alleged, is nothing
else but a Separation made in the Communion of the Church, upon account of
something in Divine Worship, or Ecclesiastical Discipline, that is not any
necessary part of it. Now nothing in Worship or Discipline can be necessary to
Christian Communion, but what Christ our Legislator, or the Apostles, by
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, have commanded in express words.

In a word: He that denies not any thing that the Holy Scriptures teach in
express words, nor makes a Separation upon occasion of any thing that is not
manifestly contained in the Sacred Text; however he may be nicknamed by any
Sect of Christi^ns, and declared by some, or all of them to be utterly void of
true Christianity, yet indeed and in truth this Man cannot be either a Heretic
or a Schismatic.

These things might have been explained more largely, and more advantageously:
but it is enough to have hinted at them, thus briefly, to a Person of your
parts.

FINIS.

