A PROPOSAL for Promoting USEFUL KNOWLEDGE among the British Plantations in
America.
THE English are possessed of a long Tract of Continent, from Nova Scotia to
Georgia, extending North and South through different Climates, having different
Soils, producing different Plants, Mines and Minerals, and capable of different
Improvements, Manufactures, etc.

The first Drudgery of Settling new Colonies, which confines the Attention of
People to mere Necessaries, is now pretty well over; and there are many in
every Province in Circumstances that set them at Ease, and afford Leisure to
cultivate the finer Arts, and improve the common Stock of Knowledge. To such of
these who are Men of Speculation, many Hints must from time to time arise, many
Observations occur, which if well-examined, pursued and improved, might produce
Discoveries to the Advantage of some or all of the British Plantations, or to
the Benefit of Mankind in general.

But as from the Extent of the Country such Persons are widely separated, and
seldom can see and converse or be acquainted with each other, so that many
useful Particulars remain uncommunicated, die with the Discoverers, and are
lost to Mankind it is, to remedy this Inconvenience for the future, proposed,

That One Society be formed of Virtuosi or ingenious Men residing in the
several Colonies, to be called The American Philosophical Society; who are to
maintain a constant Correspondence.

That Philadelphia being the City nearest the Center of the Continent-Colonies,
communicating with all of them northward and southward by Post, and with all
the Islands by Sea, and having the Advantage of a good growing Library, be the
Center of the Society.

That at Philadelphia there be always at least seven Members, viz. a Physician,
a Botanist, a Mathematician, a Chemist, a Mechanician, a Geographer, and a
general Natural Philosopher, besides a President, Treasurer and Secretary.

That these Members meet once a Month, or oftener, at their own Expense, to
communicate to each other their Observations, Experiments, etc. to receive read
and consider such Letters, Communications, or Queries as shall be sent from
distant Members; to direct the Dispersing of Copies of such Communications as
are valuable, to other distant Members, in order to procure their Sentiments
thereupon, etc.

That the Subjects of the Correspondence be, All new-discovered Plants, Herbs,
Trees, Roots, etc. their Virtues, Uses, etc. Methods of Propagating them, and
making such as are useful, but particular to some Plantations, more general.
Improvements of vegetable Juices, as Cyders, Wines, etc. New Methods of Curing
or Preventing Diseases. All new-discovered Fossils in different Countries, as
Mines, Minerals, Quarries, etc. New and useful Improvements in any Branch of
Mathematics. New Discoveries in Chemistry, such as Improvements in
Distillation, Brewing, Assaying of Ores, etc. New Mechanical Inventions for
saving Labor; as Mills, Carriages, etc. and for Raising and Conveying of
Water, Draining of Meadows, etc. All new Arts, Trades, Manufactures, etc. that
may be proposed or thought of* Surveys, Maps and Charts of particular Parts of
the Seacoasts, or Inland Countries; Course and Junction of Rivers and great
Roads, Situation of Lakes and Mountains, Nature of the Soil and Productions,
etc. New Methods of Improving the Breed of useful Animals; Introducing other
Sorts from foreign Countries. New Improvements in Planting, Gardening, Clearing
Land, etc. And all philosophical Experiments that let Light into the Nature of
Things, tend to increase the Power of Man over Matter, and multiply the
Conveniences or Pleasures of Life.

That a Correspondence already begun by some intended Members, shall be kept up
by this Society with the ROYAL SOCIETY of London, and with the DUBLIN SOCIETY.

That every Member shall have Abstracts sent him Quarterly, of every Thing
valuable communicated to the Society's Secretary at Philadelphia; free of all
Charge except the Yearly Payment hereafter mentioned.

That by Permission of the Postmaster-General, such Communications pass between
the Secretary of the Society and the Members, Postage-free.

That for defraying the Expense of such Experiments as the Society shall judge
proper to cause to be made, and other contingent Charges for the common Good,
every Member send a Piece of Eight per Annum to the Treasurer, at Philadelphia,
to form a Common Stock, to be disburs'd by Order of the President with the
Consent of the Majority of the Members that can conveniently be consulted
thereupon, to such Persons and Places where and by whom the Experiments are to
be made, and otherwise as there shall be Occasion; of which Disbursements an
exact Account shall be kept, and communicated yearly to every Member.

That at the first Meetings of the Members at Philadelphia, such Rules be
formed for Regulating their Meetings and Transactions for the General Benefit,
as shall be convenient and necessary; to be afterward changed and improved as
there shall be Occasion, wherein due Regard is to be had to the Advice of
distant Members.

That at the End of every Year, Collections be made and printed, of such
Experiments, Discoveries, Improvements, etc. as may be thought of public
Advantage: And that every Member have a Copy sent him.

That the Business and Duty of the Secretary be, To receive all Letters
intended for the Society, and lay them before the President and Members at
their Meetings; to abstract, correct and methodize such Papers, etc. as require
it, and as he shall be directed to do by the President, after they have been
considered, debated and digested in the Society; to enter Copies thereof in the
Society's Books, and make out Copies for distant Members; to answer their
Letters by Direction of the President, and keep Records of all material
Transactions of the Society, etc.

Benjamin Franklin, the Writer of this Proposal, offers himself to serve the
Society as their Secretary, 'till they shall be provided with one more capable.

Philadelphia, May 14. 1743.

