THE Poor Doubting CHRISTIAN Drawn to CHRIST. Wherein The main Hindrances,
which keep Men from coming to CHRIST, are discovered. With special Helps to
recover GOD'S Favor.

By Thomas Hooker.

With an Abstract of the Author's Life.

Isaiah lv. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that
has no Money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without
Money, and without Price.

BOSTON. Printed by GREEN, BUSHEL, and ALLEN, for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhil.
1743.

The PREFACE.
MR. THOMAS HOOKER was one of the most esteemed Divines in England, Holland,
and New England, in his Day; for great Abilities, a piercing Judgment, solid
Learning, extraordinary Sanctity, deep Acquaintance with the Scriptures and
experimental Divinity, and for awakening and successful Preaching: And his Name
and Writings were very dear to Multitudes of the most serious Christians in
those distant Countries.

Dr. Cotton Mather tells us, -- That He was born at Marfield, in Licestershire
in ENGLAND, about the Year 1586. His natural Temper was cheerful and courteous;
but accompanied with such a sensible Grandeur of Mind, as caused his Friends to
prognosticate that he was born to be considerable: His Parents gave him a
liberal Education, and sent him to Cambridge; where he was chose a Proctor of
the University, [whose Office is to see good Orders and Exercises duly
performed there.] where the Influence he had on the Reformation of some growing
Abuses, signalized him; and he became a Fellow of Emanuel College: The Ability
and Fidelity wherewith he acquitted himself in his Fellowship, was sensible to
the whole University; and while he was in this Employment, the more effectual
Grace of GOD gave him the Experience of a true Regeneration. It pleased the
SPIRIT of GOD very powerfully to break into the Soul of this Person, with such
a Sense of his being exposed to the just Wrath of Heaven, as filled him with
the most unusual Degrees of Horror and Anguish, as broke not only his Rest but
his Heart also, and caused him to cry out, While I suffer thy Terrors, O LORD I
am distracted: He long had a Soul harrassed with such Distresses. He afterward
gave this Account of himself; That in the Time of his Agonies, he could reason
himself to the RULE, and conclude there was no Way but Submission to GOD, and
lying at the Foot of his Mercy in CHRIST JESUS, and waiting humbly there, 'till
he should please to persuade the Soul of his Favor: Nevertheless, when he came
to apply this RULE to himself, in his own Condition, his Reasoning would fail
him, he was able to do nothing. Having been a considerable while thus troubled
with such Impressions from the SPIRIT of Bondage, as were to fit him for the
great Services and Employments which GOD intended him; at length he received
the SPIRIT of Adoption, with well-grounded Persuasions of his Interest in the
New Covenant. It became his Manner at his laying down for Sleep in the Evening,
to single out some certain Promise of GOD, which he would repeat and ponder,
and keep his Heart close to it, until he found that Satisfaction of Soul
wherewith he could say, I will lay me down in Peace and sleep; for thou, O LORD
make me dwell in Assurance. And he would afterward counsel Others to take
(...) same Course; telling them, That the Promise was the Boat, which was to
carry a perishing Sinner over unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Being well got through
the Storm of Soul, which had helped him to a most experimental Acquaintance
with the Truths of the Gospel, and the Way of employing and applying those
Truths; he was willing to serve the Church of GOD in the Ministry.

Leaving the University, he now had no Superior, and scarce any Equal, for the
Skill of treating a troubled Soul: He publicly and frequently preached about
London; and in a little Time grew famous for his ministerial Abilities, but
especially for his notable Faculty at the wise and fit Management of wounded
Spirits. Mr. Rogers of Dedham, The famous Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the
Parish Church of Dedham in England.
so highly valued him for his multifarious Abilities, that he used many
Endeavors to get him settled at Colchester: But Chelmsford in Essex, a Town of
great Concourse, hearing the Fame of Mr. Hooker's powerful Ministry, addressed
him to become their Lecturer: And about the Year 1626, he accepted their Offer;
becoming not only their Lecturer but also on the Lord's Days an Assistant to
one Mr. Mitchel the Incumbent of the Place; who being a godly (...), gladly
encouraged Mr. Hooker, and lived with him in a most comfortable Amity. Here his
Lecture was exceedingly frequented and succeeded; and the Light of his Ministry
shone through the whole County of Essex: And his Hearers felt those penetrating
Impressions of his Ministry upon their Souls, which caused them to reverence
him as a Teacher sent from GOD. As his Person was adorned with Learning, so his
Preaching was set off with a Liveliness extraordinary: Yet the Vigor in his
Ministry being raised by a Coal from the Altar, it would be a Wrong to the good
SPIRIT of GOD, if HE should not be acknowledged the Author of it: That SPIRIT
accordingly gave a wonderful and unusual Success to the Ministry, wherein he so
remarkably breathed. Hereby was a great Reformation wrought, not only in the
Town, but in the adjacent Country; from all Parts whereof they came to hear the
Wisdom of the LORD JESUS CHRIST in the Gospel, by this worthy Man dispensed:
And some of great Quality among the rest, would often resort from far to his
Assembly.

'The Joy of the People in this Light, was but for a Season: The conscientious
Nonconformity of Mr. Hooker, to some Rites of the Church of England, then
vigorously pressed, especially on such able and useful Ministers as were most
likely to be laid aside by their scrupling those Rites, made it necessary for
him to lay down his Ministry at Chelmsford, when he had been about four Years
employed there, in it. Hereupon, at the Request of several eminent Persons, he
kept a School at his own hired House, having our Mr. John Eliot This was
afterward the reverend and renowned Mr. Eliot of Roxbury in N. Eng.
for his Usher, at Little-Baddow, not far from Chelmsford: Where he managed his
Charge with such Discretion, such Authority, and such Efficacy, that he did
very great Service to the Church of GOD in the Education of such as afterward
themselves proved not a little serviceable. In a Manuscript written by our
blessed Eliot, he gives a very great Account of the little Academy then
maintained in the House of Mr. Hooker; and among other Things, he says, To this
Place I was called, through the infinite Riches of GOD'S Mercy in CHRIST to my
poor Soul: For here the LORD said to my dead Soul, Live; and through the Grace of
CHRIST, I do live, and I shall live for ever! When I came to this blessed
Family, I then saw, and never before, the Power of Godliness in its lively
Vigor and Efficacy. While he continued thus in the Heart of Essex, and in the
Hearts of the People there; he signalized his Usefulness in many other
Instances: The godly Ministers round about the Country would have Recourse to
him, to be directed and resolved in their difficult Cases; and it was by his
Means that those godly Ministers held their monthly Meetings, for Fasting,
Prayer, and profitable Conferences. He was indeed a general Blessing to the
Church of GOD. And that which made the silencing Mr. Hooker more unaccountable,
was, that seven and forty conformable Ministers of the neighboring Towns,
understanding the Bishop of London pretended Mr. Hooker's Ministry to be
injurious or offensive to them, subscribed a Petition to the Bishop for his
Continuance in the Ministry at Chelmsford: Yet all would not avail. The
spiritual Court sitting at Chelmsford about 1630, had not only silenced him,
but also bound him in a Bond of Fifty Pounds, to appear before the High
Commission. But his Friends advised him to forfeit his Bonds rather than throw
himself any further into the Hands of his Enemies; sent the Sum into Court; and
having by the Earl of Warwick a private Recess for a Time, he fled from the
Pursevants to take his Passage for the LOW COUNTRIES: At parting with some of
his Friends, one of them said, Sir, what if the Wind should not be fair when
you come to the Vessel? Whereto he instantly replied, Brother, Let us leave
that with Him who keep the Wind in the Hollow of his Hand: And it was observed,
that though the Wind was cross 'till he came aboard, yet it immediately then came
about fair and fresh; and he was no sooner under sail, but the Officer arrived
at the Seaside, happily too late to come at him.

Arriving in HOLLAND, he was invited to a Settlement with Mr. Paget at
Amsterdam: But being secretly willing Mr. Hooker should not accept the
Invitation, he went to Delft; where he was most kindly received by Mr. Forbs an
aged and holy Scotch Minister, under whose Ministry many English Merchants were
then settled. Mr. Forbs manifested a strong Desire to enjoy the Fellowship of
Mr. Hooker in the Work of the Gospel; which he did about two Years: In all
which Time they lived like Brethren. At the End of two Years, he had a Call to
Rotterdam; which he the more readily accepted, because it renewed his
Acquaintance with his invaluable Dr. Ames, who had newly left his Place, [viz.
Professor of Divinity] in the Frisian University. With him Mr. Hooker spent the
Residue of his Time in Holland, and assisted him in composing some of his
Discourses: For such was the Regard which Dr. Ames had for him, that
notwithstanding his vast Ability and Experience; yet when he came to the Narrow
of any Question about the instituted Worship of GOD, he would still profess
himself conquered by Mr. Hooker's Reason; declaring that though he had been
acquainted with many Scholars of diverse Nations, yet he never met with Mr.
Hooker's Equal, either for Preaching or for Disputing.

But having tarried in HOLLAND long enough to see the State of Religion in the
Churches there; he became satisfied it was neither eligible for Him to tarry in
that Country, nor convenient for his Friends to be invited thither after him.
Wherefore, about this Time, understanding that many of his Friends in Essex
were upon the Wing for a Wilderness in AMERICA, where they hoped for an
Opportunity to enjoy and practice the pure Worship of CHRIST, in Churches
gathered according to his Direction; He readily answered their Invitation to
accompany them in this Undertaking. Returning to England, he was thickly
scented by the Pursevants, [and remarkably preserv'd] but concealed himself
more carefully 'till he went on board the Ship at the Downs, which bro't him
and Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Stone to NEW ENGLAND in 1633. She set sail about the
Middle of July and arrived at Boston on Sept. 3. which glorious Triumvirate
coming together, as Dr. Cotton Mather calls them, inspired the People here with
great and universal Joy; as I remember the ancient People speaking in my
youthful Days.
Mr. Hooker and Mr. Cotton were for their different Genius, the Luther and
Melanchion of NEW ENGLAND. At their Arrival Mr. Cotton settled with the Church
of Boston; but Mr. Hooker with the Church of Newtown, Since and now called
Cambridge.
having Mr. Stone for his Assistant. Inexpressible was now the Joy of Mr.
Hooker to find himself surrounded with his Friends, who were come over the Year
before to prepare for his Reception: With open Arms he embraced them, and
uttered these Words, Now I live, if ye stand fast in the LORD. But such
Multitudes flocked over after them, that Newtown became to strait for them: And
it was Mr. Hooker's Advice, that they should not incur the Danger of a Sitna or
an Esek, where they might have a Rehoboth. Accordingly in June 1636, He, with
about an hundred Persons in the first Company, removed an hundred Miles to the
Westward, to settle on the Banks of CONNECTICUT-RIVER: Who not being able to
walk above ten Miles a Day [thro' the Woods,] took up near a Fortnight in their
Journey; having no Pillows to take their nightly Rest on, but such as their
Father Jacob sound in the Way to Padan-aram. Here [ viz. at Hartford] Mr.
Hooker was the chief Instrument of beginning ANOTHER COLONY: [ viz. CONNECTICUT
COLONY.]

He was a Man of Prayer, and would say, That PRAYER was a principal Part of a
Minister's Work; 'twas by this that he was to carry on the rest. Accordingly he
devoted one Day in a Month to private Prayer with Fasting before the LORD,
beside the public Fasts, which often occurred. He would say, That such
extraordinary Favors as the Life of Religion, and the Power of Godliness, must
be preserved by the frequent use of such extraordinary Means as Prayer with
Fasting: And if Professors grow negligent of those Means, Iniquity will abound,
and the Love of many wax cold. He did much abound in Acts of CHARITY. He had a
singular Ability at giving Answers to Cases of Conscience; whereof happy was
the Experience of some Thousands: And for this Work he usually set apart the
second Day of the Week; wherein he admitted all sorts of Persons in their
Discourses with him to reap the Benefit of the extraordinary Experience which
himself had found of Satan's Devices. Though he had a notable Hand in discussing
and adjusting controversial Points, yet he would hardly ever handle polemical
Divinity in the Pulpit; but the Spirit of his Ministry lay in Points of the
most practical Religion, and the grand Concerns of a Sinner's Preparation for,
Implantation in, and Salvation by CHRIST. That reverend and excellent Man Mr.
[Henry] Whitfield, having spent many Years in studying Books, did at length
take two or three Years in studying Men: And in Pursuance of this Design,
having acquainted himself with the most considerable Divines in England, at
last fell into the Acquaintance of Mr. Hooker: Concerning whom he gave this
Testimony, That he had not though it there had been such a Man on Earth; a Man in
whom there shone so many Excellencies, as were in this incomparable Hooker; a
Man in whom Learning and Wisdom were so tempered with Zeal, Holiness, and
Watchfulness. When one that stood weeping by the Bedside, in the Time of his
[last] Sickness, said to him, Sir, You are going to receive the Reward of all
your Labors: He [raised up himself So Dr. C. Mather expressed it to me.
and] replied, Brother, I am going to receive MERCY. At last he closed his Eyes
with his own Hands, and gently stroaking his Forehead, with a Smile in his
Countenance gave a little Groan, and expired, on July 7. 1647. In which last
Hours the glorious Peace of Soul which he had enjoyed without any Interruption
for near thirty Years together, so gloriously accompanied him, that a worthy
Spectator then writing to Mr. Cotton, a Relation thereof, made this Reflection;
(...) the Sight of his Death will make me have more pleasant Tho'ts of Death
than ever I yet had in my Life! Thus lived and died one of the first Three. He
of whom his Pupil Mr. Ash I suppose the Rev. and famous Mr. Simeon Ash of
London: And by this he means OLD England; and by the other, NEW.
gives this Testimony; For his great Abilities and glorious Services, both in
this and the other England, he deserves a Place in the first Rank of them whose
Lives are of late recorded.

These are so many Passages recited from his Life, written by Dr. Cotton
Mather; who also calls him, the Light of the Western Churches and Pillar of
CONNECTICUT COLONY; and declares, that yet he has underdone in this Part of his
Composure: And Dr. Increase Mather, writing of Mr. Hooker, says; So good and so
great a Man; than whom CONNECTICUT never did, and perhaps never will see a
greater Person; and that Dr. Ames used to say. He never knew his Equal.

As to the following Treatise, -- It evidently breaths his most pious Spirit,
and shows his intimate Acquaintance with Heart-Religion. It is delivered in the
plainest and most familiar Language, void of all Ornament, as if he were
speaking privately to some distressed Soul; which was his usual Manner in his
practical Discourses, as being more adapted to reach the Heart, than please the
Imagination. And this admirable Condescension in a Man of such vast Abilities,
is a clear Discovery of the real Greatness of his holy Soul.

It seems to be but Part of others on the same Text, delivered to a popular
Auditory, taken in short Hand by one of his Hearers in England, and published
there, after his coming over hither, without his Knowledge, as many if not most
of his practical Discourses were; as also with diverse Mistakes committed by
Transcribers and Printers, which I have endeavored to correct. And for the
Reader's clearer Understanding the particular Purport of the several Parts; I
have presumed to divide the Treatise into Chapters, and set the Heads in the
former Margin for their Titles, in this, which I guess to be about the seventh
Edition.

I would recommend it to those desirous of having the Impediments which hinder
them from applying by Faith to CHRIST, removed; and by divine Help, would learn
the happy Way of going first to the Promises of CHRIST, and then therewith to
CHRIST himself; and in this Way daily living on him and deriving from him all
their Strength and Blessedness.

And may the DIVINE SPIRIT attend it to the Soul of every one that reads it;
and by promoting the Life of Faith, and other Parts of Sanctification, increase
their present Comfort, and the Glory of the DIVINE REDEEMER, as well as their
mutual Joy with HIM and this blessed Instrument of his, when they shall meet
together in the growing World above: AMEN.

Thomas Prince.
Boston, April 1. 1743.
THE Poor doubting Christian Drawn to CHRIST.
JOHN vi. 45. Every Man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the
Father, comes unto me.


CHAP. I. Impediments which hinder Souls from coming to Christ, removed.
THERE are diverse Impediments which hinder poor Christians from coming to
CHRIST; all which I desire to reduce to these following Heads,

I. FIRST, Such Hindrances as really keep Men from coming to take hold of
Christ at all; which are briefly these.

1. Blind, Careless, or Presumptuous Security; whereby Men content themselves
with their present Condition, presuming all is well with them, when there is no
such matter.

2. Being convinced of this, they bethink how to save themselves by their own
Strength; and thereupon set upon a Reformation of Life, thinking to make God
amends by reforming some Sins which they hear themselves reproved of by the
Ministers.

3. The Sinner being convinced of his utter inability to please God in himself,
at length gets up a Stair higher, and sees all his Performances, and Prayers,
and Duties to be of no power in themselves, but that he must leave all, and
cleave only unto Christ by Faith; and this he thinks he can do well enough, and
so thrusts himself upon Christ, thinking all the work is then done, and no more
to be looked after.

4. If he sees this fails him too, then he goes yet further, and confesses he
cannot come to Christ, except Christ give him his Hand, and help him up;
therefore now he will attend on the Ordinances, and labor and bestir himself
hard in the use of all good Means, conceiving thereby to hammer out at last a
Faith of his own to make him happy. And here he rests, hanging as it were upon
the outside of the Ark so long, till at last the waves and winds growing fierce
and violent, he is beaten off, and so sinks for ever.

II. Besides these, there are OTHER kinds of Hindrances which do not indeed
deprive a Man of Title and Interest to eternal Happiness, but make the way
tedious and uncomfortable, so that be cannot come to Christ so readily as he
desires and longs to do: The ground whereof is this; when Men, out of carnal
Reason, contrive another way to come to Christ than ever he ordained or
revealed; when we set up our Standards by God's Standard, or our Threshold by
his, Ezekiel. 43.8. and out of our own Imagination, make another state of
believing than ever Christ required or ordained. No marvel that we come short
of him: For thus we put Rubs, and make Bars in our way: We manacle our Hands,
and fetter our Feet, and then say that we cannot take, nor go: Thus it is with
you poor Christians, and the Fault is your own But, amongst many, there be
three Hindrances which are chiefly to be observed, Three main Hindrances which
keep Men from Christ
by which many gracious Hearts are marvelously hindered from coming to, and
from receiving that Comfort from Christ which they might, and he is willing to
impart unto them.

[1] First; The distressed Soul, being (happily) truly humbled, takes notice of
the Beauty of Holiness, and the Image of God stamped on the Hearts of his
Children, and of all those precious Promises which God has made to all that
are his; now the Soul seeing these, begins thus to Reason with it self and
says, Surely if I were so holy and so gracious, then I might have hope to
receive the pardon of my Sins: Or were my Heart so enlarged to Duties, and
could my Heart be so carried with Power against my Corruptions, to master them,
then there were some Hope: But when I have no Power against Sin, nor any Heart
to seek so importunately for a Christ, how dare I think that any Mercy belongs
to me, having so many Wants? Thus they dare not come to the Promise; and they
will not venture upon it, because they have not that Enlargement to Duties, and
that Power against Corruption which sometimes the Saints of God have.

But we must know, this does not hinder; and that we make that a Hindrance,
which, in Truth, is none. For (observe it) we must not think to bring our
Enlargements and Hope to the Promise, but go to the Promise for them: Hope must
be stirred, and Desire quickened, and Love and Joy kindled by the Promise. But
who made this Condition of the Covenant, That a Man must have so much of
Enlargement, before he can come to the Promise? Our Savior being our Husband,
requires no Portion with us, nor ever looked after any: All that he looks for
is mere Poverty and Emptiness. If thou have nothing, yet he will have thee with
thy nothing; provided that thou will have him. Therefore it is thus written,
The Rich he sends away empty; but the Poor he satisfies, and the Thirsty he
refreshes with Good; and so, as that there is nothing required on our Side but
to receive him as a Husband: For, Buy without Money is the Text. You must not
come and think to buy a Husband: The Lord looks for no Power or Sufficiency
from you, of yourselves; nor of your selves any Power against Corruption, or
Enlargement to Duties: If you will be content that Christ shall take all from
you, and dispose of you and all; then take a Savior, and then you have him.

Object. But the poor Soul says, If I go thus hood-winked, how shall I know
that I do not presume, and how shall I know that I have a true Title to the
Promise?

Answ. I answer: There is no better Argument in the World to prove that thou
have an Interest in Christ, than this, which is thy taking of the Lord Christ
as a Savior wholly, and as an Husband only, John 1.12. As many as received
him, to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe
on his Name. He does not say, To as many as had such Enlargement to Duties, and
such Power against Corruption; but if thou will take Christ upon those Terms on
which he offers himself: There is no better Argument under Heaven than that, to
prove that thou have a Title to the Promise. Indeed there is a desperate
Despair that often seizes upon the Hearts of distressed Sinners.

[2.] Therefore in the second Place, as the Sinner looks upon the Excellency of
Christ and of Grace, and upon his own Insufficiency withal, which makes him
that he will not venture upon the Promise; so he looks too altogether upon his
own Sinfulness and Worthlessness, and therefore dare not venture upon it: He
views the Number of his Sins so many and vile, and the Continuance of them so
long, and durable; and he sees the Floods of Abominations coming in so amain
upon his Soul, and Satan to boot, (who helps him forward in all this,)
therefore he dares not make out unto Christ. But this is the Policy of the
Devil, who (if he can) will make a Man to see Sin through his own Spectacles, or
not to see it at all; and then to say, There is Mercy enough in a Savior, and
therefore I may live as I list. But when the Sinner will needs see his Sin,
then he will let him see nothing but Sin; and this, to the End that he may
despair for ever.

Now here the poor Sinner is at a stand, and can go no further: For tell him of
the Mercy of God, and of the plenteous Redemption in Christ, and of the Riches
of the Freeness of God's Grace: What (says he) should I think there is any
Mercy for me, and that I have any Interest in Christ? That were strange. And
thus the Soul is always poring, and always too much fastened and settled upon
his Corruptions, ever stirring the Sore, without ever going to the Physician.
Where note, That a Man is as well kept from looking to Christ by Despair, as by
Presumption. Before he sees his Sin, he thinks his Condition is good, and that
he has a Sufficiency of his own, and needs not go to Christ; and when he sees
his Sin, then he beholds so much Vileness in himself, and in it, that he dares
not go to Christ, lest when he comes before him, he sends him down to that
ever-burning Lake of Fire and Brimstone. Herein the Devil is very subtle: But
this does not hinder our Title to Christ; neither ought it to discourage us
from laying hold on Salvation. For,

1. First, (Observe it) For whom did Christ come into the World, and for whom
did he die when he was come? Was it for the Righteous? Such needed him not: It
was for the poor Sinner that judges himself, that condemns himself, and that
finds he cannot save himself. Paul says, 2 Timothy 1.15. Christ Jesus came into
the World to save Sinners, of whom I am the chief: And the Prophet, Zech. 13.1.
There is a Fountain opened for Sin and for Uncleanness; that is, for all sorts
of Sins, and kind of Sinners; be their Iniquities never so great, and never so
vile, there is a Fountain set open for them; come who will. There was never any
saved that was not a Rebel first; nor any received to Mercy, that first opposed
not the Mercies of God, and his Grace in Christ. The fiery Serpents did sting
the People in the Wilderness; first then they were stung, and being stung,
there was a brazen Serpent to heal them. But,

2. Observe the Folly of this Plea: What Scripture ever said, that the
Greatness of Man's Sin could hinder the Greatness of God's Mercy? No Scripture
says so; we see David prays to the contrary, Psalm. 25.11. Have Mercy upon
me, O Lord, and pardon my Sins, for they are great: Nay, God himself does the
quite contrary, Isai. 43.24, 25. Thou have made me serve with thy Sins, and
wearied me with thine Iniquities; yet I am he that blotteth out thy
Transgressions for my Names Sake. When the Jews did tire God with their
distempered Manners, and burdened him with their sinful Courses; then the
Lord, for his own Names sake, would not so much as remember their Iniquities
against them.

3. Again observe, That Sins, though they be never so heinous of themselves, yet
if the Soul can see them, and the Heart be burdened with them, they are so far
from hindering the Work of Faith, and from making thee incapable of Mercy, that
they fit thee the rather to go to Christ. The Truth is (which I pray you to
take Notice of) it is not properly our Unworthiness, but our Pride and
Haughtiness that hinders us from coming to Christ; for we would have something
from ourselves, and not all from him. But to the distressed Soul, that sees the
Vileness of his Sins; I say, suppose thy Sins were (...); yet upon such a
Suppose, thou would not go to Christ, as persuaded of the Freeness of his
Grace; but because thy Sins are not many, and upon Conceit that thou have a
Worthiness in thy self, and would bring something to Christ, and not receive
all from him; therefore thou keep back. And is it not plain (then) that it
is thy Pride and thy Self-conceitedness that hinders thee? Thou think thou
must have thus much Grace and Holiness; and Christ must not justify the
Ungodly, but the godly Man. But I tell thee, that, upon such Terms, he will
never justify thee, or any Man while the World stands.

Object. But the Soul replies again; My Sins are worse than so, not only
because they are many, but because of the Mercy and Salvation that I have
rejected, and which has been offered me from Day to Day.

Answ. But, I answer: This cannot hurt thee, provided that thou can see those
Evils of thine: For then, though thou have cast away the Kindness of the Lord,
yet the Lord will not cast thee away, if thou will come and seek him earnestly
again and again, Isai. 57.17, 18. For the Iniquity of his Covetousness I was
wroth (says God) and I smote him; I hid myself, and he went on frowardly in
the Way of his own Heart. If this could have hindered, Judah should never have
received Mercy: But the Text says, I have seen his Ways, and will heal him;
Jer. 3.1. Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet turn again unto me,
says the Lord. So then, there is no Time past, if a Man has but a Heart to
return. There is no Limitation of the Riches of God's free Grace, except the
Sin against the Holy Ghost; therefore says Christ, Rev. 3.20. I stand at the
Door and knock: Though he cry 'till he be hoarse, and stand 'till he be weary,
yet he stands still: If any adulterous or deceitful Wretch open, the Lord will
come in, and bring store of Comfort to him, and sup with him.

Object. Oh, all that is true, (says the poor Soul) had I but a Heart to mourn
for my Baseness. See my Sins I do, but this is my Misery, I cannot be burdened
with them; I have a Heart that cannot break and mourn for dishonouring God, and
offending him so many Ways. But I say,

Answ. This Hurts not neither; provided that thy Heart be weary of it self,
because it cannot be weary of Sin, Mich, 7.18. The Lord shows Mercy, because
he will show Mercy: It is not because thou can please him, but because Mercy
pleases him. When did the Lord show Mercy to Paul? I say, When, but even when
Paul did express most Malice against him? Acts 16. Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? He persecutes Christ, and yet Christ pities him, and shows him Mercy:
And so the churlish Jailer, when he was most opposite against the Means of
Grace, the Lord even then showed most Compassion upon him. He that (before)
resisted the Means of Grace, was now bro't home by those Means that before he
resisted.

Object. But woe to me (says the poor Soul) you are now come to the Quick; this
very Word is like a Millstone about my Neck, and I in the Sea, ready to be sunk
for ever. This is the Depth of that Baseness that lies on me, even this, that
all the Means can do no better upon me. Why, what though Paul and the Jailer were
bad enough, so bad as you say? Yet they were made better by the Means: But this
is my hopeless Condition, that the Means of Grace prevail nothing on me. Oh, is
there such an heart in Hell as I have? For how bad must it needs be, when all
the Means in the World can do it no more Good! And now, methinks I feel my
Heart more hard and inexorable under all God's Ordinances, than when at first I
believed. My Condition therefore is (most certainly) hopeless, seeing the Means
that should soften me, do but harden me, and make me worse.

Answ. This is the last Plea whereby the Devil keeps in, and possesses the
Heart of a poor heartless Sinner. But let me answer thee, and for Answer, I
say: This hurts not neither: For here at least thou may have Hope of Mercy?
And here observe the three Things by Way of Answer; and know that.

1. First; The Word and Means of Grace do work Good, if they make thee more
sensible of thy Hardness and Deadness. Though happily they work not that Good, and
after that Manner that thou desire; yet if they make thee to see thy
Baseness, thy Hardness of Heart, and Dullness of Spirit, in Regard of that Body
of Death which hangs upon thee, then the Word and they work in the best Manner;
because it is after God's Manner, howsoever not after thine. That Physic works
most kindly, that makes the Party sick before it works: So it is with the Word.
Before, thou had a proud Heart, and did therefore lift up thy self in thine
own Abilities, and did trust in thine own Strength, and thou tho'tst that thy
Care, and the Improvement of the Means, would work Wonders: But now the Word
works sweetly, when it makes thee apprehensive, that a wounded Soul is the Gift
of God, not of Man, nor of the Means; when it makes thee look up to God for it,
and to prize it when thou have it; and to wait upon God with thy daily Prayers,
still to continue it so. To feel Deadness, is Life; and to feel Hardness is
Softness: Only remember this one Caution; except there be some Lust or
Distemper that thy Heart hankers after, (for then the Word will harden thee,
because thou hardnest thy self) that one I say excepted, thou art in a good Way.

2. Secondly; (Mark this, I beseech you) Thou art the Cause why thy Heart is
not softened, and why the Word works not upon thy Soul: The Distemper of thine
own Heart, hinders the working of the Word, and Dispensation of God's
Providence, and the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace. Thou think to limit the
holy One of Israel; but that may not be: For, his Covenant is a Covenant of
Grace; and the Lord (who is free) will not stand bent to thy Bow, or give thee
Grace when thou will; for, Wait for Mercy.
it is not for us to know the Times and Seasons. What if the Lord will not give
thee Grace this Year, nor the next, nor all thy Life? If at the last Gasp he
will drop in a little of his Favor, it is more than he owes thee. Therefore
hear to Day, and wait to Morrow, and continue in so doing, because thou know
not when God may bless his own Ordinances. Complain not of Delays, but wait,
for God has waited for you long; and therefore if he make you wait for Peace
of Conscience, and Assurance of his Love, he deals but equally with you, and as
shall be best with you. God gives what, and when, and how he will; therefore
wait for it.

3. Thirdly; Know and consider, that thou have rested upon thine own Duties and
Endeavors, Rest not upon Duties.
and so do not go to God, that blesses both the Means, and all the
Endeavors of his this Way. The Fault therefore is thine own, (I say) thine
own, because thou restest in thine own Performances, and in the Power of the
Means that thou apprehendest, and do not go to God, that would have wrought
more than all they can: For, did a Man depend upon God's Power and Mercy in his
Ordinances, he should always find some proportionable Succor, as well when he
finds no Success, as when he finds any. God sometimes give, and sometimes
delays to give: But God's Love is as constant when he gives not, as when he
gives. Therefore labor to quit all carnal Confidence in holy Duties. Rest not
in thine own Performances, but look beyond all Duties to God in Christ, and
desire him to give thee the Success above them.

Watch how thy Soul behaves it self after the naked Discharge of a Duty: All
quiet and calm, notwithstanding he lives in a daily Course and Practice of Sin;
so that he prays and lies, fasts and cozens, and yet this makes all whole: I
tell you, it is an undoubted Argument, that the Soul did place a carnal
Confidence in his own Performances, and as yet never attained to a Lord Christ
in the Duty: For he that seeks a Savior in his Duties, and rests not in
Self-Performances, this Man brings a Savior a Christ into his Soul. And mark
what follows; Christ brings pardoning Virtue, and purging Virtue with him, and
gives him more Power against Corruptions, and more Suspicion over his own Soul
than ever he had before: So that the Soul begins to quarrel with it self, and
lies down with Shame, and says, What shall I think of my praying and hearing?
Where is the Virtue and Power of it? Did ever Christ hear my Prayers, or come
into my Soul by his Ordinances? Where is the purging Virtue then, to clear me
of my Sins? Where is the purifying Virtue to cleanse me of my Corruptions? This
is a Ground of a gracious Heart, that places not any Confidence in holy
Duties, but only in the Lord Christ.

Do not content yourselves in this, that you see a Need of a Savior, because
your Minds are enlightened therein, and your Reason persuaded thereof; when in
the mean Time you place a kind of Confidence in the Duty performed and Service
discharged, and think thereby to bring Christ at your Beck, and you in the mean
while do what you please: This is a wonderful cunning Craft of Satan. This I
say then, a Man may see a Need of a Savior; but do not quiet thy Soul because
thou know it must be so, and because thou find by Experience thou can
not help thy self, the Guilt of Sin still sticks upon thee, and therefore a
Savior now must help thee: I say content not thy self with the mere Notion of
it, to say, I see it should be so, and it must be so, and rest thy self
contented in the Performance of Services, and think to bring a Savior at thy
Beck, to do what thou will for thy Soul; this is a Slight that Satan has pinned
to thy Soul. Many think to have a sovereign Authority over Christ, when they
have performed Duties: So that he does not use the Means to be led to Christ,
but he takes up his Duties to be commanders of Christ, and that he may dispose
of Christ for his own Turn; so that he makes Christ an Abetter of his own
Wickedness, not a Subduer of his Corruptions. This is a mavelous Deceit, when
Men rest in their own Abilities, and so abuse Christ. And this will appear in
these Particulars.

First; Watch how thy Heart is in the Performance of Duty. Does thy Prayer, and
Hearing, and performing of Services, make thee venturous and foolhardy to
meddle with Corruptions? Then it is a certain Ground thou placest carnal
Confidence in thine own Performances. As for Example: If a Professor should
say, What if I do now and then sin? And what if I do now and then pilfer, and
use false Weights and Measures? I Will but pray so much the more, and fast so
much the oftener: Will not my Conscience then be satisfied? It shall be
satisfied; I will command it: I will put in Bail for my Sin, and pray against
it. Now I beseech you observe it; this praying and performing of Duties, is
merely to command a Savior to give Allowance to Sin, that so he may commit it
freely. As who would say, I have Authority over my Savior, and he shall pardon
my Sin, and give me Allowance to commit Sin. O the wretched Villainy that is in
this Man's Heart! Fearful is thy Estate, whosoever thou art, that make thy
Performances an Abettor of thy Distempers: So that thou do thy Duties not to
convey Christ, that he may help thee to prevent Sin, but that Christ may take
off the Venom and Indignation of Sin, that so thou may commit Wickedness
without either Suspicion or further Distraction.

Many a Man makes his Services his Saviors. For, he makes them the Bottom to
bear up his Conscience: The Ground whereof is this: Happily he finds and feels by
woeful Experience what the Fruits of Sin are: He sees the Venom of his
Corruptions, and the lamentable Effects of all his sinful Practices: He though it
it before, a fine Thing to swear, and lie, and drink, and follow base Company;
but now they are Gravel to his Heart, and Gall to his Soul. His Conscience
flies in his Face, and he is ready to sink down to Hell under the Burden of
his mis-order'd Life. Conscience says, These be thy Sins, and these will be
thy Damnation: They have been thy Delight, but they will prove thy Shame and
Confusion in the End; and shortly thou shall find the Smart of them: To Hell
therefore, be packing, and gone.

Now this Man has no other Cure for his Conscience in such a Case, but this;
he entreats Conscience to be quiet. He confesses he has lived in base
Courses, and his Condition to be very miserable; but now he will reform all. He
has neglected Prayer heretofore, but now he will pray: He has hated God's
Servants, but now he will love them: His Ways have been exceeding evil, but now
he will reform them, and now he will turn over a new Leaf. This he says, and
this (he thinks) will serve his Turn. And thus many poor Souls use the Means as
Mediators, and so fall short of Christ. But a gracious Heart does not only
pray, and hear, and receive, and use all possible Means to obtain CHRIST, but
is restless and unsatisfied 'till he enjoy and possess CHRIST in the Means. He
rests not upon the bare Performance of any Duty, neither thinks by Virtue of
any such his Endeavors to get into Christ.

I will express this Particular more fully in this Manner. A rich Usurer that
is sick of some Disease; tell him such a Physician can cure him, but he stands
upon State, and will not come without a great deal of Charge. Charge (says he)
I do not stand upon that; I have Money enough by me, enough to fetch him
hither. Such a Man now places all his Confidence in his Money. So when the
Soul sees the Guilt of Sin is not removed, and that Conscience is still
snarling, and that (the Law condemning him) Christ is the only Savior, and he
only that can satisfy and cure all. But now, How shall Christ be procured? Why?
His Prayer, and Fasting, and Performances, may command so much, and that by the
Power and Merit of the Work done. The Voice of a Pharisee, and proper Language
of a Papist. But what Promise is there for it? Within-book none. But thus Fools
rest on their own Performances, and so fall short of Christ and Salvation.

Object But oh (says a poor Sinner) fain would I go out of my self. I see too
well now, that I have rested, and do rest upon Duties done; but I cannot deny
my self as I would.

Answ. I answer, It is Satan's Subtilty to keep us in ourselves, by
endeavoring thus to make us go out of ourselves: For by our own Strength he
would have us to do it; and persuades us we may. But this is a mavelous
Deepness of his, wherein he shows both Malice and Cunning in the suparlative.
For here he makes us believe (and we, out of Ignorance are persuaded as he
would have us) that we have the Staff in our own Hands, that is, the Power to
get out of our selves. But is it so? Oh no, it is a supernatural Work to be
quite out of our selves. The same Hand must bring us out of our selves, that
must bring us to Christ: And this is Self-denial: And Self-denial is, when the
Soul knows it has nothing, Self-denial, what it is.
and therefore is so overpowered with the mighty Hand of God, and the Work of
his Spirit, that it does not so much as expect any Power or Ability from it
self, or from the Creature, in the doing of any Good: For it knows it is dead,
and therefore cannot help it self, much less can the Creature do it any Good,
It therefore looks up to Heaven, and seeks all Sufficiency from God alone. For
(observe it) whiles I thus think that I have Ability to go out of my self; do I
not then say, I have a Principle within me to deny my self? But it is not so;
rather it is quite contrary: For to deny a Man's self, is to know he has no
Power in himself to do any spiritual Duty: Therefore we must look only to the
Voice that calls us, the Voice of Christ, and know that he that calls us from
the Ways of Darkness, and out of our selves, must and will bring us out.
Therefore expect only Power from Christ to pluck thee out of thy self, and to
make thee a Believer; for the same Hand must do both, or it will never be.

I would not have a poor Creature think thus with himself: If this Means, and
these Ordinances will do me no good, nor work upon my Heart, I shall never have
Comfort: But speak thus unto God, and say, In truth, Lord, I expect no Power
from my self, nor from the Means; but my Resolution is, to look up to him that
has hid his Face yet from his poor Servant. I will not look any lower, as here
within my self, for any such Power: No, Lord, but to the highest in Power and
Gifts. Nor will I look to the Minister, or to the Means, but I will wait upon
thee (O Lord) and look up to thy Power, to work by thine own Means. Remember
what the Prophet says: Isai. 50.20. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord,
and obeys the Voice of his Servant, that walks in Darkness, and has no
Light, (of Comfort) let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay himself
upon his God. Then when all other Things in the World fail, let the Soul look
up to the Lord, and get away from it self. For then is the fittest Time of all
to meet with God. I would have a Christian choose this Time above all Times, the
fittest wherein to meet his Savior, and to disappoint Satan: For, as I said,
it is the last Refuge that the Devil has: And if he miss of this, his Force is
gone for ever. For otherwise the Sinner, partly seeing the Beauty of Grace,
will not; and partly seeing the Baseness of his own Heart, will not dare to
come to Christ.

[3.] But the next Complaint, in the next Place, is, Want of Sense and Feeling,
such as a Christian must have, and finds not. Therefore the distressed Soul
says, Alas! I never knew what it was to have the Assurance of God's Love, I
never received any Evidence of God's Favor; and can I (then) think that I have
Faith? They that believe, have their Hearts filled with Joy unspeakable and
glorious; the Word says as much: But I am a Stranger to this Joy; how then can
I think that I have any Work of Faith wrought in me?

Answ. I answer; This does not hinder, either that thou have not Faith, or that
thou may not come to God in Christ by believing. Only remember these three
Particulars;

First; Thou must not think to have this Joy and Refreshing before thou go
to the Promise: Thou must look for it when thou have chewed and fed upon it: Or
would thou have the Lord give thee the whole Bargain at once, and before the
Match be made? This Joy is a Fruit that proceeds from Faith after much
wrestling; and does not presently flow from Faith, not so soon as ever a
Christian begins to believe, but after a Time, and then the Heart is joyous;
but never filled with Joy before believing. Afterward, and when a Man has had
the sweet Dew of the Promises dropping upon him; but many a Day after, let him
look for this Joy.

Secondly; Know that these Joys, and this Sense and Feeling may be absent from
Faith. For a Man may have a good Faith, and yet want the Relish and Sweetness
which he longs after. One may want what he Desires, and yet want neither Life
nor Heat. A Tree may want Leaves and Fruit, and yet want neither Sap nor
Moisture: And a Man's Faith may be somewhat strong, when his Feeling is nothing
at all. David was justified and sanctified, and yet wanted this Joy. And Job
trusted upon God when he had but little Feeling; as when he says, Thou make
me a But to shoot at; yet I will trust in thee though thou kill me. Therefore
build not your Comfort upon Sense and Feeling, which is to build upon the Sand;
but go to the Promise, as to the Rock, for it.

Quest. But how comes this Desire after Christ?

I answer: There are no more but two Affections in the Soul to absent Good, God
infinitely wise having so framed it; and these two are Hope and Desire. The
Understanding says, such a Thing is profitable and comfortable if I had it;
then Hope is sent out to wait for that Goodness; and if it comes not, then
Desire is sent out to meet that Goodness: Hope stands and waits for it; but
Desire wanders up and down seeking and enquiring after a LORD JESUS, and goes
from Coast to Coast, from East to West; O that I could, O that I might, and
when shall I? And how may I come to the Speech of a Lord Christ? As it was with
the Spouse in the Canticles; when her Beloved was gone, she wandered up and
down seeking him, and enquiring of the Watchmen if they did not see him whom
her Soul loved; so wanders from this Thing to that, from this Place to that
Place, and never cease to seek and see if she can gain Notice of Christ. It
goes to Prayer, to see if that will entreat a Christ; it goes to the Word, to
see if that will reveal a Christ: It goes to Conference, to see if it can hear
of Christ there: Then it comes to the Congregation, and to the Sacrament, to
see if it can hear of any News of a Lord Christ, and of Mercy.

The Soul thus continues wandering and seeking, till at last the Lord Christ
comes into the Soul, when the Soul has thus hungered and longed for him. At
length the Lord Christ is pleased to show himself in view: Behold, the King
comes: so the Soul says, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away thy Sins. O
thou poor brokenhearted Sinner, here is thy Savior; he is come down from
Heaven to speak Peace to thy Soul in the Pardon of thy Sins. Thou that hungrest
for a Christ, here he is to satisfy thee: Thou that thirsts after Christ,
here he is to refresh thee. Thou that have long sought him, he says, Here I
am, and all my Merits are thine.

Now when the Lord Jesus is pleased to present himself to the Soul, now Desire
has met with the Lord.

It is in this Case with a Sinner, as it is with a Traitor who is pursued, and
takes a strong Hold, and is there besieged: And now he sees no hope of Favor,
nor no hope of Escape; therefore he is content to submit, and lay his Head on
the Block, that he may receive Punishment for his Offense: Now coming to
Execution, he hears an inkling from the Messenger there is yet Hope he may be
pardoned. The poor Traitor in the Prison, with that is stirred up to hope. Nay,
then he hears by another Messenger from the King himself, if he will come to
the Court, and seek to his Majesty, and importune his Grace for Mercy and
Favor, it is like he shall be pardoned. Then he makes haste, and Desire carries
him to the Court to sue for Favor from the King. So that now he will be
listening and enquiring of every one there, Did you hear the King speak nothing
of me? How stands the King's Mind toward me? Pray how goes my Case? Then some
tell him, the Truth is, the King hears you are humbled, and that you are sorry
for what you have done: At last the King looks out of the Window, and sees the
Malefactor, and says, Is this the Traitor? One says, Yes, if it please your
Highness, this is the Man that is humbled and pleads for Mercy, and desires
nothing so much as Favor. Hereupon, the King being full of Mercy, tells him,
The Truth is, his Pardon is a drawing, and coming toward him. With that his
Heart leaps in his Bowels, and his Heart is enlarged toward his Majesty; and
he says, God bless your Majesty; never was there so favorable a Prince to so
poor a Traitor. His Heart leaps for Joy, because his Pardon is coming toward
him. Happily it is not sealed yet: Now when it is sealed, and all done, the King
calls him in, and delivers it.

So it is with a poor Sinner, he is the Malefactor. You that have committed
High Treason, you think not of it: But take heed, God will pursue you one Day.
Happily God lets you alone for the present, but he will surprise you on a sudden,
and Conscience will pluck thee by the Throat, and carry thee down to Hell. And
now the Lord pursues him with a heavy Stroke and Indignation, and lets fly at
his Face, and sets Conscience at work as a Pursevant, and that says; These are
thy Sins, and to Hell thou must go, God has sent me to execute thy Soul. Now
the poor Soul sees he can no Way escape from the Lord, and to purchase any
Favor he sees it impossible; therefore he is resolved to lie down at God's
Feet, and hope. Now Hope is a Faculty of the Soul to look out for Mercy: As a
Man that is in Expectation of the Coming of his Friend, goes to the Top of a
Hill, looks round about him, to see if he can understand any Thing of his
Friend; so the Soul hopes and waits, and stretches it self out for Mercy. When
will it be, Lord? When will this Pardon come? The Soul gets up and stands as it
were a tip-toe: O when will it come, Lord?

How does God stir up the Heart to hope? It Is worth the while to consider how
this is maintained.

1. First; The Lord sweetly stays the Heart, and persuades it that his Sins are
pardonable, and that the Good he wants may be supplied; this is a great Support
to the Soul. Hope is always of a Good to come. Now when a poor Sinner sees his
Sins, the Number of them, the Nature of them, the Vileness of them, the
Cursedness of his Soul, that he can take no Rest; he sees no Rest in the
Creature, nor in himself. Though he pray all Day, yet he cannot get the Pardon of
one Sin: The Soul is out of any Expectation of Pardon, or Power of Mercy in any
Thing he has or does: Though all Means, all Helps, though all Men and Angels
should join together, yet they cannot pardon one Sin of his. Now the Lord lifts
up his Voice, and says from Heaven, thy Sins are pardonable. O the Infiniteness
of God's Power! though the Guilt of Sin is powerful to condemn the Soul. But when
the infinite Power of the Lord is considered, as able to overpower all his
Sins, this lifts up the Heart in some Expectation that the Lord will show
Mercy to a Man; though it is a hard Thing to hope, when the Soul is thus
troubled, (Can this Heart be broken? Can these Sins be pardoned? Can this Soul
be saved?) Now comes in the Power of God: God can pardon them. Never measure
the Power of God by that shallow Conceit of thine. All Things are possible to
God, though not to Men. And as it is said of Abraham, He hoped above Hope; he
looked to the Lord that was able to do what he had promised: He considered not
that he had a dead Body, but that he had a living God to hope on. Justice
cannot be so severe to revenge thee, as Mercy is gracious to do Good unto thee.
If thy Sins be never so many, God's Justice never so great; yet Mercy is above
all thy Sins, above all thy Rebellions. This may support thy Soul.

So there you have the first Ground to stir up Hope; thy Sins are pardonable.
There is more Power in God to show Mercy to thee, than Power in Sin to destroy
thee.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost; it was
the Scope of his coming. Now says the broken and humble Sinner, I am lost. Did
Christ come to save Sinners? Then Christ must fail of his End, or I of my
Comfort. God says, Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden: I am
weary: Unless the Lord intended good to me, why did he invite me, and bid me
come? Surely he means to show Mercy to me.

(1.) Oh take heed of Despair. Question thy Estate thou may, thou must; but
to cast away all Hope is very heinous in the Eyes of the Lord. Cast away all
carnal Confidence thou must, and yet thou must hope. Let Israel hope in the
Lord, for in the Lord, etc.

1. The Lord takes this very ill at our Hands. Thou go to the deep Dungeon
of thy Corruption, and there thou say these Sins can never be pardoned: I am
still proud, and more stubborn: This Distress God sees not, God succoureth
not, his Hand cannot reach, his Mercy cannot save. Now mark what the Prophet
says to such a perplexed Soul, Isaiah 40.27. Why say thou thy Way is hid
from the Lord? The Lord says, Why say thou so? The young Man shall faint
and be weary; but they that wait on the Lord shall renew their Strength. Is any
Thing too hard for the Lord? You wrong God exceedingly: You think its Matter of
Humility, to count your self so vile. Can God pardon such a Wretches Sin as
mine? Mark that Place of the Psalmist; they spoke against the Lord, Can the
Lord prepare a Table in the Wilderness? They spoke not against themselves, but
against the LORD. So we speak against God, and charge God himself. It is true,
says the Soul, Manasseth was pardoned, Paul was converted, God's Saints have
been received to Mercy; But can my Sin be pardoned? Can my Soul be quickened?
No, no, my Sins are greater than can be pardoned, says the despairing Soul.
Consider how injurious this is to God, to make the Power of Sin greater to
condemn thee, than the Power of God to save thee: To make the Power of Satan
stronger to ruinate thee than the Power of God to relieve thee, and succor
thee. And what can you say more? And what can you do more against the Lord? Is
not this to make God an Underling to Satan, and to Sin? This is just as to say,
The Almightiness of God is weaker than the Weakness of Sin; the Sufficiency of
God is weaker than the Malice of Satan. It is so; poor humble Sinners many
Times will make bitter Complaints this Way; and they think they speak against
themselves. No, no, they speak against the LORD. They spoke against the Lord,
when they said, Can the Lord prepare a Table in the Wilderness? So you speak in
this desperate Manner: Why truth, Lord, this proud Heart will never be humbled;
if any thing would have wrought, it would have been done ever this Day: How
many Sermons, how many Mercies, how many Judgments, how many Prayers? And yet
this proud Heart, this stubborn Heart will not be reformed. You think you speak
against your selves now: No, no, you speak against the Lord. And know, this is
one of the greatest Sins thou committest, to say thy Sins cannot be forgiven.

2. Secondly; As this Sin is injurious to God, so it is dangerous to thy own
Soul. It is that which takes up the Bridge, and cuts off all Passages, and
there can no spiritual Comfort or Consolation come into the Soul of a poor
Sinner, Luke 3.5, 6. Every Valley (or Ditch) shall be filled, and then all
Flesh shall see the Salvation of the Lord. What are these Ditches? Why nothing
else but those deep Gulfs and Ditches of Despair: And unless these be filled,
no Man can see the Lord Jesus Christ. The Truth is, this Despair of the Soul is
that which cuts the Sinews of Man's Comfort, and takes off the Power and Edge
of all the Means of Grace; it daunts all a Man's Endeavors; nay, it plucks up
Endeavors by the very Roots: For that which a Man despairs off, he will never
labor after. It Is here, as with a Man in the Pangs of Death: Unto such a Man,
as all Things are unavailable for his Good: His Bed will not ease him, Meat
will not refresh him, chafing will not revive him; at last we say he is gone,
he is a dead Man; Friends leave him, Physicians leave him: They may go and pray
for him, and mourn for him, but they cannot recover him. So this Despair of
Soul makes a Man cast off all Hope, and lie down in a forlorn Condition,
expecting no Good to come. Alas, says the poor Soul, what skilleth for a Man
to pray? What profits it a Man to read? What Benefit in all the Means of
Grace? The Truth of it is, the Stone is rolled upon me, and my Condemnation is
sealed for ever, and therefore I will never look after Christ, Grace and
Salvation any more. Let him come to hear the Word, and mark how he casts off
the Benefit of it. It was mavelous, seasonable and profitable, it was the
good Word of God unto such as have share therein: Why then may not you expect
Benefit therefrom? No, says the Soul, the Time of Grace is past, the Day is
gone. If Ministers would pray for him, and good People pray for him, he bids
them save their Labor; for Hell is his Portion, and his Condemnation is sealed
in Heaven. See now and consider what desperate Danger Despair brings to a poor
Heart, and carries him beyond the reach of Mercy. That Is a sweet passage of
David's, Psalm 77.7. Will the Lord cast me off for ever? I said this is my
Infirmity, says the Text. The Word in the Original, This is my Sickness, as
who shall say, This would be my Death: What, is Mercy gone for ever? then my
Life is gone, then is all my Comfort gone, my Hope gone: Therefore take heed of
this, it takes off the edge of all our Endeavors and God's Ordinances that
might do us good.

(2) Secondly. This marvellously condemns that great Sin of Presumption; a Sin
more frequent, and if it be possible, more dangerous. The Presumption of carnal
Hypocrites that bolster themselves up with mavelous Boldness in their course.
It is as true here, and I beseech you observe it, as they said Saul has slain
his thousands, and David his ten thousands: Despair has slain his thousands,
but Presumption his ten thousands. That Men may swear, and lie, and cozen, and
break all Commands, and yet hope to be saved. They hope Grace will save them,
and yet resist Grace. They hope Jesus Christ will save them, and yet oppose
Christ. This is that which has slain many thousands among us; and they are few
that have not split upon this Rock. And therefore I say, this serves to reprove
the Baseness of such Hypocrites that boast themselves, and compare their Hopes
with the Hopes of the Saints. It is true, say they, I cannot walk so freely, I
cannot repeat a Sermon, I have not those Parts that they have; yet I hope to be
saved as well as they. This is that which has slain so many thousands of Souls
that are now roaring in Hell; and they may thank Presumption for it.

Now this Hope is not the Hope of the Saints. The Hope of the Saints is a
grounded Hope; but these Hopes hang upon some idle Pleas and foolish Pretenses,
and some carnal Reasons* But I tell you they will fail, and sink into the
bottomless Pit ere they are aware. It is the Command and Counsel of Peter, That
every Man should be ready to give an account of his Faith and Hope that is in
him. Look to the Reasons that carry you, and to the Arguments that persuade
you; see they be not groundless and foolish Hopes. You hope to be saved, and
you hope to go to Heaven, and you hope to see the Face of God with Comfort.
Look about, I say; good Hope has good Reasons, grounded Hope grounded Reasons.

(3) Thirdly. The Saints of God many times are deprived of Comfort; not because
God withholds it, but because they put it from themselves, and will not have
it though he offered it; as David, Psalm. 77. My Soul refused Comfort: He was a
sullen Child that will not eat his Milk, because he cannot have it in the
golden Dish. So sometimes, and because God does not for us what we would, we
will have nothing at all. These are the main Hindrances, and I might add many
more; for carnal Reason is very fruitful this way, and we through our own Folly,
and the Devil's Craft, are apt to abuse things, and to make them Hindrances in
our way to Happiness eternal.

CHAP. II. Helps to come to CHRIST.
I Come now to the Cures of all these Impediments, where, if we had the Wisdom
and Care we should have, we might break through them all to Christ. The Means
(especially) are Four, whereby we may be inwardly strengthened against them
all, and be at last able to overcome, and put them to foil for ever.

I. The first Cure and Help is this; 1. Help
We must not look too long, nor pore too much, or unwarrantably upon our own
Corruptions within, so far as to be feared or disheartened by them from coming
to the Riches of God's Grace. For this is a sure and everlasting Truth, that
whatsoever Sight of Sin unfits a Man for Mercy, when he may take it, and it is
offered, that sight of Sin is ever sinful, though it have never so fair an
outside of Sorrow and deep Humiliation. Namely, as when we think, and say, (as
often we do) Had I a Soul so thoroughly humbled, and bruised, and softened, and
so forth, I could do well enough. And thus the Devil keeps us in Sin, The godly
Sorrow what it is.
by poring too long and much upon our Sins; as thinking thereby to get from
them. But such a course is a sinful course. Tell not me of Sorrow, and
Repentance, and Humiliation; all that Sorrow, and Humiliation, and Repentance,
is naught, that keeps a Man from receiving Mercy when there is need, and it is
offered. See this in Abraham, he had this Promise, that he should have a Son in
his old Age: And Romans 4.19. He being not weak in Faith, regarded not his old
Age or Deadness, nor the Barrenness of Sarah 's Womb, but believed in him who
had promised it. There he rests, and there he stays; he saw his Body was dead,
yet there was a living Promise; and what though Sarah's Womb was barren, yet the
Promise was fruitful. He knew his own Deadness and her Barrenness; but he stood
not long there. As Abraham therefore, so we may see our Sins, and consider our
many Weaknesses, but must not so settle upon them, or consider of them as to be
hindered by them from coming to God for Mercy, which he freely offers us, and
we stand in need of: For, while the Soul of a Man is daily plodding upon his
own Misery and distempered Life, these two things follow.

1. First. Stop the Stream of God's Promise, and let down the Sluice against it,
so that the Promise cannot enter into us.

And 2. Secondly. We set open the Stream and Floodgate of Corruption, and make
it to run most violently down, and to flood in upon us; and in the end to
over-whelm us. Now the Inconvenience arising hereby, is enough to slay the best
Christian in the World; for what can a Man get out of his Corruption? He can
have no more thereof than is to be had; and it is in vain to look for Comfort
where it is not to be had: All this, and the least of all this may dishearten
us, but will not encourage us, or put Heart into us. See the Humility and
Wisdom of the Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.17. she follows Christ; but he listens
not to her, but gives her a sore Foil, and calls her Dog; and says, you
Gentiles are Dogs; and the Gospel of Grace and Salvation is the Children's
Bread. Now if she had only considered the Words of Christ, and only looked into
her self and her own Baseness, she had never come to have received either Mercy
or Comfort from him. But she says, Truth Lord, I am a Dog, yet the Dogs eat of
the Crumbs that fall from their Master's Table. This was her Resolution:
Wherein there are two Things which express and set forth the Frame of a
gracious Heart, a Heart that is truly wise to attend to it is own Baseness with
Faith: And that is her Humility and Wisdom: As if she had said, Thou say I
am a Gentile and a Dog; I confess it: There Is her Humility. Yet though I am a
Dog, I will not go out of Doors, but lie under the Table for Mercy: There Is her
Wisdom. And thus she; and so we must, and should when our Corruptions (as I
said) flood in upon us, and we see ourselves quite lost, and damned in our
Sins, we must then say, In truth Lord, I am as bad as thy Word can make me, yet
let me not fly from Mercy, but lie at the Feet of my Savior's Mercy, 'till he
look upon me as once upon Peter, Luke 22.61.

It is fit, and we ought to see our Sins: But stay we must not too long there:
See them we must, but not fasten on them, so as to shackle us from coming to
Christ. I have said it, and will say it, That that Sight of Sin which does not
drive a Man to Christ for Mercy, is ever sinful. Labor therefore to see thy
Sins, and that thus;

How to see Sin aright.
First; See thy Sins in the royal Law, as in the right Glass; a Glass that will
present them such as they be; and look not off 'till thou have seen them so.

Secondly; So see them, as that by such a holy Gaze at them, thou may see an
utter Insufficiency in thy self to satisfy for them.

Thirdly; And so see them, that thou may by that Sight behold an absolute
Necessity of Christ to succor thee, and then away speedily to him that can
only help thee, and dwell no longer on thy Sins, but go to the Throne of Grace,
where is plentiful Redemption, whence issue out Pardons in Abundance to remove
that Guilt that Sin has brought upon thy Soul; and where is Power enough to
enable thee to be more than Conqueror over thy Corruption. Briefly, every Soul
should say thus; It is true, Lord, my Sins are many and great, for I have
departed from thee the Fountain of Bliss: But shall I go on, and so further
from thee, and persist in Evil? God forbid. All this while I speak to
brokenhearted Christians. You profane ones, you have your Portion already, and
shall have more of it in Hell hereafter; therefore for a while stand you by,
and let the Children come to their Bread.

Isaiah 66.2. The Lord looks to him that is of an humble and contrite Heart,
and that trembles before him. A poor Creature cannot but observe every Word of
God, and tremble at every Truth; whose Mediation is such as this: Here is
Salvation indeed, but it is not mine; here is Mercy, but I have no Part in so
great Mercy; and thus he shakes at every Apprehension of every Word of God,
concluding certainly that he shall never enjoy any Part of it. But mark what
the Text says, The Lord looks at such a trembling Soul; that is, he casts
sweet Intimations of his Goodness and Love into him, and says, Thou poor
trembling Sinner, to thee be it spoken, I have an Eye toward thee in the Lord
Jesus Christ. Therefore he further says, Isaiah 40.2. Comfort ye, comfort ye
my People, speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her Warfare
is accomplished, and her Iniquity is pardoned: tell Jerusalem she is accepted,
tell her what my Mind is.

And here he goes on, and says to his Minister, speak to the Heart of such an
humble Penitential, and tell him from Me, nay tell him from Heaven, and tell
him from the Lord Jesus Christ, and from under the Hand of the Spirit, that his
Person is accepted, and his Sins are all of them done away, and he himself
shined upon in great Mercy.

Here Ephraim is the Picture of a Soul truly humbled, in whose Behavior we may
see the Behavior of a true Penitent toward God, and God's Dealing toward
him. The Text says, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself (there is the Heart broken and thirsty) thou have chastised me, and I
was chastised; turn thou me, and I shall be turned; thou art the Lord my God.
Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I
smote upon my Thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear
the Reproach of my Youth. Thus the Sinner, as if he should have said, I am the
Wretch that have seen all the Means of Grace in an abundant Measure, and yet
never profited under the Hand of any. The Lord has corrected me, but I would
not be tamed; and he instructed me, but I would not learn. Lord turn me, thou
art my God; I have nothing in my self; nay, now I see the Evils which before I
never perceived; and I observe the Baseness of my Course, which before I
considered not. Now I am ashamed of my Abuse of Grace so plainly revealed: I am
even now confounded with the Sense of those Abominations my Soul did formerly
take Pleasure in. This may be conceived to be the Mourning of a poor and much
broken Sinner. And now mark God's Answer: Ephraim is my Son, he is a pleasant
Child: For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still,
therefore my Bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have Mercy upon him. As
much as to say; I observed all those secret Sighs, I considered all those
Tears, I heard all those Prayers, and took Notice of all those Complaints, and
my Bowels even yearn toward this poor dejected Sinner, an humble Soul that
seeks to me for Mercy. The Truth is; I will embrace him with my loving
Kindness. This for the first Means of Help.

Now, 2. Help.
The second Means of Cure is this, Take heed of judging thy Estate by carnal
Reason without the Rule, which is commonly the Fashion and Fault of poor
distressed Spirits, who pass fearful Sentence against themselves upon
groundless Arguments, and say, I never found it, I feel no such Thing, and I
fear it is not so. But in this we hear but carnal Pleas, coming out of Satan's
Forge, and by his Help, from our selves, against our selves, for we judge our
selves by them. But, I say, Take heed of this Wile of Satan's, The Danger of
judging ourselves rashly.
and make Conscience of this as much as of any other Fault, as much as of
Swearing, Stealing, Whoring, or Murder; for it is as truly Sin as those, though
not so great; yet a far greater Sin than you imagine. Consider this thou
humble-hearted Christian, for to thee I speak. Therefore when upon these
Grounds thou concludest that thy Case and Estate is naught; see and consider
against how many Commandments thou offendest.

First, Thou dishonourest God, and the Work of his Grace, by denying that which
God has done for thee: Also, and speak unreverently against him; besides
thou art a Murderer, for that thou woundest thine own Soul. Further, thou
robbest thy self of much Comfort, and so art a Thief; and thou barest false
Witness against thy self, yea, against Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, and
the Work of Grace already wrought in thee. Also thou joinest with the Devil
against the Lord Jesus Christ. Are these no Sins?

But you will say, I speak as I think. Yet that hinders not, but that thou
bear false Witness. As we see, if a Man affirm such an one is a Drunkard,
and knows it not, this Man bears false Witness, because though the Man be indeed
a Drunkard, yet it is more than he knows. So thou say thou have nothing,
when thou do but only fear it, and suspect it, and do not feel it. I speak
this the rather, because of the sinful Distemper that creeps in upon the Hearts
of many brokenhearted Christians; and so as that out of a self-willed Road of
carnal Reason, and a vile Haunt that they have gotten, their Hearts are
persuaded that they do well to do so, and that they can never be well except
they do so.

But they that are such (mark what I say) when Reason is plain against them,
and plain Scripture evidenceth the contrary, do not so much attend what the
Minister says, as they stand and invent how they may answer the Minister; and
(so) put away their own Mercy. Therefore let the Fear of God fall upon every
poor Soul that hears this; and let him know, that howsoever he has taken or
given leave to himself, or taken up the Wasters, by taking up^^eas against the
Truth; yet now he is to change the Course, to go aside, and to mourn apart for
his Misprision: Also to wonder that the Lord has not all this while taken away
all the Comforts of his Grace, and all the Motions of his Spirit from him. The
Prophet David prays the Lord to turn away his Eyes from beholding Vanity, Psalm.
119.37. Now if God must do that; that is, turn away our Eyes that they see not;
much more must he turn away our Hearts that they attend not on lying Vanities.
We must attend God and the Voice of his Spirit; but to listen to carnal Pleas
(which we have no Warrant to do) is to sin deeply, and to hurt our own Soul
both deeply and dangerously. No Man would deal with a Cheater. Carnal Reason is
a Cheater, therefore we should not heed it, unless we would resolve to be
cozened. And (...) Sorrow at last, and you may thank your selves for it. Away
then with your Tinder-boxes, abase your selves before the Throne of Grace, and
be at last wise to Salvation so nigh.

Ho, every one that thirsts, (says God by his Prophet) come and buy without
Money, take of the Well of the Water of Life, and live for ever, freely. Many a
poor Minister, while he preaches the good Word of God, would fain leave his
Commodity behind him, while he says, You must have it; and you shall have it;
it is your Portion, and belongs of Right unto you. Thus we are fain even to
force God's Favor upon you. Hereupon we beseech you to believe, and we entreat
you for the Lord Jesus sake to receive Mercy, and to humble your Hearts.

Thus we deal with you in fatherly Terms. But will you take so great and so
good a Commodity from us?

No, Beloved; many sweet Promises, and many admirable precious Things of Grace
and Salvation are revealed, but Men are negligent to take for themselves: In
this Case our Markets stand upon ourselves; we pass not to lay out any thing
here to benefit: Some carnal Plea or other marrs all. This argues plainly the
small Estimation that we have of Christ. But the poor hungry Sinner, one that
is apprehensive of his own Weakness and Feebleness, longs 'till the Feast Day
comes, that he may partake of these and such Delicates. Oh how carefully does
he listen, and how diligently does he attend what the Minister says? And if
the Word come home to his Conscience, enlightening his Heart, and reproving him
of his Ways: Then he cries out; Oh, I am in great Trouble; good Lord comfort
me: I am full of Doubts; good Lord resolve me: I am ignorant in spiritual
Things; good Lord teach me: I have a proud, stout, stubborn Heart; good Lord
humble me. He was never better than now. Therefore take this for a general
Rule; That a good Heart is never better at ease, than when the Word works most,
and most bitingly. Contrarily, A wicked graceless Person is never better than
when the Word works least, or never a whit upon him. But when he thinks the
Minister will come close to his Sore and Soul, he will not be at home that Day,
he will be sure to be out of the Town, or not in Place. He knows the Word would
awaken him, and affright him, and he cannot bear the Blow, therefore he keeps
away, and shuns the Hearing of the Word, when it should work to his Reformation
any Way. 3. Help.


And now for a third Help, let us be marvelously wary and watchful that we
enter not into the Lists of, and dispute with Satan, upon Points which are
beyond the Reach of Man, as thus to say; I am not elected, therefore God will
not look upon me to do me any Good. Or, it is a vain Thing for me to use the
Means of Mercy, my Time of Mercy being out. Oh the Days of Grace that I have
seen, when the Lord knocked sweetly at my Heart, and was pleased to reveal my
Sins unto me at such a Time: But then (hard-hearted Wretch that I was) I shut
the Door upon him, and now he is gone and past, and now there is no Hope for
the Visit of Grace, or that Christ should return again to show me any Mercy. If
the Devil can have thee here, all thy Comfort is gone; for upon this Ground a
Man shall never receive Rest to his Soul, come what Days will. And how can he?
For if he cannot judge of, or know Comfort, how shall I the Minister, be able
to give, or he, the Hearer, to take it?

And here look as it is with a poor traveling Man, one that falls among
Thieves, who come and promise to carry him a nearer Way, but bring him into a
Wood whither no Passengers come, and there they do what they will unto him: So
it is with a poor Soul, when the Devil gets him into these unwarranted
Disputes, as it were, large Wildernesses of God's eternal Counsel, where are no
Passengers, and therefore he cannot but be void of Helps and Succor, and so as
that Satan may now exercise his full Pleasure, and whole Malice, by terrifying
his poor desolate Soul.

To avoid which Straits, observe these three Rules.

1. First; Let the Soul in this Case bear upon the Almightiness of the Power of
God, who said to Abraham, I am God all-sufficient, Genesis 17.1. For if thou be
persuaded of the All Sufficiency of God, that Assurance cannot but stay thee
(slipping) from falling. And here remember that God can do more than thou can
think. He is able, and does thee good, though thou know it not. And further,
consider that the Soul cannot doubt of God's Will, but with that very Doubt
makes some Question of his Power. This for the first Rule.

2. For the Second. And secondly, it bids check to thine own Heart for meddling
with God's Secrets, and for prying so into his Closet of hidden Counsels. For
no Man should go beyond his Bounds; and it appertains not to thee to look into
this Ark of Matters sealed up. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret Things belong to God, but
revealed Things belong to us. And who has known the Mind of God? says Paul, 1
Cor. 2.16. Mark this, you that will be climbing up the Ladder of God's eternal
Predestination, and going up into the Skies to know what God's secret Mind is.
Keep your Stations wisely; for neither the Devil, nor all the Devils in Hell,
ever knew the Mind of the Lord. When Jonah cried against Nineveh, saying,
Within forty Days all you; that is, all you Drunkards, and Adulterers, and
Murderers, and others, shall be destroyed: Mark here how the King resolves; his
Words are, Jonah 4.19. Who can tell if the Lord will repent, and stay his
fierce Wrath that we perish not? Therefore when the Devil tells thee thus much,
and says, God has appointed a Way to Salvation, and you have had the Means,
and did not profit by them, therefore God will never show you Mercy, nor give
you Grace. Thus the Devil. But how can he tell that? Surely all the Devils in
Hell cannot tell it: Say with thy self, Let me walk in that Course which God
has appointed and commanded, and do that which I ought; and then I may say,
and with Comfort say it, Who knows but God may break the Heart of a proud,
rebellious, contrarying Sinner, such as mine is, and such as I am? None verily
but God knows whether or no. The third and last Rule follows.

3. Thirdly; Therefore measure not the Riches of God's Love, and the Sweetness
of his saving Grace according to your own Conceits; nor do you think that
because you cannot conceive it, therefore God will not do it, for the Prophet
says, Isaiah 55.7, 8, 9. Let the Wicked for sake his Way, and the unrighteous
Man his Thoughts; that is, All you wicked Ones, and you that have lived lewdly,
return from your wicked Ways, and vain Thoughts, and he will abundantly show
Mercy.

Object. But will the Lord pardon all my Sins, says the poor doubting Soul? I
cannot think it: If I my self were a God, I should never pass by such
intolerable Things as have been done by me.

Answ. But I answer: Because you cannot, you think God cannot or will not: Yes,
says the Lord, I can abundantly pardon: For my Thoughts are not your Thoughts,
nor my Ways as your Ways. A poor Creature thinks his Sins are unpardonable, and
that he shall never get Assurance of God's Favor, or Hope of his Love. But you
are Men, says the Lord, and have finite Thoughts; but I am a GOD, and in
Mercies infinite, when you think I will have no Mercy.

Object. But were ever any such received to Mercy as I, says the drooping
Soul? And therefore why should I be the only Man?

Answ. To this I say: When Christ had wrought many strange Miracles, the People
said there were never any such Things done in Israel. And therefore it is plain
not to be doubted, that God can do Things that never like were done: Job 9.10.
He does great Things past finding out, and Wonders without Number, says Job:
And therefore judge not either God's Power or Love by thy Scantling.

The best Christians are most suspicious of themselves, and none fuller of
Doubts and Fears, than those that have least Cause to fear or doubt that their
Estates are broken and bad. Therefore Satan makes it his chief Work to grieve
and terrify such. Besides their own distrustful Hearts are always ready to join
Issue with his false Reports against them, raising false Surmises against
themselves, and putting Mercy from them; as if they were hired by the Devil to
take his Part in pleading against their own sure Salvation. Therefore it is
worth the Time to hear what David says, Psalm. 42.8. The Lord shall command his
Loving Kindness in the Morning. It is a Phrase taken from Princes and great
Men, whose Words are a Law of Command. For so God will send forth, as by a
Commandment, his loving Kindness to a truly humble Christian. As if it should
be said: Go Love and everlasting Mercy, take thy Commission; and I charge thee
go to that poor brokenhearted Sinner, go to that poor, hungry, and thirsty
Soul: Go and prosper, and prevail, and stamp my Love upon his Heart, and there
let it stand whether he will or no. Thus the Lord charges his loving Kindness
to do good to poor Sinners, and by his own Almightiness bears up the Soul, when
it is ready to sink under the weighty Burden of its many Transgressions.

Object. But what? Shall I have Mercy? No, no, (says the poor doubting Heart)
Will the Lord Jesus accept me? No, surely. Could I pray so, and so, and had I
these and those Parts, and could I perform Duties after this and that Manner,
then there were some Hope; but all is contrary, and therefore woe and alas,
there is no Mercy for me.

Answ. But to answer this also, Let me tell thee, whoever thou art, that God
invites thee in particular, as by Name, and that all the Sweetness in Christ,
and in his precious Promises appertain to thy Soul, and thou have as great an
Interest in them as any Servant of God in the World whatsoever.

No, no, says the trembling Soul, I cannot believe that such a Wretch as I,
shall, or can go to Heaven. It cannot be. Heaven shall rather fall than I come
there. Thus the discouraged Sinner knocks for Mercy, and shuts the Door against
himself.

And now, when all carnal Reasonings, and high soaring Imaginations (as Paul
calls them) have raised up strong Holds against Mercy and Comfort; when the
Word cannot for the present settle Peace in the unquiet Soul; God is made at
last to command his loving Kindness, and send it with a Commission from Heaven;
and to say unto it, I charge you break open the Doors of such a reluctant
Sinner, rend off that Veil of Ignorance that is before his Eyes; silence all
his Doubts and Fears: And when this is done, I charge you go home to that
broken Soul, and to cheer and refresh it with the Sense of my sweet Favor; and
with the Assurance of my Love to fill it.

While we were Enemies, says the Apostle, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. And
here the Lord sends from Heaven to a poor miserable Creature, and says,
Commmend my Love, commend my Mercy to such a distressed Soul, and tell it, Though
it has been an Enemy to me, yet I am a Friend to it. Tell it, Though it has
been a Traitor to me, I have been a good King to it. And tell it, that though it
has been a Rebel to me, I have yet been a loving God to it. Tell the Man
(whose Heart that is) that his Sins are pardoned, his Person accepted, and that
his Soul shall be saved. Tell him his Sighs and Groans are not lost, and that
his Prayers are heard in Heaven. Let him know that the Lord Jesus died for
Sinners when they were Sinners. Make all this good to his Soul, I charge you
before you come back. So much for the third Help.

4. Help.
The fourth Cure is this. And it is especially to be observed by a Christian
above all, in his Proceedings with himself in Bar of judgment; and that is,
Pass no hasty Sentence against thy self but according to the Evidence of the
Word. If thou art to be approved, let the Word of God do it: And let the same
Word examine thee, if thou come to be examined, If this Word speak for thee,
no matter, though all Men and Angels speak against thee, and if it condemn thee,
no matter who speaks for thee: By it thou risest or fallest to thine own
Master. What though some wrangling Fellow step in, and will be determining Causes
before the Judge comes: Shall his Word stand? No: Therefore a wise Man will
stay till the Judge himself do come, and wait upon the Judgment of his Mouth.
Deal thou no otherwise with thine own Soul: Put not the Case to be tried by a
Company of peevish carnal Reasons, but stay till the Word (which is the Judge)
come; and judge thy self by that, and hold to that for thy Life, and the Life
of thy Soul. The Light is that which manifests all Things, says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.13. His Meaning is: The Light of the Word, and the Evidence of God's
Truth, manifested to the Souls of God's People; These properly are the Judges:
The other are but wrangling Cases, not to be admitted. And here Sense and
Feeling, grounded upon carnal Matter, are like Foggs and Mists, which make a
Man in case that he cannot see his Way, but upon clearing up his State and
Condition, is open before him; and then it is manifest what it is, Learn of me
(says our Savior, Mat. 11.29.) and you shall find Rest to your Souls: And the
Psalmist says; I will enquire what the Lord will say. So say thou, I will not
hearken what carnal Reason will say; I will hear what God says. The Want of
this, is the Cause why we have so many Distractions and Disquiets, and why we
are still in our Doubtings; even because he that teaches, and can persuade
with us, is a Deluder.

And hereof it is, that the poor Soul says: What, shall I have an Interest in
Christ? shall I have a Title to the Promises? Nay, this belongs to those that
are brokenhearted. Indeed if I had such Power against Corruption, such
Heavenly-mindedness, and this and that precious Grace, there were some Hope;
but I am so full of Weakness, and many Times led Captive by such a rebellious
Heart, that it is too apparent I never had saving Grace: Nay, I fear I never
shall have it truly wro't in my Soul.

This you say, poor Soul: But who told you so? and where learned you that
Religion? I am sure you never learned it of Christ. For who, or what Word tells
you, if I have such a Load of Corruptions, I shall never have Grace? Not the
Word of Christ, I am sure: Wherefore I charge you hold to the Truth of the
Word; Learn of me, says Christ, and put not your Case to be decided by carnal
Reason; neither regard what it tells you: For if you take that Way, and turn
not back, you can never come to Christ, no Way to him that Way. Learn of the
Lord Christ, (for his Word is faithful, and his Promise sure) and there you
shall find a Tower of Rest as strong as Mount Sion. It is that Word whereby we
shall be judged at the last great Day, when Sense and Feeling shall be cast
over the Bar for Deceivers, and never come into Court again

And thus much of the four Cures. It rests that I now propound four Rules, by
which a Man may know how to order himself, and so to walk, that he may keep a
strait Course by the Word, and not turn aside to the one Hand, or to the other,
from that Guide, of his Way. And thus walking, he may get into his Hands the
Evidences that can assure him of a Rest perpetual, and establish his Mind with
perfect Peace, For they work none Iniquity, that walk in this Way.

CHAP. III. Rules to direct a Christian how to use the Word of GOD for his
Evidence, or Assurance with Peace.
Rule 1.
THE first of these Rules teaches to use the Word of God aright: for as thou
must in all Things that concern thy Soul repair to the Word; so thou must
consider thine own Uprightness by it, and see what Work is in thy Soul that is
able to answer the Word, and to testify that the Work of Grace is there. And
here be sure to take thy Soul at the best: Do not always pore upon the worst
that is in it, nor upon thy Failings, nor that that can only accuse thee; but
if there be any Thing there that may justly speak for thee, neglect not that.
It is an Injustice for any Court so hear one Side and not another. The
Scripture is a Text of Justice, and the Lord does not lie at catch with his
Children, but takes them at the best as Romans 4.22. it is therefore said that
Abraham believed the Promise, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness.
Indeed, as in Genesis 12. he had some Doubtings; but God took him at the best: And
speaks this of his Faith. So Sarah is spoken of as of a gracious Woman, and of
a Pattern for Women, by calling her Husband Lord; which was a Sign of Reverence
to her Husband, and an humble Heart to the Lord: And yet we read that she
derided the Message of the Lord by the Angel, Genesis 18.12. The Lord buries that,
and only speaks of that which was to her Commendation, and so took her at her
best too. Now as the Lord dealt with these, so should we with our selves:
Whatsoever is found sincere and upright in us, that should we observe, as well
as that which is not so; nay, that rather and before the other. If a Man should
have his Cause handled in any Court of Justice after this Fashion; namely, that
(there) should only be observed what is failing in the Cause, and never that
that makes for it; the best Cause that is might go to the Ground: Therefore the
Court will hear all read: As every Bond or Bill that shall come in, and every
Matter of Agreement; briefly, every Thing: The Cry will be, Let all be read.
Again, suppose a Man have a Bond or other Instrument in Court, and that the
Lawyer only does open and read the Failings in it, and that which seems to make
against the Party: If the Judge only hear that, how can it but go against that
Side? Therefore that Party says, Good my Lord hear all. Now when all is read,
those Defects are corrected, and the Cause goes well, which had not been so, if
that Bond or Deed, or other Instrument had been read to Halves, not thoroughly.
So when Men shall bring in so many and main Indictments against themselves, and
say, Oh what Pride and Stubbornness is in my Heart! Oh how weak am I, and dull,
and dead, and backward to holy Duties; Oh how careless of enjoying Communion
with God! How negligent in sifting and trying my own Heart, in watching over my
Senses, and mourning in secret for my daily Failings! Though this were so, yet if
Men will see no more (and these too much) no marvel if they trouble their own
House, or if Satan by their own Words judge them. To such an one therefore I
say, All that thou say may be true, but art thou not troubled with these
Failings? And are they not the greatest Grief that thy Soul has? Yes, says
the poor Soul, I confess my Heart is vexed, and my Soul grieved for them; and I
could be content to be any Thing that I could not be so. Now hear on this Side,
and take the best. For as it is with a Man's Hand and the Staff, so it is here.
I compare the Promise to a Staff: You know the back of a Man's Hand cannot take
hold of the Staff; but the Palm of his Hand can. So turn thou the right Side of
thy Soul to the Promise, and then thou may take by it: But we take not by
it, because we turn the backside of our Hearts to the Promise: For then, the
Soul says, Oh my Stubbornness is great, and mine Inabilities grievous, and
Corruptions many. But this is the wrong Side; which will ever hinder thee from
taking hold of the Promise. But turn to the right Side, and then say, My Soul
hates these, and my Soul is right-weary of them. Oh this is the right Side;
turn to that, and thou art well. This for the first Rule.

Now for the second; Rule 2.
and secondly, Labor to have thy Conscience settled and established in that
Truth, which now out of the Word thou have gotten to bear Witness of the Work
of Grace in thee. For if there be any Want of the Assurance of God's Love, and
if the Evidence of the Work of Grace come not roundly in, but there be some
Guilt of Sin still remaining, Conscience will make new Stirs, and breed new
Broils, and continually move and unquiet the Heart: Therefore as it is good to
have our Judgment informed by the Word, when we see the Good that is in us, so
it is meet we should make Conscience persuaded of if, so as Conscience may
speak for us, and all be made strait. Otherwise, as the Debtor that is indebted
to many Creditors, if he agree not with all, or with all save one, that one may
come upon him as well as all the rest: So for the poor distressed Soul that
lies at the Mercy of the Lord, and is so deep in Arrearages to the Law, that he
cannot wind out; if he labor not to still Conscience, and what is else against
him, in every Point as well as in some; if he leave one undischarged, that one
may set his Conscience against him, as well as an hundred.

The Want of this, is the Cause why new Suits and new Bills are daily put in
against us: Only because Conscience is not pacified, nor all quieted. And now
take a poor Sinner that has all his Doubts and Objections answered; come to
him, and say, Are all these all your Doubts and Objections? he will say, Yea.
And are they all answered? here he will say, Yea too. And have you now any
Thing to say against that which has been made known unto you? No not now. But
say to him again, Did your Conscience say to you, It is a Sin to say you have
no Grace? Here he demurs and stops, and says, No, I dare not say so, but I
rather say the contrary. And now mark what he says: All the Books are crossed,
and all Objections answered, and yet Conscience puts in a new Plea, because
happily it was not satisfied to the full, and in every Parcel of Aberration.

And now come to him again, and say, You are sometimes captivated by Sin, are
you not? And are you willing to be at God's free Dispose, and that he should
pluck away all your Corruptions, as it were Shackles from you, are you not?

Oh, says the poor Sinner, I must needs yield to that. Then I affirm to thy
Soul, that this is a Work of true Grace. Here (therefore) let Conscience be
fully satisfied. But how satisfied? Thus: Cancel all Self-Accusations, and this
will quit all Scores, and clear the Heart, scattering all Clouds that mist it.
This will cast out all Cavils, and all new Bills against us: For if our
Consciences condemn us not, then we have Boldness toward God. We must then
stop the Mouth of Conscience; that is, be convinced, and agree, that it is a
Sin to say, God has not wrought this Work of Grace in the Heart, when it is so
clear he has. For though Sense and Feeling be (as it sometimes will be) gone,
yet Conscience remembers the Day and Year when the Sinner had a clear Evidence
of God's Love, and therefore says, Lord thou know it, and thou did say
out of thy Word at such a Time, that the Heart of this poor Soul was upright
and sincere before thee.

And here it should be with a poor Sinner, as with a wise Man, when he would
make his Lands sure unto him and his Posterity by Evidences and Writings
sealed: He is not content here only to have his Evidences in his own keeping,
but will have them enrolled in Chancery, such a Year, and such a Day: That if
he should lose his Deeds, he might be sure where to find them. So it should be
with the distressed Soul; it should not only be willing to have all Objections
to the contrary of it answered; but it should further get them recorded in the
Court of Conscience, as in Chancery; that when Sense and Feeling are lost, yet
it may readily go to that high Court of Conscience, and there find the Day and
Year when God's Love was made sure unto it. This for the second Rule.

Rule 3.
For the third: Thirdly We should strive, and that mightily, to have our Hearts
overpowered with the Evidence that Reason and Conscience make good unto us;
that so we may quietly receive, and calmly welcome it; yea, and yield and
subject our Hearts to the Truth of it. But here we all stick: And there are
three Things in the Soul of a Man; three, I say, that abet all these Quarrels
and Oppositions against the Evidences of the Word in that Man. The first, for
1. Reason objects. 2. The second, then Conscience accuses. And the third, 3.
The Will of Man will not submit. And here we find by Experience, that when a
Man has stilled Conscience, and silenced all Reasons to the contrary of his
Peace; yet such is the Iron of the stubborn Heart, that nothing can bar it; but
still it maintains, and will, some Gainsaying and some new Quarrels against
the Truth and it self. Besides, it keeps on foot even that that has been long
ago answered, and let down: Nay, that a Man would think had been buried in a
deep Grave (as deep as Hell) never to rise again. Now in this Case it is with a
poor Sinner, as with a Man that has a contentious Adversary. Happily the Cause
that they two have in Hand, has been tried in all Courts of Law, and at last
comes to the Chancery: And there it is concluded against the cavilling
Adversary, as in the other Courts; there all Matters are as well stated and
ordered as a Man would wish, and as an honest Man would grant: Yet will not
this Man, that is so contentious, be so concluded, or so yield, but will to the
Law again with a back Suit, and then, and upon that old Grudge, stake down all
he has, and sell all to his Shirt. His Will he will have, whatever it cost
him. Nor will he give over, till the Judge does come to take notice of him, and
so to cast out his Cause with himself, whom therefore he commits to Prison, and
says, Sirrah, these Matters were (all of them) long ago answered, and will you
trouble us again, not with new Matters, but with old Quarrels?

Just so it is with the Heart even of a gracious Man sometimes, and one that is
humbled in some Measure; and could be content to yield to the commanding Power
of God's Word, and to the Witness of his own Conscience: And therefore says,
My Condition is better than I thought it was; yet there is an old proud,
self-willed Heart still in me; an Heart that will not be quieted nor said unto;
but still will be quarrelsome, and maintain the old Exception. For though all
Reasons are well confuted, and Conscience bears witness it is so; and the
Minister, as the Judge under Christ, cast out the Cause: Yet (observe it) the
poor distressed Sinner will keep the old Road of objecting against himself: And
though he has been answered fully, and to every Point, not many Hours before;
yet he keeps old Matters still fresh, and out of the Salt, till they yield a
foul Scent to all that come within the hearing of them. And thus, even when a
Man would think he should not dare to come in Court with such old cashiered
Stuff; yet that proud self-willed Heart will be doing still; nor will yield or
give over. Have we not just Cause then to labor our Hearts so far as to get
them overpowered with the Authority of the Truth concerning whatsoever God
reveals to them for their Good? Oh therefore, poor Soul, do not reject the
Evidence which God makes known, and passes upon thee for thy sure Welfare
eternally. Do not, because thou have not that Comfort that thou would, reject
all; as if thou would have none at all. So then the Fault here is not
properly because thou can not, but because thou will not receive the Promise:
And this is that that so wracks and torments thy Spirit; this is that which
breeds the Quarrel so hard to be compounded; and hence it is, that when Reason
is satisfied, and Conscience convinced, yet the Soul is perplexed still. For
put this Question to it, and say unto it, Are you persuaded that the Lord has
done you this Good, that he will show an everlasting Mercy to your Soul? And it
will say, No; and that all the World shall not persuade it of that. Ministers
are merciful (will such a distempered Soul say) and Christians are charitable,
and loath to displease too much, or to discourage one in my Case, or do to me as
I should do to them: But did they know me indeed, they would never think thus
of me: Certainly I shall never find it so. What? Have I Grace? All the World
shall never persuade me to it. Mark what I say: This is merely thy Pride and
Self-willedness, that will not receive that Good which God is willing to give
thee. But repent, or this Pride of thy pettish Heart will cost thee dear, one
Day; I wish not.

Object. But some will say, How can you make this Pride? We are ever
complaining of, and condemning our selves; and can this be Pride?

Answ. Yes, I say, (and mark what I say) it is intolerable Pride against the
Majesty of Heaven: And this I make good by these two Things. For,

1. First, For a Man to follow his own Conceits and Self-willedness against the
Truth, the Force of Reason, and the Witness of the Servants of God, and his own
Conscience, cannot but be Pride.

2. Secondly, And for a Man, because he has not what he would, to be
(therefore) off the Hinges so, as throw away all God's Kindness, and to deny
the Grace that is given him: And this because he cannot be Conqueror as he
desires; is not this Pride? That Measure of Mercy which God has already showed
to thy Soul, is incomprehensible, beyond Man's Reach; and yet because thou
can not have what thou would, thou will have nothing at all. Just as if a
Man that has the Law on his Side, and his Estate settled on him, should,
because his Evidences are not written in great golden Letters, nor in the
largest royal Paper, throw all away. This is your Case: For so you, because you
have not so much of Grace, or with such a Sweetness as you would, you deny you
have any. But have you no Humility, because none to your Mind, or not so much,
or not in such a Manner as you require? Oh Pride; and Pride in the highest
Degree!

These Things considered, labor to bring your Hearts more down in a holy
Subjection to God's Measure and Time. And think it your Duty, as well to
receive Comfort when God offers it upon good Terms, as to do any Duty
commanded. And know that it is as truly a Sin (though of a higher size) to reject
Mercy when God offers it, as to kill a Man, which God has forbidden. I say,
Not as much; for I know there is odds in the Degree. Therefore you (the Saints
of God) that have been thus pestered, and thus possessed to become your own
Enemies, remember (when your Hearts thus begin to slide away) to take your
Hearts unto you, and not to give them the Reins at such desperate Conclusions
against God and Conscience. Deal better with your Souls, and say, Good Lord,
this is the proud unyielding Distemper of this vile Heart of mine. For, what
would I have? Is not God's Word clear in this Point, and my Conscience
satisfied? Do not the Ministers of God affirm my State to be good? And shall I
thus dishonor God, and slight them?

Object. But what says the poor Soul to this? Must I eat my own Words? Must I
say and unsay? Say I have Grace, when before I said, I had none?

Answ. Yes, and be thankful too to God that you may say so. Is it not better
for you to cross your own Flesh, than to cross God's Spirit? Take Notice of
this, and fear least that proud and peevish Soul of yours (which now refuses
Consolation when God offers it) be forced to fare as a Man that eats his own
Flesh, and so to come upon her Knees for Comfort, and get none to her dying
Day. For though God will save you at last, yet (mean while) you shall have an
Hell upon Earth before this be.

One would have thought it had been great Humility in Peter to refuse to let
Christ wash his Feet; but it was no such Matter. Indeed nothing less; therefore
Christ takes him up roundly for it (which is indeed the only Way to cure such a
Distemper as this) John 13.8, 9. If I wash thee not, thou have no Part in me.
If you will needs have your own Way, and humor yourself, and will not be
persuaded; you may go down to Hell in the Mind. Peter might have paused here,
and taken Breath, but did not: His stout Stomach quickly came down, and he
presently said, Then, Lord, not only my Feet, but my Hands, and my Head, and
all. It is the Humility of a good Heart, to take what God offers. Most
Christians think they are humble-hearted, when yet they are so far proud, as to
give Way to this sullen Disposition. Therefore labor to over-master this
over-soaring Heart of thine, with the Authority of the Word of God; and be sure
to receive Mercy while God offers it, lest he draw in, and take away the
Comfort of his Spirit from thee, and make thee go howling and roaring to thy
Grave. Though he bring thee to Heaven in the End; yet thou may have an
uncomfortable Hell before thou come thither. So for the third Rule, the last
follows.

The last Rule is this: Rule 4.
Maintain the good Work which thy Heart has submitted unto, and keep it as the
best Thing in thy House, and (of Treasure) the best under Heaven. And then,
when thou have by it obtained certain Evidence that thy Estate is good; hear
nothing against it, but stick fast to it, as to thy Life. Regard nothing (what
is not in the Word) to the contrary of that Evidence of thy Salvation; that I
mean which thou have been persuaded of by the Word of Truth. And here, if Satan
or carnal Reason have any Thing to say against thee, let them bring Scripture,
and then yield to it in the true Sense; but without the Word hear nothing. Look
as it is with a Man that is at Law for Lands; if he have his Adversary on the
Hip, and have gotten some Advantage against him, he will keep him there, and
hold him to the Point. So do thou in a better Case. For if a Man will follow
every wrangling Lawyer at every impertinent Quibble or Out-leap, he must never
look for an End of lawing: And it is the Fashion of many Attorneys, rather to
breed Quarrels, than to kill them in the Conception. So in this Case, he that
will quarrel where he may resolve, shall never have done. And therefore hold to
the main Point. Deal with Satan as with a subtle Adversary, that is full of
Wiles and Fetches. It is the Cunning of the Enemy to lead you aside: And he
will have many Vegaries, if you be in a good Way, to bring you out: But be sure
to hold to that Truth which you have received from the Evidence of the Word,
and the Witness of Conscience.

How the Soul being tempted, may answer Satan's Accusations.
When a Man has gotten some Comfort, then the Devil begins to play the Lawyer
in this or the like Manner.

Satan. Do thou not see how weak and poor thou art? how destitute of all
saving Grace, and how contrary thou walk to God?


Sinner. It is true (says the Soul) yet it is as true, that, whosoever confesses
and forsakes his Sin shall have Mercy, Prove. 28.13.


Satan. But (says the Devil) do thou not see that thou art full of Pride and
Weakness, and secretly unwilling to come to Duties?


Sinner. It is true (says the Soul) I am so, yet I hate, and desire to forsake
this Way, and therefore shall find Mercy; the Word says so, Isaiah 55.7.


Satan. But (says the Devil) are you of God's Counsel? secret Things belong to
God.


Sinner. Indeed (says the Soul) I know not what God's secret Will is; yet that
I know, that the Word says; which is, He has no Pleasure in the Death of a
Sinner, but invites such daily to come unto him, Ezekiel. 33.11.


Satan. But (says the Devil) many cozen themselves: Mercy is as a black Swan,
a rare Bird; and few obtain it: And why (then) may not you be cozened as well
as others?


Sinner. But (says the Soul) the Lord will not cozen me, and the Lord knows my
Heart; and the Word knows what the Lord knows.


Satan. But (says the Devil) may not you be deceived in the Letter of the
Word? The Word is true indeed; but how know you that you rightly apply it, and
that the Word and your Heart suit together?


Sinner. Why (says the Soul) I desire as earnestly to have my Sin purged, as I
do to have it pardoned. I know my Heart by the Word, and to the Word I repair;
and the Lord knows that I hate all Sin inwardly, and reform it outwardly, to my
weak Power; and therefore I know I shall find Mercy. Show me a Place of
Scripture that says I do not rightly apply the Word, and I believe it; but I
will not believe thee; for thou art, as thou wast from the Beginning, a Liar.
Thus hold to the Word, and the Devil will be tired, weary, and leave thee; keep
you here, for if he catch you a wandering after Sense and Feeling, you are
gone. The Prophet says; Psalm. 119.98. Thou through thy Commandments have made
me wiser than my Enemies, for they are ever with me. Satan is wise by long
Experience; and the Flesh, and carnal Reason, and the World are wise too: But
blessed be our God that makes every poor ignorant Servant of his wiser than all
these. But how? The Word must ever be in your Hands, and the Meditation of it
in your Hearts: It must be always with you; and you must keep it with you
daily: For that will make you not to know only what is amiss, but to get Ground
against Corruption, and whatever else may hinder your Peace with God and with
your selves.


Satan deals in this Case with the Soul, as the Enemies in War: When Joshua
defeated the Men of Ai, he got them out of the City; and then they that lay in
Ambush went and took it, and burnt it with Fire, Josh. 8.19. So the Devil does.
Our Castle or City is the Promises, the Word and Ordinances of GOD: Now if the
Devil can but get you out of this Castle, he has you where he would: If you
will look after every Bird that flies, and listen after every Word of carnal
Reason and Temptation that comes, you are gone: If he can get you from the sure
Hold of the Promise, he will entangle you in his Snare of Unbelief, and so
prevail against you.

Little Children, if ye abide in God's Commandments, ye abide in God, says the
Apostle, 1 John. 2.28. As if he had said, Children, your Enemies are many, and
great, and cunning; therefore keep at home, and within the Walls of your sure
Hope, and then you are well, whatsoever Weather is up. It is the Fashion of
Parents, if their Children run abroad and catch a Blow, to tell them that they
are well enough served; you might have kept at home when you had Warning. So
here.

The Issue of the Point is this: Judge thy Soul by the Word, and look upon that
sacred Piece in the Glass of it self: And here, let it bear Witness for thee:
And what the Word of GOD does evidence to thee, that do thou maintain, and hear
nothing against it. This is the Way to receive constant Comfort, and the Way to
go on cheerfully in thy christian Course. Let Quarrels, Troubles, and
Temptations come, yet keep close within Doors, and rest thy self upon the
Riches of that Grace that is in CHRIST JESUS. Then you may be for ever
comforted, and go singing to Heaven, and cheerfully to your Graves, though you
meet with never so many Temptations and Oppositions, crossing your Way.

CHAP. IV. Now follow some Means to obtain an Interest in the Promises, and
improve them for our Benefit.
IT rests that I show you some Means, whereby a Man may so improve his Time,
that at last he may obtain this blessed Estate of being glad in the Lord. The
Means are four. But before I begin with them, you must first know that we may
use the Means, and yet find no Means under Heaven to do it, except God strike
the Stroke. You must therefore wait upon GOD, and the SPIRIT of GOD in the Use
of the Means for this Matter, by believing rightly to your Assurance. For, so
the Text says, Phil. 1.19. To you it is given to believe: It must be given
therefore: And Faith is the free Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. It is GOD then that
must do it; who yet will not do it without us, being reasonable Men and Women
in the Power of Willing. Again, The LORD affords us Means; yet not to use them,
and give HIM the slip. And here it is a good Saying; Let the LORD do what he
will, and let us do what we should. We must not think when we have the Means,
that we can get Faith presently: For, as Paul says, Ephesians. 1.10. The same Power
that raised up Jesus from the Dead, must make us able to believe; or else all
the Angels in Heaven, and all the Ministers on Earth, and all the Help that Men
and Means can give us, will do us no Good.

Now the Means are of diverse Kinds: As, Hearing, and Prayer, and Sacraments,
which are the Conduit-Pipes through which God communicates Faith. But I let them
pass, and fasten upon those which are needful for feeble Christians, to the
bringing of them into this blessed State of rightly believing. And these are
such as follow.

1. Means. First; We must, as much as in us lies, labor to pull away all those
carnal outward Stays that the Soul leans upon, and all other like Succors, and
whatsoever Contentment it is, which a poor Sinner does betake himself to, as to
his Refuge for Relief and Help; that when all these are taken from us, we may
be forced to go for Succor thither, where right Succor is to be had. It is a
Thing natural to us all, even from our first Parents, a Desire to have the
Staff in our own Hands, and to be able to supply our selves of all Necessaries,
without being beholden to others, or to any.

Now therefore, the Way to make the Soul to lean upon CHRIST, is, to pluck away
all those deceiving Props. The last Thing we fly unto is the Promise; which if
we could find Good any where else than in CHRIST, we would never go to him for
it. GOD hears last of us: And therefore here we should do with ourselves, as
the Enemy does with a City besieged, when he would make the Inhabitants, or
those that keep it, to yield; The Way he takes is to famish them, to cut off
all Provision, and stop all Passages, so that none can come to relieve them;
then they presently yield themselves to the Mercy of the Assailant: So it is
with our Nature. And seeing it is so that we are still trusting to our own
Strengths, and relying upon something of our own; the best Way were to famish
the Heart, by cutting off all the Means and Comforts whereby the same is
succored, and quieted, but not rightly in Christ. For when the Heart is thus
famished, it will then seek out to a SAVIOR, and there betake it self, because
there is no other Thing or Means otherwise to help it.

The poor Woman in the Gospel had spent all her Goods upon the Physicians,
Matthew. 5.26, 27. and if she had had but a little Means left, yea, but one
Farthing-token (for any Thing that I know, or does appear) she would never have
gone to CHRIST: But when all these failed, then she was forced to seek to
CHRIST, that was ready and willing to do that for her, and more than she
desired. Our Souls must have something to bear upon, and they cannot subsist
without some Under-Props. Hereupon therefore, when all our carnal Hopes are
taken from us, we stay (as we must needs) upon the Promise, because we have
nothing else to rest upon. Yet it is not required (though I thus speak) that a
Man should cast away all outward Comforts, such as GOD affords him for the
Interim here: Oh no: But only this; That (though he have much this Way) yet
that he labor to get his Heart to see and acknowledge the Insufficiency and
Nothingness of them all, 'till he have the suparlative Comfort, CHRIST, above
above all; and not to repose in them (having them) as some do, making them our
whole Contentment, and sole Rest: For then they are but lying Vanities, and
broken Staves, which will not only cozen us, but pierce us too, and that deeply.

And now when the Soul sees that these Things cannot succor it, but lay it in
a worse Case; a Man will then be content to have his Heart divorsed from them.
And here it is with the Soul as it was with Noah's Dove, when the Ark began to
rest upon the Mountain of Ararat: Noah then sent out the Dove; but the Dove
found no Rest for the Sole of her Foot. No question there were many dead
Carcases to settle upon; but the Dove found no Rest, 'till she came to the Ark
again. So when a Man finds no Rest in any Thing the Creature affords, and can
get no Footing for the Soul there to stay it self upon; then it betakes it self
to CHRIST the Ark, and goes home to the Promise, and rests there, and expects
from thence what is needful for it. As (therefore) in the Art of Swimming; he
that will swim, must pluck his Feet from the Bottom, and commit himself to the
Stream to bear him up: So in this our Purpose to Heaven, we must draw our
Hearts from these vain Things below, and these from them; and though we have
Honor and Preferments, yet we must put no Confidence in them, but pluck our
Affections, as it were Feet from them, and learn by our Believing to commit our
selves wholly to the Power of the Promise, and thence to receive Comfort, and
permanent abiding.

Let not the Gods of this World, then, as Honor, and Profit, and Pleasures,
deceive thee. Did the Pride of Pharaoh's Heart deliver him? Did the Riches of
the rich Man in Hell save him? Did Herod's Applause that he had, do him any
good? Did these Gods secure them? Nay, have they not left them in the Lurch?
Therefore let us take our Hearts off from these Things, and (in Comparison to
those of our better Life) have a base Esteem of them, and see so great a Vanity
and Emptiness, and Insufficiency in them all; that we may be forced to seek to
Christ, and say as David, Help Lord; for vain is the Help of Man. Labor we
further to see the privy Wiles of our own Hearts, and to hunt out all those
Mazes, and Turnings, and Windings of our subtle Souls: For here it is wonderful
to see how the Soul is ready to hang her Comforts upon every Hedge, and to
shift and shirk in every By-corner for them. Now when thou see thine Heart
thus seeking Comfort in vain Helps, call it from them, and pluck them away, and
up by the Roots, and see the Emptiness of them: Then will thy Heart be fit and
ready to make out to CHRIST. And this for the first Means.

2. Secondly; Therefore when this is done, there is in some Part, some Way made
for the Promise to come into thy Soul; therefore labor thou in the second
Place, to have thy Heart possessed thoro'ly, and persuaded effectually of the
Fullness of that Good which is in the Promise, and of that satisfactory Mercy
and Freeness of the Grace that is in CHRIST; so that the Soul may be
established with that full Content which is to be had in the Riches of the
Promise. But mark what I say; Let us persuade our Hearts first; and not content
our selves that we are able to dispute somewhat fully of the Excellency of the
Promise, and of those Riches in it, through the free Grace of GOD in CHRIST. For,
what is it to purpose that the Heart knows this, and knowing it, to be so
fore-stall'd, that it can never come to the Promise? Therefore leave not thy
Heart 'till it come to value the Promise by that which the Word speaks of it,
in a true Account. I say, leave not thy Heart, 'till thou see the Promise of
Grace most beautiful in thine Eye; and that thy Heart may get some Earnest
touching the Goodness of GOD, and the Riches of his Grace toward thee by the
same. And here bring thy Heart to know and see, that the Promise is better than
all the Riches and Honors that thou can have, or the World can bestow: For
so we read, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thee, will trust in thee; for thou,
Lord, have never failed them that seek thee. If thou know and wilt believe
this, this Kind of Knowledge and Persuasion cannot but breed Confidence and
Resolution, and (consequently) quiet the Heart. We dare trust a Friend whose
Faithfulness we have tried; and we rest upon that which we know by the sure
Card of Experience. The Promises of GOD are (all of them) as true as Gospel.
Seek from one End of the Heaven to the other, turn all the Bible over; and see
if ever any Man leaned on the Promise, and the Lord did not perform what he had
promised for the Good of his Soul. Except the Lord had been my Delight, I
should have perished in my Trouble, (says David, Psalm. 119.92.) My Flesh
fails, and my Heart also; but thou art the Strength of my Heart, and my
Portion forever. Psalm. 73.26.

But here lies a great Matter, a Work of mavelous Difficulty and great
Necessity; and therefore, that thy Heart may sit down satisfied with the
Sufficiency of the Promise: I will propound three Rules how the Promise may be
improved and conduce to thy singular Benefit here and hereafter.

How to improve the Promises for our Benefit.
Rule 1. For the first of these Rules: Labor daily to present thy Soul a
greater Good in the Promise, than thou can see any where else. It is a Man's
Skill, (and it should be his Endeavor) daily to look narrowly to his Heart,
and to see what it is that the Heart desires most; and accordingly to present
the greatest Good unto it. And what may that be? Even that which has more of
Contentment in it, than any Thing else in the World. And here, we should deal
with our Hearts as Men will with a corrupt Justice, when they would have him to
be on their Side; there, the only Way is to bribe him; but though this be sinful
in that Case, yet it is good to bribe (as it were) the corrupt Heart with the
Goodness of the Promise; that so the Heart may cleave to it, and long after it.
Do Honors, or Riches, or the Applause of Men, or any earthly Pleasures offer
thee Content and Satisfaction? Then persuade thy Heart there is a greater Worth
in the Promise, than can be had in all them. For here is an exceeding Weight of
Glory: And he that has it shall be made a King, and shall have that Glory that
will never fade. Further, Does thy Heart hanker after earthly Joy and Mirth?
Thou shall find more Joy in the Promise, than in the cracking of these Thorns.
Does thy Heart hanker after Riches? Tell thy Heart that there are unsearchable
Riches in CHRIST, and that through him we have a Title to all the Promises of
this Life and a better. We know that he that offers most for the Bargain has
it; therefore we should observe the goings-out of our Hearts, and what Offers
are made to give them the best Content, and with such to present them. This the
Promise does; and this with a greater Good in GOD, than in all Things in the
World beside. Therefore, Oh the Height, and Depth, and Length, and Breadth of
the Love of CHRIST, which passes Knowledge!

The Consideration of so much, should not only work a Longing after CHRIST, and
the Promise; but fill our Faces with Shame and Confusion, that ever we should
set so light by such Riches of Mercy, and walk unworthy of so great Salvation.
Could we comprehend the unmeasurable Dimensions of GOD'S Love and Goodness
revealed in his Word; O how would our Hearts be enflamed toward him! When the
Sinner thinks thus with himself; I that have done all that I could against so
good a GOD, that my Heart even bleeds to think of it; there was no Name under
Heaven that I tore in Pieces more, or so much, as God's Name; his Wounds, and
Life, and Heart-Blood I have rent and torn a thousand Times. Nay, there was no
Command in the World that my Soul so much despised, as the Command of the LORD
JESUS. There was no Spirit which ever spoke to me, which I so much resisted as
the Spirit of the Almighty. Oh how many sweet Motions has the LORD let into my
Soul, thereby to force me from my Courses so base, and Practices so sinful? By
how many Mercies has he allured me; by how many gracious Promises has he
invited me; by how much of his Goodness provoked me to forsake my Sins, and to
turn to him? But I have flown in the Face of his Ministers, and BLESSED SPIRIT,
and rejected all Terms of Reconciliation. If I had lien in a Dungeon, and been
plagued with Torments all my Lifetime, yea, though I could have had another
World full of Miseries to live in; I should count it infinite Mercy, so the
Lord would pass by my sinful Miscarriages, and pardon these inward
Insurrections.

But that GOD should send his dearest SON to love me, and that so incomparably,
and so unconceivably as that I could not possibly hate him so much, as he loved
and affected me; that I could not so exceed in Unkindness toward him, as he
has exceeded in tender Kindness toward me; What a Love is this? What
Unkindness for so great Love? Were it not righteous with GOD, never to speak
Comfort more to my Soul, that have so lightly esteemed his Promise, and sweet
word of Comfort? Had it not been just with him now to take all this (as he well
might) for an Advantage against me? Was it not just that I, who have lived in
Sin, should have perished in my Sins? And as just that I who have so much loved
Corruption, should have reaped the bitter Fruit of it, long e're this? But that
the LORD should find an Enemy, and not slay him; nay, that he should give his
beloved SON out of his own Bosom to save him, is a Love not to be expressed. O
the Height of this Mercy, beyond all Desire or Though It! Oh the Breadth of this
Mercy, a Breadth without any Bounds! Oh the Length of this Mercy, a Length
beyond all Times! Oh the Depth of this Mercy, a Profundity beyond all
Expression!

Labor here (therefore) to have Access to the Promise, and to bring thy Soul
unto it. Here speak a good Word for it, and say, Stand off Profits, and
Pleasures, and Preferments; Room for the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Thus speak, and set
a peerless most excellent Price upon the Promise: And be sure of this (for it
is a sure Rule) Whatsoever the Soul does account as best, that it will choose,
and leave all others for it. Therefore if the Soul could once out-bid the
World, and out-shoot the Devil in his own Bow, and put by all those Things
which the Devil casts as Rubs in it is Way of coming to the Promise; this Labor
would be a Work of great Gain, and usher in the Promise it self. For Example,
as thus: When thou see thy Heart look after Friends; let those Friends usher
the Way to think on the infinite Love and Favor of GOD in CHRIST, that Friend,
as he calls himself: And when thy Heart would hunt after Wealth, let this usher
a Way to the Promise, and say, If the Heart find such Content in Riches, what
should it find in the Riches of GOD'S Grace in CHRIST! And thus present a
greater Good from the Promise, than from any Thing else; and thou dealest
safely and well for thy self. This for the first Rule.

2. The second Rule is; Labor to bring thy Heart to this, That all the Things
in the World without the Promise, are nothing: And that if thou had all that
the Earth can afford, and not the Promise, thou have gotten but the Wind, or
that which will rather be a Curse to thee than a Blessing: For, Faith is the
Substance of Things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. It gives a Kind of Being and
Subsistence to all. So that there is no Subsistence in Honor or Riches, if
they subsist not by Faith; and without Faith they are Cloggs and Snares to us,
no Helpers: Except Faith give them their Denomination, and a Blessing
therewith, they are poor and empty Things. Our Prayers, if they want Faith in
the Promise, are Prayers of no Substance; Words, and nothing else. On the other
Side, the most broken and chattering Prayers of a poor Soul, when a poor
Creature can scarce utter five Words with any Sense; yet these (how weak
soever) mingled* with Faith, are a very powerful Prayer. So all your Hearing,
and my Preaching hangs upon Faith; otherwise they are but lost Labor, wanting
that which gives a Kind of Being to whatsoever I speak, or you hear. This for
the second Rule.

3. The third Rule in this second of Means, is this: Labor to acquaint thy
Heart with that Good which the Promise promises: And this, before carnal
Reason comes and possesses thy Heart. Remember here that the Promise is most
sure, and will come when it shall be most seasonable, and best for thee, and
when God sees it most fit; for then, we shall most certainly have it. Heb.
4.16. Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may receive
Comfort and Mercy in Time of Need. Not when we see it fit, but when God sees it
fit and profitable. But this it is which carries away many. Sometimes they are
a little affected with the Excellency of the Riches of GOD'S Grace in CHRIST,
and seeing what great things the Lord has done for their Souls, they say, O
that I were such a one; and O that I might die the Death of the Righteous! But
when it comes so to pass that they have not what presently they expect, then
they cast away their Hope; and then the good Promise of GOD being out of
request, the Devil presently steps in and wonderfully prevails with them: They
should say with the Prophet, Heb. 3.17. When the Fig Tree shall not blossom,
neither shall the Fruit be on the Vine, when the Labor of the Olive shall
fail, and yield no Fruit; then will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God
of my Salvation: But where no Blossoms are, nor Fruits appear, there all Joy
goes to the Ground. We do not consider that Comfort from the Promise, and from
the Lord JESUS, is then most seasonable, when we have most need, and
(consequently) may receive most good by it: For then may we be sure to have the
Promise so to surprise our Hearts, that they shall be possessed and made happy
with the All Sufficiency of GOD. But we go not so far. This for the second
Rule, under the second Means.

3. Means.
In the third place, look for all the good which thou need and can desire
from that Sufficiency which is in the Promise; and do not think of thy self to
add any good unto it, but go to it for all thy good. For, there are all the
Cords of Mercy that must draw thee; and there is that All Sufficiency that can
supply thee; and therefore look for all from thence; but think to bring nothing
thither, nothing (I say) that can be of Power to enable thee to a Power of
believing.

Object. And here, it is a weak Plea for a Man to say, I dare not look to the
Promise, I cannot believe it; for if I could (and O that I could) then I might
expect some good Fruit from it.

Answ. To answer this, Thou shall never believe upon these Terms; for, thou
must not first have Faith, and then go to the Promise, but must first go to the
Promise for the Power of that Faith: From the Promise thou must receive Power
to Believe. And therefore say with the Prophet, Psalm. 119.49. O Lord remember
thy Word to thy Servant, wherein thou have caused me to Trust. When Men are
enlarged in Love to a Man, and make fair Weather of Promises unto him; this
persuades him to trust unto them, and to rely upon them for good to come;
therefore he says, I durst never so much as have thought of it, much less
expected it, if you had not promised so much. And even so here; the Promise of
GOD (made to the Soul) makes the Soul to rest upon what is promised.

To expect Faith without a Promise, is as if a Man should expect a Crop of Corn
without Seed; for the Promise is the immortal Seed of GOD'S Word, whereby the
SPIRIT breeds this Faith in the Hearts of all that are his. So Christ, John
5.25. The Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the
SON of GOD, and they that hear it, shall live: It is spoken of raising of a
dead Man from the Grave of Sin: First, There is the Voice of CHRIST to the
Soul, before there can be an Echo again of that Soul to CHRIST; and so the
Power of the Promise must first come to the Soul, and we must first hear the
Voice of GOD in the Promise, before we can return an Echo back again to the
LORD: The LORD must say, Come to me, before the Soul can say, I come, Lord.
Therefore when thou see much Deadness, and dead unfitness of Heart in thee to
the Promise, do not thou then leave, and give off, and say, 'Thus I am, and so
it is with me,' and so an End; but go to the Promise and say, 'Whatsoever
Frailties I find in my self, yet I will look to the LORD, and to his Promise;
for if I want Faith, the Promise must settle me, and I must not bring Faith to
the Promise, but receive Faith from it to believe; and therefore I will wait
upon GOD till he please to work it. Thus for the third Means.

And now in the last Place, and lastly; 4. Means.
Labor to submit to the most equal Condition of the Promise, not making more
Conditions there than GOD has made. Now the Promise requires no more of a Man,
but that he come and lay hold of Mercy; therefore do thou require no more.
There is enough in the Promise to do thee good; therefore do thou expect all
Good from it, and be content there to take of GOD whatsoever he has therein
offered to thy Faith. Buy without Money, says the Prophet: Isai. 55.1, 2. This
is the Condition that GOD offers Mercy upon, buy Wine and Milk, that is, Grace
and Salvation; without Money, that is, without any Sufficiency of your own. If
a Man should go running up and down to borrow Money before he comes to buy, he
may famish before he can come: So the LORD offering CHRIST'S Mercy and
Salvation without our Cost, and saying, Come, take it without Money; and yet we
will run up and down to borrow Money of our Prayers and other Duties also, and
from our Prayer against Corruption, we may be starved spiritually before we can
buy at that Hand. If we go this Way to Work, we may quickly lose our Labor,
and our Selves. And therefore make GOD'S Commodities no dearer than GOD himself
makes them. Many a poor Soul not remembering this, is kept from coming to the
Promise: For, O says one, 'If I were able to master my Sins and Distempers as
such a one can do, then I might with Boldness believe.' But this is to bring
Money: But art thou not content to have CHRIST of free Cost; so as he may have
thee, and rule in thee, and supply what is wanting to thee, and open thy Sores,
and heal thy Corruptions? Then why go thou not to the Promise with an empty
Heart; that the LORD may supply thee, and master all thy Risings, and make thee
a clean Heart? But that must come afterward, as the Lord says, Ezekiel. 16.6, to
10. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own Blood, behold thy
Time was the Time of Love; and I spread my Skirt over thee, and covered thy
Nakedness; yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, and
thou becamest mine: (that is, thou wast content that GOD should marry thee in
all thy Rags) then I washed he with Water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy
Blood from thee, and anointed thee with Oil; I clothed thee also with
broidered Work, etc. Here we see that CHRIST first marries the Church to
himself; and then gives Grace, and passes over his Estate to his Spouse. And
now, were it not a wonderful great Folly, if some great King should make Love
to a poor Milk-Maid, and she should put it off, and refuse the Match, till she
were a QUEEN; where if she will match with the King, she may be sure to be made
a Queen presently. But this comes after, and not before the Marriage. So we
must not look for Sanctification the first Day, nor till we come to the LORD in
our christian Vocation: For this is all the Lord requires of us, namely, to see
our Sins, to be weary of them, to be content that the Lord Jesus shall reveal
unto us what is amiss, and seal a Pardon for it, and take it away; and
(further) give us his Grace to take down the old Building, and to set up a new
one in us after his Image: For then the Lord will bring us to himself, and into
the Wedding-Chamber; and then through his great Mercy, all our Corruption shall
fall to the Ground.

And when the LORD has brought thy unfaithful Heart to Believe; then labor to
husband this Grace well, and to improve it for thy best good, and live by it.
It is a mavelous great shame to see those that are born to fair Means, I mean
the poor Saints of GOD that have a Right and Title to Grace and CHRIST, yet
live at such an under-rate: I would have thee live above the World, though thou
have not a Coat to cover thee, nor a House to put thy Head in; yet if thou have
Faith, thou art a rich Man; therefore husband thy Estate well. It Is a shame to
see some live, and husband not that Estate they have; they live as if they had
it not, so full of Want, so full of Care, so full of Pride, so weak, and so
unable to master their Sins; whereas the fault is not in the Power of Faith,
nor the Promise, nor in the LORD; for GOD does not grudge his People of
Comfort, but would have his People live cheerfully and have strong Consolations
and mighty Assurance of his Love; and therefore the Text says, Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say, rejoice, Phil. 4.4. And so Heb. 6.18. God has
sworn; that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong Consolations. Nay, the Lord rejoices in the Prosperity of
his Servants, and therefore has richly provided for you, that you may rejoice;
and in not so doing, we offer a great deal of Wrong to the Lord and his
Promises, and bring an ill Report upon that Grace and Mercy of his: And we
hereby also open the Mouths of the Wicked, and make them say, "Oh, these
precise People talk of Quiet and Contentment, and Joy in the Holy Ghost! There
is great Talking of these Things, but we could never see it yet." O Brethren,
it is a great Shame: Are the Riches and Revenues of Faith so great, that a
Christian may live like a Man all his Days? Let all the Drunkards and malicious
Wretches against God, laugh and be merry; yet they cannot see one of those Days
that a poor Saint can; yea, though he lay in Prison all his Life long, Matthew.
17.20. If a Man had but Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, and shall say to this
Mountain, Go hence, it shall be done. Whether this be spoken of justifying
Faith, or no, I will not now dispute; but this I am sure of, Resist the Devil,
and he will flee from you, Jam. 4.7. And you may trample under all your Lusts
and Corruptions. This is the Life of Faith; and this Life we may live, this
Life we ought to live. If a Tradesman have a fair Stock and quick Returns, if
he goes down the wind, and begin to decline and decay; every Man will say, He
was left mavelous well, but either he knew not how to use it, wanting Skill,
or else attended not on it wanting Care; Another Man would have lived bravely
upon half of that Means which he had: So there is never a poor Christian, which
trades in a Christian Course, but he has a fair Estate, and may live like a
Man. One Promise is enough to make a Man live comfortably all his Days, though he
were in never so much Want: But if he be cast behind-hand, and goes down the
Wind with Comfort and Joy; and sinks because of his Pride, and Distempers, and
Vexation: The Fault is not in the Estate; for the Lord left him very well; he
had a Child's Portion, had he had an Heart to fear God and love him; as David
says, Oh be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love and
fear thy Name. The Fault was not in the Promises, that they could not, nor in
his Faith that it would not help him: But he let the Promises lie by; they came
into the Table, but he never cast them up, nor husbanded them aright: He had a
World of Consolations, that would have given a Man Liberty in Prison, Honor in
Shame and Disgrace, and Comfort in Time of Distress; but he did not husband
them: And therefore be advised to do as the Tradesman does; he will not spend
of his Stock, but live of his Trading: O I would have every Christian live of
his Faith. Whatever Strength thou need, fetch it from Grace in Christ; and
whatever Comfort thou want, fetch it from Christ; but live by Faith, and
make a good Living of it too; and then thou have improved the Promise aright:
Bring but an empty believing Heart with thee, and the Oil will never fail, and
the Meal in the Barrel will never decay, but continually supply thee, as it did
that poor Widow.

CHAP. V. How shall a Man be trained up, that he may get the Skill of Living by
Faith.
Quest.
BUT how shall a Man be trained, that he get this Skill of Living by Faith?
Every Man has his Shifts and Tricks, and lives by his own Devices; and the
Devil has enough of them in the World that live this Life; but the best Life
of all is little looked after?

Now for an Answer, know thus much, That there are three Particulars for the
training up the Heart to learn this Skill of Living by Faith.

1. First, We must labor to get Matter for our Faith to work upon.

2. We must labor to fit Faith for the Work.

3. We must labor to order our Faith aright in the Work.

I. First, We must provide Matter for our Faith to work upon. For this we see
ordinarily, if a Workman want matter to work upon, either a Carpenter or the
like; he must needs cease his Work, and he can go no further. And if a Man's
Work fails, how can he provide for his Family? This is the complaint of poor
People now adays, that they have no Work. So it is in a Christians course;
many poor Christians that are newly set up, and are not aforehand in the World,
they want even Matter for their Faith; I mean some are ignorant and cannot
read, and some have not means of a preaching-Ministry, others have but small
Parts and cannot hear, and little do they retain of what they do hear: The
Promises of GOD not understood, nor remembered, nor rightly applied; they live
marvellously poor, when they might live very comfortably in the World.

Now the Matter of our Faith, is the whole Word of GOD. As it is with the Be
in gathering Honey: As the Spider gathers Poison out of every Flower; so the
Be gathers Honey out of the same Flower, and out of the sweetest Flower she
sucks the most Honey. Oh the Word of GOD, how full of sweet Flowers is it!
There is the sharpest Terrors, and the fearfullest Plagues too: A gracious
Heart will gather Sweetness out of both of these. But above all, the Sweet of
the Promises of the Gospel, the sap and sweet therein, and the Blood of the
LORD JESUS CHRIST that is communicated thereby: Oh the faithful Soul sucks most
there. Now that we may provide Matter for our Faith, observe these Rules, which
are commonly observed in all Provisions.

First, That they provide and lay in, in season, timely, as soon as they can:
This is the Practice of him that would husband his Estate wisely; his care is
to buy at the best hand: So I would have a good Christian to store up all the
Promises of GOD, in all the good Word of GOD seasonably: I mean when all thy
Parts and Abilities are strong, and Nature is able to sight it out; and while
the fair day of GOD'S Favor lasts; and while the Word and Sacraments are
dispensed; this is the best time to lay in spiritual Provisions, that we may
not want them, when we have use of them. It is a mavelous strange and
preposterous course when a Man is weak, his Eyes dim, and his Heart and
Strength fails, and even ready to give up the Ghost; then to lay in Grace and
Provision of Mercy; and then for him who has hated the Ministers, and loathed
the Means of Grace, and abused the Patience and Long-suffering of God; Oh then
to have a Minister come to him, and have a Promise in the day of Persecution;
then for a Man to bethink himself of the Promises and Comforts of the Gospel;
when a Man should spend on the Promises, then to be getting of them; this is
ill husbandry. The better way is this, to be buying and getting in at every
turn: And this is the reason why our SAVIOR says, Luke 19.42. O if thou had
known, in this thy Day, the Things that belong unto thy Peace! While the Word,
and thy Life, and the Sabbaths, and the Ordinances last; this is thy Day; we
know not how soon the LORD may take all from us. Oh the Estate of the poor
Palatinates! if it be true we hear of them, they have lost all the Means of
Grace, and they have Idolatry now amongst them, and their Enemies force them to
go to Mass against their Consciences; and they cannot see a good Minister, nor
a good Christian, but they weep to consider the times they once had. Therefore
let us labor to be wise in the Lord, now while the Fair is; and consider how
GOD deals with his Children: Psalm 48.9. We have thought of thy Loving
kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple. It is spoken there of the Goodness
of GOD toward Sion: She was a Cup of Poison, and a Stone of stumbling: When he
had spoken of all the Bulwarks that GOD had made, and all the Goodness and
Mercy he had showed to his People, and the Malace and Wrath of his Enemies: he
says, This God is our God even for ever and ever, v. 14. as if he had said,
The LORD did provide for his People, in Egypt, and overthrew proud Pharaoh that
set himself against GOD; and this is our GOD: When thou art in the Wilderness,
this GOD is thy GOD; when thou art in Persecution, this GOD is thy GOD, and the
GOD of all: Thus he stores up while the Season lasts.

2. Note this, as thou must observe what GOD does to others, so labor to
treasure up thy own Experiences, he has delivered us, and he does and will
deliver us, says the Apostle: 2 Cor. 1.10. and 1 Timothy 4.18. And the Prophet
David says, Psalm. 119.52. I remembered thy Judgments of old. Oh well fare a
good old store: I remember, says he, how thou did rebuke Amaleck, and
overthrow Nimrod, and Ahitophel. Oh it is admirable to consider these things: I
received Comfort, says he; GOD will overthrow every Enemy; and this is Store
for thy Faith to work upon, Psalm. 89.49. Where are thy former Loving
Kindnesses? David is aforehand with GOD now; he is not come to buy Food just
at the time of Famine, but it is laid up beforehand. Lay in abundantly of all
the Promises of all kinds; you had better leave than lack; and its the Wisdom
of a Man to have somewhat to spare, and to have an overplus aforehand; that a
Man may not live feebly and poorly, and be at his Wits end at every turn, and
know not which way to shift for himself, and have no Bread in his House; I
mean, no Provision of Promises by him: Isa. 42.23. Who is wise, let him hear
for the Time to come: As if he had said* You must not only lay in Promises for
the present, but store them for afterward; as the Chapman says, I shall want
this at such a time; and so the Husbandman says, I shall have occasion for
this or that at such a time, and so get it aforehand. Oh that GOD would give
us these Hearts! It is good, as we may say, to keep Promises in Store, that we
may spend them at leisure. In the Days of Famine, says the Prophet, Thou shall
have enough, Psalm. 37.19. These precious Promises will be good Meat in Lent;
when happily thou shall sit under a hollow Tree, and creep among the Bushes, then
three or four of these Promises will give a Man a good meal of Comfort;
therefore store them up, they will do you no harm: And when you are driven from
House and Home, and Friends, and all, these will exceedingly refresh. Oh how
sweetly are they scattered up and down in the Word, according to the Saints
several Necessities and Occasions. Bring this precious Provision home, leave it
not in the Market; it is a folly to say, I have good Provision, but it is not
here. Let the Word of God dwell plenteously in you, and richly in all Wisdom,
Col. 3.16. Observe, It must be plenty, not scant; it must dwell in you, that
you may but step aside and have it; there is the Matter for your Faith to work
on. So also

II. In the next Place, we are to sit Faith for the Service; that it may
succeed with more Comfort and better Speed. Though a Man be a Believer, yet there
is a great deal of Dullness and Bluntness comes upon this Grace, though he have
it. See how our Savior chides his Disciples, Oh Fools, and slow and dull of
Heart to believe, etc. So we ought to whet our Faith, that it may line and
square the Promises (as it is in the Hebrew) that it may pierce through the Veil
of all the Riches of the Freeness of GOD'S Grace, and so bring Comfort to us.
It Is with the Hand of Faith, as it is with the Hand of the Body; if it be
nummed, stiff, or frozen, a Man must rub it, or warm it, before he can hold any
thing; so it is with the Hand of Faith, for Faith is the Hand of the Soul, it
takes hold of that Mercy which GOD has provided for us in CHRIST JESUS. Now
Faith is sometimes numm'd and stiff through Carelessness and Looseness; therefore
it is not enough for a Man to have Faith, but he must supple and oil the Sinews
of Faith, that he may more freely take hold of the Promises of Life, and
receive Comfort from thence. And that this may be done, we must,

1. First, Maintain the Evidence of Faith once gotten: With question
undeniable, this Grace of Faith once gotten, is to be maintained* Mark it, I
speak not of those that have not Faith; it is in vain to bid a Man live by
Faith, who has none: But it is for those in whose Hearts GOD has been pleased
to work this blessed Grace: This must be the Care of those that have gotten
Faith; they must know the Nature of Faith in general, and of this Faith in
particular, whether it be of that Faith which Peter speaks of; for there is a
great deal of Copper-Faith in the World. As, that JESUS CHRIST came into the
World to save Sinners, and the like. Now when thou have gained Evidence that
thou have Faith, then fill it up, and keep it by thee, and labor to make the
Demonstration of it so plain to thy Soul, that it may be undeniable. What a
great Folly is it for a Man to question, when he should use it? The Work must
needs be much hindered, though he have never so much Faith, when he begins to
cavil with it, and to question whether it be good or no. It Is a proverbial
Speech; He that doubts of his Way, misseth his Way; for while he is doubting,
he goes no Way in Conclusion: So he that questions whether he has Faith or no,
gets little good at present by it. Tell a poor Sinner of living by Faith, and
he says, It Is good News if he had it. It Is poor Comfort to bid a Man go warm
him when he has no Fire; so it is poor Comfort to bid a Man live by that which
he never had. Quarrelling and Doubting when a Man has it, hinders the Use and
Benefit of Faith: Here is a Man that is quarrelling about it, when he should
live on it. Mat. 14.22, -- 31. When the Disciples saw JESUS walking on the Sea,
they though it it was a Spirit; but JESUS said unto them, Be of good Comfort, it is
I: Now when Peter knew it was CHRIST, being somewhat too venturous, he said, If
it be thou, Lord, bid me come unto thee on the Water; and CHRIST said, Come;
and Peter going, the Water began to be boisterous, his Heart began to sink,
etc. and CHRIST said unto him, O thou of little Faith, why do thou Doubt? As
if he had said, It Is now no Time of Doubting, but a Time of Believing. The LORD
bid him come, and he had Ground enough to come, and strength of Faith to come;
but when he saw the Waves great and troublesome, instead of Believing, he fell
a Questioning and Quarrelling with the Promise. As it is with a foul rusty
Musket; shoot such a one off, and it will recoil. When Faith grows rusty with
Doubting, we sit down dismayed and unsettled; the very Questioning and
Quarrelling against the Work of Faith, many Times does as much disable a Man to
put forth the Power of Faith, as if he had no Faith at all.

2. Secondly, When thou have maintained the Clearness of the Work of Grace
before gained, then labor to bring thy Heart to mavelous Stillness and
Calmness from Time to Time. Stayedness and Stillness of the Soul, frames the
Heart to hold the Shield steadily, and bear off the Blow comfortably when it
comes. Those boisterous Affections, those Crowds and Troops of troublesome
Imaginations, as Fear and Jealousy; these unrank the Frame of the Soul, that it
is not at the Command of Faith. As it is in an Army, when Ranks and Files are
broken, they are at a Rout; be the Commander never so skillful, he cannot in
that Condition march on: So though we had never so vigorous a Faith, yet if the
Soul were hurled up and down with those boisterous Distempers, the Soul could
not command Faith. When it was told the Disciples, Luke 24.41. that CHRIST was
risen from the Dead, and had manifested himself to them; the Text says, They
believed not, and wondered: They would not believe for a while; and it was
through the Violence of their Joy, which made them they had no Leisure to
believe. As it is true of moderate Affection, so it is true of strong Fear, and
Cares and Distempers; because these hurry the Soul violently, and transport it
so, that he cannot believe. As it is in a Road, the Traveller is fitted to go
his Journey, but he is hindered because the Crowd is so great and strong, that
they cross him, and oppose him, and are ready to carry him another Way against
his Will; just so it is with a Soul thus troubled with tumultuous Thoughts,
especially Melancholy, and those other Enemies of the Soul, as vain
Imaginations, sinful Fears, sinful Sorrow, distempered Tho'ts and Cares; that
though the Heart is willing and able to believe, yet those Stirrings of
boisterous Affections, they cross Faith in the Way, and bear it down. There
David chides his Heart in Psalm 42.5, 11. and 43.5. even rocks it asleep, and
would bring it quiet, saying, Why art thou so disquieted, O my Soul, why art
thou disquieted within me? etc. There are three Things fit our Purpose in this
Text.

1. That a tumultuous Distemper of Heart makes a Man lie flat upon his Back, as
'twere, and sink into a Swound.

2. It hinders the Work of Faith. Mark what follows: Hope thou in God. As if he
had said, Leave those Distempers of Heart, and rest upon the Freeness of GOD'S
Grace.

3. David yet looks up to GOD for Mercy: For he is yet my God. The virtue of
this Rule we find by Experience; especially in melancholy Persons, when they
have swarms of Thoughts buzzing in their Minds; Sometimes restless Fears, that
do chase their Hearts, as the Hound does the Deer in the Forest; and after this
comes another Affection, and after that another; and so at last they come all
together: Sometimes the Horror of a Man's Conscience makes Hue and Cry after
him, and makes him say, Oh how my Heart smites me! Methought I saw Hell gaping
for me, and the Devil even standing at my Elbow, ready to carry me down to
everlasting Destruction: This makes his Soul to have such an Amazement and
Gastliness of Spirit, that he cannot reach the Promise of GOD. Well, take the
LORD'S Advice by the Prophet: Exodus 14.13. Fear not, but stand still, and see
the Salvation of the Lord: That is, lay aside those restless Imaginations, and
those Crowds of foolish Conceits; stand still, and be quiet, and with the Eye
of Faith behold the Salvation of God.

3. A third Rule how Faith may be fitted for the Work: Take notice of this; In
the Want of any Means, do not first seek for them; and in the Presence of any
Means GOD affords, look not first to them for Succor and Supply, but first go
to the Promise, that it may supply what you need, and that the Promise may
bless what Means you have. It is an uncomfortable and disorderly Course, for a
Man barely and firstly to look at those Things which are within the Compass of
Sense, and so range up and down in the Use of the Means, when the Promise and
CHRIST are the last Though It of in our Hearts. As for Instance: In a Time of
Poverty, how does the Soul unfit it self for the Promise? When a Man sees his
Estate low, and he is like to come to Misery, he says, I have some good
Friends that will not see me Want, I have so much Means left yet, and I have my
Health and Strength, and I hope to get a poor Living. Not one Word all this
while of a Promise: But what say you to this? If Death take away all thy
Friends, Sickness take away thy Health and Strength, Fire or Thieves take away
all thy Goods, whither will thou now go? Why then at a dead Lift, as we
commonly say, he is fain to go to that Mercy which endures for ever. Oh
Friend, are you there now? Why came you not thither at first? Well, since thou
art come, reason thus: I am like to be poor, and my Friends may die, and
Thieves may rob me of all my Goods, but the Mercy of the Lord endures for
ever. So a Minister that is faithful, desires to preach fruitfully, and to the
Benefit of the Congregation; and then we catch at the Helps that are near at
Hand, and we go to our Books and Studies, our Wits and Pains, and think these
will do the Deed. We do well in all this; but the Fault is in the Order of
doing them. Happily GOD knocks off Man's Wheels, and a Man is not able to come to
the Bottom of the Point; and if he be able to compass the Truth in some
Measure, yet GOD blasts all he does, and there is no good comes to the Souls of
his People; at last he is fain to go to the Promise; and then the poor Minister
says, LORD, thou have said thou will be with thy faithful Ministers to the end
of the World; Little Strength there is in us; but be thou with us LORD: Now the
Work goes on again. The Tradesman is honest and painful, and he hopes to
campass a good Estate by his Calling; his Stock is good and great, and his
Skill is sufficient, and his Pennyworth shall be as reasonable as any others,
and his Acquaintance are many: Then GOD blasts all these, and then he comes to
the Promise, as in Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever the Righteous does, it shall prosper:
Hold here now, and say, I expect all from the Promise, Mercy and Succor from
the Promise. This was the course that Jacob took, Genesis 32.9. first he wrestled
with GOD and overcame him; then he wrestled with his Brother Esau, and says, O
God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac, which said unto me,
Return into thine own Country, and I will do thee good; I am not worthy the
least of all thy Mercies: Lord deliver me from the hand of my Brother Esau, for
I fear him. Thus he wrestled with the LORD by Virtue of a Promise, overcame
him, and then overcame his Brother Esau. So Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be
without COVETEOUSNESS; and be content with such Things as ye have: But how will
you have help against this Coveteousness? A Man would have said thus; You have
got a good Portion, and but little Charge, and many Friends: But GOD takes such
a Course as this; for he says, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And
thus when I have chased away Doubting, then Faith is ready, and the Shield is
scoured.

III. Now for the Ordering of Faith in the Work; there are two Things to be
attended to.

1. How the Soul should get to the Promises.

2. How the Soul should take, receive, and improve this Sufficiency and
Excellency that is in GOD, through CHRIST and the Promise.

1.] How the Soul should get to the Promise: You see all is ready, the Way
open, and Faith is fitted; there are three Rules to be observed, how the Soul
may get to the Promise.

1. Throw off all Power and Ability in thy self. Nevertheless, says the
Apostle, I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. It is not I
that live by any Power of my self, but CHRIST lives in me. It was CHRIST'S
quickening, reviving, and enabling, though he had Faith. I know, says the
Prophet, Jer. 10.23. that the Way of Man is not in himself, neither is it in
Man to direct his own Steps. So do thou say, if ever thou would have thy
Heart fitted to go to the Promise; say, It is not here, LORD, it is not in this
vain Mind, it is not in the Power of this dead Heart, or any Passage that ever
I received, whereby I am able to believe in thee. I mean the Principle of Life
is not here, the Root of Faith is in the Promise, and from thence it comes into
the Soul. As it is with a Mariner, when the Ship is upon the Ground in the Ebb
and low Water, he does not expect to tug his Ship to the Shore by any Power of
himself: So, It is not in my Wisdom that can direct me, and it is not in my
Weapon that can defend; it is not this Humility that can bring my Soul down; It
is not here, it is not I, LORD, that can rest, or go to a Promise; even all our
Abilities are at a low Ebb: All that we are, or can do, is to empty our selves,
and fit our selves, and get up the main Mast; that is, let the Soul be ready
for a Promise, and by Virtue of that be carried Heavenward, and Christ-ward.
Take Notice of this in your own Souls, that the Heart would begin at home: If a
Temptation come, the Heart of it self would overcome it; and if a Duty be to be
done, the Heart of it self would perform it; and if Opposition come, the Heart
of it self would resist it. O remember that a Man offers an injury against
Reason, Sense, and Religion, and all. Now thy Faith begins to wrestle with him
and his dealing; and Conscience checks, and thou will tear thy own Heart out of
thine own Bosom. Brethren, this will not do it: When a Ship of an hundred Ton
is upon the Ground, the Mariners may pull and tug their Hearts out, ere they
make her go. Oh go then and say, It is not I that can be patient, and put up a
Wrong, be quiet, expect it not from hence. Let the Heart lie still, till the
Wind and Tide, and Promise come, and that will carry thee.

2. The second Rule. Bring the Promise home to thy Heart, that the Promise may
bring thy Heart to it. And thus I would have you reason: The Lord Jesus Christ,
by the Power of his SPIRIT, is in the Promise undeniably, and undoubtedly, and
unspeakably accompanying in his Manner, as he shall see fit. This I say, That
the almighty Power of CHRIST does really and continually accompany the Promise
for the Good of his* Hence it is called, The SPIRIT of Promise; for there is an
almighty creating Work goes along with the Promise. And I reason thus* That
Word that discerns the Thoughts of the Hearts of Men, that Word must needs have
the almighty Work of GOD'S SPIRIT accompanying of it: So far as GOD has
promised it, not when thou happily think it fit, but when GOD sees it fit. He
does it as a voluntary Workman; therefore thou considerest that there is an
almighty Power, and a Fullness in the Promise: Then lay that Promise upon thy
own Heart, and conclude it, and look for Virtue from thence, to draw thy Soul
to it again.

I have several Passages to express this more fully. Jacob would not believe
that Joseph was alive; or if he were alive, he had but little Means, and was
poor, Genesis 45.26, -- 29. But when he saw the Chariots that Joseph had sent him,
then he believed, and said, I have enough; Joseph my Son lives. The Chariots
sent from Joseph to Jacob, brought Jacob to Joseph. So every believing Soul is
poor and feeble, and disabled to go to GOD, and to believe in the LORD JESUS
CHRIST: Therefore look thou unto the Chariots of Israel first, and that will
convey thee to the Promise. As it is with the Miller, first he prepares the
Mill fitly, and orders all the Occasions thereof; and when the Stones are fit,
and laid to go, yet it will not, till the Sluice be pulled up, and the Water run
that drives the Mill: So the Soul is humbled, and lies level with the Lord and
his Truth, and is content to yield to his Conditions; but now the Soul of it
self, in it self cannot go, it has not the Principle of Going; but let down
the Sluice of the Promise, and let that come to thy Heart, and it will bring thy
Soul home to the Lord. As Luke 19.9. This Day is Salvation come to this House:
Not to the Walls of thy House, but to Men that are in thy House. They did not
come to Salvation, but Salvation came to them. The Lord sent Salvation to
salute the House of little Zaccheus.

3. The third Rule. When the Promise is thus come home to thee, and thou see
the Sufficiency and Authority of it, then all thou have to do is this; In the
Stream of that Promise, be carried home to the Promise. The Prodigal, Luke 15.
is said to be like a lost Sheep. (Mark this, for it concerns you, poor
Creatures.) The poor Sheep is wandering up and down, now in the Mouth of the
Lion, and then in the Briars, and sometimes in the Pit. The Text says, He
leaves ninety nine to seek that; That is, in comparison of what care he
expresses to the lost Sheep; he leaves a Man regenerate not carelessly, but he
will not express so great Love as to a poor lost Man; And though thou can not
find the way to Heaven, yet he will find it for thee; lie thou upon the
Shoulders of JESUS CHRIST. When thou find thy Heart feeble and weak and thy
self unable to believe; then the LORD JESUS CHRIST brings THE SPIRIT of Grace,
and that comes to seek, and JESUS CHRIST lays that Soul of thine upon his
Shoulders, that is, upon the Riches of the Freeness of his Grace: Therefore let
thy Heart be transported by the Power of that Grace, and by the Virtue of that
Mercy which GOD has made known to thee for thy everlasting good. When the
Chariots are come, get up into them. The LORD JESUS CHRIST is gone up to
Heaven, and has sent these Chariots for thee; therefore get thee up, and say,
"LORD, take me up with thee." When the Mariner has Sea-room enough, he cares
for no Man, if he can but observe the Channel; he looks not so much at his Oar,
or any thing, so that he can but observe the Channel. This Channel is the full
Tide of Promise; therefore lay thy self upon the Promise, and say, LORD, in the
virtue of that Grace, and in the Power of that SPIRIT, carry me; and in the
Riches of that Mercy of thine, LORD convey the Heart of this poor Sinner, and
make me happy with thy self for ever.

Again, Never let a quick Stock lie dead by you; it is monstrous ill Husbandry
not to be trading with a quick Stock. As it is in the World with Temporals,
even so it is in our Spiritual Estate. Though a Man have a little for the
present, yet if he have some old Reversions to come, it will refresh his Heart,
and bear him up in time of Poverty and Misery; and he says, If he can make but
a scrambling Shift for a while, for so long time, then he hopes to live as well
as any Man in the Country. So there are some of the Promises we have in
Possession: Oh, but there is the Reversion of old Promises, old Rents. As old
Rents of Farms that were let long ago, when the Leases come out, they are worth
treble the Rent they were let for at the first: So there are old Rents of
Comfort and Mercy; as, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you. Then no more Tears, no more Trouble, no more Sorrow, no more
Sin. Oh get those into your Hands, and have them in use, and say, The Day will
come when we shall have Happiness and Joy beyond all that the Tongue of Man can
express, or the Heart conceive. Though we are buffeted with many Temptations, and
wearied with a world of Corruptions, yet we shall be saved, says Faith. Thus a
Man may make a pretty good shift to live upon these terms, though we have nothing
else to live upon in the World. Remember what I speak now, and labor to fasten
this Truth upon thy Heart; That there is not only present good in thy self, but
in ANOTHER, and reserved by ANOTHER for thy Comfort, and be thou content it
should be so; not only to look and see what thou have, but consider that the
greatest part of thy Glory, is in the Glory of CHRIST; and the greatest part of
thy Wisdom, is in the Wisdom of CHRIST; and the greatest part of thy Liberty,
is in the Liberty of CHRIST; and thy Riches, in the Riches of CHRIST. And know,
whatever is in CHRIST thou have it all as thine, 1 John 3. 1, 2. Behold what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we are now the Sons of
God! I tell you Brethren, this is a marvelous Privilege; and if you had no
more but this, you had a Child's Portion: But it appears not what we shall
have, we have but a Glimpse now; what think you will the Harvest be? Now we
have but the sips of it, what shall then the full Cups be when we shall see
CHRIST as he is? Thus did Moses improve his Estate, Heb. 11.26. He bore all
Afflictions comfortably; yea, he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures of Egypt; why, because he had an Eye to the Recompense of
Reward. We account not of a Man's Estate for what he has in present
Possession; but what is like to befall him, and what he is born unto. What
Moses did, do thou,: Remember thou have a good Stock upon the Ground, which
will pay all thy Debt, and yet live like a Man too. Though thou have many
Corruptions, many Disgraces cast upon thee; though thou have little Strength, and
art at a great loss in point of Comfort; yet there is enough in Heaven, enough
in CHRIST, both of Riches and Comfort. Let thy Soul then be careful to make all
these present with thee for thine own good.

Quest. But some will say, How may a Man expect THAT from the PROMISE, which
GOD intends, and will undoubtedly bestow?

For Answer hereunto, I will show WHAT thou may expect, and WHAT GOD will
undoubtedly bestow. If thou do believe, Heaven and Salvation are certainly
thine, and Perseverance to the End, and that Manner and Measure of Assistance,
that may make thee fit for Perseverance: These three Things grow here. But for
temporal Blessings which we desire, and that Measure of spiritual Blessings
which we would have; so much Grace, and so much Assistance, and so much
Abilities to do Duties; God does not engage himself to bestow these. But that
which God engages himself to bestow, both for temporal and spiritual
Blessings, it may be discovered in these three Particulars: So much Grace and
Assurance of God's Love, and so much Comfort in Grace as he sees fit for thee,
after his own Order, and in his own Time. I will open them all, because many do
here bungle wonderfully.

1 First; He will bestow them in his own Order, not thy Order. First, He will
make thee fit, and make thee good, that thou may be able to digest them, and
then he will bestow them on thee. Happily a poor Man is driven to desperate
Hazard, and is brought miserably under, and therefore the Heart cries earnestly
for some more Supply; and he calls and GOD answers not; and he labors to look
up to the Promise, where GOD says, Nothing shall be wanting to him, and yet it
comes not. I say, GOD will give these in his own Order-First, GOD will make
thee fit for this Estate, and then give it. I never knew a good Man desperately
poor, but his Heart was desperately proud; therefore the Lord will make him
good, and make his proud Heart yield, and then bestow these Things: Look for
that first, and then for the other.

Again, Another Christian labors exceedingly for the Assurance of GOD'S Love,
and cannot obtain it; and seeks to GOD in the Use of the Promises, and yet he
cannot find it settled. Well, GOD will give thee Comfort and Consolation, but in
his own Order. And know this, that commonly the Lord never debars the Soul of
Comfort, but he sees the Heart is not fit for it. Thy Heart would be proud and
careless, and GOD would hear no more of thee, and thy Sail would overturn the
Boat; therefore when God has abased thy Heart, and made thee content to want
what he shall deny, then he will give thee Assurance, but it must be in his own
Order. And this is the Reason why the most smoke out their Days in Discontent;
the Reason is, There is a proud Heart and a sturdy Disposition of Spirit that
will not come unto God's Terms. As it is with a Physician; he will not give a
Cordial to his Patient, when he will: For if he were in a burning Fever, it
were the next Way to send him going; but first he purges him, and makes him
fit, and then gives him a Cordial: So it is in these Things which thou cravest;
the Lord will give thee them, when thou shall not surfeit of Comfort, and
Assurance, and Prosperity; and when thy Heart is emptied and purged, and able
to digest these Things, then the Lord will give them.

2. Secondly; The Lord will give us temporal Blessings, and that Measure of
Spiritual, in his own due Time; not when thou and I would, but when he sees
most fit; as John 2. 3, 4. The Mother of JESUS comes to our Savior, and says,
They have no Wine. She though it she had Christ at command: But he answers her,
Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine Hour is not yet come. So it is with
our Souls; we want Comfort, and we want Strength against our Corruptions, and
we want Assurance, and Assistance: But what have I to do with that proud Heart,
says our Savior? My Time is not yet come. You would have it now, as they said,
Acts 1.6. Lord, will thou NOW restore the Kingdom to Israel? GOD will do in his
own Time, and we must wait his Leisure. This is one Thing that does necessarily
accompany the Covenant of Grace, as I have showed before that the Lord should
dispense the Blessings of his Kingdom when HE pleases, and not when we will.
When the Lord sees these Blessings of spiritual Mercies and temporal Favors
are ripe and most seasonable to thy Necessity; then thou shall have them: But
the Time is in GOD'S Hand.

3. Thirdly; The Lord does not promise in such a Manner and Measure, and such a
peculiar Thing, to give that temporal Blessing, and that spiritual Assistance
we desire; but the Lord will do that which he knows most fit: For so the Text
says, Prove. 30.8. Feed me with Food convenient for me. There was Faith now; he
wholly refers himself to God, When a Man comes to the Tailor to have a Garment
made, he does not cut out the Garment himself, but refers it to the Judgment of
the Workman. So must we do, refer our selves to GOD; and know, God promises
nothing, but as he sees it fit for thy Good. It may be thou shall not have this
Blessing, or that Grace. As it is with a Potter, he is minded to make so many
Vessels of Honor: So if the Lord will make thee a Vessel of Honor, go away
contented; whether thou have so much Prosperity, and so much Good, or no, and
so much Grace, it matters not so much; it is enough that thou art elected to
eternal Happiness.

Now you see how to manage and improve the Promise aright for your best
Advantage, and to expect that from the Promise which it will yield.

[2.] Again, Another Particular in this third Rule of living by Faith, is this;
How to take, and how to enjoy the Sap and Sweet of the Promise, and to live by
it. When the Husbandman has sown his Ground, and his Fruit is ripe, and he
has reaped it, then he must gather in his Corn that he may live upon it. So
let us gather in the Promises when we see the best Advantage; Now let us take
the Gain, and live by it, and that comfortably too, in the Proof of God's
Goodness therein. For this End, let me suggest these five Directions.

1. First: Thou see what GOD is in the Promise, and thou expectest no more
than GOD is there: Then, eye that particular Good in the Promise which thou
stand in need of; eye that Good in Christ and in the Promise, and then set
God's Power and Faithfulness awork to bring that Good, and his Wisdom to
continue it. As for Instance: I am in Persecution, and either I would have
Deliverance and Safety, that I might not be imprisoned; or else Comfort and
Refreshment, if the Lord carry me thither; and therefore I would see all this
in the Promise, still reserving the Conditions beforementioned. If thou art in
Prison, eye Liberty and Preservation in Christ; he that is the great Deliverer
of his People, and carries his People in his own Hands: And then set God's
Power and Faithfulness a-work, that can do it; and his Wisdom, that can
continue it for thy Good. That which thou see and need in the Promise,
that the Power and Wisdom of God may communicate to thy Soul. This is the
Meaning of that Place, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy Ways unto the Lord, trust in him,
and he shall bring it to pass. Roll thy self, and lay all thy Occasions upon
the Lord: Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 5.7. Cast your Care upon the
Lord, for he cares for you. It is God's proper Office and Work: He cares for
thy Soul, therefore lay it all upon him, and put over all thy Care into his
Hands, and set his Power and Faithfulness a-work: Only this is here a little to
be scanned. I speak not (...), that (...) should take no Care at all, but I
say, Hang all the Weight and Burden upon the Lord. The Brewer, he tumbles the
Barrel of Beer, and he rouls it, but it is the Earth that bears it: So whatever
Trouble is in thine Eye, or Ear, or Heart, roll it upon the Lord. That is thus:
The Weight of a Man lies especially in three Things, which a Man must hurl off
himself and lay upon the Lord. Either First, A Man shall not be able to know
what he shall do, or what he is commanded: Or else, Secondly, He shall not be
able to do what God commands, and he knows: Or else, Thirdly, He shall not find
Success in what he does. It is not a Trouble to do what we can, or to employ
our selves as we are able: But this is the Trouble, when the Heart says, I
know not what the Mind of God is; or, I shall not do what I know; or, It will
not succeed; or, No, it is not in my Power. Now leave all these with God, and
meddle not with them, but put them over to the Lord, and meddle with thine own
Duty, and thine own Work; and let God alone with his: And say thou unto the
Lord, In truth, Lord, it is not in my Power, it is not in my Parts or Work,
either to compass that Wisdom, that is able to direct my self, or to have any
Power to do all that is commanded, much less to give good Success. Lord, I will
not meddle with that, but leave it with thy Majesty: If thou in thy Power can
not, nor in thy Faithfulness and Goodness carest not for thy poor helpless
Creature, then I am content: And if thou will not be faithful, then I am
content to be miserable.

And so also thou may suppose a Man that has promised to undertake some
Business for a Friend, and in the End it proves somewhat troublesome, and
therefore he wishes his Friend to take it again into his own Hands; for it is
very troublesome: But a Man will leave it to him, and say, He has engaged
himself to do it, and he will not look after it; I will not meddle with it any
more. So whatever it is that is in God's royal Prerogative, leave it with God,
and do not meddle with it; let God now look to it; leave it to his Faithfulness
and Power to accomplish it. So did Abraham, Romans 4.16, -- 20. Who against Hope
[or, above] Hope, believed in [or, under] Hope, that he should become the
Father of many Nations. Sarah's Womb was barren, and his Body dead, and yet he
must have a Son: And therefore he sets God's Power a-work, and says, ver. 21.
Lord, this Body is dead, and Sarah is barren: There is no Help here: But thou
art able, and thou have engaged thy self to do it. You see he sets God's Power
to work, and puts over all the Weight and Burden of the Care upon the Lord.
And therefore says Mordecai, Esther 4.14. If thou altogether hold thy Peace
at this Time, Enlargement and Deliverance shall come from some other Place. He
was resolved that God had Deliverance for his Church, and would not deny his
Truth. Salvation will come, says the Text. He knows not the Place or the
Means: But he knows Salvation will come. So set thou God's Power and
Faithfulness to work, and not thy own Care: Commit it to the Lord, and cast thy
Care upon him, so far as concerns the Burden of it. This is the first
Direction.

2. Secondly; By Faith go to the Promise again for Help and Power to wait on
God in that Way, and to look toward God in the Use of those Means, he has
appointed for the attaining of that Good which his Power will work for thee.
God will certainly work it: And so thou must meet God in the Course of his
Providence, in the Improvement of the Means he has appointed for thy Good.
Observe thou his Providence, and do thou what God requires: For otherwise we
live not by Faith, but tempt God, and throw away the Promise and all, and
deprive our selves of that Good which God would bestow; we not walking in that
Way which he has appointed. Luke 24.49. when our Savior was to go to Heaven,
he said, Behold, I send the PROMISE of my FATHER amongst you: But tarry you in
the City of Jerusalem, until you be endued with Power from above. Christ would
indue them with the SPIRIT; but they must tarry at Jerusalem and wait for it.
So I say, Would thou have Grace and the SPIRIT from above, and the Wealth of
the World? Then walk in that Way God has appointed: Stay at Jerusalem, and be
in the Way, and meet God in his Providence; and then thou shall receive from
his Power and Faithfulness what thou need. Thou would have God bless thee
in thine Estate, and yet thou would be idle and careless: But this will not
do the Deed: God would give thee a Blessing, but thou art not there to take it.
This is the Excellency of the Promises of God; as they require Conditions
before they bestow Mercies; so they make us able to be Partakers of the
Conditions, and give the Conditions: As for Example, Ezekiel. 36. the Lord in the
former Part of the Chapter promises to give them many Things; but how? It must
be by Prayer, and humbling themselves before him: He will give thee a Family
Blessing, by Prayer in it; and a Blessing in private, by Prayer in private; and
Strength against Sin, and Power against Corruption: But I will be sought unto
for all these, says the Lord: And the Text says, Prove. 20.7. Blessed is the
Man that walks in his Integrity, and his Children after him. Therefore walk
thou in the Integrity of thine Heart; that is the Condition of a Christian in
General; or as a Husband, or as a Wife, or as a Servant, in the Particular.
This the Promise requires. But mark this now: The same Promise that requires
the Conditions, will help us to perform form the Conditions: And the same Lord
that says, I will be entreated and sought to for these; the same Lord says,
Psalm. 10.17. He prepares their Hearts to pray. Go thou therefore to God to
help thee to pray, that he may bestow his Blessing upon thee, which he has
promised, Ezekiel. 26.27. he will first give them a new Heart, then teach them to
walk in his Ways. So if thou will walk in his Ways, thou shall have his
Blessings: Therefore go thou by the Power of Faith, to the Promises of God, for
Strength and Grace, and in that thou must use the Means appointed; and then
expect a Blessing from it in the Course of his Providence. Now is God's Power
and Faithfulness set a-work.

3. The third Direction. We must set it down, and conclude it, that God will do
it; so shall we receive in the Ways of his Providence whatsoever he has
promised to give. That is the Work of Faith, and that is to draw Sap and Virtue
from the Promise, John 3.33. He that has received his Testimony, has set to
his Seal that God is True. There, by Sealing, is meant sealing to the Promise.
This is the Nature of Sealing; when a Man has drawn the Articles of Agreement,
and when they have sealed, the whole Matter is done. So Faith must make the
Promise authentical, and put a Seal to it that it is true; and says, It is
done in Heaven, and I am fully resolved, and setledly persuaded thereof, that I
shall have whatever I have believed; and Thou, LORD, have promised, and I have
used the Means in the Ways of thy Providence. Famous is that of Abraham, Genesis
22.5. The Lord has bidden him sacrifice his Son, and yet had said before he
should live: And therefore when he came to the Place, he said to his Servants,
Abide you here with the Asses; for I and the Lad will go yonder, and sacrifice,
and return again to you. He thought to sacrifice him, and yet by Faith he
believed that he should bring Isaac again. So I would have a poor Saint of God
believe and conclude. When thou find thy Comforts like Isaac's in the Ashes,
and thy Estate helpless and hopeless; yet even then set God's Power a-work, and
wait upon him in the Use of the Means he has appointed, and there conclude it,
and that He will bring Patience, Power, and Deliverance, and so in every Kind,
according to all Necessities. Yet remember this, Expect no more from the
Promise, than God will give in the Promise: But say, My Sins shall be mastered
one Day, and these Temptations shall one Day be overthrown, that have so long
annoyed the Soul of thy Servant; I have begged Succor against these
Corruptions within, and these Temptations without, and yet it is not; but I
know it is done in Heaven; it wants nothing but the taking out; Thou will bestow
upon thy Servant what thou see fit. 1 Samuel 1.18. Hannah wept sore, and prayed
to the Lord, and went away, and was no more sorrowful: And she said, Lord, I
believe that I shall either have a Child, or that which is as good, or better:
Now the Business was done.

But suppose the Lord delays, and does not suddenly accomplish what he intends,
and thou have used Means to receive; he gives not, grants not, sends not
Succor according to thy Desire, and the Tenor of the Covenant, as thou
conceivest;

4. Then in the fourth Place, FAITH is to take up it is Stand, and stay till it
come: As thou resolvest, so it will be: Stay 'till it be, and stay it out. Here
is much Work to do. We prevent God's Kindness, when we go away before he be
willing to bestow a Kindness on us. But Faith will not do so: He that believes,
does not make haste: He makes haste to obey, but he stays, and resolves that it
will be. Hab. 2.3. The Vision is for an appointed Time; but at the End it shall
speak, and not lie; Therefore wait for it, because it will surely come. Thou
art pestered with thy Sins, and have labored by Faith to subdue them; and thy
Estate is low, and thou have labored by Faith for Deliverance: And yet it
comes not: Therefore stay till God sees fit, and it will come. Psalm. 123.2. As
the Eyes of Servants look to the Hands of their Masters, and as the Eyes of a
Maiden to the Hand of her Mistress; so our Eyes wait upon the Lord our God,
until he have Mercy upon us. It is not, 'till I will, or 'till I see fit, or
according to my Mind; but until the Lord have Mercy. We suddenly slide away
from the Covenant which the Lord makes with us; because we have it not when we
will, therefore we go away. 1 Samuel 13.13. When Samuel tarried long, and the
People began to murmur, Saul went and offered a Burnt-offering to the Lord: And
therefore Samuel said unto him, Thou have done foolishly, thou have not kept
the Commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee; for now would the
Lord have established thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever. If Saul had stayed the
Lord's Time, HE would have established his Kingdom upon Israel for ever: But he
prevented the Lord's Kindness, and offered sacrifice unseasonably and sinfully.
So it is many Times with a proud, pettish, rash and distempered Heart: If we
have not what we would, and when we would, then we are all amort, [ i.e. quite
dead-hearted,] and murmur, and say, Why should we wait any longer? Thou have
done foolishly: Have thou prayed and looked to the Promise thus long, and will thou now give over? The Lord would have comforted thee, had thou gone on: But
the Lord has withdrawn himself from thee, because thou have withdrawn thy
Heart from the Promise. When the Carriage is heavy, and the Way dead, there are
many sore Pulls, and often the Wagon is at a Stand; and if a Man should then go
away and give over, all his Work were lost. Therefore stay thou 'till the Lord
show Mercy. Thus long thou have called and sought, and looked up to the
Promise, and waited upon the Lord, and attended upon the freeness of his Grace;
once more happily would have done it: thy Heart was almost humbled, thy Sin was
almost conquered: Oh thou silly Soul, why did not thou hold it out? It would
have come at the last; my Life for thine. Now take heed of this; If the Time
seems tedious, and thy Heart begins to sink, and thy Spirit is weary; take heed
of flying off, take heed of shifting for thy own Comfort, and looking to base
Ends and Aims: No, hold thy Mind to, and keep thy Eye of Faith upon the
Promise, and stay it out 'till God see the Time fit: And know, it is the best
Time, when it is GOD'S Time. In the 27th of the Acts, ver. 31. Paul says, Except
these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. Every Man was skipping overboard
to save himself, but Paul stayed them. A Man would have though it otherwise; but
the Apostle knew it was not so; for the Lord had revealed it to him. So I say,
Be thy Temptations never so strong, and thy Sins never so many, and thou
beginnest to complain, and say, I have cried, Lord, and sought earnestly,
and yet my Condition is worse, and my Soul more sinful, and I am less able to
help my self, there is no more Succor to be expected. Now take heed of going
out of the Ship, and from the use of Means: Keep in the Ship; for in it you
shall be safe. Keep in the Promise, and still your Hearts there: You shall have
a happy Arrival at Heaven, though it be upon a little broken Board: It Is no
matter, stay God's Time.

5. The fifth Direction. Lay hold on GOD in CHRIST, and wrestle with him, and
never let him go. For yet happily the Lord seems not only to delay his poor
Servants, and to withhold his Favor; but he seems to frown and say, He will
not hear; and he seems to be angry with the Prayer of his Servants, and with
their Importunity; and he seems as if he would not succor and supply: Thus he
dealt with Jacob, Genesis 32.26. There the Lord says, Let me go; I care not what
becomes of thee, Let me go: But Jacob lays hold upon him, and would not let him
go. So the last Work of Faith is this: In a holy Humility labor to contend
with GOD, and by a strong Hand overcome the Lord; for the Lord loves to be
overcome thus. Be not saucy with the Lord: But in the Sense of thine own
Baseness, as it were, catch the Lord Jesus, and strive with him; leave not
'till thou have those Comforts he has promised, and thou have begged. This is
the Glory and the Victory of the Triumph of Faith, that gives thee the Day too;
and the Lord, as 'twere, lays down the Weapons, and yields himself as
conquered: As was with Jacob, when GOD saw he could not prevail, he said, Verse
28. Thy Name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, because thou have
prevailed with God. God is ready to give what he has promised; but he will
have us try the Mastery with him. God overcomes himself, and we by Faith in
God, overcome or prevail with God: As Jam. 2.13. Mercy triumphs over Justice.
Lord, says my Soul, Why should not I have that Mercy, Supply and Succor?
Says Justice, Thou art a sinful Wretch, and thou have wronged me: Says Anger,
Thou have deserved to be plagued; and therefore thou shall feel the smart of my
Displeasure. Now Faith lays hold upon the Riches of the Freeness of God's Mercy
in Christ; and in him Justice is satisfied, and Anger appealed for all: And now
Mercy is purchased for all, and Mercy triumphs over Justice; and Faith takes
hold upon and overcomes GOD himself, as I may say, with a holy humble Baseness
of Heart. You know what the Lord did to the Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.28. when
she had striven with him a great while, and would take no Denial; at last he
says, O Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. Take
what thou will; if thou will have Life for thy Child, and Peace for thine own
Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, take it; for it is all thine. He, as it
were, turns her loose to all his Treasury. If she had gone away at the first or
second Denial, she had found no Help: But because she held out, she had all her
Heart's Desire. God would have us wrestle with his Majesty, that he may be
overcome in Mercy and Goodness.

I might have here taken some of the most desperate Cases that could be, that
you might have seen what Faith would have done in the Midst of the Want of all
Means, and in the greatest Extremity that could have befallen a poor Sinner;
but I pass over that at this Time.

Now therefore consider what has been said: Lay these Things up, and have them
ever before you, and practice them: And by often writing, learn to write: And
by often living, learn to live. Many People live poorly, and make a poor Shift
to go to Heaven: But I would not have a Christian live so, but be Master of his
Art. Know and see your Way, and use the Means, Labor to get Good thereby; that
you may have the Sap and Sweet of the Promises, and so go singing and rejoicing
and triumphing up to Heaven.

The Conclusion.
NOW that which I conclude withal is this: You see how far the Lord has
brought us; how the Soul has been prepared, and cut off from Sin and Itself,
if fitted for the Lord Jesus, by Contrition and Humiliation; and that the Soul
comes to see that there is no Hope in the Creatures, nor any Succor in Heaven,
but in the Lord Jesus Christ; and so at last the Sinner comes, and lies at the
Foot of the Lord Jesus, and knows that either he must be another Man, or a
damned Man. Now when he sees that Prayer and all other Means will not profit,
and the Power of the Means yet prevails not, and the Power of his Corruptions
is not yet mastered; then he looks up to Christ, and is contented that he
should do what he will with him. Now when the Lord Jesus sees him lie wearied
thus with his Corruptions, then the Lord gives special Notice to his Soul that
it is his Purpose to do him good, and that there is Mercy for that broken Heart
of his. With that Hope is stirred; and Faith cries out, Is it possible? Is it
credible? Shall this Wretchedness of mine be pardoned? Oh, my Desire is kindled
within me, and I long for that Day: O that I might once see the Funeral of all
my Sins! Mark now how Love and Joy are cheared to entertain this Mercy; and Oh
how is the Soul bound and engaged to GOD, that offers free and undeserved Grace
to a stubborn and rebellious Sinner! At last the Will says Amen to the
Promise; and further says, O that Mercy I will have! And thus the Soul is come
home to GOD by Vocation. Now the Prodigal is come home to his Father; and the
Father's Heart leaps within his Breast, when he sees him lie at the Door. And
as the Father rejoiceth, so the Angels in Heaven rejoice; and all the Faithful
shall rejoice, and say, Oh my Husband, Oh my Father. Oh my Child, and Oh my
Wife, that was a sinful Woman, is come home again to her first and best
Husband. You that have found it thus in your selves, be comforted: You that
know it in others, rejoice.

To sum up all briefly, we see,

First; When we have plucked away all carnal Props, that then there is Way made
for the Promise to come in to us.

Secondly; And when our Hearts are possessed thoro'ly of the Sufficiency of
GOD'S Promise and Grace; that then the Promise that draws near, begins it is
Work.

Thirdly; That when we expect all from the Promise, even Power to come to it,
that then It lays fast hold upon us.

Fourthly; That when we are content to yield to the just Conditions of the
Promise, then the Promise carries us, and all in us.

Thus we have seen the Hindrances removed, and the Means propounded: And hence
we see, that Faith is to be labored for above all Graces. And now that we may
be moved and persuaded importunately to seek after this blessed Grace of God;
let us further consider thus much, namely, that if we once get this Grace, we
get all other Graces with it; which is a Ground of much Comfort, and cannot but
keep us doing: For will it not much encourage a Man, when in the doing of one
Work he knows he shall do another, nay, all his Work with one Labor! But so it
is in the Work of Faith. Oh then how should it encourage us to labor for
Faith, seeing that by getting it, we have all? Men that are wise to provide for
themselves, and to lay out their Moneys in some Purchase for the best; when
they see a Ground well wooded and watered, but especially to have some rich
Mines in it, all their Minds will be upon such a Place, because, having it,
they have all with it. So it should be here, in our Desires: And as there, so
here; get this Grace, and get all: Strengthen here, and all is strong: But want
here, and want every where: Having this Grace of Faith, you need not seek for
Wisdom; for Faith will make you wise to Salvation: And you need not labor for
Patience; for he that is faithful, will be patient: And so for other Graces. He
that has the Grace of Faith, has them all; has Holiness, has Cleanness,
has Love, has a pure Mind, and good Conscience; and what has he not? The
Saints of God endeavor with much Pains to get Grace, and to subdue Corruption:
But because they take not the right Way to it, they seek and do not find.

Many a poor Soul mourns and cries to Heaven for Mercy, and prays against a
stubborn hard Heart, and is weary of his Life, because this vile Heart remains
yet in him; and yet happily gets little or no Redress: The Reason is, and the
main Wound lies here; he goes the wrong Way to work; for, he that would have
Grace must (first of all) get FAITH: Faith will bring all the rest; buy the
Field and the Pearl is thine; it goes with the Purchase. Thou must not think
with thine own Struggling to get the Mastery of a proud Heart; for that will
not do: But let thy Faith go first to CHRIST, and try what that can do. There
are many Graces necessary in this Work; as Meekness, Patience, Humility, and
Wisdom: Now Faith will fetch all these, and possess the Soul of them. Brethren,
therefore if you set any Price upon these Graces, buy the Field, labor for
Faith; get that, and you get all. The Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with
open Face, beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the LORD, are changed into the
same Image, from Glory to Glory. The Lord Christ is the Glass, and the glorious
Grace of God in Christ, is that Glory of the Lord: Therefore first behold this
Grace in Christ by Faith (and thou must do so before thou can receive Grace.)
First, See Humility in Christ, and then fetch it thence: First, See Strength
and Courage in him, whereby to enable thy weak Heart, and Strength will come;
there fetch it, and there have it. Would you then have a meek, gracious, and
humble Heart? I dare say for some of you, that you had rather have it than any
Thing under Heaven, and would think it the best Bargain that ever you made;
which is the Cause why you say, O that I could once see that Day, that this
proud Heart of mine might be humbled: Oh if I could see the last Blood of my
Sins, I should then think my self happy, none more, and desire to live no
longer. But is this thy Desire, poor Soul? Then get Faith, and so buy the
whole, for they all go together: Nor think to have them upon any Price, not
having Faith: I mean Patience, and Meekness, and the humble Heart: But buy
Faith, the Field, and you have the Pearl. Further, Would you have the Glory of
God in your Eye, and be more heavenly-minded? Then look to it, and get it by
the Eye of Faith: Look up to it in the Face of JESUS CHRIST, and then you shall
see it; and then hold you there: For there, and there only, this Vision of the
Glory of God is to be seen, to your everlasting Peace and endless Comfort. When
Men use to make a Purchase, they speak of all the Commodities of it; as, That
there is so much Wood, worth so much; and so much Stock, worth so much; and
then they offer for the whole, answerable to these severals. So here; there is
Item for an heavenly Mind, and that is worth Thousands; and, Item for an humble
Heart, and that is worth Millions: And so for the rest. And are those Graces so
much worth? What is Faith worth then? Hence we may conclude and say, O precious
Faith! precious indeed, that is able, through the Spirit of Christ, to bring so
many, nay, all Graces with it: As one Degree of Grace after another: Grace
here, and Happiness for ever hereafter. If we have but the Hearts of Men (I do
not say of Christians) methinks this that is spoken of Faith, should provoke us
to labor always, above all Things, for this blessed Grace of God, the Grace of
Faith.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. IMPEDIMENTS that hinder Souls from coming to CHRIST removed. Page 1.
CHAP. II. HELPS to come to CHRIST. Page 35 CHAP. III. Rules to direct a
Christian how to use the Word of GOD for his Evidence of Assurance with Peace.
Page 58 CHAP. IV. Means to obtain an Interest in the Promises, and improve them
for our Benefit. Page 76 CHAP. V. How shall a Man he trained up that he may get
the Skill of living by Faith. Page 98 The CONCLUSION. Page 138.

