SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS ON Absolute Predestination.

Extracted from a late AUTHOR

Very suitable for these Times.

BOSTON: Reprinted and sold by Thomas Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in
Cornhill. 1743.

Serious CONSIDERATIONS On Absolute Predestination.
GOD out of his Infinite Love, who delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but
that all should live and be saved, has given his only Son, to the end that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life: He is
the true Light, who enlightneth every Man that comes into the World. And this
Light would work out the Salvation of All, if not resisted. Nor is it less
Universal than inbred Sin, being the Purchase of his Death who tasted Death for
every Man. For as in Adam all died, even so in CHRIST shall all be made alive.

2. But some are not afraid to assert, That GOD by an Eternal and unchangable
Decree has predestined to Eternal Damnation the far greater Part of Mankind,
and that absolutely, without any respect to their Works, but only for the
showing the Glory of his Justice: And that for the bringing this about, he has
appointed these miserable Souls necessarily to walk in their wicked Ways, that
so his Justice may lay hold on them: And that he justly condemns these, although
he has withheld from them that Grace by which alone they could have laid hold
of Salvation, as having decreed, (without any respect to their Works) That they
shall not obey, and that the Gospel which he publicly invites them to accept,
shall never prove effectual for their Salvation, but only serve to aggravate
their Guilt, and occasion their greater Damnation.

3. We may safely call this Doctrine a Novelty, seeing in the first four
hundred Years after Christ, there is no Mention made of it, by any Writer,
great or small, in any Part of the Christian Church. For, as it is contrary to
the Testimony of Scripture, and to the Tenor of the Gospel, so all the ancient
Writers, Teachers and Doctors of the Church, pass it over with a profound
Silence. The first Foundations of it were laid, in the latter Writings of
Augustine; who in his Heat against Pelagius, let fall some Expressions, which
some have unhappily gleaned up, for the establishing of this Error; thereby
contradicting many others and many more, and frequent Expressions of the same
Augustine. It was afterward taught by Dominicus, a Popish Friar, and the Monks
of his Order, and at last it was unhappily taken up by John Calvin, (otherwise
a Man in diverse respects to be commended) to the great staining of his
Reputation, and Defamation both of the Protestant and of the Christian
Religion. However we should not reject it for the Silence of the Ancients, if
it had any real Bottom in the Word of GOD; and if it were not highly injurious
to GOD himself, JESUS CHRIST our Mediator and Redeemer, to the Power, Virtue,
Nobility and Excellency of his Blessed Gospel, and lastly, to All Mankind.

4. First, It is highly injurious to GOD, because it makes him the Author of
Sin. I confess the Assertors of this Doctrine deny this Consequence of it: But
that is but a mere Illusion, and is equally ridiculous, as if a Man should
deny, that two and two makes four. For if GOD has decreed, that the Reprobated
shall Perish, and if he has also decreed that they should walk in those wicked
Ways, by which they are led to that End: Who, I pray, is the first Author and
Cause thereof but GOD, who so willed and decreed? This is as plain and natural
a Consequence, as any can possibly be. And therefore although many of the
Preachers of this Doctrine have sought out various strange, strained and
intricate Distinctions to avoid it, yet some, and that of the most eminent
among them, have openly acknowledged it. I shall instance a few among many
Passages. Calvin in cap. 3. Genesis Id. 1 Inst. c. 18. S. 1. Id. Lib. de. Praed.
etc.
I say that by the Ordination and Will of GOD, Adam fell. GOD would have Man to
fall. Man is blinded by the Will and Commandment of GOD. We refer the Causes of
hardening us to GOD. The highest or remote Cause of hardening is, The Will of
GOD. These are Calvin's Words. Besa Lib. de Praed.
GOD (says Beza) has predestined whomsoever he saw meet, not only unto
Damnation, but also unto the Causes of it.

Zanch. de Excaec. q. 5. Id. lib. 5. de Not. Dei.
It is certain (says Zanchius) that GOD is the first Cause of Obduration.
Reprobates are held so fast under GOD's Almighty Decree, that they cannot but
Sin and Perish. Martyr in Romans
GOD (says Martyr) does incline and force the Wills of Wicked Men into great
Sins. Zuing. lib. de Provid. c. 5.
GOD (says Zuinglius) moves the Robber to kill. He kills, GOD forcing him
thereunto. Resp. ad Vorst. par. 1. p. 120.
Reprobate Persons (says Piscator) are absolutely ordained to this twofold
End, To undergo everlasting Punishment, and Necessarily to Sin: And, therefore
to Sin, that they may be justly punished.

5. If these Sayings do not import, That GOD is the Author of Sin, we must not
then seek these Men's Opinions from their Words, but some Way else. It seems as
if they had assumed to themselves that monstrous, twofold Will they feign of
GOD: One by which they declare their Minds openly, and another more Secret and
Hidden, which is quite contrary to the other. Nor does it at all help them to
say, That Man sins willingly; since that Willingness to Sin is (according to
their Judgment) so necessarily imposed upon him, that he cannot but be Willing,
because God has willed and decreed him to be so. This Shift is just as if I
should take a Child unable to resist me, and throw it down from a high
Precipice. The Weight of its Body indeed makes it go readily down, and the
Violence of the Fall beats out its Brains and kills it. But though the Weight of
its Body and not any immediate Stroke of my Hand makes the Child die; whether
is the Child or I the proper Cause of its Death? Let then any Man judge,
whether they who make GOD's Part as great, and more immediate, in the Sins of
Men, do not make GOD the Author of Sin, and so are highly injurious to him?

6. Secondly, This Doctrine is injurious to GOD, because it makes him delight
in the Death of Sinners, contrary to the Express Words of GOD himself. As I
live, says the Lord GOD, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but
that the Wicked turn from his Way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
Ways: For why will ye die, O House of Israel? Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. This is good
and acceptable in the Sight of GOD our Savior: Who wills all Men to be
saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the Truth. 1. Tim. ii. 4. The Lord is
long-suffering, not willing that any should Perish, but that all should come
unto Repentance. But if he has created Men only for this very End, that he
might show forth his Vengeance upon them (as these Men affirm) and for
effecting this End, has with held from them that Grace, whereby alone they
could be saved from perishing, yea and also predestined the Evil, that they
might fall into it; certainly he must delight in their Death, contrary to his
own express Declaration.

7. Thirdly, This Doctrine is highly injurious to CHRIST our Mediator, and to
the Efficacy and Excellency of his Gospel. For it supposes his Mediation to be
necessarily of none effect, with regard to the Salvation of the Greater Part of
the World: As if he had not by his Sufferings and Death thoroughly broken down
the middle Wall, nor yet removed the Wrath of GOD, or purchased the Love of GOD
for all Mankind: As if it was before decreed, that it should be of no Service,
to the far greater Part of Mankind. And it is to no Purpose to say, That his
Death was of Efficacy enough to have saved all Mankind; if in effect its Virtue
be not so far extended, as to put all Mankind into a Capacity of Salvation.

8. Fourthly, It makes the Preaching of the Gospel a mere Mock and Illusion, if
many of those to whom it is preached, are by an irrevocable Decree, shut out
from being benifited by it. It wholly makes useless the preaching of Faith and
Repentance, and the whole Tenor of the Gospel Promises and Threatings. For if
such a Decree be already past, Man needs do nothing but wait for Irresistible
Grace: Which if he be Elected, will come, though it be but at his last Hour: And
if he be Reprobated, will never come, be his Diligence and waiting what it can.

9. Fifthly, This Doctrine makes the coming of CHRIST and his Sacrifice on the
Cross, which the Scripture affirms to have been the Fruit of GOD's Love to the
World, to have been rather a Testimony of GOD's Wrath to the World, yea one of
the greatest Judgments and Severest Acts that can be conceived of GOD's
Indignation toward Mankind: It being only ordained (according to this Doctrine)
to save a very few, and for the hardening and increasing the Damnation of the
far greater Number of Men, namely of all those who do not truly believe: The
Cause of which Unbelief again, (as these Divines, so called, above assert) is
the hidden Counsel of GOD. Certainly then the coming of CHRIST was never to
them a Testimony of GOD's Love, but rather of his implacable Wrath: And if the
World may be taken for the far greater Number of such as live in it, GOD never
loved the World, according to this Doctrine, but rather hated it greatly, in
sending his Son to be crucified in it.

10. Sixthly, This Doctrine is highly injurious to Mankind; for it renders them
in a far worse Condition than the Devils in Hell. For these were some time in a
Capacity to have stood: They might have kept their happy Estate but would not:
Whereas many Millions of Men are tormented for ever, according to them, who
never were happy, nor ever can be. It renders them in a worse State than the
Beasts of the Field, of whom the Master requires no more than they are able to
perform, and if they be killed, Death is to them the End of all Sorrow: Whereas
Man is in Pain without End, for not doing that which he never was able to do.
It puts him into a far worse Condition than Pharaoh put the Israelites: For
though he withheld Straw from them, yet they could get it by much Labor. But
they make GOD to withhold from Men all Means of Salvation, so that they cannot
attain it by all their Pains. Yea, they place Mankind in that Condition which
the Poets feign of Tantalus: Who oppressed with Thirst, stands in Water up to the
Chin, yet can by no Means reach it with his Tongue; and being tormented with
Hunger, has Fruits hanging at his very Lips, yet so as he can never lay hold
of them with his Teeth. And these Things are so near him, not to nourish him,
but to torment him. So do these Teachers make GOD deal with Mankind. They make
the outward Creation, the Works of Providence, the Smitings of Conscience,
sufficient to convince the Reprobates of Sin, but never intended to help them
to Salvation. They make the Preaching of the Gospel, and the offer of Salvation
by CHRIST sufficient to condemn them; serving to beget a seeming Faith and a
vain Hope; yet by Reason of GOD's Irresistible Decree, all these (say they) are
wholly ineffectual to bring them the least Step toward Salvation, and do only
contribute to make their Condemnation the greater, and their Torments the more
violent and intolerable.

11. In direct Opposition to this we affirm, That GOD out of his infinite Love,
who delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but that all should live and be
saved, has sent his only begotten Son into the World, that whosoever believes
in him might be saved. This Doctrine is so evident from the Scripture
Testimony, that there is scarce found any other Article of the Christian Faith,
so frequently, so plainly and so positively asserted. It is that which makes
the preaching of CHRIST to be indeed the Gospel, or Glad Tidings to All; as the
Angel declared his coming to be, ( Luke, ii. 10.) Behold I bring You Good
Tidings of Great Joy which shall be to all People. Whereas if this Coming of
CHRIST had not brought a Possibility of Salvation to all, it should rather have
been accounted Bad Tidings of great Sorrow to most People. Neither would the
Angel have had Reason to sing, Peace on Earth and Good Will toward Men, if the
Greatest Part of Mankind had been necessarily shut out from receiving any
Benefit from it. And indeed if so, how should CHRIST have sent out his Servants
to preach the Gospel to every Creature? that is, To every Son and Daughter of
Mankind; for here is no Exception. He commands them to preach Salvation to All,
Repentance and Remission of Sins to All, warning every one and exhorting every
one as Paul did, Col. i. 28. But how could they have preached the Gospel to
every Man, as became the Ministers of CHRIST, in much Assurance, if Salvation
by that Gospel had not been possible to All? What if some of those had asked
them, Has CHRIST died for Me? Should they have answered conditionally, If thou
repent, CHRIST died for Thee? The same Question would have recurr'd, Has
CHRIST died for Me that I may repent? Otherwise My Repentance is impossible. To
this nothing could be answered but the same thing over again. Whereas those who
bring the Glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace, are to preach the Common
Salvation, Repentance unto All, offering a Door of Mercy and Hope to All, through
JESUS CHRIST, who gave himself a Ransom for All. The Gospel invites All. And
certainly CHRIST intended not to deceive and delude the Greater Part of
Mankind, when he invites and cries, saying, Come unto me all Ye that are weary
and heavy-laden, and I will give You Rest. If All then ought to seek after him,
and to look for Salvation by him, he must needs have made Salvation possible to
All. For who is bound to seek after that which is impossible? Certainly it were
a Mocking of Men to bid them to do so. And such as deny, that by the Death of
CHRIST Salvation is made possible to All Men, do most blasphemously make GOD
mock the World, in giving his Servants a Commission to preach the Gospel of
Salvation unto All, while he has before decreed, that it shall not be possible
for them to receive it. Do not they make the LORD to send forth his Servants
with a Lie in their Mouth, commanding them, to bid All and every one believe,
that CHRIST died for Them, and had purchased Salvation for them: Whereas
(according to this Doctrine) he has done no such thing, or ever intended it?
Seeing then CHRIST has commanded to preach Repentance and Remission of Sins to
All, it is certain that he died for All: And that it is possible for all to
repent and believe. In as much as he who commissioned his Servants thus to
preach, is a GOD of Truth and no Mocker of poor Mankind, neither does he
require of any Man, that which it is simply impossible for him to do.

12. Moreover, if we regard the Testimony of the Scripture, there is not, that
I know of, one Scripture which affirms, CHRIST did not die for All, whereas
there are diverse Scriptures which positively and expressly affirm, He did. As
1. Tim. ii. 1, 3, 4, 6. I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks be made for all Men, etc. For this
is good and acceptable in the Sight of GOD our Savior, who will have all Men
to be saved and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth -- Who gave himself a
Ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Except we make the Apostle to
assert quite another thing than he meant there can be nothing more plain than
this. For first he here directs them To pray for all Men; and to prevent such
an Objection as this, CHRIST prayed not for the World, neither wills he us to
pray for all: Because he wills not that all should be saved, but has
ordained many to be damned, he adds, This is good and acceptable with GOD who
wills all Men to be saved. I desire to know what can be more expressly
affirmed? Or, can any Two Propositions be stated in Terms more contradictory,
than these Two,

GOD wills not some Men to be saved, and

GOD wills all Men to be saved?

If we believe the last, as the Apostle has affirmed, the first cannot be
true. Whence (to conclude) he gives us a Reason of CHRIST'S Willingness that
all Men should be saved, in these Words, Who gave himself a Ransom for all. As
if he had said, since he gave himself a Ransom for All, it is plain he wills
all Men to be saved.

13. The same thing is positively affirmed, Heb. ii. 9. We see JESUS who was
made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death, crowned with
Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of GOD might taste Death for every Man.
He that will but open his Eyes, may see this Truth here asserted. If he tasted
Death for every Man, then certainly there is no Man for whom he did not taste
Death; and then there is no Man who may not be made a Sharer of the Benefit of
it.

14. Again, Our LORD himself says, He came not to condemn the World, but that
the World through him might be saved. John iii. 17. And John xii. 47. He came not
to judge the World, but to save the World: Whereas, according to that Doctrine,
he did come rather to condemn the World, and not that it might be saved by him.
For if he did not come to bring Salvation to the greater Part of Mankind, but
to increase their Condemnation, it necessarily follows, That he did not come
with an Intention to save, but to judge and condemn the greater Part of the
World, contrary to his express Testimony.

15. Yet again, as the Apostle Paul asserts, That GOD wills the Salvation of
all, so does the Apostle Peter assert, That he wills not the perishing of
any, 2. Pet. iii. 9. The LORD is not slack concerning his Promise, as some Men
count Slackness: But is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance. And this is agreeable to that
of the Prophet Ezekiel, xxxiii. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no
Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way and
live. Now if it be safe to believe GOD, we must not think, that he intends to
cheat us by all these Expressions, but that he is in good Earnest. And if his
Will take not Effect, the blame is on our Parts; which could not be if CHRIST
had never died for us but left us under an Impossibility of Salvation. What
mean all those earnest Invitations, all those regretting Expostulations the
Scripture is full of? As Why will Ye die, O House of Israel? They will not come
unto me that they might have Life. I have waited to be gracious unto You. How
often would I have gathered You, and Ye would not? Are Men who are so invited
under no Capacity of being saved? Is Salvation impossible to them. Will you
then suppose GOD in this to be only like the Author of a Romance, or Master of
a Comedy, who amuses and raises the various Affections and Passions of the
Spectators: Sometimes leading them into Hope, and sometimes into Despair; All
this being, in effect, but a mere Illusion, while he has appointed what the
Conclusion of all shall be?

16. Farther yet; This Doctrine is abundantly confirmed by that of the Apostle,
1 John ii. 1, 2. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, JESUS
CHRIST the Righteous: And he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours
only, but also for the Sins of the Whole World. The Way which our Adversaries
take to evade this Testimony, is most foolish and ridiculous. The World here,
say they, is the World of Believers: For which we have nothing but their own
Assertion. For first, let them show me, if they can, in all the Scripture,
where the whole World is taken for Believers only. I shall show them, where it
is many times taken for the quite contrary, as, The World knows me not: The
World receives me not: I am not of this World. Besides all these Scriptures,
Psalm xvii. 14. Isai. xiii. 11. Matthew. xviii. 7. John vii. 7. and viii. 26. and
xii. 19. and xiv. 17. and xv. 18, 19. and xvii. 14. and xviii. 20. 1 Cor. i.
21. and ii. 12. and vi. 2. Gal. vi. 14. James i. 27. 2 Peter ii. 20. 1 John ii.
15. and iii. 1. and iv. 4, 5. and many more. Secondly, The Apostle in this very
Place contradistinguishes the World from the Saints thus, And not for Ours
only, but for the Sins of the whole World. What means the Apostle by Ours here?
Is not that the Sins of Believers? Was not he one of those Believers? And was
not this an Universal Epistle, written to all the Saints that then were? So
that according to these Men's Comment, there would be a very unnecessary and
foolish Redundancy in the Apostle's Words, as if he had said, He is a
Propitiation not only for the Sins of all Believers, but also for the Sins of
all Believers. Is not this to make the Apostle's Words Nonsense? Let them show
us, where ever there is such a Manner of Speaking in all the Scripture; where
any of the Penmen first name the Believers together with themselves, and then
contradistinguish them from some other whole World of Believers.

17. But we need no better Interpreter for the Apostle than himself, who uses
the very same Expression in the same Epistle, c. v. 19. Saying, We know that we
are of GOD and the whole World lies in Wickedness. There cannot be found in
all the Scripture, Two Places which better answer one another: Seeing in both
the same Apostle in the same Epistle, to the same Persons, contradistinguishes
himself and the Saints to whom he writes from the whole World: which yet
according to these Men's Comments ought to be understood of Believers; as if
St. John had said, We know Particular Believers are of GOD, but the whole
World of Believers lies in Wickedness. What absurd wresting of Scripture
were this? And yet it may be as well pleaded for as the other. Seeing then the
Apostle tells us plainly, That CHRIST died not only for the Church of GOD to
whom he wrote, but also for the whole World, let us hold fast this Truth,
which we have received not of Men but of GOD.

18. But in order to make it yet more plain, we shall show these two Things.

First, That GOD has given to every Man born into the World, a Time or Day of
Visitation, during which they may be saved.

Secondly, That for this End, he has given to every Man, a Measure of Light
and Grace, which if it is not resisted will work the Salvation of All; but if
it is, will become their Condemnation.

19. Now according to this Doctrine, the Mercy of GOD is excellently well set
forth, in that none are necessarily shut out from Salvation; and his Justice,
in that he condemns none but such as might have been saved and would not.

This Doctrine agrees with the whole Tenor of the Gospel, wherein Repentance
and Remission of Sins are commanded to be preached to every Creature.

It magnifies the Merits and Death of CHRIST, in that it not only accounts them
sufficient to save All, but declares them to be brought so nigh to All, that
they are thereby put into a Capacity of Salvation.

It exalts above all the Grace of GOD, to which it attributes All Good,
ascribing thereto not only the first Motions of Good, but also the whole
Conversion and Salvation of the Soul.

As it makes the whole Salvation of Man to depend upon GOD, so it makes his
Condemnation to be wholly of himself, in that he resisted the Grace of GOD, and
when he might have been saved, would not.

It takes away all Ground of Despair, in that it gives every Man cause to hope
for Salvation, nor yet does it feed any one in Security, in that none know how
soon their Day may expire: And therefore, it is a complete Incitement and
lively Encouragement to every Man, to forsake Evil and close with that which is
Good.

Lastly, It is really and in effect, though not in so many Words, confirmed and
established by all the Preachers of the Christian Religion, that ever were, or
now are, even by those who otherwise oppose this Doctrine: In that they all,
whatsoever Place they come to, do preach to the People and to every Individual
among them, that they may be saved, entreating them to believe in CHRIST, who
has died for them. So that what they deny in the general, they acknowledge of
every Particular; there being no Man to whom they do not preach, in order to
Salvation, telling him JESUS CHRIST calls and wills him to believe and be
saved: And that if he refuse he shall therefore be condemned, and his
Condemnation is of himself. Such is the Power of Truth, that it constrains its
Adversaries, even against their Wills to plead for it.

20. We do not indeed by this Day of Visitation, understand the whole time of a
Man's Life; though in some it may be extended to the very Hour of Death: But such
a Season, at least, as sufficiently clears GOD of every Man's Condemnation,
which to some may be sooner, and to others later, according as the LORD in his
Wisdom sees meet. So that many Men may, outlive this Day, after which GOD
suffers them to be hardened, as a just Punishment of their wilful Unbelief, and
even raises them up as Instruments of Wrath, and makes them a Scourge one
against another. To Men in this Condition may be fitly applied those
Scriptures, which are abused to prove, That GOD constrains Men to sin. This is
plainly expressed by the Apostle. Romans i. from v. 17. to the end: But
especially v. 28. Even as they did not like to retain GOD in their Knowledge,
GOD gave them up to a Reprobate Mind, to do those Things which are not
convenient. And that many outlive the Day of their Visitation, appears by
CHRIST'S weeping over Jerusalem, Luke xix. 42. saying, If thou had known in
this thy Day the Things that belong unto thy Peace! But now they are hid from
thy Eyes: This plainly imports a time when they might have known them, which
now was removed from them.

21. But though we affirm there is a time given to all, wherein they may be
saved, yet we deny not such Grace may be given to Some, that they must be
saved. There may be some in whom the Grace of GOD so works, that they cannot
resist it. But there are none in whom it does not work so that they might be
saved, if they did not wilfully reject Salvation.

22. By these Positions, two Great Objections are easily solved. The first is
brought from those Places of Scripture, wherein GOD seems to have predestined
some to Salvation. We grant he has: So here is no Difficulty at all. The Second
is drawn from those Places, wherein GOD seems to have predestined some to
Destruction; because he is said, To harden their Hearts, and to have raised
them up, that they might cause his Power to be known. But if they be numbered
among those Men, whose Day of Visitation is over, this Objection also is at an
end.

23. We come now more directly to show, That GOD has given to every Man a Day
or Time of Visitation, wherein it is possible for him to be saved. Now if we
prove that, there is a Time or Day given, in which those might have been saved,
who actually perish, the Matter is done. (For none deny that those who are
saved have a Day of Visitation) And this appears by the Complaints the Spirit
of GOD, throughout the whole Scripture, makes, even to those that did Perish,
challenging them for not accepting GOD's Visitation and offered Mercy. Thus the
LORD expresses himself first of all to Cain, Genesis iv. 6, 7. And the LORD said
unto Cain, why art thou wroth, and why is thy Countenance fallen? If thou do
well, shall Thou not be accepted? If thou do not well, Sin lies at the Door.
This was said to Cain, before he slew his Brother. We see how GOD gave him
Warning; and offered, in the Day of his Visitation, Acceptance if he did well.
For those Words, Shall thou not be accepted? must import, Thou shall be
accepted, if thou do well. So that if we may trust GOD, the Fountain of all
Truth, there was a Day in which it was possible, even for Cain to be accepted.
The LORD himself also shows, That he gave a Day of Visitation to the old World,
Genesis vi. 3. And the LORD said, my Spirit shall not always strive with Man:
Manifestly implying, That his Spirit did strive with him for a Season, which
Season expiring, GOD ceased to strive with him in order to his Salvation. From
this Day of Visitation which GOD has given to many, it is, that he is said to
wait to be gracious, Isai. xxx. 18 And to be long-suffering, Exodus xxxiv. 6.
Numb. xiv. 18. Psalm. lxxxvi. 15. and Jer. xv. 15. where the Prophet in his
Prayer lays hold on the Long-suffering of GOD; and in his Expostulating with
GOD, he shuts out the Objection of our Adversaries in the 18th Verse, Why is my
Pain perpetual and my Wound incurable, which refuses to be healed? Will Thou
altogether be unto me as a Liar and as Waters that fail? Whereas, according to
our Adversaries Opinion, the Pain of the most Part of Men is perpetual, and
their Wound altogether incurable. Yea the Offer of Salvation unto them is as a
Lie and as Waters that fail, being never intended to be of any Effect unto
them. The Apostle Peter says expressly, That this Long suffering of GOD waited
in the Days of Noah, for those of the Old World; answerably to Genesis vi. 3. And
that none may object that this Long-suffering or striving of the LORD was not
in order to their Salvation, the same Apostle faith as expressly (2. Pet. iii,
15.) That the Long-suffering of GOD is to be accounted Salvation: And with this
Long-suffering, a little before he couples, That he is not willing that any
should perish. Where, taking him for his own Interpreter, as is most fit, he
teaches, that those to whom the LORD is long-suffering (which he declares he
was to the Old World, and is now to All, not willing that any should perish)
they are to account this Long-suffering of GOD to them Salvation. But how can
they account it Salvation, if there be not so much as a Possibility of
Salvation conveyed to them therein?

24. St. Peter, further refers to the Writings of Paul, showing this to have
been the Universal Doctrine. Where it is observable he adds, In which are some
Things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest
to their own Destruction: Intimating plainly those Expressions in Paul's
Epistles, as Romans ix. etc. which some unlearned in Spiritual Things, wrested so
as to contradict GOD's Long suffering toward All, not willing that any of them
should perish, but that all should come to the saving Knowledge of his Truth.
Would to GOD many had taken more Heed than they have to this Advertisement.

25. That Place of the Apostle Paul which Peter seems here more particularly to
hint at, does much contribute also to clear the Matter, Romans ii. 4. Despisest
thou the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance and Long suffering, not knowing
that the Goodness of GOD leads thee to Repentance? St. Paul speaks here to
the unregenerate and wicked, who (in the following Verse he says) treasure up
Wrath unto the Day of Wrath. And to such he commends the Riches of the
Forbearance and Long suffering of GOD, showing that its tending is, To lead
them to Repentance. But how could it have this Tendency, To lead them to
Repentance? Or how could it be called Riches of Goodness to them, if there was
not a Time wherein they might repent by it, and come to be Sharers of the
Riches thereof?

26. The Sum is this: If GOD plead with the Wicked, from the Possibility of
their being accepted; if GOD'S Spirit strive with them for a Season, in order
to save them who afterward perish; if he wait to be gracious unto them; if he
be Long-suffering toward them; if during the Time of this Long-suffering GOD
wills them not to perish, but by the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance
leads them to Repentance; Then there was a Day of Visitation, even to those
who have perished, wherein they might have been saved.

27. Secondly, This appears from Isaiah, v. 4. What could I have done more to
my Vineyard? For in Verse 2, he says, He had senced it and gathered out the
Stones thereof and planted with the choicest Vine. And yet (says he) when I
looked it should have brought forth Grapes, it brought forth Wild Grapes.
Wherefore he calls the Men of Judah to judge between him and his Vineyard,
saying, What could I have done more to my Vineyard than I have done in it? And
yet (as is said) it brought forth Wild Grapes: Which was applied to those in
Israel, who refused GOD's Mercy. The same Similitude is used by CHRIST, Matt.
xxi. 33. Mark xii. 1. and Luke xx. 9. where JESUS shows, how to some a Vineyard
was planted, and all Things given necessary for them, to get them Fruit to
render their Master, and how the Master many Times waited to be merciful to
them, in sending Servants after Servants, and passing by many Offenses, before
he determined to destroy and cast them out. Now this cannot be understood of
the Saints, or of such as repent and are saved: For its said expressly, He will
destroy them. Neither would the Parable any way answer the End for which it is
brought, if these Men had not been in a Capacity to have done good. Yea such
was their Capacity that CHRIST says in the Prophet, what could I have done
more? So that it is manifest, by this Parable, repeated by Three Evangelists,
CHRIST declares his Long-suffering toward those Men, who, when Means of
Salvation were afforded to them, did nevertheless resist and would not be saved.

28. Lastly, That there is a Day of Visitation given even to the Wicked,
wherein they may be saved, and which being expired they are then shut out from
Salvation, appears evidently by CHRIST'S Lamentation over Jerusalem, expressed in
three sundry Places, Matt. xxiii. 37, Luke xiii. 34, and 19, 41, 42. And when
he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over it, saying, If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy Day the Things that belong to thy Peace!
But now they are hid from thine Eyes: Than which nothing can be more plain. For
first, he here shows, That there was a Day, wherein the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem might have known those Things that belonged to their Peace: Secondly,
That during that Day, he was willing to have gathered them, even as a Hen
gathers her Young: Thirdly, That because they refused the Things belonging to
their Peace, they were at length hid from their Eyes. Why were they hid?
Because ye would not suffer me to gather You; ye would not see those Things
that were good for you, in the Season of GOD's Love toward you: And therefore
now, that Day being expired, ye cannot see them. And for a farther Judgment,
GOD suffers you to be hardened in Unbelief.

29. So it is after they have rejected the Offer of Mercy, and Salvation, and
not before, that GOD harden, Men's Hearts. And thus To him that has shall be
given; and from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he
has: He has not; because he has lost the Season of using it, and so to him
it is now as nothing. For CHRIST uses this Expression, Matt. xxv. 26. on
occasion of the taking the one Talent from the slothful Servant: Which Talent
was no way insufficient of itself, but of the same Nature with those given to
the others. And therefore the LORD had Reason to exact the Profit of it
proportionably, as of the rest. So (I say) it is after rejecting the Day of
Visitation, that the Judgment of Obduration is inflicted on Men: As CHRIST
pronounces it on the Jews, out of Isaiah vi. 9. which all the Four Evangelists
mention. Matt. xiii. 14. Mark iv. 12. Luke viii. 10. John xii. 40. And last of
all, St. Paul, after he had offered Salvation to the Jews at Rome, pronounces
the same, Acts xxviii. 26. Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet unto
our Fathers, saying, Go unto this People and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and
shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For the
Heart of this People is waxed gross and their Ears are dull of hearing, and
their Eyes have they closed; least they should see with their Eyes, and hear
with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and should be converted and
I should heal them. So it appears, that GOD would have had them to see, but
they closed their Eyes; and therefore they were justly hardened.

30. What now remains to be proved is, That GOD has given to every Man during
the Day of his Visitation, a Measure of saving sufficient Light and Grace. And
this I shall prove, through GOD's Assistance, by plain and clear Testimonies of
Scripture.

31. First, from that of St. John i. 9. That was the True Light which lights
every Man that comes into the World. He had said before, The Life that is in
him is the Light of Men, and, the Light shines in the Darkness: And to this he
adds, He is the true Light that lights every Man that comes into the World.

32. From whence we may in short observe, That the Apostle calls CHRIST the
Light of Men. And as he is the Light, if we walk with him in that Light which
he communicates to us, we come to have Fellowship and Communion with him, as
the same Apostle says elsewhere, 1 John i. 7 Secondly, That this Light shines
in the Darkness, though the Darkness comprehend it not. Thirdly, That this true
Light lights every Man who comes into the World. Here the Apostle carefully
avoids their Captiousness, who would restrain this to a certain Number; for,
where every one is, there is none excluded. And should they say, that this
every Man is only every one of the Elect, the following Words every Man that
comes into the World would plainly refute them. So that it is clear, there
comes no Man into the World, whom CHRIST has not enlightened in some Measure,
and in whose dark Heart the Light has not shined. Though the Darkness comprehend
it not, yet it shines there, and the Nature thereof, is to dispel the
Darkness, where Men shut not their Eyes upon it.

33. And for what End this Light is given, is expressed in Verse 7. where John is
said to come for a Witness to bear Witness to the Light, that all Men through it
might believe. Our Translators indeed (to make it suit their own Doctrine) have
turned the Words through Him, as if all Men were to believe through John. For which
as there is nothing in the Text, so it is contrary to the whole Strain of the
Context. For seeing CHRIST has lighted every Man with this Light, is it not,
that they may come to believe through it? John shined not in Darkness, but this
Light shines in the Darkness, that having dispelled the Darkness, it may beget
Faith.

34. Seeing then this Light is the Light of JESUS CHRIST, and the Light through
which Men come to believe it needs not to be doubted, but that it is a
supernatural, saving and sufficient Light. It cannot be any of the natural
Faculties of our Soul, because it is said to shine in the Darkness, which
Darkness is no other than the natural State of Man. And that it is sufficient
and saving, I prove thus:

That which is given that all Men through it may believe; that by walking in
which we have Fellowship with GOD, must be sufficient to Salvation; but such is
this Light. Therefore, it is sufficient for Salvation.

Again, That which we are commanded to believe in, that we may become the
Children of the Light, must be a supernatural, sufficient and saving Principle:
But we are commanded so to believe in this Light. Therefore, It is a
supernatural, sufficient, and saving Principle.

The first Proposition cannot be denied; the second is CHRIST'S own Words, John
xii. 36. While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the
Children of the Light.

35. If it be said, That by Light here is meant CHRIT'S outward Person, this is
sufficiently answered by the Words themselves, and by the Verse going before,
Walk, while ye have the Light, least Darkness come upon you; plainly importing,
That when that Light in which they were to believe was removed, they should
lose the Capacity or Season of believing. Now this could not be understood of
CHRIST'S Person; for many did savingly believe in Him (as we do at this Day)
when His outward Person was far removed from them. So that this Light in which
they were commanded to believe must be that inward Light from CHRIST, which
shines in every Man's Heart for a Season, even during the Day of his
Visitation: While this continues to call, invite and exhort, Men are said to
have it, and may believe in it. But when they have rejected it, it is at length
withdrawn, and then they know not where to go. And therefore to such rebellious
ones, the Day of the Lord is said to be Darkness and not Light, Amos v. 18.

36. That a Measure of this saving Light or Grace is given to All, CHRIST
tells us expressly in the Parable of the Sower, Matt. xiii. Mark iv. and Luke
viii. where He says, That this Seed sown in those several Sorts of Ground, is
The Word of the Kingdom, even that Word which, as St. James says, is able to
save the Soul. Now we may observe, That the Seed which was sown by the
Way-side, and in the Stony and Thorny-Ground, although it did not profit there,
was the same Seed which was sown in the good Ground. But the Cares of the
World, or the Deceitfulness of Riches, or the Desire of other Things, or the
Fear of Persecution, hinders this Seed from growing in the Hearts of many. Not
but that, in its own Nature, it is sufficient to Salvation; being the very same
with that, which grows up and prospers in the Hearts of those who receive
it. So that, though all are not saved by it, yet there is a Seed of Salvation
sown in the Hearts of All, which would grow up and save the Soul, if it were
not choked and hindered.

37. To this answers the Parable of the Talents, Matt. xxv. He that had two
Talents was accepted as well as he that had five, because he used them to his
Master's Profit. And he that had one might have done the same. His Talent was
of the same Nature with the Rest. It was as capable to have brought forth an
Increase in Proportion as any of theirs. And so, though there be not a like
Proportion of Grace given to all, but to some five Talents, to some two, and to
some one Talent only, yet there is given to All that which is sufficient, and
no more is required than according to that which is given: For unto whomsoever
much is given, of him also much shall be required. Luke xii. 48. He that had
the two Talents was accepted in giving four, nothing less than he that gave the
ten. So should he also that gave the one, if he had given two. And no doubt one
was as capable of producing two, as five of producing ten, or two four.

38. I shall add but one Proof more, That all Men have a Measure of saving
Grace, which is that of the Apostle Paul to Titus c. ii. 11. The Grace of GOD
that brings Salvation has appeared unto all Men: Than which there can be
nothing more clear, it comprehending both Parts of the Controversy. First, it
testifies, that it is no natural Principle, but the Grace of GOD bringing
Salvation. Secondly, It says, that this has appeared, not to a Few, but to all
Men. And there is nothing (as the following Words declare) required of Man,
which this Grace teaches not. Yet I have heard a Public Preacher, to evade
the Strength of this Text, deny this Grace to be saving and say, It meant only
common Graces, such as is the Heat of the Fire and the Light of the Sun. Such
is the Darkness of those that oppose the Truth! Whereas the Text says
expressly, it is saving (Soterios.) Others that cannot deny but it is saving,
say, This all Means not every individual, but only some of all Kinds. But is a
bare Denial sufficient to overturn a positive Assertion? If the Scriptures may
be so abused, what so absurd as may not be pleaded for from them? Or what so
manifest as may not be denied? We have then no Reason to be staggered at their
denying what the Scripture expressly affirms. They may as well persuade us,
that we do not intend that which we affirm, as make us believe the Apostle
speaks a Thing in plain Words, and yet intends quite the Contrary.

39. And indeed can there be any Thing more absurd, than to say, where the Word
is plainly ALL it does not mean ALL, but only FEW? It is true that ALL is
sometimes taken for the greater Number, of two Numbers mentioned; but let them
show us if they can, either in Scripture, or Profane or Ecclesiastical
Writings, that any Man who wrote Sense, did ever use the Word ALL, to express
of two Members, the Lesser. Whereas they affirm, that the far Lesser Number
have received saving Grace, and yet will have the Apostle to signify them only
by the Word ALL: Contrary to all the Rules of speaking, as well as to the whole
Tenor of the Gospel.

40. We conclude then, That the Gospel is indeed Good Tidings of Great Joy
which may be unto all People: That the Ministers thereof, are to preach to
every Creature, to declare to all the common Salvation, and to offer Repentance
and Remission of Sins, to all, warning every one and exhorting every one: That
CHRIST died for All who died in Adam, that he gave himself a Ransom for All;
tasting Death for every Man: That he came not to condemn the World, but that
the World through him might be saved: That he wills that all Men should be
saved, and wills not that any should perish: That he is the Propitiation not
for our Sins only, who believe, but also for the Sins of the whole World. That
accordingly he gives to all a Day or Time of Visitation, wherein it is
possible for them to be saved; and therein a Measure of saving Grace, so that
if they die, their Blood is on their own Heads: Seeing, when they might they
would not come unto Him, that they might have Life.

FINIS.

