Mr. HANCOCK'S SERMON ON THE Danger of an unqualified Ministry.

THE DANGER OF AN UNQUALIFIED Ministry, Represented in a SERMON, Preached at
Ashford, in the Colony of Connecticut, Sept. 7th. 1743.

And now printed at the earnest Desire of the Hearers.

By John Hancock, Pastor of the first Church in BRAINTREE.

Mal. ii. 7. The Priest's Lips should keep Knowledge, and they should seek the
Law at his Mouth; for he is the Messenger of the LORD of Hosts.

Romans xi 13. -- I magnify mine Office.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, next to the
Prison. 1743.

N. B. THOUGH there has been a great Cry of late, That the Church is in Danger
from an unconverted Ministry; Particularly in an outrageous Sermon of MR.
GILBERT TENNENT upon the Danger of an unconverted Ministry, preached at
Nottingham, printed and reprinted at Philadelphia and Boston, and
industriously spread through many Parts of America, to the Hindrance of the
Gospel; -- Nothing, as the Author of the following Discourse remembers, has
been published, in this Time, upon the Danger of an unqualified Ministry which
threatens the Destruction of pure and undefiled Religion in these Churches:
which encourages him to hope the present Discourse may be both seasonable and
useful at this Day, though he wishes the Argument had been handled by a more
skilful and masterly Pen.

THE Danger of an unqualified Ministry.
I TIMOTHY iii. 6. Not a NOVICE; lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into
the Condemnation of the Devil.


THE Introduction of well qualified Persons into the ministerial Office, being
of such Importance to the true Interest of Christianity, it was found worthy of
apostolic Inspection and Care. Accordingly we find the Apostle Paul, the
inspired and learned Writer of this Epistle, filling up six Verses, in the
Beginning of this Chapter, with serious Advice and Caution to Timothy about it,
and pursuing the same Argument in many other Passages of his Epistles.

The great Apostle, first of all, allows it to be a true and faithful Saying,
that if a Man desire the Office of a Bishop, an Overseer and Teacher in the
Church of CHRIST, he desires a good Work; an honorable (however, at the same
Time, a laborious and dangerous) Function. It is a most useful and sacred
Employment, a good Work, whereby the Glory of CHRIST, and the Salvation of Men
are greatly promoted: For it is the evident Design of the Institution of the
evangelical Ministry to instruct and save a miserable World, and thereby
advance the Glory of divine Grace.

The good Apostle then proceeds to ennumerate the superior and necessary
Qualifications of a Bishop, or good Minister of JESUS CHRIST, which Timothy
must carefully observe, in admitting Persons to this high and sacred Office;
which amount to no less than sixteen in the six following Verses, viz. A Bishop
must be blameless; The Husband of one Wife, that is, One that has not put away
his Wife for every Cause (as the Manner of some then was) and married another;
Dr. Hammond in Loc.
vigilant; sober; of good Behavior; given to Hospitality; APT TO TEACH; not
given to Wine; no Striker; not greedy of filthy Lucre, but patient; not a
Brawler; not covetous: one that rules well his own House, having his Children
in Subjection with all Gravity; for if a Man know not how to rule his own
House, how shall he take Care of the Church of God?

The fifteenth Qualification of a Gospel Minister, which the Apostle here gives
Timothy, is contained in this wise Caution, viz. NOT A NOVICE; that is, as it is
expressed in the Margin of the Bible, one newly come to the Faith: Plainly
intimating, that a Bishop must be well instructed and established in the Faith.
Every Scribe, which is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a
Man that is an Householder, which brings forth out of his Treasure Things new
and old. Matthew. 13, 52.


The Greek Word answering to the English one, NOVICE, is Neophutos, "Which
properly signifies, one that is but newly planted, or instructed in the Faith."
"A raw young Christian." And this inspired Apostle absolutely forbids, that
such an one should be admitted into holy Orders. And the subjoins a very solemn
Reason, which loudly bespeaks the great Danger of such an one's Undertaking
this Ministry; viz. Lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the
Condemnation of the Devil: both into the Devil's Sin and Punishment.

Dr. Hammond well observes, that Neophutos, NOVICE, "Signifies not in Respect
of Age," for Timothy himself was such, yet the Apostle gave him Authority to
command and teach in the Church, and suffered no Man to despise his Youth: But
it "signifies in Respect of receiving the Faith," one newly brought over to the
Profession of the Christian Faith, whether young or old. So then according to
the genuine Use of the Word, a Man may be a Novice, or Babe in understanding
the Mysteries of the Gospel, and so very unqualified to undertake the
ministerial Office, who, in Respect of Age, may be honored as a Father or
Master: And on the other Hand, a Person that is young in Years may yet be freed
from the Imputation of a Novice, as was young Timothy in Respect of his good
moral and ministerial Accomplishments, and so be counted worthy of some
ecclesiastical Dignity and Preferment.

The last Qualification of a Bishop here mentioned, is, in the 7 Ver. in these
Words, He must have a good Report of them which are without, lest he fall into
Reproach, and the Snare of the Devil,

Such are the Apostolic Directions here given to Timothy about introducing Men
into the Gospel Ministry; and they are of standing Use to the Church of CHRIST,
and should be carefully observed by all those whose Office it is to confer holy
Orders. Hence the Apostle also adds that solemn Caution, in the fifth Chapter
of this Epistle and twenty-second Verse, Lay Hands suddenly on no Man.

I shall now give you the Sum of the whole Matter in this doctrinal Note, viz.

Doct. That it is of very dangerous Tendency for unqualified Persons to be
employed in the sacred Ministry: Or, that the Pastors of the Churches should
use great Caution and Vigilance in admitting Persons to the ministerial Office.
For the Danger of putting unsuitable and unqualified Men into the evangelical
Ministry is much every Way, though the Text confines it to the Persons that dare
invade this sacred Office in a State of NOVICESHIP.

But yet, as Necessity is laid upon the Officers of the Church to exclude such
from the Ministry, they are in Danger of involving themselves in the same Guilt
and Condemnation, by opening a wide Door of Entrance, and prostituting the holy
Ministry to every bold Intruder. Be not Partaker of other Men's Sins, that ye
receive not of their Plagues.

Nay, such unfaithful Ministers are the very Instruments of enhancing the Guilt
and Punishment of every such Novice, by admitting them to a Dignity and Office
for which they have not one canonical Qualification. This is the Mean of
lifting them up with Pride, and precipitating them into the Condemnation of the
Devil. So then, the Danger of employing unqualified Men in the Ministry is
greater, and of more extensive bad Influence than is at first imagined; yea,
the important Interest of Christianity is vastly affected by this preposterous
and evil Practice, as may be shown in the Sequel of this Discourse.

The Danger hereof is great, First, To every NOVICE who undertakes the Work of
the Ministry. Secondly, To every Officer in the Church who authoriseth their
Mission. Thirdly, The Danger hereof is great to the Souls of them that are
taught and led by them. Fourthly, The Ministry of unqualified Men is of very
dangerous and destructive Tendency to the true Interest of Religion.


The Seasonableness and Importance of this Subject, in these Times, led my
Thoughts to the Choice of it, when my Reverend Brother asked me to stand in his
Place, and be his Monitor upon this solemn Occasion. He and others must take it
as a sure Token of my unfeigned Love to him, and Desire to serve him, that I
have taken this Work upon me, under great Infirmity of Body and Mind: And this
must be my Apology for the many Defects, this venerable Audience may doubtless
discover in the Performance. Brethren I am with you in Weakness, in much Fear
and Trembling. But in a humble Dependence on the Help of Divine Grace, shall
endeavor to speak as the Oracles of GOD, and minister as of the Ability which
GOD gives. And whilst in our Doctrine we show Uncorruptness, Gravity,
Sincerity, and sound Speech, we ought not to be condemned: Why then do thou
find Fault? To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. Isa. 8.20.
Happy is he that condemns not himself in that Thing which he allows. But
to proceed, --

1. To show, in the first Place, the dangerous State and Situation of every
NOVICE, who undertakes the Work of the Ministry.

The great and learned Apostle represents it in strong and awful Terms; Lest
being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. Such is
the fearful Expectation of an inspired Apostle concerning such as intrude
themselves into the sacred Ministry, without some due previous Qualifications
for it. He represents them as exposing themselves to violent Temptation, and
terrible Condemnation: They are in Danger of the Judgment. Their Danger is
great whether they know it, or not. The Mouth of an inspired Apostle has
declared and forewarned them of it. St. Paul himself was well acquainted with
the Infirmities and Temptations of Christians in general, and Ministers in
particular; he experimentally knew the Danger, even an Apostle of CHRIST was
in, of being lifted up with Pride, through extraordinary Manifestations of GOD
unto him, as he himself expresses it for his own Humiliation, and the
Instruction of all Ages, in 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Lest I should be exalted above
Measure, through the Abundance of the Revelations, there was given to me a
Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet me. -- For this Thing I
besought the LORD thrice, that it might depart from me. But what says the
Answer of GOD his Savior unto him? My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my
Strength is made perfect in Weakness. It is enough that this Affliction is
given thee for thy Good, and that I support thee under it. Particularly,

1. A Novice, by being admitted to the Dignity of an Ambassador for CHRIST, is
in Danger of being lifted up with Pride. Having but lately professed, and been
initiated into the Christian Faith by the sacred Rites thereto belonging, he
may be peculiarly exposed to this spiritual and devilish Lust, whether he be
really sanctified, or not.

If he be only externally called to be a Saint, and not really converted, he
only heaps up Fuel to feed this foolish and hurtful Lust, by all his high and
specious Professions of Godliness. Pride has an absolute Ascendency and
Dominion over him, and he walks in Pride, at the same Time that he puts on the
Cloak of religious Zeal. He makes a fair Show in the Flesh, that he may more
securely indulge his unmortified Lusts, and Passions, and hugs his Pride. And
thus he endeavors to sanctify all the deceitful Workings of it by a forward
sanctimonious Zeal for the Glory of GOD and the Good of Men.

GOD knows the reigning Pride and Naughtiness of his Heart, at the same Time
that he pretends to be high in the Favor of GOD, zealous for his Glory, and
crucified to the World: And when he is judged, he shall be condemned.

He also that has but newly embraced the Christian Faith, and received CHRIST,
may also be under peculiar and strong Temptations to Pride and Vanity, by
receiving ecclesiastical Preferment; especially, if he be brought out of a
State of dark Heathenism into this mavelous Light anti Grace. A true Convert
may be justly styled a Novice in the Things of GOD, and deemed very unworthy of
the ministerial Office. So great a Dignity, so suddenly bestowed on him, may
tempt him to Pride, such a Preferment in the Church tends directly to feed his
Pride; and exalt him above Measure. For there is the Remainder of this
spiritual Lust in the Regenerate, and it is a secret and dangerous Enemy to
their Salvation; and alas! who are in more Danger of falling into this Snare of
the Devil than Persons of little Knowledge, and great Zeal? Or than Novices in
Religion?

Such Persons are very unfit to have the Instruction and Government of the
Church committed to them, however wise and sufficient they are in their own
Conceits for these Things. This Affectation of being Teachers in the Church of
CHRIST may, and does commonly arise from bad Causes; such as gross Ignorance,
Partiality, Pride, Self-Conceit, Love of popular Applauses, Presumption and
Confidence; and such as are influenced by it would do well to examine and know
themselves, and the Principles and Motives by which they are ruled; for it is no
uncommon Thing to see the worst Designs covered under the goodly Appearance of
religious Zeal, and high Pretenses to the SPIRIT.

Novices are Babes in Understanding, and have Need that one teach them which be
the first Principles of the Oracles of GOD, instead of taking to themselves the
Office of public Teachers. Ignorance, Conceit, and Pride too often consist
together in the same Subject, and betray Persons into wild and extravagant
Conduct. We read in I Cor. 4.19. Of the Speech of them which are puffed up.
Such are apt to boast of a false Gift, and pride themselves in some high
Accomplishments, which exist only in their vain Imaginations. The Scripture
supposes that a Man may think himself to be something, when he is nothing,
Gal. 6.3.
and thereby deceive himself, and not only so, but be a Derision also to all
about him. Be not wise in your own Conceits.

Pride has always been the Bane of the Church, as it was the Ruin of the Devil.
And how mysterious soever it be, that Pride should enter into such pure,
intellectual Beings, as were the fallen Angels in their first Estate, yet it is
not at all strange to account for the Working of it in an apostate Creature. It
is here insinuated that Pride was the Devil's Sin, what threw him headlong into
Perdition; this is the Offspring of the Devil, and full of all Subtilty and
Mischief, the Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience, and that
lusts to Envy in the Regenerate.

"It seems the Devil was tempted by the glorious Condition wherein he was
created to aspire after the Godhead," and be as GOD; and this was the Snare the
Devil laid to seduce and ruin our first Parents in their primitive and exalted
State. For so the Devil insinuates to our Mother Eve, That God knew, that in
the Day they eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, then their Eyes
should be opened, and they should be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. Genesis 3.5.
So that a dignified State is not out of the Reach of Temptation to Pride; but
such as receive ecclesiastical Honors may be exposed to peculiar and dangerous
Temptations. Especially Novices are in great Danger of growing giddy and lordly
in such an elevated State in the Church; and such Persons indeed most commonly
love to have the Pre-eminence, and are most apt to be confident, assuming and
desirous of vain Glory. Vain Man has naturally an insatiable Thirst after
Honor, not considering that Promotion is a mighty Incentive to Pride.

Pride, Pride is the Enemy of all Righteousness, and the true Source of
Abundance of Mischief to the Church of GOD. The wise Man observes, Only by
Pride comes Contention; Prove. 13.10.
though it has many Coverings and Windings to hide and transform it self in.
The Working of it is after the Working of Satan, with all Deceivableness and
cunning Craftiness. From whence come Wars and Fightings Schisms, Errors,
Heresies, Disorders, Intrusions, Confusions, Emulations, Hatred, Wrath, Strife
in the Church of CHRIST? Come they not hence, even of this devilish Lust of
Pride? This also is like to be the Plague and Pest of the Church, 'till this
Enemy shall be destroyed, when the Church shall commence triumphant. Then
comes the End when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to GOD, even the
FATHER, when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority, and Power; for
he must reign, 'till he has put all Enemies under his Feet. 1 Cor. 15.24, 15.


2. A Novice by being promoted to ecclesiastical Dignity is in Danger of
falling into the Condemnation of the Devil: For so the Apostle teaches us,
lest -- he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. This is the Condemnation
that is most dreadful and amazing.

Pride was the leading Step, the sad Prologue and Presage to that Condemnation
into which the Devil fell, who was cast out of Heaven into the Torments of
Hell. This is the Condemnation of the Devil. Says the Apostle Peter, God
spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered
them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. Pet. 2.4.
So true is the wise Man's Observation, Pride goes before Destruction, and an
haughty Spirit before a Fall.

The Devil, and our first Parents, and the Children of Pride, have found it so
of a Truth by a woeful Experience: Those that walk in Pride, he is able to abase.

Places of the highest Dignity in Church and State, are commonly the most
slippery and dangerous; and it may be the Pinnacle of the Temple, the highest
Preferments in the Church, are of all others the most so. -- Which
Consideration is enough, one would think, to restrain the Ambition of vain
Minds, to influence all that are Candidates for the ministerial Office and
Dignity, to enter upon it with Humility, Fear and Trembling, and with the most
Christian Views and Designs.

As for Novices, or unqualified Persons, who thrust themselves into the Office
of a Bishop, and take this Honor to themselves they are in manifest Danger of
falling into the Condemnation of the Devil. Hence we have that wise Caution of
the Apostle James, My Brethren, be not many Masters or Teachers, knowing that
we shall receive the greater Condemnation.

Secondly, The admitting unqualified Persons into the Ministry, is of dangerous
Consequence to those that authorize their Mission. Herein they are accessory to
their Ruin, for by exalting them to be public Teachers in the Church, they
exalt them above Measure, and lead them into the Snare of the Devil, and so are
chargeable with great Guilt, as is plainly intimated in the forementioned
Passages; Lay Hands suddenly on no Man, neither be Partaker of other Men's
Sins, keep thy self pure, pure from the Blood of all Men: As if one Way for the
Overseers of the Flocks to keep themselves pure and innocent from Transgression
is, to use proper Caution about filling up the Ministry, and shutting the Door
of Ordination against all unqualified Persons.

And indeed the encouraging such Novices to undertake the Charge and Care of
Souls, argues a great Degree of Unfaithfulness in the Ministers of Christ, and
exposes them to divine and ecclesiastical Censure. Moreover, the Souls of such
daring Intruders, and the Souls of them that are committed to their Trust, are
greatly endangered by the Unskilfulness of such blind Guides. How then will the
Rulers in the Church, who are continually negligent in this Matter, be able to
give an Account of their Stewardship to the Judge of all? The Blood of Souls
may be required of them: Especially the Souls of such Novices whom they have
been instrumental of lifting up with Pride, and so delivering unto Satan: For
by conferring this Honor upon them, they have given them a powerful Incentive
to Lust, and cannot be innocent.

Furthermore, by a servile Compliance with that Spirit that lusts to Pride
and Dominion, Ministers basely betray the important Trust Christ has committed
to them: And such a licentious Practice is directly contrary to sacred Canon,
particularly 2 Timothy 2.2. The Things that thou have heard of me among many
Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be ABLE TO TEACH
OTHERS ALSO.

Not but that Novices may artfully creep into the Church, after all the
Precaution and Vigilance of its faithful Pastors; but then, if their Admission
be not owing to the criminal Neglect of CHRIST'S Ministers, in examining and
proving them, he will not impute it to them for Sin.

However, what is here pleaded for is, that the Officers of Church, that are
concerned in this important Affair, should be very careful to acquaint
themselves with the good Qualifications of those whom they put into the
Ministry, and not act with an implicit blind Faith in an Affair of CHRIST'S
Kingdom, upon which so much Good depends.

Observe the apostolic religious Care with which the College of the Apostles
was filled up, after the Transgression and tragical End of Judas the Traitor,
as it is expressed in the first Chapter of Acts. Of these Men, says Peter to
the Disciples, which have companied with us all the Time that the Lord Jesus
went in and out among us -- must one be ordained to be a Witness with us of his
Resurrection, and they appointed two, -- and they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord,
which know the Hearts of all Men, show whether of these two thou have
chosen, that he may take Part of this Ministry, etc.

This was doubtless written for the Direction and Admonition of the Church in
all Ages, and the Pastors of the Churches should remember how they have
received and heard, and hold fast the faithful Word.

Thirdly, The admitting unqualified Persons into the Ministry, is very
dangerous and destructive to the Souls of such as are led of them. This is of
very dangerous Tendency to those, to whom they are sent to minister. For not
being possessed with an awful Sense of the Worth of Souls, and the Importance
of the ministerial Office, nor influenced by Christian Motives in the
Undertaking of it, nor qualified to feed the Church of GOD, the precious Souls
of Men will be in utmost Hazard of perishing under the Ministry of such
Novices.

Such are apt to be confident enough that they themselves are Guides of the
Blind, and LIGHTS of them which are in Darkness; whereas it would be much more
safe and becoming for them to be jealous of themselves, and with the most
serious Self-Reflection take Heed that the Light which is in them be not
Darkness. Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou blind
Parisee! Thou Hypocrite! First cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye, and then
shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye. But if
the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch.

Sad and dangerous indeed is the State of the Church, when it is so forsaken of
GOD, as to be left to the Care of unskilful and unfaithful Guides. GOD
complains of such in the Jewish Church in old Time. The Leaders of this People
cause them to err, and they that are led of them are destroyed. Isai. 9.16.
His Watchmen and blind, they are all ignorant. Isai. 26.10.
Such also was the heavy Charge our blessed Savior fastens upon the Jewish
Teachers in his Time. They be blind Leaders of the Blind. Mat. 15.14.
And he pronounces a dreadful Woe unto them, Woe unto you, ye blind Guides. It is
the greatest Curse of GOD that can fall upon a sinful People, to smite their
Teachers with Blindness, and give them up to the Conduct of such blind Guides.

But Thanks be to God, this, I firmly believe, has never been the unhappy Case
of his People in this Land, from the Days of our Fathers to this Time: But GOD
has highly favored us with a learned and enlightening, converted and converting
Ministry; Though some, with fiery Zeal, and but little Knowledge and Discretion
have of late falsely accused the Body of the Clergy of this Country as
"unconverted, and preaching an unknown Christ." "That the most that preach, do
not experimentally know Christ."

Thus the Body of our Ministry have been slanderously reported by some, whose
Persons have been had in Admiration. And now, what is the Tendency and Effect
of such a Spirit of Censorious and rash Judging their Brethren, but as a worthy
Divine of our own well expresses it, The filling the Minds of People with evil
Surmisings, against their Ministers, as though they were for the most Part,
carnal unregenerate Wretches. Dr. Chauncy in his late Treatise, P. 140.


This, this is the true Source of those scandalous Separations, wherewith some
of our Churches have been lately torn. The Lord pardon his Servants in this
Thing, who have been unhappily instrumental of raising such a Spirit of
Bitterness and Separation among the People of God, and may the good Lord rebuke
it in his Time.

Says the forementioned excellent Author, in his Vindication of the standing
Ministry of this Land, May it not be said of the Body of the Ministers in
New England, that they are a Set of Men as sound in the Faith, and of as good a
Life, as any Part of the Christian Church are favored with? Hear the Opinion
of that eminent Man of GOD, Dr. Cotton Mather upon this Head. Says he, in their
Vindication, in Answer to a Slander of George Keith upon the Ministers of
New England, There is not that Spot of Ground upon the Face of GOD'S Earth,
which can proportionably match New England for Ministers, that not only have
and use true Piety, but also are most exemplary for it. Neighbors, you have
Reason to be thankful for such holy, humble, able, painful and prayerful
Ministers as God has generally blessed these Churches with.

And I exhort you, as you would approve yourselves worthy to wear the Name that
begun at Antioch, that you do not forget that Command of our Lord, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch
for your Souls.

Blessed be the glorious Head of the Church, who has all along delivered these
Churches from an ignorant, base, vicious and scandalous Ministry, and has made
the Seminaries of Learning, planted among us, such rich Blessings to them. God
forbid, that the Glory should depart from us.

Fourthly and finally, The Ministry of Novices is of very dangerous Tendency to
the true Interest of Religion. This is vastly concerned in the good Abilities
and Qualifications of all those who undertake the Office of Teachers in the
Church of Christ. That they be apt to teach, sound in the Faith and well
reported of all Men, able Men.

This is the Will of GOD our Savior, in the Institution of a standing
Ministry, in his Church; that Men be well qualified and spirited for this great
and good Work; that they give themselves to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word; that they make a Business of it, that their profiting may appear to all,
and that they may profit his People.

Such are Pastors according to GOD'S Heart, Jer. 3.15.
who shall feed his People with Knowledge and Understanding, which is Food
convenient for rational and immortal Souls, Angels Food. For without Knowledge
the Soul cannot be good: It is pleasant to the Soul, and Understanding shall
keep it; and if thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self.

He is a good Minister of Jesus Christ, who is nourished up in the Words of
Faith and good Doctrine, being able also to teach others.

When our blessed Savior sent forth his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he
took Care to furnish them with Powers and Credentials, sufficient for their
Work. He forewarned them of the Difficulty and Danger of their Mission, and for
their Security gave them that divine Instruction and Counsel. Beheld I send you
forth as Sheep in the Midst of Wolves; be ye therefore as wise as serpents, and
harmless as Doves: Mat. 10.16.
Herein showing us, that ministerial Wisdom and Prudence are necessary
Qualifications for his Ambassadors; and that it is very dangerous to send forth
any in that sacred Character, without such Christian Furniture, well proved.

Such as rush into the sacred Ministry without it, run before they are sent,
and expose themselves and Religion to great Reproach. And such ignorant rash
Zealots are in manifest Danger of corrupting the Word of God, of handling the
Word deceitfully, and doing infinite Injury to the Church of Christ. The Lord
Jesus Christ never sent them without his Credentials, and therefore they shall
not profit his People. I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they
shall not profit this People, says the Lord. Jer. 23.32.


It is observable, that when Christ gave his Apostles their Commission to go
and teach all Nations, he directs them to tarry at Jerusalem until they were
endued with Power from on High; 'till they received their Credentials, in the
extraordinary Gifts of Tongues and Miracles, which, we read in the second
Chapter of Acts, were gloriously bestowed on them, to qualify them for such an
extraordinary Mission, as gospelizing the whole World.

The Apostles of our Lord have been very careful to give the Churches of Christ
all the necessary Qualifications of good Ministers of Jesus Christ, that they
may be furnished at all Times with able and faithful Pastors, and so be kept
pure from a corrupt and bad Ministry.

Indeed, whosoever has a just Apprehension of the Greatness, Difficulty and
Importance of the evangelical Ministry, needs not Arguments to convince him
of the Necessity of encouraging and supporting learned and godly Pastors in the
Churches. It is therefore owing to Ignorance, Pride, and Want of Consideration
and Judgment, that any think and speak contrariwise, That Men of mean Abilities
and Seize in Knowledge, are able to preach the unsearchable Riches of
Christ, open the great Mysteries of Godliness, and defend the Gospel.

Alas! It requires no small Compass of Reason and Learning to be able to preach
and defend the Gospel; for Ministers are set to defend, as well as preach the
everlasting Gospel: And if Need be, they must contend earnestly for the Faith,
which was once delivered to the Saints. The Servant of the Lord must also be
patient, in Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves.

It is also required of a Bishop, That he hold fast the faithful Word as he
has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and
convince the Gainsayers (for there are many unruly and vain Talkers and
Deceivers, as in the Apostles Days, so in all Ages of the Church, whose Mouths
must be stopped; who subvert whole Houses, teaching Things which they ought not
for filthy Lucres Sake); 1 Tit. 1.9, 10, 11.
In Doctrine showing Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech that
cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary Part, may be ashamed.

But how shall they, that are ignorant and unlearned, be able to do this? To
convince Gainsayers, and defend the great Mysteries and Truths of the Gospel,
against the cunning Craftiness of them that lie in Wait to deceive? Instead of
doing these to any good Purpose, those Aliens will be in great Danger of
corrupting the Truth, and so being put to Flight before the Adversaries
thereof. The Apostle Peter says, that in Paul's Epistles there are some Things
hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as
they do also the other Scriptures unto their own Destruction. 2 Pet. 3.16.


For GOD'S Sake, Brethren, what would have become of the Christian Religion
long ago, had it not been for the wise and learned Defenders of it against its
ablest Adversaries? Such as the Apostle Paul, Origin, Justin Martyr, and others
among the Fathers; and many since the Time of the Reformation of the Church
from Popery.

God has raised up able Advocates and Apologists to espouse and defend his own
Cause from Age to Age, who have been valiant for the Truth, and quitted
themselves like Men in the Cause of God, so that Truth has not fallen in the
Streets, but still prevails in the Earth.

And indeed the Revival of Learning, since the glorious Reformation, has been a
great Elucidation and Establishment of the Truths of our holy Religion: So that
the Enemies of good Literature are Enemies to the true Interest of
Christianity, whether they know it or not.

It has been publicly observed, that the Interest of Religion and good
Literature, have been wont to rise and fall together: Wherefore say our
Fathers, As we desire that Reformation and Religion should flourish, it
concerns us to endeavor, that both the College and all other Schools of
Learning, in every Place, be duly inspected and encouraged Dr. Chauncy's
Treatise, P. 257, 8.


Alas! How soon would the Church of God be laid desolate, if the Hedge of a
learned, able and faithful Ministry, which Christ has set about it, were once
taken down. Ignorance, Error, Heresy, Superstition, Confusion and every evil
Work, would soon cover the Face of the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts. It would
quickly be overgrown with Thorns, and Nettles cover the Face thereof, when the
Wall thereof is broken down. With such awful Severity and Judgment, God
threatens the Church of Israel for their Unfruitfulness under his most gracious
Cultivations in Isa. 5.5, 6. And now -- I will tell you what I will do to my
Vineyard, I will take away the Hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and
break down the Wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, and I will lay it
Waste, it shall not be pruned, nor dug, and there shall come up Briars and
Thorns, I will also command the Clouds that they rain no Rain upon it.

Were the Gospel-Treasure put into broken Vessels, it would soon run out and
perish. If the Teaching and Government of the Church were committed to
unskilful and unfaithful Guides, Ignorance would soon be the Mother of
Devotion; and Heresy and Confusion, the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Christian Church. For to this Purpose testisieth the Apostle Peter, by the
Spirit of Prophecy, (...)
There shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, -- and many shall follow their pernicious Ways, by Reason of whom the
Way of Truth shall be Evil spoken of. And through Coveteousness shall they with
feigned Words, make Merchandise of you. --

How is it possible for a Novice to magnify his Office, and recommend Religion
to the Esteem and Practice of Men? He that teaches Man Knowledge should not he
know? Because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the People Knowledge, and
sought to find out acceptable Words. But how shameful is it, for weak, raw,
illiterate Men to exalt themselves to the Priesthood, and set up for Teachers
in the Church? who have Need that one teach them, which be the first Principles
of the Oracles of God? And have Need of Milk, and should as newborn Babes
desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby?

Moreover, the setting up and sending forth such Teachers in the Church of
Christ, is the great Reproach to Christianity, and the direct Way to promote
the Contempt of the Clergy, than which a greater Injury can scarce be offered
to the true interest of Religion.

Thus I have finished the doctrinal Part of my Subject, and shall now close it
with several useful Reflections. --

First, We may learn, from what has been offered upon this Argument, the great
Care that the glorious Head of the Church, has taken for its Instruction and
Support.

For to this End, Christ was pleased to raise up a Succession of inspired
Prophets and Teachers in the Jewish Church, and at sundry Times, and in diverse
Manners, spoke unto the Fathers by them. In the Fullness of Time, he manifested
himself to Israel, full of Grace and Truth, as the Lord who teaches us to
Profit, as the great Teacher of the Church, who spoke as never Man spoke. When
he had finished the Work of GOD, and ascended up on High, he gave Gifts unto
Men, Some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

Moreover, the Highest himself has established the Security and Safety of the
Church in Opposition to the confederated Powers of Earth and Hell, in that
glorious Promise, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. (...)
Its Defense is of GOD. GOD is in the midst of her, therefore the burning Bush
is not consumed. We have a strong City, Salvation will GOD appoint for Walls
and bulwarks.

How beautiful and safe is the Church in the Favor and Protection of the
Almighty, under all the Imperfection that cleaves to his Ministers and Members
in this militant State? This is our Hope, and this our Confidence, that God
will help her, and that right early.

Secondly, This Doctrine gives a Rule of Conduct to the Ministers of Christ in
admitting Persons into the sacred Ministry; that they proceed with great Care
and Caution in such a weighty Affair, as they would approve themselves faithful
to Christ and his Interest. They are forbid to put a Novice into the
evangelical Ministry. Lay Hands suddenly on no Man.

For any of the Ministers of Christ then, to give their Credentials to unworthy
Men, is to act directly in the Face of Scripture Canons, and betray the Cause
of Christ. It is really to expose their own Souls and the Souls of all they are
concerned with to Condemnation, and doing infinite Mischief to the true
Interest of Religion.

I would use here great Plainness of Speech, for I apprehend the Case requires
it, and freely say, that I cannot see how Ministers can answer to GOD and their
own Consciences, their admitting raw, indiscreeit, rash, illiterate and blind
NOVICES into their Pulpits, and commending them to these Churches, as useful
Instruments of carrying on the Work of GOD, as has been the Manner of some
more lately. I leave it to those Reverend Gentleman, who signed the Testimony
of the Assembly of Pastors in July last, to reconcile their own Conduct with
the Advice therein given, in this very Instance (among others) viz. That
Ministers do not encourage raw and indiscreet young Candidates in rushing into
particular Places, and preaching publicly or privately, as some have done to
the no small Disrepute and Damage of the Work where it once promised to
flourish. For it is notorious that some Rev. Subscribers, or Attestators, soon
after the breaking up of that Assembly admitted an illiterate and BLIND Guide
into their Pulpits.




The Overseers of the Flocks of Christ, are indispensably obliged, by his holy
Word, to commit this sacred Treasure to faithful Men who shall be ably to teach
others also, and not to cast these holy Things to the Dogs of the Flock.

It is to be feared, that there has been too much Indifference and Coldness
among the Clergy of New England, as well as elsewhere, in this important
Article, of examining and introducing Candidates into the Ministry; especially,
in the Years last past, has the sacred Ministry been laid too common, as if it
were not a sacred Enclosure, and any bold Intruder might take this Honor to
himself, without due Qualifications, or a regular Call; which in the Nature of
Things bodes very Ill to the Church of Christ: Whereas the Scripture says, No
Man takes this Honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron. Mat. 16.18.


Were the Ministry of the Gospel committed to ignorant, conceited Novices, it is
not unlikely that, within two seven Years, the Church would be reduced to a
State of Heathenism, thick Darkness would cover the Earth, and gross Darkness
the People.

And the present unbounded License of public Teaching, I apprehend to be a
leading Step to the scandalous Disorders and Confusions of these Times: And its
high Time to correct and reform this shameful Abuse of the ministerial
Authority.

But to the Praise of the Government of this Colony, be it spoken, that they
have expressed an examplary Care in this Matter of introducing Candicates into
the holy Ministry, above all the Provinces in New England: And it is doubtless
a great Part of the Beauty and Strength of your good Constitution. We rejoice,
beholding your Order, and the Stedfastness of your Faith in Christ. Upon this
very Thing depends the Safety and Prosperity of these Churches.

Suffer me then, my reverend Fathers and Brethren, (though most unworthy) to
press it upon you to show all good Fidelity in this important Affair. For this
Power of examining and putting Men into the Ministry, is committed to you to
exercise for the Good of the Church. Oh let it not be in vain, but approve
yourselves faithful to Christ, and the Souls of Men, that you may both save
your own Souls, and be happily instrumental, in this Way, of promoting the
common Salvation.

Thirdly, This Doctrine also admonishes the Churches of Christ, to take Heed
of committing their Souls to the Care of unskilful Novices. For hereby the
Souls of Men are exposed to eternal Ruin. Who then in his Wits would be
careless and unconcerned in the Choice of a Guide and Pastor to his Soul? There
is surely no Affair in the whole Circle of Life that requires more serious Care
and assiduous Prayer, than this of choosing able, faithful, skilful Guides for
our Souls. And as Christ has given these Churches Power of choosing their own
Pastors, so let them be exhorted to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith he has
made them free, and not abuse it in a criminal Manner.

Let the Churches be advised to act with prudent Care and Caution in the
Exercise of this Power. Be not fond of Novelties, but covet earnestly the best
Gifts. Ask Counsel of God, and take the best Advice of the faithful Ministers
of Christ; who are commonly most able and ready to serve your best Interest. Oh
beware of heaping to yourselves Teachers, and leaning to your own
Understanding. For the Time will come, says the Apostle, when they will not
endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves
Teachers, having itching Ears; and they shall turn away their Ears from the
Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables. 2 Timothy, 4.3, 4.


Verily, it is to be feared, we are fallen into this Time, now so many of
unstable Minds are ready to forsake their own faithful and approved Pastors,
and the assembling themselves together, to follow the sounding Brass of
ignorant, conceited Novices. Verily, verily I say unto you, says our Savior,
the good Shepherd, he that enters not in by the Door into the Sheepfold, but
climbeth up some other Way, the same is a Thief, and a Robber. But he that
enters in by the Door, is the Shepherd of the Sheep. To him the Porter
opens, and the Sheep hear his Voice. John 10.1, 2, 3.


Fourthly, This Doctrine ministers Reproof to every NOVICE that is thrusting
himself into the Ministry. For do but consider the infinite Danger of so doing;
Lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil.
Such know not what they ask and seek, whilst they are striving for the Mastery,
to enter into the sacred Ministry. My Brethren, be not many Masters, don't be
too forward and hasty, in setting up for Teachers, lest ye receive the greater
Condemnation.

Yet strange it is, that so many, in these Days, apprehend themselves well
qualified for the ministerial Office without Learning, or Study, or any
Qualification for this good Work; except Ignorance, and Confidence may be
accounted such. It is to be suspected, that Pride and Self-Conceit is at the
Bottom of such a stupid and wild Conduct. What other Cause but Pride can be
assigned for the very scandalous Intrusions of illiterate Laymen, and raw
Novices into the Labors of GOD'S faithful Ministers, in one Place and another,
to the great Vexation and Disturbance of the Churches of Christ in this Land?
Only by Pride comes Contention.

The Reverend Mr. Appleton, in his late excellent Sermon to the Convention of
Pastors in the Massachusetts Bay, gravely advises such Ministers as play the
Bishop in another's Diocese, To examine themselves and see, whether it don't
proceed from, and whether it don't serve to cherish a secret Pride in the
Heart, that they are not aware of, being covered over with a Zeal for doing all
the Good they can? He goes on to represent the Mischiefs that commonly attend
such a Practice, with peculiar Force of Expression. -- And doubtless it is
found commonly to hurt the Ministers into whose Parishes they intrude
themselves, as it tends to draw off the Esteem and Affections of their People
from them, and very much obstructs and hinders their Usefulness among them, and
so in this Way it is also very hurtful to the People, and they lose very much
the Benefit of the standing Ministry among them. Moreover, it has a Tendency to
unhinge People, to put them in an unsteady Frame, it causes itching Ears, etc.
-- Indeed, says he, There are some Stars of Light that have their Orbits quite
cross the Spheres of the Earth, and all the other Planets, such as Comets, or
blazing Stars; but these are such, as are extremely heated, and set into a
Blaze; and have been looked upon as ominous Appearances, and whatever Use God
may make of them, for the Benefit of those Globes whose Spheres they cross; --
yet it may be said, that the State they are supposed to be in, and the Manner
of their Motion is such, that they give a most dreadful Shock to some Globe,
that should happen to come in their Way. -- So that there is no Argument from
Comets for Ministers to set up for wandering Stars; indeed GOD may, and does
bring Good out of such Things, but for Men (without any plain Call) to go from
Place to Place, entering into other Men's Charges, and crossing their Spheres,
I think, is very ominous to the Church of Christ, and threatens their Peace,
their Purity and their Order exceedingly. -- We know what Kind of Angels they
were that kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation. --

I am fully persuaded, that great have been the Mischiefs and Inconveniences
that have risen by the Practice of Itinerant Preaching, too many to be now
enumerated, which this Government by a late Act, have in a great Measure
restrained. And I Am heartily sorry, with many others, that the last Convention
of Pastors, in the Massachusetts, have left the Door still open for the
Progress of Itinerants, when they gently touch this Head in these Words. That
Ministers do not invade the Province of others, and in ordinary Cases preach in
another's Parish, without his Knowledge, and against his Consent.

It well becomes the Candidates for the sacred Office of the Ministry, to be
humble, prayerful, and teachable, submitting themselves to the Order of the
Gospel and these Churches, which will be an excellent Preservative from Envy,
Pride, Passion, Confusion and every evil Work.

Says Dr. Chauncy in his late excellent Treatise on the present State of
Religion, etc. Its natural to expect Confusion, when mere Youths in Age, as
well as Christian Knowledge and Experience, are invited into the Pulpit, and
admired for their bold and ignorant speaking of Things they little understand;
and shall the Want of Years, and Knowledge and Experience in these Persons be
pleaded in Excuse for the wretched Mistakes and Follies they run into? It ought
rather to be urged as one of the strongest Reasons against their taking upon
them the Business of the Ministry; which would at once prevent all this
Mischief.

That learned and pious Prelate of the Church of England Bishop Burnet, in his
Preface to the pastoral Care, represerits the daring Boldness of many Intruders
into it, in a most affecting Manner. Says he, Our ember Weeks are the Burden
and Grief of my Life. The much greater Part of those who come to be ordained
are ignorant to a Degree, not to be apprehended by those who are not obliged to
know it. The easiest Strangers, I mean the plainest Parts of the Scriptures.
They cry and think it a said Disgrace to be denied Orders, though the Ignorance
of some of them is such, that in a well regulated State of Things they would
appear not knowing enough to be admitted to the holy Sacrament.

This, says he, does of ten tear my Heart. -- These Things pierce one's Soul,
and make him often cry out, Oh that I had Wings like a Dove, for then would I
fly away and be at Rest.

He observes further, Burnet's pastoral Care. P. 50.
It were indeed happy for the Church, if those who offer themselves to Orders
had but such a Sense of them as Tradesman have of their Freedom; who do not
pretend to it, 'till they have finished the Time prescribed, and are in some
Sort qualified to set up in it.

Whereas alas! Men who neither know the Scriptures, nor the Body of Divinity,
who have made no Progress in their Studies, and can give no tolerable Account
of that holy Doctrine, in which they desire to be Teachers, do yet, with equal
Degrees of Confidence and Importunity, pretend to this Character, and find the
Way to it too easy, and the Access to it too free.

Fifthly, This Doctrine may also serve to admonish all young unexperienced
Converts to take Heed to themselves, watch and be sober; lest being lifted up
with Pride, they come into Condemnation. GOD resists the Proud, but he gives
Grace unto the Humble. Be clothed with Humility. Learn of Christ who was meek
and lowly in Heart, and has laid Humility in the Foundation of his heavenly
Doctrine. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Mat. 5.3.
I say to every Man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than
he ought to think, but to think soberly. This will be the best Antidote against
many Irregularities and Scandals that prevail in the present Times, and even
among many of the those, who have been the Subjects of the late religious
Commotion in the Land. Particularly, a Spirit of rash, censorious Judging which
is gone forth, and rages in the Country? than which nothing can be more
contrary to the Spirit of Christ and his Gospel.

It is a just Observation of one Dr. Chauncy, etc. P. 169.
who has Understanding in the Times; says he, I shall not exceed the literal
Truth, when I say, that there never was a Time; since the Settlement of
New England, wherein there were so much bitter and rash Judging: And what may
be worth a Note, the Places where this Appearance has been most remarkable,
have commonly been most filled with Uncharitableness in all the Expressions of
it.

It would be endless to reckon up the monstrous Sayings which many who call
themselves, the Converts of the present Times, have uttered; especially against
some of the most valuable Ministers in the Country, out of a Spirit of mere
Jealousy.

If these Persons are Christians indeed, then there may be Christianity without
Charity, contrary to the Apostle's express Declaration, If I have no Charity I
am nothing. If any Man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
Tongue -- this Man's Religion is vain. Jam. ^.26.
If such Persons have performed the Commandment of the Lord, what means then
this Bleating of the Sheep in our Ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which we
hear? So much Clamor and evil Speaking among high Professors?

Nay, my Brethren, this is not a vain and trivial Matter, it ought not to be
passed over with such a gentle Rebuke as the Manner of some is, in the cold
Language of Eli to his wicked Sons, Why do ye such Things? Nay, my Sons, for it
is no good Report that I hear. But it was a very bad one, and such an
Antichristian Spirit of rash Judging ought to be rebuked sharply. For the great
Founder of our holy Religion has expressly said, Judge not.

And now from whence comes such a Spirit of rash Judging? Comes it not hence,
even of this Lust of Pride? And such as indulge it are in Danger of falling
into the Condemnation of the Devil.

There has been, of late, much Talk about Religion, and a remarkable Work of
GOD in the Country; but it must be remembered, that the Kingdom of GOD is not in
Word but in Power: And, for my own Part, I have been waiting to see the Work
prove it self in the Power of Godliness, and the genuine Fruits of the Spirit
of GOD, in all Goodness, Righteousness and Truth.

But indeed the unwearied Pains taken by the Friends of the late religious
Commotion among us, to persuade People, that GOD has remerkably revived his
Work in the Land, is so far from being a Confirmation of it, that, in my
Opinion, it is more apt to bring a Suspicion upon it.

If there be such a happy Revival of GOD'S Work, as some contend earnestly for,
what Need of calling of Assemblies, and so much Preaching and Writing to
possess the Minds of People with the Belief of it? For the Work of GOD will
prove itself, by producing a visible and glorious Reformation among the happy
Subjects of it, which the Lord hasten in his Time.

Sixthly, Let the Ministers of Christ consider what Reason they have to be
humbled for the Remainder of Pride in them.

Though the Work of the Ministry be attended with many humbling Circumstances
and pressing Difficulties, particularly at this Time; yet have our Hearts, dear
Brethren, been truly humbled to this Day? Are we clothed with Humility down to
the Foot? Has not Pride, that Root of Bitterness, been springing and operating
in us to our Shame? Is not Knowledge apt to puff us up, and make us
Superstitious and Imperious? Ready to lord it over GOD'S Heritage, and make us
Busy-bodies in other Men's Matters, or Bishops in another Man's Diocese?

Does not the empty Applause of Men, serve to exalt us above Measure, and feed
the Pride and Vanity of our Minds.

Are we not too apt to spend our precious Time in vain Disputes and Wranglings,
instead of studying to profit the Souls of our People both in Word and Doctrine.

Are we patient and penitent when we hear the Defaming of many? Oh let us
examine ourselves, and labor to keep under and subdue this dangerous Lust,
Lest that by any Means when we have preached to others, we ourselves should be
Castaways.

I shall conclude with a serious Address, First, To my Rev. and dear Brother,
whose Consecration to God, in the Gospel of his Son, we are now attending.
Secondly, To the Church and People of God in this Place.

First, Dear Sir, Suffer the Exhortation that speaks to you, as to a Son and
Candidate for holy Orders. You have heard something of the great and necessary
Qualifications of a good Minister of Jesus Christ, and the Danger of admitting
unqualified persons to take Part of this Ministry; and I doubt not, but that
your Heart is in some good Measure affected with the Sense of the Difficulty
and Importance of the Work upon which you are entering.

I have known your Education, Principles and Manner of Life from your Youth up,
and have had a good Taste of your Ministerial Gifts and Accomplishments, all
which, in my Judgment, are so many desirable Qualifications to perfect you for
the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. These Things,
being in you and abounding, both free you from the Imputation of a Novice, and
us from the Guilt of putting such an one into the Ministry.

But yet, there is Room for Growth; you must Labor to increase in Wisdom and
he most useful Learning; but above all Things, grow in Grace and in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. My Son, be strong in the Grace
that is in Christ Jesus. To this End give Attendance to Reading, to
Exhortation, to Doctrine, meditate upon these Thing, give thy Self wholly to
them, that thy profiting may appear to all, and in all Things. Study to show
thy Self approved unto God a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth.

I do this Day, with sacred Freedom and Pleasure, act the Part you have
devolved upon me; (however unequal to it) and in Concurrence with other Pastors
and Churches convened on this solemn Occasion, join Heart and Hand in
seperating you to the Gospel of God. We bring you, Dear Sir, to this People,
and bless you in the Name of the Lord; may the Lord bless you out of Zion, and
have Respect unto your Offering!

You enter Sir, upon the Work of the Ministry, in a dark and difficult Time,
wherein you will find uncommon Temptations to Unfaithfulness; But be of good
Courage, and let none of these Thing move you. Do the Work of a good Minister
of Christ, will all Fidelity; and be valiant for the Truth.

And as my Subject leads me to give you this Caution, so I would do it both for
your own Safety, and the Safety of pure and undefiled Religion: That is, guard
your Pulpit against every Novice; exclude, if possible, all unqualified Persons
from the ministerial Office, Lay Hands suddenly on no Man; be not Partakers of
other Men's Sins, keep thy self pure.

Finally, take heed unto thyself, and unto thy Doctrine, continue in them, for
in so doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee.

In the Second Place, I turn and address my self to the Church and People of
God in this Place. Holy Brethren, Partakers of the heavenly Calling, we
congratulate you this Day upon the wise Choice, that the glorious Head of the
Church has directed you to make of a Pastor, whom we trust is after his own
Heart, who shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding, and so fill up the
Breach he has made upon you in the Decease of your late faithful and pious
Pastor. Rev. Mr.. James Hale.


Adore the good Providence of God, Dear Brethren, in finding out, and setting
over this Congregation a Man to go in and out before them. May the Lord
preserve his going out, and coming in, from this time forth and even for
evermore!

And now, lift up your Hearts with your Hands to God in the Heavens to beless
this his Servant, and make him a rich Blessing to your own Souls, and the Souls
of your Children, yea of the Children that shall be born.

Continue instant in Prayer to God for your Pastor, be kindly affectioned to
him, in Honor preferring, esteeming him very highly in Love for his Works
sake. Honor and support him according to his Character; let no man despise his
Youth.

Receive him as a precious Gift of our ascended Jesus, as a Messenger of the
Lord of Hosts, and be ye thankful above all Things. Labor to profit under his
holy Ministry, and hold fast the faithful word, that his Heart may rejoice, and
he may go on his Way and Work rejoicing.

Finally Brethren, Farewell, be perfect, be of good Comfort, be of one Mind,
live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Amen.

FINIS.

