AN Expostulatory and Pacifick LETTER, By Way of Reply to the Revd Mr. GEE'S
Letter of Remarks, on the printed Testimony of the late Convention of Pastors
in Boston, against several Errors and Disorders in the Land: Addressed to the
Revd Mr. NATHANAEL EELLS their Moderator.

By John Hancock, Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in Braintree.

Prove. xviii. 19. A Brother offended is harder to be won than a strong City:
and their Contentions are like the Bars of a Castle.

1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old Leaven.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, next to the
Prison. 1743.

A LETTER, etc.
Revd Brother,
I AM extremely surprised and sorry (with many others) to see your printed
Letter of Remarks, on the public Testimony of the late Reverend Convention:
More especially for the Impropriety (as I humbly conceive) of your appearing at
the Head of this Controversy, and opening a new Scene of Disputation; and for
the intemperate Spirit and Design you seem to discover in the whole Performance.

Sir, I must confess, I should have sooner expected such a Letter of Remarks
from almost any other Minister in the Province than from your self, not from
the least Apprehension of Insufficiency for the Task, but considering the
Spirit of Jealousy and Separation that has unhappily come upon you with
respect to your Reverend Brethren, which meeting with a Temper, not perhaps the
most flexible, is not easily overcome and suppressed.

I believe, it is evident to all sober unprejudiced Readers, that you occupied
the Room of a Remarker under a Spirit of too much Resentment to serve the Cause
you espouse, or your own Credit that is engaged in it. Some of your good
Friends would doubtless have excused this Labor -- (all Things considered)
with a Master spare thy self.

I Am sensible, Sir, it is no easy Task for Gentlemen, even of a cool Spirit,
when dipped in Controversy, to keep their Temper sweet and pleasant, and know
what Spirit they are of. And doubtless, with all your Seize in Knowledge
and Grace, you have been exercised herein to suppress the Workings of that
Spirit that lusts to Envy.

I am persuaded, that when you come to reflect, in the cool of the Day, on your
Performance, you will see Reason to retract some Things, which, if I mistake
not, are written in a hasty Spirit, and which tend not to the Use of edifying.

Some of your Friends are very jealous lest the Archers should hit and sorely
wound you under your present feeble and broken State, but I would hope better
Things, even in the present Strife of Tongues; endeavoring to stir up my self
and my reverend Brethren by Way of Remembrance of that sacred Admonition, A
soft Answer turns away Wrath; but grievous Words stir up Anger.

Sir, my principal Design in this Essay (however unequal to it) is to point out
some Instances of that intemperate Spirit and Zeal which seem to run through your
Letter, and which I fear led you into some unhappy Mistakes.

I think it must be owing to such a Spirit and Zeal, that you so hastily
caught at a Shadow of Reason for attaching Dr. CHAUNCY on the Title Page of
the Testimony, particularly for publishing it with SUCH A POMPOUS AND DELUSIVE
TITLE. But the Dr's handsome Vindication of himself, together with your
Retractation, forbid all further Remarks upon this Head.

You are careful to represent the Danger that Strangers may be in, of being
misled into this false Judgment, namely that our anniversary Convention is to
be considered as a formed Body of all the Pastors of the Churches in this
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, acting in their ecclesiastical Character,
whose Determinations are to be regarded as carrying some special Power and
Authority with them, like that of a provincial Synod. And then add, that our
annual Convention is an Assembly of Pastors merely occasional, etc, Page 4, 5.

Now Sir, Is it not your Design by thus industriously exposing the Weakness of
our anniversary Convention to weaken the Influence of their late solemn
Testimony against the prevailing Disorders of these Times? And do you think to
do GOD Service by thus enervating the Force of those right Words, as coming
from a considerable Number of the Senior, very judicious and pious Pastors of
these Churches?

But supposing it be really so (which I don't deny), How came you, reverend
Brother, eight Years ago to separate yourself from the Convention, not only
viva voce, but by a drawn Instrument which you read before many Witnesses?

And I cannot help remarking here that when you appeared, and offered to speak
at the late Convention, you was pleased to put the Convention upon proving this
notorious Fact, which not a little surprised and moved many of your Fathers and
Brethren. Wherefore suffer me to expostulate with you reverend Brother.

1. Whether the hasty Temper you discover in your Letter toward Dr. CHAUNCY be
not owing, in some Measure, to his openly opposing your speaking in the late
Convention, 'till you were pleased to make some Retractation of your former
Conduct in separating from it? 2. Whether when it was proposed by some reverend
Gentlemen there present, that if you would please to declare you then spoke as
a Member of this Convention, you should have all Liberty of Speech, you did not
hastily refuse in the intemperate Heat of Spirit?
Another false judgment upon Matters of Fact into which you think many Readers
may be led, is this, namely, That none but such as are Pastors of the Churches
of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay were admitted to Vote in the late
Convention, whereas it is well known that others were admitted to Vote who are
Pastors of Churches beyond the Bounds of this Province, P. 6.

This Representation is evidently to show the Inconsistency of the Style of the
Title Page of this Testimony: But Sir, I challenge you upon this Point, viz.

To produce above one Instance of a Pastor of a neighboring Province, or
Colony, that voted the Articles in the printed Testimony, particularly the
last, upon which you insist most. I don't indeed think there was so much as a
single Instance; to be sure, I could not find one by diligent Search in the
Time of it, and I heard several of the Pastors in the Province of New Hampshire
expressly declare, the Evening after, that they did not vote; those Gentlemen
modestly excusing and contenting themselves with being Spectators only.

What a slender Reason have you then for supposing as you do (Page 7.) That the
Majority in the last Vote (which occasioned such Debates about the late Revival
of Religion) was determined by them who are not Pastors in this Province?
followed with another Supposition and Insinuation, that the Vote on the last
Paragraph was the Execution of a Design among a Party. Upon which I must
express my Grief for your Suggestion of the Prevalency of a Party-Spirit in
such an Assembly of Divines.

Sir, having worn the Title Page of this Instrument as you are pleased to call
it, by spending near seven Pages of Remarks upon it, which the most of your
Readers think you might as well have spared; You turn over a new Leaf, and
attach the Testimony it self, passing a severe Censure upon it as unlikely to
have a good Effect for the Revival and Advancement of real, vital and practical
Religion: Together with a plain Insinuation that the Convention who formed it
had not at Heart, nor were well acquainted with, the State of Religion in this
Land for several Years past. And you freely declare it to be your Judgment,
that if we consider it in the whole as a Testimony against Disorders and
Errors, it powerfully tends to unhappy Effects, both among them who live at a
great Distance from us, and among our own Churches. You add also, with great
Freedom of Speech, I know not, how any Thing could be better calculated and
contrived to confirm the fallacious Accounts of the State of Religion in
New England, which have lately been sent over to Scotland, by some virulent
Opposers of the remarkable Work of GOD's Grace, which has been carrying on in
various Parts of our Land, for some Years past.

Reverend Sir, I Am apt to think that the Charity that becomes a Gentleman of
your Character would dispose you to put a better Construction upon the Spirit
and Conduct of the late Convention. -- I Am very sorty a Gentleman of your
Station should insinuate, that the Convention instead of having the State of
Religion at Heart in forming this Testimony, etc. -- were carrying on a Party
Design to the Hurt and wounding of Religion here, and confirming the fallacious
Accounts of the State of Religion, that have been sent abroad.

Perhaps the florid Accounts, in Favor of this remarkable Work, that have been
sent into Scotland from hence, have not been perfectly free from the high
Charge of Fallacy; at least I Appeal to those worthy Gentlemen themselves that
have been most early and pompous (not to say delusive) in their Accounts of the
flourishing State of Religion here, whether if they were to send over their
Accounts under the present Darkness and Disorder attending the Work of GOD,
they could in Conscience make such a perfect Work of it. It is evident beyond
all Contradiction, that both the plausible Accounts sent from hence to
Scotland, and from thence to us, were drawn up too suddenly to give the World a
just and sober Representation of the State of Religion for some Years past, as
if the worthy Authors were striving for the Mastery, who should be first in
this good Cause. It is observable that the Testimonies concerning the State of
Religion in foreign Parts do as widely differ, as the Testimonies that are
given of it from among our selves; and it is no easy Matter to sift out the
Truth: Nor do I at all wonder, that some serious and inquisitive Gentlemen in
Scotland are very desirous of being informed of the true Sentiments of the Body
of the Clergy of this Province concerning it, which some may perhaps fear may
be collected, both from the Rev. Mr. Appleton's Convention Sermon, printed at
the almost universal Desire of the late Convention of Pastors, and also from
their printed Testimony against the Errors and Disorders in the Land.

You are pleased Sir (Page 8.) to mention several Authors of these fallacious
Accounts, whose Vindication it is not my Business to attempt, neither do I
suppose they would desire it of me considering their own Abilities to vindicate
themselves: Only, you must excuse me if I say you appear to do it with a Sneer,
as if the Characters of some of them were so exceptionable as to render their
Accounts suspected; but Truth is great, and may be spoken by an Opposer.

Dear Sir, suffer me to remark here what, as far as I understand, is
universally noticed, viz. That you would have done yourself much more Honor,
if you had spared the Rev. Mr. Mather, and your Marginal Note upon him. Don't
you now really think so yourself, considering old Things that are passed away?
Don't there seem to be one Ounce of the old Leaven in your Sowerness toward
your late Rev. Colleague? If it be so, as a Man of GOD, you will diligently
search and purge it out.

YOU, and others, in the same Way of thinking, may represent these Accounts in
as dim a Light as you please, yet nothing is more notorious, than that within
these two or three Years past, Antinomian and Familistical Errors, Enthusiasm,
gross Delusions, and scandalous Disorders of various Kinds, have been
lamentably prevailing in our Churches to the great Darkening and Hindrance of
the Work of GOD. And true it is, that this printed Testimony of the late
Convention tends to put this Matter beyond all Dispute, and if it so happens
that this Testimony contradicts some hasty Accounts of the late Revival of
Religion in New England that have been sent abroad, why should the Convention
be blamed when they are called to make a faithful Declaration against the
manifest Disorders that have attended it.

I cannot imagine, Sir, how such a Testimony against Errors and Disorders should
tend to increase them, and obstruct the Progress of GOD's Work, as you
insinuate and say, Page 10. I am more apt to think, it has a direct Tendency
to prevent the Growth of Errors; and so to promote the Work of GOD's Grace in
the Land. And I Am confident, that if the Pastors of these Churches had acted
more closely up to the Rev. Mr. Tennent's Maxim, Principiis obsta, to crush the
Cockatrice in the Egg, (and I wish he himself had begun sooner to practice upon
it) it would have been an excellent Preservative against the growing Disorders
of these Times; and so would have shortened, if not superseded the printed
Testimony.

Moreover, I Am much confirmed in this Opinion, because it is evident that in
the Instance of Visions and Trances, which Ministers in general were zealous to
oppose at first, are I think universally ceased in the Land. Whereas, if they
had been countenanced by a Number of the Leaders of this People, we had been
furnished long ago with sufficient to have made a Romish Legend.

This makes me think, that the Silence of Ministers in bearing a faithful and
seasonable Testimony against Disorders is the blameable Cause of their Increase
and Continuance among us. Many Pastors of this Convention apprehended that
Necessity was laid upon them now, at least, to testify publicly against those
growing Disorders: Neither have I any Reason to surmise, but that they formed
their Testimony from a serious and hearty Concern for the flourishing State of
Religion in the Land.

I would charitably hope with you, Reverend Sir, that many among our selves
have lately experienced a saving Conversion to GOD; but must dissent from you
in supposing that they will be tempted to entertain Prejudices against their
own Pastors, as well as other Ministers because they gave not a fuller
Attestation to a remarkable Revival of Religion in various Parts of the Land. I
rather think such as are true Converts will judge their Pastors faithful in
making such a Stand against prevailing Disorders, which threaten to destroy the
Work of GOD.

Moreover, I Have Reason to think that Multitudes in those Places that have been
rent with them, as well as others, had great Expectation of receiving such a
faithful Testimony from the late Convention of Pastors; and I Am sorely grieved
that you raise and sanctify Prejudices in the Minds of People upon this Head
that may be in Danger of leavening the whole Lump. For it is very evident that
the Minds of many are unhappily leavened with Prejudice already against their
faithful Pastors, and we need not help forward their Afflictions.

You then proceed, Sir, (in Page 10) by Way of Prevention or Correction of the
supposed bad Effects of this Testimony, both at Home and abroad to publishd to
the World as undeniable Matter of Fact, (I) That scarce one third Part of the
"Pastors of the Churches of this Province were present at the "late Convention.
True: And what then? Are they not for all that properly styled the Convention
of Pastors of this Province? Were there not as many present at this Convention
as has been known at any Time? I know very well that the Paucity of the Number
has not been admitted as any Objection against their acting in some important
Affairs, particularly in distributing the charitable Collection from Year to
Year. Though if there be any Defect in the Distribution of it, I hope it will
be remedied by preaching the Convention-Sermon for the future, at nine o'Clock
in the Morning.

You affirm also (2) That of those Pastors who were present, it was but a small
Majority that voted the last Article or Paragraph, which caused such Debates
about an Attestation to the Work of GOD's Grace, appearing of late Years in a
remarkable Revival of Religion among these Churches.

You then appeal, Sir, to the Rev. Moderator that upon counting the Votes, when
there were at least seventy Ministers present, he declared that Thirty Eight
was the Number who voted in the Affirmative.

You offer several concurring Circumstances to support this Fact, and express
your Surprise to have heard this Point, contested and denied more than once by
some, and at length you say, You are persuaded the Moderator will be ready at
any Time to attest this Fact.

Whereupon, apprehending I had a just Right to be ascertained of it, I sent a
Letter to the Rev. Moderator July 1. humbly requesting him to certify me of two
Facts, very confidently asserted in your Letter, about which I was of doubtful
Mind; viz. The forementioned Fact, and that mentioned in Page 3. of your
printed Letter, whether he plainly told that Assembly, he could not subscribe
the Testimony for himself personally: Upon which there was a Vote for his
signing it as Moderator. But that good Gentleman refused to give me any
Satisfaction in either of these Points, in his Answer to me.

I confess, I am at a loss how to account for the Moderator's Conduct, upon
Supposition that he refused to subscribe it for himself personally, who has
been most famous of any in these Parts for a steady Opposer of the very
Disorders and Errors mentioned in the Testimony; I observe this very much to
his Honor, for by differencing between the Good and Evil, he, together with
many others, have approved themselves true Friends to the Work of GOD.

But from all I can find after diligent Enquiry into this Matter, it is far
otherwise; the Moderator, as his constant Practice has all along been, only
expressed his Desire, that the Members that voted the Testimony should
subscribe it with him, but it was voted that the Moderator should sign it
alone; this I believe is the Truth of the Case.

As to the other Fact about polling upon the last Paragraph of the Testimony, I
will freely declare also what appears to me to be the whole Truth, viz, I
believe the Moderator did count the Votes as you assert. But it was done
sometime after the Vote upon the last Article was passed, and after diverse
Members were gone off, supposing the Votes to have been now finished. This is
what several Members of that Convention who voted the Testimony, have told me
for their Parts, and which I Am told, was the Case of several others who moved
from the Convention.

Besides, diverse Gentlemen who never voted at all, in passing any of those
Articles (some out of Principle, others apprehending they had no Right to vote)
were counted on the Negative without any Distinction.

I Will dismiss this Point with one Remark more, viz. That every one of the
Articles in the printed Testimony relating to Errors and Disorders were voted
in the Affirmative by a very great Majority.

Rev. Sir, you would not have it thought that the Committee, chosen to draw up
a Report on this Occasion, were all of them shutting out an Attestation to the
late Work of God's holy Spirit among us.

In Answer to this I shall only remark two Things.

(1) That the Character of every one of that Rev. Committee is so well
established, as not to admit of the least Doubt that they are Friends to the
Work of GOD's Grace, and are always ready to set to their Seal to the Truth:
Neither can I begin to think in my Heart, that we were in Perils by false
Brethren at that Time, or that there is any Reason to cry out a Confederacy, a
Confederacy against the Work of GOD. (2) If any of that Rev. Committee were
dissatisfied at the Report, it would have been but fair and friendly in them to
have made their Remonstrance in Presence of the Committee, before it was
brought into public; which I Have been informed was not the Case.
Rev. Sir, you then complain of it as undeniable Fact, (P. 3) That when Pastors
of an established Character as Friends to the Cause of Truth and Holiness,
would have testified what they though it concerning the late Revival of Religion in
various Parts of the Land, they were interrupted in a rude Manner and treated
with open Contempt. You go on to say is it not true in Fact, that many earnest
Pleas for their being heard were stifled in Clamor and Opposition?

Rev. Brother, If such an Assembly had indeed treated one another with so much
Rudeness, Contempt and Clamor, would it not have been much more becoming your
Character, instead of exposing their Nakedness, to have silently covered it
with a Mantle of Charity? That Charity which covers a Multitude of Sins.

But really Sir, I am not sensible that the Charge is just: I know there was
too much intemperate Heat and Passion expressed by Gentlemen on both Sides of
the Question; and to the best of my Observation, full as much on one Side as
the other, whereby it was evident, that we are all Men of like Passions! Nay, you
are the only Person, I ever heard speak of the Behavior of that Rev Gentleman
you refer to (in the Margin) in the soft Language of a just Warmth of
Resentment, testifying against the bad Spirit that appeared to prevail in the
Assembly, and the ill Treatment given to Pastors, who only desired a patient
hearing, while they spoke in Favor of the late Work of GOD's Grace.

But, Sir, Pastors had Liberty of Speech there in the Cause of GOD; and to the
best of my Remembrance were generally treated with Respect and Decency.

Its true, you was opposed speaking in tat Convention, 'till you would be
brought to say at least, that you spoke as a Member of it, which you refusing
to do, your Attestation was not received, and its generally thought, that
Justice was done you.

I must remark here, that several worthy Gentlemen on your Side of the Question
did not seem at that Time to be in the Exercise of that Wisdom, which is easy
to be entreated. For after several Concessions were made on some Articles in
the Report at their Desire, it was publicly observed, that they did not vote
one single Article in the printed Testimony: For which extraordinary Conduct
you profess to give a Reason (in P. 12, 13) which possibly may be found wanting.

You are not ignorant, Sir, that it was said in the Debate, that the Time would
not allow of every Members giving a particular Account of the extraordinary
Work in his own Place, which was one Reason of their not being heard more fully
upon that Head, and did not proceed from a united Endeavor in the Pastors to
shut out an Attestatiion to the Work of GOD's holy Spirit among us. And to be
plain, there was also a Jealousy in the Minds of Gentlemen, who appeared
zealous for the Testimony, that the Rev. Protesters spared no Pains to prevent
the passing and Publication of it.

Rev. Brother, as to your declaring publicly with great Freedom that you are
one of those Ministers in Boston who, in Concurrence with a Number of Ministers
in the Country, have desired and proposed to have an Interview at Boston the
Day after the approaching Commencement; That is in plain English, to have a
separate Convention, in order to give an open conjunct Testimony to the late
happy Revival of Religion in many Parts of this Land. etc.

I firmly believe you heartily concur in this extraordinary Motion, and the
rather, because it is carrying on the same Design you seemed to project ever
since you separated in such an extraordinary Manner from the Convention above
seven Years ago, viz. The holding a separate Convention: To prevent which, I am
one of those Pastors which told you, dear Brother, at that Time, we would upon
our Knees entreat your Continuance among us, but we were unhappily disappointed.

The Projection, if I mistake not, was to begin with separating the united
Ministers of Botston, which happily failed by the kind Mediation of some of
your Reverend Fathers and Brethren; and perhaps, I my self was instrumental to
reconcile them, though in a most secret, yet not less sincere and effectual
Manner.

But, Reverend Brother, Why do the Reverend Gentlemen concerned in this Affair,
appear so shy of subscribing this Proposal (for to do you Justice, you are the
only Gentleman who has not acted behind the Curtain, by refusing a Subscription
to this Account) and appointing the Place of Meeting for the designed Interview
of Pastors -- both in the common News Letters and your own printed Letter --
but oblige your Fathers and Brethren to call at the Place of your Abode for
Information: Would it not have been much more fair, open and generous, to have
given the most public Notice of the Place of convening, that all your Reverend
Fathers and Brethren might come to the Help of the common Cause.

Sir, I have finished my Remarks upon your Letter, in which I have sincerely
aimed at declaring the whole Truth; and if I am mistaken in any material Point,
or have transgressed the Rules of Decency and Charity, I heartily desire to be
forgiven.

And now, dear Brother, suffer me to expostulate with you on this melancholy
Occasion. Why do you strive in this Manner to promote a separate Convention?
Will the common Salvation be really promoted by it? Will Not the Effects of it be
sad and fatal to the true Interest of Piety? Will Not the common Adversary to
Truth and Peace be gratified by such Altercations between the Ministers of our
holy Religion?

I beseech you, let us take Heed of falling out by the Way. Let there be no
Strife between the Ministers of CHRIST, for we are Brethren: Let us love as
Brethren, be pitiful and courteous.

In fine, I am fully persuaded that the most effectual Method, under GOD, to
reduce GOD's People to a proper Temper of Mind, and the Order of the Gospel, is
for the Clergy to show a reconciling and charitable Spirit, and first be
reconciled among themselves: then may they with a better Grace and Force
address the People to consider and reform their Ways. And it is high Time for
us all to attempt this; and may the GOD of Peace and Order in all the Churches
of his Saints add his Blessing to our united Prayers and Endeavous to forward
and accomplish such a glorious Design.

Dear Brother, wishing you Health and all the Blessings and Comforts of a
successful Ministry, and desiring your Prayers for me, that I may be in Health,
and my Soul prosper; and that I may be prepared to give up a good Account of my
Stewardship.

I am your affectionate Brother, and Servant in the Ministry of the Gospel,
John Hancock.
Braintree, July 5. 1743.

