The true Excellency of a MINISTER of the GOSPEL.

A SERMON Preached at Pelham, Aug. 30. 1744. Being the Day of the ORDINATION OF
THE Revd Mr. Robert Abercrombie TO THE Work of the Gospel Ministry In that
Place.

By Jonathan Edwards, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in Northampton.

Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 8. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thumim and thy Urim be with thy
Holy One.

BOSTON: Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for W. Mc ALPINE in Union-Street. 1744.

THE True Excellency of a Gospel Minister.
JOHN V. 35. He was a burning and a shining Light. --


THAT Discourse of our blessed SAVIOR we have an Account of in this Chapter
from the 17 Verse to the End, was occasioned by the Jews murmuring against him,
and persecuting him for his healing the impotent Man at the Pool of Bethesda,
and bidding him take up his Bed and walk on the Sabbath Day. Christ largely
vindicates himself in this Discourse, by asserting his Fellowship with God the
Father in Nature and Operations, and thereby implicitly showing himself to be
Lord of the Sabbath, and by declaring to the Jews that God the Father, and he
with him, did work hitherto, or even to this Time; i. e. although it be said
that God rested on the seventh Day from all his Works, yet indeed God continues
to work hitherto, even to this very Day, with Respect to his greatest Work, the
Work of Redemption, or new Creation, which he carries on by Jesus Christ his
Son. Pursuant to the Designs of which Work was his showing Mercy to fallen Men
by healing their Diseases, and delivering them from the Calamities they bro't
on themselves by Sin. This great Work of Redemption, God carries on from the
Beginning of the World to this Time; and his Rest from it will not come till
the Resurrection, which Christ speaks of in the 21 and following Verses: the
finishing of this Redemption as to its Pocurement, being in his own
Resurrection; and as to the Application, in the general Resurrection and
eternal Judgment, spoken of from V. 20. to v. 30. So that notwithstanding both
the Rest on the seventh Day, and also the Rest that Joshua gave the Children of
Israel in Canaan; yet the great Rest of the Redeemer from his Works, and so of
his People with him and in him, yet remains, as the Apostle observes, Heb.
Chap. 4. This will be at the Resurrection and general Judgment; which Christ
here teaches the Jews, was to be brought to pass by the Son of God, by the
Father's Appointment, and so the Works of God to be finished by him.

And inasmuch as this Vindication was so far from satisfying the Jews, that it
did but further enrage them, because hereby he made himself equal with God,
Christ therefore refers them to the Witness of John the Baptist; whose
Testimony they must acquiesce in, or else be inconsistent with themselves;
because they had generally acknowledged John to be a great Prophet, and seemed
for a while mightily affected and taken with it, that God, after so long a
withholding the Spirit of Prophecy, had raised up so great a Prophet among them
-- and it is concerning him that Christ speaks in this Verse wherein is the
Text; He was a burning and a shining Light; and ye were willing for a Season to
rejoice in his Light.

In Order to a right understanding and Improvement of the Words of the Text, we
may observe

1. What Christ here takes Notice of in John, and declares concerning him, viz.
That he was a burning and a shining Light. He was a Light to the Church of
Israel, to reveal the Mind and Will of God to them, after a long continued dark
Season, and after they had been destitute of any Prophet to instruct 'em, for
some Ages: He arose on Israel, as the Morning Star, the Forerunner of the Sun
of Righteousness, to introduce the Dayspring, or Dawning of the Gospel-Day, to
give Light to them that 'till then had sat in the Darkness of perfect Night,
which was the Shadow of Death; to give them the Knowledge of Salvation; as
Zecharias his Father declares at his Circumcision, Luke 1.76, 77, 78, 79. And
thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest; for thou shall go before
the Face of the Lord, to prepare his Ways; to give Knowledge of Salvation unto
his People, by the Remission of their Sins, through the tender Mercy of our
God; whereby the Day spring from on high has visited us, to give Light to them
that sit in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, to guide our Feet into the
Way of Peace.

And he was a burning Light, as he was full of a Spirit of fervent Piety and
Holiness, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mother's Womb, having his
Heart warmed and enflamed with a great Love to Christ, being that Friend of the
Bridegroom, that stood and heard him, and rejoiced greatly because of the
Bridegroom's Voice; and was glad that Christ increased, though he decreased,
John 3.29, 30. And was animated with a Holy Zeal in the Work of the Ministry:
He came in this Respect in the Spirit and Power of Elias; as Elias was zealous
in bearing Testimony against the Corruption, Apostacies, and Idolatries of
Israel in his Day, so was John the Baptist in testifying against the Wickedness
of the Jews in his Day: As Elias zealously reproved the Sins of all Sorts of
Persons in Israel, not only the Sins of the common People, but of their great
ones, Ahab, Ahaziah and Jezabel, and their false Prophets; with what Zeal did
John the Baptist reprove all Sorts of Persons, not only the Publicans and
Soldiers, but the Pharisees and Sadducees, telling them plainly that they were
a Generation of Vipers, and rebuked the Wickedness of Herod in his most beloved
Lust, though Herod sought his Life for it, as Ahab and Ahaziah did Elijah's. As
Elias was much in warning the People of God's approaching Judgments, denouncing
God's awful Wrath against Ahab, Jezebel and Ahaziah, and the Prophets of Baal,
and the People in general: So was John the Baptist, much in warning the People
to fly from the Wrath to come, telling them in the most awakening Manner, that
the Ax was laid at the Root of the Tree, and that every Tree that brought not
forth good Fruit should be hewn down and cast into the Fire, and that he that
came after him had his Fan in his Hand, and that he would thoroughly purge his
Floor, and gather his Wheat into the Garner, and burn up the Chaff with
unquenchable Fire.

John the Baptist was not only a burning, but a shining Light: He was so in his
Doctrine, having more of the Gospel in his Preaching than the former Prophets,
or at least the Gospel exhibited with greater Light and Clearness, more plainly
pointing forth the Person that was to be the great Redeemer, and declaring his
Errand into the World, to take away the Sin of the World, as a Lamb offered in
Sacrifice to God, and the Necessity that all, even the most strictly moral and
religious stood in of him, being by Nature a Generation of Vipers; and the
spiritual Nature of his Kingdom, consisting not in Circumcision, or outward
Baptism, or any other external Performance or Privileges, but in the powerful
Influences of the Holy Ghost in their Hearts, a being baptized with the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire.

In this Clearness with which he gave Knowledge of Salvation to God's People,
John was a bright Light, and among them that had been born of Women there had
not arisen a greater than he. In this Brightness this Harbinger of the Gospel
Day excelled all the other Prophets, as the Morning Star reflects more of the
Light of the Sun than any other Star, and is the brightest of all the Stars.

He also shone bright in his Conversation, and his eminent Mortification and
Renunciation of the Enjoyments of the World; his great Diligence and
Laboriousness in his Work, his Impartiality in it, declaring the Mind and Will
of God to all Sorts without Distinction; his great Humility, rejoicing in the
Increase of the Honor of Christ, though his Honor was diminished, as the
Brightness of the Morning Star diminishes, as the Light of the Sun increases;
and in his Faithfulness and Courage, still declaring the Mind and Will of God,
though it cost him his own Life. Thus his Light shone before Men.

2. We may observe to what Purpose Christ declares these Things of John in the
Text, viz. to show how great and excellent a Person he was, and worthy that the
Jews should regard his Testimony: great are the Things which Christ elsewhere
says of John the Baptist, as in Matthew. 11.7. to the 14. He speaks of him as a
Prophet; and more than a Prophet; and one, than whom, there had not risen a
greater among them that had been born of Women. He observes how great and
excellent a Light he was in the Text, to show the Jews how inexcusable they
were in not receiving the Testimony he had given of him; as you may see v. 31,
32, and 33.

Therefore that which I would observe from the Text to be the Subject of my
present Discourse is this:

It Is the Excellency of a Minister of the Gospel to be both a burning and a
shining Light.

Thus we see it is in Christ's Esteem, the great Prophet of God, and Light of
the World, Head of the Church, and Lord of the Harvest, and the great Lord and
Master whose Messengers all Ministers of the Gospel are.

John the Baptist was a Minister of the Gospel; and he was so more eminently
than the ancient Prophets: for though God at sundry Times, and in diverse
Manners, spoke the Gospel by them; yet John the Baptist was a Minister of the
Gospel in a Manner distinguished from them: he is reckoned in Scripture the
first that introduced the Gospel Day, after the Law and the Prophets, Luke
6.16. The Law and the Prophets were until John; since that Time the Kingdom of
God is preached. And his Preaching is called the Beginning of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, Mark 1.1. He came on that Errand, to give
Knowledge of Salvation to God's People, through the Remission of their Sins;
(as his Father Zecharias observes Luke 1.77.) and to preach these glad Tidings
that the Kingdom of Heaven was at Hand.

John being thus eminently a Minister of the Gospel, and a burning and shining
Light being taken Notice of by Christ as his great Excellency, we may justly
hence observe, that herein consists the proper Excellency of Ministers of the
Gospel.

I would, by divine Assistance, handle the Subject in the following Method.

1. I would show that Christ's Design, in the Appointment of the Order and
Office of Ministers of the Gospel is, that they may be Lights to the Souls of
Men.

2. I would show what is implied in their being burning Lights.

3. I would show what is implied in their being shining Lights.

4. I would show that it is the proper Excellency of Ministers of the Gospel to
have these Things united in them, to be both burning and shining Lights.

5. I would apply these Things to all that Christ has called to the the Work of
the Gospel Ministry, showing how much it concerns them earnestly to endeavor
that they may be burning and shining Lights.

6. Show what Ministers of the Gospel ought to do that they may be so.

7. Say something briefly concerning the Duty of a People that are under the
Care of a Gospel Minister, correspondent to those Things that Christ has taught
us concerning the End and Excellency of a Gospel Minister.

I. I would observe that Christ's Design in the Appointment of the Order and
Office of Ministers of the Gospel was that they might be Lights to the Souls of
Men.

Satan's Kingdom is a Kingdom of Darkness; the Devils are the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World. But Christ's Kingdom is a Kingdom of Light; the Designs
of his Kingdom are carried on by Light; his People are not of the Night, nor of
Darkness, but are the Children of the Light, as they are the Children of God,
who is the Father of Lights, and as it were a boundless Fountain of infinitely
pure and bright Light, 1 John 1.5. Jam. 1.17.

Man by the Fall extinguished that divine Light that shone in this World in its
first Estate. The Scripture represents the Wickedness of Man as reducing the
World to that State wherein it was when it was yet without Form and void, and
Darkness filled it. Jer. 4.22, 23. For my People is foolish, they have not
known me: they are sottish Children; and they have none Understanding: they are
wise to do Evil; but to do Good they have no Knowledge. I beheld the Earth, and
lo it was without Form and void; and the Heavens, and they had no Light. But
God in infinite Mercy has made glorious Provision for the Restoration of Light
to this fallen dark World; he has sent him, who is the Brightness of his own
Glory, into the World, to be the Light of the World. He is the true Light, that
lights every Man that comes into the World, i. e. Every Man in the World
that ever has any true Light. But in his Wisdom and Mercy, he is pleased to
convey his Light to Men by Means and Instruments; and has sent forth his
Messengers, and appointed Ministers in his Church to be subordinate Lights, and
to shine with the Communications of his Light, and to reflect the Beams of his
Glory on the Souls of Men.

There is an Analogy between the divine Constitution and Disposition of Things
in the natural and in the spiritual World. The wise Creator han't left the
natural World without Light; But in this our solar System has set one great
Light, immensly exceeding all the Rest, shining perpetually with a transcendant
Fullness and Strength, to enlighten the whole; and he has appointed other
lesser, subordinate or dependant Lights, that shine with the Communications and
Reflections of something of his Brightness. So it is in the spiritual World;
there God has appointed Jesus Christ as a Sun of Righteousness: The Church of
God has not the Sun to be her Light by Day; nor for Brightness, does the Moon
give Light to her; but the Lord is her everlasting Light, and her God her
Glory. The new Jerusalem has no Need of the Sun, nor the Moon; for the Lamb is
the Light thereof. And the Ministers of Christ are as it were the Stars that
encompass this glorious Fountain of Light, to receive and reflect his Beams,
and give Light to the Souls of Men. As Christ therefore is in Scripture called
the Sun, so are his Ministers called Stars. So are the twelve Apostles, the
chief Ministers of the Christian Church, called Rev. 12.1. And there appeared a
great Wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her
Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars. And so are the ordinary
Ministers of the Gospel called Rev. 1.16. And he had in his Right Hand seven
Stars. And v. 20. The Mystery of the seven Stars, which thou saw in my Right
Hand, and the seven golden Candlesticks; the seven Stars are the Angels of the
seven Churches. Here also Ministers of the Gospel are implicitly compared to
those Lamps that enlightened the Temple at Jerusalem, upon the Tops of the
golden Candlesticks: and more expressly in Zech. 4.2. I have looked, and behold
a Candlestick, all of Gold, with a Bowl upon the Top of it, and his seven Lamps
thereon.

These Lamps have all their Oil from Christ, and are in kindled by his Flame,
and shine by his Beams; and being thus dependant on him, they are near to him,
and held in his Right Hand, that they may receive Light from him, to
communicate to others.

The Use of a Light is threefold; to discover, to refresh, and to direct.

The first Use of a Light is to discover Things, or make them manifest. Without
Light nothing is to be seen. Ephesians. 5.13. Whatsoever does make manifest is Light.
Ministers are set to be Lights to the Souls of Men in this Respect, as they are
to be the Means of imparting divine Truth to them, and bringing into their View
the most glorious and excellent Objects, and of leading them to, and assisting
them in the Contemplation of those Things that Angels desire to look into; the
Means of their obtaining that Knowledge is infinitely more important and more
excellent and useful, than that of the greatest Statesmen or Philosophers, even
that which is spiritual and divine: They are set to be the Means of bringing
Men out of Darkness into God's mavelous Light, and of bringing them to the
infinite Fountain of Light, that in his Light they may see Light: They are set
to instruct Men, and impart to them that Knowledge by which they may know God
and Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life eternal.

Another Use of Light is to refresh and delight the Beholders. Darkness is
dismal: the Light is sweet, and a pleasant Thing it is to behold the Sun. Light
is refreshing to those who have long sat in Darkness: They therefore that watch
and keep awake through a dark Night, long and wait for the Light of the
Morning; and the wise Man observes, Prove. 15.30. That the Light of the Eyes
rejoiceth the Heart. Spiritual Light is especially refreshing and joyful. Ps.
97.11. Light is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in Heart.
They that see the Light of Christ, the Star that has arisen out of Jacob, are
refreshed, and do rejoice, as the wise Men that saw the Star that showed them
where Christ was, Matthew. 2.10. And when they saw the Star, they rejoiced with
exceeding great Joy.

Ministers are set in the Church of God to be the Instruments of this Comfort
and Refreshment to the Souls of Men, to be the Instruments of leading Souls to
the God of all Consolation, and Fountain of their Happiness: they are sent as
Christ was, and as Coworkers with him, to preach good Tidings to the Meek, to
bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the
opening of the Prison to them that are bound, and to comfort all that mourn:
They are to lead those that labor, and are heavy laden to their true Rest, and
to speak a Word in Season to him that is weary: They are set to be Ministers of
the Consolation and Joy of the Saints. 2 Cor. 1.24. We have not Dominion over
your Faith; but are Helpers of your Joy.

The third Use of Light is to direct. It Is by Light that we see where to go: he
that walks in Darkness knows not whither he goes, and is in Danger of Stumbling
and Falling into Mischief. It Is by Light that Men see what to do, and are
enabled to work; in the Night, Christ tells us no Man can work. Ministers are
set to be Lights to Men's Souls in this Respect also; as Zecharias observes of
John the Baptist, Luke 1.79. To guide our Feet in the Way of Peace. Ministers
have the Record of God committed to them that they may hold that forth, which
God has given to be to Man as a Light shining in a dark Place, to guide them in
the Way through this dark World to Regions of eternal Light. Ministers are set to
be the Instruments of conveying to Men that true Wisdom spoken of Job 28. Which
cannot be gotten for Gold, nor shall Silver be weighed for the Price thereof;
which cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the
Sapphire.

I proceed now to the

II. Thing proposed, viz. to show what is implied in a Minister of the Gospel's
being a burning Light.

There are these two Things that seem naturally to be understood by this
Expression, viz. That his Heart be filled with much of the holy Ardour of a
Spirit of true Piety; and that he be fervent and zealous in his Administrations.

1. That his Heart be full of much of the holy Ardour of a Spirit of true
Piety. We read of the Power of Godliness. True Grace is no dull, inactive,
ineffectual Principle; it is a powerful Thing; there is an exceeding Energy in
it: And the Reason is, that God is in it; it is a divine Principle, a
Participation of the divine Nature, and a Communication of divine Life, of the
Life of a risen Savior, who exerts himself in the Hearts of the Saints, after
the Power of an endless Life. They that have true Grace in them they live; but
not by their own Life; but Christ lives in them: His Holy Spirit becomes in
them a living Principle and Spring of divine Life: The Energy and Power of
which is in Scripture compared to Fire Matthew. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with
Water; but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not
worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. True
Piety is nothing remaining only in the Head, or consisting in any speculative
Knowledge or Opinions, or outward Morality or Forms of Religion; it reaches the
Heart, is chiefly seated there, and burns there. There is a holy Ardour in
every Thing that belongs to true Grace: True Faith is an ardent Thing, and so
is true Repentance; there is a holy Power and Ardour in true spiritual Comfort
and Joy; yea even in true Christian Humility, Submission and Meekness. The
Reason is that divine Love or Charity is the Sum of all true Grace, which is a
holy Flame inkindled in the Soul: It Is by this therefore especially, that a
Minister of the Gospel is a burning Light: A Minister that is so, has his Soul
enkindled with the heavenly Flame; his Heart burns with Love to Christ, and
fervent Desires of the Advancement of his Kingdom and Glory; and also with
ardent Love to the Souls of Men, and Desires for their Salvation.

2. The inward holy Ardour of his Soul is exercised and manifested in his being
zealous, and fervent in his Administrations: For, he is a burning Light; which
implies that his spiritual Heat and holy Ardour is not for himseif only, but is
communicative, and for the Benefit of others: He is ardent, as he is a Light,
or in the Performance of the Duties of that Office wherein he is set to be a
Light in the Church of Christ. His fervent Zeal, which has its Foundation and
Spring in that holy and powerful Flame of Love to God and Man, that is in his
Heart, appears in the Fervency of his Prayers to God, for and with his People;
and in the Earnestness, and Power with which he preaches the Word of God,
declares to Sinners their Misery, and warns them to fly from the Wrath to come,
and reproves, and testifies against all Ungodliness; and the unfeigned
Earnestness and Compassion with which he invites the weary and heavy laden to
their Savior; and the fervent Love with which he counsels and comforts the
Saints: and the holy Zeal, Courage and Steadfastness, with which he maintains
the Exercise of Discipline in the House of God, notwithstanding all the
Opposition he meets with in that difficult Part of the ministerial Work; and in
the Diligence and Earnestness with which he attends every Duty of his
ministerial Function, whether public or private.

But I hasten to the

III. Thing proposed in the Handling of this Subject, viz. To show what is
implied in a Minister's being a shining Light.

There are three Things that seem to be naturally signified by it.

1. That he be pure, clear and full in his Doctrine. A Minister is set to be a
Light to Men's Souls, by Teaching, or Doctrine: And if he be a shining Light in
this Respect, the Light of his Doctrine must be bright and full; it must be
pure without Mixtures of Darkness; and therefore he must be sound in the Faith,
not one that is of a reprobate Mind; in Doctrine he must show Uncorruptness;
otherwise his Light will be Darkness: He must not lead his People into Errors,
but teach them the Truth only, guiding their Feet into the Way of Peace, and
leading them in the right Ways of the Lord.

He must be one that is able to teach, not one that is raw, ignorant or
unlearned, and but little versed in the Things that he is to teach others; not
a Novice, or one that is unskilful in the Word of Righteousness; he must be one
that is well studied in Divinity, well acquainted with the written Word of God,
mighty in the Scriptures, and able to instruct and convince Gainsayers.

And in Order to be a shining Light, he must be one that really knows what
Religion is, one that is truly acquainted with that Savior and Way of
Salvation, that he is to teach to others, that he may speak the Things that he
knows, and testify the Things that he has seen, and not be a blind Leader of
the Blind: He must be one that is acquainted with experimental Religion, and
not ignorant of the inward Operations of the Spirit of God, nor of Satan's
Devices; able to guide Souls under their particular Difficulties. Thus he must
be a Scribe well instructed in Things that pertain to the Kingdom of God; one
that brings forth out of his Treasures, Things now and old.

And in Order to his being a shining Light, his Doctrine must be full, he must
not only be able to teach, but apt to teach, ready to instruct the Ignorant,
and them that are out of the Way, and diligent in Teaching, in public and
private; and careful and faithful to declare the whole Counsel of God, and not
to keep back any Thing that may be profitable to his Hearers.

Also his being a shining Light implies that his Instructions are clear and
plain, accommodated to the Capacity of his Hearers, and tending to convey Light
to their Understandings.

2. Another Thing requisite in Order to a Minister's being a shining Light, is
that he be discreet in all his Administrations. The fervent Zeal that thus
should animate and actuate him in his Administrations should be regulated by
Discretion: He should not only be knowing, and able to communicate Knowledge
and formed to do it; but also wise, and know how to conduct himself in the
House of God, as a wise Builder, and a wise Steward. And as he is one that God
has sent forth to labor in his Field, and committed the Care of his Vineyard
to, so he should conduct himself there as one whom his God does instruct to
Discretion: He should not only be as harmless as a Dove, but as wise as a
Serpent; showing himself a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth; and one that knows how to govern the Church of God,
and to walk in Wisdom toward those that are without.

3. Another Thing implied in a Ministers being a shining Light, is that he
shines in his Conversation: If he shines never so much in his Doctrine and
Administrations in the House of God, yet if there be not an answerable
Brightness in his Conversation, it will have a Tendency to render all
ineffectual. Christ, in Mat. 5.14, 15, 16. says to his Disciples (having
undoubtedly a special Respect to those of them that were to be sent forth to
preach the Gospel) Ye are the Light of the World: -- Men do not light a Candle,
and put it under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, and it gives Light unto all
that are in the House. And how does Christ direct them to give Light to others?
Let your Light, says he, so shine before Men, that others seeing your good
Works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. And he tells the same
Disciples again Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
Fruit. And how should they bring forth Fruit? Christ tells them, Ver. 10. If ye
keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love, and v. 14. Ye are my Friends
if ye do whatsoever I command you.

God sent his Son into the World to be the Light of the World these two Ways,
viz. By revealing his Mind and Will, to the World, and also by setting the
World a perfect Example. So Ministers are fet to be Lights, not only as
Teachers, but as Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.3.

The same Things that Ministers recommend to their Hearers in their Doctrine,
they should also show them an Example of in their Practice. Thus the Apostle
says to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.11. These Things command and teach; and then adds in
the next Verse, Be thou an Example of the Believers, in Word, in Conversation,
in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. So he directs Titus, in his
Teaching, to recommend Sobriety, Gravity, Temperance, Patience and other
Virtues, in the Beginning of the 2d Chapter of Titus. But then adds in the 7th
v. In all Things showing thy self a Pattern of good Works.

We see in natural Bodies, that when Heat is raised in them to a high Degree,
at Length they begin to shine: And, as I observed before, a Principle of true
Grace in the Soul is like an inward Heat, an holy Ardour of an heavenly Fire
inkindled in the Soul: This in Ministers of the Gospel ought to be to that
Degree, as to shine forth brightly in all their Conversation; and there should
as it were be a Light about them wherever they go, exhibiting to all that
behold them, the amiable, delightful Image of the Beauty and Brightness of
their glorious Master.

I proceed to the

IV. Thing proposed, which is to show that the Excellency of a Minister of the
Gospel consists in his being thus both a burning and a shining Light.

This is manifest in two Things;

1. Herein his Ministry is acceptable and amiable in the Sight of God and Men.

When Light and Heat are thus united in a Minister of the Gospel, it shows that
each is genuine, and of a right Kind, and that both are divine. Divine Light is
attended with Heat; and so, on the other Hand, a truly divine and holy Heat and
Ardour is ever accompanied with Light.

It Is the Glory of the Sun that such a bright and glorious Light, and such a
powerful, refreshing, vivifying Heat, are both together diffused from that
Luminary. When there is Light in a Minister, consisting in human Learning,
great speculative Knowledge and the Wisdom of this World without a spiritual
Warmth and Ardour in his Heart, and a holy Zeal in his Ministrations, his Light
is like the Light of an Ignis Fatuus, and some Kinds of putrefying Carcasses
that shine in the dark, though they are of a stinking Savor. And if on the other
Hand a Minister has Warmth and Zeal, without Light, his Heat has nothing
excellent in it, but is rather to be abhorred; being like the Heat of the
bottomless Pit; where, though the Fire be great, yet there is no Light. To be
hot in this Manner, and not lightsom, is to be like an Angel of Darkness. But
Ministers by having Light and Heat united in them, will be like the Angels of
Light; which for their Light and Brightness are called Morning Stars, Job 38.7.
When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy.
And because of that holy Ardour of divine Love and Zeal with which they burn,
they are compared to a flaming Fire, Psalm. 104.4. Who makes his Angels
Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming Fire, and are therefore called Seraphims,
which is a Word that is derived from a Root that signifies to burn. So that by
Ministers of the Gospel being burning and shining Lights, the Angels of the
Churches will become like the Angels of Heaven, and those Stars held in the
right Hand of Christ here below, will be like those Morning Stars above, and
which is much more, hereby Ministers will be like their glorious Lord and
Master; who is not only the Master of Ministers of the Gospel but is the Head
and Lord of the glorious Angels, whom they adore, and who communicates to them
the Brightness in which they shine, and the Flame with which they burn, and is
the glorious Luminary and Sun of the heavenly World, from whence all the
Inhabitants of that World have their Light and Life, and all their Glory. In
this Sun of Righteousness is that Light, whose Brightness is such that the
Light of the Sun in the Firmament in Comparison of it is as Darkness, yea black
as Sackcloth of Hair: For he is the infinite Brightness of God's Glory; and of
him it is said, Isai. 24.23. Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun
ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem,
before his Ancients, gloriously. And accompanying this bright Light in him, is
the infinitely intense Flame of Love. There is no Love to be compared to his;
nor ever was Love to both God and Man so manifested, as has been in what Christ
has done and suffered; for herein was Love! Ministers by being burning and
shining Lights, become the Sons of God, of whom we read that he is Light, and
that he is Love; 1 John 1.5. This then is the Message which we have heard of
him, and declare unto you, that God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all;
and Chap. 4.16. And we have known and believed the Love that God has to us:
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him.

Therefore it must needs be that Ministers, by being burning and shining
Lights, are acceptable and amiable in the Sight of God, as he delights in his
own Image and in the Image of his Son: And hereby also they will be honorable
and amiable in the Sight of Men, all such as have any Sense of that which is
truly excellent and beautiful; and it is the Way to have their Ministry pleasant
and delightful to those of this Character that sit under it.

2. Herein a Minister of the Gospel will be likely to answer the Ends of his
Ministry: By this Means his Ministry will not only be amiable, but profitable.
If a Minister has Light without Heat, and entertains his Auditory with learned
Discourses, without a Savor of the Power of Godliness, or any Appearance of
Fervency of Spirit, and Zeal for God and the good of Souls, he may gratify
itching Ears, and fill the Heads of his People with empty Notions; but will not
be very likely to reach their Hearts, or save their Souls. And if, on the other
Hand, he be driven on with a fierce and intemperate Zeal, and vehement Heat,
without Light, he will be likely to kindle the like unhallowed Flame in his
People, and to fire their corrupt Passions and Affections; but will make them
never the better, nor lead them a Step toward Heaven, but drive them apace the
other Way.

But if he approves himself in his Ministry, as both a burning and a shining
Light, this will be the Way to promote true Christianity amongst his People,
and to make them both wise and good, and cause Religion to flourish among them
in the Purity and Beauty of it.

When divine Light and Heat attend each other in Ministers of the Gospel, their
Light will be like the Beams of the Sun, that don't only convey Light, but give
Life; and Converts will be like to spring up under their Ministry, as the Grass
and the Plants of the Field under the Influences of the Sun; and the Souls of
the Saints will be likely to grow, and appear beautiful as the Lily, and to
revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, and their Scent to be as the Wine of
Lebanon; and their Light will be like the Light of Christ, which is the Light
of Life, John 8.12.

If the Sun should shine upon the Earth, with the same Brightness that it does
now, yet if it were without any Heat, it would give Life to nothing; the World
be a desolate Wilderness, with nothing growing in it; the Death of every living
Thing must be the Consequence; and the Sun's Light could be of no Service to
us, but to cause us to see our own and others Misery, without being able to
help our selves or them. On the other Hand, if the Sun diffused the same Heat
that now it does, but the World was destitute at the same Time of any Light, it
would be equally unserviceable: Mankind having no Light to guide them in their
Business, in tilling the Field, or gathering the Produce of the Earth, we
should be like the Egyptians in their three Days Darkness, who saw not one
another, nor rose from their Place: And thus also Death would be the
unavoidable Consequence. But by Light and Heat accompanying one another, the
whole Face of the Earth becomes fruitful, and is adorned, and all Things are
quickened and flourish, and Mankind enjoy both Life and Comfort.

I proceed to the

V. Thing proposed in handling the Doctrine, to apply these Things to all here
present, that Christ has called to the Work of the Gospel Ministry, observing
how much it concerns such to endeavor to be burning and shining Lights.

Our Office and Work is most honorable, in that we are set by Christ to be
Lights or Luminaries in the spiritual World. Light is the most glorious Thing
in the material World, and there are, it may be, no Parts of the natural World
that have so great an Image of the Goodness of God, as the Lights or Luminaries
of Heaven; and especially the Sun, who is constantly communicating his benign
Influence to enlighten, quicken and refresh the World by his Beams; which is
probably the Reason that the Worship of the Sun was (as is supposed) the first
Idolatry that Mankind fell into. But so are Ministers honored by their great
Lord and Master, that they are set to be that to Men's Souls, that the Lights
of Heaven are to their Bodies; and that they might be the Instruments and
Vehicles of God's greatest Goodness, and the most precious Fruits of his
eternal Love to them, and Means of that Life, and Refreshment and Joy, that are
spiritual and eternal, and infinitely more precious than any Benefit received
by the benign Beams of the Sun in the Firmament. And we shall be likely indeed
to be the Instruments of those unspeakable Benefits to the Souls of our
Fellow Creatures, if we have those Qualifications, which have been shown to be
the true and proper Excellency of Ministers of the Gospel. Herein our Glory
will answer the honorable Station Christ has set us in. And hereby our
Ministry will be likely to be as beneficial as our Office is honorable: We
shall be like Christ, and shall shine with his Beams; Christ will live in us,
and be seen in his Life and Beauty in our Ministry, and in our Conversation,
and we shall be most likely to be the Means of bringing others to him, and of
their receiving of his Light, and being made Partakers of his life, and having
his Joy fulfilled in them. And this will be the Way for us hereafter to be as
much advanced and distinguished in our Reward, as we are honored in the Office
and Business we are called to here. In this Way, those whom Christ has set to
be Lights in his Church, and to be Stars in the spiritual World here, shall be
Lights also in the Church triumphant, and shine as Stars forever in Heaven,
Dan. 12.3. And they that be wise shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever.

But if we fail of the proper Excellency of Ministers of the Gospel, we shall
not be in the Sight of God the more worthy or honorable for our high Office,
but the more abominable and inexcuseable; our Wickedness being aggravated by
God's great Goodness and Condescension to us, and the peculiar Obligations that
he laid upon us: and instead of being eminently beneficial and great Blessings
as Lights to reflect the Beams of Christ's Glory and Love, we shall be so much
the more hurtful and pernicious, for our being in such a Station; and so shall
be likely hereafter to suffer a so much more dreadful Punishment. The Devils in
Hell are so much the more odious to God, and more the Objects of his Wrath,
because he set them in the Dignity and Glory of Angels, the Excellency of which
State they are fallen from. And it is likely that those in Hell that will be
nearest to the fallen Angels, in their State of Misery, will be those that
Christ once set to be Angels of the Churches, but through their Unfaithfulness,
failed of their proper Excellency and End.

Here I would apply my self in a few Words to the Person whose intended
Ordination, this Day, to the great Work of the Gospel Ministry, is the Occasion
of this Discourse.

You have now, dear Sir, heard something of the Nature and Design of that
Office to which you are this Day, in the Name of Christ, to be solemnly set
apart. You are therein called to be a Light to the Souls of Men, a Lamp in
God's Temple, and a Star in the spiritual World. And you have heard wherein, in
Christ's Esteem, consists the proper Excellency of one in that Office, and how
in this a Minister of the Gospel becomes like his glorious Master, and
glorifies him, and is likely to be the Instrument of the Salvation and
Happiness of the Souls of Men, and to receive a glorious Reward from the Hands
of God.

These, Sir, are the Motives that you are to be influenced by, to endeavor to
be a burning and a shining Light in the Work of the Ministry. As to the Things
of this World, you are not to expect outward Ease, Pleasure and Plenty: Nor are
you to depend on the Friendship and Respect of Men; but should prepare to
endure Hardness, as one that is going forth as a Soldier to War. But they are
higher Things than these, more excellent Benefits than the World can afford,
that Christ offers to those that approve themselves to him in this Work.

God in his Providence has brought you far from your native Land, and from your
Friends and Acquaintance there; but you will have Reason notwithstanding to
acknowledge the good Hand of his Providence toward you, if he is pleased to
make you a burning and shining Light in this Part of his Church, and by the
Influence of your Light and Heat (or rather by his divine Influence, with your
Ministry) to cause this Wilderness to bud and blossom as the Rose, and give it
the Excellency of Carmel and Sharon, and to cause you to shine in the midst of
this People with warm and lightsome, quickening and comforting Beams, causing
their Souls to flourish, rejoice and bear Fruit, like a Garden of pleasant
Fruits, under the Beams of the Sun.

By this Means you will be to their Souls the Vehicle of the Influences and
Blessings of the heavenly World which is a World of Light and Love, shall be
ever held in Christ's right Hand, and shall be terrible to the Powers of
Darkness; and shall see more and more of the Light of Christ's Glory and Grace
in this Place, with you and this People, and shall hereafter not only shine
your self, as the Brightness of the Firmament, but shall meet with them in
Glory also, who shall shine there around you, as a bright Constellation in the
highest Heaven; where they shall be your everlasting Crown of Rejoicing.

But I hasten to the

VI. Thing proposed, which was to show what Course Ministers of the Gospel
ought to take, or what Things they should do, that they may be burning and
shining Lights.

And here I shall but just mention Things, without enlarging.

And in Order to this, Ministers should be diligent in their Studies, and in
the Work of the Ministry to which they are called; giving themselves wholly to
it; taking Heed to themselves, that their Hearts be not engaged, and their
Minds swallowed up, and their Time consumed, in Pursuits after the Profits and
vain Glory of the World.

And particularly, Ministers should be very conversant with the Holy
Scriptures; making it very much their Business, with the utmost Diligence and
Strictness, to search those Holy Writings: For they are as it were the Beams of
the Light of the Sun of Righteousness; they are the Light by which Ministers
must be enlightened and the Light they are to hold forth to their Hearers; and
they are the Fire whence their Hearts and the Hearts of their Hearers must be
enkindl'd.

They should earnestly seek after much of the spiritual Knowledge of Christ,
and that they may live in the clear Views of his Glory. For by this Means they
will be changed into the Image of the same Glory and Brightness, and will come
to their People, as Moses came down to the Congregation of Israel, after he had
seen God's Back-parts in the Mount, with his Face shining. If the Light of
Christ's Glory shines upon them, it will be the Way for them to shine with the
same Kind of Light on their Hearers, and to reflect the same Beams, which have
Heat, as well as Brightness. The Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in
the Face of Jesus Christ, is the Treasure the Apostle speaks of, that Ministers
have as in Earthen Vessels: 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. For God who commanded the Light to
shine out of Darkness has shined into your Hearts, to give the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. But we have this
Treasure in Earthen Vessels. This was probably typified of old by the burning
Lights and Lamps which Gideon's Soldiers had in one Hand in Earthen Pitchers,
while they held a Trumpet in the other, with which they sounded (typifying the
Preaching of the Gospel) And thus with the Sound of these Trumpets, and these
burning Lights or Earthen Vessels, they overcame the Enemies of God and his
People.

Ministers, in Order to their being burning and shining Lights, should walk
closely with God, and keep near to Christ; that they may ever be enlightened
and enkindled by him. And they should be much in seeking God, and conversing
with him by Prayer, who is the Fountain of Light and Love: And knowing their
own Emptiness and Helplessness should be ever dependant on Christ; being
sensible with Jeremiah that they are Children, should sit as Children at
Christ's Feet to hear his Word, and be instructed by him; and being sensible
with Isaiah that they are Men of unclean Lips should seek that their Lips may
be as it were touched with a live Coal from the Altar, as it were by the bright
and burning Seraphim.

I come now to the

VII and last Thing proposed, to say something very briefly concerning the
Duties of a People that are under the Care of a Minister, corresponding with
these Things that Christ has taught us concerning the Nature and End of this
sacred Office. And here I would have a special Respect to the People of God in
this Place, who are about to have the Care of their Souls committed to him,
that is now solemnly to be set apart to the Work of the Ministry.

If it be, as you have heard, the proper Excellency of a Minister of the Gospel
to be a burning and a shining Light, then it is your Duty earnestly to pray for
your Minister that he may be filled with Divine Light, and with the Power of
the Holy Ghost, to make him so. For herein you will but pray for the greatest
Benefit to your selves; for if your Minister burns and shines, it will be for
your Light and Life. That which has been spoken of, as it is the chief
Excellency of a Minister, fo it renders a Minister the greatest Blessing of any
Thing in the World that ever God bestows on a People.

And as it is your Duty, to pray that your Minister may by this Means become
such a Blessing to you, so you should do your Part to make him so, by
supporting him, and putting him under the best Advantage, with a Mind free from
worldly Cares, and the Pressure of outward Wants and Difficulties, to give
himself wholly to his Work; and by all proper Acts of Respect and Kindness and
Assistance, to encourage his Heart, and strengthen his Hands: And to take Heed
that instead of this you don't take a Course to obscure and extinguish the
Light that would shine among you, and to smother and suppress the Flame, by
casting Dirt upon it; by necessitating your Minister by your Penuriousness
toward him, to be envolved in worldly Care; and by discouraging his Heart by
Disrepect and Unkindness. And particularly when your Minister shows himself to
be a burning Light by burning with a proper Zeal against any Wickedness that
may be breaking out amongst his People and manifests it by bearing a proper
Testimony against it in the Preaching of the Word or by a faithful Exercise of
the Discipline of God's House, instead of taking it thankfully, and yeiding to
him in it, as you ought, don't raise another Fire of a contrary Nature, against
it, viz. the Fire of your unhallowed Passions, reflecting upon and reproaching
him for his Faithfulness. Herein you will act very unbecoming a Christian
People, and show yourselves very ungrateful to your Minister, and to Christ who
has bestowed upon you so faithful a Minister, and will also, while you fight
against him, and against Christ, fight most effectually against your own Souls.
If Christ gives you a Minister that is a burning and shining Light, take Heed
that you don't hate the Light, because your Deeds are reproved by it; but love
and rejoice in his Light; and that not only for a Season, like John the
Baptist's apostatizing Hearers: And come to the Light. Let your frequent Resort
be to your Minister for Instruction in Soul Cases, and under all spiritual
Difficulties; and be open to the Light and willing to receive it; and be
obedient to it. And thus walk as the Children of the Light, and follow your
Minister wherein he is a Follower of Christ, i. e. wherein he is as a burning
and shining Light. If you continue so to do, your Path will be the Path of the
Just, which shines more and more to the perfect Day, and the End of your Course
shall be in those blissful Regions of everlasting Light above, where you shall
shine forth with your Minister, and both with Christ, as the Sun, in the
Kingdom of the Heavenly Father.

FINIS.

