AN ESSAY ON COMETS, THEIR NATURE, THE Laws of their Motions, the Cause and
Magnitude of their Atmosphere, and Tails; WITH A Conjecture of their Use and
Design.

Sold by Rogers and Foul at their Printing House next to the Prison in
Queen Street, BOSTON. 1744.

AN ESSAY on COMETS.
IT IS an admirable Work of our GOD, that the many Globes in the Universe are
placed at such Distances, as to avoid all violent Shocks upon one another, and
every thing wherein they might prove a prejudice to one another.

Even Comets too, move so as to serve the Holy Ends of their Creator! COMETS,
which are commonly called Blazing Stars, appear unto later Observations to be a
sort of Excentrical Planets, that move periodically about the Sun.

Sir Isaac Newton, from whom it is a difficult thing to dissent in any thing
that belongs to Philosophy, concludes, that the Bodies of Comets are solid
compact, fixed, and durable even like those of the other Planets.

He has a very critical Thought upon the Heat, which these Bodies may suffer in
their Transits near the Sun. A famous one, in the Year 1680, passed so near the
Sun, that the Heat of the Sun in it must be twenty-eight thousand time as
intense as it is in England at Midsummer; whereas the Heat of boiling Water, as
he tried, is but little more than the dry Earth of that Island, exposed unto
the Midsummer-Sun: and the Heat of red-hot Iron he takes to be three or four
times as great as that of boiling Water. Wherefore the Heat of that Comet in
its Perihelion was near two thousand times as great as that of red-hot Iron. If
it had been an Aggregate of nothing but Exhalations, the Sun would have
rendered it invisible. A Globe of red-hot Iron, of the Dimensions of our Earth,
would scarce be cool, by his Computation, in Fifty Thousand Years. If then this
Comet cooled an hundred times as fast as red-hot Iron, yet, since his Heat was
Two Thousand times greater than that of red-hot Iron, if you suppose his Body
no greater than that of this Earth, he will not be cool in a Million of Years.

The Tails of Comets, which are longest and largest just after their
Perihelions, he takes to be a long and very thin Smoke, or a mighty Train of
Vapors, which the ignited Nucleus, or the Head of the Comet, emits from it.
And he easily and thoroughly confounds the silly Notion of their being only the
Beams of the Sun, shining through the Head of the Star.

The Phenomenon of the Tails of Comets depend upon the Motion of their Heads,
and have their Matter supplied from thence.

There may arise from the Atmosphere of Comets, Vapors enough to take up such
immense Spaces as we see they do. Computations made of and from the Rarity of
our Air, which by and by issue in Astonishments, will render this Matter
evident.

That the Tails of Comets are extremely rare, is apparent from this; the Fixed
Stars appearing so plainly through them.

The Atmosphere of Comets, as they descend toward the Sun, is very sensibly
diminished by their vast running out, that they may afford Matter to produce
the Blaze. Hevelius has observed, that their Atmosphere is enlarged, when they
do not so much run out into Tail.

Sir Isaac Newton has an Apprehension, which is a little surprising, That those
Vapors which are dilated, and go off in the Blazes of Comets, and are diffused
through all the Celestial Regions, may by little and little, by their own proper
Gravity, be attracted into the Planets, and become intermingled with their
Atmospheres. As to the Constitution of such an Earth as ours, it is necessary
there should be Seas; thus, for the Conservation of the Seas, and Moisture of
the Planets, there may be a necessity of Comets, from whose condensed Vapors,
all that Moisture, which is consumed in Vegetations and Putrefactions, and so
turned into dry Earth, may by degrees be continually supplied, repaired, and
recruited. Yea, he has a suspicion, that the Spirit, which is the finest, the
most subtle, and the very best part of our Air, and which is necessarily
requisite unto the Life and Being of all Things, comes chiefly from Comets. If
this be so, the Appearance of Comets is not so dreadful a thing, as the
Cometomantia, generally prevailing, has represented it.

Mr. Cassini will thus far allow bad Presages to Comets, That if the Tail of a
Comet should be too much intermingled with our Atmosphere, or if the Matter of
it should, by its Gravity, fall down upon the Earth; it may induce those
Changes in in our Air, whereof we should be very sensible.

Bernoulli, in his Systema Cometarum, supposes, That there is a Primary Planet,
revolving round the Sun in the space of four Years and 157 Days; and at the
Distance of 2,583 Semidiameters of the Orbis Magnus. This Primary Planet, he
supposes, either from his mighty Distance, or his minute Smallness, to be not
visible unto us; to have several Satellits moving round him, though none
descending so low as the Orbit of Saturn; and that these becoming visible to
us, when in their Perigaeon, are what we call Comets.

Seneca's Prediction, That a Time should come, when our Mysteries of Comets
should be unfolded, seems almost accomplished. However Seneca has not obliged
us with the Phenomenon observed by him, which encouraged this Prediction.

No Histories of Comets were of service to the Theory of them, until Nicephoras
Gregoras, a Constantinopolitan Astronomer, described the Path of a Comet in
1337.

All that considered Comets until Tycho Brabe, considered them as no other than
Vapors below the Moon.

Anon, the sagacious Kepler improving on Tycho's Discoveries, came at a true
System of Comets, and found, that they moved freely through the Planetary Orbs,
with a Motion that is not much different from a Rectilinear one.

The incomparable Hevelius went on, and though he embraced the Keplerian
Hypothesis, of the Rectilinear Motion of Comets, yet he was aware, That the
Path of a Comet was bent into a curve Line toward the Sun.

At last the illustrious Sir Isaac Newton arrives with Demonstrations, That all
the Phenomenon of Comets would naturally follow from the Keplerian Principles.
He showed a Method of delineating the Orbits of Comets geometrically; which
caused Admiration in all that considered it, and comprehended it.

The most ingenious Dr. Halley has made Calculations, upon which he ventures to
foretell the Return of Comets; but he observes, that some of them have their
Nodes pretty near the annual Orb of the Earth. I will transcribe the Words he
concludes with: 'What may be the Consequences of so near an Appulse, or of a
Contact, or lastly of a Shock of the Celestial Bodies, (which is by no means
impossible to come to pass) I leave to be discussed by the Studious of Physical
Matters.'

The Sentiments of so acute a Philosopher as Dr. Cheyne upon Comets, deserve to
be transcribed. Says he,

There is a Species of Heavenly Bodies, called COMETS, which revolve about the
Sun; in very Oblong Elliptick Orbits, approaching to Parabolick Curves. The
Times of their Periodical Revolutions are very long, since in three or four
Thousand Years, we have not positively determined the Returns of above one or
two; however, its certain, that like our Planets, they do move in a recurring
Orbit, that the Sun is in one of the Foci of this Orbit, that by a Ray from the
Sun, they describe equal Area's in equal Times, that the same Law of
Gravitation obtains in them, which does in the Planets; that their Peroidical
Times are certain and invariable, and that their Motions are regular, only
their Course in their Orbits is not determined one way, but in differently some
of 'em move one way, others another: They are also about the same Bulk with the
Planets, generally speaking; and like them are compact solid Bodies, but
surrounded with a vastly large thin Fluid, intermixed with several grosser
Particles, and composing an irregular unequally disposed and uncertainly
agitated Mass; which is called its Atmosphere, whose Diameter, is ten or
fifteen Times as long as that of its Body. Besides which, it has a long lucid
Train, which is raised in its Approach to the Sun, by the Heat thereof, and
extends sometimes to four hundred Thousand Miles above its Body. It is always
opposite to the Sun, because it is the thiner part of its Atmosphere, extremely
rarefied by his Rays; and so rare that the Stars may be seen through it. This
Tail accompanies it through its Course overall the Planetary Regions,
increasing in its Approach to the Sun, and lessening in its Recess. These
Comets sometimes come so near the Sun, as to be heated to such a Degree that
they cannot become cool again, in many Thousands of Years. This with its
violent Motion in a Curve, which comes near to a straight Line, after it has
passed its Perihelium, and the irregular Disposition of the confused Mass of
its Atmosphere, makes it an unfit Habitation for Animals, that are not in a
State of Punishment, so far as we can conceive of the Nature of Animals. And
therefore some have though it it designed, to supply the Expense of Fluids in the
Sun and the Planets. But as I have before hinted, this does not seem so very
probable, because Nature always supplies constant and regular Expenses after a
constant and regular Manner. Now the Returns of these Bodies are so irregular
and uncertain, and we so little feel the Effects of these Returns (which of
Necessity must be felt, if these frightful Bodies made the Reimbursement
mentioned, since the Sun and Planets as recruited all at once, or in a very
short time, of all the loss they have suffered in their Fluids for many Years
before,) that I am afraid no such benign Influences, are to be expected from
them. I readily grant, that there may be some Clouds of Vapors sweep'd off the
Tails of these Comets, by the Sun and Planets as they approach them. But then
it is uncertain of what Nature these Vapors are, for every Vapor will not
become a Fluid, unless its Parts be of such a determined Figure and Size as the
Nature of Fluids require. Now it is certain, that Heat will raise any Body into
a Vapor, provided it be sufficient to dissolve the Union of its Parts, and
increase their Bulk to a necessary Dimension: Moreover its hardly accountable
how the Sun should draw from thence only the Fluid of Light, the Earth, that of
Water, the other Planets their proper Fluids; or if they were supposed to draw
all promiscuously, how these Effects can answer the Design, since Water in the
Sun, which wanted only more of the Fluid of Light, would be as improper a
Guest, as Fire on the Earth which wanted only more Water. I think it is more
probable, that these frightful Bodies are the Ministers of Divine Justice, and
in their Visits, lend us Benign or Noxious Vapors, according to the Designs of
Providence: that they may have brought, and may still bring about, the great
Catastrophes of our System, by raising of Tides, changing the Figures, and the
Positions of the Planets, and the very Nature of the Orbits themselves: and
that they may be the Habitation of Animals in a state of Punishment; which, if
it did not look too national, there are many Arguments to render not
improbable. But as for the Diminution of the Quantity of Fluids in the Sun and
Planets, it is certainly so small and so inconsiderable (though still it be
someting) that it will never be sensible in any finite Number of Years, and so
needs not so magnificent of Light, I do believe it may be demonstrated, that if
all the Fluid which the Sun loses in a Year were brought into a solid Form, it
would not equal a Grain of Sand. Now what is that to the vast Body of the Sun?
And as for the Fluids on our Globe, though some of them be reduced into a solid
Form, yet upon Examination it will be found that most of the same is again
dissolved into a Fluid; for in all Animals and Vegetables, the Matter is plain;
and as for Minerals and Metals, I doubt much, whether there be very many new
Productions or Generations of that kind, since their first Production. So that
though there be some loss of Fluids on our Globe, yet there is store enough to
supply all the Uses of Life and Vegetation, for any finite number of Years; and
by the Frame, and Make of this our System, it does not seem designed to last
for ever, without some considerable Changes.

As to the Comets, I have little more to say about them, than what I have
already said, their Nature, Orbits, Motions and Situations, have been so lately
determined, (indeed it is but of late, that the Astronomy of the Planets
themselves, and their Satellits has been brought to any tolerable Perfection,
and much later since final Causes have been cultivated, with that Care becoming
so noble and about 'em extant, so few of 'em, that we know of, have visited us
twice, that we have scarce any solid Foundation to build our Reasoning upon.
Only, as I have before hinted, these blazing Stars seem not designed for the
Habitation of Animals in a State of Happiness, nay even scarce of Animals not
under a State of Punishment; they may be the first Rudiments of Planets, not as
yet brought into our System, or rather the Ruins of some banished thence, to
wander in these long Eccentrick Orbits, through the World. But most likely they
are the Ministers of Divine Justice, sending baneful Steams, from their long
Trains, upon the Planets, they come nigh; and if what is commonly said of 'em
by Astrologers be true, they seldom visit us without some such direful
Salutation. However, from them we may learn that the Divine Vengeance, may find
a Seat for the Punishment of his disobedient Creatures, without being put to
the Expense of a new Creation.'

When I see a vast Comet, blazing and rolling about the unmeasurable Ether, I
will think;

'Who can tell, but I now see a wicked World made a fiery Oven in the Time of
the Anger of GOD! The Lord swallowing them up in his Wrath and the Fire
devouring them!

What prodigious Mischief and Ruin might such a Ball of Confusion bring upon
our sinful Globe, if the Great GOD order its Approach unto us.

How happy they, that are in the Favor and Friendship of that Glorious Lord,
who knows how to deliver the Pious out of Distresses, and reserve the Unjust
for a Punishment of a Day of Judgment.

-- Si fractus illabatur Orbis,
Impavidum ferient Ruin.
A Synopsis of certain Matters relating to the Planets, as they are determined
by the latest and most accurate Astronomers.
The Distance from the Sun, in English Miles.
Of Mercury Miles 32,000,000 Venus 59,000,000 The Earth 81,000,000 Mars
123,000,000 Jupiter 424,000,000 Saturn 777,000,000

The Diameter in English Miles.
Of Mercury Miles 4,240 Venus 7,906 The Earth 7,935 Mars 4,444 Jupiter 81,155
Saturn 67,870 The Sun 763,460

The Time of the Periodick Revolution.
Days Hours Of Mercury 87 23 Venus 224 17 The Earth 365 6 Mars 686 23 Jupiter
4,332 12 Saturn 10,759 7

Mr. Derham's ACCOUNT of their Magnitude.
Saturn has an Orb of 1,641,526,386 English Miles Diameter, Jupiter an Orb of
895,134,000 Miles. Mars an Orb of 262,282,910 Miles Venus an Orb of 124,487,114
Miles. Mercury an Orb of 66,621,000 Miles.

