Dr. Colman ON Satan's fiery Darts IN Blasphemous Suggestions.

THE Case of Satan's fiery Darts IN Blasphemous Suggestions AND Hellish
Annoyances: As they were considered in Several SERMONS, Heretofore preached to
the Congregation in Brattle-Street, Boston, May 1711. and lately repeated to
them May 1743.

By Benjamin Colman, D. D. Pastor of said CHURCH.

And now published at the Desire of some, who having suffered by such
Temptations, would thus (by the Will of GOD) minister to the Direction and
Support of Others in like spiritual Trouble and Distress.

Romans xvi. 20. The GOD of Peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet shortly: The
Grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST be with you: Amen.

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for J. EDWARDS in Cornhill. 1744.

Satan's fiery Darts, IN Blasphemous Suggestions, AND Hellish Annoyances.
JOB II. 9, 10. Then said his Wife unto him, Do thou still retain thine
Integrity? curse GOD and die: But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the
foolish Women speaks; what? shall we receive good at the Hand of GOD, and
shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his Lips.


WE have heard of the Patience of Job, and seen the End of the LORD; which some
excellent Expositors have said was to give an early and illustrious Type of the
Humiliation of CHRIST, and his Sufferings, in his Way to Glory and Exaltation,
as our Intercessor at the right Hand of GOD.

Among the many excelling Examples and Patterns given us through the Holy
Scriptures, of Suffering Affliction and Patience, no One is more remarkable,
noble and illustrious, teaching and affecting than that of JOB'S; in the
surprising first and second Assault of Satan upon his Family, Estate and Person.

The Sovereign and gracious GOD had proved his Grace in this his Servant in a
long prosperous State; and now was pleased to make a sudden Change upon him,
for an equal Display of the Power and Glory of his Grace in a State of deepest
Affliction.

Satan was greedy of a Permission to tempt and sift him, as he afterward was to
try Peter. The cruel Devil spoiled him of his Substance, and bereaved him of
his Children and Servants in one Day; and that in so terrible and judicial a
Manner as might speak most dreadfully the immediate Hand and utmost Indignation
of Heaven: But failing of his Wish, hereby to provoke him to curse GOD; he
asked a further Permission to smite his Body from Head to Foot, with Boils and
fiery Ulcers, extremely painful and tormenting, as well as filthy and
loathsome. It was the Pleasure of Sovereign Grace, to permit this also, that
the Trial of Faith in his chosen Servant might be found to Praise and Honor
and Glory through all Generations of the Church on Earth, and at the Day of the
Coming of CHRIST to Judgment.

But no Word amiss falling from the afflicted Saint, in this his destitute and
tormented State; no Words but of profound Humility, Resignation, Worship and
Thanksgiving, dropping from his Lips; the subtle Tempter having spent all his
outward Forces, betook himself to his hellish Craft and Policy, and annoyed his
gracious Soul with diabolical Suggestions and blasphemous Thoughts against GOD;
to second him in which he excited his Wife, whom the spiteful Fiend seems to
have left to him on Design to make her his Tempter and Tormentor. -- So he
afterward grieved our blessed SAVIOR; against whom not prevailing by more
immediate Assaults in the Wilderness, he used the unwary and rash Lips of
Peter, and got him that just Rebuke, "Get thee behind me, Satan.

Her Words in my Text are very gross, and smell rank of Hell; Then said his
Wife to him, Do thou still retain thy Integrity? curse GOD and die.

I am not ignorant that the Hebrew is capable of another Sense, and that some
make it a Piece of gracious Advice, "Bless God, and expire: But I adhere to our
Translation, which perfectly agrees with Job's Reply to her; Thou speak as a
foolish Woman! What, shall we receive Good at the Hand of GOD, and shall we not
receive Evil?

Some think her Words spoken in Way of profane Sarcasm, from a vexed and enraged
Heart; q. d. Yes, keep on blessing GOD! for what I pray! for Plagues and Want?
and to what Fruit? to perish praising! persist then, and die as a Fool dies.
-- But more simply taken, and as our Translators give 'em, they are a Piece of
profane and furious Counsel; cast off thy Reverence of the DIVINE MAJESTY, and
dare to reproach that GOD who can deal so hardly and unjustly by thee;
notwithstanding all thy religious Services and Worship, thy Devotion and
Integrity; Curse him though thou die for it; curse and provoke him to strike thee
dead at once, and put an End to all thy Misery.

I confess this Sense sounds very horrid! but not beyond the Devil; who dared
to demand of the SON OF GOD himself, to fall down and worship him: And as HE
then turned and rebuked the Tempter and drove him away; " Get thee hence Satan!
Math. iv. 10. So Job in the Spirit and Strength of his REDEEMER turned to his
Wife and rebuked her; Thou speak as a foolish wicked Woman! What? shall we
receive Good at the Hand of GOD, and shall we not receive Evil?

These are Words of high and merited Anger and severe Reproof; but like those
of the Archangel when contending with the Devil, there is no railing in them:
The holy Man kept a Guard on his Lips, though no doubt his Soul was pierced with
Horror at her Words. He detested the impious Motion, and rejected it with
Abhorrence, without a Moment's Hesitation. He might well call her a foolish
Woman, rash and inconsiderate, and also profane; as the Fool m^an^ in the
Phrase of Scripture. -- And then he more mildly argues with her; yet with a
sufficient Resentment: What? shall we receive Good, and so much Good as we have
done, in a long Course of high worldly Prosperity! and shall we not receive
Evil? even such Evils, so many and mighty ones together; and breaking in upon
us all at once, bereaving us of Children and Household, Substance and Estate,
Ease and Health; in such sudden and awful Manner. Can any Thing be wrong or
unjust that a good GOD orders to befall us? The Evil of Affliction comes from
Him now, as much as all the Affluence of worldly Prosperity that has heretofore
distinguished us! and weigh now the one against the other; what Good we have
received all the Days of our Life, and comparatively how few and light
Afflictions; and then say, if we ought not to bear silently and patiently, and
with adoring Submission, the Evils which He now pleases to lay upon us?

This was Job's gracious Way of Reasoning; these Thoughts had kept his own
Spirit calm, and with the same he would lay the roil'd Spirit of his Wife, and
stop her muttering and blaspheming Mouth. -- The Good and the Evil of this Life
are both from GOD; his Sovereignty (abstracted from every other Consideration)
accounts for both in our State of Trial: The least of the Good is not deserved,
the Evil is all merited and much more; the Good is much more for Kind, Measure
and Continuance, through our whole Lives, than the Evil; the Good is at least
necessary and what we could not subsist without, the Evil what may be lived
under and outlived. The most common Mercies of this Life are usually the
greatest and most needful. The Good is not only for Necessity, but also for
Delight; the Evil is no more than we need, and what we could not do well
without: The Evil and the Good both come according to GOD's
Covenant-Faithfulness to his own People; the Evil is improvable to the best
Good, and it is the Will and Meaning of GOD that we so improve it; and (to have
done) the Good which we receive from the Hand of GOD does not always give to
particular Graces an equal Luster, as does the Evil. -- Should we not then
receive the Evil in this State of our Trial and Probation? Surely it is
calculated for it; the Honor of GOD requires it; there are passive Graces
which our fallen State calls for the Exercise of; and CHRIST the Captain of our
Salvation was made perfect through Suffering.

But to return. -- In the Words of my Text we have one of the most diabolical
Motions that was ever (...) to a holy Soul against the blessed GOD; and also
(...) the noblest Resentments that such a Soul is capable of. No Wonder
therefore that we find so express and (...) a Divine Approbation of Job's
gracious and holy (...) to his Wife's outrageous Words: " In all this did not
(...) sin with this Lips.

Satan assaulted him by her: He used and acted (...), and spoke by her Lips: So
in the Beginning he bega^^e^ Eve, and by her prevailed on Adam. It is one of
his cursed Policies which he yet continues to assault us in the weakest Place,
and by them we love. He sends Temptations by unsuspected Hands; theirs that
have most Interest in us and Influence upon us. Profaness in such a Relative,
or Discontent, Passion, Rage in 'em, is an unknown (yet too well known)
Provocation to Evil.

The cursed Motion in the Text is 1. to hard Thought^ of the blessed GOD and
his holy Providence; and 2. (...) outrageous and blasphemous Words: "Do thou
still retain thy Integrity? curse GOD and die! What could be more furious and
extravagant, impious and detestable. Well might he with Horror hear, and spue
out the hell^^^ Suggestion with high Indignation and Detestation; and well is
the Judgment of GOD given strongly in his Favor, on his doing so. GOD
justifies and honors (...) GOD acquits and absolves him, upon a first and
second ^^ery Trial. He approved himself to be the perfect (...) upright Man. By
not offending in Word, Jam. iii. 2* (...) an impatient Word fell from him,
under so many s^^p^ising Blows and Breaches upon his Person, (...) Estate not a
Word, but of Humiliation and (...) when urged to Rebellion by all the ^orce and
(...) of Hell: moved as he was to curse, he s^^ll (...) blessing; the cursed
Suggestion entered only his (...) into his Soul; that abhorred from it.

Let the DOCTRINE therefore, for our Ins^r^^^^^^ (...) Warning, and also for
Comfort and Support (...) may be Occasion, be this,

"That many of GOD's dear Children are often annoyed with cursed and diabolical
Suggestions, which He will never reckon to them as their Sin, because they do
in their Souls abhor and reject them with utmost Detestation.

This was Job's Case, and so it is of many a gracious Saint in our own Time: We
see 'em terrified and pierced with hellish Suggestions, which they abhor, and
are ready to shriek out at: they look on 'em as their own Wickedness, and so at
themselves as Devils almost: they loathe themselves on this Account, and cry to
GOD for Deliverance, and are in Anguish, that ever such foul Thoughts should
have Access to them, and as they apprehend lodge within them: But what says my
Text to 'em? even as GOD in it did to Job; "in all this they have not sinned.

I am then in the following Discourse to speak to these three Propositions: 1.
That the most upright and dearest of the Children of GOD in his Church on
Earth, may be sometimes annoyed and tormented with some of the most cursed and
diabolical Suggestions, most injurious and dishonorable to the blessed GOD. 2.
That these hellish Thoughts and Injections should be most grievous and abhorred
to their holy Souls, and rejected with utmost Detestation. 3. That then they
are not their Sin, nor will ever be imputed to them by the Holy GOD.


I. The dearest of GOD's Children in his Church on Earth may be at Times
annoyed and terrified, pursued and haunted by some of the most cursed and
diabolical Suggestions, most injurious and dishonorable to the blessed GOD.

If Job suffered thus in his Day, why not the most dear and pleasant Child of
GOD in ours? Who among us shall be exempt from this, or any other Kind of fiery
Trial? Nay, a greater than Job presents HIMSELF to us in the Front of the New
Testament: Matthew. iv. 1. Then was JESUS led up of the SPIRIT into the
Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil: And when the Tempter came to Him he
said, If thou be the SON OF GOD --! And again, If thou will fall down down and
worship me! -- Then JESUS says unto him, " Get thee hence Satan. What an
impudent, impure and damnable Motion was this of the Devil's to the SON OF THE
HIGHEST when He took the Likeness of sinful Flesh! Not only was he moved to
distrust and tempt GOD, but even to worship the Devil. "Surely then there can
be no Sin so foul and monstrous, but the best of Saints may be tempted to it.
And whom may not Satan use as a Tempter to another, when the Wife of Job was so
abused by him, and afterward the Lips of Peter to blaspheme the Purpose and
Decree of GOD, respecting the Sufferings of CHRIST, as unjust and impossible,
to the very Face of CHRIST, and in the Presence of his Fellow-Apostles; Matthew.
xvi. 22. For he seems not so to have taken him aside, as to ^e out of their
Sight and Observation, if out of hearing.
before whom he received a like Rebuke that the Devil had in the Wilderness;
"Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an Offense to me; for thou savourest not
the Things that be of GOD.

When we consider Satan's using Job's Wife to vex his righteous Soul, and draw
him into Sin and Rebellion against GOD; it forces into our Remembrance his
Malice and Subtilty from the Beginning, when he took the Form of the Serpent in
his first Temptation, so fatal to Mankind through all Generations. The Woman
was first in the Transgression; the Devil gat into her, and by her into Adam;
he shocked her by a horrid Suggestion against the Goodness and Truth of GOD and
prevailed! Has God indeed said (said the blasphemous lying Spirit) ye shall not
eat, least ye die? Whereas he knows that in the Day you eat, your Eyes will be
opened, and you will be like HIMSELF for Knowledge and Understanding. The
malicious and false Fiend suggests to her, that from Ill Will and Envy GOD had
forbid them the delicious and improving Fruit, and that the Threatening, by
which he had ^^^^rain'd them, was a Lie. In all his modern Temptations he takes
the same Course; "he questions the Precept, he denies the Danger, and he
suggests some great ^^vantage. So the Devil began with belying and re^^^aching
the blessed GOD, to alienate Man's Heart from him.

I might mention two Instances more, which are famous in Scripture Story, of
the Wives of good Men, used by the Devil to tempt them into ill Thoughts of
GOD. The first is that of Zipporah to Moses, when she was terrified into the
Circumcision of her Son; for she saw her Husband struck sick on his Journey,
and threatened with ^^ath for the Omission, and hereby disabled for the Duty;
^he therefore cast the Foreskin at his Feet and said, " A (...) Husband art
thou to me. This is vulgarly interpr^^^d in Way of Passion and Wrath; and for
ought I know it is the right Sense of the Words, after all the (...) Criticism
that has been bestowed on them, to make them bear another Sense. Now, in this
literal Sense, -- (...) Moses was a bloody Husband for obliging her to ^^e^ute
the Command of GOD in that bleeding Rite of C^^cumcision; then what a bloody
Imputation is here ^^^gested against the good GOD, that He should insti^^^^ and
require it, as the Sign and Seal of his Covenant, threaten now to spill the
Blood of Moses for his daring to ^mit it so long, from his Indulgence to her!
If this (...) the real Meaning and Language of angry Zipporah, (...) a virulent
Repr^ach do her Words imply against GOD and his gracious Law?

The other Instance I pointed at is Michal the Wife of (...), when show saw him
in his Transport of holy Zeal and Joy dancing before the Ark of GOD: She
blasphe^ed the religious Act as lewd and shameful; and as if it were below the
Dignity and State of the King of Israel ^o ^isrobe and uncover himself so
before the DIVINE MA^^S^Y. -- Was it Michal's Pride, or was it Satan's Envy and
Rage, that we must impute these Reproaches against GOD unto? Doubtless she was
possessed, the Devil was in her, and he filled her Heart with Contempt, and her
Mouth with Railings. She vilify'd GOD and his Ark, in reviling David, his Zeal
and Devotion; and GOD laid her under Reproach, and made her vile for the rest
of her Life.

But to return again: The Devil needs no Instruments by whom to tempt: He has
Access to our Minds, if GOD do not restrain and forbid him, to raise and move
evil Thoughts in us. He shoots his fiery Darts, and they enter we know not how;
but we feel 'em pierce and fasten in our Souls. For how one Spirit acts on
another we know not; but this we know, that Satan can fill the Heart against
the HOLY GHOST; as in the Case of Ananias and Sapphira.

Sometimes the Devil has hurried poor Souls with Atheistical Thoughts; for he
finds an evil Heart of Unbelief within us, and foments it at Times, to high
Degrees of Infidelity; so as not only to question the Mystery of the Trinity,
and therein of JESUS, GOD manifest in Flesh; but also the very Being and
incomprehensible necessary Perfections of the DEITY; his Eternity, perfect
Prescience and Decrees; which are indeed as the thick Darkness, or rather
unapproachable Light wherein the ETERNAL dwells; and into which it may be the
Angels of Heaven are no more allowed to pry with any Thought of searching them
out, than the Church of old in the Wilderness was permitted to come near unto
the Bounds about the Mount to gaze; into which if they had looked, what could
they have seen but Cloud and Lightning?

The Word and Providence of GOD are also special Objects of Satan's furious
Attack, in his Assaulting the Faith and Love of GOD's Saints. And herein he
does by the Members, as he did by the HEAD, in the forty Days of our LORD'S
Temptation.

Thus Asaph was almost born away headlong into Unbelief and Despondency; though
he had thrown out his strong Anchor and Cable, Truly GOD is good to Israel,
even to them that are of a clean Heart! Yet could he scarce outride the furious
Storm: Psalm. lxxiii. -- But as for me, my Feet were almost gone, for I was
envious at the foolish, when I saw the Prosperity of the Wicked: -- Verily I
have cleansed my Heart in vain, and washed my Hands in Innocence! But should I
speak thus, I shall offend against the Generation of thy Children! -- Yet was
my Heart grieved and I was pricked in my Reins; so foolish was I and ignorant,
I was even as a Beast before Thee! For never the less I am continually with
thee, thou have holden me by my right Hand; and whom have I in Heaven but Thee,
and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee, etc.

The Rage and Blasphemy of the Devil is especially spent against the
Faithfulness and Truth of GOD, in his Promises and Threatenings: he inrages the
wicked very often by accursed Misrepresentations of the one, and would drive
the Godly into Despondencies and Desperation, by impudent Denials of the other.
He has a furious Antipathy to that Name of GOD which is the strong Tower of the
righteous, and into which they are ever flying; for in it all his Glory passes
before sinful Man; Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7. The LORD, the LORD GOD, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth; keeping Mercy for
Thousands, etc. The Devil stabs a Child of GOD to the Heart, and pierces him in
the most sensible and tender Part, while he reproaches him, and makes him but
seem to doubt the Goodness and Truth of GOD, his Covenant-Kindness and
Faithfulness. No Wonder therefore if we find the most Eminent Saints on holy
Record thus afflicted and tormented by the Blasphemer and Avenger. -- As Job
was thus outrag'd in my Text, so were David and Asaph and Heman in their times,
long after; for the Tempter is the same to all that are living godly in every
Age; as they are much the same in respect of Faith and Infirmity* David tells
us in Psalm xlii. how he went mourning because of the Oppression of the Enemy,
who insultingly reproached him from Day to Day, "Where is thy GOD? It was a
Sword in his Bones, more for the Name of his GOD than the Scorn cast on
himself; the Voice of Him that reproacheth and blasphemeth! why art thou cast
down O my Soul, and why disquieted within me? hope thou in GOD, for I shall yet
praise Him. -- Asaph was a like suffering Saint by like violent Temptations to
Despondency; Psalm. lxxvii. His Sore ran in the Night and ceased not; his Soul
refused to be comforted; he remembered GOD (his Name, Perfections, Promises and
Works) and yet his Trouble remained or increased; his Spirit was overwhelmed
while it made diligent Search; "Will the LORD cast off forever? and will he be
favorable no more? is his MERCY clean gone forever, and does his PROMISE fail
forevermore? has GOD forgotten to be gracious, has he in Anger shut up his
tender Mercies? -- I said, this is my Infirmity, I will remember the Years of
the right Hand of the most High! Thy Way is in the Sea, thy Path as in the
great Waters, and thy Footsteps are not known. -- Heman also was a Man of like
Sorrows, and of like Faith and Devotion: He has given us a Psalm of Instruction
to Souls in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the Deeps; Psalm. lxxxviii. " O LORD
GOD of my Salvation, I have cried Day and Night before Thee; let my Prayer come
before thee, incline thine Ear unto my Cry; for my Soul is full of Troubles,
and my Life draws nigh unto the Grave; -- why castest thou off my Soul, why
hidest thou thy Face from me? LORD, I have called dai^y upon thee, I have
stretched out my Hands to thee; and st^^l in the Morning shall my Prayer
prevent thee: After all the Tossings of the Night, the Light of the Morning
shall find me praying.

In fine, it has often been the Complaint of humble and gracious Persons, that
they have found themselves annoyed with unaccountable irreverent, foolish,
vile, filthy, base, abominable Thoughts; They know not what, how or why! but
they seem to buzz about 'em like Swarms of Flies, or break about 'em like
Sparkles of Fire; more especially when they would set themselves to meditate
and pray, and have their Minds most solemn and composed and close with GOD in
holy Exercises. -- Now what shall we say to these Satanical Molestations and
Disturbances? On the Serpent's part it is more easy to account for it, from his
Spite and Malignity against GOD and his Grace; but on the part of GOD, his
Permission of Baalzebub herein, and the holy Ends of his gracious Government;
it may be more difficult for us to conceive aright.

1. On the part of Satan it is obvious to account for it from his implacable
Hatred of GOD, and of Souls recovering into his Holiness and Favor; from which
he is himself utterly and forever excluded. He hates GOD because of his
Holiness, and for his righteous Judgment, his Power and Vengeance; which it is
his Torment to think of, and know it coming on him. So when the fierce Devils,
"exceeding fierce from the Tombs, whither they had driven the two possessed,
beheld their Judge, the HOLY ONE OF GOD in their Way, and were corrected by his
Power and stopped; Matthew. viii. 29. They cried out saying, "What have we to do
with thee; JESUS thou Son of GOD! art thou come to torment us before the Time?
It is the Devil's Torment to behold Angels or Men holy and happy, while he is
miserable. He hates GOD because he is unlike him, and under his Wrath; he
spitefully hates to see GOD served and glorified by others; he would pollute
and damn our Souls, that we may be as he is, impure and odious to GOD. He
affects a Kingdom of his own on Earth, in Opposition to the Kingdom of GOD and
of Grace. He could not bear to see Man in Paradise, and be himself in Hell; to
see Adam in the Likeness and Love of GOD and worshipping before Him, and
himself cast from those Felicities. Cursed in his Rage on this Account, beyond
a common damned Ghost I may suppose, he wishes for Millions and Worlds to
follow by his Means into the State of eternal Miseries; and having beguiled our
miserable first Parent into an Apostasy from GOD, and finding himself only the
more damned, and a SAVIOR revealed for the Sons of Men; and Him a singular and
eminent SEED of that very Woman whom he had deceived into Sin and Misery; his
Envy and Hatred against all her natural Seed, but more especially against the
blessed and promised ONE Himself, and those that should believe on his Name,
has been so inflamed -- that as a roaring Lion he drives through the World, (and
is going up and down in it, which are his own Words) seeking whom he may
devour; And whom he cannot destroy he loves to distress, affright and scare,
terrify and wound; or worry if he cannot rend; and no wonder if he roar the
more, when he sees and cannot reach his Prey; as in the Case of Job, and Souls
upright like him: -- Or like a Dog rather he goes about the City, and haunts
the Villages like the Wolf by night; grinning and barking at the Flock of
CHRIST and his Lambs, whose Blood he thirsts after. So the HOLY GHOST has
represented to us our Adversary the Devil, 1 Peter v. 8. shown us our Enemy and
Danger: So that on the Tempter's part it is easy to say, why he annoys Souls
with his hellish Suggestions against the blessed GOD; he hates both GOD and
them, and desires nothing more than to see GOD dishonored and them polluted,
that they may be damned. -- This was his Wish and Hope in his Attempt on holy
Job; to bring the Man of boasted Integrity to curse his GOD; and for the same
Reason he desired to have the Sifting of Peter who was too ready to boast in
himself; though all Men forsake thee, yet will not I: Luke xxii. 31. Satan has
desired to have thee, to sift thee as Wheat: to have him for his own if it
might be, and carry him off an easy Prey, if CHRIST had not prayed for him that
his Faith should not fail; but if that may not be, he desires however by
winnowing to shake and toss him furiously, and show his Chaff.

In short, as Dr. Tillotson has it: Malice against GOD and Envy to Men account
for Satan's Tempting us; to spoil (if he can) GOD of his Subjects and debauch
them from their Allegiance, into his own Condemnation, Malignity and Misery. --
A Ghost in Hell does not presently commence Devil, in this Height of Malignity
against GOD and Cruelty toward Fellow-Sinners; if we may take Leave to form an
Idea to our selves by the Words which the Parable puts into the Mouth of the
rich Man there; Nay Father Abraham, but if one went to them from the Dead they
would repent! Send Lazarus therefore to my Father's House, for I have five
Brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they come also into this Place of
Torment! -- The best Thing, I suppose, that was ever intimated with Respect to
a lost Soul in Hell: but such a parabolical Representation means not to affirm
any Thing with Respect to Hell itself, but only to affect and move the Bowels
of Sinners, to themselves and others, in our present State of Probation and
Repentance.

2. It may be more difficult for us to dive into the wise and holy Ends of GOD,
in his Permission of these fiery Assaults of Satan upon the Children of his
Love.

It was a most dark Dispensation to pious Job and his Friends, when it was his
Case: his Wife broke out even into Blasphemy upon it, and his Friends afterward
rent their Garments, and sat down by him silent and astonished, wailing and in
Fears: It amazed Job himself under the Conscience of his Integrity; and it
threw his Friends into horrid Tears and Suspicions of some heinous Iniquity by
which he had provoked the Wrath and Judgment of GOD in so many and heavy
Instances of it at once: But while He now stands in the Eyes of some, as the
Hero of an inspired Epic. Poem, Sir Richard Blackmore.
brave in Distress, valiant in Affliction, maintaining his Character for Virtue
and Piety under the most powerful Temptations, and exasperating Provocations,
that the Malice of Hell could invent; let us take a more adoring View of the
End of the LORD herein; to represent unto his Chosen and Sanctified through all
Generations, in every Part of his visible Church; that he should in like
Manner, here and there, call one and another of them, as unto single Combat
with the Enemy of their Salvation; arming 'em beforehand with the Shield of
Faith, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Sword of the Spirit, whereby they
should be able to quench the fiery Darts of the wicked One; and stand as Job
did in the evil Day, and come off Conquerors and more than Conquerors through
JESUS that has loved them. Ephesians. vi. 10, 11, 12. Romans viii. 37, 38.

1. The Sovereignty of GOD must set us down silent under such astonishing
Dispensations, Trials and Exercises of his most gracious Saints; nor may his
Will, Wisdom, Goodness and Faithfulness be doubted, questioned or disputed by
Them or others. It was (without Doubt) the Error of Job and his Friends that
they entered so far into an Argument and Dispute about the Reasons of the
Divine Conduct respecting him; which may seem too much verging toward a Saying
unto GOD, what do thou? or why have thou done this? which who shall say?
Eccles. viii. 4. Therefore Job and his Friends received no other Answer from
Heaven, either first by Elihu who spoke under a Divine Impulse and Inspiration,
nor afterward by the more immediate Voice out of the Whirlwind, but the
unaccountable Greatness, Majesty and most certainly wise and perfect Dominion
and Government of GOD most High and Holy. All Flesh must be silent before Him;
be dumb and not open their Mouth because GOD does it! be still and know that it
is of GOD; like Aaron hold their Peace, like Eli say " It is the LORD! -- Job
and his Friends did but darken Counsel by Words without Knowledge, while they
were ready to fix one Rule and Measure in all Providential Dispensations. We
are let into the Secret and Reason in the Case of Job, that we may learn to
rest satisfied in the Will of GOD, and the Dispositions of Providence, whatever
befalls our selves or others. GOD is wise and holy, and his Work perfect, in all
Things that respect either his Children or his Enemies. We may neither say, "
Why does the Way of the Wicked prosper? Or wherefore does GOD seem to look
favorably upon the Way of them that deal treacherously? And why do they devour
the Man that is more righteous? without laying down to our selves, and that
strongly, an immovable Foundation, as the Prophet does, Hab. i. 12.13. " Art
thou not from Everlasting, O LORD my GOD, my HOLY ONE? thou art of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity. So when the Prophet Jeremiah was ready to have pleaded
with GOD, and was tempted to talk with him of his Judgments, he was inspired
first to lay down this Principle, never to be departed from, but ever kept in
Mind, " righteous art thou O LORD!

2. As GOD will not suffer his upright Servants to be tempted above what they
are able to bear, but will with the Temptation find a Way for their Escape, so
his gracious Purpose in permitting Satan's fiery Assaults on their Souls, is to
glorify his Grace in their holy bearing and resisting them, and so by the
Weakness of Man to make the Triumphs of Grace the more glorious over the
Subtlety, Malice and Wrath of Satan. So it was in the Conflict of Job, -- "Let
me try his boasted Grace (said the Tempter) and he will curse thee to thy Face;
"He is in thy Hand (said GOD) and my Grace in him shall triumph gloriously over
thy Spite and Power. Therefore when he held fast his Integrity under the first
Scene of dreadful Trials, the ALMIGHTY even gloried in him over his false and
cruel Enemy, Job ii. 3. " And still he holds fast his Integrity; although
thou movedst me against him. And in the Record of these Sufferings and Patience
of Job, the Grace of GOD is glorified to his Church forever in the Power, the
Riches and Alsufficiency thereof. The perfect Man came out of his first and
second Fire, as the three Worthies did out of the fiery Furnace, without the
least Smell upon him, or his Raiment so much as scorched: And as the LORD GOD
OF HOSTS, the GOD of Israel was magnified in the Sight of Nebuchadnezzar and
all the Princes of his vast Empire, in the one Miracle of Power; so is the
Power of Faith, Patience, Penitence, Adoration, Submission glorified to the
Saints of GOD in all Ages by the History of Job; and perpetual Glory is
rendered by the Church on his Account from Age to Age. And how abundantly
crowned then is that Trial of Faith, whatever it be, by manifold Temptations
for a Season, though it be tried by Fire, which shall be found to Praise Honor
and Glory unto the Day of Christ, and in that glorious Day, and unto all
Eternity? -- Thus has the LORD set apart some for Himself! And "they shall be
mine says the LORD in the Day when I make up my Jewels! "Thou shall tread upon
the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under
Foot! because he has set his Love upon me, (and shown it by trusting in me)
therefore will I deliver him; I will set him on High, because he has known my
Name; he shall call upon me and I will answer him; I will be with him in
Trouble, I will deliver him and honor him: Psalm xci. Thus GOD did by his
Servant Job, and so he often glorifies his Grace in the suffering Members of a
tempted Savior, that they may glorify him, by being Types of Him.

3. Satan may be permitted to distress the Souls of GOD's Children by his foul
Suggestions, to show them the Corruption that is in them by Nature, and the sad
Remains of it after their Regeneration, their Weakness and Danger, and absolute
Dependence in their best Estate on his free Grace for Preservation and Safety.
GOD lets 'em see what they are liable to, and capable of, if he should leave
'em; what Enemies beset them and whither they would hurry 'em. GOD shows 'em
Themselves and effectually abases 'em, makes 'em low and vile in their own
Eyes, fills 'em with Shame and Fear, and makes 'em to know that they are but
Dust and Pollution: This makes 'em watch and pray with a holy Jealousy of
themselves, lest as Satan beguiled Eve he prevail over them her Offspring,
conceived in Sin, and shapen in Iniquity. GOD brings them to Despair in
themselves, and to trust only in CHRIST for Righteousness and Strength, for
present as well as future and eternal Salvation. Psalm xvii. 7, 8, 9. Show thy
mavelous Loving Kindness, O thou that savest by thy right Hand them which put
their Trust in Thee, from those that rise up against them: Keep me as the Apple
of the Eye, hide me under the Shadow of thy Wings; from the Wicked that oppress
me, from my deadly Enemies that compass me about! like as a Lion that is greedy
of his Prey, -- arise O LORD, disappoint him, cast him down.

Satan sees the natural Profaness, Atheism and Infidelity of our evil Hearts;
that there are the Seeds of all Impiety, Blasphemy and Malignity in us, he
makes his Advantage of this natural Propensity in us, and while he watches to
inflame the Soul from within it self, GOD frustrates him in his mischievous
Device, by discovering to the Soul its own native Viciousness and Impurity;
with its absolute Need of the Succors of Almighty Grace; and that
self-loathing and abhorring, with Fear and Trembling, it must only go and cast
it self upon sovereign Mercy: Psalm cxliii. I flee unto Thee to hide me,
quicken me O LORD for thy Name Sake; for thy Righteousness sake bring my Soul
out of Trouble; and of thy Mercy cut off mine Enemies, and destroy all them
that afflict my Soul; for I am thy Servant. Thus the Result of all is,

4. GOD permits and uses the foul and furious Assaults of Satan upon the Souls
of his Children unto the most kind and gracious Event and Issue, to be truly
the Means of a great Increase of Grace in them, and of their Establishment and
Perseverance in Grace, and very often of much Light and Comfort, Peace and Joy
in believing. The grievous Chastning yields the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness to them that are exercised thereby; wherefore lift up the Hands
that hang down and the feeble Knees; and make strait Paths for your Feet; lest
that which is lame be turned out of the Way, but rather let it be healed.

The Temptation in it self tends only to defile and pollute, but GOD makes it
purifying; its natural and designed Tendency is only to darken and torture, but
GOD turns the Shadows of Death into the Light of the Morning. It has been, I
doubt not, the first Means of saving Conversion to many a Soul, the Means also
of Growth and Increase to many a regenerate Person, and the Forerunner of a
confirmed Peace to many a happy Penitent and true Believer in CHRIST. I say,

1. The Means of the first saving effectual Conviction and true Awakening to
many a Sinner. GOD holds the Devil in those Chains of Darkness as to make him
against his Will, and contrary to his own wicked Design, to serve and minister
in bringing some of his Elect into a saving Fight to the Blood of CHRIST, and
Subjection to him as Prince and Savior. So the Shepherd uses the barking of
his Dog to bring back a stray Sheep to the Fold. " The wicked is snared in the
Work of his own Hands; Higgaion Selah! i. e. put a special Remark on this; it
is a Point that deserves our deepest Attention. Psalm. ix. 16.

Satan would not choose (we may well think) to disrest a Soul that is at Ease in
Sin, but rather would soothe and rock him into a sounder Sleep: but the Tempter
may be so infatuated at times, for ought we know, as to raise those Fears and
Horrors in some under their first (and but common) Conviction, which he can
never lay again, and which free Grace makes to issue in their saving
Conversion. Or rather may we not think, that GOD having awakened the Soul, and
Satan fearing to lose his hold of it, his Rage is over ruled to promote and
carry on the good Work of GOD begun, and to drive the Soul faster and closer to
its SAVIOR.

2. It may be a more sensible and evident thing in the Kingdom of GOD'S Grace
within Men, that the Assaults of Hell upon them are frequently made the Means
of Increase in Grace, and of the Progress of Sanctification. The Tempter
attempts, again and again, to blast the Work of Grace begun, to bring it to a
stop, to deter and dishearten the pious Soul in its Way: there is a Lion in the
street, an Adder in the Path! desist or turn back! -- but GOD turns the
affrighting Suggestion to Unbelief and Despondency, into an Alarm unto Faith,
holy Fear, Prayer and Fortitude; so that what was meant to affright astonish
and deter, is made to quicken unto Prayer, Watchfulness and Diligence, in a
more earnest Flight to the SPIRIT of Grace for Succor, and to the atoning
cleansing Blood of a great SAVIOR and INTERCESSOR: by which means you may have
often found, O buffetted Child of GOD, that you had been less humble, careful,
sollicitous and anxious about your spiritual State, and in your Walk with GOD,
if you had never felt those Conflicts with your spiritual Adversaries, which a
holy GOD has mercifully called you to endure, and has carried you through.
These are the Beginnings of Revenges upon the Enemy, which call upon all around
the suffering Children of GOD to rejoice with them, and on their Account. --
Shall I say to them what I have though it, and been persuaded from what I have
heard and seen from such distressed Christians under the Persecutions of some
unseen evil Adversary; "You love GOD much the more, and fear him more, and
adore him better, and walk the more humbly and closely with Him, and hate Sin
the more, and pray the better, and are the more circumspect meek and lowly in
Heart, and have really much the more Communion with GOD, from what you have
suffered by the Malice and Wrath of Satan. So his Wrath shall praise GOD by
your Lips, as long as you live; and the Remainder thereof GOD will restrain.

Upon all

3. The fiery Assaults of Hell upon the dear Children of GOD prove the Means,
as of their greater Purification from Sin and Growth in Holiness, so of all Joy
and Peace in believing to them. The Affliction for the present is very
grievous, but it yields the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness to them that are
exercised thereby. So blessed is the Man that has endured Temptation, for after
the Conflict comes the Crown: Light is sowing through all the Clouds and
Darkness, Rain or Tempest, for the Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in
Heart: As Job found it in the Day when GOD justified him, after he had humbled
him and made him viler than the Dust in his own Eyes; " Go to my Servant (said
the HOLY ONE) and he shall pray for you. The Joy of Victory follows upon
Satan's Assault and Defeat. GOD crowns the humble Overcomer with Garlands of
Joy here sometimes, and will with those of Glory hereafter; for when he is
tried he shall receive the Crown of Life. Job shone the brighter all his
After-life in the Eyes of all about him; and it was to him the same Thing as if
he had only been in the Mount with Moses, and came down with his Face. His
restored Prosperity was doubly serene and pleasant, both to himself and his
Friends. He was seen and loved like David long after, when he came back with
the Sword and Head of the Giant in his Hand. So shall it be done to Him whom
the King of Saints delights to honor. -- When Asaph also had got through his
Temptation, hear how he triumphed in his GOD and over the Enemy: Psalm lxxiii.
23, 24. Never the less I am continually with Thee, thou have holden me by my
right Hand; thou shall guide me by thy Counsel, and afte^ward receive me to
Glory: Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is nothing on Earth that I
desire beside thee: my Heart and my Flesh fails, but thou art the Strength of
my Heart and my Portion for ever. Asaph's sore Dejections cleared the Way to
these his Exultations; which bring to Mind the Words of CHRIST to his
Disciples, when they returned from their more easy Acquests over Satan, "LORD,
the very Devils are subject to us through thy Name: "'It Is so, replied the late
tempted JESUS, -- I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven! but in this
rejoice not that the Devils are subject to you; but that your Names are written
in Heaven. Victory over Satan's Temptations, in some of his remarkable and
violent, but more especially in the Course of his ordinary Assaults, may
minister unto us the joyous Hope of our Election of GOD, and of our final
Perseverance in Grace. No doubt but holy Job spent the latter Part of his Life
in the more blessed Assurance of his Interest in the Love of GOD, and in the
Joys thereof; by the Breaches which Satan was permitted to make on him for a
Season. 1 Pet. i. 6, 7. "Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a Season
(if need be) ve are in Heaviness through manifold Temptations, that the Trial of
Faith, though tried as with Fire, may be found unto Praise and Honor and Glory
in the Day of CHRIST. This is but as CHRIST himself suffered, being tempted,
and the Consolations of GOD flowed down upon him. Matthew. iv. 11. Get thee hence
Satan, and the Devil left him, and Angels came and minister'd to him. Those
holy benevolent Spirits are ministering Spirits to the Heirs of Salvation; and
never so more gladly, than when they have seen 'em combatting with the Powers
of Darkness, and steadfastly resisting them. So the Darkness of the Night makes
the Light of the Morning pleasant, and even Dirt and Sand are used to scour and
brighten the Vessel, and the scullions foul Hands to wash and cleanse it. So
Silver and Gold pass through Fire and are refined: only the Dross is purged
away.

Thus we have looked a little into this dark Dispensation of Divine Providence;
this mysterious Conduct of Sovereign Grace, in the Permission of the fiery
Assaults of Satan upon some of the dearest Children of GOD: Although they are
dear to GOD, and He so to them, yet are they sometimes annoyed with hideous
hateful Suggestions against his Holiness and Glory. GOD has his wife, most holy
and gracious Ends in this Permission; Glory to Himself; and much spiritual Good
to these his favorite Sufferers.

I will only add, -- When our LORD gave the Tempter his last Rebuke, upon his
most horrid Assault, He passed immediately upon his public Ministry: And his
Apostle St. Paul was established and enlarged in his abundant Labors and
extensive Services, by the Messengers of Satan of one kind and another, that
dogged and set upon him, where ever he went: I Will read you some Account of it,
and conclude on this Head, 2 Cor. iv. 8, 9, etc. We are troubled on every side,
yet not distressed, we are perplexed but not in Despair; persecuted but not
forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the Body the
Dying of the LORD JESUS, that the Life also of JESUS may be made manifest in
our Body; -- For which Cause we faint not, but though our outward Man perish,
yet the inward Man is renewed Day by Day: For our light Affliction, which is
but for a Moment works for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of
Glory: While we look, not to the Things that are seen, but at the Things which
are not seen; for the Things which are seen are temporal, but the Things which
are not seen are eternal.

I come now to the second Thing proposed, which is,

II. These hellish Suggestions, and horrid diabolical Thoughts, as they should
and will be most grievous and abhorred to a holy Soul, so ought they to be
rejected and cast out with utmost Detestation.

It is not only Matter of Fact and Experience, but also of Necessity, that they
are thus grievous to and abhorred by a holy Mind: As it is Duty to GOD, so
where Grace is in Exercise it is in the Nature of Things necessary. -- Job
appears in the Text as if stabbed to the Heart by his Wife's hideous Words; he
answers the foul Temptation with Abhorrence, he ejects the cursed Thought, he
reprehends her with Indignation, and calls her a foolish wicked Woman; and
argues on GOD's Behalf, why utmost Reverence, Love, Fear, Gratitude, Adoration
Submission was due from him to the blessed GOD, and should ever be rendered by
him, by the Help of his Grace: What? Shall we receive Good at the Hand of the
LORD, and shall we not receive Evil? Thus Grace will direct, urge and constrain
us to think and speak in any like Case; as we know it was exhibited by our
blessed SAVIOR in his Temptations.

But let us take the Truth before us, the Duty propounded to us, in its several
Parts, and briefly speak to each of them: These infernal Thoughts and
Injections, should be very grievous and distressing to us, we should heartily
detest 'em, reject and spue 'em out as soon as they arise in us, if we can; and
at the same Time fortify our selves with holy Reasoning and Argument, as we are
able; as Job piously and wisely did under the Direction and Assistance of GOD.

1. They should be very grievous and distressing to our Souls, and they
necessarily are so to a gracious Heart. As a Sword in our Bones it should be to
us as it, was to David: Psalm. xlii. -- It is hard to hear our selves, a Parent
or a Friend, any whom we esteem and reverence, spoken evil of or reviled; but
how much more dear and sacred is the Name and Glory of GOD most High, good and
holy, wise and just, to a pious Heart? " Holy and reverend is his Name! Him
thou shall fear, to him thou shall cleave and Him thou shall serve! He is thy
Praise and He is thy GOD. Deuteronomy. x. 20. That glorious and fearful Name, the LORD
thy GOD. xxviii. 58.

It should be grievous to apprehend the Enemy of GOD and of all Righteousness
so nigh us, and that by our Apostasy from GOD he has such Access to us. It may
well scare us to think that he is or has been (as it were) at our right Hand,
and whispering into our Ear with a contagious filthy Breath; Things so impious
in themselves, and to us pernicious without the Succors of preserving Grace.

It should be horrible to imagine (but that the Heart is conscious to its own
Wickedness) that Satan should see any Way of Entrance into us for his hellish
Blasphemies, and Profaness! or that he should conceive the least Hope of
Success against us, in such barefaced Infidelity, Atheism and Devilism! that he
should seem to see us so like himself! or that any of the Humane Race, but
especially under the Light of the Gospel, could be really such incarnate
Devils, as this would render them.

We may well tremble with Horror from a pious Self-Love, lest those hellish
Suggestions should make any Impression, find the least Entertainment in us, or
Compliance from us. For sooner should we choose to cease to be, then to be
capable of regarding and yielding to a Thought of this Nature, against the
Being, Holiness and Glory of the GOD that made us! which were to bring up Hell
from beneath, and act the Devil in open Daylight.

In a Word, It should grieve us to think or know that there is any such Degree
of Malignity against GOD in any Creature whatsoever! That even Hell it self can
show any Thing so vile and unclean. As one would be scared to see a Devil, so
this Idea of diabolical Spleen and Hatred, and of spiritual Filthiness, may
justly make our Blood run cold through every Vein, and the Hair of our Head to
rise up an End!

So grievous and terrifying have the blasphemous Suggestions of Satan been to
holy Souls, in whom the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD dwells and rules, having filled them
with Faith and Love, Reverence and godly Fear.

2. We must therefore in our Souls detest and loathe, feel and express a
vehement Abhorrence of such hellish Suggestions. "Do I not hate them, that hate
thee? (said holy David, teaching us to feel and speak thus after him, Psalm
cxxxix) and am I not grieved with them that rise up against Thee? I hate 'em
with perfect Hatred, -- I count them my Enemies: Search me O GOD and know
Heart, try me and know my Thoughts, and see Thou and show to me if it be not
thus.

What should our Souls equally detest, as this expressed open Enmity, Hatred,
Contempt and Spite against the Holy GOD? At what should they equally rise,
bursting with Anger Disdain and Wrath? Meekness, I had well nigh said, were
here a Vice; and Mildness the Want of Zeal; did I not call to Mind the
Arch-Angel's Words when contending with the Devil; how far he kept from any
railing Accusation, but only said " the LORD rebuke thee. Provoked Abishai
could not preserve a like Government of himself when Shimei only railed against
his Earthly King; "Shall this dead Dog curse my Lord? said he: But what would
David himself have said, had the Curse been uttered against his King and GOD,
the LORD of Glory? The basphemous Being and his Act had equally been the hated
of David's Soul, and should be of ours? Although there needs no imprecating any
Curse upon the Devil, cursed as he is long since from the Mouth of GOD, and
under the Sentence of eternal Death. -- "If any Man love not our LORD JESUS
CHRIST let him be Anathema, Maran-atha, says the Apostle 1 Cor. xvi. 22. Which
is to say, cursed in the highest Manner and Degree! how accursed then to us
should the Devil and his blasphemous Suggestions be, which breathe implacable
and furious Hatred against the Being, Blessedness and Grace of God to us through
JESUS CHRIST our LORD?

An Idolater will not suffer his dumb and dead Idol to be spoken against; if he
calls it his God he will not bear to hear it despised; an Egyptian of old would
have stoned the Man that should have sacrificed his Abomination before his
Eyes; nor would One of all the rout at Ephesus endure a Blasphemer of their
Goddess Diana! Nor is there a modern Zealot of Rome Antichristian, but thinks
it meritorious to be the Death of you if you affront their Wafer-Idol the Host,
when elevated in the Church, or when carried through the Streets in Form and
Pomp. Can then the least Thought be whispered in our Minds against the Honor
of our GOD and SAVIOR, and not wound and pierce them? should not that be
execrable to us, which is reproachful and contemptuous of HIM? What Devotion,
what Love or Fear of GOD, can there be in us, if this Resentment and
Indignation be wanting in us, when his Name is blasphemed? And when the
Endeavor is to make us Partners in the Blasphemy? -- Well was it made a Law to
the Israel of GOD, Levit. xxiv. 15. Whosoever curses his GOD shall bear his
Sin, and he that blasphemeth the Name of the LORD shall surely be put to Death,
and all the Congregation shall certainly stone him with Stones.

3. To express our Detestation of a blasphemous Injection we should instantly
reject and spue out the Abomination, and not suffer the vile Thought to lodge
in us. As it is but rising and entering, we must rebuke, suppress, forbid and
curse it in the Name of the LORD. Let us vehemently turn away, and neither
hearken nor argue; as Calvin Caveamus itaque, ^e Satanae his Flabellis nos
adversus DEUM sollicitanti Aures prae^eamus; ne ab illo circumveniamur:
Monemur, ejusmodi Blasphemias, ut quae Satanae Vomitus, acri^er esse
reda^guendas: Vehementiam opponere debemus; non enim ludendum est cum f^rioso
Host -- So the Jews were will not to rend their Clothes at the hearing of
Blasphemy.
advises. The cloven Foot is seen here at once, and there needs not a Moment's
Thought what to do. "Be gone from me thou cursed Thought," thou Child of the
Devil, and Enemy of all Righteousness! I detest and defy thee, thou art none of
mine, but art execrable to me! my GOD impute it not unto me! my GOD I will
adore thee! raise now my Adorations of Thee more than ever! I would even loathe
my own Soul, that the hated Foe could think to find any liking in me! my GOD
forbid it! and get thee hence Satan! -- So the blessed Apostle, filled with the
HOLY GHOST, set his Eyes on the Sorcerer Elymas, who sought to turn away the
Deputy from the Faith; and said, " O full of all Subtlety and Mischief, thou
Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness! will thou not cease to
pervert the right Ways of the LORD! Acts xiii. 10.

4. After the Repulse and Rejection of the vile Temptation, we may fortify our
Souls against every Return of it, by holy Reasonings and Argument, Meditation
and Prayer, religious Discourse, and setting our selves to the immediate Duties
incumbent on us in our present State and Circumstances; from which we should
not suffer any Temptation to divert us, or keep us.

So when Job had rebuked his Wife, and spoke his Detestation of her Words; he
then proceeded to give the Reason of his doing so; saying, " What? shall we
receive Good from the Hand of the LORD? and shall we not receive Evil? q. d.
Shall I curse GOD to Da^, because he pleases in his Sovereignty, or for the
Punishment of my Sins, which have daily made the Forfeiture of all the
Affluence of good Things with which his Providence had distinguished me, now to
bereave me of them? or be it for the Trial Exercise and Increase of his Grace
bestowed on me, which He may prove and require the Exercise of as he pleases!
or if He has proved it in a State of outward Prosperity for so many Years
together; shall he not now call me to express the same Faith and Love,
Adoration and Praise, Devotedness and Subjection in a State of Humiliation and
Adversity; destitute, afflicted, tormented? I will lie therefore silent and
adoring before him in the Dust where his wise and holy and righteous PROVIDENCE
has laid me, and go on to worship, "Naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and
naked shall I return; the LORD gave and the LORD has taken; blessed be the Name
of the LORD. "I will therefore still go on to bless, and call upon my GOD, and
the LORD shall save me! He is still the same Good, gracious and holy GOD to me;
and by his Grace I will be the same humble thankful abased Worshipper before
Him; trusting in Him and waiting on Him for his Salvation:" -- As He has had my
daily Thanksgivings and Praises in the Months past wherein the LORD preserved
me; when his Candle shone upon my Head and by his Light I walked through
Darkness; when his Secret was upon my Tabernacle and my Children were about me!
"As I then sent and sanctified them when the Days of their Feasting were gone
about, and early rose up in the Morning to offer Sacrifices according to the
Number of them all; so Morning and Evening, and through the waking painful
Hours of every Day and Night, will I (by his Grace) now ly adoring my GOD in my
Sores and Ashes! -- "I then feared for them and for my self, and said, " It may
be my Sons have sinned in their Rejoicings and cursed GOD in their Hearts; (for
out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts and Blasphemies) -- but if it were only
I might fear my Sons had neglected to render unto GOD the Praise and Glory of
his Mercies as became them; I therefore failed not to offer for 'em my
Burnt-Offerings: -- " And shall I now curse HIM, whom I have been all my Life
blessing? because I have neither Child to offer for, nor a Sheep or Ox out of
my Thousands and Hundreds to bring unto his Altar; nor Strength to rise and go
to it as my exceeding Joy? -- No, Thou art my Hope O LORD GOD! thou art my
Trust from my Youth! by Thee have I been holden up from the Womb, my Praise
shall be continually of thee! I am a Wonder unto many, but thou my strong
Refuge! let my Mouth be filled with thy Praise and with thy Honor all the Day.

I have put this Run of Scripture together, and as it were into the Mouth of
tempted Job, to assist others when tempted to hard Thoughts of the blessed GOD,
in strengthening and confirming themselves in their Adorations before Him. In
much fewer Words Job set the Temptation in its true Colors, as most unjust and
base, ungrateful and impious; and what his Soul should never come into, GOD
helping him; but keep at the greatest Distance from it.

It was the SPIRIT and Grace of CHRIST that thus animated Job and filled his
Mouth with Arguments; for when JESUS was himself led by the SPIRIT into the
Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, he rebuked the filthy and impudent
Suggestions of Satan once and again, by giving his holy and irresistible
Reasons from the Word of GOD; " It is written, said he, and again -- it is
written: So it became Him who took our Nature, therein to be made under the
Law, and to fulfill it; and whose Glo^^ it was to say " Thy Law is within me.

Joseph was the princely Type of CHRIST both in his resolute Repulse of the
Tempter, the Devil in his Mistress; refusing to see or hear her; and yet
arguing too the great Wickedness, and Sin against GOD; and also the foul
Ingratitude Injustice and Villainy to his Master: And when nothing would do with
the impudent Creature he fled: An Act as heroic in its Circumstances, as
David's facing the Monster of a Man, the Defier of the Host of GOD. -- In like
manner, when David was outrag'd by Michal for the Transports of his Devotion,
he bid her think if it were not grateful in him to dance before the LORD and
his Ark, who had preferred him to her Father's House, and made him the King of
Israel; "the devout will honor me said he, and I will be yet more vile than
thus, and base in my own Eyes. 1 Samuel v. 22.

In short, Sin is never to be parly'd with, but at once and resolutely to be
denied; yet is it the Act of Wisdom and Grace to reason with our selves for our
Confirmation and Establishment in just and holy Resolutions; and with others
for their Reproof and Conviction. The Holy Scripture is our Armory or Magazine
to supply us with Helmet and Shield, Sword and Buckler, for our Defense against
the Darts of Hell; and for Offense and Wounding to the Enemy, who flies before
the holy hated WORD. From this Artillery discharge upon the Hosts of Hell, and
they will flee from you.

Thus rebuke the Tempter and refuse to sin: and when this is done, clench the
Denial with the Word of Truth, which sets before you the impious Nature of Sin,
and the cursed Nature and End of the Tempter; our Relation and natural
Subjection to GOD and infinite Obligations to Him; his Laws Promises and
Threatenings; and be the Christian fixed in his Post, strong in the LORD and in
the Power of his Might, to withstand the Wiles of the Devil, and wrestle
against Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the Darkness of this World,
and spiritual Wickedness in high Places: Think, what is holy and righteous,
wise and good, Duty and Interest; and there fix your Foot, and stand, having
your Loins girt about with Truth and having on the Breastplate of
Righteousness. Commit yourself thus to GOD and to the Word of his Grace, which
is able to keep you from falling.

So far we have seen under the two first Propositions; that the dearest
Children of GOD may be called to endure the most foul and accursed Annoyances
from the Devil; which will be unspeakably grievous to them and abhorred, and
ought to be infinitely detested and instantly rejected by them. -- Yet if they
cannot get rid of them, as they desire and strive to do, they must beware of a
too intense contending with them; but turn away as from a barking Dog, or from
an abusive raving Scold, or from a cursing Shimei. -- As the heavenly Mr.
Janeway advises in this Case, Let not such Thoughts have any Time of Abode in
your Mind, but turn 'em out with all the Loathing and Abhorrence that you can;
and with as little Trouble and Disturbance as you can; or else it pleases the
Devil if he can but make you your own Tormentor. -- Divert your Thoughts
therefore to something good and holy, and let those very Injections be
constantly the Occasion of some spiritual Meditation, and that the quite
contrary to the Blasphemy or infidel Suggestion: Or fall a praying with
Earnestness; and the Devil will be weary if he finds his Designs thus broken;
and that those Sparks of Hell which he strikes into Souls to kindle and inflame
Corruption, do but put Warmth into Grace, and set Faith and Prayer a working:
He will be beat with his own Weapon when it is turned upon him, what he
intended as Water to cool or quench your Love to GOD, proves like Oil to make
it flame the more vehemently.

I go on now to show in the last place,

III. That these grievous and abhorred Injections are not the Sin of the dear
Saints of GOD, nor will be reckoned so by their holy and gracious GOD; nor do
they defile and pollute their Souls, nor bring them under Guilt, when they are
detested and rejected. This the Text is plain and positive in, " In all this
Job sinned not.

It is strange to observe the dreadful Fears of many melancholy Christians,
who are hurried and distressed with evil and wicked Thoughts which their Souls
abhor; "That it is altogether (or very much) their own Wickedness and Guilt; and
they are ready to account and call themselves the most unbelieving and profane,
the most polluted and vile of any in the World; and to think that none have
Hearts and Minds so alienated from GOD, and turned against Him as theirs: they
impute all to themselves, and think themselves twofold more the Children of
Hell than others! -- Why is it thus? they are ready to ask, if there is not a
Fountain of Impurity in Me more than in others, casting up such Mire and Dirt?
Or if the Hand of Satan be in the troubling of the Waters, yet is it not plain
he finds all this odious Filth at the Bottom in me? for which I should abhor my
self and fear lest GOD abhor me! -- And yet verily GOD sees not Iniquity or
Perverseness in them, but is pleased in the Struggle and Victory of his own
Grace within them.

The Support and Relief of such distressed Souls, and to convince them of their
Error, I had principally in Mind in the Choice of this Subject; although I take
it not to have been the very State of the Case with Job, who was too
intelligent and established a Worshipper of GOD to be driven from the happy
Confidence of his Integrity and Uprightness, by the Assaults of Satan or by the
Arguments of his Friends: He appealed from them unto GOD the Searcher of the
Heart, and who knows all Things, that He knew he loved Him: Chap. x. v. 7. Thou
know that I am not wicked! and in his last Reply, he finished with a long
Train of noble Appeal to GOD and Affirmations to Men: Chap. xxvii. As GOD
lives who has taken away my Judgment, and the ALMIGHTY who has vexed my
Soul; all the while my Breath is in me and the Spirit of GOD is in my Nostrils;
my Lips shall not speak Wickedness, nor my Tongue utter Deceit: GOD forbid that
I should justify you; 'till I die I will not deny my Integrity: My
Righteousness I hold fast and will not let it go; my Heart shall not reproach
me as long as I live.

But alas! how few of the dear Children of GOD in our Days arrive at like
steady full Assurance of Faith as Job had, respecting their Integrity! they are
too often soon shaken in Mind; though we are admonished by the HOLY GHOST not
to be so on one Account and another. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 2. Even Ministers as well as
common Disciples may be too justly likened to Reeds shaken with the Wind! and
no wonder, when Peter himself was so easily carried away as the dry Stubble by
a sudden Blast of Temptation, in his Self-Confidence, and after Warning given
him by his LORD.

But what now lies before us, is to affirm and prove that there may be the
foulest Motions to Sin, made by Satan to the Minds and Hearts of the most
sincere and pious among the People of GOD; as this in the Text was to Job,
"Curse GOD and die! and yet if their Soul abhors from the cursed Motion,
consent not to it, but detest it; it is not their Sin, but only Satan's: -- "in
all this they have not sinned.

If we receive the Witness of Man, the Witness of GOD is greater. My Text is
the Witness of GOD concerning Job; and by it the SPIRIT OF GOD witnesses the
same concerning You, O afflicted and tossed in Spirit and not comforted; if you
are enabled by Him to detest and eject like blasphemous and diabolical
Injections, as odious and abominable to you. GOD, the righteous and gracious
Judge, is then so far from beholding this Iniquity in you, that on the contrary
He will in the great and last Day, before Men and Devils, in the most free and
open manner own accept and reward it as the Power of his Grace in You, and an
Instance of the sincere Devotion of your Souls toward Him Van Mastricht de
Suggestionibus blasphemis. "Sunt Tentationes Satanae, quibus Menti etiam
pientissimorum obtrudit Cogitationes adversus Majestatem DEI, Sufficientiam
CHRISTI etc; non esse DEUM, vel Providentiam particularem; quibus etiam egregii
pii exagitantur, ad hoc tantum ut conturbentur, et in Officiis Cultus Divini
fatigentur. Sunt quidem in his Suggestionibus horrenda Scelera, sed nequaquam
in tentatis, quippe qui ab eis abhorrent; sed in tentante solo. -- Communis est
Sors optimorum, hujusmodi Insultus Satanoe sustinere, quin et ipsius CHRISTI,
Matthew. iv. -- Id a quo ingenue abhorret, et cui fortiter obnititur, non esse
suum Peccatum; quin potius durissimam Crucem, sibi portatu long molestissimam.
.

But to put this matter yet in a clearer Light, and give the utmost
Demonstration of it, let us again recur to the horrid Motion of the Devil to
the Man CHRIST JESUS our LORD; who was in all Points tempted as we are, yet
without Sin: Heb. iv. 15. For we have not a High Priest which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our Infirmities: let us therefore come boldly to the Throne
of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in Time of need. --
For was not the LORD of Glory, the HOLY ONE of GOD annoyed by Satan with as
cursed Suggestions respecting the blessed GOD, as ever You were? and yet in Him
was no Sin.

He was tempted to a Distrust and Disbelief of his FATHER'S Care and kind
Providence; He lets thee starve and famish, and casts thee here, where no Bread
is to be got; care now for thy Self, and if thou art the SON and Prophet, the
promised Messiah, as thou have been declared at thy Baptism, command that these
Stones be made Bread: q. d. thy FATHER is unnatural and cruel, thy Dependence
on Him vain; thy Hunger is natural necessary and innocent after so long
Abstinence and Devotion; Self-preservation is thy Duty, and it is a Case of
Necessity, and calls thee to go out of the ordinary Way for thy Supply. -- But
our LORD in effect bid the Tempter remember how the Church of old had been fed
in the Wilderness by the care of his FATHER; nor without his Blessing could the
miraculous Bread nourish Him.

Again, the Devil's last Temptation of our SAVIOR was more foul and horrid
than the first: In some visionary Representation of all the Glories of the
Kingdoms of this World, he set them before Him; and impudently called them all
his own, and told him he would give 'em all unto him, if he would fall down and
worship him. What a Land-skip is here of the Devil's drawing in a Wilderness?
becoming the Father of lies and the Pride of Lucifer, with the Subtlety of the
Old Serpent! and equally impudent his Claim and Promise. May I be permitted to
paraphrase the hellish Suggestion: q. d. You have been led up into this horrid
Wilderness, and are you not here miserably abandoned by Him you call your
Father! I the God of this World appear to succor you! your Father has little
in it to call his own! Rome and all the Glories of it are all mine! this poor
Judea and the Wilderness about it he may call his! My Idols fill Italy and
Greece! there I am worshipped with utmost Pomp and Glitter! the Earth and all
its Learning and Philosophy bows to me! to Me the Poets sing, and Caesar with
all the Potentates are my Votaries: the Powers that be are ordained by me, and
their Dominions are by me distributed! to whomsoever I will, I give them! are
you not now poor desolate, empty in your great Title the Son of GOD! do you
deserve to be so abandoned! be mine and see what I will do for you! this World
and all its Glories shall immediately be yours! its Rule, its Riches, its
Homage and all its Worship! render me only this small Acknowledgment, this
single Act of Homage, " fall down and worship me!

Thus the evil One, the Prince of this World came first with Flatteries and
Allurements, and afterward with Rage and Terrors, with all the Powers of
Darkness surrounding our blessed LORD, and found nothing in him; for in Him was
no Sin. And if JESUS was thus tempted, yet without Sin; so if any of his dear
Members are in like Manner tempted, and by his Grace are kept from yielding; by
his Power are enabled to resist and rebuke the Temptation, it is by no Means
Sin in them; but they are more than Conquerors through Him.

Let us reason and argue a little on this Point.

1. The mere thinking on Sin, or the Contemplation of it with Aversion of Soul,
can by no Means defile the Mind. GOD Himself beholds Sin, thinks of it, yet is
infinitely holy, and of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and cannot look on
Iniquity. Hab. i. 13. i. e. He beholds it with Abhorrence, his Soul hates it,
his Word forbids, condemns and threatens it. The holy Angels also see our Sins,
open and secret, consider and detest 'em; are offended at and grieved by them;
and it is their Holiness. -- Good Men make diligent Search and Enquiry into the
Nature of Sin, their own and others among whom they dwell; discern the moral
Evil, Guilt and Pollution of it; its Turpitude, Baseness and Malignity; yet are
they not defiled hereby, no but the more purified both in Heart and Life. --
Regenerate Persons and sincere Penitents find it absolutely necessary for them
often to call their past Sins to Remembrance; they can neither show themselves
Men nor Christians without doing so, for a renewed Repentance on the Account of
'em, to increase their Humiliation and Abasement before GOD, to quicken
themselves in the Mortification of the Body of Sin and Death which they carry
about with them, to fix their Abhorrence of it and of themselves for it, and to
strengthen their Watch against every Motion to it, from within or from without;
-- but all this is according to Godliness, and purifying to the Soul in obeying
the Truth. -- Now it is the same Thing in the Event, through the Grace of GOD
with and in his Saints, if vile and wicked Thoughts arise involuntarily in 'em,
or are thrown and cast in upon them by Satan without and against their Will: If
the Soul in either Case rise against them in Fear, in Mourning, in Hatred and
loathing of them; Iniquity is but purged away hereby, and the Soul confirmed in
holy Disposition, and the Habit of Grace is strengthened. As if you rinse a very
foul Vessel, though it be in dirty Water, yet it will be something the cleaner
for it; the Dirt at the Bottom will be in Part (at least) loosned, and cast out
with the Water; so here, though the Injection of Satan be never so unclean and
defiling in it self, yet the Soul spuing out the foul Thought, casts up also
something further of its natural Impurity together with it.

Indeed there is a Contemplation or thinking of Sin that is most impure and
defiling: To think of it with liking and Complacency or Desire is highly so; to
crave, intend, and project it, to muse and dwell on it with Pleasure, to roll
it as a sweet Morsel under our Tongue with Taste and Relish; to recollect it
with Delight and chaw it over again as the Cud, (which is to injure the
wholesome Property of the clean Creatures) this is to listen to the Tempter with
Inclination and Consent, and call the forbidden Fruit good for Sight and Taste,
and is grossly polluting to the Soul; as also in a Degree it is, not to have our
Hearts rise against, and fly from every Motion within us to known Sin. For in
this Case Lust lodges, is harbored and entertained, conceives and brings
forth; and is so much real Adultery, Murder, Profaness of the Heart: Matthew. v.
12. But on the contrary, to think of Sin with Grief and Mourning, Fear and
Confusion, Indignation and Rejection, this is purgative and purifying, wholesome
and healthful, medicinal and restorative, nourishing and strengthening to a
Principle of Grace, in Act and Exercise.

2. Let it be moreover considered, that the very Argument I am upon supposes
the abhorred detested Thoughts injected by another, and that they do not come
or proceed from the Soul it self, nor are originally its own, and that the Soul
is grieved by 'em, offended at 'em, disowns and rejects 'em: they are therefore
some spurious Births from abroad, laid secretly and basely at our Door, or
within it, and falsely fathered on us, if we are so foolish as to receive and
own them. If we consent not, it is only the Devil's Sin; his Act, his Guilt and
he must answer for it. If for Instance, the first Adam had done as the SECOND
did; if our first Parents, had rebuked the Tempter and detested his Motion to
them, when he persuaded them to disbelieve and disobey GOD; the Sin had rested
only on the Devil; they had remained innocent and been confirmed in Holiness;
but they yielded to his cursed Suggestion, took part in his Act and in his
Apostasy from GOD.

Indeed, now in our fallen State we have just Reason to suspect our Selves and
fear always, sometimes more than at other, whether the vile Motions to Sin
within us be not from our own Hearts, which are deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked; who can know them? No wonder therefore if the holiest Child
or Servant of GOD be sometimes ready to say, I fear it is Sin dwelling and
reigning in me, and the Hand of the Devil is it may be little in it; for as St.
James says " Every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lust and
enticed; and how shall I know but that it is thus with me?

But let us call in the Aid of the blessed St. Paul to set this matter in its
true Light; and it is well for the Church that it has these two Apostles to
give Light into each others Meaning. In the vii. Chap. to the Romans, "the
Apostle gives a Description of the Conflict between Grace and Corruption which
he experienced in himself! and no doubt but every renewed sanctified Soul has
more or less the like Experience. The Apostle calls himself carnal and s^ld
under Sin, because he at Times did that which he allowed not, but truly hated:
but his Support and Relief was, that it was no more He that did it, but Sin
that dwelt in him: for, the Good that he would he too often did not, but the
Evil that he would not, that he did: Now (says he again) if I do that I would
not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me: He goes on, I
find then a Law that when I would do good, Evil is present with me: For I
delight in the Law of GOD after the inward Man; but I see another Law in my
Members warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to
the Law of Sin! O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of
this Death? -- The like spiritual Conflict and lusting of the Flesh against the
Spirit, and of the Spirit against the Flesh, was found in the Christians at
Galatia, so that they could not do the Things that they would. Gal. v. 17.

We see here that a good Man may have this Rejoicing, the Testimony of his
Conscience to his Complacency in the Law of GOD, and that his highest Pleasure
in Life is, when Heart and Life are in the strictest Conformity to the Law and
Will of GOD; and that with his Mind he is serving the Law of GOD; and yet at
Times, hold himself no better than one brought into Captivity to the Law of
Sin, a carnal Creature, and sold under it: And yet he must not impute to his
own Will and allowance the Evils which he bewails, groans out under, strives
against and hates himself for. To this he must recur, "It is no more I that do
it, but Sin which dwells in me; a Body of Death which I am hourly groaning,
for a full Deliverance from. -- It is the Experience and Confession of the
holiest Saints on Earth, that there are sad Remains of Impurity and Uncleanness
cleaving to them; the Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, which are defiling
to their best Frames and Duties; and too often lusting strongly and at Times
prevalently; so that the Good which they desire to do they too often do not,
and the Evil which they would not they at Times do: Their Souls delight in GOD,
after the inward Man, but yet they find another Law, Power or Principle of
Corruption, warring against the Law of GOD and the Law that bears Rule in their
Minds. -- Now suppose this carnal Principle ( mortified but not yet slain and
extinguished) lusts and tempts to blasphemous and diabolical Tho'ts of it self
alone or by the Instigation of Satan; and at the same Time suppose the
sanctified Spirit lusting against these hellish Motions, and groaning within it
self for Deliverance from them, and Victory over 'em; ready to abhor it self on
the Account of them, and crying out of its own Captivity and Bondage, -- we may
be then assured, that whatever be the Rise of the cursed Temptation; be it from
Job's own corrupt Nature, or from his Wife, or from his Adversary the Devil; it
is not at all his own Sin and Act; it is no more He that does it, though it may
be from Sin that dwells in him; Sin which he allows not, Sin which he is
daily laboring to mortify, and from which he is earnestly seeking Deliverance.

In short, All Sin is voluntary; the Will is in it, the Choice is of it, the
Soul likes it, and hence Guilt arises. -- All that I shall further add on this
Argument, to carry it to the utmost Evidence and Demonstration, is

3. There is not only no Sin, but much Virtue; a notable Exercise of Grace, and
Victory over Temptation, in the Case supposed; when blasphemous Tho'ts arising
in us, or violently suggested to us, are abhorred by us, detested and rejected.
Violent Temptations to hideous Sin are hereby resisted, refused and overcome:
And how far is this from the committing Sin, or contracting Guilt? GOD, the
righteous Judge reckoned it to Job for Righteousness, and his Triumph over
Satan; still he holds fast his Integrity! although thou movedst me against
him, to destroy him without a Cause.

This added to his Character, (says Mr. Henry on the Place) turned to his
Praise and Glory! GOD himself speaks of it with a kind of Pleasure and Wonder,
and of Triumph in the Power of his own Grace! He stands the faster, and holds
the faster, for being shaken! still he does so; after so violent an Assault
upon him! he has got Ground instead of losing any! his Constancy shows proves
and crowns his Integrity! He is more hearty and lively than ever in blessing
Me.

Thus Job approved himself the perfect and upright Man, one that feared GOD and
eschewed Evil; and that there was none like him on the Earth: None tried,
tempted and afflicted like him in his Day, or since among mere Men, or that
bore Temptations of like Kind and Degree, so many and great, with like Heroic
Piety and Fortitude. -- The Tempter could not but own himself beat, and GOD
justified in all that He had said of his penitent, patient, believing faithful
Servant.

GOD meant and allowed the Trial, that it might stand on Record for the Comfort
of his tempted Saints, and for the Edification of his Church for ever. It is a
Banner displayed for others to fight under, in the Cause of Truth and Holiness,
to the End of the World. Job has helped many a weak and strong Believer to beat
the Devil again and again, down to our own Days. He still sits as a King in the
Army; and what Hosts of suffering Saints are still fighting under and after
him, and conquering by Faith in his REDEEMER.

And by every Fight and Victory they certainly get some further Strength and
Power against Sin, and Confirmation in Grace; even as the Testimony of CHRIST
was confirmed in the Corinthians, and they confirmed to the End; that they
might be blameless in the Day of CHRIST: 1 Cor. i. 6, 8. Satan also is more and
more bruised under the Feet of GOD's People; and like the conquering Israelites
they will be c^ll'd by JESUS to set their Feet on the Necks of the
Principalities and Powers of Darkness; and the Promises of both Testaments will
be fulfilled to them and in them; " thou shall tread upon the Lion and the
Adder; on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the Power of the Enemy, Psalm.
xci. Luke x. So Light is sowing for the righteous, in the Hours of greatest
Darkness; and the humble Disciples of JESUS will one Day like the Seventy
return with Joy to Him, saying, "LORD, even the Devils are subject to us through
thy Name! -- And he said to them, " I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from
Heaven! and in this rejoice, " that your Names are written in Heaven.

The Day is coming when the Saints shall judge the World, shall judge Angels!
Then they shall see their Enemy, the Old Serpent, the Devil and Satan at the
Bar of CHRIST their Savior, and damned and cast into the Lake of Fire! Then
having followed CHRIST in the Regeneration they shall sit down with him on his
Throne! Then having drank of his Cup and been baptized with his Baptism, they
shall sit on his right Hand and on his left in his Kingdom! -- Let 'em realize
now by Faith how full will be their Joy, how bright their Glory, how high their
Honor, how wide their Fame and Renown in that illustrious Day! They Conquerors
and more than Conquerors! and so their Triumphs more than August or Roman;
Divine, Celestial and Eternal! -- Wherefore my beloved Brethren, count it all
Joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations, yea the most fiery Trials; for
blessed is the Man that endures them, for when he is tried he shall receive
the Crown of Life, which the LORD has promised to them that love Him: But let
Patience have its perfect Work, that ye may be perfect and entire wanting
nothing. James i. 2, 3, "4, 12.

I close with some Words of the very Reverend and pious Dr. Horneck on this
Argument: Unallowed blasphemous and other wicked Thoughts in the Heart do not
defile it: This Doctrine must be often inculcated, because of the great Number
of pious Souls who look upon themselves as the vilest Wretches in the World,
and are ready to run into Desperation, because so many horrid Tho'ts and filthy
Suggestions present themselves to their Minds; more especially disturbing them
in their Devotions and religious Exercises: But not being allowed of, nor
consented to; however dreadful and heinous they are in themselves, they no more
defile the Heart than boisterous Winds, and the Commotion of the Water fully
the Pearls that ly at the Bottom. -- That they are not their own Tho'ts is
evident, because their Will is contrary to them, their Understanding is
convinced of the Iniquity of them, and their Hearts Desire is to be rid of 'em.
The Soul in this Case is like the young Men in the fiery Furnace; while a
thousand Sparks fly about them, not a hair of their Head is singed.

To have done, -- In every Congregation almost there are some whose Case this
is: Some are known to us, and there may be others: To all such I have bro't the
Mind of GOD and they must make Conscience of receiving it as from Him:
Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another: Comfort the
Feeble-minded, and support the Weak: And the very GOD of Peace sanctify you
wholly; and I pray GOD your whole Spirit Soul and Body be preserved blameless
unto the Coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST: Faithful is He that calls you, who
also will do it. Amen.

Having thus in some poor manner and measure endeavored to show, that the most
pious and gracious Persons in the Church of GOD on Earth, may be annoyed with
most accursed hideous Tho'ts and Suggestions against the Blessed GOD, his
Truths and Laws; which ought to be and will be very grievous to and abhorred by
them, and should be rejected instantly with De^^station, or rather with a holy
Disdain and Contempt; and that when they are so they are not our Sin, and will
never be reckoned against us as our Sin by GOD our righteous and gracious
JUDGE; and that not only is there no Sin in this Case committed by the grieved
and distressed Soul, flying to CHRIST for Refuge and Protection; but indeed
there is the true Exercise of Grace and Victory over Sin; true Grace is tried,
proved, displayed and triumphant before the Eyes of the invisible Hosts and
Armies of the Living GOD, as really as David triumphed in the Sight of all
Israel when the horrid blaspheming Giant fell dead before his Faith, and the
Philistine Army took to their Heels and fled; and we should learn of the
timorous, affrighted Israelites to shout and pursue the flying Enemy.

I proceed therefore to the USE and IMPROVEMENT of the Subject; and though the
principal Part thereof must be to relieve and direct (by the Will of GOD)
distressed Souls under the Annoyances of Hell; yet there being also many
weighty Inferences that offer to us by Way of Instruction, Caution, Conviction,
Counsel and Direction, as well as of Support and Comfort to the Soul that is
tempted and weary; I shall take those in my Way also.

I. First then by Way of Inference and Instruction, I shall recollect and
mention some Truths of great Importance, naturally flowing from what has been
already said, and indeed all along implied and supposed therein:

As, 1. The cursed Nature of Sin, the hideous Fruit of the Creature's Apostasy
from GOD; and the Malignity against Him that is in our corrupt Nature: We may
here take a near and full View of the deformed Face, the odious and filthy
Features of SIN; as it lusts in us against the blessed GOD; and to what a
Degree it would exceed, if the Word, SPIRIT and Grace of GOD did not restrain
and prevent it.

For, are there then the Seeds of this Atheism and Blasphemy and Rage against
GOD in us, if he should leave us to our selves, or deliver us up to Satan to
sift us? Are our Hearts so evil as to have the least Propensity to such
detestable Impieties? Can Satan see it possible to bring us into them? Does he
know us to be so wicked as to hope to succeed against us in such barefaced and
horrid Profaness? What? even to be as vile and foul as Himself already? That
all his own spiritual Wickednesses, and the Filthiness of Hell, may be already
in us, while here in the Body? even to curse GOD before a Soul is actually got
into the Place of Despair and Torment? Where only (one would think) such a
Thing can be imagined as a blaspheming because of their Plagues! -- If Sin
tends even to this here on Earth; or if it has ever turned Angels and Men into
such Devil; into the worst and last Degrees of such Malignity against the most
good, most holy perfect and blessed GOD; the Author of all Being Perfection and
Blessedness; -- O what an EVIL is it? Of what a filthy Nature and what a Sty of
Pollution? -- Ah, whither are we fallen? Into what a Mire have we sunk? For
what Shame have we changed our Glory? -- And consequently, what Humiliation,
what Mourning, Self-loathing and Abhorrence, what Fear and Jealousy for our
selves does our fallen State call for? We should heavily bear the Sense of
Original Sin, our Conception in Sin, our corrupt Nature, the Plague of our own
Hearts, the Leprosy and Defilement of our Souls, their Guilt and Wound.

Well may such a filthy Nature render us from our Birth, the Children of Wrath!
And never should we confess our Sins to GOD, but first we should bewail this
Spring and Source of them! First let us seek the Pardon of this, and beg for a
Renovation in the Spirit of our Minds, a Change of Heart, a new Nature! That we
may be purified and made clean, sanctified through out in Body Soul and Spirit:
Psalm li. 5, 10. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother
conceive me! create in me a clean Heart, O GOD; and renew a right Spirit within
me! cast me not away from thy Presence! -- Well might the Apostle groan to be
delivered from the Body of Sin and Death! O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me?

2. Are very good People at Times annoyed with cursed and diabolical
Suggestions, which they detest and yet find it hard to free themselves from?
This may convince us that there is a Devil, and of what a cursed Nature he is,
how hateful he should be to us; his Guilt also, and how great his Damnation
will at last be. -- These Things I put together, because of their Affinity; yet
are they distinct Inferences, and to be briefly spoken to each by themselves.

1. Doubtless there is a Devil; a Tempter of a most accursed Nature; the
Exciter of these hated Tho'ts which haunt at times some of the dear Children of
GOD, and grievously distress and terrify 'em; unavoidably rising in their
Minds, as if the Blasphemy where whispered in their Ear and urged upon them.
Not that the Devil knows our Tho'ts always, though he may shrewdly guess at 'em;
nor can he make us think or hinder our thinking as he will; nor in any Manner
or Degree but as he is permitted: Never the less that there are wicked, lying,
profane, spiteful Spirits that do find a near Access to the Minds of godly
Persons, and have Pleasure in worrying and tormenting them, has been by many
sadly experienced. -- It Is true that this is the Lot of some only, and those
ordinarily more or less subject to Fear and Melancholy: but then it is to be
considered also, that GOD permits not the Devil to persecute whom or when he
pleases after this hideous Manner, as he could not come at Job 'till GOD gave
him Permission; and that such Kind of Annoyances will presently make Persons
sad and melancholy; for what is more dejecting in itself? The Devil also may
doubtless discern when and where there is most Likelihood of succeeding in his
Temptations of one kind and of another, and apply them accordingly: He
persecutes the more soft and timorous Temper with black and gross Suggestions,
while he seldom tempts the sanguine free and gay Minds to Melancholy; no, but
to licentious Airs and careless Jollity: he fishes with the Bait that is
likeliest to take with the Constitution of Nature, the Circumstances of Life;
or with the altered Frame of Persons under the Changes that pass over them. --
But to return,

One Proof of a Devil, or malignant Nature employing it self against GOD, is
had in the inward Persecutions that piously disposed Minds are made to suffer
in vile and odious Tho'ts, which they resist, cry out of, and fly from, but
cannot rid themselves of. Here is Satan as plainly to some suffering Souls, and
unto them that are made acquainted with their Distresses, as his bodily
Possessions have been frequently undoubted, where the possessed have been
agitated, rent and torn by him, in horrible Manner, in the Sight of others.

That there is a GOD we know by his Works, and that He is a most wise, powerful
and infinitely good BEING; because these his Divine Perfections do gloriously
appear in them: In like manner that there is a Devil, or Spiritual Wickednesses
in high Places, is evident and notorious from many palpable Effects, which
prove him a Being apostate; base, envious, malicious, cruel, outrageous against
GOD and Goodness. -- The Temptations to Sin which we feel our selves, and see
the World of Mankind carried away with, and hear the Good and Virtuous groan
under the Annoyance ^f, are a sufficient Proof of a World of Devils, that like
cunning Serpents, or roaring Lions are lurking or walking about, to bite and
devour.

This was so palpable to the Heathen World, that many of them came into the
Imagination of two Principles; the One of all Good, the other of all Evil; and
they ignorantly worshipped the One with Love and Veneration, the other with
Dread and Horror: But Reason and Revelation has banished this ridiculous and
inconsistent Thought from the Christian World; the Word and Works of GOD
concurring in this plain Account of Him, that HE the first Cause of all Things
is necessarily and infinitely good; and that Evil is only from the Creatures
Apostasy and Rebellion against GOD, Opposition to his Will and Enmity against
it: For there needs only a Deflexion from what is good and right, to make Sin
and Evil.

We find therefore some apostate Intelligences, besid^ our own wicked Hearts,
suggesting Evil to us, and persuading to it with Importunity and Vehemence, and
sometimes with Violence and Virulence, even to our own Horror and Loathing at
Times (evil and wicked as we are) and to our exquisite Pain and Anguish; and
what can we impute this to but a Devil? Or what can we infer from it but the
Being of such a cursed Spirit, the Enemy of GOD's Glory and of our Holiness and
Happiness.

This Argument I find in Zanchius, Unde hae malae, invitae Cogitationes? Non a
Nobis quia invitae; non a Deo neque bonis Angelis, quia malae; ergo a Diabolis.
Whence are those evil and impious Thoughts and Motions forcing in upon us? not
from our selves, for they are against our Wills; not from GOD or good Angels
because they are so wicked; therefore they must be from Satan; some invisible
Evil One, even fuller of explicit Spite and Rancour against GOD and Holiness
than our own corrupt Hearts appear.

To use the Words of the Venerable and judicious Mr. Baxter here, --
Temptations (says he) are sometimes so unnatural, so importunate and violent,
that the Person tempted even feels something without himself, persuading and
urging him: He can neither be alone, nor go about his Calling, but he is
followed and dogged with earnest Motions to Sin; and unto Sins too to which he
never found himself inclined; Sins which he has no Pleasure in, nor Prospect
from; Sins that are quite against the Temperature of his Body, and the Desire
of his Mind. -- Truly, a Mind thus persecuted will need no Argument scarce,
beside its own Sense and Experience, to satisfy it "that there is a Devil, its
Adversary, which desires his Annoyance, Defilement, Damnation.

2. From hence likewise it appears, what a hateful Spirit the Devil is; and how
abhorred and abominable he should be to us; how loathed and feared and detested
by us. -- What just Cause does he give us to hate him, if this be his Rage and
Malice against us? or much rather if he move us thus at any time against the
Blessed GOD! would have us blaspheme HIM, curse him, and entertain odious
Thoughts of Him! -- cursed Spirit, a Hater of GOD, and hated by GOD, -- should
not we hate him? Psalm. cxxxix. ult. " Do I not hate them, O LORD, that hate
Thee? And am I not grieved with them that rise up against Thee? I hate them
with perfect Hatred, I count them mine Enemies. We can have no other Idea of a
Devil, as such, but as most odious and accursed! And the more strongly Grace is
rooted, and Goodness ruling in us, the more must he be an Execration to us.
Hatred was made for such an Object, as much as Love for GOD most good and holy.

More especially how should we hate to be our selves like unto such an odious
Creature as Satan! or to be under his Power, possessed and acted by him, or
obedient to him! of such a Father, the Devil, doing his Lusts! how should this
make us abhor our own Souls, our own Being! for how odious must we then be to
the blessed GOD! how accursed in the Sight of HIM that made us in his own
Likeness and Love. Look into the Word of GOD, and see the soul Face in that
Glass; "thou Child of the Devil, as truly as Elimas the Sorcerer was before
thee! And of that wicked One, as much as Cain who slew his Brother, and went
out blasted from the Presence of GOD! His Servants we are to whom we obey, led
Captive by him at his Will; the miserable Prey of the Lion or Dragon of Hell;
the forlorn Spoil of the Powers of Darkness! What a Shame and Reproach is this
to Human Nature! To Men made but little lower than the Angels of Light, and for
Angelic Perfection and Felicity among them! -- but how are we fallen by Sin,
into the Hands of Devils, into the Mire of their Prison, in Chains under
Darkness! -- Here is Bondage and Slavery abjectly chosen, and continued in! as
if Sinners could love their Masters, and would not go free; although the SON OF
GOD has come down from Heaven; and even died, as well as besought them, to make
them free.

It is true that no Man can be truly said to love the Devil; and the more
Sinners come to know of him the more they must hate him; and mutual everlasting
Hatred between them and Devils in Hell will be one Part of their eternal
Torment: But Multitudes love his Lusts, and wear his inglorious Chains with
Mirth and Pleasure; yea some count 'em their Ornaments, like true Hottentots in
the visible Kingdom of GOD. The Devil is worshipped and served in the dark
Places of the Earth out of gross Ignorance and Fear; but by Multitudes under
the Light of the Gospel from liking to his Motions, in all the Filthinesses
both of Flesh and Spirit: A practical Love they show to their deadly Enemy, and
they hate their Friend, their Father, their Redeemer, the Holy One of GOD! --
It would be a good Step in Religion to hate the Devil! how few of the Sons and
Daughters of Men do it in Truth, whatever they may think! It is the Property of
Grace, and no small Part of our Christian Bond by our Baptism, to renounce the
Devil and all his Works; yea to hate his Likeness in our selves or others; to
mourn and bewail it in our selves, and behold it in Transgressors and be
grieved. The Act of Renunciation and Abjuration in our Baptism should be
remembered by us, repeated and confirmed every Day we live: This is our
Allegiance and Fidelity to GOD our KING, and this is the Liberty of the Sons of
GOD, the glorious Liberty which we are called into by the Gospel. Moreover, we
must infer

3. The Devil's great Guilt and the Greatness of his Damnation at the last,
from his being the Seducer of Men into Sin, Apostasy from GOD and Rebellion
against Him; and from his persisting in his Attempts against the Children of
GOD unto this Day, with like Enmity, Falsehood and Malice, as he tempted Adam
the Son of GOD in Paradise. -- As he there belied GOD and beguiled Eve, so he
belies GOD still, and would terrify penitent and believing Souls into unjust
and hard Thoughts of Him; even the most vile and accursed that can be; in
Defiance of all that he has said to us in his Word. It is his Hatred of GOD,
more than of us, that accounts for all this. His Envy is of GOD's Glory, his
Malice against the Work of GOD! This gives the Glare of Hell in them. Indeed
the Blood of Souls alone is a Scarlet and Crimson die, but the deeper Stain is
the lying against the HOLY GHOST, whose Holiness he hates, declares War against
and defies. He makes War with the LAMB and his Members; is bruising the Heel of
the SON OF GOD in them to this Day, although he has so long since seen Him
ascended on High, leading Captivity Captive: He wars even in Heaven against
Michael and his Angels! The Dragon fights though he knows that he can never
conquer, and that the Time of his Torment is coming on! he blasphemes GOD,
deceives the Nations, accuses the Brethren, persecutes the Woman and her Seed,
the Church; and casts out his Floods to drown her spiritual Seed; and all
because they keep the Commandments of GOD and the Testimony of JESUS! But his
Judgment is coming on and the Serpent's Head will be then utterly crushed: even
at the second Appearing of the SON OF MAN with Power and great Glory; when the
Devil and his Angels shall be judged by the LORD and his Saints; who will
destroy him by the Breath of his Mouth and by the Brightness of his Coming. But
previous also to this final Judgment, will the Angel of JESUS come down with
the Key of the bottomless Pit and a great Chain in his Hand, and lay hold on
the Dragon, the Devil and Satan, and bind him and shut him up for a thousand
Years. Rev. xx. 1, 2. At the Expiration of which, to show himself a true Devil
still, as soon as loosed he will return to his deceiving the Nations, and
gathering Gog and Magog together against the Camp of the Saints; which will be
the filling up his Measure, and then Death and Hell, the Deceiver and damned
Ghosts together, shall be cast into the Lake of Fire, which is the second
Death,. 10, 14.

Surely it must needs be thus: The Arch-Sinner and first in Revolt from GOD,
and the inveterate Enemy, shall least of all escape the Divine Vengeance: The
Saints shall judge Angels: They shall see their Adversary and Tempter brought
forth in Chains before the Bar of CHRIST, around whose Throne they shall stand;
they shall hear him arraigned, convicted and damned from the Mouth of the
glorious MAN, JESUS CHRIST; for his first malicious Seduction of our first
Parents, and for all his Endeavors since to maintain and increase our
Apostasy! The Guilts of Mankind will be laid upon him; a heavy Load! his Spite
against the SAVIOR and all whom the FATHER gave to him! his Impotent
Blasphemies and his prevalent Solicitations will all come into one Account,
and be revenged together in his Condemnation: The Saints shall see the Judgment
executed, and sing together with a loud Acclamation, Thrice holy, just and
true! now is come Salvation and Strength, the Kingdom of our GOD, and the Power
of his CHRIST.

Let me illustrate the Matter a little from the Wickedness and tragic End of
Haman, and the Salvation, Joy and Gladness thence arising to the Jews: That
vile enormous Power, Haman, in his Luciferian Pride, Envy and Rage, murderously
plotted, and almost compassed, the Destruction of the captived Church: The good
Queen Esther petitioned in her Fear and Anguish for her Life and the Life of
her People; for alas! they were sold in the Intention of the Evil One, to be
destroyed, to be slain and to perish! But in the End, confounded with Guilt and
speechless, Haman is doomed and dragged to the Gallows, which he had prepared
for Mordecai the Jew, after he had just lived to see him exalted, crowned and
triumphing! his Associates in the plotted Destruction fell with him under a
dreadful Vengeance; and thence was the Church's Salvation and Triumph
perfected! Esther reigned, Mordecai went out from the Presence of the King in
royal Apparel, and the Jews had Light and Gladness Joy, and Honor. -- So when
the Grand Enemy of the Saints is bro't to the Bar of CHRIST, in the Judgment of
the great Day, they will rise up and say -- " This LORD is the Adversary and
wicked One! And then the abject Devil would most gladly fall at the least
Saint's Foot to beg for his Life! Whose Triumph will be high and glorious as
the Devil is led away to his Eternal Torments. -- His Damnation will be then
great, as are now his Blasphemies against GOD, and his Spite at all his Saints.

This is the second Inference, -- there is a Devil; a Host of accursed Spirits,
of a most cursed Disposition, under hideous Guilts, and reserved to a dreadful
Damnation. O let us fear his Malice, and resist his Temptations, that we may
never partake in his Torments, the devouring Fire and everlasting Burnings,
prepared for him.

3. Is there a Devil, a Host of evil Spirits of such a cursed Disposition, and
implacable Malice against GOD and the Souls of Men, and the Peace of his
Children? And is there not an innumerable Company of HOLY ANGELS, a thousand
times ten thousand, and Millions of Millions of blessed Creatures, who behold
the Face of GOD above, and stand in his Presence, and are Thrones, and
Dominions and Principalities and Powers in the Heavenly Places? most benevolent
and friendly to the Souls of Men on Earth, and Fellow Servants Worshippers and
Brethren with all that are sanctified in the Church of CHRIST? and they are all
by Office as well as Inclination Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister
unto the Heirs of Salvation. Hebr. i. 14. -- Let us consider THESE in their
Ministration under CHRIST the REDEEMER, and the HOLY GHOST the SANCTIFIER; and
what an Overbalance are they, for the Consolation and Security of the poor
tempted Members of the Church on Earth! as it is written, for our Learning and
Support, Psalm. ciii. ult. Bless the LORD ye his ANGELS that excel in Strength,
that do his Commandments, harkening to the Voice of his Word! bless the LORD,
all ye his HOSTS, ye Ministers of his that do his Pleasure! Bless the LORD O
our Souls!

Is it not written of these holy, happy, potent Spirits in the Heavenly Places,
that they are the Angels of CHRIST'S little Ones here below, and do always
behold the Face of their FATHER in Heaven? And that he gives them Charge
concerning 'em, to keep 'em in all their Way, to hold 'em up in their Arms! And
that there is Joy in the Presence of these Holy Ones above, over every one
Sinner that repents! Psalm. xci. 11. Matthew. xviii. 10. Luke xv. 7, 10.


These blessed Angels are ever opposing and even fighting against the Devil and
his Angels; insomuch that we read of the War in Heaven by Michael and his
Angels against the Dragon, the Old Serpent, the Devil and Satan; the Accuser of
the Brethren, Rev. xii. 7, 10. It is the same Archangel that St. Jude tells us
contended with the Devil about the Body of Moses, and probably presided at his
Burial! the same Prince among the Angels of Light, whom Daniel saw standing up
for the afflicted Church before the coming of CHRIST in the Flesh, and holding
with its persecuted Members. Dan. xii. 1. Be it the LORD CHRIST himself, or
some Celestial Principality commissioned by HIM, the Succor of his Elect is
the same through Life and Death; and it may be said to the most timorous and
frighted of them, as Elisha to his terrified Servant, awaking early in the
Morning and seeing the Assyrian Host incompassing the Hill on which the Seer
dwelt; " fear not, for they that be with us are more than all these Enemies;
more in Number and more for Strength! " and the LORD opened the young Man's
Eyes, and behold the Mountain was full of Horses ad Chariots of Fire round
about Elisha: i.e. he saw an Army of bright and flaming Angels guarding the Man
of GOD; and leading away blindfold the Assyrian Host at the Will and Prayer of
the meek and humble Prophet: a strange and pleasing Spectacle to Heaven and
Israel. 2 Kings vi. 15, 16.

This is indeed the very State of the Case, as it is laid before us in our
Bible, from the Beginning to the End of it; that through Patience and Comfort of
the Scripture the least and weakest Believer may have Hope; and attain
Quietness and Assurance for ever.

The Time would fail me to mention the recorded Ministrations of the Angels of
GOD to Abraham and Jacob and even to Hagar and Ishmael; to Elias and Daniel and
the Worthies in Babylon; to Peter in the Prison, to Paul in the Storm; to
Cornelius (...) the Closet or Family, and to John in Patmos, for the Testimony
of JESUS.

The same have been the Succors by Angels to the Church in general, from the
Slaughter of the firstborn in Egypt, and the giving the Law ^n Sinai; unto
David's taking the Kingdom and marching against the Philiscines, upon the
Signal given him of an invisible Host going before him over the Mulberry Trees;
and unto the Day of Joshua the High Priest, when the Captive Church had just
emerged out of the Den and Fires of Babylon: Satan then opposed virulently his
bitter Accusations against Him and his People, to frustrate their Prayers and
Intercessions; but the LORD Himself answered for 'em: HE that had taken upon
Himself their Sins, to bear them away: Zech. iii. 2, 4, 7. " The LORD rebuke
thee, O Satan! even the LORD that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee! Is not
this a Brand plucked out of the Fire? And he spoke to those that stood before
Him; the holy Angels his Attendants; who in this Vision (says the judicious Mr.
Clark) represented the Ministers of CHRIST, as his ordinary Instruments in this
Work; saying, "Take away his filthy Garments from him! -- And to Him he said, "
I have caused thy Iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with
Change of Raiment: And then the Angel of the LORD protested unto Joshua, (as
the present Representative of his humble mourning and accused Ones) saying, If
thou will walk in my Ways and keep my Charge, I will give thee Places among
these (my Angels) that are standing by; i. e. in the Heavenly Mansions among
'em for evermore! although now thou and thy Fellows are Men wondered at! For
behold I will bring forth my Servant the BRANCH, thine and their strong and
mighty REDEEMER.

And having thus named HIM, the glorious SON OF MAN whom the LORD has made
strong for Himself, and in WHOM only we have Righteousness and Strength, in
Whom the Seed of Israel are justified and do glory; let me finish the present
Argument by observing, what all the tempted Members of CHRIST should lay up in
their Hearts; -- how the Angels of GOD minister'd with unknown Adoration and
Delight to the MAN CHRIST JESUS, in the Days of his Humiliation, Temptations,
Ministry, Sufferings and Dying for us; from before his Conception and Birth
unto his Burial and Resurrection from the Dead! He was seen of Angels,
worshipped and minister'd to by 'em while lying in the Manger; "The Multitude of
the Heavenly Host gave Glory to GOD in the Highest, from their Goodwill to Men,
congratulating us on the Goodwill of GOD to us in a SAVIOR'S Birth; and they
directed the Shepherds to the Place where the Babe lay: In like Manner they
attended and guarded Him through his Infancy, also in the Wilderness of
Temptation, in the Garden of his Agony, at his mock Trial and on his Cross:
They never deserted him through all these tragic Scenes, while his Disciples
forsook him and fled; and while the Dogs compass^d him and the Assembly of the
wicked enclosed him: No, He told his Guard and Crucifiers that at his Word the
Legions of Angels stood ready then to have delivered him.

They attended his holy Body to its Grave, and there guarded it to the Morning
of the third Day, when they rolled away the Stone from the Mouth of the
Sepulcher; and the comforted the holy Women in their Tears and Fears; "We know
that you seek JESUS that was crucified! Come see the Place where the LORD lay;
and go quickly and tell overwhelmed Peter and the Disciples.

And now, O humble Believer in JESUS, the most sinful and the most timorous,
will thou not encourage thy self from the Readiness of the Holy Angels to
succor and help thee in thy Times of Need! You must see them also, ever near
thee, by the Commandment of thy SAVIOR! They love thee for his Sake, and in a
Measure as they ever loved Him; and as the Members of his Body, of his Flesh
and of his Bones; filling up what is behind of the Sufferings of CHRIST in your
Flesh, Col. i. 24.

Yet must you beware of trusting in the Aids of Angels, any more than you would
in any Arm of Flesh! Nor may you pray to 'em, or give 'em Worship, as the
blessed Apostle himself was ready to do when they had brought him so many
Revelations and Comforts from GOD! "See thou do it not (said the Angel) for I
am thy Fellow Creature and Servant, and a Worshipper of JESUS! -- Never the
less receive 'em as the Angels of GOD, as Abraham and Jacob did; " This is
GOD'S Host! and on the Ladder from Heaven to Earth see 'em descending to, and
ascending from the Sons of Men! -- Come into a holy Fellowship and Communion
with them, by FAITH in CHRIST, and by the Life of JESUS manifested in thy
mortal Flesh. 2 Cor. i^ 8, 11. Let 'em only see CHRIST and his Grace in thee
and they will cleave to thee in Love, and never leave thee to the Will of
Satan, thy and their Enemy. -- You must make the LORD your Refuge, even the
MOST HIGH your Habitation; and then the Promise is, Psalm xci. 11. He shall
give his ANGELS Charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy Ways; and they shall
bear thee up in their Hands, lest thou dash thy Foot against a Stone: Thou
shall tread upon the Lion and the A^^er, etc.

But still beware of the Serpent, -- for he quoted this very Text to the SON OF
GOD himself, when he moved him to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple. Watch and pray that ye enter not into Temptation, and then be strong in
the LORD and in the Power of his Might. When thou passest through the Waters
they shall not overflow thee; and when thou walk through the Fires thou shall
not be burnt. In all your Acts of Worship, secret and public, see the LORD
sitting upon his Throne, high and lifted up, and his Train filling the
Celestial Temple! before Him stand the Seraphims with covered Faces, and you
may hear 'em cry to one another; " Holy, holy, holy is the LORD OF HOSTS, the
whole Earth is full of his Glory! Nor think your self then undone although a
Man of unclean Lips, and dwelling among a People of unclean Lips! but confide
in the LORD of Angels that he will cause his Seraphims to fly down at thy
contrite Prayer (as he sent Gabriel to Daniel while he was making his
Supplication) "to touch thy Lips and take away thy Sin. Isai. vi. 7. Then you
may beat a Defiance to all the Powers of Hell and say, Romans viii. 35 -- 39. Who
shall separate us from the Love of CHRIST? Shall Tribulation or Distress,
Persecution, Famine, Nakedness or Sword? No, I am persuaded that neither Death,
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor
Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to
separate us from the Love of GOD which is in CHRIST JESUS our LORD.

4. If some of GOD's Children are annoyed with most grievous and abhorred
Injections from the Evil One; then how thankful to GOD should others be, who
are free from such Annoyances are mercifully prevented and graciously preserved
in Peace and a right Mind.

It is of the great Mercy and Power of GOD, that no more of us suffer, as some
have done from the fiery Darts of Satan. If GOD did not restrain and chain him
up; if he did not set a Hedge of Defense about us, as he did about Job; of
which his Enemy complained; if GOD should give him the Permission which he
eagerly seeks and catches at; how miserable would he soon make our Life? how
would the Wolf worry every Sheep of CHRIST'S Fold? not a Moment's Ease would he
give us; into what Dejections and Despondencies would he scare us? and into
what pale and meagre Specter of Melancholy would he change us! What Visions
of Hell would he begin within us, and multiply upon us! -- But the merciful GOD
suffers not the Devil to have his Will and Lust upon us; and hence is the
Peace, Tranquillity and Comfort which his Saints enjoy; all their Quiet and
Serenity is the Gift of GOD; and when He gives Quietness who can make Trouble?

It is a special Precept of Religion, Col. iii. 15. Let the Peace of GOD rule
in your Hearts, unto which ye are called in one Body, and be ye thankful. And
it is a special Benediction, Phil. iv. 7. The Peace which passes all
Understanding keep your Hearts and Minds through JESUS CHRIST. And a special
gracious Promise it is,. 9. The GOD of Peace shall be with you: The GOD of
Peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet. Romans xvi. 20.

When we see others in racking Pains, it should raise our Souls in
Thanksgivings to GOD for the Comforts of Ease. When we see others drooping and
sinking under Melancholy and Sorrow of Heart, our more easy, bright and
cheerful Minds should be lift up in Praise to GOD: It is the Way to fix and
increase a sanctified Joy in us. But a Soul restored from the Pains of
Melancholy, more especially after it has suffered the permitted Terrors of
GOD, from the Temptations of Satan, will best know how to prize the Mercy of a
quiet Mind, and rise in thankful Praises for it. -- How sweet think you was it
to the poor Demoniac, that had been so long raving and raging, tearing himself
and roaring among the Tombs; when the evil Spirit was cast out, and he was
sitting at JESUS Feet clothed and in a right Mind? Luke viii. 35. Pleasant it
was to others to see him there and thus, who had been so lately driven and torn
by the Legion; but how much more pleasant was it to the Man himself! how did he
adore his Deliverer, and embrace his sacred Feet? How did he bless himself in
the Change wrought upon him! torn by Devils before, and now gathered under the
healing Wings of his SAVIOR! -- O let us bless GOD for the free and quiet Use
of our Reason and Understanding; and a well informed, faithful and yet peaceful
Conscience! Let this be our Rejoicing (let us seek it, by living so before GOD
as to attain and preserve it) the Testimony of our Consciences that in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
GOD, we have our Conversation in the World.

How dreadful is the Story of King Saul, when the evil Spirit from the LORD
troubled him! not all the State of a King, nor the Pleasures of a Court, nor
the Fidelity of such Sons as Jonathan and David; not David's Sword nor yet his
Harp, nor yet the Shouts of Victory nor Songs of Triumph could charm down nor
chase away the gloomy Fiend. O let us fear Sin, and flee Guilt, which causes
the Spirit of the LORD to depart from Men, and opens a wide Door for the evil
Spirit from the LORD, by his Judgment and Permission, to enter into and torment
them. 1 Samuel xvi. 14. David's Spirit of Devotion is the best Prevention, and
the surest Cure of it. Integrity and Uprightness must preserve us! that is a
solid and deep Foundation to build a settled Peace on: Simplicity and godly
Sincerity. The Winds may blow, the Clouds gather black, the Rains fall, and the
Seas roar and beat; but a House founded on this Rock, by Faith in CHRIST, is
safe. -- Conscience is a sure Friend to the upright, but a terrible Enemy to
the vain and false, the presumptuous and the Hypocrite. Well might false and
ungrateful Saul, false to his GOD and to his People, to his Sons and faithful
Servants, have his Conscience enraged and inflamed against him. It is not to be
imposed on and deceived by Men at their Will, nor yet to be bribed or stunned.
It will not be adjur'd to Quietness by a feigned Force of Devotion, but
exasperated the more; as Saul found it, when he would have inquired of the LORD
again, but he answered him not. So when the Sons of Sceva exorcis'd the evil
Spirit in the Name of JESUS whom Paul preached; the possessed Man leapt on 'em,
and prevailed against them, and they fled away naked and wounded: Acts xix. 15.

We must seek Quiet and Rest from GOD only, in his own Way; the Way of Faith,
Repentance, Prayer, Praise, in secret and public; by Meditation,
Self-Examination, Ejaculations, Self-Dedication and Resignation; in the
conscientious Discharge of all relative Duties, abiding with GOD in our
Callings, and walking with Him in our Houses; and then in his House, in all the
Ordinances of the LORD; keeping his Sabbaths, choosing the Things that please
him, and laying hold on his Covenant; all which GOD has joined, and we must by
no means separate 'em; doing Justice, loving Mercy, and walking humbly before
him; that he may give us within his House and Walls a Place and Name among his
Sons and Daughters, an everlasting Name which shall not be cut off. Isai. lvi.
3, -- 7.

In these Ways let us make Conscience of laboring after a gracious Ease and
Cheerfulness of Spirit, by the Will of GOD: If He gives Quietness who can make
Trouble? And if he hides his Face who then can behold him? My Soul wait thou
only on the LORD for all my Expectation is from him! Psalm. cxxx. Out of the
Depths have I cried unto thee O LORD! hear my Voice, let thine Ear be attentive
to my Supplications! I wait for the LORD, my Soul does wait, and in his Word do
I hope. -- It is promised, Isai. xxxii. 17. The Work of Righteousness shall be
Peace, Quietness and Assurance for ever. GOD meets him that is rejoicing in
working Righteousness, those that remember him in his Ways. -- But to return
from this small Digression,

5. If some of the Children of GOD are here often annoyed with foul Injections
from Hell, how should it excite and raise in 'em all the more earnest Desires
after Heaven; the Place and State of everlasting Rest from Sin and Sorrow, and
of the Perfection of Holiness and Fullness of Joys for ever.

When Job, after too long a Silence, opened his Mouth, it was to curse the Day
of his Birth, and wish himself in his Grave; because "there the Wicked cease
from troubling, and there the weary are at Rest, they hear not the Voice of the
Oppressor. -- O he should have refreshed himself rather with his Hopes of being
in a very short time in Heaven, the REST which remains to the People of GOD
for ever! where are Pleasures for evermore. And this was his Hope and Joy and
Crown of Rejoicing, as he tells us, Chap. xix. 25. "For I know that my Redeemer
lives, and though after my Skin Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh I
shall see GOD; whom I shall see for my Self and mine Eyes shall behold, and not
another, though my Reins be consumed within me.

The distant Point from Hell is HEAVEN; and so the Hallelujahs of One from the
Blasphemies of the other. Satan who left the peaceful Realms of Light, can
return thither no more: he lists not to come near that Holy of Holies again,
nor could he find Entrance: Or if when the Sons of GOD here below present
themselves before Him, the Devil come among them, it is to disturb their
Devotion, and to seek some Permission within the Compass of his own Air, to
have the sifting of some weak and frail Saint here below, or the deceiving some
Vessel of his own into Destruction, as he asked and had leave to do Ahab. The
Dead in Christ only are free and far away out of the Reach of his Malice; they
look down on the Batts of the Night on our Surface and say, "How art thou
fallen, Lucifer, Son of the Morning. The Soul in Heaven is confirmed in Grace
and sure for ever, and past all Fear of Evil: Sin is no more, and could the
Evil One come there he could find nothing to fasten a Temptation on: He sees it
and is grieved, and gnashes with his Teeth, and melts away. If he make War with
Michael, he is sure of a Defeat: O thou Enemy, Destructions are come to a
perpetual End.

Now he comes down in Wrath, great Wrath, for he knows that his Time to
tempt, and the godly Man's Time to suffer by his Temptation, is short: The
present Life is the only Time; Death puts the Believer far away out of the
Reach of any spiritual Foe; the Spirit of the Just as soon as out of the Body
of Sin, is out of the World of Sin also; for it passes immediately and
triumphantly through the Powers of the Air, under a bright and strong Guard of
Angels; before whom the infernal Hosts fly and melt away, as they did before
the Chariots and Horses of Fire that came down for Elias; for the little Ones
in the Church of CHRIST have their Angels, as well as He the Prince among his
Prophets, which behold the Face of their FATHER in Heaven, and know their Faces
too here below; and are as ready to carry their Souls to the Paradise of GOD,
as they were to bury the Body of Moses. Then a Fullness of Holiness, Glory and
Joy remains to them for ever and ever; infinite and eternal Joys are ministered
from the Vision of GOD and of the LAMB; and from the Sight and Hearing of the
Adorations of the thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands about
the THRONE; saying with a loud Voice, Worthy is the LAMB that was slain, to
receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor and Glory, and
Blessing! O in what Transport will every new arriving Saint fall down with
them, and worship Him that lives for ever and ever.

But let us only consider the Day of a Believer's Death as his Freedom for ever
from a State of Temptation, either from within or from without; his putting off
the Armor of Righteousness which he wore here, and boasting over an Enemy
utterly beaten and broken, never to rally more against him; what a welcome
blessed Day must this be unto him! O thou Enemy, Destructions are come to a
perpetual End! "Now is come Salvation and Strength, the Kingdom of our GOD and
the Power of his Might! for the Accuser of the Brethren is cast down; and they
overcame him by the Blood of the LAMB, and by the Word of their Testimony; not
loving their Lives unto the Death! therefore rejoice ye Heavens and all that
dwell in them. Rev. xii. 10, 11.

Thus look up to JESUS and his crowned Saints, poor tempted Child of GOD here
below; and see the high Reward of their Patience and Constancy in bearing
Temptations and Conquest over them! how bright their Crowns, how loud their
Songs of Victory, and what Palms are in their Hands! let all animate you to
follow on and fight and overcome, in the Strength of CHRIST, their LORD and
yours! Those his Worthies were lately weltring in Dust and Sweat and Blood, as
you are now! Consider the End of their Faith and Patience, lest you be weary
and faint in your Minds. -- Let me only read to you the Vision of these Victors
above, that have put off the Harness, and rest from their Labors: Revel. vii.
9, -- 17. After this I beheld, and lo, a great Multitude, which no Man could
number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their
Hands; and cried with a loud Voice, saying, Salvation to our GOD which sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the Angels stood round about the
Throne, and about the Elders, and the four Beasts, and fell before the Throne
on their Faces, and worshipped GOD, saying, Amen: Blessing, and Glory, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our GOD for
ever and ever. Amen. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, What are
these which are arrayed in white Robes? and whence came they? And I said unto
him, Sir, thou know. And he said to me, These are they which came out of
great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the
Blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the Throne of GOD, and serve him
Day and Night in his Temple: and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell
among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall
the Sun light on them, nor any Heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of Waters:
and GOD shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes.

II. Let the second Use be of Caution in two or three Particulars, wherein we
may else do Wrong to the Doctrine before us and misimprove it.

1. Let us beware of imputing to the Devil too much of our own Sin and Guilt,
the corrupt Workings of our own Hearts. We have Sin dwelling in us, and must
remember how we are admonished by the HOLY GHOST, that every Man is tempted
when he is drawn away of his own Lust and enticed. James. i. 14. The regenerate
have the Remains and Lusting of Sin within them; and in its Prevalence at times
the Apostle charges it on indwelling Sin; Romans vii. 17, 20. It is Sin which
dwells in me. We must by no means say, that the Agency of the Devil is in
every Temptation which Men suffer, or Sin which they commit: Neither can we
say, that his Hand is not in this or that Sin: He is invisible, and our own
wicked Hearts act so in Conjunction with him, that sometimes which is most to
blame is not to be said. It is best for the Sinner, often to take it wholly to
himself, but too common to hear him laying it to the Devil. Satan moved David
to number the People, and Satan filled the Heart of Ananias and Saphira to lie
unto the HOLY GHOST. -- Only where the Injection is involuntary, without and
against a Person's Will; where it is violent unnatural, a horror and torment to
a Person, there it may be reasonably attributed to the Devil, his Malice and
Force. But ordinarily it is wise and best to charge our selves, humble abase
and loathe our selves before GOD. Yet it may be utterly wrong to accuse,
condemn, torment our selves, where we are only annoyed assaulted and tempted,
without our yiedling to the detested Motion. -- In Temptations to Sin, that are
attended with Profit and Pleasure our own Hearts may in all likelihood be the
principal, and Satan only accessory: Or if he is first in the Motion and there
be our Compliance, we are accessory in the Crime, and must smite upon our own
Breast. Yet the Case too often is, that profane and lewd People tempt the Devil
to tempt them; or are so habituated to and set upon their wicked Ways, that
they need no Tempter besides themselves.

2. Another Extreme we should be cautioned against is, of making too light of
this Doctrine of the Annoyances which gracious Souls sometimes meet with from
diabolical and hellish Suggestions of Satan. It is, I am sensible, a ridiculous
kind of Suggestion against the Devil, in the Opinion of many at this Day. Many
a Free-thinker may be ready to scoff at it as fanatical, whimsical, splenetic,
Enthusiasm and what not. Some virtuous Persons may be too far in such a Though It;
because they have never felt any thing of it themselves, and through the Favor
of GOD it is not the known Case of very many, and generally those few by
Constitution of Body subject to Melancholy. -- Others it may be, of the
Children of GOD, may d^ubt and scruple much the Reality of this Truth, from the
Peace and Quiet which through the Goodness of GOD they have always themselves
enjoyed, since GOD has wro't upon their Souls, and given 'em Comfort in his
Ways; and they have found a holy Fear and Reverence of GOD increasing with
their Pleasure in Religion, (...) Yet I can assure both the one and the other
(whether they profanely ridicule, or whether they meekly and tenderly pity our
Doctrine) it is an undoubted Fact, what many have felt and others seen, and
there is no denying against Sense and Sight. It is a real Case, that many very
pious Persons are grievously buffeted, vexed and tormented by some invisible
wicked Power, with base, odious, profane, impure Thoughts, which their Souls
abhor. -- In like manner, People may doubt or deny (if they please) whether
ever there was an Apparition or a Possession, because they themselves were
never so unhappy as to see the one or the other; or because there have been
Fancies, Lies and Cheats obtruded on the World in one Case or ^ther; but to me
however, it were the Height of Skepticism and unreasonable doutbing. -- And so
it is to make all that has been said concerning Hellish Annoyances to be the
Fruit of a distempered Brain, the Power of Melancholy, or Fitts of Vapor. --
There is a Medium we shall do well to keep, that we may not be superstitious;
but we must quarrel both with Scripture, Experience and humane Testimony, if we
question the Reality of this Fact; that good People and of good Understanding
do at times suffer, as we have been saying, from a cruel Tempter that is
blasphemous and invisible.

3. A third Caution which I would put in is, that we do not allow our selves to
question the Justice and Righteousness of the Divine Permission; or to
entertain hard Tho'ts of the blessed GOD on this Account. -- Alas! we are no
Judges of what the Sovereign GOD may do or can do; or of the Rights and Wisdom
of his Government: We have not yet been in the Worlds of Spirits, to see their
various Natures, States, Orders and Services in the Creation of GOD. But this
we know both by Revelation and Experience that Man has sold himself to Sin, and
that he did it by the Instigation of the Devil, and what wonder than is it,
that the Devil has so much Access to and Influence on him; either to gain his
Mind and Will to what is evil, or if that is refused then to insult and terrify
him.

Man gave up himself to the Tempter on his first Assault, on his plain giving
the Lie to GOD and charging him even with an Envy of his Creatures Improvement
in Knowledge and Happiness; and is it any strange Punishment of this his
shameful and disloyal Surrender of himself to the Devil^s Will, that it should
be so much from that Day in the Power of the Tempter to vex and distress him
with new Temptations, or fiery Injections on his resisting and refusing them?
or might he not by a just Rejection from GOD have been given over to the
Possession of Satan, as his Tormentor for ever, for his base Rejection of GOD,
his easy Commandment and terrible Threatening of Death? -- Moreover, from
Generation to Generation the Sons and Daughters of Men do in effect
acknowledge, confirm and establish, by their own Act and Deed, the Dominion and
Tyranny of the Devil over themselves and their Children, by their ungodly Lives
and Conversations; abandoning themselves and their Offspring to all manner of
Wickedness. And after all, dare they impeach the Goodness and Justice of GOD in
permitting him the Power, which they have themselves given him, of Access to
their Minds and Consciences, either as a Tempter or a Tormentor? Is it strange
that the Devil should call himself the God of this World, and say of the
Kingdoms and Families of it, " All this is mine! when such Multitudes are led
Captive by him at his Will in the Places of most pure Faith and Worship; and
willingly deceived by him into eternal Perdition? Or is it wonderful that among
the small Number of those that are saved from him, as to his Rule, some of them
are cruelly handled and persecuted by him? Can this give us any Pretense for an
arraigning of the Divine Mercy? when as it is of the LORD'S Mercy that the very
best have not been utterly abandoned to themselves, and given up a Prey to
Satan, as they are ready to acknowledge. -- How much more must we all own that
the just GOD may judicially give over wicked and incorrigible Sinners to their
own Hearts Lusts, and to the Power of Satan to deceive and harden them to their
final Destruction, as he gave over Ahab to the lying Spirit and his dismal End!
or to torture them before their Time, and drive them despairing and roaring out
of the World, as he did by Judas, Spira etc! And doubtless he may for as wise
gracious and holy Ends, relating to his own Glory and our Salvation, and
Satan's Confusion and eternal Judgment; try and explore the Truth and Power of
his Grace in his Servants and Children, by permitting the Temptations of the
Devil, and the Efforts of his Malice and Spite against them. Let us not dare
therefore to have or favor any hard Thoughts of the blessed GOD, for his
permitting the Enemy of our Souls and his Glory, to tempt and distress us when
our Hearts are most and best in our Endeavors after a holy Walk before him,
and Communion with him. In this Frame the Tempter found holy Job, when he shot
the fiery Dart at him, "Curse GOD and die.

4. The last Caution I would give is this, That those who have never suffered
after this kind do not grow secure or high-minded thereon; but fear and pray
that they enter not into Temptation. It is not because you are better than
others, that you have been spared and they grievously tried and buffeted: No,
Job was the first Saint in his Day, and therefore the rather selected to be the
Champion, the David to go out against Goliath and slay him. You are not sure but
that it may be your Turn to suffer thus, before you die. Security or
Self-Confidence may expose you to the Trial and Combat; as Satan desired to
have Peter to sift him, when he heard him vaunt, "I am ready to go with Thee to
Prison and to Death. CHRIST pitied him and prayed for him that his Faith might
not fail. How well is it for us, that we have a SAVIOR to fear and care for
us, when we do not enough fear for our selves. -- The kind Rule and Law to us
is, the kindest Admonition and Warning imaginable to us; " Thou stand by
Faith, be not high minded, but fear. Satan's Advantage over Peter was from his
Self-Assurance: he foiled him, though he could not make his Faith to fail.
Never therefore presume. Humility is the great Security of the Grace of GOD
with us, and his Grace is our only Preservative. GOD resists the proud, but
gives Grace and more Grace to the Humble. We had need be sober and vigilant,
wakeful and on our Watch, because our Adversary the Devil goes about as a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. And it is with Fear and Trembling
that we must be working out our Salvation, that so GOD may still work in us
both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. Phil. ii. 13. The Way of GOD, his
working on, in and with us, is agreeable to the Nature (the Understanding and
Reason, Liberty and Freedom) which he has given us; in Concurrence with our own
Endeavors, and making us diligent and careful in them.

III. The third Use may be of Conviction, Awakening and Terror to profane
BLASPHEMERS, who make a Sport of belching out, at their filthy Lips, those
cursed and diabolical Words, which a gracious Heart trembles with Horror at the
Though It of, ^r to have suggested to him.

How many such are there, to be every where met with, through the Christian
World, who feel no Remorse in uttering the Blasphemies against GOD which any
Devil from Hell can Suggest to them! They set their Mouth against the Heavens,
and their Tongue rages through the Earth: they make a Mock of Sin, misusing,
abusing taking in vain, the holy and awful Name of GOD most High; in ludicrous
Oaths, Curses, Imprecations, atheistical Talk, ridiculing the holy Scriptures,
vilifying Religion! they curse GOD and look up, look about 'em and regard no
Man, damn themselves and others in Railery or in Rage. These incarnate Devils
turn the Earth into a Hell before the Time; and would rend the Heavens (one
would think) and tear the Name and Royalties of GOD in Pieces. In execrable
Speech they daily reproach the Name of their MAKER, his Worship and his Laws,
his Threatenings and his Curse; the Blood of their SAVIOR and all his offered
Grace. Surely these are willing to be though it the Sons of Hell and the Children
of Belial, and whose else can they be! they declare their Sin as Sodom and
glory in their Shame! they are plainly possessed and acted by the Devil, and
his Lusts they do! they aloud proclaim themselves his Vassals, and the Enemies
of their GOD, and of all that are good and holy! they neither fear his great
and glorious Name, nor tremble at his Word and Curse; but despise his Being,
laugh at his Wrath, sport at his Lightning and Thunder, and mock at Damnation!
-- They wait not for Satan's Motion, but would raise him by impious
Adjurations, and bring him up from below! they open wide both Heart and Mouth
for him to enter; and provoke GOD to depart from them wholly; saying to Him, "
We desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways! they belch out the Flames of Hell, and
sear themselves as with a glowing Iron from it.

O what a Mark of Reprobation do such Men wear, what a Brand of Perdition on
their Cheek and Lips! their Mouth is full of Cursing, their Ways always
grievous, and the Judgments of GOD are far away out of their Sight! What
Fellowship have they with Devils already, and how meet are they to go to 'em,
how ripe for Damnation! nor would they find it any Hell to be with Devils,
might they be kindly received by 'em in the Pit below, or would GOD the Judge
still seem to disregard 'em as they think he does now; or Conscience would not
awake there to trouble 'em, and be a never-dying, ever-gnawing Worm within 'em.
Surely these flagrant Sinners would choose the Company of Devils, if the Fire of
Hell could be quenched.

But how contrary to this is the Spot of GOD's Children, the shining Star worn
on their Breast; to show 'em to be among the Nobles of the Court of HEAVEN! the
same devilish Tho'ts which are a Pleasure to the wicked, terrify and torment
the godly! the one trembles at that which is the other's Sport! It is a Sport
to a Fool to do Mischief; he throws about Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death, and
says -- " Am I not in jest? -- Let it comfort the One that GOD has said, " To
this Man will I look that is poor and contrite, trembling at my Word! And let
it terrify the others to read the Vengeance written, " Thou shall not take the
Name of the LORD thy GOD in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless.
Everlasting Blasphemy shall be the eternal Punishment of Blasphemers! They and
Devils together shall gnaw their Tongues for Pain, and blaspheme the GOD of
Heaven, and never repent to give him Glory, Rev. xvi. 11.

If any who have used themselves to profane Swearing, Cursing and execrable
Speech, or who curse inwardly though they dare not speak out, cast their Eyes
upon these Lines; let me call upon them in the Name and Fear of the HIGH AND
LOFTY ONE that inhabiteth Eternity, to repent instantly of this their
Wickedness, and fall on their Knees and pray that the Thoughts of their Hearts,
and Words of their Mouth, may be forgiven. -- O why should any dare to use
themselves to that Profaness, which a gracious Heart sees so much Impurity in,
and feels so much Horror at!

IV. The fourth Use is of Comfort to Melancholy and distressed Persons under
this Oppression of Satan, which we have been speaking of. -- Notwithstanding
all the Fear and Grief hereby occasioned to you, you see that there has no
Temptation befallen you but what is common to the dear Children of GOD; and
that GOD will not reckon to you for Sin these hellish Injections which have
annoyed and disquieted you. They do not pollute your Souls, because you abhor
'em; they are not yours for you do not like 'em, do not consent to or comply
with 'em; they have been (I hope) a Proof and Display of GOD's Grace in you,
and a Means of the Increase thereof to you; nay you are strong, I trust, and
the Word of GOD abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked One! because
greater is He that is in you than he that is in the World. 1 John ii. 13, 14.
iv. 4. Yea blessed is the Man that endures Temptation, for when he is tried he
shall receive the Crown of Life; which the LORD, the righteous Judge shall give
him! -- Blessed is the Man to whom the LORD imputes not Iniquity, and in whose
Spirit there is no Guile.

Let such troubled Souls consider, that these Annoyances from the Enemy and the
Avenger are much rather a hopeful Symptom of Grace ruling in them, than of a
graceless State or the Rule of Sin: that they are no Argument of weak Grace,
but rather of its Growth and Strength: Nor is it any Token that your Soul is
out of Frame, and that the Exercise of Grace is suspended, that it is not
lively and vigorous; for was not JESUS led up by the SPIRIT into the Wilderness
of Temptation, immediately after his Baptism? and was not Job assaulted he was
fearing for his Children, and offering Sacrifices according to the Number of
them all? -- Therefore neither are these diabolical Assaults any Argument of a
sad Defect or Decay of your Love to GOD, or Change of his toward you! and much
less of his shutting out your Prayer and Cry to him; as the Psalmist once
suddenly apprehended when he shouted by Reason of Affliction and spiritual
Distress: Alas! for his Weakness! he was never more heard and regarded by GOD
than he was then; even as CHRIST was never more heard, nor ever more acted
strong Faith in his FATHER'S Love, than when he prayed in the Garden and on the
Cross, "Father, if it be possible, let the Cup pass? And my GOD, my GOD, why
have thou forsaken me? -- Never forget therefore -- that presently after the
HOLY GHOST descended as a Dove upon our SAVIOR, and the Voice from Heaven had
said of Him, " This is my beloved SON in whom I am well pleased; then also was
the Time of Love to Him, even his forty-days Temptation, and the repeated
Insults of Hell upon him: and it was to prove Him to be that SON of GOD which
he had been declared from Heaven.

Again let it be your Comfort, O Child of GOD, under all your Annoyances from
Hell, which you resist and detest, that they are only a Sign that Satan hates
you, and it may be fears you; and that you hate him and shall never be his. It
will comfort you to think that you are hated by him, as Job was; he loves his
own, and we know that he hated CHRIST first, and hates the holy ever blessed
GOD implacably, for evermore.

I add, that it may be a Sign that Satan fears thee, and therefore furiously
attacks thee: he fears (I hope) that he shall lose thee, and sees thee at least
beginning to fear GOD, and in his Fear turning earnestly from Sin, caring for
thy Soul, and seeking after an Interest in CHRIST, and the Mercies of GOD through
Him: this will inrage him to be sure, and if GOD permit him he will doubtless
come down in great Wrath, as knowing that his Time is short if thou art turning
to GOD: As the Lion roars first after his Prey, but more yet if he sees it
escaping from him.

I say again, to conflict with Satan is the Property of true Grace, and it is
the Property of the Devil to conflict with that: who but the Saints of the MOST
HIGH have ever been the Objects of his Spite, the Subjects of his Persecution!
but fear none of these things which thou shall suffer! behold, the Devil shall
cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried, and you shall have
Tribulation ten Days! be thou faithful unto Death and I will give thee the
Crown of Life. Rev. ii. 10.

Yea, though thou be foiled by Satan in some Encounters, as Peter was once and
twice, yet you may " rise again by Repentance, and obtain Establishment in
Grace by your Fall, as he did. And remember, "that GOD trains up those whom he
loves and is preparing for Glory by Exercises of Trial, Temptation and
Suffering. So Joseph and David were educated long in the School of Affliction,
and fitted for their Princely State and Glories. -- And the greater the Fight
of Affliction be, the greater is the Victory, and the greater the Triumph.

But you will say after all, "I question whether I do indeed resist, reject,
abhor and spue out those Evil Thoughts as I ought to do, and as a Child of GOD
certainly ought and will do! I often fear, and apprehend I have sad Cause to
fear, that I give 'em Admission and make 'em my own." -- But I answer again,
"If you fear, hate, pray against 'em; if they afflict, grieve, burden and
distress you; you do abhor 'em; you do reject 'em. It is Conquest enough (says
Mr. Capel in his Treatise on Temptations) that those evil Thoughts are born as
your Burden, too heavy for you to bear; though the Soul cannot get rid of 'em,
yet it resists and overcomes 'em: The beaten Enemy rallies and is beaten again.
-- The Servants of GOD (says he) are " more afraid than hurt; they are rather
Bug-bears than any real Hurt or Mischief to them: The Horror of 'em keeps from
the Sin it self; terrifies from it.

V. I come now to the fifth and last Use, which is of Counsel and Direction;
what Rules to give for Support against, and for Deliverance from such cursed
and devilish Suggestions and Annoyances, as we have been treating of.

Now the repeated Rule to us is in general this, Jam. iv. 7. Resist the Devil
and he shall flee from you: 1 Pet. v. 9. Whom resist, steadfast in the Faith. We
must refuse, deny, oppose, repulse, resolutely and steadfastly: And to help us
in doing so,

1. Let us get and ever preserve right Conceptions of the DIVINE BEING; even
those vast and awful and glorious ones which the Word and Works of GOD supply
us with. These let us be frequently calling to Mind, so as to fix them in our
Minds, with great Solemnity. Let us use our selves to think often of GOD, and
ever speak of Him with great Seriousness and Reverence; never lightly or
vainly. -- I do not say that the Habit of this will keep us from the
Temptations of Satan, nor make 'em less tormenting to us; no, the Torture of it
is from the greater Reverence we have of GOD; but it will arm and fortify us
against the Temptations, and strengthen us to resist them.

For how can I be will not to think of GOD aright, according to his Excellent
MAJESTY, Holiness, Goodness, Wisdom; his Eternity, Immensity, Sovereign
Dominion and Power; his Truth Grace and Mercy; my Creator, Preserver; Savior,
Sanctifier and heavenly Father; and yet bear to have any Thing mean, base, vile
suggested to me of Him; or that any such Thought should rise within me against
him! No, the better we know what GOD is, the more shall we esteem, admire,
venerate, love and joy in Him, and the less shall we endure an unworthy Thought
of Him; but our Faith will turn it into an Occasion of a more express and
raised Adoration.

2. That we may defend our selves from, or overcome such Assaults of the Evil
One, let us diligently study the Holy Scriptures, meditate much in GOD's Law,
attentively read his Word daily, and attend on the preaching of it with
Reverence, Meekness and Love. This is the Shield of Faith, whereby to quench
all the fiery Darts of the wicked One. Ephesians. vi. 16. This is the Helmet of
Salvation and the Sword of the Spirit. By this we must defend our selves, and
put by the dangerous Passes, the deadly Thrusts of the Enemy; and by this we
are to offend and pierce the Tempter, whom we must wound and stab and torture
by opposing the written Word to his cursed Motions. " It is written, said our
Holy SAVIOR, and so he has taught us to shame and put to Flight the Armies of
the Aliens. The Devil cannot have the Face to say to us, as he did to Eve, "Yea,
has GOD said? when we open our Bible to him, and show him the written Text;
written by the Finger of GOD himself, concerning Himself. At other Debate or
Argument he may be too hard for us, but keep to this and there can be no Reply
or Evasion. Tell the Tempter you fear and stand in Awe of the holy Word, and by
that also he shall be judged! tell him that he also knows it to be true and
trembles! Parley not with him, if he say again, " Yea, has GOD said? But insist
upon it, " Yes has GOD said, and thou know it. Let us keep to the Word, and
GOD will keep us from or in the Hour of Temptation. Rev. iii. 10. Eve lost her
self and us, by not abiding by what she knew GOD had spoken. Instead of
insisting on GOD's Authority and Veracity, she went to reasoning with the
Serpent: She should have kept to the Commandment, the Promise and the
Threatening; kept the Terrors and the Rewards of GOD in her Eye;" do this and
live, but in the Day thou eatest, thou shall surely die. Will the Tempter show
us the Kingdoms of this World and all the Glories of 'em; let us show him the
Glories of Heaven, and the Flames of Hell; and where is the Power of his
Temptation? -- The End of the written and preached Word is to instruct direct
and warn us, that we be not ignorant of his Devices, and that we be armed
against the Wiles of the Devil. "I went into the Sanctuary (said the tempted
and dejected Psalmist) and there understood I the End of the Wicked, in whose
flourishing I was grieved. The Word brought him Light and Comfort, and
scattered all his Clouds. It is mighty through GOD to the pulling down
Imaginations, and every high Thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge
of GOD, revenging every Attempt against it, and bringing into Captivity every
Thought to the Obedience of CHRIST. 2 Cor. x. 5. It is the Means appointed for
our Deliverance from the Power of Darkness, and of our Translation into the
Kingdom of GOD's dear SON: The Means of recovering Souls out of the Snare of
the Devil, when they are in most Danger of being taken Captive by him. 2 Timothy
ii. 26.

3. PRAYER, sincere, and fervent and continued Prayer, is a most necessary,
special, excellent and effectual Means of quenching Satan's fiery Temptations,
and to fix the Soul in a steadfast raised Reverence of GOD, and Trust in Him. It
is a grand Article and Part of Prayer, as our LORD has taught us in his most
excellent Form and Directory, the LORD'S Prayer, "lead us not into Temptation,
but deliver us from Evil; the Evil one Satan, the evil thing Sin.

In the Possessions of old, we read that the worst kind of unclean and
malicious Spirits went out by Prayer and Fasting. To be sure then let us not
neglect this powerful Means, which is always present with us; for we are bid to
draw nigh always with true Hearts, and in the full Assurance of Faith; praying
always with all Prayer (vocal or ejaculatory as Occasion offers; -- and when
does it not offer?)

This Direction is not only a matter of Counsel to us, but of Commandment also,
and special Prescription: for when the Apostle in the Name of CHRIST had been
numbering to the Ephesians, all the Parts of the Christian Armor, whereby they
must stand in the evil Day, he adds upon and unto all THIS; " praying always
with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
Perseverance. This is both the Saints Strong Hold, for Refuge and Retreat from
the Enemy; "I flee unto Thee "to hide me; "Thou art my Hiding Place, and shall
compass me about with Songs of Deliverance: And it is also his Tower of
Salvation, from whence he discharges on the Enemy, and sometimes can def^e him
and triumph over him. When the Thorn pierced most, and Satan buffetted the holy
Apostle, he besought the Lord thrice; and received the blessed Answer, "My
Grace shall be sufficient for thee. He had learned this of our LORD JESUS in
the Garden of Temptations, that Hour of the Power of Darkness, when he went
away the third time, with increasing Fervency, Importunity and Submission; O my
Father, if this Cup may not pass away. So he encountered and vanquished the
Powers of Darkness, and sanctified to the Church for ever the Way of Prayer for
Victory over them, and Deliverance from them. -- When Peter also was to be
tempted, CHRIST prayed for him, and told him that he had done so, that he might
pray for himself. It ever was and will be the Way of GOD's People. When
Rabshakah blasphemed, raved and threatened, Hezekiah lift up his Prayer, and GOD
answered, Let the Daughter of Sion despise him! whom has he reproached! -- and
when Haman had devised against the Church, Esther and Mordecai sought the LORD
by Fasting and Prayer, and then she fell down in Tears also before the King. --
Do we feel or fear the Annoyances of the evil Spirit, let us go in our Tears
with Faith to the good SPIRIT of GOD, for his Aids, Succors, Influences, to
prevent and keep us; and though the Tempter should follow you to your Knees and
even dare to suggest Blasphemy to you there; yet let him not deter or drive you
from Praying, but double your Adorations of GOD, and say " At what time I am
afraid I will trust in Thee; in GOD will I praise his Word, in the LORD, I have
put my Trust; I will not fear what Men or Devils can do unto me.

4. Pray for heavenly Prudence, and the Wisdom that comes from above, for the
Government of your Thoughts, that Satan may not find Advantages against you
through your not keeping your Heart with all Diligence. We must be Workers
together with GOD, and Heart-work is hard Work. If the LORD be thy Keeper, he
will help thee to keep thy self, and to guard the Thoughts of thy Heart,
Examine me, O LORD, and prove me; try my Reins and my Heart; for thy Loving
Kindness is before my Eyes, and I have walked in thy Truth: Search me O GOD and
know my Heart, try me and know my Tho'ts and see if there be any wicked Way in
me, and lead me in the Way everlasting. The Habit of vain, trifling, light,
worldly, sensual Thoughts, give^ Place and Power to the Devil; and opens the
Heart wide to him to take Possession, and his Goods will be in Peace, for he
desires no more, nor any faster hold; he gives therefore the careless,
tho'tless Heart no Trouble: On the contrary, if a Person begins to take Though It
about the State of his Soul, the Enemy of all Righteousness will presently
oppose and raise a War, in that Soul; which on the Soul's Part must be carried
on by guarding and governing the Imaginations, Inclinations, Desires and
Resolutions of the Mind and Will; that vain Tho'ts may not lodge within us, but
be kept out or turned out: -- But the Government of the Though It is too large and
wide a Field of Argument to be here entered on; and what the Argument I am upon
supposes the Person at present to be much disabled for; and therefore Divines
do in this Case rather advise him not to be too intent upon and sollicitous
about; but rather only to neglect, slight, turn away from, and disdain the foul
Injection, whatever it be; which may be the most proper and effectual Rule and
Power the Soul can have, or express over it self in such a Case.

5 Keep not the Devil's Counsel, and give not way to Melancholy, Discontent
and Dejection, but beware of Solitude and Idleness, and reveal your Trouble to
your Minister, Parent or some gracious Friend, and not only ask but heed the
Assistance of their Counsels and Prayers The Rev. Mr. Clifford in his Preface
to his Collections from Mr. Baxter, of the Signs and Causes of Melancholy,
tells us from Mr. Bolton; That too much Secresy and Concealment may cause the
Wound of a terrified Conscience to bleed inward, rankle, f^ster and grow
desperate; whereas seasonable Discovery may comfort and cure it. I knew One who
kept close in his Bosom the Temptation of Blasphemy for the Space of above
twenty Years: All which Time the Devil tyraniz'd extremely, and kept him almost
in continual Terror. He thought that there had never been Man before him that
had such vile and prodigious Thoughts, and that if the World knew what they
were, he should be abhorred as a Monster, and the loathsomest Creature upon
Earth. -- But at last hearing the Nature, Manner and Remedy of these hideous
Injections, discovered by the Ministry of the Word; and afterward privately
informing himself further and more fully from the Minister; he was happily
taken off the Rack for Time to come, and most wonderfully refreshed. -- Use
therefore the Means, and magnify the Mercy of GOD to You, if He bless 'em to
bring you out of your sad, dark and disconsolate Condition; -- or if he bless
'em to keep you from falling into it.
, and diligently apply, as to the religious Duties, so to the proper and
peculiar common and worldly Business of the Day. Do not choose to be much alone
with the Tempter; he is much too strong for thee by thy self. CHRIST indeed was
led up by the SPIRIT into the Wilderness to be tempted, and continued in the
Solitude; but He was the Son of Man whom GOD called alone, and made strong for
himself; the Fullness of the GODHEAD was in Him, and the SPIRIT without Measure;
and he was to tread the Winepress alone. Do thou keep to the Footsteps of his
Flock, whereof thou art a Member; associate with them, in public and private,
and commune with them. As Iron sharpens Iron, so the Countenance of Friends one
another: It is more especially so in religious Friendships and Freedoms: there
let the Friend be unto thee as thy own Soul; but choose wisely, such as are able
to advise thee, and will be ready and faithful. GOD has made us for one
another, but we must depend on HIM alone, not on any Arm of Flesh. Our Faith
must not stand on the Wisdom of Men, but on the Power of GOD; and we must edify
one another by the written Word of GOD, and with the Comforts wherewith we our
selves have been comforted of GOD. -- We ease one another's Backs, by bearing
one another's Burdens. It is an Honor and Happiness to be able to admonish
and counsel one another, as there is Occasion. " Blessed be thou, thy Wisdom
and Advice, said David to Abigail. A Soul-Friend is a Friend indeed: This
eminently is to fulfill the Law of Love. Love to GOD and Love to Souls is the
fulfilling of the Law.

Mr. Baxter tells us, that of forty or fifty Persons, who have been at a Time
known to him, under the Oppression of blasphemous and vile Thoughts, there have
not been four or five but were sensibly under the Power of Melancholy, either
from their natural Temperament, or from cross Providence, or some Spice of
Discontent under their outward Circumstances. We must neither give Place to the
Devil by Anger or by Melancholy; the Tempter makes Advantage of every Temper,
and of every Extreme. But in one particular all Divines agree and advise, and
that is,

6. That afflicted tempted Persons make not too great a Matter of their
molesting Thoughts; which they are very prone to do, and they give Tempter a
great Advantage thereby. Non multum volvat et revolvat Cogitationes istas, says
the very pious, judicious and learned Van Mastricht: "Don't keep poring on and
revolving in your Minds the Molestations given you; but humbly obtest and plead
before GOD your utter Aversion to them, with Thankfulness to GOD for it; and
beg of him to enable you not to lay 'em so to Heart, as to be hindered by 'em
in Matters of present Duty, toward GOD, your selves, your Families or
Neighbors. Nay, be so much afraid of being taken off from the Duties of the
Day, of whatever kind it be, at Home, in the Shop, or abroad; as to be driven
to these Duties, lest you give Place to the Tempter: Rebuke him therefore and
say, " Depart from me, thou Evil One, for I will keep the Commandments of my
GOD. -- And if yet you cannot get rid of him as you would, still " beware of a
too intense contending with him: rather " turn away says one Divine as from a
barking Dog, and as you would from a furious Scold in the Street, says another.
Turn from 'em with a holy Contempt and Disdain, as CHRIST rebuked them, " Get
thee hence Satan.

I remember the Venerable Mr. Baxter speaks on this Argument in the following
Manner, If you make a great Matter of every Thought that is cast into your
Mind, you keep 'em the longer in Mind, and it is the Way to fix 'em there.
Troublesome Thoughts are like angry Scolds, who if you regard and answer 'em
will follow and dog you, and never have done; but if you answer 'em not, and
turn from 'em, they will have done and give over; or at least you get out of
hearing 'em. -- The Devil's Design (says he) is to disquiet and vex you; let
him see that you will not regard him. He Will keep you to it all Day long, if he
finds you harkening to and answering all he says. He will take you off from
greater Duties and from all Duties, if you stay to wrangle with him. -- As the
Archangel railed not again at the raving Devil, but only said " the LORD
rebuke thee; so answer and rebuke the Injections of Satan, and argue not with
him. -- Yea, labor after a placid Submission to the Will of GOD in his holy
Permission of them. Turn the cruel Exercise given by an Enemy, into a Sacrifice
and Surrender to GOD. This Example Job gives in our Text, and so did CHRIST in
the Garden; "Father, let the Cup pass! never the less not as I will. St. Paul
seems to have been in this Frame under the Thorn, and the Answer to his Prayer
was, " My Grace shall be sufficient for thee. -- Godliness with Contentment is
great Gain: We must labor after Contentment in the Will of GOD under the most
fiery Trials: It is the Sum and Crown of all moral Obedience, active or
passive: It is the Top-stone of the Moral Law, the Ten Commandments: We had not
known Sin, nor yet the Perfection of Grace in a sincere Obedience, if the Law
had not said, and ended thus, " thou shall not covet. There is one Will in
Heaven, which is GOD's, and thence is the Perfection of Holiness and Happiness.
If it could be thus on Earth, we should be perfect too here below. That we may
be so, as far as is possible, Contentment in the whole Will of GOD is the last
Commandment. This would fulfill the whole Law, in both the Tables of it; in all
the Devotion we owe to GOD, in all the Love we owe to our Neighbor, and in all
the Care we should have of our own Souls. And to exhibit, evidence and promote
this blessed Frame in us under the most fiery Trials, let me proceed to another
Rule or Direction, which is

7. Make Conscience of daily exercising your selves in Adoration, Blessing,
Thanksgiving and Praise to GOD; more especially for CHRIST and the sure Mercies
of the Everlasting Covenant of Grace, purchased and ratified by his Blood. In
GOD I will praise his Word, in the LORD I have put my Trust, I will not fear
what Flesh (or Spirit) can do unto me; when they would swallow me up! or while
fighting daily they oppress me. Psalm lvi. 1, 4. This is to fly to the Rock of
Salvation, and hasten our Escape from the windy Storm and Tempest. For the Name
of the LORD is a strong Tower, which the righteous fly to and are safe; and the
Promises in CHRIST are the Anchor of our Souls in every Storm of Temptation.

"Tie your selves daily therefore (says Mr. Baxter) to spend as much Time in
confessing Mercies received, as in confessing Sins committed. Be more in the
Praises of GOD, and less in bewailing your selves. Thanksgiving is the greater
Duty; give this the largest Share of your Time: -- As Change of Diet will
change the Temperature of the Body, so you may sweeten your embitter'd Minds by
delightful Thoughts of GOD. Praise Him for his Mercy and his Truth, when the
Tempter would have you question or deny both. You will find your Graces move,
and Comforts flow by this Means; as when you go into Sunshine you find Light
and Warmth. -- Or if you cannot find at last that you have the delighting Love
which you desire, you may not be able to deny but you have a desiring seeking
and lamenting Love. Thank GOD for this, and take Encouragement from it, and it
will increase both Love and Comfort. -- But after all, as he goes on to advise
and direct

8. " Overvalue not the passionate Part of Duty, nor build too much on
Transports of Joy as the surest Evidences of true Grace, or necessary to a Walk
before GOD and Communion with Him; but know that a resolved humble Choice and
Endeavor are the Life of Grace and Duty; when Feelings are but lower and
uncertain Things. -- This is another of the Rules given by the heavenly and
experienced Mr. Baxter.

"You know not what you do, says he, when you lay so much on the passionate
Part, and are striving for deep and transporting Apprehensions: These are not
the main and great Things, nor the Essentials of Holiness. Too much of this
Feeling may distract you: and GOD knows best how much of it may be good for
you, or what you may be able to bear. -- Passionate Feelings (says he) depend
much on Nature; some People are much more sensible than others; a little Thing
goes deep with 'em. The most wise and solid are usually the least passionate,
and the weakest hardly moderate their Passions. GOD is not an Object of Sense,
but of the Understanding and Will. I have known many complain for Want of
deeper Feelings, when if they had been more, it might have distracted them."
Thus He.

Some good Souls have been ready to wish they could feel greater Degrees of
Terror, such as they have seen others in, or heard 'em tell of their passing
through: but this does not seem to be a natural Exercise of Grace, whether we
consider GOD or our Selves: For, the Pains of every Birth belong to GOD alone
to order, and not at all to us to choose: And as we are very thankful to GOD
when a Child is born with fewer and more gentle Pains to the Mother; so by all
means ought the Soul to be that passes through the New Birth, by the Will of GOD,
with lesser Agonies of Distress: for Instance, -- though the Jailor could never
enough be thankful to GOD, that he broke open his hard Heart, like the Iron
Gate of the Prison, by the Terrors of an Earthquake; -- yet ought not Lydia to
be as much raised in Gratitude to the same Sovereign Grace? and was she not as
much affected (think you) with the Kindness and Gentleness of GOD in his
dealing with her in a more mild and placid manner? Acts xvi. 14. " Whose Heart
the LORD opened, that she attended to the things spoken by Paul; and when she
was baptized and her Household, she besought us saying, If ye have judged me to
be faithful to the Lord, come into my House and abide there: and she
constrained us.

9. Look to thy holy, humble, constant, even, and if possible cheerful
Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel; that thou be righteous before GOD, walking
in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the LORD, blameless. O That my Ways
were directed (as David teaches us to pray) that I might keep thy Precepts!
then shall I not be ashamed, when I have Respect unto all thy Commandments! I
will keep thy Statutes, forsake me not utterly" -- Walk before me, said GOD to
Abraham, and be thou perfect; and lo I establish my Covenant with thee; -- "The
LORD is with you while ye be with Him; and if you seek him he will be found of
you; but if you forsake him he will forsake you. Look diligently to thy holy
living, and Satan shall never hurt you. " Eschew Evil, and GOD will make his
Hedge about you. "Who shall harm you if you be Followers of that which is good.
GOD is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able,
but will with the Temptation find a way to escape. -- Satan will be discouraged
if he sees he cannot hinder thee in holy living, but only quickens thee in thy
Care and Heed thereto. This is to turn the Devil's Weapons against him, and to
stab him with his own Sword. The righteous shall hold on his Way; GOD will not
suffer his Feet to be moved, and he that has clean Hands shall wax stronger
and stronger. -- Answer therefore and rebuke the Tempter, strong in Faith;
"depart from me, thou evil One, for I will keep the Commandments of my GOD!
"LORD I will keep thy Statutes, O forsake me not utterly! -- That Temptation is
lost on us that does not cause us to transgress; but if it increase our Watch
unto Prayer and Obedience it is our Gain. "He that commits Sin is of the
Devil, but in this the Children of GOD are manifest; how shall I do this
Wickedness and sin against GOD! Ye are then of GOD, little Children and have
overcome! for greater is HE that is in you, than he that is in the World.

10. After all, and in all, build nothing upon thy own Righteousness, nor act
or trust in thy own Strength; but seek to and rely on CHRIST for Righteousness
and Strength; and cast thy polluted, guilty, perishing, wounded Soul on the
free Sovereign Grace, Mercy and Compassion of GOD, imploring the everblessed
ETERNAL SPIRIT, the Convincer of Sin, the Sanctifier of Souls, and then their
COMFORTER, to be ever with thee; to succor and support thee, to defend and
keep thee, to rebuke the Tempter, to bruise him under thy staggering Feet; and
say unto thee, " My Grace is sufficient for thee, and I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee. -- Thus go in the Name of CHRIST to the Everlasting FATHER
for the Gift of his HOLY SPIRIT, to show thee the Evil of Sin, to work in thee
a saving Humiliation for it, to give thee a true and deep Repentance,
Contrition and Self-loathing on the Account of it, to enable thee to cry for
Pardon and Renovation; to be in thee the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, to
help thee with Groanings which cannot be uttered, and succor thee when
tempted; to work Faith in thee and the proper Exercise of it upon every
Occasion, in every Time of Need; to make it work by Love, to make thee know the
Love of CHRIST which passes Knowledge; to ground and root it in thee; to give
thee and increase in thee a Child-like Fear and Reverence, and a Christ-like
Submission to his and thy Heavenly Father, his GOD and thine; a Covenant GOD
and FATHER in Him. -- And then to be thy COMFORTER; for it is his blessed
Office, under and from the Ascended SAVIOR; who was tempted, and that
hideously, both in the Wilderness and in the Garden; and in our stead, bearing
the Sins of his Elect, and is therefore able to succor them that be tempted.
-- O implore the exalted JESUS to endue thee from on High, with the HOLY SPIRIT
of Promise; not as on the Day of Pentecost with his extraordinary Operations or
Manifestations; it would be a satanical Delusion and high Presumption in thee
to look for any thing of this Nature; but beg of HIM what is infinitely better,
his HOLY SPIRIT in his common and ordinary Influences to renew and change thee,
to purify thy Heart, to give thee new and holy Affections, and in them a new
Nature; and to put on thee the whole Armor of GOD, whereby thou may stand
in the evil Day, and finally overcome all thy spiritual Enemies.

Make therefore the Name and Righteousness of CHRIST, and the Promises in Him,
thy Sanctuary and Tower of Salvation, and fly to that and be safe. All thy Help
comes through HIM and from Him: fly to the Rock, whither Satan cannot come. --
You know how the Devil tore and threw the poor Child, as they bro't it to
CHRIST: but instantly he left it, and fled from the Face of the SON OF GOD. The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah will prevail; He has prayed for thee, that thy Faith
do not fail; and however Satan may be permitted to sift thee, fail it shall
not, if thou reliest on his Intercession. -- For this End the SON OF GOD was
manifested, to destroy the Works of the Devil and to snatch the bleeding Lambs
from his Jaws: the Son of David is still going against the Lion and the Bear to
save his Flock from their Teeth; He is the good Shepherd and knows his Sheep,
and they shall never perish, nor shall any pluck them out of his Hand. He has
spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a Show of them openly, triumphing
over them on his Cross; He conquered, in his Death and Resurrection, he
triumphed in his Ascension, and reigns in his Exaltation: Revel. i. 18. "I am
He that lives, and was dead, and am alive for Evermore, Amen; and have the
Keys of Hell and of Death.

And as to Doubts and Fears which the Godly may still have at Times, about
their Love to GOD, their Election, Vocation, Faith, Repentance, Justification,
Sanctification and Perseverance; they must recur to CHRIST and the blessed
SPIRIT of GOD; " Pendulus semper a Bonitate et Auxilio DEI, as Mr. Mastricht
expresses it; hanging as a Child about the Parent's Arms for Safety; casting
all our Cares and Fears upon Him, who cares for us; who has said to us -- " be
without Carefulness, for I will never leave thee nor forsake thee! "fear not ye
for I know that ye seek JESUS which was crucified! And again, Fear thou not,
for I am with thee, be not dismayed I am thy GOD; I will strengthen thee, yea I
will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right Hand of my Righteousness.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 14. l. 84. dele him. P. 18. l. 16. r. Tears. l. 18^ ^. Fears. P. 22. l.
38. r. Flight.

APPENDIX.
AN excellent LETTER on the foregoing Subject coming lately into my Hand, I
have prevailed with the Person to whom it was wrote, to yield to my publishing
a Part of it, as I now do, without asking Leave of the Revd. and judicious
Writer of it, -- for I truly think it will make up some Defects, and also give
Strength and Force to some Things said, in this Treatise.

July 19. 1743. Dear Sir,
I Think your Difficulties are not peculiar to you, but such as I have met with
frequent Instances of; though Persons under such like Difficulties are ready to
think them peculiar, and that no One's Case is like their's. -- It is evident
that Satan's Design is to hinder their serving GOD, and using the proper Means
for their own Profit and Comfort; by wasting away their Time and Lives in
unprofitable Exercises of Mind, needless Doubts, Scruples, Terrors, and
fighting with Shadows; and it soon through Melancholy becomes natural for them
to pore upon that which is unprofitable* and thereby they feed their own
Disease, and involve themselves more and more, till they get an Aversion to,
and object most against, those Things which have the greatest Tendency to their
Relief: There is a certain Gloom upon the Mind which the Devil makes great
Advantage of; for it weakens the Mind and disables it from guarding against
him; to his utmost therefore he strives to increase that Gloom; (for he sees
that the Mind while under it is like a City without Walls) and to that End will
ever now and then be casting in some horrid Though It, or frightful Suggestion, or
Temptation: And if the Person in such a Case goes to dispute with him, or fight
against him, he often makes his Advantage of that very disputing and fighting;
and by that Means plunges the Soul deeper and deeper, and entangles it more and
more. The best Way of resisting the subtle and strong Adversary is to neglect
him, turn from him, and not enter into Disputes with him; nor take so much
Notice of his Suggestions, however frightful and horrid, as to be alarmed with
them: For if he has once alarmed and affrighted the Soul, then he has gained a
great Advantage against it, and he will be sure to improve it to his utmost. --
The best Way is for a Person to look unto GOD for Help, and go right on his
Way, and not stand to hear what the Devil has to say. This above any other
Course disappoints him, for hereby he loses his Opportunity to try his Strength
and Subtilty with us; for he knows well that if he can draw into a Dispute with
him he shall be too subtle for us: A Resolution to go steadfastly right forward
in the Way of Duty and of all Duty, (if one could maintain it) without standing
still, or turning aside, is one of the best Remedies under such sort of
Difficulties. -- The great Strife of the Devil is to weaken and break such
Persons Resolution and Stedfastness in the Way of Duty, and either by Terror or
Persuasion to make 'em neglect some Ordinance, or some Duty of our general or
particular Calling; some Duty of Worship, or some necessary worldly Business;
or something that Providence calls us to, by which we might profit our Selves,
our Families, our Neighbors or the public Societies unto which we belong. And
I have observed that Persons under such Circumstances, being in Darkness and
Doubts of the State of their Souls, generally take a wrong Course to obtain
Satisfaction: they spend all their Time almost in anxious poring on past
Experiences, and viewing 'em over and over: Not but that they ought to examine
past Experience; but this is not all, nor yet the main Thing they have to do:
Deliverance from Doubts and Darkness, in such Cases, is not obtained chiefly by
Self-Examination, but Action I have always observed that when Persons instead
of applying themselves with all their Might to seek GOD and his Grace, and to
serve him, forgetting the Things that are behind, and pressing forward in the
Way of all Duty, as though they counted not themselves to have apprehended; I
say, when instead of this, they neglect their great Work, and abandon
themselves to musing, poring and looking over Things that are past; they get
nothing by it: A spending seven Years in thus examining past Experiences or
present Circumstances, brings 'em no nearer to Satisfaction; but rather
intangles and perplexes their Minds more and more, and gives Satan greater
Advantage: And however with their examining themselves they do as they think
strive to go on in a Way of Duty, yet in their seeking GOD they commonly err in
four Things:

1. They seek him with an unsubmissive Spirit. It is true they sometimes seek
earnestly and with Bitterness of Soul; but there is commonly a Sort of
Uneasiness, and inward Tumultuousness, and Unquietness of Spirit; which shows a
Want of that humble, meek, calm and submissive Spirit, that becomes a poor
unworthy Worm, and more especially a Christian, or a Child of GOD, when GOD
frowns or hides his Face. I have often seen this; they have some Degree of that
Frame which Job had before Elihu spoke, and GOD after him out of the Whirlwind;
they complain "that they cry to GOD and he does not answer, they seek him but
they cannot find him; " they go forward, but he is not there; and backward but
they cannot perceive him! He seems to shut out their Prayer, and turn a deaf Ear
to them. But I have known many Instances of such as made these Complaints,
being brought afterward by the Grace of GOD to seek him after quite another
Manner; to lie as it were at his Foot, in a humble submissive quiet Frame of
Spirit, in a great Sense of their utter Unworthiness, and of GOD's Holiness and
Sovereignty, and so remaining in a calm waiting Frame; when once they have been
brought to this, all their Clouds have been scattered, and GOD has wonderfully
appeared and unveiled himself for their Consolation: and I never knew it fail,
when Persons after great Darkness, and having been long tossed up and down, as
in a tempestuous Ocean, have been brought to this Temper; GOD has as it were
shown himself in haste to comfort them; and ran (as it were) to meet 'em, while
they were yet a great Way off: CHRIST has been like the swift-footed Roe, or
the young Heart on the Mountains of Spices.

2. Another Error in such Persons seeking GOD, is seeking with Discouragement.
Before they ask they do as it were conclude they shall have a Denial; and while
they are asking, they do as it were tell GOD that he will not answer 'em; and so
they greatly dishonor him, deny him the Glory of his Grace, and provoke a
Denial. They ask in a heartless Manner, because in a discouraged Manner. Hence
they have no Resolution to say as Jacob did, " I will not let thee go, except
thou bless me. When they ask and are denied, it has not that Effect upon them,
as it had upon the Woman of Canaan, to make her cry the more earnestly, and to
be the more resolute. On the contrary, they are knocked on the Head, and are
ready to conclude, that GOD don't intend to show 'em Mercy, and that his Mercy
is clean gone for evermore.

3. Another Error in their seeking is, that they seek Comfort more than
Holiness. We ought to seek Comfort, and the Joy of the Light of GOD's
Countenance, as of more Worth than all the World; but our Minds should be more
engaged, and our Strength more employed, in an earnest Care and Strife to do
our Duty to GOD, and to serve him; than to attain the Comfort of Satisfaction
about our own Condition: It should be our Meat and Drink to do the Will of GOD:
If we take effectual Care of this, GOD will take Care of our Comfort, and will
do that for us, which we can never do for our Selves: He Will scatter our Clouds
and Darkness, and fill our Souls with Light.

4. Another Error in such Persons seeking GOD is, that they do not seek him in
the Way of all Duty. It may be they abound in praying, and reading, and
meditating, and fasting; and lie upon their Faces as Joshua did, when smitten
before A^; but they are not so thorough in the mean Time to search out the
Achan; the Trespass in every Way of the Commandments of GOD. For GOD is to be
sought and waited on in the Way of the Practice of every Thing that he calls us
to, whether they be the Duties of the first or second Table: the immediate
Duties of Religion, or of secular Business: These are all of 'em Wisdom's Gates
and the Posts of her Doors, where we are to watch and wait.

Thus Sir, I have briefly expressed my Thoughts with Regard unto the
Difficulties of that Nature which you labor under. Experience abundantly
convinces me of my Insufficiency to relieve in such Cases. It is GOD that must
help to give good Advice, and also to follow it. It is the good Shepherd must
seek his Sheep: To His Alsufficient Power and Grace I recommend your Case, and
am

Sir, Your Obliged Friend and Servant,



