THE TESTIMONY Of the President, Professors, Tutors and Hebrew Instructor of
HARVARD COLLEGE in Cambridge, Against the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, And
his Conduct.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed and sold By T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in
Cornhill. 1744.

THE TESTIMONY, etc.
IN regard of the Danger which we apprehend the People and Churches of this
Land are in, on the Account of the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield, we have though it
ourselves obliged to bear our Testimony, in this public Manner, against him and
his Way of Preaching, as tending very much to the Detriment of Religion, and
the entire Destruction of the Order of these Churches of Christ, which our
Fathers have taken such Care and Pains to settle, as by the Platform, according
to which the Discipline of the Churches of New England is regulated: And we do
therefore hereby declare, That we look upon his going about, in an Itinerant
Way, especially as he has so much of an enthusiastic Turn, utterly
inconsistent with the Peace and Order, if not the very Being of these Churches
of Christ.

And now, inasmuch as by a certain Faculty he has of raising the Passions, he
has been the Means of rousing many from their Stupidity, and setting them on
thinking, whereby some may have been made really better, on which Account the
People, many of them, are strongly attached to him (though it is most evident,
that he has not any superior Talent at instructing the Mind, or showing the
Force and Energy of those Arguments for a religious Life, which are directed to
in the everlasting Gospel) Therefore, that the People who are thus attached to
him, may not take up an unreasonable Prejudice against this our Testimony, we
think it very proper to give some Reasons for it, which we shall offer,
respecting the Man himself, and then his Way and Manner of Preaching.

First, as to the Man himself, whom we look upon as an Enthusiast, a
censorious, uncharitable Person, and a Deluder of the People; which Things, if
we can make out, all reasonable Men will doubtless excuse us, though some such,
through a fascinating Curiosity, may still continue their Attachment to him.

First then, we charge him, with Enthusiasm. Now that we may speak clearly upon
this Head, we mean by an Enthusiast, one that acts, either according to Dreams,
or some sudden Impulses and Impressions upon his Mind, which he fondly imagines
to be from the Spirit of God, persuading and inclining him thereby to such and
such Actions, though he has no Proof that such Persuasions or Impressions are
from the holy Spirit: For the perceiving a strong Impression upon our Minds, or
a violent Inclination to do any Action, is a very different Thing from
perceiving such Impressions to be from the Spirit of God moving upon the Heart:
For our strong Faith and Belief, that such a Motion on the Mind comes from God,
can never be any Proof of it; and if such Impulses and Impressions be not
agreeable to our Reason, or to the Revelation of the Mind of God to us, in his
Word, nothing can be more dangerous than conducting ourselves according to
them; for otherwise, if we judge not of them by these Rules, they may as well
be the Suggestions of the evil Spirit: And in what Condition must that People
be, who stand ready to be led by a Man that conducts himself according to his
Dreams, or some ridiculous and unaccountable Impulses and Impressions on his
Mind? And that this is Mr. Whitefield's Manner, is evident both by his Life,
his Journals and his Sermons: In which, the Instances of this dangerous Turn
are so many, that we cannot touch on more than a very few of them. From these
Pieces then it is very evident, that he used to govern himself by his Dreams;
one Instance we have of this, is in his Life, page 12. Near this Time I dreamed
that I was to see God on M. Sinai. This made a great Impression upon me.
Another like Instance we have p. 39, 40. I prayed that God would open a Door to
visit the Prisoners, quickly after I dreamed that one of the Prisoners came to
be instructed by me; the Dream was impressed much upon my Heart; in the Morning
I went to the Door of the Goal. -- Once more, a like Instance we have page 43.
I dreamed I was talking with the Bishop -- and that he gave me some Gold, which
chinked in my Hands; and p. 44. The Guineas Chinking in my Hand, put me in Mind
of my Dream.

Now if we consider these Instances, we must suppose him conducting himself by
his Dreams: Nay, the Second looks as if he would have us think, that it was a
divine Direction to him, as was that of the divinely inspired Apostle, which
caused him to attempt to preach the Gospel at Macedonia. And as plain it is,
that he usually governed himself by some sudden Impulses and Impressions on his
Mind; and we have one Instance that may satisfy us, that his first setting out
upon his Itinerant Business, was from an Enthusiastic Turn. Journal from London
to Gibraltar, p. 3. He says, He will not mention the Reasons that persuaded
him, that it was the divine Will that he should go abroad, because, they might
not be deemed good Reasons by another; but says, He was as much bent as ever
to go, though strongly solicited to the Contrary, having asked direction from
Heaven about it for a Year and an half. Other Instances there are, wherein he
shows it to be his Custom to attribute any common Turn of his Mind to a Motion
of the Holy Spirit upon him, without any more Reason than any Man may, any
Recollections of his Memory, or sudden Suggestions of his own Understanding.
Such an one you have, Journ. from Gibral. to Savan. p. 6. I went to Bed with
unusual Tho'ts and Convictions, that God would do some great Things at
Gibraltar --: Another, Journ. from Savann. to England, p. 22. where he Says,
That the Lesson before he left Savannah being St. Paul's Shipwreck; and that,
before his leaving Charlestown being the First of Jonah, made such a deep
Impression upon him, that he wrote to his Friend to acquaint him, he was
apprehensive he should have a dangerous Voyage, and it happening to be bad
Weather accordingly, he says, God has now showed me, wherefore he gave these
previous Notices. So that every Scripture that came to his View, was received
as the Bath Kol of the Jews, and he plainly shows himself as much directed by
this Way of finding out the Will of God, as he calls it, as the old Heathen
were by their Sorts Homerciae, Virgilianae, etc. And of this we have a very
full Instance, same Journ. Page 38. where you have a particular Application of
the Words which appeared upon the Doctor's first opening the Book of Common
Prayer, viz. The Lord has visited and redeemed his People; upon which he
wisely observes, so it was, for about 8 of Clock the Men saw Land. Sometimes he
speaks as if he had Communications directly from the Spirit of God, Journ. from
Gibral. to Savann. p. 5. God was pleased to show me, it was not his Will.
Journ. from Savann. to N. E. p. 31. The Power of the Lord came upon me: So
also, p. 38. and again, p. 68. The Spirit of the Lord was upon me: Journ. from
N. E. to Falmouth in Engl. page 6. The Lord gave me that Freedom that the
Spirit came down upon them as a rushing mighty Wind. Sometimes, and indeed very
frequently, he (in a most enthusiastic Manner) applies, even the historical
Parts of Scripture particularly to himself, and his own Affairs; and this
Manner he endeavors particularly to vindicate. Sermon. of Searching the
Scriptures, p 246. of his Sermons. It is this Application of -- the historical
Parts of Scripture when we are reading, that must render them profitable to us;
and appeals to the Experiences of the Christian, that if he has so consulted
the Word of God, he has been as plainly directed how to act, as though he had
consulted the Urim and the Thummim. For in this plain and full Manner, he says,
p. 38. of his Life, The holy Spirit has, from Time to Time, let him into the
Knowledge of divine Things, and has directed him in the minutest
Circumstances. And no doubt hence it is that he says, formention'd Sermon. p.
247. That God, at all Times, Circumstances and Places, though never so minute,
never so particular, will, if we diligently seek the Assistance of his holy
Spirit, apply general Things to our Hearts: Which though it may be true in some
Measure as to the doctrinal and preceptive Parts of Scripture, yet is it
evidently enthusiastical, to say so, as to the historical Parts of it. In this
Manner he pretends a Direction from God to go to England from Savannah, p. 28.
of that Journ. The like use we have made of Scripture, p. 36. so p. 42. That he
should be cast upon Karrigholt Island, because he had an Impression upon his
Mind, as to what the Apostle tells the Mariners, That they must be cast upon a
certain Island.

But we proceed to mention one Piece of Enthusiasm of a very uncommon Turn,
which shows to what a great Length this unhappy pernicious Disposition of the
Mind may carry a Man. When Page 32 of his Life, he personates our blessed Lord
himself, when in his Passion, says he, It was suggested to me, that when Jesus
cried out, I thirst, his Sufferings were near at an end; upon this I threw my
self upon the Bed, crying out, I thirst, I thirst: Soon after I felt my Load go
off --, and knew what it was truly to rejoice in the Lord. And certainly it is
easy enough to conceive, from what Spirit such a Suggestion must come. To
mention but one Instance more, though we are not of such Letter learned as deny,
that there is such an Union of Believers to Christ, whereby they are one in
him, as the Father and he are One, as the Evangelist speaks, or rather the
Spirit of God by him; yet so Letter-learned we are, as to say, that that
Passage in Mr. W -- 's Sermon of the Indwelling of the Spirit, p. 311: vol. of
Sermons* contains the true Spirit of Enthusiasm, where he says, to talk of any
having the Spirit of God without feeling of it, is really to deny the Thing.
Upon which we say, That the Believer may have a Satisfaction, that he has the
Assistance of the Spirit of God with him, in so continual and regular a Manner,
that he may be said to dwell in him, and yet have no feeling of it; for the
Metaphor is much too gross to express this (however full) Satisfaction of the
Mind, and has led some to take the Expression literally, and has (we fear)
given great Satisfaction to many an Enthusiast among us since the Year 1740.
from the swelling of their Breasts and Stomachs in their religious Agitations,
which they have though it to be feeling the Spirit, in its Operations on them. But
it is no way necessary to instance any further upon this Head; for the
aforesaid Compositions are full of these Things.

The whole tends to persuade the World (and it has done so with respect to
many) that Mr. W. has as familiar a Converse and Communion with God as any of
the Prophets and Apostles, and such as we all acknowledge to have been under
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

In the next Place, we look upon Mr. W. as an uncharitable, censorious and
slanderous Man; which indeed is but a natural Consequence of the heat of
Enthusiasm, by which he was so evidentally acted; for this Distemper of the
Mind always puts a Man into a vain Conceit of his own Worth and Excellency,
which all his Pretenses to Humility will never hide, as long as he evidently
shows, that he would have the World think he has a greater Familiarity with
God than other Men, and more frequent Communications from his Holy Spirit.
Hence such a Man naturally assumes an Authority to dictate to others, and a
Right to direct their Conduct and Opinions; and hence if any act not according
to his Directions, and the Model of Things he had formed in his own heated
Brain, he is presently apt to run into slander, and stigmatize them as Men of
no Religion, unconverted, and Opposers of the Spirit of God: And that such has
been the Behavior of Mr. W. is also sufficiently evident as was the former
Head. Hence were his monstrous Reflections upon the great and good Archbishop
TILLOTSON, (as Dr. Increase Mather Styles him) comparing his Sermons to the
conjuring Books which the Apostles persuaded the People to destroy.

Hence also is that Reflection made upon Mr. Commissary Garden, Journal from
Savana to N. E. p. 22. where he says, he was obliged to tell him he believed he
was an unconverted Man. But what obliged him to tell all the World of it in his
Journal? and why did he believe so? Because (he says) all his Discourses were
so inconsistent with and contrary to the Gospel. But this (considering Mr.
Garden's Character) must be only according to his peculiar Notions of
Inconsistency. If the Commissary were too severe upon Mr. W. his Spirit might
indeed be naturally irritated thereby; but he should have considered, that it
is no new thing, that true Christians should persecute (in some Degree) one
another. Again, p. 44. He insinuates in a very unchristian Manner, That Mr. H
-- n of New p -- t had no experimental Knowledge of the N. Birth.

The next Instance we shall note, is the reproachful Reflections upon the
Society which is immediately under our Care. p. 55. Where are observable his
Rashness and his Arrogance. His Rashness, in publishing such a disadvantageous
Character of Us, viz. Because some Body had so informed him. Surely he ought,
if he had followed our Savior's Rule, to have had a greater Certainty of the
Truth of what he published of us to the whole World. But his Arrogance is more
flagrant still, that such a young Man as he should take upon him to tell what
Books we should allow our Pupils to read. But then he goes further still, when
he says, p. 95. both of Yale College as well as ours, As for the Universities,
I believe it may be said* Their Light is now become Darkness, Darkness that may
be felt. What a deplorable State of Immorality and Irreligion has he hereby
represented Us to be in! And as this is a most wicked and libellous Falsehood
(at least as to our College) as such we charge it upon him. But why does he say
thus? Why, because this is complained of by the most godly Ministers. Here we
are at a Loss to think whom he means by the most godly Ministers. Certainly not
the Rev. Gentlemen of the Town of Boston (with whom nevertheless he was most
acquainted) for they are in the Government of the College, have assisted in
making the Laws by which it is governed, and constantly visit us by a
Committee, and themselves four Times in a Year, and make Examination how the
Laws are executed. Besides, we don't know that he has been pleased to allow to
any one of them any such religious Character, in any one of his Journals, as
should make us think he means them, but rather the reverse. Vid. p. 76 of his
Journal from N. E.

But we shall finish this Head of his Censoriousness, when we have mentioned
his pernicious Reflections upon the Ministers of the Churches in this Land. We
say this Land; for it is far from a torturing of the Words, to suppose he
directly means them, when he says, p. 70. He is persuaded the generality of
Preachers talk of an unknown unfelt Christ; though he has evasively said (since
he came this time) that he did not restrain the Expression to the Ministers of
N. England, though he did not exclude them. Admirably satisfactory this
Explanation! But he cannot come off so easily in the Reflection he makes upon
our Ministers, p. 95. Many, nay most perhaps that preach, I fear, do not
experimentally know Christ -- Is it possible he should say, this is no Charge
upon the Ministers of these Churches? It is true, it is not so in Form; but is
it not one of the most uncharitable Things he could have done, to manifest
these his Fears to all the World, without Ground? Without Ground, we say; for
as to the greatest Part of them by far, their Conversation is as becomes the
Gospel, and we may challenge him and all the World to show the contrary.

And now let the World judge, if we have not the highest Reason to tax Mr. W.
as an uncharitable, censorious and slanderous Man; that he has been guilty of
gross Breaches of the Ninth Command of the moral Law, and an evident disregard
to the Laws of Christian Charity, as they are delivered to us in the N.
Testament. And now is it possible that we should not look upon him as the
blameable Cause of all the Quarrels on the Account of Religion, which the
Churches are now engaged in? and this not only on account of his own Behavior;
but also as the coming of those hot Men amongst us afterward (who, together
with the Exhorters that accompanied them, cultivated the same uncharitable
Disposition in our Churches) was wholly owing to his Influence and Example. So
that all the Errors, Confusions and Quarrels that our Churches are now in, are
owing to to this censorious, most unchristian Carriage and Disposition; and it
is, to us, a very mavelous Thing, when such Behavior as Mr. W. etc. have
used, is plainly and directly contrary to the moral Law, and all the Rules of
Christianity, that the People, in general, should not be able to see it.

Again, We think it highly proper to bear our Testimony against Mr. W. as we
look upon him a Deluder of the People. How he designs to manage in this Affair
now, we know not; but we mean, that he has much deluded them, and therefore
suppose we have Reason in this respect to guard against him. And here we mean
more especially as to the Collections of Money, which, when here before, by an
extraordinary mendicant Faculty, he almost extorted from the People. As the
Argument he then used was, the Support and Education of his dear Lambs at the
Orphan-House, who (he told us, he hoped) might in Time preach the Gospel to us
or our Children; so it is not to be doubted, that the People were greatly
encouraged to give him largely of their Substance, supposing they were to be
under the immediate Tuition and Instruction of himself, as he then made them to
believe; and had not this been their Though It, it is, to us, without all
Peradventure, they would never have been persuaded to any considerable
Contribution upon that Head; and this, notwithstanding, he has scarce seen
them for these four Years; and besides has left the Care of them with a
Person, whom these Contributors know nothing of, and we ourselves have Reason
to believe is little better than a Quaker; so that in this Regard we think the
People have been greatly deceived.

Furthermore, the Account which Mr. W. has given the World of his Disbursement
of the several Contributions, for the use of his Orphan House (wherein there
are several large Articles, and some of about a Thousand Pounds, our Currency,
charged in a very summary Way, viz. For sundries, no Mention being made therein
what the Sum was expended for, nor to whom it was paid) is by no means
satisfactory. And as we have so much Reason to be dissatisfied with the Man, so
we think,

Secondly, We have as much Reason to dislike and bear Testimony against the
Manner of his Preaching; and this in Two respects, both as an Extempore and as
an Itinerant Preacher.

And first, as to his extempore Manner of preaching; this we think by no means
proper, for that it is impossible that any Man should be able to manage any
Argument with that Strength* or any Instruction with that Clearness in an
extempore Manner, as he may with Study and Meditation. Besides, it is
observable that your extempore Preachers give us almost always the same Things
in the applicatory Part of their Sermons, so that it is often very little akin
to their Text, which is just opened in a cursory, and not seldom in a perverted
Manner, and then comes the same kind of Harangue which they have often used
before, as an Application; so that this is a most lazy Manner, and the Preacher
offers that which cost him nothing, and is accordingly little Instructive to
the Mind, and still less cogent to the reasonable Powers. Now Mr. W. evidently
shows, that he would have us believe his Discourses are extempore, and indeed
from the Rashness of some of his Expressons, as well as from the dangerous
Errors vented in them, it is very likely: Hence, no doubt, were the many
unguarded Expressions in his Sermons when he was here before; and since he has
come again, he has told us, That Christ loves unregenerate Sinners with a Love
of Complacency: Nay, he has gone rather further, and said, That God loves
Sinners as Sinners; which, if it be not an unguarded Expression, must be a
thousand times worse: For we cannot look upon it as much less than Blasphemy,
and shows him to be stronger in the Antinomian Scheme than most of the
Professors of that Heresy themselves; and that this is not unlikely, is to be
suspected, because the Expression was repeated, and when he was taxed with it,
by a certain Gentleman, he made no Retractations.

But lastly, We think it our Duty to bear our strongest Testimony against that
Itinerant Way of preaching which this Gentleman was the first promoter of among
us, and still delights to continue in: For if we had nothing against the Man,
either as an Enthusiast, an uncharitable or delusive Person, yet we apprehend
this Itinerant Manner of preaching to be of the worst and most pernicious
Tendency.

Now by an Itinerant Preacher, we understand One that has no particular Charge
of his own, but goes about from Country to Country, (...) Town to Town, in any
Country, and stands ready to Preach to my Congregation that shall call him to
it; and such an one is Mr. (...) for it is but trifling for him to say (as we
hear he has) That he requires in order to his preaching any where, that the
Minister also should invite him to it; for he knows the Populace have such an
Itch after him, that when they generally desire it, the Minister (however
diverse from their's, his own Sentiments may be) will always be in the utmost
Danger of his People's quarrelling with, if not departing from him, should he
not consent to their impetuous Desires. Now as it is plain, no Man will find
much Business as an Itinerant Preacher, who has not something in his Manner,
that is (however trifling, yea, and erroneous too, yet) very taking and
agreeable to the People; so when this is the Case, as we have lately unhappily
seen it, it is then in his Power to raise the People to any Degree of Warmth he
pleases, whereby they stand ready to receive almost any Doctrine he is pleased
to broach; as has been the Case as to all the Itinerant Preachers who have
followed Mr. W's. Example, and thrust themselves into Towns and Parishes, to
the Destruction of all Peace and Order, whereby they have to the great
impoverishment of the Community, taken the People from their Work and Business,
to attend their Lectures and Exhortations, always fraught with Enthusiasm, and
other pernicious Errors: But, which is worse, and it is the natural Effect of
these Things, the People have been thence ready to despise their own Ministers,
and their usefulness among them, in too many Places, has been almost destroyed.

Indeed, if there were any thing leading to this manner of Management in the
Directions and Instructions given, either by our Savior or his Apostles, we
ought to be silent, and so would a Man of any Modesty, if (on the other hand)
there be nothing in the N. Testament leading to it. And surely Mr. W. will not
have the Face to pretend he acts now as an Evangelist, though he seems to prepare
for it in Journ. from N. E. to Falmouth in England, p. 12. where he says, God
seems to show me it is my Duty to Evangelize, and not to fix in any particular
Place: For the Duty of that Officer certainly was not to go preaching of his
own Head from one Church to another, where Officers were already settled, and
the Gospel fully and faithfully preached. And it is without (...), that the
Mind and Will of Christ, with respect to the Order of his Churches, and the
Business of his Ministers in them, is plainly enough to be understood in the N.
Testament; and yet Mr. W has said of (...), in one of his Sermons, he thinks
that an Itinerant (...) of preaching may be very convenient for the furtherance
of the good of the Churches, if it were under a good Regulation. Now we are apt
to imagine, if such an Officer would have been useful, (...) himself would have
appointed him; and therefore (under Favou^ (...) is to be wise above what is
written, and supposes either that (...) Lord did not know, or that he neglected
to appoint all such Officers in the Ministry, as would further in the best
manner the Truths of the Gospel: And it is from such Wisdom as this, that all
the Errors of Popery have come into the Christian Church, while the Directions
of the Word of God were not strictly adhered to, but one though it this Way or that
Ceremony was very convenient and significant, and another another, till they
have dressed up the Church in such a monstrous heap of Appendages, that at this
Day it can hardly be discerned to be a Church of Christ.

And now, upon the whole, having, we think, made it evident to every one that
is not prejudiced on his Side (for such as are so, we have little hope to
convince) that Mr. W. is chargeable with that Enthusiasm, Censoriousness and
delusive Management that we have taxed him with; and since also he seems
resolved for that Itinerant Way of preaching, which we think so destructive to
the Peace of the Churches of Christ; we cannot but bear our faithful Testimony
against him, as a Person very unfit to preach about as he has done heretofore,
and as he has now begun to do.

And we would earnestly, and with all due respect, recommend it to the Rev.
Pastors of these Churches of Christ, to advise with each other in their several
Associations, and consider whether it be not high Time to make a stand against
the Mischiefs, which we have here suggested as coming upon the Churches.

Harvard College, Dec. 28. 1744. EDWARD HOLYOKE, President. HENRY FLYNT, Tut.
and Soc. EDWARD WIGGLESWORTH, Soc. and S. T. P. Holliss. JUDAH MONIS, Instr.
Hebr. BELCHER HANCOCK, Tut. JOSEPH MAYHEW, Tut. and Soc. THOMAS MARSH, Tut.
JOHN WINTHROP, Math. and Phil. Not. Prof. Holliss.



