A LETTER From a Gentleman in BOSTON, To his Friend in CONNECTICUT.

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
AGREEABLE to your Desire, I now send you the best Information I can get,
concerning an Application to England. And the following is said to be a Copy of
the Heads of a proposed Act of Parliament, with the Case of the Colony of
Rhode Island added, as an Exemplification of the pernicious Effects of Paper
Currency: Which I shall take for granted, till such Time as the Gentlemen
concerned in the Application, shall give the World a genuine Copy of what they
have sent Home.

Heads proposed for an Act of Parliament, to regulate and finally suppress
Paper-Currencies in the Provinces and Colonies of Massachusetts Bay,
New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode Island, in New England, in North America;
and to ascertain their Currencies in all Time coming.

WHEREAS for many Years last past, the British Provinces and Colonies of
Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode Island, in
New England, in North America; have emitted, from Time to Time, enormous Sums
of public Bills of Credit, to defray the necessary Charges of Government; and
also upon Loan to themselves, Members of the Legislature, and to other
Borrowers, their Friends, at easy and fallacious Lays, to be repaid at very
long Periods; and by their provincial Laws, made a Tender in all Contracts,
Trade, and Business, whereby Currencies, various and illegal, has been
introduced, which from their continued depreciated Nature, in the Course of
many Years, have much oppressed Widows, and Orphans, all other Creditors, more
especially the Merchants of Great Britain, trading to those Plantations; their
outstanding Debts have suffered incredible Discount, to their very great Loss
and Damage. The Act of Parliament. VIth of ANNE, ascertaining the Rates of
foreign Coins in her Majesty's Plantations in America, the good Intentions
thereof have been frustrated; the Affairs of Coinage and Currencies being
solely in the Crown, the Prerogative has been notoriously abused and infringed:
Therefore to regulate and finally suppress those Paper-Currencies in the
Provinces and Colonies, and to ascertain their Currencies in all Time coming,

Be it enacted, and c. That in the British Provinces and Colonies of
Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode Island, in
North America, after Day of in the Year Bills of Credit commonly called
Paper-Money, shall no more be a Tender in Commerce and other private Business,
and be receivable only in Course for public Taxes. That during said seven
Years, it shall be in the Option of all Persons to pay their public Taxes and
Duties in provincial or colony Bills, or in Silver and Gold Sterling Alloy,
after the following Rates, viz. During the first Year, Silver at 31 s per
Ounce; during the Second at 30 s per Ounce; the Third at 29 s; during the
Fourth at 28 s; during the Fifth at 27 s; during the Sixth at 26 s; during the
Seventh and last Year at 25 s per Ounce of Silver, and Gold in Proportion; to
be understood Bills of the old Tenor, and the several other Tenors in
Proportion, as current at passing of this Act; that during the seventh and last
Year, the Possessors of the outstanding Bills are required to bring them into
the Treasury to be redeemed with Silver, after the Rate of 25 s per Ounce; and
if Silver and Gold shall not be sufficient in the Treasury, the Possessor shall
notwithstanding deliver his Bills into the Treasury, the Treasurer giving him a
Receipt for the same; which shall entitle him to Interest thereupon after the
Rate of 10 per Cent. per Ann. until redeemed as aforesaid. The Treasurer
refusing or neglecting to exchange said Bills, or grant said Receipts, shall as
a Penalty. That after the Expiration of seven Years, no public Bills shall any
more be received into the Treasury to be exchanged, and their Legislature shall
upon no Pretext whatsoever in Time coming emit any Bills of public Credit.

That all Bills of public Credit formerly emitted by the said Provinces and
Colonies shall be punctually cancelled, according to the Tenor of the several
emitting Acts, where their Periods do not exceed the Space of seven Years from
this Act's taking Place; and where the Periods are longer, the several Sums of
the exceeding Years shall be distributed, proportioned and assessed amongst the
seven Years, at the Direction of their respective Legislatures, so as to be
fully cancelled at or before the Expiration of the said seven Years. Where any
of these Provinces or Colonies shall refuse or neglect to call in, and cancel
their respective Bills of public Credit, in Conformity to this Act, the King
in Council may appoint Commissioners, with full and proper Power, at the Charge
of the Colony, to assess the same. And the Possessors of any of said Bills may
recover in common Course, in any of his Majesty's Dominions, the Value of such
Bills from any Person who shall have acted as a Member of those respective
Legislatures in any of the seven Years, excepting such Members as shall have in
Form entered their dissent.

To prevent the great Damage and Confusions in Commerce, and all other
Business, which for many Years past have prevailed in said Provinces and
Colonies, from their various, perplexed and fallacious Currencies;

Be it enacted, That from and after all Contracts (Specialties excepted) made
in said Provinces and Colonies shall be understood to be a Currency the same as
in Great Britain, on Sterling Value, and shall be recovered accordingly.

Provided, That in order to extricate, with more Ease, the People of said
Provinces and Colonies from their present Confusions of Currencies and
Contracts, they may be INDULGED as follows, viz. That all Contracts
(Specialties excepted) made preceding this Act, may be satisfied in their
provincial Bills, according to the Value of such Bills, as settled by their
provincial Acts, in Force at the Commencement of this Act.

That any Governor or Commander in Chief in any of those Provinces and
Colonies, whether immediately appointed by his Majesty, or elected by the
Freemen or Company of the Charter-Governments, where the Governor has not a
negative Voice, giving his or their Assent, or not entering their Dissent from
any Resolve, Bill or Act of any of their General Assemblies, contrary to this
Act, shall be deemed guilty and shall be disqualified, dismissed, and for ever
rendered incapable of any Place of Profit or Trust under his Majesty; and such
Resolve or Act shall be ipso facto void with a Salvo of the Prerogative of the
Crown as to Currencies.

To vouch and illustrate the pernicious Effects of Paper Currencies (public
Bills of Credit issued by Act of the provincial Assemblies in the British
American Plantations) which from the indirect (iniquitous, fraudulent and
fallacious) Practices of their Legislatures, have lessened the commercial
Credit of those Parts, and in Consequence become a Discouragement to the
Commerce of Great Britain, we shall instance the Case of the Colony of
Rhode Island, as an Exemplification of the Whole. In the Affair of Currencies
the British American Colony of Rhode Island have defrauded more in a few Years
than any of the most wicked Administrations in the several Nations of Europe
have done in many Centuries. A Contract made 30 Years ago for 100 l. Sterling
in Value, that is, Silver at 8 s. per OZ. is at present reduced to a nominal 32
s. per OZ. This they have effected by large and frequent Emissions of public
Bills of Credit, bearing no Premium or Interest, not to be cancelled 'till
after 10 or 20 Years, and notwithstanding made a private Tender in Law as ready
Cash; naturally Bills upon such a Footing do suffer large growing Discounts in
all Trade and Business, and gradually become of little Credit or Value. This
Expedient of depreciating their Government-Bills, by their Laws made a Tender
and Currency, is promoted by the fraudulent Debtors, and desperate Part of the
Colony, in order to pay former Contracts with a much less Value than was
contracted for, and more especially to defraud the British Merchants in their
outstanding Debts. The Paper-Money-Promoters are the Desperate and Fraudulent,
these being vastly the Majority in the Colony, carrying all Elections (both
legislative and executive Parts) of their Government are annually elective.
Thus Government is perverted, and become worse than a State of Nature. If by
Chance any of the Elected opposes the Emission of those fraudulent Bills, he is
dropped next Election, as a professed Enemy to the Interest of the Colony.

Industry and Frugality are banished, Extravagancies encouraged by copious
Loans of those public Bills of Credit to private Persons easily obtained, the
present and succeeding Generations are inextricably involved, and will become a
Colony of desperate Debtors to the neighboring Colonies, who inadvertently
have given their Bills a Credit; which will terminate in the Loss of the
Merchants of Great Britain trading to New England. This poor small Colony, from
a late exact Perlustration, contains not exceeding 20,000, Men, Women and
Children, Whites, Indians and Negroes, have extant about 400,000 l. Paper
Money. And of this above three Quarters is in the Possession of People of
neighboring Colonies.

The Rhode Island Charter Government Emissions of Paper Money, to all Intents
and Purposes, are attended with the same fraudulent Effects as was that
infamous private Combination, called Land-Bank, in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, lately suppressed by Act of Parliament, and
do supply the Place of the same. Their Bank Emissions of Anno 1738 and 1741
seem to fall within the late Act of Parliament, against the American Banks or
Combinations: The Clause is "all Corporations acting under any Charter formerly
granted for particular Purposes, who shall endeavor to raise any Stock,
transfer Shares, and c. not intended in such Charter to be raised, or by
Abuser, of said Charter, shall forever be deemed illegal and void."
Rhode Island Emissions cannot in any Sense be said to defray the Charges of the
Government, but a Corporation fraudulent Stock (called by themselves
Bank-Money) to let to Interest; which Interest, about 3000 l. for their small
annual Charges of Government is deducted, is a Dividend for the Benefit of
their several Townships. People with so loose a Charter, and so capable of
being perverted, may be called an incorporated Mob or Corporation; and are of
worse Consequence than common Mobs, because they pretend the Authority of a
Charter, to color and skreen their Iniquities.

It is instilled into the Populace, That Currencies are a Privilege of the
common Consent of the People, and not a Prerogative of the Crown; that
notwithstanding the unwarrantable Latitude they may take, they are safe,
because Charters are reckoned sacred; the King and Parliament will not meddle
with their Charter-Privileges; vacating of Charters being deemed odious.

Some Instances of particular Effects of their Fallacies and Frauds.

1. The Preamble to their several Acts of Emissions are fallacious, deceitful
and imposing "always depending upon our dread Sovereign's Countenance and
Toleration therein, unto whose royal Command this Colony, as in Duty bound,
will at all Times readily submit": More especially in the Preamble to their
Emissions Anno 1740, 1741, they pretend a Government-Necessity for emitting
those Bills; whereas almost their whole Emissions were divided by Way of Loan
amongst the Members of their Legislature, and their Friends; they very falsely
say, "A constant Charge attends the Inhabitants of this Colony above other
Parts of New England; they are a Barrier to other Parts of New England."
Whereas by Land the Colony of Rhode Island is entirely encompassed and
protected from the Indians by the neighboring Colonies; and have, ever since
the Emissions of their Bills, refused to contribute toward the New England
Indian Wars.

2. The Borrowers of this Loan-Money (with much Propriety called themselves the
Sharers) are generally the Members of their Legislature; and the most
considerable of the Electors, their Friends, being much in Debt, do find that
the more they multiply this depreciating Currency, the real intrinsic Value of
their Debts becomes less, and the very great Loss of the fair Creditor, and
Benefit to the fraudulent Debtor. Their first Loan was in 1715, Exchange with
London being 65 per Cent. Advance, the last Re-payment of this Loan was Anno
1735, Exchange 410 per Cent. Advance, that is, for 100 l. Sterling in Value
borrowed, they pay in only 33 l. Sterling in Value; so that their Profit is 66
l. Sterling on the 100 l. Sterling.

3. In Consideration of this great Profit, the Sharers in the late Loans do or
may sell and transfer their Shares at 35 per Cent. Advance, ready Money being
upon easy Lay, viz. for the first ten Years only 5 per Cent. Interest, and
lately only 4 per Cent. and for ten Years more ten partial Payments of the
Principal, without Interest, and sometimes post-pon'd.

4. Those Sharers upon the Fund of a small Parcel of Land may continue
borrowing this public Money indefinitum. By an Act of the Colony, a Man may
borrow to the Half of the reputed Value of his Land: Thus upon 1000 l. reputed
Value of Land he borrows 500 l. By fraudulent, multiplied, depreciating
Emissions, this Land, as real Estate, continuing of a permanent intrinsic
Value, becomes worth 2000 l. nominal Value. In this depreciating Money here is
a Fund for borrowing 500 l. more. In Progress of more Years Depreciations the
nominal Value of this Land becomes 3000 l. which creates a Fund for borrowing
500 l. more, and so progressively indefinitum.

5. The only Credit for circulating their Bills in their Face, is that the
Bills shall be received in the Treasury in all public Payments. Their public
Payments, or Taxes, do not exceed 3000 l. per Annum, and upon this Fund they
pretend to circulate Four hundred thousand Pounds.

I SHALL not be ashamed to make my Observations on the before recited Heads for
an Act of Parliament, and their Illustrations, although I should be ranked with
you as a Patriot for making Paper-Money. And however merry the Newport
Gentleman may make himself with this Affair; I take it to be a Matter of such
Consequence to the Provinces and Colonies, as to require our most serious
Attention.

For in the Preamble to the proposed Act, it is set forth, That the Governments
have emitted from Time to Time enormous Sums of Bills of public Credit, to
defray the necessary Charges of Government; and also upon Loan to themselves,
Members of the Legislature, and to other Borrowers, their Friends, at easy and
fallacious Lays. And the Affairs of Coinage and Currencies being solely in the
Crown, the Prerogative has been notoriously abused and infringed.

So that the Crimes objected indiscriminately against all the Governments are,
emitting enormous Sums of Bills of public Credit, the Members of the
Legislature and their Friends sharing the Bills emitted, and breaking in upon
the Prerogative of the Crown respecting Coinage and Currencies. These are the
three Articles of Charge to be exhibited by these Gentlemen, who have sent Home
the before recited Sketch of an Act of Parliament; against the poor unhappy
Provinces and Colonies.

I shall consider each of these respective Articles of Charge by themselves,
and then endeavor to show, That according to the present State of Things in
this Province, there is no Occasion for the proposed Act of Parliament.

And First, As to the enormous Sums of Paper Bills of public Credit emitted,
it is absolutely necessary to adjust what shall be deemed an enormous Sum for
all the Provinces and Colonies. Whether what is at present extant in all the
four Governments, be an enormous Sum for them inclusively? Or, Whether the Sum
emitted by one Province or Colony, be an enormous Sum for that Province or
Colony? These two Questions seem to be absolutely necessary to be settled
before this Article of Charge can be fairly affixed upon the Provinces and
Colonies, whatever it may be on any one individual Province or Colony. For if
in the Massachusetts there is extant l. 350,000 Old Tenor: Now if this Sum be
not an enormous One ( i.e. as much again as it ought to be, which is the
Meaning of this Word, enormous, when applied in this Manner) then the
Representation, as to the Provinces and Colonies, is unjust. And if 400,000 l.
for Rhode Island, and 100,000 l. for New Hampshire, all upon Loan, (and
New Hampshire has not above an eighth Part of the Business negotiated in it as
Rhode Island) be judged an enormous Sum for them to emit; yet 350,000 l. not
one Six Pence of it upon Loan (and in perpetuam rei memoriam, a considerable
Part of it was for defraying the Expense of victualling and transporting five
hundred Troops, free of Charge to the Crown, to the Rendezvous at Jamaica,
during the Administration of the late Governor Mr. BELCHER, and some Recruits
since his Excellency came to the Chair) cannot, considering the Trade of the
Province, be judged an enormous Sum. Nor can 50,000 l. in your Colony, who
likewise contracted a considerable Debt to show your Loyalty in sending Troops
to Jamaica, be deemed an enormous Sum for you, because it is well known, although
you don't trade to Sea so much as Rhode Island, yet your Colony is much richer
than Rhode Island. And New Hampshire, in Point of Riches, bears no Proportion
to you; notwithstanding all which, and your remarkable Care to preserve the
Value of your Money, you and we are indiscriminately represented as culpable as
Rhode Island and New Hampshire, whose Bills are out upon Loan, and neither of
our Governments can be said to have any out upon Loan. Therefore this
Representation, with respect to the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, and the
Colony of Connecticut, is very unjust.

And as to the Second, That the Members of the Legislature and their Friends,
shared the Bills among them upon Loan, on easy and fallacious Lays. Of this
Article of Charge, the Massachusetts and Connecticut are entirely free, because
they have no Moneys out upon Loan, however it may be with Regard to
Rhode Island and New Hampshire.

Thirdly, That Coinage and Currencies being solely in the Crown, the
Prerogative has been notoriously abused and infringed. This is no less than a
Charge of High Treason, if true: But I apprehend the Gentlemen are much
mistaken, and that Coinage and Currencies are not synonimous and convertable
Terms; Coinage being only applicable to Metals: Hence Coin differs from Money.
Because Money is any Matter, whether Metal, Wood, Glass, Horn, Paper, and c.
which have Course as a Medium in Commerce. And therefore he that counterfeits
the King's Coin is punished as a Traitor; he that counterfeits a Bank Note, or
a Banker's Note, is punished with Death, but not as a Traitor. And in the Act
of Parliament, against the last Silver-Scheme and Land-Bank Companies, the
emitting their Notes in Lieu of Money, is not adjudged Treason, nay so far was
it judged from being Treason, that the first Merchant's Company was excepted
out of the Act, by a special Proviso: And why the Provinces and Colonies
emitting their Bills is a more treasonable Act, than the Silver-Scheme and
Land-Bank Companies emitting their's, needs some further Explication. Wherefore
the Provinces and Colonies must stand acquitted of the Crime of High Treason,
with respect to Coinage: And (...) verily believe this is the first Instance of
Coinage, amongst the English, being applied to Paper, it being never usual in
England to call Exchequer Notes (which are Bills of public Credit) East India
Bonds, Bank-Notes, and c. Coins; and yet they are as much so, as our Bills of
public Credit.

Currencies being a mercantile Affair, and applicable to all Sorts of
Commodities, does not seem to me to be a Prerogative solely vested in the
Crown, if it is, there is no Occasion for an Act of Parliament, because the
Crown has sufficient Power to support its own Prerogative, when invaded, as can
be sufficiently evinced from the English Story. This therefore seems to be put
in, in order to raise an Indignation in the Ministry against our Privileges;
which by this private Application they have made a greater Invasion on, than
ever all America did on the Prerogative. And I would just say, That an Attempt
to destroy the Rights and Privileges of the People is the highest Species of
Treason.

I shall now add, That considering the present State of Things in this
Province, there is no Need of an Act of Parliament, (if all that is meant in
this Application, is to ascertain the Value of Debts.) For in October 1741, the
Laws for making Province Bills a Tender expiring, the Judges made up Judgment
after the Rate of Silver when the Debt was contracted; and two Persons, who
looked upon themselves to be aggrieved by said Judgments, applied by Petition
to the General Assembly for Relief, who referred the Petitions to the May
Sessions, staying Execution in the mean Time; and passed a Bill in both Houses,
entitled, An Act in Explination of sundry Acts of this Province relating to the
Payment of private Debts contracted since the 31st Day of October, 1741. To
this Bill the Governor did not give his Assent; but assured the Houses, That,
as he was sensible that some hard Cases may arise to particular Persons among
them, he would very readily concur with them in doing every Thing for their
Relief, which was consistent with his Majesty's Instructions, the Laws of the
Province, and the Rule of natural Justice; And had the engrossed Bill, which
was projected for that Purpose, received some Amendments toward the End of it,
he should not have scrupled giving his Consent to it. Thus ended that Sessions
without any Thing being done. At the next May Session, as soon as the Court was
settled, the Governor made a Speech relating to old Bonds and Mortgages. And
on the 30th of May sent them a Message, informing them the Money when stated in
their last Act was stated Seven and an half per Cent. above the Value. The 2d
of June his Excellency sent the House of Representatives the following Message,
viz.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
As the usual Time for your making a Grant for the Support of his Majesty's
Governor is now come, I would take this Opportunity of observing to you, that
the Sum granted at the last May Session for my Support, fell short of the
Value, which was evidently designed me by that Grant; the Bills of Credit in
which it was made being computed as equal to Silver at Six Shillings and Eight
Pence per Ounce, which is now known to be an Overvaluation of them: Wherefore,
as it seems a Point of Justice that this Mistake in the former Assembly's
granting and my accepting that Sum, should be set right, and I flatter my self
that I have not forfeited my Claim to such Justice, I hope you will consider it
at the same Time that you make the Grant for my future Support.


Upon this Message the House made his Excellency a Grant of Five Thousand Four
Hundred Pounds old Tenor; and the General Court passed a Resolve in Lieu of the
Bill projected at the Sessions in April, recommending to the Justices of the
Superior Court, to reconsider such Judgments as they had already given for
Debts due upon Bonds and Mortgages. But a solemn Debate being had before the
Judges, they did not see Cause to reconsider their Judgment. This being the
true State of Things here, shows, that as to the Point of ascertaining the
Value of Debts, the Application to Parliament was needless.

As to the Case of the Colony of Rhode Island, cited as an Exemplification of
the pernicious Effects of Paper Currency, it is plain, That it is given as a
Specimen for all the other Governments, to involve them all, as well as
Rhode Island, in the Penalties of the Act of Parliament against the Land-Bank,
not excepting New Hampshire it self. And if Rhode Island is an incorporated Mob
or Corporation, no doubt but the Application will be also made to Massachusetts
and Connecticut; though I confess I am at a Loss to know what an incorporated Mob
is, for if I understand the Meaning of the Word Mob, it is this, "An unlawful
Assembly met to do an unlawful Act." Now a Government incorporated by his
Majesty's Charter, convened by the Powers granted in said Charter, if they
should do an unlawful Act, cannot be called a Mob, because the Illegality of the
Meeting is as necessary to constitute a Mob, as the Illegality of the Actions
done. And I cannot but observe, that this is a most insolent Treatment of the
People. However, as I am contracted in Time, and as your Colony, Government and
Governed, are so abusively treated, I hope some able Hand among you will make
some more particular Remarks on this Affair.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servt.
Boston, Feb. 27th, 1743,4.
POSTSCRIPT
I CANNOT but think it very unreasonable for those Gentlemen to be so severe in
their Complaint against the Rise of Exchange, Silver and Gold; when they are
the only Purchasers of Bills of Exchange, Silver and Gold, to make Remittances
for the enormous Quantity of English Goods they import; and while they continue
so to do, our Case must remain remediless, by either Acts of Parliament, or
Acts of our Legislatures; it being impossible in this Course of Trade, to keep
Silver or Gold among us: The Effect ever following the Cause. All such Attempts
being as fruitless as to enclose the Cuckoo by a Wall. Wherefore, I would beg
Leave to ask this one Question; Whether the Merchants bidding one upon another,
in the purchasing Bills of Exchange, Silver or Gold, is not as great a Cause of
the depreciating our Money, as the multiplied Emissions of Paper Bills?


