Mr. ALLEN'S ELECTION SERMON.

May 30. 1744.

Magistracy an Institution of CHRIST upon the Throne.

A SERMON preached in the Audience of HIS EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire;

The HONORABLE His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL AND House of REPRESENTATIVES of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND, On the Day of Election of
COUNSELORS for said PROVINCE.

By James Allen, V. D. M. Pastor of the Church in Brookline.

Magistratus custos est utriusque tabulae, veram religionem plantare debet et
dilectionem erga proximum, eliminare quicquid istis contraium sese ^^^ert -- --
-- Ne putent se ad otium et ad opes corradendas vocari in ^am dignitatem -- sed
uno ocu^o Deum, altero subditos respiciant. Aret. de Magist. Justitiae ^erendae
causa Roges esse creatore. Bod. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by John Draper,
Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for Daniel Gookin in
Cornhil. 1744.

At a Council held at the Council Chamger in BOSTON, upon Thursday the
Thirty-first of May, 1744.
Voted, THAT JACOB WENDELL and JOSEPH WILDER, Esqrs. be a Committee to give the
Thanks of this Board to the Rev. Mr. James Allen, for his Sermon preached
Yesterday before the General-Court, and to desire of him a Copy thereof for the
Press.

Copy Examined, per J. WILLARD, Secr.

MAGISTRACY An Institution of CHRIST Upon the Throne.
ISAIAH vi. 1. In the Year that King Uzziah died, I saw the LORD sitting upon a
Throne, high and lifted up. --
IT IS the just observation of the contemplative Psalmist, that the heavens
declare the glory of GOD, and the firmament shows his handiwork; and that
the earth is the LORD'S, and the fullness thereof, he has founded it upon the
seas and established it upon the floods. Now if GOD had wisdom to contrive, and
power to effect these beautiful globes, he has an indisputable right to the
government of them, and is certainly qualified for it: Nor may it be thought,
that it does not comport with his majesty, or is an obstruction to his quiet
and happiness to concern himself in the government of the world. The notion of
Lucretius is contradictory to that idea of the divine being, the oracles of
truth furnish us with. To suppose, that, when he had made the world, he took no
further thought or care, but left it to shift for itself, implies one or other
of these absurdities, that he either made it for no wise design, or through
some mistake in its formation it did not answer his original purpose; like an
unskilful artificer, not having framed his work according to the model of it in
his own mind, throws it by, and does not care what becomes of it: But as it is
a most wise production, that has no blotches or blunders in it, but in all its
parts exquisitely done, and every way correspondent to the design in the
eternal mind, there can be no reason upon this account why he should not govern
it. And then, as he is a most wise agent, and all his works the effects of
counsel, and consequently had some wise design in making it, it is absolutely
necessary for him to govern it, in order to accomplish that design; and how can
he act more like himself, and display the glory of his perfections better, than
by preserving the several ranks of beings, in that harmonious and admirable
order they were placed in at first? or why should it be thought below his
dignity to regard the works of his own hands? or can it be any difficulty to an
omniscient and omnipotent being to attend such a number of things as the
government of the world includes? To imagine this is to limit the most high,
debase his excellencies, and bring him down upon a level with his creatures,
and to think that because we find our minds and powers so narrow and limited,
that a small number of objects bound our thoughts and cares, therefore the
inspection of so many must be a burden to GOD himself. It becomes us better to
confess and adore with the psalmist, than to object against providence, The
LORD reigns, he is clothed with majesty. -- he is the king of all the earth.
But then, as to the form of that government which he exercises, it is a subject
so sublime and mysterious that we can say but little of it; and therefore
having asserted that the LORD reigns, he presently adds, that clouds and
darkness are round about him. His way is in the sea, his path in the mighty
waters, and his footsteps are not known. But though, the arcana imperii are an
height we cannot reach, a depth we cannot fathom, yet we must think there is a
great deal of reason and righteousness in them; and that a most beautiful scene
would open to us, if we were let into all the secret springs of the divine
government, and could trace the various steps and gradation by which every
design in accomplished.

Good men, in all ages, have been so well satisfied with the wisdom, goodness
and equity of providence, that they have acquiesced in it, rejoiced in
tribulation, triumphed when surrounded with greatest dangers, and thick and
black clouds have impended over the church or state, and threatened its
subversion.

It is from our professed belief of his all-disposing providence, and just
sense of our absolute dependence upon it, and of our duty to acknowledge GOD in
all our ways, and implore his direction in an affair of the highest importance,
and wherein the interest of the province, both civil and religious, is so
nearly concerned, that we are now assembled in this house of worship.

Thanks be to the LORD upon the throne, that our civil liberties granted by the
ROYAL CHARTER are continued, under the auspicious reign of king GEORGE the IId;
and that this day is again revolved upon us, wherein the heads of our tribes,
are met together to select and constitute, by the consent of the governor, one
main branch of our legislature.

And whereas your Excellency and the honorable Board have called me, however
unworthy, to declare the counsels of heaven to you, upon this occasion;
stirring up your pure minds, by way of remembrance, I desire to speak with
humility and fear, as becomes the oracles of GOD, and with fidelity to my great
LORD and MASTER, knowing that I must give an account.

When the angel of the LORD appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire, out of the
midst of a Bush, he said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight; so
let us all now turn aside, for a while, and lift up our eyes above the hills,
above the firmament, and behold with the wondering prophet the LORD sitting upon
a throne high and lifted up.

The prophet Isaiah was of noble birth, of the royal family, and nephew to king
Uzziah he here speaks of, as the Jews relate. And he was of a noble spirit, and
not exceeeded by any that prophesied before, or after him in clearness and
abundance of visions, and revelations, especially concerning the MESSIAH; and
in a curious and polite, lofty and majestic style.

The first words of my text spread a melancholy gloom upon the face of rulers.
In the year that king Uzziah died. Though a great man in Israel, and a good man,
yet he died. Neither grace nor grandeur can exempt from death. Princes, who are
in a qualified sense the breath of a people's nostrils, derive their breath
from GOD; and when it pleases him, the sovereign arbiter of life, their breath
goes forth, they return to the earth, and in that very day their thoughts
perish. Whatever distinction GOD, in his providence, has made betwixt one man
and another, in civil respects, they are all in death's account equal. King
Uzziah's reign was long and prosperous, and Judah was happy under it; but he
must not live always: It is the prerogative of him, whom the prophet saw upon
the throne, to be the KING ETERNAL.

It was in the year of this king's death, that Isaiah had his vision. GOD, at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the fathers by the
prophets; sometimes by dreams, sometimes by a audible voice, and sometimes by
visions, as here to Isaiah, and afterward to Ezekiel by the river Chebar. It
is not to be supposed, that the eyes of the prophet were so strengthened by a
supernatural power, as that he saw into the third heaven, at so vast a
distance; but he had a representation of the light and glory of it, conveyed to
his mind by some sensible images, and of the LORD sitting upon a throne there,
not like king Solomon's, a throne of ivory, and overlaid with the purest gold,
but a Ezekiel i. 26.
sapphire throne, transcendently bright and glorious, above all competition or
control, and commanding over all other thrones.

There are several important articles which might come under our consideration
here, as the heads of my present discourse:

As, I. The person whom the prophet saw thus exalted and dignified. II. The
import of his advancement, or the ideas it serves to convey to us. III. His
qualifications for his exalted station. IV. The extent of his dominion. V. The
nature and form of his administration, etc.


But I must confine myself to the two first of these heads.

I. Then, I am to consider who it is that the prophet saw upon the throne.

It could not be any mere man, or an angel, assuming a human form. It is the
place of the angelical orders to stand about the throne, and minister unto it;
and this is honor enough for them. It was a divine person, the SON OF GOD, the
root and the offspring of David, the bright and morning star. Some think it was
the first of the divine persons who was exhibited to the prophet, and that we
read of a like appearance of his, Dan. vii. 9. I beheld till the thrones were
cast down, and the ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow,
and the hair of his head like the pure woo^, his throne was like the fiery
flame, and his wheels (...) burning fire, etc. But I rather think this to be
understood of CHRIST, who is called the ancient of days, because of his
immutable and eternal divinity, and that it is a mistake to assert that the
FATHER, or the HOLY GHOST ever appeared in such a low and diminutive form; but
the SON often occasionally did so, for he was to be incarnate, (...) his glory,
and dwell among us. Thus he appeared to Abraham; and in the same shape, upon
the burning mount, at the giving of the law; and, in the like manner to Isaiah;
for so the vision is explained, John 12. 41. These things said Isaiah, when he
saw his glory and spoke of him: All which appearances were undoubtedly designed
to prefigure his assumption of the nature of man, and its subsequent
advancement to the throne of GOD, the authority of a prince and a judge there.

Whether he assumed the form of that individual body he appeared in afterward,
is an inquiry more speculative than practical.

To set upon the throne of his FATHER was the glory he had with him before all
worlds, and which he had a natural right to: And it is also the glory the
FATHER promised him as the reward of our Redemption, Isaiah liii. 12. Therefore
will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death. -- Psalm xvi. II.
Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. In the prospect of this recompense he
engaged, suffered the cross, and despised the shame, and is now thus highly
exalted above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come,
and has put all things under his feet. --

The apostle John long since beheld him in the same place and posture, Rev. 5.
1. with all the shining myriads about him, and praising of him.

It is then an exalted JESUS the prophet saw, and I am now speaking of. He that
was made lower than the angels, is now crowned with glory and honor. And such
an high priest the christian has, who is set down on the right hand of the
throne of the majesty in the heavens. I hope you will all hear the report with
pleasure. I am sure, if through grace we arrive at the vision that comes after,
it will never tire us. CHRIST upon the throne is the attractive object of every
eye, and engages every heart, angels behold and wonder, and saints adore the
risen GOD: His throne is guarded with legions of blessed spirits, who with
united voices proclaim his excellencies and shout his praises. They did not
disdain to sing his birth to humble shepherds, and now with joy celebrate the
glories of his exaltation. And the redeemed and perfected spirits unite in the
consort, Rev. 19. beg. I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying,
Alleluja, -- for the LORD GOD omnipotent reigns. Thus the saints are joyful
in glory, the children of Zion (...) joyful in their king, they sing with loud
Hosannah's to the son of David, the vaults of heaven echo with songs of
praise, and the triumph shall never end: Blessed are they that dwell in thy
courts, they will be still praising thee. Thus the LORD JESUS CHRIST, the
eternal SON of GOD, from a low and humble state on earth, is advanced to the
highest seat of dignity, and sustains a post of the utmost grandeur in the
heavenly world: He sets upon a throne of majesty, that commands reverence and
honor from us who are now worshipping at his feet, and from all intelligent
beings.

He sets upon a throne of grace, to which we may may come boldly. The
consideration of his majesty might make us afraid to draw near and speak to
him: This effect it had upon the prophet, when he beheld the glory of the LORD,
Then, said I, woe is me, I am undone: But he is exalted upon a mercy-seat, with
a rainbow (an emblem of mercy) about his head: This invites the sinner to him,
even to his seat, to lay open his wants, complain of his grievances, and
implore his compassion and help. He sets upon a throne of GRACE to give out
pardons to humble supplicants, and communicate blessings to the poor and needy;
and he is as ready to give as we can be to ask them.

He sets upon a throne of government, giving out his laws, and demanding our
obedience, and observing what regards we pay to them, that he may reward, or
punish us accordingly: For the throne of judgment is also his; and at his word
we either stand or fall.

Having thus spoken of the person, the prophet saw upon the throne of glory,
high and lifted up:

I proceed to consider,

II. The import of the vision, or the ideas it serves to convey to us. And it
certainly includes all that is great and good. The subject is truly sublime,
and full of mystery, and we may never expect to comprehend it while in our
present state of imperfection, but the advantages of it to us, are surprisingly
great and various.

CHRIST upon the throne in our nature, what can be more delightful to hear and
contemplate? And how great and boundless the expectations it raises in us? He
is now ready to all acts of care about his people, they are ever under his eye,
and within reach of his arm; he is a sun to enlighten, a shield to defend, and
a fountain to supply them: What more is needful to encourage the active
christian, to revive the drooping saint, or to astonish the daring sinner?
CHRIST'S advancement is the believer's assurance, that he shall live and reign
with him in that blessed world, where they shall hunger no more, neither shall
the sun light on them, nor any heat; for the lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters,
and GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

To be particular here,

1. This exaltation of CHRIST speaks the transcendant dignity and excellency of
his person, that he is worthy of the throne he sets on, and qualified for all
the great designs of his advancement. It would be a dishonor to the wisdom of
GOD to place him there, if he was a mean person, or an insufficient ruler: It
speaks his joint-interest in the FATHER, the eternal head of government, and
oneness with him in nature and glory: For GOD never did, or will receive any
other into the throne, to share the dignities and prerogatives of it: To which
of the angels said he at any time, set thou at my right hand? Nothing like it
was ever spoken to any of them. They are the first and purest productions of
divine light, above man in his original state of integrity and perfection; but
infinite descents below the SON of GOD, and pay their joint homage to him in
the lowest postures of humility and reverence. Their wisdom is folly; their
power, weakness; and their holiness, impurity, compared with his. This vast
disproportion they themselves do readily acknowledge, and are ashamed and blush
at the stupidity of some men, in debasing him almost to a level with
themselves: The excellency of CHRIST infinitely transcends all angelical
perfection; some faint rays of this glory were visible to his disciples, Through
his veil of flesh: We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of
the FATHER, -- John i. 14. But how little of it appeared to them, in respect of
what the prophet saw, when HE was sitting upon his throne, with all the
celestial inhabitants about him, and sparkling in all the bright rays of the
FATHER'S glory, and his own. The prophet Ezekiel had a like vision of him,
clothed with robes of dazzling light. But after all, we may not suppose that
the fullness of glory was visible to either of them: It was not the splendour of
unveiled majesty, but the likeness of his glory; the fullness of it, is light
inaccessible and cannot be viewed by mortal eyes. Glorified spirits have much
brighter visions of him. The soul in its exalted state shall see the king in
his beauty, all the perfections of that infinitely great and glorious nature in
their brightness and purity, the effect whereof will be the highest admiration,
ardent love, and an eternal spring of universal praise.

2. It speaks the utmost grandeur. To ascend a throne is the very top of
preferment; flesh and blood can rise no higher: The most aspiring tempers do
but aim at this, and have no notion of a superior advancement; and it is but
here and there one, that can grasp the royal dignity. This honor was conferred
upon CHRIST at his ascension, according to the prediction, Psalm. 47. 5. GOD is
gone up with a shout; the LORD with the sound of a trumpet; sing praises to
GOD; sing praises to our king, for he is the king of all the earth: The LORD
reigns over the heathen, he sits upon the throne of his holiness, the
shields of the earth belong unto him, he is greatly exalted. He promised but
little grandeur when he was stretched upon a cross, the sport of men, and the
mark of violence. Man thought the meanest honor too much for him, but in GOD's
esteem all the glory of heaven was not too great: When he was arraigned at the
bar, he intimated that he should by and by ascend a throne, and head an empire
comprehending both heaven and earth, and they should hereafter see him coming
in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory, attended with all the holy
angels, to take vengeance upon his enemies: They entertained the report, (as we
may imagine) with a disdainful smile; thinking it no better than the wilds of
enthusiasm, for so mean a person to challenge so exalted honors: He was born
in a stable, begun his life with brutes, and ended it with malefactors; but now
is the LORD of hosts, principalities and powers: oh surprising change, and
beyond all imagination to them by whose wicked hands he was crucified and
slain! here he was despised of men; there he is adored by angels: here in
contempt and mockery he was crowned with thorns; but now he wears the crown of
glory: here he was nailed to a cross; but there he sets upon a throne high and
lifted up: here he groaned under the weight of sin and the curse; there he
triumphs: here he had no form or comeliness; but now he shines in all the
beauties and glories of the godhead, and has the most profound respect and
veneration paid him by the infinite numbers about him.

3. It assures us of the accomplishment of our redemption, The FATHER that
chose him to this work, knew him equal to it, He did not lay the help of his
perishing creature upon a broken reed, but upon one that was mighty. The burden
was too heavy for an angel's shoulders, but the SON was able to bear it, he
could both fulfill the precept and suffer the penalty of the violated law; and
so discharge the debt we owed to inflexible justice. The FATHER, by an audible
voice from the excellent glory, testified his acceptance of what he had done:
And the SON appeals to him, when leaving the world, that he had glorified him
on the earth, and finished the work he had given him to do; and, according to
the eternal compact between them, supplicates for that glory he enjoyed before
the world was, which was as readily given him, as it was asked for, as the
psalmist by spirit of prophecy declares, I have set my king upon my holy hill
of Zion, Psalm. ii. 6. He raised him from the dishonours of the grave, and
placed him at his own right hand; and the grandeur he now possesses, is an
incontestible evidence, as of the dignity of his person, so of the sufficiency
of his sacrifice; for if he had not accomplished the work he engaged in, but it
had come imperfect from his hand, he had not been thus advanced, but left
eternally under the power of death. His resurrection assures us, that the whole
debt was paid, the thundering law silenced, and the justice of GOD has no
further demands to make upon us. We have nothing to do now in way of
satisfaction; (...) our whole work is to believe in, adore and love a once
crucified, but now enthroned JESUS. He is gone to heaven, as he came from it on
our account, and is making intercession for transgressors, pleading from a
throne for us, with arguments rolled in blood, and therefore prevalent. And how
numerous, how rich and comprehensive are the blessings conveyed down to us,
from the fountain of love and mercy, by his means? And how much greater those
we are the joyful expectants of? What is it that GOD reconciled is not willing
to do for us? If we miss of pardon and grace here, salvation and glory
hereafter, it is our own fault. The apostle's argument is strong and
convincing, that seeing GOD spared not his own SON, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things? Romans viii. 32.

4. It intimates to us, that he is open to the view of all the celestial
inhabitans. A Throne is the most public station, and the person upon it
affords an advantage for a general notice; no one is debarred from vision, but
every eye sees him. Here the believer has sometimes a glimpse of his glory, and
his love through the thick medium of ordinances; but this is personal and secret:
but there he exhibits himself to all at once; they behold with open face the
glory of the LORD; and as the sun sometimes forms its likeness in a cloud, so
they are transformed into the same image, from glory to glory. There Is no need
of any artifice, of taking the advantage of rising ground, or of climbing the
sycamore-tree to behold him, for he is not hid in a throng, nor is the vision
transient, but he is fixed upon a throne, and always to be seen. And with what
pleasure and admiration do they behold him? The company of prophets and
apostles, the noble army of martyrs, the general assembly of believers and
church of the firstborn, will afford an additional joy; but it is JESUS the
mediator that fills the soul with delight and satisfaction, and is infinitely
more to it than all heaven besides. It is the favor he demands for all his
redeemed, that they may be where he is, to behold his glory: And this is the
believers ardent wish, and perpetual desire; and the grant of it is sure. It is
given in promise to them, They shall walk with me in white, for they are
worthy; they shall sit with me on my throne.

5. And I know come to what I chiefly design. It denotes his actual government
over all things. A Throne speaks dignity and authority: and all power is his
both in heaven and on earth. The Government of the world is upon his shoulder;
and his name wonderful, counselor, the mighty GOD, the everlasting Father,
the prince of peace, of the increase of his government and peace there shall be
no end; upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it and to
establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever:
These are some of the magnificent and lofty expressions of the holy men of GOD
concerning the dominion of CHRIST, speaking as they were moved by the HOLY
GHOST; and after this pompous manner the prophets have all along described the
glories of his Kingdom.

The ancient heathen confined the dominion of GOD to the supreme heavens, over
the angelical orders, and would not allow that he had any concern in the
affairs of this lower world, the government of kingdoms, states and empires;
but the oracles of truth instruct us better. It is true, that is the most noble
part of his dominion, but he is said to look down from heaven; not as a bare
spectator of the actions of men, but as their LORD and JUDGE, that he may
render to every man according to his works. Fortune or chance has nothing to
do, takes no place in the world, except in the absurd imaginations of men: The
prophet Ezekiel's wheels don't move and roll at random, but under the direction
of the cherubims. The government of CHRIST is a discreet and wise authority,
which none can justly fault: The wisest politicians, in their most deliberate
acts, are often guilty of mistakes; and, when they see the event of things,
wish they had ordered otherwise: But there is no imprudence or injustice in
CHRIST, in his whole management. Some of his dispensations have the face of
absolute sovereignty; but it is because our faculties are not strong enough to
see into the amazing depths of wisdom contained in them: Others may seem to us
disorderly and confused, though there is accountable reason for them. As to one
event and another, we may say and admire as Romans xi. 33. Oh the depth of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of GOD! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! Our Lord CHRIST, in the execution of
his REGAL office, is represented as mounted upon a Cherub, riding upon the
heavens, and flying upon the wings of the wind: And the wonders of his
providence are expressed in terms most sublime, both as to his acts of terror
and vengeance upon his enemies, and of help to his friends: When he arises out
of his place the earth trembles, the foundations of the hills are shaken,
because he is wroth; there goes a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of
his mouth devoureth. When his people are in distress, He rides upon the
heavens for their help, and in his excellency on the sky; and the stars in
their courses fight their battles against Sisera. The clouds are his chariots,
from them he discharges his thunders, to the terror and amazement of mankind;
and by them he waters the earth, and makes it verdant and fruitful, adorns it
with the beautiful prospects it now affords us: And at his pleasure he shifts
the scene, changes the face of the earth, strips it of his gay attire, and puts
every thing around us in a dying posture, to remind us that we ourselves are
so: By the breath of GOD the frost is given, and the breadth of the waters
straightened, and he seals up the hands of every man: And then he operates under
the earth, where no eye of man can penetrate, or his hand reach, and makes the
pillars of the world tremble: He shakes it with the same ease that we can move
a finger, or wave a feather, either from natural causes, or by an immediate act
of power, we cannot tell which, nor how; at this our hearts tremble and are
moved out of their place.

The great and sudden changes in public affairs; the revolutions of states and
kingdoms, which surprise and astonish us, are the effects of a designing mind,
of an alwise cause. The various conditions and circumstances of men, that some
are prosperous, others adverse; some rich, and others poor; some in dignity,
while others are low and level with the earth; is not the result of mere
chance, but the design of CHRIST, and for wise ends. The beauty and glory of
the whole consists very much in the variety of its parts: And the
qualifications of men, for the different stations and parts they are to act, in
the rank of rational beings, is from CHRIST the fountain of wisdom. Thus CHRIST
upon the throne is the LORD of all, and has authority and power sufficient to
govern all by himself, and without the instrumentality of men or angels; but he
is pleased to make use of them in the conduct of his affairs both civil and
ecclesiastical. As to his government by angels we know but little of it: They
are invisible agents in the services they do us; but his rule by men is evident
and indisputable; for he has said, Judges and officers shall thou make in all
thy gates which the LORD thy GOD gives thee throughout thy tribes; and they
shall judge the people: and the civil ruler is called the minister of GOD. The
distinction of king and subject, rulers and ruled, is not the contrivance of
designing men, but of divine ordination: It Is CHRIST upon the throne that has
appointed magistracy, that advances men to superior or subordinate offices,
and accomplishes them for government; and has declared to us for what end he
does it, and accordingly what the people over whom they preside may expect from
them, and they from him as they behave and manage in their respective spheres;
and also what regard he will have us pay to them.

And here I shall be particular as the occasion leads me.

1 st then. Magistracy is an institution of CHRIST upon the throne. This is an
assertion that stands in the strongest light in the sacred oracles. The wisdom
of GOD thought it highly necessary for man in his apostate condition, whatever
it might have been if he had kept his primitive state, and retained his
original purity and glory; and therefore imposed it not as a burden, but a
blessing upon mankind; for what is or can be more beneficial to the world? It Is
the very life and soul of humane society; without it, what but perpetual
discords and contentions might be expected? Oppression, injustice, and the most
flagitious enormities would soon lift up their heads and grow rampant, and the
whole earth become a theater of the most bloody tragedies. An ungoverned
society of men would be no better than a herd of savage beasts, worrying and
devouring one another: To prevent this confusion, GOD has instituted civil
government to be a guard upon our persons and lives, and defend us from the
violence and injuries we might be exposed to from men more crafty and powerful
than ourselves.

It was an unhappy juncture when there was no king in Israel to restrain the
boisterous lusts and headstrong passions of the people; but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes; libertinism and licentiousness, idolatry and a
practical contempt of GOD, his laws and worship, broke in like a flood upon the
nation, and exposed them to the angry resentments of heaven. Where all
authoritative and coercive power is taken off, men will soon think that where
there is no law, there is no transgression, and make it evident that it was not
so much the dread of hell, as of a halter, that restrained them from the
greatest villainies.

A commonwealth without government is like a body without eyes, which stands
exposed to a thousand mischiefs, but can defend itself from none of them: To
take away government, would be to deprive mankind of all that is civil and
sacred, and to reduce a beautiful world to a mere chaotical state of darkness
and confusion; but a well-ordered commonwealth how beautiful and glorious to
behold! And how happy the BRITISH constitution! and how justly may it be the
admiration and the envy of the nations about it, with a KING upon the throne,
swaying the scepter of righteousness, with his nobles about him, and officers
under him, in their several degrees of subordination! herein bearing some
little and faint resemblance of the prophet's vision of the LORD sitting upon
his throne, surrounded with his ministers, the holy angels, who are celebrating
his glory and serving his government: Thus the sun, the fountain of light is
placed in the center, with the stars and planets in their respective orbs, and
different degrees of magnitude, revolving about him, and all contributing to
the benefit of our system. But supposing, that government had not been of
divine institution, but mankind had been left entirely to their own liberty,
there is no doubt but they would soon have been so fully convinced of the
absolute necessity of it, that they would not have continued long without it.
Anarchy is such a state as no reasonable man would choose, there being no
manner of safety in it, either of life or property. It was an ancient custom
among the Persians to abrogate the laws of the kingdom, shut up their courts of
judicature, and silence the oracles of justice upon the death of their
sovereign, and every man was left to his own empire for five days together; in
which time such horrid things were done, and outrages committed as to convince
them, by sad experience of the want of a king, and the necessity of laws. It
was the just observation of the roman oraror, Nihil tam aptum est ad jus
conditionemque naturae, quam imperium, sine quo, etc. Nothing is so adapted to
the state and privilege of humane nature as government, without which it is
impossible that families, cities or nations should subsist, yea without it the
race of mankind would be soon extinct.

There is doubtless a certain economy in the world above, amongst the bright
intelligences that encompass the throne of GOD, and the LAMB: This seems to be
plainly intimated by the distinguishing titles given them of thrones,
dominions, angels, archangels, cherubims, and seraphims: There is a sort of
regimen in the starry regions, in their higher and lower scituatitions and
degrees, without which composition, they could not properly be called an army:
And there is something of this to be found amongst the irrational tribes; the
bees, as Virgil and others have observed, have their king, and the cranes their
leader; and they observe their nocturnal watches in disposed orders. Thus
magistracy is an ordinance of CHRIST, the alwise GOD and supreme LORD of the
world: And seeing he has constituted it among men, he certainly demands our
practical acknowledgment of it; and who would be loath and backward to make this
concession, since we are all beholden to government, for order, peace and
religion? We are certainly worthy of nothing but confusion, if we are
ungrateful to GOD, for regular government: Now we may dwell quietly in our
houses, or sit under our own vines and fig trees, and none to make us afraid:
Now the wealth we obtain by honest industry, may be insured to posterity: Now
we may be build temples for the worship of GOD, without danger of having them
pulled down, by sacrilegious hands; and adore the GOD that made us, without
being molested with mutinies and uproars: Now we may enjoy our sabbaths, and
have constant opportunities for our souls, in the free use of all those means,
whereby immortal spirits are trained up for the heavenly world: For these
things, bless we GOD, and honor the KING.

But in asserting civil government to be an institution of CHRIST, I don't
intend that any particular form of it is so; for this, the apostle expressly
says, is an human ordinance. It was never the design of GOD, that any one model
should universally obtain amongst mankind; for if it had, he would undoubtedly
have expressly revealed it, and not left the world thus long in the dark; for
divines of the greatest note and eminence, have never been able to find out any
such intimation of his pleasure in holy writ: And if he had preferred any
particular form, it is no ways probable that he would have permitted that of
the Israelites, his favorite people, to have been so often changed, as we find
it was no less than five times: It looks as if these several alterations of
their constitution were permitted, on purpose to convince the world that every
form was alike indifferent to him; and that he left it to the prudence of every
nation to make choice of that, which best suited their own tempers and
circumstances, and that if any people sound their's defective, the fault was
their own if it was not reformed. And this being the true origin of civil
government, it is a very natural inference that rulers derive their authority
under GOD, from that constitution to which they belong; for it is absurd to
suppose, that kings and governors are sent down immediately from heaven, with
their commissions in their hands: And since the power of the civil ruler flows
from the constitution he is under, the natural extent of it is limited by the
maxims of doing that, which is just and right to all under that constitution.

2. It is CHRIST upon the throne that advances magistrates to their respective
offices. Every one's calling and station in the world is of GOD, he has
appointed the time of our coming upon the stage of action, the part we shall
manage, and when we shall retire and make room for others. Thus Moses was
called to conduct Israel his people; but the priesthood was settled upon Aaron:
Nebuchadnezzar was his servant to humble the pride of the Jews; and Alexander
was raised up to overthrow the persian monarchy. One is designed to weild the
sword, another to hold the plough; one to advise as an oracle of policy,
another to excute. The powers that be, are ordained of GOD, and no man takes
this honor to himself: The thrones of earthly princes are his; thus it is said
of Solomon, that he sat upon the throne of the LORD as king, in the room of
David his father. Promotion comes not from the east or west, north or south;
does not drop down from the clouds, or spring out of the earth, nor is blown
into men's hands by the wind; but GOD is the judge, he puts down one, and
sits up another; by him kings reign, and princes decree justice; by him
princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.

There have been some fanatics, that, in the strongest terms, have denied the
divine right of civil rulers; and asserted that no man's conscience was bound
to a submission to them, and to oppose their authority, was no immoral act: of
this stamp were the Manichees, the German Anabaptists, and other enthusiastic
sectaries since, who, under a pretense of setting up the throne of CHRIST, have
been for subverting the thrones of kings, as if they were diametrically
opposite as GOD and Belial, as heaven and hell; but this is to confront the
sovereignty of the most high, who in the plainest terms assures us, that the
higher powers are from him, and have the impress of divinity upon them. But
then this is, in a mediate manner, for there is no title to dominion by GOD's
immediate designation, as it was in David's case, and his successor Solomon; no
prophet or vision is now to be looked for, and there is no king or ruler upon
the earth, that, if he pretends to such a right to govern, is able to make out
his claim: It is by the mediation of men, that rulers are constituted, from the
king upon the throne, to the lowest officer under him, and nothing but ordinary
providence is to be expected in it. The apostle Peter calls government, (...)
an ordinance of man, not because it is introduced by man without a divine
mandate, but because it is instituted for the benefit of men: The civil ruler
is expressly called GOD's minister, Romans 13. and it is there said, that there
is no power, but of GOD; and therefore he demands the loyalty and subjection of
the christian Romans to their authority in things just and right. It is
observable that Nero, that monster of tyranny and cruelty, had the imperial
dignity at that time, and yet as he was advanced to it by the providence of
GOD, he must be submitted to, and obeyed in all lawful things. The usurpation
of power and the abuse of it, are not of GOD, for he is not the author of
confusion, or of sin, but the power itself is his. Mr. HENRY in Loc.


Having thus said, that magistrates are appointed by CHRIST the great LORD and
head of the political body,

I shall now proceed to consider,

3. The design of their constitution, the duty incumbent on them, and what GOD
himself, and the people over whom they preside, justly expect from them. Now
the great end of government is the good of the subject: This is the very design
of CHRIST himself, in his rule over us; it cannot be any-ways to advance
himself, and his own interest; for being infinitely happy in himself, he does
not want us, nor is he capable of receiving any advantage at all from us; but
it is that he may do us good, and qualify us for the enjoyment of himself,
which is the supreme dignity and happiness of the rational creature; that he
may rectify the disorders of our natures, restore his image bright in us, and
raise up to himself beautiful temples out of the ruins of apostasy, and mould
us into that divine form which is requisite to prepare us for the heavenly
world and our everlasting abode there: To this end both the doctrinal and
preceptive part of his religion naturally tend; and in this, his providential
dispensations do all concur and unite; and if this good design of his
government over us is not reached, it is our own fault.

Now in this the GOD of heaven is a pattern to our earthly GODS; and it is
their duty and glory to imitate him herein; for in nothing can they resemble
him more than in concerting measures, and laying out themselves for the good of
others: They are styled nursing fathers, and as such must be as extensively
beneficial as they can, to all under their care, protect the innocent, right
the injured, encourage the diligent, supprss disorders, punish the disobedient,
defend the poor and needy, the widows and fatherless from fraud and violenec;
and how little does that magistrate comport with his character, who does not
make these his governing design. Civil power is not to be looked upon as an
empty, insignificant name, a mere sound without substance: The sun in the
heavens was not placed in his exalted sphere, merely to be gazed at, but to
afford light and heat to the earth, for the production of grain and fruit,
herbs and flowers, for the delight and benefit of mankind: And the more exalted
stations persons sustain, so much the greater care and business lies upon their
hands, that instead of indulging themselves in ease and delicacy, they are to
watch night and day, and be always contriving and active for the prosperity and
welfare of their people* But they should be especially concerned to promote the
honor and interest of religion among the people, by good laws, and their good
example: It is the main qualification of a governor, that he endeavors to
make his subjects good men and good christians, obsequious to the laws of GOD,
and loyal to the crown of heaven: And those of supreme dignity should exercise
special care, that the truths and ways of GOD are not reproached by the ill
principles and practices of those in subordinate powers: This was the good
resolution of the pious king David, Psalm ci. 3, 6. I will set no wicked thing,
or person, before mine eyes, I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall
not cleave to me: Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land. Those only
he would search for, and promote, that would design and act for the honor of
GOD, and the public good, and not those that were grasping after preferment
from selffish views, to enrich or aggrandize themselves by empowerishing their
subjects: As they rule by CHRIST, they should rule for him, and make it evident
by their good lives, that authority and religion, grace and government, are not
inconsistent things. May they for ever be conjunct and inseparable in the
legislative powers of this land.

We think it well becomes our high place and station, said that excellent
Emperor Theodosius, to give admonitions and injunctions to our subjects
concerning religion. Again says he, We do nothing in the heat of war* or the
cool retirements of peace, but consult and order how the good subjects of our
empire may truly worship GOD, and spend their days in his service. This was a
noble speech; and it is the glory of a christian governor to say and do
likewise, to advance the religion of GOD our SAVIOR, to be a guardian to his
churches, a patron of virtue, a promoter of learning, and to shine in all the
graces that adorn the christian: These are the most splendid ornaments in a
prince's crown, attractive of the divine love, the delight of angels, and the
admiration of men: Such a magistrate is a man after GOD's own heart, and may
depend upon the divine conduct in his affairs personal and political: This will
command the most profound reverence, and the highest love and honor from his
people: Then will these apostolic canons come with a peculiar emphasis, and
they will see the admirable beauty of them: Be ye subject to every ordinance of
man, for the LORD' s sake; put them in mind to be subject to principalities and
powers; to obey magistrates, etc. Indeed a people under the influence of
religious principles and strongly impressed with a sense of their duty to GOD,
and rightly distinguishing betwixt the man and the office, will obey a bad
magistrate in things not in themselves unlawful: Thus the christians were
observant of the imperial edicts of Commodus, Phoras, etc. but it cannot be
thought to be with that freedom and alacrity as to a good ruler. The apostle
speaking of the intention of magistracy, says, that rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to the evil. They should appear like the HOST of GOD formidable
and terrible, the cherubims that guarded the tree of life with the flaming
sword of justice in their hands, to execute wrath upon the bold and daring
criminals, and to suppress vice and immorality, in all its forms and
complexions, and to drive it if possible out of the land: Wickedness naturally
tends to deprive a people of the divine smiles and protection, and to bring
down distressing calamities upon them. The prosperity of a province infallibly
depends upon the favor and blessings of heaven, but if GOD be gone from us,
what can be expected but a series of woes and judgments? Such a people cannot
subsist long, but must inevitably sink into disgrace and ruin, which to
prevent should be the care and endeavor of the civil ruler. The apostle adds
-- a praise to them that do well; that do their own proper business, that
confine their zeal and activity within their own limits, and wherein they are
called of GOD, there abide, and are faithful; these shall have the countenance
and protection of those under whom they serve.

But its time that I proceed to the next particular to be considered, viz.

4. The qualifications of the civil magistrate, or what he must be according to
the direction of CHRIST, to answer the design of his constitution, and that he
may discharge with fidelity, and to divine acceptance, the important trust
reposed in him. It is not every man that is fit to govern, how much soever he
may think himself qualified for it: The weight of government is too heavy to be
laid upon every one's shoulder, they must be able men to surmount its
difficulties, and wade through its emergencies. There may be many excellent
qualities in a man, and yet he may not have a turn for government: The great
and glorious characters by which rulers are known and distinguished in the
sacred oracles, convey to us such sublime ideas, as cannot be in any measure
answered, except by here and there one of an exraordinary genius: Sometimes
they are dignified with the title of GOD's, Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile
the GODS. GOD himself styles them so; and how much does it magnify their
office, and what reverence and honor does it call for from us? They are styled
the lights of a people. Thus the royal David was the light of Israel: They are
lights for splendour, counsel and comfort; and what greater title can be given
of a mortal man? or, what more is spoken of GOD himself? GOD is light; wisdom
and knowledge, power, purity and all perfection is comprehended in it.
Sometimes they have the character and style of shields of the earth, Psalm.
xlvii. 9. The shields of the earth belong to the LORD; i. e. magistrates, the
protectors and guardians of a nation, are dependant upon GOD: And it is a great
blessing to a people to have such shields, especially when it may be said of
them, that they belong to the LORD; that is, not only constituted by him, but
devoted to him, employed for his honor, and his people's interest: Then he is
greatly exalted, when princes and governors and inferior officers exert their
power to promote the kingdom and interest of CHRIST, and to defend their people
from insult and* oppression. I say, when we reflect upon such titles of the
civil magistrate, as they suggest to us something very superior, and are
almost apt to raise our thoughts of him as another sort of being, that
approaches nearer to divinity than mankind generally does, so to expect from
him something proportionably great and good. It was Jethro's advice to Moses,
to provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear GOD, men of truth,
hating covetousness, and place such over them to be rulers.

To be particular here,

. A principle of true grace living and reigning in the heart, is the first and
best qualification in a magistrate. It is the just observation of one, that no
Principles, but those of religion, are sufficient to form a great man; all
other accomplishments separate from this, will loose their luster and glory: It
is piety that makes the face of a ruler to shine. This is his brightest
ornament, as holiness is the most orient pearl in the crown of heaven: All the
bright ornaments of Greece, or all the Roman dictators and consuls were not so
great and honorable as the christian magistrate clothed with the robe of
holiness, and resplendent in the image of GOD: All the eloquence and oratory of
Cicero; or all the great achievements and conquests of Caesar, for which they
have been so much celebrated, don't render them worthy of that esteem, love and
honor which is justly paid to a christian Governor; who, by the charms of
his good example, the noble conquest of his own lusts and passions, his holy
zeal for GOD, and faithful endeavors to advance the best interests of his
people, is rendered worthy of the highest honor. GOD himself esteems and
honors such a ruler, and will honor him in the regions of the blessed: He now
shines as the sun when he goes forth in his strength; and shall hereafter shine
as the brightness of the firmament in the world of light and glory.

The GODS of a people should adorn their exalted stations with sobriety,
righteousness and sanctity. They are, as one expresses, lights upon a hill
visible to all, and they cannot transgress, but like the eclipse of the sun,
every one observes it, and the smallest defect in them obscures the whole orb
of their virtues. The Roman Optimates were so to behave in all things as to
make their conduct approved by every good man, and worthy the imitation of all:
Their Censors and Praetors were to inspect the morals, and correct the vices
and extravagancies of the people. It was given in charge by the GOD of Israel,
to the electors of the empire to choose the person that he should nominate to be
their king; and to the king so elected, to act under the influence of religious
laws in his administration, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. It shall be when he sits upon the
throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law, and it shall
be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may
learn to fear the LORD his GOD, that his heart be not lifted up, and that he
turn not aside from the commandment to the right hand or to the left: And to
excite him to this, and to induce to practice what he read, he is told the
advantage that his religion would be unto him, viz. that it would prolong his
government, and entail a blessing upon his posterity. Secular dignity lays no
foundation for a blessed hope, translates no man to the celestial paradise:
It Is only holiness that qualifies for happiness, the vision of CHRIST upon the
throne, and the rivers of pleasures that flow from it. The sanctifying work of
the divine spirit upon the soul, and his testimony to it, in concurrence with
our own spirit, is that alone which can give us that sweet peace which passes
all understanding, a divine calm in a dying hour, and afford us a comfortable
prospect of future glory. It is not the coat and character of a minister of
state, that will be any advantage to him in the great audit-day, that will
secure him from the animadversions of the supreme JUDGE, or render his doom any
thing less severe: It will not make in his favor to plead, that he has been a
ruler over men, and sustained such a post. It Is nothing but our graces, and
good works, the genuine product of them, that will recommend us to the divine
acceptance: If our station and business be high, if we have not the hearts of
sincere humble christians, we shall have but the greater ignominy, and fall at
last. Our earthly GODS must stand at the same bar, and be judged by the same
rule with their people; and without an impression of the divine character upon
them, they shall have the doom of the wicked and slothful servant, and be
excluded the blissful presence and kingdom of GOD for ever. We see then the
obligation upon magistrates to be good men: It Is absolutely necessary to
themselves and their own comfort in the present, and happiness in the coming
world; and it is necessary to their people, to form them to religion and
virtue, by the shining examples of it in their own persons.

2. Great knowledge and wisdom, are essential qualifications in civil rulers.
Piety alone will not do; for then every good man would be qualified to rule, which
it is certain he is not; but they must be wise and understanding men, and like
the accomplished ruler of the Jews, who conducted his people, as in the
integrity of his heart, so with the skillfulness of his hands: How can the
grand intentions of government be served, or how can government itself be
secured from contempt, when it falls into weak and unskillful hands? If the
blind lead the blind, there is no need of an oracle from heaven to foretell the
consequents. Oculum cum sceptro, was the Egyptian emblem of government. It is
the same frantic madness, says Dr. Henry More, to exile prudence out of the
affairs of state, as to exclude reason out of the mathematics and philosophy.

It bodes well to a people when it may be said of them as Ezekiel. 27. 8. Thy wise
men, oh Tyrus that were in thee, were thy pilots. Men skilled in the art of
navigation, and could direct their brave fleets in times and places of danger,
their safety and prosperity consisted very much in having such wise men in so
useful and important a service. Magistrates are the pilots of a people, and
therefore must be men of great wisdom and prudence; an ignorant pilot is a
solecism, and to what purpose is the office of a magistrate without ability to
execute it? A weak and giddy head will soon cause a staggering body, and a
ruined state: The political house must inevitably fall that has the slender
reed, instead of strong pillars, to support it. Knowledge and wisdom are the
two eyes of the magistrate; with one he views the people in their constitution,
tempers and outward circumstances, what are their dangers, and from what causes
they arise, and what may be done to prevent them; with the other he forms such
schemes, and applies such remedies as are proper to the case. Who then is
sufficient for these things? where is the man that answers the character of an
accomplished ruler? he is like Elihu's interpreter, one among a thousand.
Indeed almost every man thinks himself qualified to set at helm, guide and
govern public affairs; but this is because he is both a stranger to himself,
and to the difficulties of government.

3. Courage is a necessary and excellent quality in a magistrate. Knowledge of
the state of the province, and wisdom to conduct its affairs to advantage, will
be to but little purpose without courage: These in conjunction will not fail to
distinguish a man amongst those of his own rank and order; but if he possesses
the former, the latter being wanting, it may be of ill consequence, as it may
deter him from speaking or acting freely, in any matter that lies before him.
If the head is crowded with sublime and noble ideas, and these ranged in most
beautiful order; it is courage must draw them out into act and exercise, and
render them serviceable to the public. A cowardly magistrate is like the
timorous hare in a lion's den; the frown or check of a great personage will
frighten him out of his conscience, and obstruct the execution of justice. The
Athenian judges held their courts in Mars-street, to show that they had martial
fire, though clothed with Apollo's robes.

4. They must be just men. The GOD and governor of the world is just, and in
this a pattern to rulers, who should endeavor to be righteous as he is
righteous. This is what he expressly requires of them; the GOD of Israel said
it, and the rock of Israel spoke it. He that rules over men must be just.
Justice obliges the magistrate to deal fairly and righteously between man and
man, to protect the innocent, and right the injured. There is an iniquity to be
punished by the judges; and there is a reward for the righteous, which the
minister of justice must see distributed, as he would not bear the sword in
vain. The just ruler will take care that righteous laws, and none but such, are
imposed upon the subject; and when made, that they are enforced with proper
sanctions, and duly executed according to the regards that are paid to them.
The Egyptians were used to picture their judges without hands, as some other
nations have done without eyes, that they might not be guilty of bribery, which
blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverts the words of righteousness. The
opposite to this, viz. injustice, is repugnant to the laws of GOD, and the
precepts of christianity; and the unjust man is abhorred of the LORD: The
apostle's words are shocking, and one would think sufficient for ever to deter
men from the practice of this sin, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 12. So that injustice is a sin
that is inconsistent with the fear of GOD, or a principle of grace in the soul:
It Is impossible that there can be sincere and undissembled piety toward GOD,
where there is not righteousness toward men. It Is one of the main strokes in
the character of a citizen of Zion, that he walks uprightly, and works
righteousness.

5. And finally. They must be men of a public spirit; seeking the good of all
their people, and not to enrich themselves: The avaritious magistrate is
compared by the prophet to a wolf ravening the prey, and aiming at nothing but
to get dishonest gain, Ezekiel. 22. 27. When it may be said of a magistrate, thine
eyes and thine heart are not but for covetousness, What but mischiefs to the
public, oppression and every sort of villainy may be expected from him?

Thus I have considered the qualifications of civil rulers; or what they are to
be and do, according to that power they have received from CHRIST, and that
relation wherein they stand. And when rulers are thus qualified, it is from
CHRIST: He is the fountain of all good, and distributes his blessings as
pleases him; and they are his gifts and graces that adorn the magistrate, and
in which he shines.

I am now to consider,

In the 5th and last place. The regards which CHRIST upon the throne, who has
constituted civil rulers, will have us pay to them. Now we are to honor them
as temporal fathers; to support the dignity of government by paying them their
just tributes; to pray for the divine blessing upon their persons and
administrations; and to yield a voluntary and cheerful subjection to them in
all their lawful demands. The debt of honor to them is a moral precept,
doubtless couched under the law of the fifth commandment. Honor the king,
which may include inferior officers, is also an apostolic charge: This honor
is to be expressed by outward gestures, and by defending and preserving their
character against such malcontents as make too free and bold with it, speak
evil of dignities, and reproach their administration; and by rendering them
that tribute or custom which is proper in their exalted stations. And then, as
we should pray that they may be under the divine influence and conduct, from
the KING upon the throne to the lowest officer under him, so we should submit
to every ordinance of man for the LORD's sake; the apostle's words are awful
Romans 13. 2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of GOD; and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation: It intends lawful
authority; for it is no fault at all, but a duty to disobey, if these
injunctions are opposite to the laws of GOD: It is an eternal maxim of truth,
that GOD must be obeyed rather than man.

But I may not enlarge upon these things, but pass to the use of what has been
spoken in some inferences, omitting others.

USE I. How great and incomprehensible is this mystery, CHRIST upon the throne,
wearing the crow^ and swaying the scepter there. It Is his humanity (...) is the
subject of all this honor. As GOD he was not capable of advancement, but has a
natural right to the throne, and to all the grandeur, properties and powers of
it: But that flesh and blood should be so raised and dignified by being united
to the SON of GOD, is a most surprising project of unsearcheable wisdom, and
comprehended by none but GOD himself; the apostle calls it (...), that GOD was
manifest in flesh, -- and recieved up to glory. There can be no greater
disproportion than between infinite and finite, GOD and man, the CREATOR and a
creature; and yet these are so conjoined as to constitute one person. What
strange paradoxes are these, viz. That the mighty GOD is a Child born, and the
everlasting FATHER, a Son given; that the eternal was made in time; and the
immortal, mortal; and yet continuing eternal, infinite: Oh ineffable display of
wisdom! The result whereof will be the admiration and praise of its glories, in
an endless duration: To unite a rational soul to a lump of clay, or to join a
clod of earth to the sun, is the effect of a boundless strength; but the union
of the divine and human nature in the person of CHRIST, is an effect of wisdom
and power infinitely beyond these: The angels of light and glory are not herein
comprehensors, but are prying into it; and it will be the matter of their
eternal inquiries,

USE II. We infer, That CHRIST upon the throne is to be praised for his
royalty, and for all the displays of his goodness and mercy to ourselves and
others, to our King and nation, and to our land. It Is the employ of the happy
myriads that guard his throne, to ascribe blessing and honor and thanksgiving
to him: The prophet Isaiah beheld, and heard the sevices thus praid to him, in
an universal consent and harmony; and with such a strong affection and fervent
zeal, that, as the visionary disciple represents it, their voices were loud as
thunder; and also melodious as harpers, harping with their harps. And this
should be our employ while here on earth; we should bear a joyful part in the
new song which the angels sing; we should celebrate him as our victorious
deliverer from the united powers of sin and hell; and as the actual bestower of
all those blessings upon us, to which the comfort of the present life is owing,
and on which our future and everlasting happiness depends; we should often
reflect upon the many and various instances of his goodness to us; and mention,
with pleasure, his great goodness toward the house of our Israel, which he
has bestowed upon them, from our beginnings unto this day; and how from a
small number, we are increased to a great multitude; our religious and civil
liberties, our magistracy and ministry, our churches and colleges, are the rich
and invaluable blessings of CHRIST upon the throne; and which loudly call for
our grateful acknowledgements this day. And now, Blessed be the LORD GOD, the
GOD of NEW ENGLAND, who only does wondrous things, and blessed be his glorious
name forever; and let all the people say, Amen. We have great cause to be
thankful for the good government we are under, both as to the KING and ministry
at home; and those in immediate authority over us. And we would take this most
public occasion to express our gratitude to the MOST HIGH, for the remarkable
preservation of the life of our KING, and his royal SON the Duke of Cumberland,
in the late battle at Dettingen. And our obligation to gratitude is greatly
increased by his deliverance from the late designed French invasion; which if
it had succeeded, what dire calamities would have been consequent upon it, the
nation would have been an aceldema, a field of blood and rapine, and reduced to
slavery: Thanks be to the LORD upon the throne, that has not given the nation
over as a prey to her adversaries; but has broken their purposes, diminished
their forces, and made them unable to accomplish their mischievous devices. Let
us now adore and sing with Moses and Israel, after the destruction of the
Egyptian host, Thou did blow with thy wind, and scatteredst them, the sea
covered Some Hundreds of them.
them, they sunk as lead in the mighty waters: Who is like unto thee, Oh LORD,
-- fearful in praises doing wonders. And now may GOD yet and long preserve the
lamp which he has ordained for his anointed; protect and defend him from all
secret attempts and open violence, and may he be wise as an angel of GOD to
conduct the great affairs of the kingdom in this cloudy day; and may he succeed
in the present war, and his just arms prove victorious! and I doubt not but
that it is the united voice of all the sons of New England, GOD save King
GEORGE, and speak well of his servant, and of his royal house, for a great
while to come.

USE III. Does the Lord CHRIST reign, let us all stand in awe of him, and not
in a slavish fear and dread of any of our fellow creatures. He that is great
and exalted above all, is greatly to be feared, his power is infinite; whereas
the power of man is limited and can extend no farther then GOD permits. When
his people the Jews were dejected by the numbers and threats of their enemies,
he rebukes their fears, and tells them how absurd and impious it was to be in
such dread of dying men, Isai. 51. 12. -- Who art thou that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man, that shall be made as
grass; and forgettest the LORD thy maker? The royal psalmist, with a vigorous
faith, triumphs in GOD, the GOD of his salvation, when the wicked, even his
enemies came upon him to eat up his flesh; and nobly resolves, that though an
host should encamp against him, his heart should not fear, and though war should
arise against him, in this he would be confident. CHRIST upon the throne, is
the LORD of HOSTS; and whatever mischievous intentions our enemies, by sea or
land, may have against us, he can protect us, who is the LORD strong and
mighty, the LORD mighty in battle; and he will do so if we make him our friend.
Let us then fear and reverence him, and we are safe; he will hide us in his
pavilion; -- he will set our feet upon a rock, and lift up our head above our
enemies round about us.

USE IV. Has the LORD upon the Throne appointed civil rulers for the good of
his people, they should then endeavor to comport with the design of the^^
advancement. My honored Fathers, CHRIST in his providence has constituted
(...) the present guardians of our lives, religion and properties; a very great
and important trust is herein committed to you; and the eyes the GOD, angels
and men are upon you to observe you in the management of it.

To excite you then to fidelity herein, be pleased to consider, and bear upon
your minds these three things, viz. Who it is that you act for: That your time
is limited and short: And, the account you must quickly give up to the great
and impartial JUDGE of the world.

Who it is you act for; and that you are the ministers of CHRIST, the LORD of
heaven and earth; and as you act by him, it should be for him: His interest and
glory, and the good of this people, should be your governing design in all your
debates and resolves, acts and laws, that you pass: And if it be so, you may
expect the divine presence with you, and that GOD himself will stand in the
congregation of the mighty, etc. And then you may expect that you will be the
happy instruments of our peace and prosperity, and of the growth and
flourishing of religion among us; then truth will spring out of the earth, and
righteousness will look down from heaven.

Again consider,

That your time of service for CHRIST and this people is limited and short,
This is a melancholy motive, but should be a quickening one, to our rulers, and
to us all, to be active and diligent in the service before us; as our LORD
himself was quickened in his work from this consideration. It Is a dying world we
are in; our days on earth are as a shadow, there is none abiding.

Where are all the sons of same we read of in past ages? And, where are those
that once were the lights of our Israel, our sheilds and our glory? Sad
experience has often told us that earthly GODS die like men. How many shining
examples of wisdom, learning and piety have we seen adorning the chair and the
council board, which our eyes shall see no more? Where are the great names of
DUDLEY, STOUGHTON, BURNIT, and others? Or, Where are the honorable gentlemen
of a lower sphere, the WINTHROPS, HUTCHINSONS, SEWALL, or the late honorable
Col. DUDLEY, an instance fresh in our minds? Vixerunt, sed mortui sunt; they
are all gone; and you, gentlemen, that succeed them are dying men: Your great
and splendid titles, your exalted stations will not exempt you a moment from
death; but you that frame laws for others, are alike subject with them to the
law of mortality. Death strains no compliments with earthly GODS: The man of
honor must die as well as the clown or beggar; death will strip him of his
purple attire, and cover him with cold earth. Place yourselves then, gentlemen,
at the end of this beautiful scene, and passing out of flying time into the
world of spirits; think and say with the royal psalmist in the midst of his
wealth and honors, Thou have put, LORD, a measure to my days, and my substance
is as nothing. Such reflections as these would be serviceable to excite you to
diligence and fidelity, in the discharge of your duty, in your respective posts
of honor and service.

Again consider,

The account you must quickly give up to the great and impartial JUDGE of the
world. And how will magistrates, negligent of their duty, dare to hold up their
guilty heads, before the flaming tribunal above; when they shall be charged not
only with their own personal sins, but with all other's sins, perpetrated by
their contrivance? Such loads of guilt will expose them to a most intolerable
doom and punishment in the other world.

Suffer me now to address your EXCELLENCY, the honorable BOARD, and the
honorable house of REPRESENTATIVES, particularly, in a few words.

May it please your EXCELLENCY, whom the LORD upon the throne has seated in the
first chair of dignity and power over us; and we acknowledge and adore his kind
hand of providence in it, and that your EXCELLENCY'S administration has been to
general acceptance among us; which affords us ground to hope that it will be
your desire and endeavor to make us happy, by a vigorous prosecution of every
thing within your sphere, that is requisite to promote the religious and civil
interests of this people.

Your EXCELLENCY has the honor of being placed at the head of a province, that
has been as remarkable for piety toward GOD, and loyalty to the crown, as any
one in the British dominions: A province that has been the delight and the care
of heaven, and in a very signal manner smiled on the prospered; that it may be
said, -- Who is like unto thee, Oh people, saved by the LORD, the shield of thy
help, and the sword of thy excellency. And therefore, SIR, your tender regards
for us, and endeavor to make us still a more flourishing and happy people,
will be an offering highly acceptable to the LORD. A great opportunity is put
into your hands to do us good; and we would hope it is because GOD loves his
people that he has set your EXCELLENCY over us in such a day and time as this:
And that you will be the means of delivering us from the perplexing
difficulties we are involved in, particularly by an unhappy Medium, uncertain
as the wind, and fluctuating like the waves of the sea, and which lies at the
mercy of every one to rise or sink at his pleasure; through the unrighteousness
whereof the land mourns; and the cries of many are going up into the ears of
the LORD of Sabbath.

I would also humbly ask your EXCELLENCY'S smiles upon the COLLEGE, the chief
seat of learning among us, the glory of NEW ENGLAND; and especially at such a
time as this, when learning is despised and vilified as a thing prejudicial to
the church and state; whereas it is the honor and safety of both.

I would further humbly beseech your EXCELLENCY to use your best endeavors and
influence at Home, to secure to us the many valuable privileges granted us by
the ROYAL CHARTER: Your EXCELLENCY'S concern and regard for us in these things,
will further endear you to us; and as it will render you worthy of the highest
esteem, love and admiration of your people while you live, so your name will be
mentioned with honor after your recess. With this consideration, Thetis
comforts her brave son in Homer, that though he should be short lived, yet he
should continue himself in the admiration of posterity; by this means, though you
seek not glory to yourself, yet you shall obtain a good report, and your memory
shall be blessed, when the memory of the wicked shall perish. But alas, what
and how little is this compared with that honor, which CHRIST upon the throne
will confer upon you, as a recompense to your fidelity in his service, and
which infinitely transcends all the honors of this passing world, and shall
last for ever.

I conclude with my earnest wishes, that the best of blessings may descend and
rest upon your EXCELLENCY'S person and family to the period of a holy and happy
life; and that you may be late transmitted to the blessed regions of
immortality and glory above, Amen.

Permit me now to apply myself to the honorable COUNCIL, and the honorable
house of REPRESENTATIVES.

Gentlemen,

Through the good hand of our GOD upon us, you are met together to day to choose
one branch of our legislature. Now there are two things that ought to govern
you in your election; One is, the ability or fitness of the person you vote
for, that he is a man of good knowledge and wisdom, and a man of integrity; if
he is defective in these, he is certainly destitute of the essential
qualifications for government. The other is this, In your choice have a
principal regard for the glory of CHRIST upon the throne, and the good of your
Country; not to please men, but GOD; not to serve a party-spirit; not to
gratify any one's ambition or humor; not from a contracted selfish principle:
I hope, gentlemen, you will detest such low and sinister designs. Be pleased to
think with yourselves, before you cast your vote, Will it be an act pleasing to
the Lord CHRIST, that I hold up my hand, or give my vote for such a man? What
is the principle that governs me in it? Is it because I think him the most
capable, and best disposed to serve the public? Or have I something else in
view? Let not prejudice or affection turn the scale; and such a man be
neglected or left out, because he is not in such a scheme or party, though
otherwise well qualified; and another take place that is less worthy, because
he has such a turn of thought, or is likely to serve such a design. It was once
the complaint of a wise and political head, I am not able to bear this people
myself alone; and it was good policy (and soon became sound divinity) which
Jethro gave him, to take wise men, and understanding, and known among the
tribes, and place such to be rulers. Never did the circumstances of this people
call for more of the spirit of wisdom and knowledge, compassion and integrity,
than at this day: When the tide serves, the wind blows favorably, and all
things make for the voyage, a less degree of skill may possibly suffice; but it
requires an artist to steer in a storm.

And, honored Sirs, after the affair of this day is over, and the several
branches of the legislature come to act in concert, it is to be desired, that
you may all approve yourselves what by profession and character you are, the
servants of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; a title which no man has any cause to be
ashamed of, and which no angel or archangel, but is fond of; and that you
manifest your love and loyalty to him, in a resolute and vigorous opposition to
every thing that tends to obstruct his interest, and the flourishing of
religion in the truth and purity of it among us; -- And in a solemn and
reverend regard to the DAY, the house and worship of GOD, and that a proper
care be taken to prevent the great and scandalous disorders that some are
chargeable with in these respects. I am sensible there are good and wholesome
laws provided, to oblige all persons to attend the public worship, and to
prevent unnecessary travels upon the SABBATH; but how little regard is paid to
them? They are every day trampled on, and in the open face of some in
authority, and yet there is little or no notice taken of it: This is an
iniquity to be punished by the judges; but if the civil officer neglects his
duty, the whole land becomes guilty and must suffer for it, for there needs
nothing more to make a sin public, than that it is connived at by those, in
whose power alone it is to suppress it.

To draw to a close, Let us all practically acknowledge the regency of CHRIST,
and submit to all his claims and demands upon us. Our duty herein is too
evident to be disputed, and the consequent advantage of it is a dignity and
felicity beyond all expression, thought or parallel. HEAVEN, with all its
charms and delightful glory, will then be ours: After a short (...) of service,
we shall be admitted into his temple above, where our eyes shall see the KING,
and behold the glory which the FATHER has given him, and be changed into the
same image, from glory to glory: And as one star differs from another star in
glory, so the rewards of blessedness shall be proportioned to the degrees of
our services here, and the honor done to GOD by them. Let these considerations
inspire us with courage and resolution in the service of CHRIST; and let them
be supporting considerations to us under all the sorrows of the present life.
Here the believer is in armor and battle with the united powers of sin and
hell, which furiously attack him; and he is almost worn out with the long and
tedious conflict; and here he meets with numberless crosses and contradictions.
Happy they, that are arrived at the heavenly world, and got above the reach of
every thing that is grievous: Blessed are the dead, that die in the LORD: There
the soul rests as in its proper center, and desires nothing more than what it
enjoys. But where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? CHRIST upon the
throne has power enough to condemn and punish them; and will exert his power,
as for the salvation of his willing people, so for the destruction of all his
enemies. The sinner shall be shut out of his reviving presence, and have no
part in the honors of his throne, or the joys that flow from it: They that now
refuse submission to his easy yoke, he will hereafter break with his iron rod;
and the opposers of his person, shall be the victims of his justice, and the
everlasting monuments of his wrath and vengeance. Sinners are apt to forget
CHRIST in his exalted state; they look rather upon his past life, his low and
mean condition, and are fearless of any harm from one so degraded: They slight
his threats, and seem to question his ability to execute them, but they will
feel the dismal effects of them, to their everlasting confusion. -- Who has
ever hardened himself against GOD, and prospered? He can crush the daring rebel
with greater ease than we can the feeble worm: To allude to Job 41. 20. Out of
his mouth goes a flame; when he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid. --
He is a king over all the children of pride. There is not any creature that has
an arm as GOD; or, that can thunder with a voice like him? What is the chaff
before the strong wind, or briars and thorns to the raging fire? No more is the
sinner in his hand: He that triumphed over all the powers of hell, when set in
battle array against him, can easily conquer the sinner when he presumes to
enter the lists with him. He decks himself with majesty and excellency, and
arays himself with glory and beauty; he casts abroad the rage of his wrath;
beholds every one that is proud, and abases him; looks upon him, and brings him
low, and treads the wicked under his feet; he girdeth himself with strength
unto battle, pursues his enemies and overtakes them, as he did the Egyptian
host, in their pursuit of Israel, neither does he turn again 'till they are
consumed. Sinners are but plotting mischief against themselves, and paving the
way to their own destruction, when they are regardless of his laws, and trample
his authority under their feet: They may think they act wisely for themselves;
but they shall find it otherwise, repent their choice and upbraid their folly
when it is too late, and they shall come to drink of the wine of the wrath of
GOD, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels,
and in the presence of the lamb. This, Oh sinner, will be thy fate unless thou
art wise betimes to make thy peace with the SON of GOD. It Is to be earnestly
wished, that every poor and perishing soul would be persuaded to submit to
CHRIST, accept him as his LORD, open his heart, and invite him to come in, and
be willing to let sin and self, and all, go to make room for him. And let us
all express our loyalty to CHRIST by our submission to our civil rulers, who
bear the title of GODS, and are invested with someting of his authority. He
requires us to render to all their dues, and to be subject to the higher powers
for conscience sake: If we do these things and render unto GOD the things that
are GOD's, and to Caesar the things that are Caesar' s, then we shall enjoy
that blessed calm in our own breasts, which arises from a sense that we have
done our duty, while we live, and shall have an happy translation after death,
from a world of sin, of snares and sorrows, to immortality and peace, happiness
and glory, with GOD and CHRIST above.

To conclude, Let us all unite in fervent supplication to GOD upon the throne,
for his blessing upon the province, That he would pardon all the sins of it,
according to the greatness of his mercy; and reform every disorder among us:
And, that the hope of Israel may be our GOD and SAVIOR, and not as a stranger
in our land, or a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry but for a night; but
that he would be always in the midst of us, and in this day of war and battle
be as a wall of fire around us, and appoint salvation to us for walls and
bulwarks: That he would bless all orders and degrees of men among us; and make
our officers peace, and our exactors righteousness: And, that the affairs of
this day may be overruled to his glory and the best good of this people: And
particularly let this be your united supplication, my fathers and brethren in
the ministry, which was the original design of your convention upon this
anniversary occasion.

And now, May the GOD of peace and grace be with us, and do for us, and for
this whole people, exceeding abundantly above all that we are able to ask or
think; and may our hearts be perfect with the LORD our GOD, all our days, and
may it be well with us for ever; for the sake of JESUS CHRIST, to whom with the
FATHER, and the blessed SPIRIT, be ascribed, as is most due, all honor and
praise, might, majesty and dominion, both now, henceforth, and in eternal ages.

AMEN.

