AN ACCOUNT Of the NEW INVENTED PENNSYLVANIAN FIRE-PLACES: WHEREIN Their
CONSTRUCTION and MANNER OF OPERATION is particularly explained; Their
ADVANTAGES above every other METHOD of WARMING ROOMS demonstrated; And all
OBJECTIONS that have been raised against the USE OF THEM, answered and obviated.

With DIRECTIONS for putting them up, and for USING them to the best Advantage.
And a COPPER-PLATE, in which the several PARTS of the MACHINE are exactly laid
down, from a Scale of equal Parts.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN. 1744.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THESE FIRE-PLACES are made in the best Manner, and sold by R. Grace in
Philadelphia. They are sold also by J. Parker in New York, and by J. Franklin
in Boston.

The within-describ'd is of the middle and most common Size: There are others
to be had both larger and smaller.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 6, of the Notes, read Sanitate. line 20, read motus. Page 14,
line 21, after the Word away, add, also a square Hole b for the Bellows.

AN ACCOUNT Of the NEW-INVENTED FIRE-PLACES.
IN these Northern Colonies the Inhabitants keep FIRES to sit by, generally
Seven Months in the Year; that is, from the Beginning of October to the End of
April; and in some Winters near Eight Months, by taking in part of September
and May.

WOOD, our common Fuel, which within these 100 Years might be had at every
Man's Door, must now be fetched near 100 Miles to some Towns, and makes a very
considerable Article in the Expense of Families.

As therefore so much of the Comfort and Convenience of our Lives, for so great
a Part of the Year, depends on the Article of FIRE, -- since Fuel is become so
expensive, and (as the Country is more cleared and settled) will of course grow
scarcer and dearer; any new Proposal for Saving the Wood, and for lessening the
Charge and augmenting the Benefit of FIRE, by some particular Method of Making
and Managing it, may at least be thought worth Consideration.

THE NEW FIRE-PLACES are a late Invention to that purpose (experienced now
three Winters by a great Number of Families in Pennsylvania) of which this
Paper is intended to give a particular Account.

THAT the Reader may the better judge whether this Method of Managing Fire has
any Advantage over those heretofore in Use, it may be proper to consider both
the old and new Methods separately and particularly, and afterward make the
Comparison.

IN order to this, it is necessary to understand well some few of the Properties
of AIR and FIRE, viz.

1. AIR is rarefied by Heat, and condensed by Cold; i. e. the same Quantity of
Air takes up more Space when warm than when cold. This may be shown by several
very easy Experiments. Take any clear Glass Bottle (a Florence Flask stripped of
the Straw is best) place it before the Fire, and as the Air within is warmed
and rarefied, part of it will be driven out of the Bottle; turn it up, place
its Mouth in a Vessel of Water, and remove it from the Fire; then, as the Air
within cools and contracts, you will see the Water rise in the Neck of the
Bottle, supplying the Place of just so much Air as was driven out. Hold a large
hot Coal near the Side of the Bottle, and as the Air within feels the Heat, it
will again distend and force out the Water. -- Or, Fill a Bladder half-full of
Air, tie the Neck tight, and lay it before a Fire as near as may be without
scorching the Bladder; as the Air within heats, you will perceive it to swell
and fill the Bladder, till it becomes tight as if full-blown: Remove it to a
cool Place, and you will see it fall gradually, till it become as lank as at
first.

2. AIR rarefied and distended by Heat, is Body or Matter of any sort is said
to be specifically heavier or l ighter than other Matter, when it has more or
less Substance or Weight in the same Dimensions.
specifically lighter than it was before, and will rise in other Air of greater
Density. As Wood, Oil, or any other Matter specifically lighter than Water, if
placed at the Bottom of a Vessel of Water, will rise till it comes to the Top;
so rarefied Air will rise in common Air, till it either comes to Air of equal
Weight, or is by Cold reduced to its former Density.

A FIRE then being made in any Chimney, the Air over the Fire is rarefied by
the Heat, becomes lighter and therefore immediately rises in the Funnel and
goes out; the other Air in the Room (flowing toward the Chimney) supplies its
Place, is rarefied in its turn, and rises likewise; the Place of the Air thus
carried out of the Room is supplied by fresh Air coming in through Doors and
Windows, or, if they be shut, through every Crevice with Violence, as may be seen
by holding a Candle to a Keyhole: If the Room be so tight as that all the
Crevices together will not supply so much Air as is continually carried off,
then in a little time the Current up the Funnel must flag, and the Smoke being
no longer driven up must come into the Room.

1. FIRE i. e. Common Fire.
throws out Light, Heat, and Smoke (or Fume) The two first move in right Lines
and with great Swiftness; the latter is but just separated from the Fuel, and
then moves only as it is carried by the Stream of rarefied Air. And without a
continual Accession and Recession of Air to carry off the Smoaky Fumes, they
would remain crowded about the Fire, and stifle it.

2. HEAT may be separated from the Smoke as well as from the Light, by means of
a Plate of Iron, which will suffer Heat to pass through it without the others.

3. FIRE sends out its Rays of Heat, as well as Rays of Light, equally every
way: But the greatest sensible Heat is over the Fire, where there is, besides
the Rays of Heat shot upwards, a continual rising Stream of hot Air, heated by
the Rays shot round on every Side.

THESE Things being understood, we proceed to consider the Fire-places
heretofore in Use, viz.

1. The large open Fire-places used in the Days of our Fathers, and still
generally in the Country, and in Kitchens. 2. The newer-fashion'd Fire-places,
with low Breasts, and narrow Hearths. 3. Fire-places with hollow Backs, Hearths
and Jams of Iron, (described by Mons. Gauger In his Tract entitled, La
Mechanique de Feu.
) for warming the Air as it comes into the Room. 4. The Holland Stoves, with
Iron Doors opening into the Room. 5. The German Stoves, which have no Opening
in the Room where they are used, but the Fire is put in from some other Room,
or from without. 6. Iron Pots, with open Charcoal Fires, placed in the middle
of a Room.
1. The first of these Methods has generally the Convenience of two warm Seats,
one in each Corner; but they are sometimes too hot to abide in, and at other
times incommoded with the Smoke; there is likewise good Room for the Cook to
move, to hang on Pots, etc. -- Their Inconveniences are, that they almost
always smoke if the Door be not left open; that they require a large Funnel,
and a large Funnel carries off a great Quantity of Air, which occasions what is
called a strong Draft to the Chimney; without which strong Draft the Smoke
would come out of some Part or other of so large an Opening, so that the Door
can seldom be shut; and the cold Air so nips the Backs and Heels of those that
sit before the Fire, that they have no Comfort, 'till either Screens or Settles
are provided (at a considerable Expense) to keep it off, which both cumber the
Room and darken the Fireside. A moderate Quantity of Wood on the Fire in so
large a Hearth, seems but little; and, in so strong and cold a Draught, warms
but little; so that People are continually laying on more. In short, it is next
to impossible to warm a Room with such a Fireplace: And I suppose our
Ancestors never thought of warming Rooms to sit in; all they purposed was to
have a Place to make a Fire in, by which they might warm themselves when acold.

2. MOST of these old-fashioned Chimneys in Towns and Cities, have been, of
late Years, reduced to the second Sort mentioned, by building Jambs within
them, narrowing the Hearth, and making a low Arch or Breast. It Is strange,
methinks, that though Chimneys have been so long in Use, their Construction
should be so little understood till lately, that no Workman pretended to make
one which should always carry off all the Smoke, but a Chimney-cloth was looked
upon as essential to a Chimney: This Improvement, however, by small Openings
and low Breasts, has been made in our Days; and Success in the first
Experiments has brought it into general Use in Cities, so that almost all new
Chimneys are now made of that sort, and much fewer Bricks will make a Stack of
Chimneys now than formerly. An Improvement so lately made, may give us Room to
believe that still farther Improvements may be found, to remedy the
Inconveniences yet remaining. For these new Chimneys, though they keep Rooms
generally free from Smoke, and, the Opening being contracted, will allow the
Door to be shut, yet the Funnel still requiring a considerable Quantity of Air,
it rushes in at every Crevice so strongly, as to make a continual Whistling or
Howling; and it is very uncomfortable as well as dangerous to sit against any
such Crevice. Many Colds are caught from this Cause only; it being safer to fit
in the open Street; for then the Pores do all close together, and the Air does
not strike so sharply against any particular Part. The Spaniards have a
Proverbial Saying, If the Wind blows on you through a Hole, Make your Will, and
take Care of your Soul. Women, particularly, from this Cause, (as they sit much
in the House) get Colds in the Head, Rheums and Destructions, which fall into
their Jaws and Gums, and have destroyed early many a fine Set of Teeth in these
Northern Colonies. Great and bright Fires do also very much contribute to
damage the Eyes, dry and shrivel the Skin, and bring on early the Appearances
of Old Age. In short, many of the Diseases proceeding from Colds, as Fevers,
Pleurisies, etc. fatal to very great Numbers of People, may be ascribed to
strong-drawing Chimneys, whereby, in severe Weather, a Man is scorched before,
while he is froze behind As the Writer is neither Physician nor Philosopher, the
Reader may expect he should justify these his Opinions by the Authority of some
that are so. M. Clare, F.R.S. in his Treatise of The Motion of Fluids, says,
page 246, etc. And here it may be remarked, that it is more prejudicial to
Health, to sit near a Window or Door, in a Room where there are many Candles
and a Fire, than in a Room without: For the Consumption of Air thereby
occasioned, will always be very considerable, and this must necessarily be
replaced by cold air from without. Down the Chimney can enter none, the Stream
of warm Air, always rising therein, absolutely forbids it: The Supply must
therefore come in wherever other Openings shall be found. If these happen to be
small, Let those who sit near them beware: The smaller the Flood-gate, the
smarter will be the Stream. -- Was a Man, even in a Sweat, to leap into a cold
Bath, or jump from his warm Bed in the intensest Cold, even in a Frost,
provided he do not continue overlong therein, and be in Health when he does
this, we see by Experience that he gets no Harm. If he sits a little while
against a Window, into which a successive Current of cold Air comes, his Pores
are closed, and he gets a Fever. In the first Case, the Shock the Body endures
is general, uniform, and therefore less fierce; in the other a single Part, a
Neck or Ear perchance, is attacked, and that with the greater Violence
probably, as it is done by a successive Stream of cold Air. And the Cannon of a
Battery, pointed against a single Part of a Bastion, easier make a Breach, than
were they directed to play singly upon the whole Face, and will admit the Enemy
much sooner into the Town.

That warm Rooms, and keeping the Body warm in Winter, are Means of preventing
such Diseases, take the Opinion of that learned Italian Physician, Antonio
Portio, in the Preface to his Tract de Militis Sanitatae tuenda, where,
speaking of a particular wet and cold Winter, remarkable at Venice for its
Sickliness, he says, "Popularis autem pleuritis quae Venetiis saeviit mensibus
Dec. Jan. Feb. ex coeli, aerisque inclementia facta est, quod non habeant
hypocausta [ Stove-Rooms] and quod non soliciti sunt Itali omnes de auribus,
temporibus, collo, totoque corpore defendendis ab injuriis aeris; and tegmina
domorum Veneti disponant parum inclinata, ut nives diutius permaneant super
tegmina. E contra, Germani, qui experiuntur coeli inclementiam, perdidicere
sese defendere ab aeris injuria. Tecta construunt multum inclinata, ut decidant
nives. Germani abundant lignis, domusque hypocaustis; soris autem incedunt
pannis, pellibus, gossipio, been mehercule loricati atque muniti. In Bavaria
interrogabam (curiositate motus videndi Germaniam) quot nam elapsis mensibus
pleuritide vel peripneumonia fuissent absumti; dicebant vix unus aut alter
illis temporibus pleuritide fuit correptus."

The great Dr. Boerhaave, whose Authority alone might be sufficient, in his
Aphorisms mentions, as one antecedent Cause of Pleurisies, a cold Air driven
violently through some narrow Passage upon the Body overheated by Labor or
Fire.

The Eastern Physicians agree with the Europeans in this Point; witness the
Chinese Treatise, entitled Tchang seng, i. e. The Art of procuring Health and
long Life, as translated in Pere Du Halde's Account of China, which has this
Passage. As of all the Passions which ruffle us, Anger does the most Mischief;
so of all the malignant Affections of the Air, a Wind that comes through any
narrow Passage, which is cold and piercing, is most dangerous; and coming upon
us unawares, insinuates itself into the Body, often causing grievous Diseases.
It should therefore be avoided, according to the Advice of the ancient Proverb,
as carefully as the Point of an Arrow. These Mischiefs are avoided by the Use
of the new-invented Fire-places, as will be shown hereafter.


. In the mean time very little is done by these Chimneys toward warming the
Room; for the Air round the Fireplace which is warmed by the direct Rays from
the Fire, does not continue in the Room, but is continually crowded and
gathered into the Chimney by the Current of cold Air coming behind it, and so
is presently carried off.

In both these Sorts of Fire-places, the greatest Part of the Heat from the
Fire is lost: For as Fire naturally darts Heat every way, the Back, the two
Jambs, and the Hearth, drink up almost all that is given them, very little being
reflected from Bodies so dark, porous and unpolished; and the upright Heat,
which is by far the greatest, flies directly up the Chimney. Thus Five Sixths
at least of the Heat (and consequently of the Fuel) is wasted, and contributes
nothing toward warming the Room.

3. To remedy this, the Sieur Gauger gives us, in his Book entitled, La
Mechanique de Feu, published 1709, seven different Constructions of the third
Sort of Chimneys mentioned above, in which there are hollow Cavities made by
Iron Plates in the Back, Jambs and Hearth, through which Plates the Heat passing,
warms the Air in those Cavities, which is continually coming into the Room
fresh and warm. The Invention was very ingenious, and had many Conveniences:
The Room was warmed in all Parts, by the Air flowing into it through the heated
Cavities: Cold Air was prevented rushing through the Crevices, the Funnel being
sufficiently supplied by those Cavities: Much less Fuel would serve, etc. But
the first Expense, which was very great; the Intricacy of the Design, and the
Difficulty of the Execution, especially in old Chimneys, discouraged the
Propagation of the Invention; so that there are (I suppose) very few such
Chimneys now in Use. [The upright Heat, too, was almost all lost in these, as
in the common Chimneys.]

4. The Holland Iron Stove, which has a Flue proceeding from the Top, and a
small Iron Door opening into the Room, comes next to be considered. Its
Conveniences are, that it makes a Room all over warm; for the Chimney being
wholly closed, except the Flue of the Stove, very little Air is required to
supply that, and therefore not much rushes in at Crevices, or at the Door when
it is opened. Little Fuel serves, the Heat being almost all saved; for it rays
out almost equally from the four Sides, the Bottom and the Top, into the Room,
and presently warms the Air around it, which being rarefied rises to the
Cieling, and its Place is supplied by the lower Air of the Room, which flows
gradually toward the Stove, and is there warmed and rises in its Turn, so that
there is a continual Circulation till all the Air in the Room is warmed. The
Air, too, is gradually changed by the Stove-Door's being in the Room, through
which, part of it is continually passing, and that makes these Stoves
wholesomer, or at least pleasanter, than the German Stoves next to be spoke of.
-- But they have these Inconveniences. There is no Sight of the Fire, which is
in itself a pleasant Thing. One cannot conveniently make any other Use of the
Fire but that of warming the Room. When the Room is warm, People not seeing the
Fire are apt to forget supplying it with Fuel 'til it is almost out, then,
growing cold, a great deal of Wood is put in, which soon makes it too hot. The
Change of Air is not carried on quite quick enough, so that if any Smoke or ill
Smell happens in the Room, it is a long Time before it is discharged. For these
Reasons the Holland Stove has not obtained much among the English (who love the
Sight of the Fire) unless in some Workshops, where People are obliged to sit
near Windows for the Light, and in such Places they have been found of good Use.

5. The German Stove is like a Box, one Side wanting. It Is composed of Five
Iron Plates scru'd together; and fixed so as that you may put the Fuel into it
from another Room, or from the Outside of the House. It Is a kind of Oven
reversed, its Mouth being without, and Body within the Room that is to be
warmed by it. This Invention certainly warms a Room very speedily and
thoroughly with little Fuel: No Quantity of cold Air comes in at any Crevice,
because there is no Discharge of Air which it might supply, there being no
Passage into the Stove from the Room. These are its Conveniences. -- Its
Inconveniences are, That People have not even so much Sight or Use of the Fire
as in the Holland Stoves, and are moreover obliged to breathe the same
unchanged Air continually, mixed with the Breath and Perspiration from one
another Bodies, whieh is very disagreeable to those who have not been
accustomed to it.

6. Charcoal Fires, in Pots, are used chiefly in the Shops of Handicraftsmen.
They warm a Room (that is kept close and has no Chimney to carry off the warmed
Air) very speedily and uniformly: But there being no Draught to change the Air,
the sulphurous Fumes from the Coals [be they ever so well kindled before they
are brought in, there will be some] mix with it, render it disagreeable,
hurtful to some Constitutions, and sometimes, when the Door is long kept shut,
produce fatal Consequences.

To avoid the several Inconveniences, and at the same time retain all the
Advantages of other Fire-places, was contrived the PENNSYLVANIA FIREPLACE now
to be described.

This Machine consists of A Bottom Plate, (i) [ See the Cut.] A Back Plate,
(ii) Two Side Plates, (iii iii) Two Middle Plates, (iv iv) which joined
together form a tight Box with winding Passages in it for warming the Air. A
Front Plate, (v) A Top Plate, (vi)


These are all of cast Iron, with Mouldings or Ledges where the Plates come
together, to hold them fast, and retain the Mortar used for Pointing to make
tight Joints. When the Plates are all in their Places, a Pair of slender Rods
with Screws, are sufficient to bind the Whole very firmly together, as it
appears in Fig. 2.

There are, moreover, two thin Plates of wrought Iron, viz. The Shutter, (vii)
and the Register, (viii); besides the Screw-Rods O P, all which we shall
explain in their Order.

(i) The Bottom Plate, or Hearth-Piece, is round before, with a rising Moulding
that serves as a Fender to keep Coals and Ashes from coming to the Floor, etc.
It has two Ears, FG, perforated to receive the Screw-Rods O P; a long Air-hole,
a a, through which the fresh outward Air passes up into the Air-Box; and three
Smoke-Holes B C through which the Smoke descends and passes away; all represented
by dark Squares. It has also double Ledges to receive between them the Bottom
Edges of the Back-Plate, the two Side Plates, and the two middle Plates. These
Ledges are about an Inch asunder, and half an Inch high; a Profile of two of
them joined to a Fragment of Plate appears in Fig. 3. (ii) The Back Plate is
without Holes, having only a Pair of Ledges on each Side, to receive the Back
Edges of the two (iii iii) Side Plates: These have each a Pair of Ledges to
receive the Side-Edges of the Front Plate, and a little Shoulder for it to rest
on; also two Pair of Ledges to receive the Side-Edges of the two Middle Plates
which form the Air-Box; and an oblong Air-hole near the Top, through which is
discharged into the Room the Air warmed in the Air-Box. Each has also a Wing or
Bracket, H and I, to keep in falling Brands, Coals, etc. and a small Hole Q and
R, for the Axis of the Register to turn in. (iv iv) The Air-Box is composed of
the two Middle Plates D E and F G. The first has five thin Ledges or
Partitions, cast on it, two Inches deep, the Edges of which are received in so
many Pair of Ledges cast in the other. The Tops of all the Cavities formed by
these thin deep Ledges are also covered by a Ledge of the same Form and Depth,
cast with them; so that when the Plates are put together, and the Joints luted,
there is no Communication between the Air-Box and the Smoke. In the winding
Passages of this Box, fresh Air is warmed as it passes into the Room. (v) The
Front Plate is arched on the under Side, and ornamented with Foliages, etc. it
has no Ledges. (vi) The Top Plate has a Pair of Ears M N, answerable to those
in the Bottom Plate, and perforated for the same Purpose: It has also a Pair of
Ledges running round the under Side, to receive the Top-Edges of the Front,
Back and Side Plates. The Air-Box does not reach up to the Top Plate by two
Inches and half. (vii) The Shutter is of thin wrought Iron and light, of such a
Length and Breadth as to close well the Opening of the Fireplace. It is used
to blow up the Fire, and to shut up and secure it a Nights. It has two brass
Knobs for Handles d d, and commonly slides up and down in a Groove, left, in
putting up the Fireplace, between the foremost Ledge of the Side Plates, and
the Face of the Front Plate; but some choose to set it aside when it is not in
Use, and apply it on Occasion. (viii) The Register, is also of thin wrought
Iron. It is placed between the Back Plate and Air-Box, and can, by Means of the
Key S be turned on its Axis so as to lie in any Position between level and
upright.
The Screw-Rods O P are of wrought Iron, about a third of an Inch thick, with a
Button at Bottom, and a Screw and Nut at Top; and may be ornamented with two
small Brasses screwed on above the Nuts.

To put this Machine to work, 1. A false Back of four Inch- (or, in shallow
small Chimneys, two Inch-) Brick-work is to be made in the Chimney, four Inches
or more from the true Back: From the Top of this false Back, a Closing is to be
made over to the Breast of the Chimney, that no Air may pass into the Chimney,
but what goes under the false Back, and up behind it. 2. Some Bricks of the
Hearth are to be taken up, to form a Hollow under the Bottom Plate; across
which Hollow runs a thin tight Partition to keep apart the Air entering the
Hollow, and the Smoke; and is therefore placed between the Air-hole and
Smoke-holes. 3. A Passage is made, communicating with the outward Air, to
introduce that Air into the forepart of the Hollow under the Bottom Plate,
whence it may rise through the Air-hole into the Air-box. 4. A Passage is made
from the back Part of the Hollow, communicating with the Flue behind the false
Back: Through this Passage the Smoke is to pass.


The Fireplace is to be erected upon these Hollows, by putting all the Plates
in their Places, and screwing them together.

Its Operation may be conceived by observing the following PROFILE of the
Chimney and FIREPLACE.
M The Mantle-piece or Breast of the Chimney. C The Funnel. B The false Back
and Closing. E True Back of the Chimney. T Top of the Fireplace. F The Front
of it. A The Place where the Fire is made. D The Air-Box. K The Hole in the
Side-plate, through which the warmed Air is discharged out of the Air-Box into
the Room. H The Hollow filled with fresh Air, entering at the Passage I, and
ascending into the Air-Box through the Air-hole in the Bottom-plate neat G The
Partition in the Hollow to keep the Air and Smoke apart. P The Passage under
the false Back and Part of the Hearth for the Smoke. The Course of the Smoke.




The Fire being made at A the Flame and Smoke will ascend and strike the Top T,
which will thereby receive a considerable Heat. The Smoke finding no Passage
upwards, turns over the Top of the Air-box, and descend between it and the Back
Plate to the Holes at B in the Bottom Plate, heating, as it passes, both Plates
of the Air-box and the said Back Plate; the Front Plate, Bottom and Side Plates
are also all heated at the same Time. The Smoke proceeds in the Passage that
leads it under and behind the false Back, and so rises into the Chimney. The
Air of the Room, warmed behind the Back Plate, and by the Sides, Front and Top
Plates, becoming specifically lighter than the other Air in the Room, is
obliged to rise; but the Closure over the Fireplace hindering it from going up
the Chimney, it is forced out into the Room, rises by the Mantle-piece to the
Cieling and spreads all over the Top of the Room, whence being crowded down
gradually by the Stream of newly warmed Air that follows and rises above it,
the whole Room becomes in a short time equally warmed.

At the same Time the Air, warmed under the Bottom Plate and in the Air-Box,
rises, and comes out of the Holes in the Side-Plates, very swiftly if the Door
of the Room be shut, and joins its Current with the Stream before mentioned
rising from the Side, Back and Top Plates.

The Air that enters the Room through the Air-box is fresh, though warm; and
computing the Swiftness of its Motion with the Areas of the Holes, it is found
that near 10 Barrels of fresh Air are hourly introduced by the Air-Box; and by
this Means the Air in the Room is continually changed, and kept at the same
Time sweet and warm.

It Is to be observed that the entering Air will not be warm at first Lighting
the Fire, but heats gradually as the Fire increases.

A square Opening for a Trap-Door should be left in the Closing of the Chimney,
for the Sweeper to go up: The Door may be made of Slate or Tin, and commonly
kept close shut, but so placed as that turning up against the Back of the
Chimney when open, it closes the Vacancy behind the false Back, and shoots the
Soot that falls in Sweeping, out upon the Hearth. This Trap-Door is a very
convenient Thing.

In Rooms where much Smoking of Tobacco is used, it is also convenient to have a
small Hole about five or six Inches square, cut near the Cieling through into
the Funnel: This Hole must have a Shutter, by which it may be closed or opened
at Pleasure. When open, there will be a strong Draught of Air through it into
the Chimney, which will presently carry off a Cloud of Smoke, and keep the Room
clear: If the Room be too hot likewise, it will carry off as much of the warm
Air as you please, and then you may stop it entirely, or in part, as you think
fit. By this Means it is that the Tobacco-Smoke does not descend among the
Heads of the Company near the Fire, as it must do before it can get into common
Chimneys.

The Manner of Using this FIREPLACE.
YOUR Cord-wood must be cut into three Lengths; or else a short Piece, fit for
the Fireplace, cut off, and the longer left for the Kitchen or other Fires.
Dry Hickery, or Ash, or any Woods that burn with a clear Flame, are rather to
be chosen; because such are less apt to foul the Smoke-Passages with Soot; and
Flame communicates, with its Light, as well as by Contact, greater Heat to the
Plates and Room. But where more ordinary Wood is used, half a dry Faggot of
Brush-wood burnt at the first making of Fire in the Morning, is very
advantageous; as it immediately by its sudden Blaze heats the Plates and warms
the Room (which with bad Wood slowly kindling would not be done so soon) and at
the same time, by the Length of its Flame turning in the Passages, consumes and
cleanses away the Soot that such bad smoaky Wood had produced therein the
preceding Day, and so keeps them always free and clean. -- When you have laid a
little Backlog, and placed your Billets on small Dogs, as in common Chimneys,
and put some Fire to them; then slide down your Shutter as low as the Dogs, and
the Opening being by that Means contracted, the Air rushes in briskly and
presently blows up the Flames. When the Fire is sufficiently kindled, slide it
up again The Shutter is slid up and down in this Manner, only in those
Fire-places which are so made, as that the Distance between the Top of the
arched Opening and the Bottom Plate, is the same as the Distance between it and
the Top-Plate. Where the Arch is higher, as it is in the Draught annexed, which
is agreeable to the last Improvements) the Shutter is set by, and applied
occasionally: because if it were made deep enough to close the whole Opening
when slid down, it would hide Part of it when up.
In some of these Fire-places there is a little six-inch square Trap-door of
thin wrought Iron or Brass, covering a Hole of like Dimensions near the
Forepart of the Bottom-Plate, which being by a Ring lifted up toward the
Fire, about an Inch, where it will be retained by two springing Sides fixed to
it perpendicularly, [ See the Plate, Fig. 4] the Air rushes in from the Hollow
under the Bottom Plate, and blows the Fire. Where this is used, the Shutter
serves only to close the Fire a Nights. -- The more forward you can make your
Fire on the Hearth-Plate, not to be incommoded by the Smoke, the sooner and
more will the Room be warmed. -- At Night when you go to Bed, cover the Coals
or Brands with Ashes as usual; then take away the Dogs and slide down the
Shutter close to the Bottom-Plate, sweeping a little Ashes against it that no
Air may pass under it; then turn the Register, so as very near to stop the Flue
behind. If no Smoke then comes out at Crevices into the Room, it is right: If
any Smoke is perceived to come out, move the Register so as to give a little
Draught, and 'twill go the right way. -- Thus the Room will be kept warm all
Night; for the Chimney being almost entirely stopped, very little, if any, cold
Air will enter the Room at any Crevice. When you come to re-kindle the Fire in
the Morning, turn open the Register before you lift up the Slider; otherwise if
there be any Smoke in the Fireplace, it will come out into the Room. By the
same Use of the Shutter and Register, a blazing Fire may be presently stifled,
as well as secured, when you have Occasion to leave it for any Time; and and at
your Return, you will find the Brands warm and ready for a speedy Re-kindling.
The Shutter alone will not stifle a Fire; for it cannot well be made to fit so
exactly, but that Air will enter, and that in a violent Stream, so as to blow
up and keep alive the Flames, and consume the Wood, if the Draught be not
checked by turning the Register to shut the Flue behind. -- The Register has
also two other Uses, If you observe the Draught of Air into your Fireplace, to
be stronger than is necessary, (as in extreme cold Weather it often is) so that
the Wood is consumed faster than usual; in that Case, a quarter, half, or two
thirds Turn of the Register, will check the Violence of the Draught, and let
your Fire burn with the Moderation you desire: And at the same Time both the
Fireplace and the Room will be the warmer, because less cold Air will enter
and pass through them. -- And if the Chimney should happen to take Fire (which
indeed there is very little Danger of, if the preceding Direction be observed
in making Fires, and it be well swept once a Year; for, much less Wood being
burnt, less Soot is proportionably made; and the Fuel being soon blown into
Flame by the Shutter (or the Trap-door Bellows) there is consequently less
Smoke from the Fuel to make Soot; then, though the Funnel should be foul, yet the
Sparks have such a crooked up and down round-about Way to go, that they are out
before they get at it) I say, if it should ever be on fire, a Turn of the
Register shuts all close, and prevents any Air going into the Chimney, and so
the Fire may be easily stifled and mastered.

The Advantages of this FIREPLACE.
ITS Advantages above the common Fire-Places are, 1. That your whole Room is
equally warmed; so that People need not crowd so close round the Fire, but may
sit near the Window and have the Benefit of the Light for Reading, Writing,
Needle Work, etc. They may sit with Comfort in any Part of the Room; which is a
very considerable Advantage in a large Family, where there must often be two
Fires kept, because all cannot conveniently come at One. 2. If you sit near the
Fire, you have not that cold Draught of uncomfortable Air nipping your Back and
Heels, as when before common Fires, by which many catch Cold, being scorcht
before and as it were froze behind. 3. If you sit against a Crevice, there is
not that sharp Draught of cold Air playing on you, as in Rooms where there are
Fires in the common way; by which many catch Cold, whence, proceed Coughs, My
Lord Molesworth, in his Account of Denmark, says, That few or none of the
People there, are troubled with Coughs, Catarrhs, Consumptions, or such like
Diseases of the Lungs; so that in the Midst of Winter in the Churches, which
are very much frequented, there is no Noise to interrupt the Attention due to
the Preacher. I am persuaded (says he) their warm Stoves contribute to their
Freedom from these kind of Maladies. Page 91.
Catarrhs, Tooth-Achs, Fevers, Pleurisies and many other Diseases. 4. In Case
of Sickness, they make most excellent Nursing-Rooms; as they constantly supply
a Sufficiency of fresh Air, so warmed at the same time as to be no way
inconvenient or dangerous. A small One does well in a Chamber; and, the
Chimneys being fitted for it, it may be removed from one Room to another as.
Occasion requires, and fixed in half an Hour. The equal Temper, too, and
Warmth, of the Air of the Room, is thought to be particularly advantageous in
some Distempers: For 'twas observed in the Winters of 1730 and 1736, when the
Smallpox spread in Pennsylvania, that very few of the Children of the Germans
died of that Distemper, in Proportion to those of the English; which was
ascribed by some to the Warmth and equal Temper of Air in their Stove-Rooms;
which made the Disease as favorable as it commonly is in the West Indies. But
this Conjecture we submit to the Judgment of Physicians. 5. In common Chimneys
the strongest Heat from the Fire, which is upwards, goes directly up the
Chimney, and is lost; and there is such a strong Draught into the Chimney, that
not only the upright Heat, but also the back, sides and downward Heats, are
carried up the Chimney by that Draught of Air; and the Warmth given before the
Fire by the Rays that strike out toward the Room, is continually driven back,
crowded into the Chimney, and carried up, by the same Draught of Air. -- But
here the upright Heat, strikes and heats the Top Plate, which warms the Air
above it, and that comes into the Room. The Heat likewise which the Fire
communicates to the Sides, Back Bottom and Air-Box, is all brought into the
Room; for you will find a constant Current of warm Air coming out of the
Chimney-Corner into the Room. Hold a Candle just under the Mantle-Piece or
Breast of your Chimney, and you will see the Flame bent outward: By laying a
Piece of smoking Paper on the Hearth, on either Side, you may see how the
Current of Air moves, and where it tends, for it will turn and carry the Smoke
with it. 6. Thus as very little of the Heat is lost, when this Fireplace is
used, much less Wood People who have used these Fire-places, differ much in
their Accounts of the Wood saved by them. Some say five sixths, others three
fourths, and others much less. This is owing to the great Difference there was
in their former Fires; some (according to the different Circumstances of their
Rooms and Chimneys) having been used to make very large, others middling, and
others, of a more sparing Temper, very small Ones: While in these Fire-Places,
(their Size and Draught being nearly the same) the Consumption is more equal. I
suppose, taking a Number of Families together, that two thirds, or half the
Wood at least, is saved. My common Room, I know, is made twice as warm as it
used to be, with a quarter of the Wood I formerly consumed there.
will serve you, which is a considerable Advantage where Wood is dear. 7. When
you burn Candles near this Fireplace, you will find that the Flame burns quite
upright, and does not blare and run the Tallow down, by drawing toward the
Chimney, as against common Fires. 8. This Fireplace cures most smoaky
Chimneys, and thereby preserves both the Eyes and Furniture. 9. It prevents the
Fouling of Chimneys; much of the Lint and Dust that contributes to foul a
Chimney, being by the low Arch obliged to pass through the Flame, where it is
consumed. Then, less Wood being burnt, there is less Smoke made. Again, the
Shutter, or Trap-Bellows, soon blowing the Wood into a Flame, the same Wood
does not yield so much Smoke as if burnt in a common Chimney: For as soon as
Flame begins, Smoke, in proportion, ceases. 10. And if a Chimney should be
foul, it is much less likely to take Fire. If it should take Fire, it is easily
stifled and extinguished. 11. A Fire may be very speedily made in this
Fireplace, by the Help of the Shutter, or Trap-Bellows, as aforesaid. 12. A
Fire may be soon extinguished, by closing it with the Shutter before, and
turning the Register behind, which will stifle it, and the Brands will remain
ready to rekindle. 13. The Room being once warm, the Warmth may be retained in
it all Night. 14. And lastly, the Fire is so secured at Night, that not one
Spark can fly out into the Room to do Damage.


With all these Conveniences, you do not lose the pleasant Sight nor Use of
the Fire, as in the Dutch Stoves, but may boil the Tea-Kettle, warm the
Flat-Irons, heat Heaters, keep warm a Dish of Victuals by setting it on the
Top, etc. etc. etc.

Objections answered.
THERE are some Objections commonly made by People that are unacquainted with
these Fire-Places, which it may not be amiss to endeavor to remove, as they
arise from Prejudices which might otherwise obstruct in some Degree the general
Use of this beneficial Machine. We frequently hear it said, They are of the
Nature of the Dutch Stoves; Stoves have an unpleasant Smell; Stoves are
unwholesome; and, Warm Rooms make People tender and apt to catch Cold. -- As to
the first, that they are of the Nature of Dutch Stoves, the Description of
those Stoves in the Beginning of this Paper, compared with that of these
Machines, shows that there is a most material Difference, and that these have
vastly the Advantage, if it were only in the single Article of the Admission
and Circulation of fresh Air. But it must be allowed there has been some Cause
to complain of the offensive Smell of Iron Stoves. This Smell, however, never
proceeded from the Iron itself, which in its Nature, whether hot or cold, is
one of the sweetest of Metals, but from the general uncleanly Manner of using
those Stoves. If they are kept clean, they are as sweet as an Ironing-Box,
which, though ever so hot, never offends the Smell of the nicest Lady: But it is
common, to let them be greased by setting Candlesticks on them, or otherwise;
to rub greasy Hands on them, and, above all, to spit upon them to try how hot
they are, which is an inconsiderate, filthy unmannerly Custom; for the slimy
Matter of Spittle drying on, burns and fumes when the Stove is hot, as well as
the Grease, and smells most nauseously; which makes such close Stove-Rooms,
where there is no Draught to carry off those filthy Vapors, almost intolerable
to those that are not from their Infancy accustomed to them. At the same time,
nothing is more easy than to keep them clean; for when by any Accident they
happen to be fouled, a Lee made of Ashes and Water, with a Brush, will scour
them perfectly; as will also a little strong Soft-Soap and Water.

That hot Iron of itself gives no offensive Smell, those know very well, who
have (as the Writer of this has) been present at a Furnace, when the Workmen
were pouring out the flowing Metal to cast large Plates, and not the least
Smell of it to be perceived. That hot Iron does not, like Lead, Brass, and some
other Metals, give out unwholesome Vapors, is plain from the general Health
and Strength of those who constantly work in Iron, as Furnace-men, Forge-Men,
and Smiths; That it is in its Nature a Metal perfectly wholesome to the Body of
Man, is known from the beneficial Use of Chalybeat or Iron-Mine Waters; from
the Good done by taking Steel Filings in several Disorders; and that even the
Smithy Water in which hot Irons are quenched, is found advantageous to the
human Constitution. -- The ingenious and learned Dr. Desaguliers, to whose
instructive Writings the Contriver of this Machine acknowledges himself much
indebted, relates an Experiment he made, to try whether heated Iron would yield
unwholesome Vapors; He took a Cube of Iron, and having given it a very great
Heat, he fixed it so to a Receiver, exhausted by the Air Pump, that all the Air
rushing in to fill the Receiver, should first pass through a Hole in the hot
Iron. He then put a small Bird into the Receiver, who breathed that Air without
any Inconvenience or suffering the least Disorder. But the same Experiment
being made with a Cube of hot Brass, a Bird put into that Air died in a few
Minutes. Brass indeed stinks even when cold, and much more when hot; Lead too,
when hot, yields a very unwholesome Steam; but IRON is always sweet, and every
way taken is wholesome and friendly to the human Body -- except in Weapons.

That warm Rooms make People tender and apt to catch Cold, is a Mistake as
great as it is (among the English) general. We have seen in the preceding Pages
how the common Rooms are apt to give Colds; but the Writer of this Paper may
affirm, from his own Experience, and that of his Family and Friends who have
used warm Rooms for these four Winters past, that by the Use of such Rooms,
People are rendered less liable to take Cold, and indeed actually hardened. If
sitting warm in a Room made One subject to take Cold on going out, lying warm
in Bed should, by a Parity of Reason, produce the same Effect when we rise; Yet
we find we can leap out of the warmest Bed naked in the coldest Morning,
without any such Danger; and in the same Manner out of warm Clothes into a cold
Bed. The Reason is, that in these Cases the Pores all close at once, the Cold
is shut out, and the Heat within augmented, as we soon after feel by the
glowing of the Flesh and Skin. Thus no one was ever known to catch Cold by the
Use of the Cold Bath: And are not cold Baths allowed to harden the Bodies of
those that use them? Are they not therefore frequently prescribed to the
tenderest Constitutions? Now every Time you go out of a warm Room into the cold
freezing Air, you do as it were plunge into a Cold Bath, and the Effect is in
proportion the same; for (though perhaps you may feel somewhat chilly at first)
you find in a little Time your Bodies hardened and strengthened, your Blood is
driven round with a brisker Circulation, and a comfortable steady uniform
inward Warmth succeeds that equal outward Warmth you first received in the
Room. Farther to confirm this Assertion, we instance the Swedes, the Danes, the
Russians: These Nations are said to live in Rooms, compared to ours, as hot as
Ovens; Mr. Borle, in his Experiments and Observations upon Cold, Page 684 of
Shaw's Abridgment, says, It Is remarkable, that while the Cold has strange and
tragical Effects at Moscow, and elsewhere, the Russians and Livenians should be
exempt from them, who accustom themselves to pass immediately from a great
Degree of Heat, to as great an one of Cold, without receiving any visible
Prejudice thereby. I remember, being told by a Person of unquestionable Credit,
that it was a common Practice among them, to go from a hot Stove into cold
Water; the same was, also, affirmed to me, by another who resided at Moscow:
This Tradition is likewise abundantly confirmed by Olearius. "'It Is a surprising
thing," says he, "to see how far the Russians can endure Heat; and how, when it
makes them ready to faint, they can go out of their Stoves, part naked, both
Men and Women, and throw themselves into cold Water; and even in Winter wallow
in the Snow.
yet where are the hardy Soldiers, though bred in their boasted cool Houses, that
can, like these People, bear the Fatigues of a Winter Campaign in so severe a
Climate, march whole Days to the Neck in Snow, and at Night entrench in Ice, as
they do?

The Mentioning of those Northern Nations puts me in Mind of a considerable
Public Advantage that may arise from the general Use of these Fire-places. It
is observable, that though those Countries have been well inhabited for many
Ages, Wood is still their Fuel, and yet at no very great Price; which could not
have been if they had not universally used Stoves, but consumed it as we do, in
great Quantities by open Fires. By the Help of this saving Invention, our Wood
may grow as fast as we consume it, and our Posterity may warm themselves at a
moderate Rate, without being obliged to fetch their Fuel over the Atlantic;
as, if Pit-Coal should not be here discovered (which is an Uncertainty) they
must necessarily do.

WE leave it to the Political Arithmetician to compute, how much Money will be
saved to a Country, by its spending two thirds less of Fuel; how much Labor
saved in Cutting and Carriage of it; how much more Land may be cleared for
Cultivation; how great the Profit by the additional Quantity of Work done, in
those Trades particularly that do not exercise the Body so much, but that the
Workfolks are obliged to run frequently to the Fire to warm themselves: And to
Physicians to say, how much healthier thick-built Towns and Cities will be, now
half suffocated with sulphury Smoke, when so much less of that Smoke shall be
made, and the Air breathed by the Inhabitants be consequently so much purer.
These Things it will suffice just to have mentioned; let us proceed to give
some necessary Directions to the Workman who is to fix or set up these
Fire-Places.

Directions to the Bricklayer.
THE Chimney being first well swept and cleans'd from Soot, etc. lay the Bottom
Plate down on the Hearth in the Place where the Fireplace is to stand, which
may be as forward ward as the Hearth will allow. Chalk a Line from one of its
back Corners round the Plate to the other Corner, that you may afterward know
its Place when you come to fix it; and from those Corners two parallel Lines to
the Back of the Chimney: Make Marks also on each Side, that you may know where
the Partition is to stand, which is to prevent any Communication between the
Air and Smoke. Then removing the Plate, make a Hollow under it and beyond it,
by taking up as many of the Bricks or Tiles as you can within your chalked
Lines, quite to the Chimney-Back. Dig out six or eight Inches deep of the Earth
or Rubbish all the Breadth and Length of your Hollow; then make a Passage of
four Inches square, (if the Place will allow so much) leading from the Hollow
to some Place communicating with the outer Air; by outer Air we mean Air
without the Room you intend to warm. This Passage may be made to enter your
Hollow on either Side, or in the Forepart, just as you find most convenient,
the Circumstances of your Chimney considered. If the Fireplace is to be put up
in a Chamber, you may have this Communication of outer Air from the Staircase;
or sometimes more easily from between the Chamber Floor and the Cieling of the
lower Room, making only a small Hole in the Wall of the House entering the Space
betwixt those two Joists with which your Air-Passage in the Hearth
communicates. If this Air-Passage be so situated, as that Mice may enter it and
nestle in the Hollow, a little Grate of Wire will keep them out. This Passage
being made, and, if it runs under any Part of the Hearth, til'd over securely;
you may proceed to raise your false Back. This may be of four Inches or two
Inches Thickness, as you have Room, but let it stand at least four Iuches from
the true Chimney-Back. In narrow Chimnies this false Back runs from Jamb to
Jamb, but in large old-fashioned Chimnies you need not make it wider than the
Back of the Fireplace. To begin it, you may form an Arch nearly flat of three
Bricks End to End, over the Hollow, to (...) a Passage the Breadth of the Iron
Fireplace, and five or six Inches deep, rounding at Bottom, for the Smoke to
turn and pass under the false Back, and so behind it up the Chimney. The false
Back is to rise till it is as high as the Breast of the Chimney, and then to
close over to the Breast; See page 19, where the Trap door is described, that
ought to be in this Closing.
always observing, if there is a wooden Mantle-Tree, to close above it. If
there is no Wood in the Breast, you may arch over and close even with the lower
Part of the Breast. By this Closing the Chimney is made tight, that no Air or
Smoke can pass up it, without going under the false Back. Then from Side to
Side of your Hollow, against the Marks you made with Chalk, raise a tight
Partition, Brick-on-Edge, to separate the Air from the Smoke, bevelling away to
half an Inch the Brick that comes just under the Air-Hole, that the Air may
have a free Passage up into the Air-Box: Lastly, close the Hearth over that
Part of the Hollow that is between the false Back and the Place of the Bottom
Plate, coming about half an Inch under the Plate, which Piece of hollow Hearth
may be supported by a Bit or two of old Iron Hoop; then is your Chimney fitted
to receive the Fireplace.

To set it, Lay first a little Bed of Mortar all round the Edges of the Hollow
and over the Top of the Partition: Then lay down your Bottom Plate in its Place
(with the Rods in it) and tread it till it lies firm. Then put a little fine
Mortar (made of Loam and Lime with a little Hair) into its Joints, and set in
your back Plate, leaning it-for the present against the false Back; Then set in
your Air-Box, with a little Mortar in its Joints; Then put in the two Sides,
closing them up against the Air-Box with Mortar in their Grooves, and fixing at
the same time your Register; Then bring up your Back to its Place, with Mortar
in its Grooves, and that will bind the Sides together. Then put in your
Front-Plate, placing it as far back in the Groove as you can, to leave Room for
the sliding Plate; Then lay on your Top-Plate, with Mortar in its Grooves also,
screwing the whole firmly together by means of the Rods. The Capital Letters A
B D E, etc. in the annexed Cut, show the corresponding Parts of the several
Plates. Lastly the Joints being pointed all round on the Outside, the
Fireplace is fit for Use.

When you make your first Fire in it, perhaps, if the Chimney be thoroughly
cold, it may not draw, the Work too being all cold and damp. In such Case put
first a few Shovels of hot Coals in the Fireplace, then lift up the
Chimney-sweeper's Trap-Door, and putting in a Sheet or two of flaming Paper,
shut it again, which will set the Chimney a Drawing immediately, and when once
it is filled with a Column of warm Air, it will draw strongly and continually.

The Drying of the Mortar and Work by the first Fire, may smell unpleasantly;
but that will soon be over.

In some shallow Chimneys, to make more Room for the false Back and its Flue,
four Inches or more of the Chimney-Back may be picked away.

Let the Room be made as tight as conveniently it may be, so will the outer Air
that must come in to supply the Room and Draught of the Fire, be all obliged to
enter through the Passage under the Bottom-Plate, and up through the Air-Box; by
which Means it will not come cold to your Backs, but be warmed as it comes in,
and mixed with the warm Air round the Fireplace before it spreads in the Room.

But as a great Quantity of cold Air, in extreme cold Weather especially, will
presently enter a Room if the Door be carelessly left open, it is good to have
some Contrivance to shut it, either by Means of Screw Hinges, a Spring, or a
Pulley.

When the Pointing in the Joints is all dry and hard, get some Powder of
Black-Lead, (broken Bits of Black-Lead Crucibles from the Silver-smith's,
pounded fine, will do) and mixing it with a little Rum and Water, lay it on,
when the Plates are warm, with a hard Brush, over the Top and Front-Plates,
part of the Side and Bottom Plates, and over all the Pointing; and as it dries
rub it to a Gloss with the same Brush, so the Joints will not be discerned, but
it will look all of a Piece, and shine like new Iron. And the false Back being
plastered and white-wash'd, and the Hearth redden'd, the whole will make a
pretty Appearance. Before the Black Lead is laid on, it would not be amiss to
wash the Plates with strong Lee and a Brush, or Soap and Water, to cleanse them
from any Spots of Grease or Filth that may be on them. If any Grease should
afterward come on them, a little wet Ashes will get it out.

If it be well set up, and in a tolerable good Chimney, Smoke will draw in from
as far as the Forepart of the Bottom Plate, as you may try by a Bit of burning
Paper.

People are at first apt to make their Rooms too warm, not imagining how little
a Fire will be sufficient. When the Plates are no hotter than that one may just
bear the Hand on them, the Room will generally be as warm as you desire it.

THE END.
EXPLANATION of the PLATE, Referring to the Pages where the several Parts are
described, or their Uses shown.
Page
i The Bottom Plate 14 ii The Back Plate 14 iii iii The two Side Plates 14 iv
iv The two Plates that make up the Air-Box 15 v The Front Plate 15 vi The Top
Plate 15 vii The Shutter or Slider 15, 20, 21, 22 viii The Register 16, 21, 22
Fig 2. The Fireplace put together 16, 39 3. The Section of a Fragment of a
Plate, showing the quarter-round Regulets that make the Joints 14 4. The
Blower, (Bottom upwards) 21 O P The two Screw Rods 14
With the pricked Lines, show the Course of the Air through the Windings of the
Air-Box.

The Capital Letters show the corresponding Parts of the several Plates.

On the DEVICE of the NEW FIREPLACE, A SUN; with this Motto, ALTER IDEM. i.e.
A second Self; or, Another, the same. By a Friend.
ANOTHER Sun! -- it is true; -- but not THE SAME.
Alike, I own, in Warmth and genial Flame:
But, more obliging than his elder Brother,
This will not scorch in Summer, like the other;
Nor, when sharp Boreas chills our shivering Limbs,
Will this Sun leave us for more Southern Climes;
Or, in long Winter Nights, forsake us here,
To cheer new Friends in the other Hemisphere:
But, faithful still to us, this new Sun's-Fire*
Warms when we please, and just as we desire.



