The Reverend Mr. James Davenport's Confession and Retractations.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green, in Queenstreet. 1744.

A LETTER from the Rev. Mr. SOLOMON WILLIAMS of Lebanon to the Rev. Mr. PRINCE
of Boston, enclosing the Rev. Mr. DAVENPORT'S humble and ingenuous CONFESSION
and RETRACTATIONS.
Reverend Sir,
THE enclosed which comes open, you will see is a CONFESSION, and RETRACTATION,
of the Rev. Mr. JAMES DAVENPORT; which he left with me Yesterday, and desired
me to enclose in a Letter to you: praying that you would see that it is
according to his Desire forthwith published, and made known in the most open
Manner. He desired me to assure you that the whole of the Paper, and every
Interline, was made and written with his own Hand. And he is full, and free in
it, and seems to be deeply sensible of his Miscarriages, and Misconduct in
those Particulars, and very desirous to do all he possibly can to retreive the
Dishonor which he has done to Religion, and the Injustice to many Ministers of
the Gospel; and in this as well as any other Way to promote the Service of
Religion, and prevent any further Prejudices against the Work of God which he
may have been the Occasion of raising or increasing. I must needs say for my
own Part I desire to bless God for that humble, and Christian-like Temper he
appears to be in; and cannot but hope that God designs to use him as an
Instrument of greater Service to the Honor of Christ, and the good of his
Church. I am Sir with great Respect your unworthy Brother and humble Servant,

SOLOMON WILLIAMS.
Lebanon, August 2d. 1744.
The Rev. Mr. Davenport's Retractations.
ALTHOUGH I don't question at all, but there is great Reason to bless God for a
glorious and wonderful Work of his Power and Grace in the Edification of his
Children, and the Conviction and Conversion of Numbers in New England, in the
neighboring Governments and several other Parts, within a few Years past; and
believe that the Lord has favored me, though most unworthy, with several others
of his Servants, in granting special Assistance and Success; the Glory of all
which be given to JEHOVAH, to whom alone it belongs:

Yet after frequent Meditation and Desires that I might be enabled to apprehend
Things justly, and, I hope I may say, mature Consideration; I am now fully
convinced and persuaded, that several Appendages to this glorious Work are no
essential Parts thereof, but of a different and contrary Nature and Tendency;
which Appendages I have been in the Time of the Work very industrious in and
instrumental of promoting, by a misguided Zeal: being further much influenced
in the Affair by the false Spirit; which, unobserved by me, did (as I have been
brought to see since) prompt me to unjust Apprehensions and Misconduct in
several Articles; which have been great Blemishes to the Work of God, very
grievous to some of God's Children, no less ensnaring and corrupting to others
of them, a sad Means of many Persons questioning the Work of God, concluding
and appearing against it, and of the hardening of Multitudes in their Sins, and
an awful Occasion of the Enemies blaspheming the right Ways of the Lord; and
withal very offensive to that God, before whom I would lie in the Dust,
prostrate in deep Humility and Repentance on this Account, imploring Pardon for
the Mediator's Sake, and thankfully accepting the Tokens thereof.

The Articles, which I especially refer to, and would in the most public Manner
retract, and warn others against, are these which follow, viz.

I. The Method I used for a considerable Time, with Respect to some, yea many
Ministers in several Parts, in openly exposing such as I feared or thought
unconverted, in public Prayer or otherwise: herein making my private Judgment,
(in which also I much suspect I was mistaken in several Instances, and I
believe also that my Judgment concerning several, was formed rashly and upon
very slender Grounds.) I say making my private Judgment, the Ground of public
Actions or Conduct; offending, as I apprehend (although in the Time of it
ignorantly) against the ninth Commandment, and such other Passages of
Scripture, as are similar; yea, I may say, offending against the Laws both of
Justice and Charity: Which Laws were further broken,

II. By my advising and urging to such Separations from those Ministers, whom I
treated as above, as I believe may justly be called rash, unwarrantable, and of
sad and awful Tendency and Consequence. And here I would ask the Forgiveness of
those Ministers, whom I have injured in both these Articles.

III. I confess I have been much led astray by following Impulses or
Impressions as a Rule of Conduct, whether they came with or without a Text of
Scripture; and my neglecting also duly to observe the Analogy of Scripture: I
am persuaded this was a great Means of corrupting my Experiences and carrying
me off from the Word of God, and a great Handle, which the false Spirit has
made use of with Respect to a Number, and me especially.

IV. I believe further that I have done much Hurt to Religion by encouraging
private Persons to a ministerial and authoritative Kind or Method of exhorting;
which is particularly observable in many such being much puffed up and falling
into the Snare of the Devil, while many others are thus directly prejudiced
against the Work.

V. I have Reason to be deeply humbled that I have not been duly careful to
endeavor to remove or prevent Prejudice, (where I now believe I might then
have done it consistently with Duty) which appeared remarkable in the Method. I
practiced, of singing with others in the Streets in Societies frequently.

I would also penitently confess and bewail my great Stiffness in retaining
these aforesaid Errors a great while, and Unwillingness to examine into them
with any Jealousy of their being Errors, notwithstanding the friendly Counsels
and Cautions of real Friends, especially in the Ministry.

Here may properly be added a Paragraph or two, taken out of a Letter from me
to Mr. Barber at Georgia; a true Copy of which I gave Consent should be
published lately at Philadelphia: -- I would add to what Brother T -- has
written on the awful Affair of Books and Clothes at New London, which affords
Grounds of deep and lasting Humiliation; I was to my Shame be it spoken, the
Ringleader in that horrid Action; I was, my dear Brother, under the powerful
Influence of the false Spirit almost one whole Day together, and Part of
several Days. The Lord showed me afterward that the Spirit I was then acted by
was in it is Operations void of true inward Peace, laying the greatest Stress on
Externals, neglecting the Heart, full of Impatience, Pride and Arrogance;
although I thought in the Time of it, that 'twas the Spirit of God in an high
Degree; awful indeed! my Body especially my Leg much disordered at the same
Time, I had the long Fever on me and the cankry Humor raging at once.
which Satan and my evil Heart might make some Handle of. --

And now may the holy wise and good God, be pleased to guard and secure me
against such Errors for the future, and stop the Progress of those, whether
Ministers or People, who have been corrupted by my Words or Example in any of
the above mentioned Particulars; and if it be his holy Will, bless this public
Recantation to this Purpose. And Oh! may he grant withal, that such as by
Reason of the aforesaid Errors and Misconduct have entertained unhappy
Prejudices against Christianity in general, or the late glorious Work of God in
particular, may by this Account learn to distinguish the Appendage from the
Substance or Essence, that which is vile and odious from that which is
precious, glorious and divine, and thus be entirely and happily freed from all
those Prejudices referred to, and this in infinite Mercy through Jesus Christ:
and to these Requests may all God's Children, whether Ministers or others say,
Amen.

James Davenport.
July 28. 1744. P. S. In as much as a Number, who have fallen in with and
promoted the aforesaid Errors and Misconduct, and are not altered in their
Minds, may be prejudiced against this Recantation, by a Supposition or Belief,
that I came into it by Reason of Desertion or Dullness and Deadness in Religion:
It seems needful therefore to signify, what I hope I may say without boasting,
and what I am able through pure rich Grace to speak with Truth and Freedom; that
for some Months in the Time of my coming to the abovesaid Conclusions and
Retractations, and since I have come through Grace to them; I have been
favored a great Part of the Time, with a sweet Calm and Serenity of Soul and
Rest in God, and sometimes with special and remarkable Refreshments of Soul,
and these more free from corrupt Mixtures than formerly: Glory to God alone.

J. D.




