A JOURNAL OF THE PROCEEDINGS IN The Detection of the Conspiracy FORMED BY Some
White People, in Conjunction with Negro and other Slaves, FOR Burning the City
of NEW YORK in AMERICA, And Murdering the Inhabitants.

Which Conspiracy was partly put in Execution, by Burning His Majesty's House
in Fort GEORGE, within the said City, on Wednesday the Eighteenth of March,
1741. and setting Fire to several Dwelling and other Houses there, within a few
Days succeeding. And by another Attempt made in Prosecution of the same
infernal Scheme, by putting Fire between two other Dwelling-Houses within the
said City, on the Fifteenth Day of February, 1742; which was accidentally and
timely discovered and extinguished.

CONTAINING,

I. A NARRATIVE of the Trials* Condemnations, Executions, and Behavior of the
several Criminals, at the Gallows and Stake, with their Speeches and
Confessions; with Notes, Observations and Reflections occasionally interspersed
throughout the Whole.

II. AN APPENDIX, wherein is set forth some additional Evidence concerning the
said Conspiracy and Conspirators, which has come to Light since their Trials
and Executions.

III. LISTS of the ^^^^ral Persons (Whites and Blacks) committed on Account of
the Conspiracy* and of the several Criminals executed; and of those
transported* with the Places ^hereto.

By the Recorder of the City of NEW YORK.

Quid facient Domini, audent cum talia Fures? Virg. Ecl. NEW YORK: Printed by
James Parker, at the New Printing-Office, 1744.

THE PREFACE:
THE Reader must not expect in the following Sheets, a particular and minute
Relation of every Formality, Question and Answer that passed upon the Trials,
it may suffice, if he be assured he has the Substance; for indeed more cannot
be expected, when it is considered, that we have no One here, as in our Mother
Country, who make it a Business to take Notes upon such Occasions; or any
others, that we know of, who are so dexterous at Shorthand, as to be
sufficiently qualified for such a Purpose; but he will be sure to have all that
could be collected from the Notes that were taken by the Court, and Gentlemen
at the Bar; with all which the Compiler has been furnished.

Upon a Review of the Proceedings, in order for this Undertaking, the Bulk of
them, which was the Product of about Six Months Enquiry, seemed somewhat
discouraging: No doubt, they might have been conracted, if this Work had been
proceeded upon in the Method of an Historical Relation only, wherein the
Compiler would have been more at Liberty to abstract the several Originals; but
it was concluded, a Journal would give more Satisfaction, inasmuch as in such a
kind of Process, the Depositions and Examinations themselves, which were the
Groundwork of the Proceedings, would appear at large; which most probably
would afford Conviction, to such as have a Disposition to be convinced, and
have in Reality doubted, whether any particular Convicts had Justice done them
or not, notwithstanding they had the Opportunity of seeing and hearing a great
deal concerning them; and others, who had not such Opportunities, who were
prejudiced at a Distance in their Disfavour, by frivolous Reports, might the
readier be undeceived: For as the Proceedings are set forth in the Order of
Time they were produced, the Reader will thereby be furnished with the most
natural View of the Whole; and ^e better enabled to conceive the Design and
dangerous Depth of this hellish Project, as well as the Justice of the several
Prosecutions.

Thus far, however, the Compiler thinks proper to premise, that as he found it
convenient to divide the Originals into numbered Sections, for the more ready
Reference to the several Parts of them, as Occasion should offer; he took the
Liberty also of lopping off from them, what, in print, he thought would be a
superfluous Formality, such as The Deponent further says, and such like, which
he thought would have been a needless Encumbrance to the Book.

The Parties accused of the (...) were numerous, and Business by Degrees
multiplied so fast upon the Grand Jury, which bore the Burden of this Enquiry,
that there would have been an immediate Necessity for others to have lent a
helping Hand in taking Examinations from (...) Beginning, if the Judges had not
found it expedient to examine the Persons accused, upon their first taking into
Custody, whereby it seemed most likely the Truth would bolt out, before they
had Time to cool, or Opportunity of discoursing in the Jail with their
Confederates who were before committed.

The Examinations thus taken by the Judges, were soon after laid before the
Grand Jury, who interrogated the Parties therefrom in such manner, as generally
produced from them the Substance of the same Matter, and often something more,
by which Means there accrued no small Advantage; for though where the last
Examination brought to light new Discovery, yet it will be seldom found, there
is any Thing in such further Examinations contradictory to the former, but
generally a Confirmation of them; and in such Case, the setting forth the same
at large, may not be thought a useless Tautology; not that this will happen
often, and where it does, 'twill be chiefly found in the Examinations and
Confessions of Negroes, who, in ordinary Cases, are seldom found to hold twice
in the same Story; which, for its Rarety therefore, if it carried not with it
the additional Weight of the greater Appearance of Truth, may make this
Particular the more excusable; and further, this is a Diary of the Proceedings,
that is to be exhibited; therefore, in Conformity to that Plan, Nothing should
be omitted, which may be of any Use.

All proper Precautions were taken by the Judges, that the Criminals should be
kept separate; and they were so as much as the scanty Room in the Jail would
admit of; and new Appartments were accordingly fitted up for their Reception:
But more particular Care was taken, that such Negroes as had made Confession
and Discovery, and were to be made Use of as Witnesses, should be kept apart
from the rest, and as much from each other, as the Accommodations would allow
of, in order to prevent their caballing together; and the Witnesses were always
examined apart from each other first, as well upon the Trials, as otherwise,
and then generally confronted with the Persons they accused, who were usually
sent for and taken into Custody upon such Examinations, if they were to be met
with; which was the Means of bringing many others to a Confession, as well such
as were newly taken up, as those who had long before been committed, perhaps
upon slighter Grounds, and had insisted upon their Innocence; for they had
generally the Cunning not to own their Guilt, 'til they knew their Accusers:
But notwithstanding this was the ordinary Method taken, both by the Judges and
Grand Jury, to send for the Parties as soon as impeached, (which however might
sometimes through Hurry be omitted) yet several who happened then to be out of
the Way, were afterward forg^t, and slipped through our Fingers, from the
Multiplicity of Business in Hand, as will hereafter appear; which therefore is
particularly recommended to the Notice of their Owners.

The Trouble of examining Criminals in general, may be easily guessed at; but
the Fatigue in that of Negroes, is not to be conceived, but by those that have
undergone the Drudgery: The Difficulty of bringing, and holding them to the
Truth, if by Chance it starts from them, is not to be surmounted but by the
closest Attention; many of them have a great deal of Craft; their
unintelligible Jargon stands them in great Stead, to conceal their Meaning; so
that an Examiner must expect to encounter with much Perplexity; grope through a
Maze of Obscurity; be obliged to lay hold of broken Hints, lay them carefully
together, and thoroughly weigh and compare them with each other, before he can
be able to see the Light, or fix those Creatures to any certain determinate
Meaning.

Though for the Reasons before mentioned, all the Trials could not be set forth
at large; yet on the principal Trials, such as, The Hughsons, Ury the Priest,
Quack and Cuffee, (the (...) first Negroes executed for the Conspiracy) and
that of the five Spanish Slaves, the Court and Gentlemen at the Bar, took Notes
more largely; but as to the rest, though there were here and there some Minutes
taken, (which are also set forth in their proper Places) yet they did not think
them equally worth the Pains; therefore upon other Trials, the Paragraphs or
Sections of the Depositions of Whites, and the Examinations and Confessions of
Slaves, taken by the Judges, Grand Jury, or others, upon the Credit whereof
such Slaves were indicted, are referred to upon their respective Trials: Which
Method, if any should object to, as subject to Uncertainty, and say, the
Witnesses might not declare exactly the same Things, and in the same Words, or
the Substance of them, before the Court, as are contained in those Depositions,
Examinations and Co^fessions referred to; the Answer is,

First, It Is most likely they did not, (nor could it be expected they should)
deliver themselves precisely in the same Words: But Abstracts were taken of
those Evidences, and Briefs prepared for the Council concerned in each Trial,
pointing out the several Articles affecting each Criminal; whereby the Council
were readily led to ask a Witness such Questions as would naturally draw out
the Substance of the same Matter in Answer, if it were the Truth; and it was
observed by those more immediately concerned in these Affairs, and whose
Province it was to give close Attention to them, that the Witnesses both Whites
and Blacks, generally kept close to the Text, and delivered in Court the
Substance of the Evidence they had before given in their Depositions,
Examinations, and Confessions.

Secondly, That what the Witnesses did actualy declare in Court upon the
Trials, was sufficient to convince twelve honest Men upon their Oaths, that the
Accused were guilty; and there is no other Way left to furnish the Reader with
the Grounds which gave such Conviction to the Juries.

For the further enlightening the Masters and Owners of Slaves accused,
convicted upon their own Confessions, and transported, and of others who were
discharged from Confinement, (for want of sufficient Evidence, as 'twas said,
before THE SECOND GRAND JURY, who were charged to continue the Enquiry
concerning this infernal Scheme) the Evidence affecting each, is referred to
under every such Negro's Confession, excepting as to such of them as were made
Use of as Witnesses, which was thought needless; for their Testimony having
gained sufficient Credit, it can scarce be supposed there will be any Doubt of
their own Guilt: But if there should be any who hesitate concerning it, all
that can be said, is, it will behove such to give the closer Attention to the
several Depositions, Examinations and Confessions, which impeach them.

The Evidence likewise affecting each White Person apprehended upon the Account
of this Conspiracy, that was afterward discharged for want of Prosecution, is
referred to under their respective Names, that it may appear what Reason there
was for their Commitment and Accusation, though they were discharged for Want of
Indictment.

It has been thought proper to add, at the End of this Journal, Lists of all
the Whites and Blacks accused of this Conspiracy, those who were executed, and
those who were pardoned upon Condition of Transportation, or otherwise
discharged from Jail, showing the respective Times of their Commitment,
Arraignment, Conviction, Execution or Discharge; whereby the Reader will be
enabled to turn to almost any Part of the Journal to satisfy his Curiosity, as
to what most materialy concerns each respective Conspirator; and with a View
also to show to what Places such of them as were transported (according to
Information received) were shipped; which is premised, as a modest Hint to our
Brethren in the West Indies, and the more neighboring English Colonies, that
they may see how tender we have been of their Peace and Security, by using all
the Precaution in our Power, that none of our Rogues should be imposed upon
them; for it was made an express Condition in the several Pardons, and likewise
the Recognizances entered into by the Securities for Slaves transported, That
the Persons pardoned should be transported to the Dominion of some foreign
Prince or State or the Island of Newfoundland [by a time therein limitted] and
if any of the Negroes or Slaves [pardoned by the Letters Patent] should at any
Time after [the Day therein limitted] be found in any of his Majesty's
Dominions, except Newfoundland, the Letters Patent as to all and every the
Person and Persons so found, should be null, void, and of no Force or Effect
(...) Which Terms have been strictly pursued and complied with, some few
Instances only excepted.

Many, it seems, have wondered, that this Journal has not made its Appearance
long ago; for, say they, the Thing dies away, and is almost forgotten (the
more's the Pity) and now People will hardly take the Pains to give it a
Perusal.

To which it is answered; That it was some Time before the Compiler could
submit himself to undergo (...) Drudgery of this kind, for several Reasons, the
Task was not very inviting, and he had borne a sufficient Fatigue, under an ill
State of Health, in the Share he had in the Proceedings themselves, for a
Course of six Months daily Attendance, and it was some Time before he could
absolutely determine to undertake it, and did set about it in earnest; and
since that, the Duties of his Offices and Profession have occasioned many
Interruptions; and when the Attention is withdrawn for a Time from a Subject,
it may not always suit the Humor to re-^ssume it, especially a Matter of this
Nature; nor perhaps can the Thoughts concerning it be easily collected again;
not that this Business required much Intention, but Recollection and Care were
necessary to introduce every Matter properly and give it Connection in its due
Order of Time, toward which the Compiler had the advantage of being all along
privy to the Proceedings, and all the Motions concerning them.

There were Reasons indeed, for making these Matters public, which could not
be withstood.

There had been some wanton, wrong-headed Persons amongst us, who took the
Liberty to arraign the Justice of the Proceedings, and set up their private
Opinions in Superiority to the Court and Grand Jury; though God knows (and all
Men of Sense know) they could not be Judges of such Matters; but nevertheless,
they declared with no small Assurance (notwithstanding what we saw with our
Eyes, and heard with our Ears, and every one might have judged of by his
Intellects, that had any) That there was no Plot at all! The Inference such
would have drawn from thence, is too obvious to need mentioning: However this
moved very little: It was not to convince (for that would have been a vain
Undertaking; the Ethiopian might as^oon change his Skin) much less was it to
gratify such.

But there were two Motives which weighed much; the one, that those who had not
the Opportunity of seeing and hearing, might judge of the Justice of the
Proceedings from the State of the Case being laid before them; the other, that
from thence the People in general, might be persuaded of the Necessity there
i^, for every One that has Negroes, to keep a very watchful Eye over them, and
not to indulge them with too great Liberties, which we find they make Use of to
the worst Purposes, caballing and confederating together (...), in great
Numbers, when they may, from the Accounts in the ensuing Sheets, from what they
see has happened, feel the Consequence of giving them so great a Latitude, as
has been customary within this City and Province, and thereby be warned to keep
themselves upon a strict Guard against these Enemies of their own Household,
since we know what they are capable of; for it was notorious, that those among
them, who had the kindest Masters, who fared best, and had the most Liberty;
nay, that those in whom their Masters placed the greatest Confidence, insomuch,
that they would even have put their own Swords into their Hands, in Expectation
of being defended by them against their own Color, did nevertheless turn out
the greatest Villains: It even appeared, that these head Fellows boasted of
their Superiority over the more harmless and inoffensive; that they held them
in an Inferiority and Dependence, a kind of Subjection, as if they had got such
Dominion over them, that they durst not, at any Time, or upon any Occasion, but
do as they would have them; from whence it may be guessed, how likely the
Defection was to be general.

The principal Inducement, therefore, to this Undertaking, was, the public
Benefit; that those who have Property in Slaves, might have a lasting Memento
concerning the Nature of them; that they may be thence warned to keep a
constant Guard over them; since what they have done, they may one Time or other
act over again; especially if there should in future Times, appear, such
Monsters in Nature, as the Hughsons, Ury the Priest; and such like, who dare be
so wicked as to attempt the seducing them to such execrable Purposes: And if
any should think it not worth their While to learn from the ensuing Sheets
(what by others perhaps may be esteemed) a useful Lesson, the Fault will be
their own; and realy it was thought necessary, for these and other Reasons
needless here to mention, that there should be a standing Memorial of so
unprecedented a Scheme of Villainy.

But though the Compiler was willing to make an Offering of his own Time, to
the Public Service, by laying these Matters in Order, for the Press; yet being
under no other Influence so to do, than his Inclination and Readiness to oblige
the Public, he was at Liberty however to suit his own Convenience; and
therefore, considering the Multiplicity of the Proceedings, it may, after all,
rather be thought, Matter of Wonder, that it makes its Appearance so soon.

Perhaps it may not come forth unseasonably at this Juncture, if the
Distractions occasioned by this Mystery of Iniquity, may be thereby so revived
in our Memories, as to awaken us from that supine Security, which again too
generally prevails, and put us upon our Guard, lest the Enemy should be yet
within our Doors.

City of New York, 12 April, 1744.
INTRODUCTION.
AS a Robbery committed at Mr. Hogg's paved the Way to the Discovery of the
Conspiracy, it may not be improper to introduce the ensuing JOURNAL and
NARRATIVE with an Account (...) that Felony, as well as the (...) Fires which
alarmed this City, close upon the Heels of each other, within less than three
Weeks, occasioned by this infernal Scheme* 'till they both came under the
Enquiry and Examination of the ^^^nd Jury, at the Supreme Court: And indeed
(...) such a close Connection between this Felony, and the Conspiracy, as will
appear by the several Steps and Examinations taken by Occasion of the former,
that the Narrative of the Robbery could not well be omitted; for the Enquiry
concerning that, was the Means of drawing out the ^^^st Hint concerning the
other; nay, this Felony and such like, were actually Ingredients of the
Conspiracy, as will appear by the Sequel.

On Saturday Night the 28th February, 1740-1, a Robbery was committed at the
House of Mr. ROBERT HOGG, in the City of New York, Merchant, from whence were
taken diverse Pieces of Linen and other Goods, and several Silver Coins,
chiefly Spanish, and Medals, and wrought Silver, etc. to the Value in the Whole
of Sixty Pounds and upwards.

The Occasion of this Robbery, as was discovered, and will appear more fully
hereafter, was one Wilson, a ^ad of about seventeen or eighteen Years of Age,
belonging to the Flamborough Man of War, on this Station; who having
Acquaintance with two white Servants belonging to Gentlemen who lodged at Mr.
Hogg's House, Wilson used frequently to come thither on that Pretense, which
gained him easy Admittance: But Wilson, it seems, had a more familiar
Acquaintance with some Negroes of very suspicious Characters, particularly
Caesar, belonging to John Vaarck, B^ker; Prince, to Mr. John Auboyneau,
Merchant, and Cuffee, to Adolph Philipse, Esquire;

The Thursday before this Robbery was committed, Wilson came to Mr. Hogg's Shop
with one of the Man-of-War's People, to buy some checqued Linen; and having
bargained for some, Part of the Money offered in Payment was of Spanish Coin;
and Mrs. Hogg opening her Bureau to change the Money, pulled out (...) Drawer
in the View of Wilson, wherein were (...) considerable Quantity of milled
Spanish Pieces of Eight: She soon reflected that (...) had done wrong in
exposing her Money to an idle (...) in that manner, who came so frequently to
her House, and immediately shut up the Bureau again, and made a Pretense of
sending the Money out to a Neighbor's to be weighed. Mrs. Hogg's Apprehensions
happened to be right; for this Boy having a Sight of the Money, was charmed
with it, and, as it seems, wanted to be fingering of it; he told his Comrades
of the Black-Guard, the before named Caesar, Prince and Cuffee, where they
might have a fine Booty, if they could manage cleverly to come at it; he said,
it was at Hogg's House in the Broad-Street; his Wife kept a Shop of Goods, and
sold Candles, Rum and Molasses, etc.

The Negroes catched at the Proposal, and the Scheme was communicated by them
to John Hughson, who kept a Public House by the North River in this City, a
Place where Numbers of Negroes used to resort, and be entertained privately (in
Defiance of the Law^) at all Hours, as appeared afterward, and will be shown
at large in the ensuing Sheets: Thither they used to bring such Goods as they
stole from their Masters or others, and Hughson, his Wife and Family, received
them: There they held a Consultation with Hughson and his Family, how they
should act in order to compass the Attainment of this Booty.

The Boy (Wilson) told them the Situation of the House and Shop; that the Front
was toward Broad-Street; that there was a Side Door out of the Shop into a
little Lane, commonly called the Jews-Alley, and if they could contrive an
Errand thither to buy Rum, they might take an Opportunity to shove back the
Bolt of the Door facing the Alley, for there was ^o Lock to it, and then they
could come in the Night afterward, and accomplish their Designs. At Nights
they usually let People in at the Front Door in the other Street, and went
through the Parlour to the (...), which Wilson well knew.


At Hughson's lodged one Margaret Sorubiero, alias Salingburgh, alias Kerry
commonly called Peggy, or the Newfoundland Irish Beauty, a young Woman about
One or Two and Twenty; she pretended to be married, but no Husband appeared;
she was a Person of infamous Character, a notorious Prostitute, and also of the
worst Sort, a Prostitute to Negroes; she was here lodged and supported by
Caesar (Vaarck's) before mentioned, and took Share (in common with Hughson's
Family) of the Spoils and Plunder, the Effects of Caesar's Thesis, which he
brought to Hughson's; and she may be supposed to have been in most of their
wicked Secrets: for she had lodged there the Summer before, and removed from
thence to a House by the New Battery, near one John Romme's, a Shoemaker, and
was well acquainted with him and his Wife: Thither also Caesar used frequently
to resort, with many other Negroes; thither he also conveyed stolen Goods, and
some Part of Hogg's Goods, of which John Romme had his Choice, if what Caesar
said, after his Condemnation, be true: and by what will appear hereafter
against Romme, and from his Intimacy with Hughson, his Merits may be concluded
to fall little short of his Companions.

With this Peggy, as she will be hereafter commonly called, Caesar used
frequently to sleep at Hughson's, with the Knowledge and Permission of the
Family; and Caesar bargained with and paid Hughson for her Board: She came
there to lodge a second Time in the Fall, not long before Christmas, 1740, big
with Child by Caesar, as was supposed, and was brought to Bed there, not many
Days before the Robbery at Hogg's, of a Babe largely partaking of a motley
Complexion.

Here is laid the Foundation of the Characters of Hughson and his Family, Peggy
and John Romme; which will afford frequent Occasion of enlarging upon: And from
such an hopeful Earnest, the Reader may well expect a plentiful Harvest.

Wilson coming to Mrs. Hogg's on Sunday Morning, to visit his Acquaintance as
usual; she complained to him, that she had been robbed the Night before, that
she had ^ost several Goods out of the Shop, a great deal of Silver Spanish
Money, Medals and other Silver Things, ^^ttle suspecting hat he had been the
Occasion of it, notwithstanding what she apprehended upon pulling out the
Drawer of Money before him, as above; but as she knew he belonged to the
Man-of-War, and that several of those Sailors frequented idle Houses in the
Jews-Alley (...) it happened that her Suspicions inclined toward them; she
imagined he might be able to give her some Intelligence about it, and therefore
described to him some Things that she had missed, viz. Snuff-Boxes, Silver
^edals, one a remarkable eight square Piece, etc. Whereupon Wilson said, he had
been that Morning at Hughson's House, and there saw one John Gwin, who pulled
out of his Pocket a worsted Cap full of Pieces of coined Silver; and that Mr.
Philipse's Cuffee, who was there, seeing John Gwin have this Money, he asked
him to give him some; and John Gwin counted him out Half a Crown in Pennies,
and asked him if he would have any more; and then pulled out an Handful of
Silver Coin, amongst which, Wilson said, he saw the eight square Piece
described by Mrs. Hogg.

SUNDAY, 1st MARCH.
THIS Morning Search was made for John Gwin at Hughson (...) supposing him to
have been a Soldier of that Name, a Fellow of suspicious Character, as Mrs.
Hogg conceived; and the Officers making Enquiry accordingly for a Soldier, they
were answered, There was no such Soldier that used that House; but it fell out,
that Caesar, the real Person wanted, was at the same time before their Faces in
the Chimney Corner: The Officers returned without suspecting him to be the
Person meant: but the Mistake being discovered by the Boy (Wilson,) that the
Negro Caesar before mentioned went by that Name, he was apprehended in the
Afternoon; and being brought before Wilson, he declared, that he was the Person
he meant by John Gwin.

Caesar was committed to Prison.

MONDAY, 2d MARCH.
CAESAR (Vaarck's Negro) was examined by the Justices, and denied every Thing
laid to his Charge concerning Hogg's Robbery; but was remanded.

Prince (Mr. Auboyneau's Negro) was this Day also apprehended upon Account of
the same Felony: Upon Examination he denied knowing any Thing of it. He was
also committed.

Upon Information that Caesar had shown a great deal of Silver at Hughson's, it
was much suspected that Hughson knew something of the Matter; and therefore
Search was made several Times at his House Yesterday and this Day, but none of
the Goods or Silver were discovered.

Hughson and his Wife were sent for, and were present while the Negroes were
examined by the Justices, and were also examined themselves ^ouching the Things
stolen, but discovered nothing; and they were dismissed.

TUESDAY, 3d MARCH.
HUGHSON's House having been searched several Times over by Mr. Mills the
Undersheriff, and several Constables, in Quest of Hogg's Goods, without
Effect; it happened this Evening, that Mary Burton Indented Servant to John
Hughson, came to him about Midsummer, 1740.
came to the House of James Kannady, one of the searching Constables, to fetch
a Pound of Candles for her Master, Kannady's Wife knew the Girl by sight, and
who she belonged to, living in the Neighborhood near them, and having heard of
the Robbery, and the several Searches at Hughson's, she took upon her to
examine Mary, Whether she knew any Thing of those Goods? and admonished her to
discover if she did, lest she herself should be brought into Trouble; and gave
her motherly good Advice, and said if she knew any Thing of it, and would tell,
she would get her freed from her Master. Whereupon, at parting, the Girl said,
She could not tell her then, she would tell her Tomorrow; but that her Husband
was not CUTE enough, for that he had trod upon them, and so went away. This
alarmed Kannady and his Wife; and the same Evening Ann Kannady went to Mr.
Mills the Undersheriff, and told him what had passed between her and Mary
Burton. Whereupon Mills and his Wife, Mr. Hogg and his Wife, and several
Constables, went with Ann Kannady and her Husband, down to Hughson's House; and
Ann Kannady desired the Undersheriff to go in first, and bring Mary Burton out
to her; but he staying a long Time, Ann Kannady went into Hughson's House, and
found the Undersheriff and his Wife and Mary Burton in the Parlour, and she
then denied what she had before said to Ann Kannady, as above; then Ann Kannady
charged her home with it; 'till at length Mary Burton said, she could not tell
them any Thing there, she was afraid of her^ Life, that they would kill her.
Whereupon they took the Girl out of the House, and when they had got a little
Way from thence, she put her Hand in her Pocket, and pulled out a Piece of
Silver Money, which she said was Part of Hogg's Money, which the Negro had
given her. They all went to Alderman Bancker's with her, and Ann Kannady
informing the Alderman, that she had promised Mary Burton to get her freed from
her Master: he directed that she should lodge that Night with the Under Sheriff
at the City Hall for Safety: and she was left there accordingly. For Mary
Burton declared also before the Alderman her Apprehensions and Fears, that she
should be murdered or poisoned by the Hughsons and the Negroes, for what she
should discover.

The Alderman sent for John Hughson, and examined him closely, whether he knew
any Thing of the Matter? but he denied that he did, at first, 'till the
Alderman pressed him very home, and admonished him (if it was in his Power) to
discover those who had committed this Piece of Villainy: little suspecting him
to have been principally concerned; he was at last prevailed with to
acknowledge he knew where some of the Things were hid; and he went home and
fetched and delivered them.

WEDNESDAY, 4th MARCH.
THIS Day the Mayor having summoned the Justice^ to meet at the City-Hall,
several Alderman met him accordingly; and sent for Mary Burton, and John
Hughson and his Wife: And Mary Burton, after Examination, made the following
Deposition before them.

DEPOSITION.
MARY BURTON, of the City of New York, Spinster, aged about sixteen Years,
being sworn; deposed,

1. That about Two o'Clock on Sunday Morning last* a Negro Man who goes by the
Name of John Gwin, (or Quin) came to the House of John Hughson, the Deponent's
Master, and went in at the Window, where one Peggy lodges, where he lay all
Night.

2. That in the Morning she saw some speckled Linen in the said Peggy's Room;
that the said Negro then gave the Deponent two Pieces of Silver, and bid Peggy
cut off an Apron of the Linen, and give to the Deponent, which she did
accordingly.

3. That at the same Time the said Negro bought a Pair of white Stockings from
her Master, for which he was to give Six Shillings; that the said Negro had
(...) Muggs of Punch, for which, and the Stockings, he gave her Master a Lump
of Silver.

4. That her Master and Mistress saw the Linen the same Morning.

5. That soon after Mr. Mills came to enquire for one John Quin, a Soldier,
who, he said, had robbed Mr. Hogg of some speckled Linen, Silver, and other
Things.

6. That after Mr. Mills was gone, her Mistress hid the Linen in the Garret;
and soon after some Officers came and searched the House; and when they were
gone and found Nothing, her Mistress took the Linen from the Place she had
before hid it in, and hid it under the Stairs.

7. That the Night before last, her Master and Mistress gave the said Linen to
her Mistress's Mother, Elizabeth Luckstead.
who carried it away.

8. That Yesterday Morning one John Romme was at her Master's House, and she
heard him say to her Master, If you will be true to me, I will be true to you;
and her Master answered, I will, and will never betray you. Romme had received
Part of Hogg'^ Goods from Caesar, alias John Gwin, or Quin, (...) before.


9. That the said Negro usually slept with the said Peggy, which her Master and
Mistress knew of.

Upon this Occasion, it seems, Hughson and his Wife ^inding that Mary Burton
was inclinable to discover them in their Villainy, touching this Robbery,
thought proper to ^ay something to blacken her Character, in order to take off
from the Credit of her Testimony, and declared, that she was a vile,
good-for-nothing Girl, or Words to that Purpose; that she had been got with
Child by her former Master, etc. The Truth whereof, however, was never made
out: But at length Hughson finding that he was near going to Goal, and as
^earing the Consequence of provoking her, changed his Note, and said, she was a
very good Girl, and had been a trusty Servant to them; that (...) ^he hard
Weather the last Winter, she used to dress herself in Man's Clothes, put on
Boots, and went with him in his Sleigh in the deep Snows into the Commons, to
help him fetch Firewood for his Family, etc.

The Deputy Town Clerk, when Mary Burton was under Examination, as he was
taking her Deposition, exhorted her to speak the Truth, and all she knew of the
Matter; she answered him, That she ha^dly dared to speak, she was so much
afraid she should ^e murdered by them; or Words to that Purpose: Whereupon the
Clerk moved the Justices, that she might be taken Care of, not knowing that she
had been removed from her Master's the Night before, by Order of a Magistrate.

After Mary Burton, John Hughson and his Wife, and Peggy were examined: Peggy
denied every Thing, and spoke in Favor of Hughson and his Wife: Peggy was
committed; and John Hughson confessed as follows.

EXAMINATION.
1. JOHN HUGHSON said, That on Monday Evening last, after Mr. Mills had been to
search his House for Goods which had been stolen from Mr. Hogg; one Peggy, who
lodged at (...) House, told him, that John Quin had left some checqued Linen
and other Things with her; that she delivered to the Examinant ^he said
checqued Linen, which he delivered to his Mother-in-Law Elizabeth Luckstead,
with Directions to hide them: That soon after the said Peggy delivered him
sundry Silver Things in a little Bagg; which he carried into the Cellar, and
put behind a Barrel, and put a b^oad Stone upon them, where they remained till
last Night about Ten or Eleven of Clock, when he delivered them to Alderman
Johnson and Alderman Bancker.

2. That while the said Silver Things lay concealed in his Cellar, the
Constables came and searched his House for the said stolen Goods, but did not
find them.

3. That this Morning the said Peggy gave him a little Bundle with several
Silver Pieces in it; which he soon afterward brought into Court, and delivered
it to the Justices then present.

Hughson absolutely refused to sign the Examination after it was read over to
him; and thereupon the Deputy Town Clerk asked him if it was not true as he had
penned it; he answered, Yes, it was, but he thought there was no Occasion for
him to sign it. He was admitted to Bail, and his Wife Sarah likewise; and
Recognizances were entered into with two Sureties each, for their Appearance in
the Supreme Court on the first Day of the next Term.

Caesar and Prince were likewise again examined, but would confess nothing
concerning the Robbery: Caesar was remanded, and Prince admitted to Bail upon
his Master's entering into Recognizance in Ten Pounds Penalty, for his
Appearance at the next Supreme Court.

But Caesar acknowledged, that what Mary Burton had deposed concerning him and
Peggy, as to his sleeping with her, was true.

DEPOSITION.
JOHN VAARCK, of the City of New York, Baker, being duly sworn and examined,
says,

1. That about Two of Clock this Afternoon, his Negro Boy told him, there were
some Things hid under the Floor of his Kitchen; that thereupon he went to look,
and found the Linen and Plates, now shown him, which he took out, and carried
to the Mayor.

2. That his said Kitchen adjoins to the Yard of John Romme, is a framed
Building, and the said Linen and Plates could easily be put there from the
said Romme's Yard, but could not be put there from his House, without taking up
a Board of the Floor.

These were supposed to be Part of the Goods stolen from Mr. Hogg, and carried
to Romme's, by Caesar, alias John Gwin.

Upon Vaarck's Deposition, Orders were given for the Apprehending John Romme,
but he absconded.

WEDNESDAY, 18th MARCH.
ABOUT One o'Clock this Day a Fire broke out of the Roof of his Majesty's House
at Fort George, within this City, near the Chapel: When the Alarm of a Fire
was first given, it was observed from the Town, that the Middle of the Roof was
in a great Smoke, but not a Spark of Fire appeared on the Outside for a
considerable Time; and when it first broke out, it was on the East Side, about
Twenty Feet from the End next the Chapel, and in a short Time afterward, it
made it is Way through the Roof in several Places, at a Distance from the First,
and each other. Upon the Chapel Bell's ringing, great Numbers of People,
Gentlemen and others, came to the Assistance of the Lieutenant Governor and his
Family; and as the People of this City, to do them Justice, are very active and
diligent upon these Occasions, most of the Household Goods, etc. were removed
out and saved, and the Fire Engines were in a little Time brought thither; but
the Wind blowing a violent Gale at S. E. as soon as the Fire appeared in
different Places of the Roof, it was judged impossible to save the House and
Chapel; so that Endeavors were used to save the Secretary's Office over the
Fort Gate, where the Records of the Colony were reposited; and also the
Barracks which stood on the Side of the Quadrangle opposite to the House; such
Diligence was used in removing the Records, Books and Papers from the Former,
many of which for Dispatch were thrown out of the Windows next the Town, that
most of them were preserved; and though, from the Violence of the Wind, the
Papers were blown about the Streets, we don't hear that any very material
Writings were lost; but the Fire had got hold of the Roof of the Office soon
after they began to remove the Records, and though the Engines played some time
upon it and afterward upon the Barracks, they were of little Service, the Wind
blowing very hard, and the Flames of the House being so near them, all seemed
to be at their Mercy; and an Alarm being given that there was Gunpowder in the
Fort, whether through Fear and an Apprehension that there was, or whether the
Hint was given by some of the Conspirators themselves, with artful Design to
intimidate the People, and frighten them from giving further Assistance, we
cannot say; though the Lieutenant Governor declared to every Body, that there
was none there; yet they had not the Courage to depend upon (...) Honor's
Assurance: But however, it happened, most of them deserted it, 'till they found
that many Gentlemen remained upon the Spot; though, had they all ^^ayed, it was
thought it would have been to little Purpose; for such was the Violence of the
Wind, and the Flames spread so fast, that, in about an Hour and a Quarter's
Time, the House was burnt down to the Ground, and the Chapel and other
Buildings beyond human Power of saving any material Part of them: At length the
Fire got to the Stables without the Fort, and the Wind blew fired Shingles upon
the Houses in the Town next the North River, so that there was the utmost
Danger of its spreading further; which occasioned many Families to remove their
Goods; but at last it was stopped at the Governor's Stables, with very little
Damage to the Houses in the Town.

While the Records were removing from the Secretary's Office, there fell a
moderate Shower of Rain, which was of some small Service; and when the
Buildings were down to the Ground Floor, some Hand Gran^d^ Shells, which had
lain so long as to be forgotten, took Fire, and went off, which few or none but
the Officers of the Fort, could account for, or imagine what was the Matter;
nor would it have been worth while to have attempted their Removal, if they had
been thought of; for the Buildings in the Fort were at that time all given over
for lost; but this served to confirm the Generality of the People in the
Notion, that there was Powder in the Fort, and if they could have done any
good, this would probably have prevented them.

But though the Floors of the several Buildings soon tumbled in, there were
many Pieces of Timber which were laid in the Walls of the House, Chapel
Steeple, and other Buildings, which continued burning almost all the Night
after; so that we could not think the Town quite out of Danger of further
Mischief, 'till those Timbers were entirely consumed; for 'twas apprehended, as
the Fort stood upon an Eminence, that the Wind according as it should have
happened to change, might have blown some of the Fire upon the Houses in the
Town, which, for the most Part, have shingled Roofs; therefore Care was taken
to keep a watchful Guard all the Night to prevent further Damage.

Mr. Cornelius Van Horn, a Captain of one of the Companies of the Militia,
very providently beat to Arms in the Evening, and drew out his Men with all
Expedition; had Seventy odd of them under Arms all Night, and Parties of them
continually going the Rounds of the City, 'till Daylight: This Incident, from
what will appear hereafter, may be thought to have been a very fortunate One,
and deserving of a more particular Remark, though at that time some People were
so infatuated, as to reproach that Gentleman for it, as a Madman.

The only Way of accounting for this Misfortune at this Time was, The
Lieutenant Governor had ordered a Plummer that Morning to mend a Leak in the
Gutter between the House and the Chapel, which joined upon one another, and
the Man carrying his Fire-Pot with Coals to keep his Soddering-Iron hot, to
perform his Work; and the Wind setting into the Gutter, 'twas thought, some
Sparks had been blown out upon the Shingles of the House; but some People
having observed, that upon the first Alarm, as before, near half the Roof, as
they guessed, was covered with Smoke, and that no Spark of Fire appeared
without, nor could any be seen, but within; it was by them concluded, that the
Reason assigned was not likely to be the right One, especially when it was
considered, that at length, the Fire broke out in several Places of the Roof,
distant from each other; but no one imagined it was done on Purpose.

FRIDAY, 20th MARCH.
PRINCE, the Negro of Mr. Auboyneau, who was bailed out of Prison, as
beforementioned, was recommited by the Mayor, and Alderman Bancker.

WEDNESDAY, 25th MARCH.
A WEEK after the Fire at the Fort, another broke (...) between Eleven and
Twelve o'Clock, at the House (...) to Captain Warren, near the Long-Bridge, at
(...) S. W. End of the Town; the Roof was in Flames, supposed at that Time to
have been occasioned by the accidental Firing of a Chimney; but when the Matter
came afterward to be canvassed, it was not altogether clear of Grounds of
Suspicion, that 'twas done designedly; but the Fire-Engines were soon brought
thither, and they played so successfully, though the Fire had got to a
considerable Head on an old shingled Roof, that by their Aid, and the
Assistance and Activity of the People, it was soon extinguished, without doing
much Damage to the House.

WEDNESDAY, 1st APRIL.
ANOTHER Week from the Last, a Fire broke out at the Storehouse of Mr. Van
Zant, toward the East End of the Town. It was an old Wooden Building, stored
with Deal Boards, and Hay at one End of it; the Fire was said to be occasioned
by a Man's ^^^king a Pipe there, which set Fire to the Hay: But it is said, the
Fire was first discovered in the N. E Side of the R^^^, before it had taken the
Hay: This House was near the River, and by the Side of a Slip out of it,
convenient for handing Water to the Engines; it was thought morally impossible
to hinder it is spreading further, there being many Wooden Buildings adjoining;
but the People exerted their usual Diligence, handed out the Boards into the
Slip, all in Flames, played the Engines, and handed and threw the Buckets of
Water, with such extraordinary Activity, it stopped the Progress of the Fire so
successfully, that it ended with little more Damage than the entire Consumption
of the Warehouse and most of the Goods in it.

SATURDAY, 4th APRIL.
THIS Evening there was an Alarm of a Fire at the House of one Quick, or (...)
(for they both lived under one Roof) in the Fly: upon Inquiry, the Fire was
found to be in a Cowstable near the House^; the Hay was on Fire in the Middle
of it; but by timely Assistance, it was suppressed.

As the People were returning from Quick's Fire, that was succeeded with a
Second Cry of Fire, at the House of one Ben Thomas, next Door to Captain Sarly,
on the West Side: this was in the Dusk of the Evening. It began in the Lof^ of
the Kitchen, was discovered by the Smoke before the Fire had got any Head, and
was soon extinguished: Upon Examination, it was found, that Fire had been put
between a Straw and another Bed laid together, whereon a Negro slept, but who
did it, or how the Fire happened at Quick's, remained to be accounted for.

SUNDAY, 5th APRIL.
A Discovery was made in the Morning early, that some Coals had been put under
a Haystack, standing near the Coach-House and Stables of Joseph Murray, Esquire; in
the Broad Way, and near some Dwelling Houses there, which had it them Fire,
would have been in great Danger; but the Coals went out of themselves, as
supposed, having only singed some Part of the Hay. It was said, there were
Coals and Ashes traced along from the Fence to a neighboring House next
adjoining the Stables, which caused a Suspicion of the Negro that lived there.

The five several Fires, viz. at the Fort, Capt. Warren's House, Van Zant's
Storehouse, Quick's Stable, and Ben Thomas's Kitchen, having happened in so
short a Time, succeeding each other; and the Attempt made of a Sixth on Mr.
Murray's Haystack; it was natural for People of any Reflection, to conclude
that the Fire was set on Purpose, by a Combination of Villians; and therefore
occasioned great Uneasiness to every one that had Thought: But upon this
Supposition, no Body imagined there could be any further Design, than for some
wicked Wretches to have the Opportunity of making Prey of their Neighbors
Goods, under Pretense of Assistance in removing them for Security, from the
Danger of the Flames; for upon these late Instances, many of the Sufferers had
complained of great Losses of their Goods and Furniture, which had been removed
from their Houses upon these Occasions.

This Sunday as three Negroes were walking up the Broad-Way toward the English
Church, about Service Time, Mrs. Earl looking out of her Window, overheard one
of them saying to his Companions, with a vapouring Sort of an Air, Fire, Fire,
Scorch, Scorch, A LITTLE, -- Damn it, BY-AND-BY, and then threw up his Hands,
and laughed: The Woman conceived great Jealousy at these Words, and thought it
very odd Behavior at that Juncture, considering what had so lately happened;
and she putting the natural Construction upon them, her Apprehensions made her
uneasy, and she immediately spoke of it to her next Neighbor Mrs. George, but
said, she did not know any of the Negroes.

About an* Hour after, when Church was out, Mrs. Earl saw the same Negroes
coming down the Broad-Way again, and pointed out to Mrs. George the Person who
had spoke the Words; and Mrs. George knew him, and said, That is Mr. WALTER' s
Quaco.

These Words, and the Airs and Graces given them by Quaco when he uttered them,
were made known to a neighboring Alderman, who informed the rest of the
Justices thereof at their Meeting the next Day.

MONDAY, 6th APRIL.
ABOUT Ten o'Clock in the Morning, there was an Alarm of a Fire at the House of
Sergeant Burns, opposite the Fort Garden: This, 'twas said, was only a Chimney;
which, upon Enquiry, the Man declared, had been swept the Friday before; but
from the great Smother in the House, and some other Circumstances; there were
Grounds to suspect a villainous Design in it.

Toward Noon, a Fire broke out in the Roof of Mrs. Hilton's House, at the
Corner of the Buildings next the Fly Market, adjoining on the East Side of
Capt. Sarly's House: It first broke out on that Side next Sarly's; but being
timely discovered, was soon prevented doing much, Mischief, more than burning
Part of the Shingles of the Roof. Upon View, it was plain, that the Fire must
have been purposely laid on the Wall-plate adjoining to the Shingle Roof; for a
Hole bad been burnt deep in it, next that Part of the Roof where the Fire had
taken hold of the Shingles; and it was suspected, that the Fire had been wrapped
in a Bundle of Tow, for some was found near the Place: Thus the Fact was plain,
but who did it, was a Question remained to be determined: But there was a Cry
among the People, The Spanish Negroes; The Spanish Negroes; Take up the Spanish
Negroes. The Occasion of this was the two Fires ( Thomas's and Hilton's)
happening so closely together, only one Day intervening, on each Side of Capt.
Sarly's House; and it being known, that Sarly had purchased a Spanish Negro,
some Time before brought into this Port, among several others, in a Prize taken
by Capt. Lush; all which Negroes were condemned as Slave^ in the Court of
Admiralty, and sold accordingly (...) and that they afterward pretending to
have been Fr^^-(...) in their own Country, began to grumble at their (...)
Usage of being sold as Slaves: This probably gave Rise to the Suspicion, that
this Negro, out of Revenge, had been the Instrument of these two Fires: and he
behaving himself insolently upon some People's asking him Question^ concerning
them, which signified their Distrust; it was told to a Magistrate who was near,
and he ordered him to Goal, and also gave Direction to the Constables to commit
all the Rest of that Cargo, in order for their safe Custody and Examination.

In the Afternoon the Magistrates met at the City-Hall, with Intent to examine
them; and while the Justices were proceeding to Examination, about Four o'Clock
there was another Alarm of Fire: Upon Enquiry, and looking out of the Hall
Windows, it was seen from thence, and found to be at Col. Philipse's
Storehouse. Upon the View of it, there was a small Streak of Fire running up
the (...) like Wildfire, from near the Bottom to the Top of the Roof, on the
Side directly against the Wind as it then blow: It not being far from the
Engines, they were instantly brought to the Place: and the Fire, to one's great
Surprise, almost as soon extinguished. This was the Middlemost of three large
Storehouses next each other in a Row, old Timber-Buildings, and the Shingles
burned like Tinder. Th^se Storehouses were not inhabited, nor had they a
Chimney in them, but were at a great Distance from any. The Fire upon
Examination, must have begun within Side; for between the Side of those
Storehouses, and the Houses (...) them, opposite to the Wind, there was a large
Space of Garden Ground; so that no Sparks from these Chimneys could have
occasioned this Mischief, had the Wind blown the contrary Way; but to discover
by whom the Fire was put, was the Difficulty.

While the People were extinguishing the Fire at this Storehouse, and had
almost mastered it, there was another Cry of Fire; which diverted the People
attending the Storehouse, to the new Alarm, very few remaining behind: But a
Man who had been on the Top of the House, (...) in extinguishing the Fire, saw
a Negro leap out at the End Window of one of them, from thence making over
several Garden-Fences in great Haste; which occasioned him to cry out, A Negro,
A Negro; and that was soon improved into an Alarm, That the Negroes were
rising: The Negro made very good Speed home to his Master's; he was generally
known; and the Swiftness of his Flight occasioned his being remarked; though
scarce (...) knew the Reason, but a few which remained at the Storehouse, why
the Word was given, A Negro, A Negro: It was immediately changed into Cuff
Philipse, Cuff Philipse: The People ran to Mr. Philipse's House in Quest of
him; he was got in at the Backdoor; and being found, was dragged out of the
House, and carried to Goal, borne upon the People's Shoulders. He was a Fellow
of general ill Character; his Master being a single Man and little at (...),
Cuff had a great deal of idle Time, which, it (...), he employed to very ill
Purposes, and had acquired a general bad Fame.

Many People had such terrible Apprehensions upon this Occasion, and indeed
there was Cause sufficient, that several Negroes ((...) many had been assisting
at the Fire at the Storehouse, and many perhaps that only seemed to be so) who
were met in the Streets, after the Alarm of their rising, were hurried away to
Goal; and when they were (...), they were continued some Time in Confinement
before the Magistrates could spare Time to examine into their several Cases,
how and for what they came there, many others first coming under Consideration
before them against whom there seemed to be more direct Cause of Suspicion; but
in a few Days, those against whom nothing in particular was alleged, were
discharged.

It was said, there was like to have been another Fire this Day, though it has
by some been supposed to have been an Accident: The Cellar of a Baker near
C^^ntjes Market was all of a Smother, and the Chips in a Blaze: but was soon
suppressed. This also occasioned some Alarm.

Quack (Walter's) was sent for and committed; he remained in Confinement some
Days without Examination, from the Hurry the Magistrates were in; but at length
Mrs. Earl and Mrs. George being sent for by the Justices, they declared
concerning him to the Effect beforementioned: Sunday, 5th April.
And Quack being brought before them, and examined, by his Excuse admitted he
had spoken the Words he was charged with; but it being soon after we had the
News of Admiral Vernon's taking Porto Bello, he had contrived a cunning Excuse,
or some abler Heads for him, to account for the Occasion of them, and brought
two of his own Complexion to give their Words for it also, That they were
talking of Admiral VERNON' s taking Porto Bello; and that he thereupon
signified to his Companions, that he thought that was but a small F^at to what
this brave Officer would do by-and-by, to annoy the Spaniards; or Words
tantamount; so that it happened Quack was enlarged from his Confinement for
some Time.

Others considering that it was but Eighteen Days after the Fort was laid in
Ashes, that these Words were uttered; and that several other Fires had
intervened, as before related; and but the next Day after Quick's Stable and
Ben Thomas's House were on fire; and the Attempt upon Mr. Murray's Haystack
discovered that very Morning; they were apt to put a different Construction
upon Quack's Words and Behavior; that he thereby meant, That the Fires which
we had seen already, were nothing to what we should have by-and by, for that
then we should have all the City in Flames, and he would rejoice at it; for it
was said, he lifted up his Hands, and spread them with a circular Sweep over
his Head, after he had pronounced the Words [by and by] and then concluded with
a loud Laugh. Whether these Figures are thus more properly applied, the Reader
will hereafter be better able to judge; but the Construction of them at that
Time confirmed many in the Notion of a Conspiracy; though they could not
suspect One of so black a Dye, as there were afterward flagrant Proofs of, and
will appear by and by.

His Honor the Lieutenant Governor was pleased to order a Military Watch to be
kept this Evening, and the same was continued all the Summer after.

WEDNESDAY, 8th APRIL.
JOHN HUGHSON and Sarah his Wife were committed to Goal by the Mayor and three
Aldermen, being charged as Accessaries to diverse Felonies and Misdemeanors.

SATURDAY, 11th APRIL. At a Common Council held this Day at the City of
New York.
PRESENT,

JOHN CRUGER, Esquire; MAYOR, The RECORDER, Esqrs. Aldermen.
Gerardus Stuyvesant, William Romme, Simon Johnson, John Moore, Christopher
Banker, John Pintard. John Marshall,
Assistants.
Henry Bogert, Isaac Stoutenbergh, Philip Minthorne, George Brinkerhoff, Robert
Benson, Samuel Lawrence,

THE RECORDER taking Notice of the several Fires which had lately happened in
this City, and the Manner of them, which had put the Inhabitants into the
utmost Consternation; that every one that reflected on the Circumstances
attending them, the Frequency of them, and the Causes yet undiscovered; must
necessarily conclude, that they were occasioned and set on Foot by some
villainous Confederacy of latent Enemies amongst us; but with what Intent or
Purpose, Time must discover; that it could not be doubted, but the Lieutenant
Governor and His Majesty's Council had taken the Alarm at this Time of Danger,
and were watchful, and anxious for the Safety of the City; and tho they were of
Opinion, that it was highly proper and necessary that a Proclamation should be
issued by the Government, promising proper Rewards to such Person and Persons
as should make such Discovery of the Incendiaties, their Confederates and
Accomplices, as that they should be convicted thereof; Yet it was well known
that the Governor and Council had not the Liberty of drawing upon the Colony
Treasurer for any Sum of Money whatsoever, upon any Emergency: And it could not
be reasonably expected the Governor should subject himself to pay such Rewards
out of his own Pocket, for the Use and Necessities of the Public; that as the
Safety of the City, so immediately concerned, seemed absolutely to require such
a Measure to be taken; so the Public, who were also interested in the
Preservation of it, would reap the Benefit in common with them, by the
Corporations laudible Resolution, should they determine to engage to pay proper
Rewards, and request the Governor to issue a Proclamation agreeable thereto;
which, he was persuaded, the Governor was well inclined to do, and the
Gentlemen of the Council to advise thereto; He therefore moved, That the Board
should come to a Resolution to pay such Rewards as should by them be thought a
proper and sufficient Temptation to induce any Party or Parties concerned to
make such Discovery.

Upon Consideration whereof, it was Ordered, That this Board request his Honor
the Lieutenant Governor to issue a Proclamation, offering a Reward to any white
Person that should discover any Person or Persons lately concerned in setting
Fire to any Dwelling House or Storehouse in this City (so that such Person or
Persons be convicted thereof,) The Sum of One Hundred Pounds, Current Money of
this Province; and that such Person shall be pardoned, if concerned therein:
And any Slave that should make Discovery, to be manumitted, or made free; and
the Master of such Slave to receive Twenty-Five Pounds therefore; and the Slave
to receive, besides his Freedom, the Sum of Twenty Pounds, and to be pardoned;
and if a Free Negro, Mulatto, or Indian, to receive Forty-Five Pounds, and also
to be pardoned, if concerned therein: And that this Board will issue their
Warrant to the Chamberlain, or Treasurer of this Corporation for the Payment of
such Sum as any Person by Virtue of such Proclamation shall be entitled unto.
And that the Mayor and Recorder wait on his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, and
acquaint him with the Resolution of this Board.

The Mayor and Recorder waited on His Honor accordingly, and a Copy of the
Order was also delivered to him.

Many Persons in the Neighborhood of the several Fires beforementioned,
thought it necessary to remove their Household Goods for Safety; and in their
Consternation, as was natural, suffered any Body who offered their Assistance,
to take them away; by which Means, some Villians had the Cruelty to make Prey
of them; for there were great Complaints of Losses upon those Occasions, which
the Magistrates took this Day into their Consideration. And it being much
suspected that there were some Strangers lurking about the City, who had been
the wicked Instruments and Occasion of these Fires; but upon the Supposition
only, that by those Means, they might have Opportunities of Pilfering and
Plundering. A Scheme was proposed, that there should be a general Search of all
Houses throughout the Town, whereby it was thought probable Discoveries might
be made, not only of stolen Goods, but likewise of Lodgers, that were
Strangers, and suspicious Persons: The Proposal was approved of, and each
Alderman and his Common Council-Man, with Constables attending them, undertook
to search his respective Ward on the South Side of the Fresh Water Pond; and
the Monday following was the Day fixed upon for making the Experiment.

The Scheme was communicated to the Governor, and his Honor thought fit to
Order the Militia out that Day in Aid of the Magistrates, who were to be
dispersed through the City, and Centries of them pos^ed at the Ends of the
Streets to guard all Avenues, with Orders of stop all suspected Persons that
should be observed carrying Baggs or Bundles, or removing Goods from House to
House, in order for their Examination; and all this was to be kept very Secret
till the Project was putting in Execution.

MONDAY, 13th APRIL.
PURSUANT to the Scheme concerted on Saturday last, the general Search was
made; but there were not any Goods discovered which were said to have been
lost, nor was there any strange Lodger of suspicious Persons detected: But
(...) Things were found in the Custody of Robin, Mr. Chambers's Negro, and Cuba
his Wife, which the Alderman thought improper for, and unbecoming the Condition
of Slave^* which made him suspect they were not come honestly by; and therefore
ordered the Constable to take them in Possession, to be reserved for further
Enquiry: And these two Negroes were committed.

FRIDAY, 17th APRIL.
THE Lieutenant Governor, by and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council,
issued a Proclamation, therein reciting the beforementioned Order and
Resolution of the Common Council, promising the Rewards agreeable thereto.

In the mean whiile, between the Sixth and the Seventeenth Instant, a great
deal of Time had been spent by the Magistrates in the Examination of the
Negroes in Custody, upon Account of these Fires, but nothing could be got out
of them.

Cuff (PHILIPSE's) was closely interrogated, but he absolutely denied knowing
any thing of the Matter; he said he had been at home all that Afternoon, from
the Time he returned from Hilton's Fire, where he had been to assist and carry
Buckets: That he was at home when the Bell rung for the Fire at Col. Philipse's
Storehouse. It appeared, upon Enquiry and Examination of Witnesses, that he,
according to his Master*s Orders, had been sawing Wood that Afternon with a
white Boy; and that when his Master came home from Dinner, he took him off from
that Work, and set him to sew on a Vane upon a Board for his Sloop; the white
Boy testified, That he stood by him to see him sew it, and that he left him but
a little before the Bell rung for the Fire: And when the Alarm of the Fire was,
and that 'twas supposed to be at his Master's Storehouse, it was said, Cuff was
asked whether he would go out with the Buckets, and that he should answer, he
had enough of being out in the Morning. Some of the Neighbors also declared
that they had seen him looking over his Master's Door but a little before the
Bell rung: But an old Man who had known Cuffee for several Years, deposed, that
he had seen him at the Fire at the Storehouse, and that he stood next him:
There seemed to be some Objection against the Man's Evidence; 'twas thought he
might be Mistaken, being very near-sighted; Upon Examination, 'twas found he
could distinguish Colors, and he described the Clothes he had on, and moreover
declared, he spoke to him, and asked him, why he did not hand the Buckets; and
that thereupon he answered him, and did hand Water, and that he knew his Voice.

There was very strong Proof that he was the Negro that leaped out of the
Window of one of the Storehouses as the Fire was extinguished, and most of the
People drawn away upon the new Alarm of a Fire; that he was seen to leap over
several Garden Fences, and to run home in great Haste.

Upon the Whole, 'twas thought proper Cuff should remain in Confinement, to
await further Discovery.

JOURNAL of the PROCEEDINGS against the Conspirators at NEW YORK, 1741.
At a Supreme Court of Judicature held for the Province of NEW YORK, at the
City Hall of the City of New York, on TUESDAY, 21st APRIL, 1741.
PRESENT, FREDERICK PHILIPSE, Esquire; Second Justice. DANIEL HORSMANDEN, Esquire;
Third Justice.


The Grand Jury called.

The following Persons appeared, and were sworn, Viz.

Mr. ROBERT WATTS, Merchant, Foreman. Messrs. Jeremiah Latouche, Merchant.
Joseph Read, Merchant. Anthony Rutgers, Merchant. John M" Evers, Merchant. John
Cruger, jun. Merchant. John Merritt, Merchant. Adoniah Schuyler, Merchant.
Isaac D^ Peyster, Merchant. Abraham Ketel^ass, Merchant. David Provoost*
Merchant. Rene Hett, Merchant. Henry Be^kman, jun. Merchant. David Van Horn,
Merchant. George Spencer, Merchant. Thomas Duncan, Merchant. Winant Van Zant.
Merchant.
Mr. Justice PHILLIPSE gave the Charge to the Grand Jury as follows.

Gentlemen of the Grand Jury,

IT is not without some Concern, that I am obliged at this Time to be more
particular in your Charge than for many preceding Terms there has been
Occasion. The many Frights and Terrors which the good People of this City have
of late been put into, by repeated and unusual Fires, and burning of Houses,
give us too much Room to suspect, that some of them at least did not proceed
from mere Chance or common Accidents; but on the Contrary, from the
premeditated Malice and wicked Purposes of evil and designing Persons; and
therefore it greatly behooves us to use our utmost Diligence by all lawful Ways
and Means to discover the (...) and Perpetrators of such daring and flagitious
Under^^ings: That, upon Conviction, they may receive condign Punishment: For
although we have the Happiness of living under a Government which exceeds all
(...) the Excellency of it is Constitution and I am* you if those to whom the
Execution of them (which My (...) COKE calls the Life and Soul of the Law) is
committed, do not exert themselves in a conscientious Discharge of their
respective Duties; such Laws which were intended for a Terror to the Evil Doer,
and a Protection to the Good, will become a dead Letter, and our most excellent
Constitution turned into Anarchy and Confusion; every one practicing what he
li^teth; and doing what shall seem good in his own Eyes: To prevent which, it
is the Duty of all Grand Juries to enquire into the Conduct and Behavior of
the People in their respective Counties; and if, upon Examination, they find
any to have transgressed the Laws of the Land, to present them, that so they
may by the Court be put upon their Trial, and then either to be discharged or
punished according to their Demerits.

I am told there are several Prisoners now in Goal, who have been committed by
the City Magistrates, upon Suspicion of having been concerned in some of the
late Fires; and others, who under Pretense of assisting the unhappy Sufferers,
by saving their Goods from the Flames, for stealing, or receiving the^^: This
indeed is adding Affliction to the Afflicted, and is a very great Aggravation
of such Crime, and therefore deserves a narrow Inquiry; that so the exemplary
Punishment of the Guilty (if any such should be so found) may deter others from
committing the like Villanie^* for this kind of Stealing, I think, has not been
often practiced among us.

Gentlemen,

ARSON, or the malicious and voluntary Burning, not only a Mansion House, but
also any other House, and the Out-Buildings, or Barns, and Stables adjoining
thereto, by Night or by Day, is Felony at Common Law; and if any Part of the
House be burnt, the Offender is guilty of Felony, notwithstanding the Fire
afterward be put outs or go out of itself.

This Crime is of so shocking a Nature. that if we have any in this City, who,
having been guilty thereof, should escape, who can say he is safe, or tell
where it will end?

Gentlemen,

Another Thing which I cannot omit recommending to your serious and diligent
Enquiry, is to find out and present all such Persons who sell Rum, and other
strong Liquor to Negroes: It must be obvious to every one, that there are too
many of them in this City; who under Pretense of selling what they call a Penny
Dram to a Negro, will sell to him as many Quarts or Gallons of Rum, as he can
steal Money or Goods to pay for.

How this Notion of its being lawful to sell a Penny Dram, or a Pennyworth of
Rum to a Slave, without the Consent or Direction of his Master, has prevailed,
I know not; but this I am sure of, that there is not only no such Law; but that
the doing of it is directly contrary to an Act of Assembly now in Force, for
the better Regulating of Slaves. The many fatal Consequences flowing from this
prevailing and wicked Practice are so notorious, and so nearly con^^^n us all,
that one would almost be surprised, to think there should be a Necessity for a
Court to recommend the Surpressing of such Pernicious Houses: Thus much in
Particular; now in General,

My ^^arge, Gentlemen, further is, to prevent all Conspiracies, Combinations,
and other Offenses, from Treasons down to Trespasses; and in your Enquiries,
the Oath you, and each of you have just now taken, will, I am persuaded, be
your Guide and I pray God to direct and assist you in the Discharge of your
Duty.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Supreme Court. WEDNESDAY, 22d APRIL.
PRESENT. The Second Justice.

The Court opened, and adjourned till Ten o'Clock Tomorrow Morning.

THE Grand Jury having been informed, That Mary Burton could give them some
Account concerning the Goods stolen from Mr. Hogg's; sent for her this Morning,
and ordered she should be sworn; the Constable returned and acquainted them,
that she said she would not be sworn, nor give Evidence: Whereupon they ordered
the Constable to get a Warrant from a Magistrate to bring her before them. The
Constable was some time gone, but at length returned, and brought her with him;
and being asked why she would not be sworn, and give her Evidence? She told the
Grand Jury she would not be sworn; and seemed to be under some great
Uneasiness, or terrible Apprehensions; which gave Suspicion that she knew
something concerning the Fires that had lately happened: And being asked a
Question to that Purpose, she gave no Answer; which increased the Jealousy that
she was Privy to them: And as it was thought a Matter of the utmost Concern,
the Grand Jury was very importunate, and used many Arguments with her, in
public, and private, to persuade her to speak the Truth, and tell all she knew
about it. To this End, the Lieutenant Governor's Proclamation was read to her,
promising Indemnity, and the Reward of One Hundred Pounds to any Person,
Confederate or not, who should make Discovery, etc. She seemed to despise it,
nor could the Grand Jury by any Means, either Threats or Promises, prevail upon
her, though they assured her withal, that she should have the Protection of the
Magistrates, and her Person be safe and secure from harm; but hitherto all was
in vain: Therefore the Grand Jury desired Alderman Banker to commit her; and
the Constable was charged with her accordingly; but before he had got her to
the Jail, she considered better of i^, and resolved to be sworn, and give her
Evidence in the Afternoon.

Accordingly, she being sworn, came before the Grand Jury; but as they were
proceeding to her Examination, and before they asked her any Questions, she
told them she would acquaint them with what she knew relating to the Goods
stolen from Mr. Hogg's, but would say nothing about the Fires.

This Expression thus, as it were Providentially, slipping from the Evidence,
much alarmed the Grand Jury; for, as they naturally concluded, it did by
Construction amount to an Affirmative, that she could give an Account of the
Occasion of the several Fires; and-therefore, as it highly became those
Gentlemen in the Discharge of their Trust, they determined to use their utmost
Diligence to sift out the Discovery.

But still she remained inflexible; till at length, having recourse to
Religious Topics, representing to her the Heiniousness of the Crime which she
would be guilty of, if she was privy to, and could discover, so wicked a
Design, as the Firing Houses about our Ears; whereby not only People's Estates
would be destroyed, but many Persons might loose their Lives in the Flames:
This she would have to answer for at the Day of Judgment, as much as any Person
immediately concerned; because she might have prevented this Destruction, and
would not; so that a most damnable Sin would lie at her Door; and what need she
fear from her divulging it; she was sure of the Protection of the Magistrates?
Or the Grand Jury expressed themselves in Words to the same Purpose; which
Arguments at last prevailed, and she gave the following Evidence: Which,
however, notwithstanding what had been said, came from her, as if still under
some terrible Apprehensions or Restraints.

DEPOSITION.
NUMB. I.
MARY BURTON, being sworn, Deposes,

1. That Prince Mr. Auboyneau's Negro.
and Caesar Vaarck's Negro.
brought the Things of which they had ^obbed Mr. Hogg, to her Master, John
Hughson's House, and that they were handed in through the Window, Hughson, his
Wife, and Peggy receiving them, about Two or Three o'Clock on a Sunday Morning.
1st March 1740, 1.


2. That Caesar, Prince, and Mr. Philipse's Negro Man (Cuffee) used to meet
frequently at her Master's House, and that she has heard them (the Negroes)
talk frequently of burning the Fort; and that they would go down to the Fly The
East End of the City,
and burn the whole Town: and that her Master and Mistress said, they would aid
and assist them as much as they could.

3. That in their common Conversation they used to say, that when all this was
done, Caesar should be Governor, and Hughson her Master should be King.

4. That Cuffee used to say, That a great many People had too much, and others
too little; That his old Master had a great deal of Money, but that, in a short
Time, he should have less, and that he (Cuffee) should have more.

5. That at the same Time when the Things of which Mr. Hogg was robbed, were
brought to her Master's House, they brought some Indigo and Bees Wax, which was
likewise received by her Master and Mistress.

6. That at the Meetings of the Three aforesaid Negroes, Caesar, Prince, and
Cuffee, at her Master's House, they used to say, in their Conversation, That
when they set Fire to the Town, they would do it in the Night, and as the white
People came to extinguish it, they would kill and destroy them.

7. That she has known at Times, seven or eight Guns in her Master's House, and
some Swords, and that she has seen Twenty or Thirty Negroes at one Time in her
Master's House:* and that at such large Meetings, the Three aforesaid Negroes,
Cuffee, Prince, and Caesar, were generally present and most active, and that
they used to say, That the other Negroes durst not refuse to do what they
commanded them, and they were sure that they had a Number sufficient to stand
by them.

8. That Hughson ((...) Master) and her Mistress used to threaten, that if she
the Deponent ever made mention of the Goods stolen from Mr. Hogg, they would
POISON her; and the Negroes swore, if ever she published, or discovered their
Design of burning the Town, they would burn her whenever they met her.

9. That she never saw any white Person in Company when they talked of burning
the Town, but her Master, her Mistress, and Peggy.

This EVIDENCE of a Conspiracy, not only to burn the City, but also destroy and
murder the People, was most astonishing to the Grand Jury, and that any white
People should become so abandoned (...) to confederate with Slaves in such an
execrable and detestable Purpose, could not but be very amazing to every one
that heard it; what could scarce be credited; But that ^^e several Fires had
been occasioned by some Combination of Villians, was, at the Time of them,
naturally to be collected from the Manner and Circumstances attending them.

The Grand Jury therefore, as it was a Matter of the utmost Consequence,
thought it necessary to inform the Judges concerning it, in or^^^ that the most
effectual Measures might be concerted, for discovering the Confederates; and
the Judges were acquainted with it accordingly.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 23d APRIL.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices.

The Grand Jury came into Court and were called over.

The Foreman desiring that Margaret Sorubiero, alias Kerry, a Prisoner might be
brought before them.

Ordered, That the Sheriff do carry the said Margaret Sorubiero, alias Kerry,
before the Grand Jury, and see her safe returned again.

The Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

This Morning the Judges summoned all the Gentlemen of the Law in Town, to meet
them in the Afternoon, in order to consult with them, and determine upon ^^ch
Measures as on the Result of their Deliberations should be judged most proper
to be taken upon the Emergency; and Mr. Murray, Mr. Alexander, Mr. Smith, Mr.
Chambers, Mr. Nicholls, Mr. Lodge, and Mr. Ja^^^son, met them accordingly; the
Attorney General (...), indisposed, could not attend.

It was considered. That though there was an Act of the Province for Trying
Negroe^* as in other Colonies, for all Manner of Offenses, by the Justices,
etc. in a summary Way; yet as this was a Scheme of Villainy in which White
People were confederated with them, and most probably were the first Movers and
Seducers of the Slaves; from the Nature of such a Conjunction, there was reason
to apprehend there was a Conspiracy of deeper Design and more dangerous
Contrivance than the Slaves themselves were (...) of; it was thought a Matter
that required (...), as well as the utmost Diligence, in the Conduct of the
Enquiry concerning it: And upon the Whole, 'twas judged most adviseab^e, as
there was an absolute Necessity that a Matter of this Nature and Consequence
should be fathomed as soon as possible, that it should be taken under the Care
of the Supreme Court; and for that Purpose, that Application should be made to
His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, for an Ordinance to enlarge the Term for
the Sitting of that Court, which in the ordinary Method would determine on the
Tuesday following.

The Gentlemen of the Law generously and unanimously offered to give their
Assistance on every Trial in their Turns, as this was conceived to be a Matter
that not only affected the City, but the whole Province.

Margaret Kerry, commonly called Peggy committed for Hogg's Robbery, being
impeached by Mary Burton, as one of the Conspirators, the Judges examined her
in Prison in the Evening; they exhorted her to make an ingenuous Confession and
Discovery of what she knew of it, and gave her Hopes of their Recommendation to
the Governor for a Pardon, if they could be of Opinion that she deserved it;
^ssuring her (as the Case wa^) that they had His Honor's Permission to give
Hopes of Mercy to such Criminals as should confess their Guilt, and they should
think proper to recommend to him as fit and proper Objects: But she withstood
it, and positively denied that she knew any Thing of the Matter; and said, That
if she should accuse any Body of any such Thing, ^he must accuse innocent
Persons, and W^ONG HER OWN SOUL. She had this (...) been examined by the Grand
Jury, and positively denied knowing any Thing about the Fires.

Supreme Court. FRIDAY, 24th APRIL.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Caesar and Prince, Negroes.

The Grand Jury having found two Bills of Indictment for Felonies, against the
Prisoners; Mr. Attorney General moved. That they might be brought to the Bar,
in order to be arraigned.

It was Ordered.

And they being brought, were arraigned accordingly, and severally pleaded, Not
Guilty.

The KING, against John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, Margaret Sorubiero, alias
Kerry.


The Grand Jury having found a Bill of Indictment for Felony, against the
Defendants in Custody; Mr. Attorney General moved, That they might be brought
to the Bar in order to be arraigned.

It was Ordered.

And the Prisoners being brought, were arraigned accordingly, and severally
pleaded, Not Guilty.

Ordered, That the Trials of the two Negroes, the Hughsons, and Kerry, do come
on Tomorrow Morning.

Court adjourned 'till Tomorrow Morning Nine o'Clock.

Supreme Court. SATURDAY, 25th APRIL.
PRESENT, The Second Justice.

The KING, against Caesar and Prince, Negroes.

The KING, against John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, Margaret Kerry.


Ordered, That the Prisoners Trials be put off 'til Tuesday the 28th Instant.

Court adjourned 'till Monday Morning Nine o'Clock.

Supreme Court: MONDAY, 27th APRIL.
PRESENT, The Second Justice.

His Majesty's Ordinance published in Court for Enlarging the present Term to
the last Tuesday in May next.

Court adjourned 'til Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 28th APRIL.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Caesar and Prince, Negroes.

The KING, against John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, Margaret Kerry.


Upon Motion of Mr. Attorney General,

Ordered, That the Trials of the Prisoners in both Causes be put off 'till the
first Day of May.

Court adjourned 'til Friday 1st May, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

The following Letter, dated this Day at New York, was some Time afterward
intercepted in New Jersey, and sent up from a Magistrate there to another here.

The Original in Female Dutch follows, so much of it as is material to the
present Purpose.

Nieu York ^en 21 April 1741 Beminde Man Johannis Romme
DIT is om U Bekent te Maken Dat ik U Brief o^tfangen heb By de Brenger Van
deze En Daer Nyt Verstaen Dat g^y Van Sins Ben Om Weer Na huis te Komen Mine
Beminde ik versoek Van U Dat gy het Best Van U Wegh Maek^ Om Varder te Gaen En
Niet in Niu Yorck te komen En Om U Self Niet Bekent te Maken Waer gey Ben Voor
John Husen die is Van Dese Dagh Zyn tryell te hebben Enook Zyn Vrou En de Mydt
is King Evidens tegen Baye Gar En Zy het U Naemook in Kwetze Gebrocht En ik ben
Bang det John Husen En Zyn Vrou Gehangen Sall Worden By Wat ik Kan horen En de
S^hout En Bombeles Soeken Voor U Over all Want Fark Neger die houdt Zyn Woort
Standen Voor Jou Brother Lucas is Voor Even Jeure Man gekosen En die hoort hoe
het is So Niet Maer Maer Blyvende U E^rwarde Vrou Elezabet Romme tot ter doet
toe


Thus Translated:

Beloved Husband John Romme,
THIS is to acquaint you that I have received your Letter by the Bearer hereof
and understand out of it that you intend to return home again My Dear I desire
of you that you make the best of your Way to go further and not to come in
New York and not to make yourself known where you are for John Hughson is this
Day to have his Trial as also his Wife and the Servant Maid is King Evidence
against both and she has brought your Name likewise in Question and I am afraid
that John Hughson and his Wife will be hanged by what I can hear and the
Sheriff and Bumbailiffs seek for you every where Vaarck's Negro Caesar.
he keeps his Word steadfast for you Brother Lucas is chosen one of the Jurymen
and he hears how it is So no more but remaining your respectful Wife Elezabet
Romme even 'til Death.

Superscribed, For Mr. John Romme Q D G

Supreme Court, FRIDAY, 1st MAY.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Caesar and Prince, Negroes. On Trial.

The JURY called, and, the Prisoners making no Challenge, the following Persons
were sworn, Viz. Roger French, John Groesbeek, John Richard, Abraham Kipp,
George Wits, John Thurman, Patrick Jackson, Benjamin Moore, William
Hammersley, John Lashier, Joshua Sleydall, John Shurmer.


THese two Negroes were arraigned on Two Indictments, the Twenty-fourth of
April last: The One for their entering the Dwelling House of Robert Hogg, of
this City, Merchant, on the First Day of March then last past, with Intent then
and there to commit some Felony; and for feloniously stealing and carrying away
then and there the Goods and Chattels of the said Robert Hogg, of the Value of
Four Pounds Five Shillings Sterling, against the Form of the Statutes in such
Case made and provided, and against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown and Dignity.

The Other for their entering the Dwelling House of Abraham Meyers Cohen in
this City, Merchant, on the First Day of March, with Intent then and there to
commit some Felony; and for feloniously stealing and carrying away then and
there the Goods and Chattels of the said Abraham Meyers Cohen of the Value of
Five Pounds Sterling. against the Form of the Statutes, etc. and against the
King's Peace, etc.

To each of which Indictments they pleaded, Not Guilty.

The Attorney General having opened both the Indictments, he wi^h Joseph
Murray, Esquire; of Council for the King, proceeded to examine the Witnesses, viz.

For the KING.
Mrs. Hogg, Mrs. Boswell, Christopher Wilson, Rachina Guerin, Mr. Robert Hogg,
Mr. Robert Watts, Margaret Sorubiero, alias Kerry. Abraham Meyers Cohen, James
Mills, Thomas Wenman, John Moore, Esquire; Cornelius Brower, Anthony Ham, Mary
Burton.
For the Prisoners.
Alderman Bancker, Alderman Johnson, John Auboyneau.
The Prisoners upon their Defense denied the Charge against them. And,

The Evidence being summed up, which was very strong and full, and the Jury
charged, they withdrew; and being returned, found them Guilty of the
Indictments.

Ordered, That the Trials of the Hughsons and Margaret Kerry, be put off till
Wednesday the 6th Instant.

Court adjourned 'til Monday Morning, 4 th May, Ten o'Clock.

SUNDAY, 3d MAY.
ARTHUR PRICE, Servant to Capt. VINCENT PEARSE, having been committed, upon a
Charge of stealing out of his Master's House several Goods belonging to the
Lieutenant Governor, which had been removed thither for safe Custody from the
Fire at the Fort; he informed the Undersheriff, That he had had some Discourse
in the Goal with Peggy, which he would communicate to a Magistrate: The
Undersheriff acquainted one of the Judges therewith; and he examined Price in
the Evening, and the following Deposition was taken.

DEPOSITION.
NUMB. I.
ARTHUR PRICE being duly Sworn, says,

1. That about the Beginning of last Week Peggy Carey, or Kerry, now in Goal,
came to the Hole of the Prison Door, in which he is confined, and told him, She
was very much afraid of those Fellows (meaning the Negroes, as he understood)
telling or discovering something of her; but, said she, if they do, by God, I
will ^ANG them every one; but that she would not FORSWEAR What she meant by
forswearing herself, may be better guessed at hereafter.
herself, unless they brought her in. Upon which the Deponent asked her, Peggy,
How FORSWEAR yourself? To which she answered, There is Fourteen SWORN. Upon
which he further asked her, What, is it about Mr. Hogg' s Goods? And she
replied, No, by God, ABOUT THE FIRE. Upon which the Deponent said to her, What,
Peggy; were you a going to set the Town on fire? And she made Answer, She was
not; but said, by God, since I knew of it, they made me swear: Upon which the
Deponent asked her, Was John and his Wife in it? (meaning John Hughson and his
Wife) And she answer* Yes, by God, they were both sworn as well as the rest.
Then the Deponent asked her, if she was not afraid that the Negroes would
discover her? And she said, No; for Prince, Cuff and Caesar, and Forck' s
[Vaarck' s] Negro were all true-hearted Fellows. Then he asked her, if Caesar
was not Forck's Negro? And she answered, No, by God, it was the other; Bastian,
alias Tom Peal, also belonging to Vaarck.
but what other she meant, he did not know.

2. That Yesterday in the Afternoon the said Peggy came to him again, and told
him, she had no Stomach to eat her Victuals; for that (...) (meaning Hughson's
Maid Mary Burton.
as he understood) has fetched me in, and made me as black as the Rest, about
the Indigo, and Mr. Hogg's Goods: But that if they did hang the two poor
Fellows below (meaning Caesar and Prince, as he understood) they (meaning the
rest of the Negroes) would be revenged on them yet; but if they sent them away,
it was another Case. Upon which this Deponent said to Peggy, I don't doubt but
they will endeavor to poison this Girl that has sworn, (meaning Hughson's
Maid) And Peggy replied, No, by God, I don't believe that; but they will be
revenged of them some other Ways: And she further said to the Deponent, for
your Life and Soul of you, you Son of a B -- h, don't speak a Word of what I
have told you.

About this Time, i. e. the Beginning of this Month, at Hackensack, in
New Jersey, eight Miles from this City the Inhabitants of that Place were
alarmed about an Hour before Day, and presented with a most melancholy and
affrighting Scene! no less than seven Barns in that Neighborhood were all in
Flames; and the Fire had got such head, that all Assistance was in vain; for in
a short Time they were burnt down to the Ground. Two Negroes, the one belonging
to Derick Van H^orn, the other to Albert Van Voerheise, were suspected to have
been guilty of this Fact; the former having been seen coming out of One of the
Barns with a Gun laden, who pretended on his being discovered, that he saw the
Person who had fired the Barns, upon which his Master ordered him to fire at
him, and the Negro thereupon immediately discharged his Piece; but no Blood was
drawn from any Mortal that could be discovered. The latter was found at his
Master's House loading a Gun with two Bullets, which he had in his Hand ready
to put in. Upon these and other presumptive Circumstances and Proofs, both
Negroes were apprehended, and in a few Days tried, convicted, and burnt at a
Stake: The former confessed, he had set Fire to three of the Barns; the latter
would confess nothing; nor would either of them discover, that any others were
concerned with them in this Villainy.

Supreme Court. MONDAY, 4th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The Court opened and adjourned 'till Tomorrow Afternoon Three o'Clock.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 5th MAY.
PRESENT, As before.

The Court opened and adjourned 'till Tomorrow Morning Nine o'Clock.

Supreme Court: WEDNESDAY, 6th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against On Trial.
John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, Margaret Sorubiero, al. Kerry,


The Jury called, and the following Jurors were sworn, Viz. Henry Lawrence,
William Hammersley, Sidney Breese, John Smith, Samuel Weaver, Patrick Jackson,
John Shurmer, John Hastier, John Robins, Henry Vandewater. Aaron King,
Alexander Ward. Jurors challenged by the Prisoners. Benjamin Peck, Joseph North,



They were indicted for feloniously, etc. receiving on the third Day of March
then last past, diverse stolen Goods, knowing the same to have been stolen, They
received the Goods of Caesar and Prince, Principals Convict.
against the Form of the Statutes, etc. and the King's Peace, etc.

To which Indictment they all pleaded, Not Guilty, upon their Arraignment, as
before.

Council for the KING, The ATTORNEY GENERAL. JOSEPH MURRAY, Esquire;

The Attorney General opened the Indictment, and then he and Mr. Murray
examined the Witnesses against the Criminals, viz.

Witnesses for the KING.
Robert Hogg, Mrs. Hogg, Rachina Guerin, Anthony Ham, Constable. Alderman
Romme, Robert Watts, Esquire; Richard Nicholls, Esquire; James Mills, Mary Burton,
Alderman Moore, Thomas Wenman, Constable John Cruger, Esquire; Mayor. Alderman
Johnson, William Jamison, Esquire;
The Conviction of Caesar and Prince read.

The Examination of Hughson before the Justices read.

Witnesses for the Prisoners.
John Nichols, Capt. Lee, Peter Anderson, and His Wife.
And the Charge against them being fully proved; the Evidence summed up; the
Arguments closed, and the Jury charged, they withdrew; and being returned,
found them all Guilty.

Sarah Hughson, Single-Woman, Daughter of John Hughson and Sarah his Wife, was
this Morning committed as one of the Confederates in the Conspiracy, being
apprehended while the Court was sitting.

Court adjourned 'til Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Jack (SLEYDALL's Negro) was this Day committed on Suspicion of putting Fire to
Mr. Murray's Haystack.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 7th MAY. A. M.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices. Court opened and adjourned till 4
o'Clock in the Afternoon.

P. M.

PRESENT, As before. Court opened and adjourned 'till Tomorrow Morning Ten
o'Clock.

DEPOSITION Taken before the Judges.
NUMB. II.
ARTHUR PRICE being duly Sworn, says,

1. That Yesterday Morning having Discourse with Sarah the Daughter of John
Hughson, about the Fires which have lately happened in the Town; she told him,
That she had been with a Fortune Teller, who told her that in less than five
Weeks Time she would come to Trouble, if she did not take good Care of herself;
but after that she would come to good Fortune; then he enquired of her Father's
Fortune; and she said, her Father would be tried and condemned, but not hanged;
but wa^ to go over the Water.

2. That then, after some other Discourse, the Depop^nent told her, that some
of the Negroes who were concerned in the Plot about the Fires, had discovered;
upon which she said, she did not know of any Plot; and thereupon he told her,
that they that were sworn in the Plot had discovered, and brought them every
one in: Upon which she colored, and put her Bonnet back, and changed Color
several times, and asked him if he knew who it was and when he had heard it?
And he told her, he had heard it by the by, and it was kept private: Upon which
she made a long stop; and then said, it must be either HOLT^'s Negro or TODD's;
for, said she* we were always afraid of them, and mistrusted them, though they
were as bad as the Rest, and were to have set their own Master's Houses on
Fire; and then she said, I wish that Todd had sent his black Dog away, or sold
him, when he was a going to do it. Dundee: TODD it seems, did threaten, and was
going to send this Negro beyond Sea (...) Fall; so that her Intelligence was
right.


3. That then the Deponent told her, Sure you had better tell every Thing that
you know; for that may be of some Service to your Father: Upon which she said,
No; for that they were doing all that ever they could to take his Life away;
and that she would sooner suffer Death, and be hanged with her Daddy (if he was
to be hanged) than she would give them that Satisfaction of telling or
discovering any thing to them; o^ Words to that Effect* That she was to have
gone up into the Country (like a Fool that she was that she did not go) but
staid to see what would become of her Mammy and Daddy; but that now she would
go up in the Country, and that she would be hanged if ever they should get her
in York again; but if they (meaning the People of this City, as he understood)
had not better Care of themselves, they would have a great deal more Damage and
Danger in York, than they were aware of; and if they did hang her Daddy, they
had better do something else: And as to the Fire at the Fort, they did not set
the Saddle on the right Horse.

4. That on Monday last Peggy came to hi^, and bid him not discover any thing
for his Life, that she had told him; for if he did, by God she would cut his
Throat.

5. The Deponent further says, That as to the Expression made use of by Sarah
Hughson, viz. As to the Fire at the Fort, they did not set the Saddle on the
right Horse; the Occasion of these Words was, the Deponents telling her, that
they had been picking out of him what they could concerning the Fire at the
Fort, and thought that he knew something of it; but he said to her, that he
took GOD to be his Judge, that he did not know any thing of it. Upon the
Supposition, that Arthur knew nothing of the Secrets of the C^^^^iracy before
he came to Goal, the Reader may be apt to judge, that he acted with more than
ordinary Acuteness for one of his Station, in pumping so much out of Peggy and
Sarah (Hughson's Daughter) and their Confidence in him, if he were a Stranger
to them, was somewhat extraordinary on the Occasion.


Upon the Information by this Deposition, Dundee (TODD's Negro) was apprehended
and committed; but, upon Examination, denied knowing any thing of the
Conspiracy.

The other Negro was at this time gone with his Master (HOLT)a Dancing Master,
to Jamaica in the West Indies, who thought it proper to remove from hence soon
after the Fire at the Fort.

VOLUNTARY CONFESSION.
MARGARET SARINBIRR, alias KEARY, declares, That she was several times at the
House of John Romme, Shoemaker, and Tavernkeeper, and saw several Meetings of
the Negroes from time to time; and in Particular, in the Month of December last
past, she saw assembled there in or about Ten or Twelve in Number, viz.

Cuff, belonging to Mr. ITEMHILIITEMSE. Brash, Mr. JAY's. Curacoa Dick, a Negro
Man. Caesar, ITEMINTARD's. ITEMatrick, ENGLISH's. A Negro belonging to Mr.
BREASTEAD, in ITEMearl (...) Street. [ Jack] Cato, Alderman MOORE's.


The rest of their Names that was in the Combination I cannot remember, or
their Master's Names. They proposed, to burn the Fort first, and afterward the
City; and then steal, rob and carry away all the Money and Goods they could
procure, and was to be carried to Romme's, and was to be joined by the Country
Negroes; and that they were to murder every one that had Money.

The Reason why I did not make this Discovery before, Romme swore them all
never to discover, and swore me too; and I thought, I WOULD WRONG MY OWN SOUL,
if I discovered it. And that all the rest of the Negroes in City and Country
were to meet in one Night.

All of the above I am ready to declare upon Oath. This Confession was penned
by a Jail Secretary.


Signed with her Mark X

This Declaration was sent from the* Goal by the Undersheriff to one of the
Judges late this Night.

The Conviction of the two Negroes Caesar and Prince, as Principals in the two
Robberies; and of Hughson, his Wife, and Peggy herself, as Accessaries in
receiving the Goods stolen, alarmed her so, that she seemed now to think it
high time to do something to recommend herself to Mercy; and this Confession
coming voluntarily from her, it gave hopes that she was in Earnest, and would
make some material Discoveries.

Supreme Court. FRIDAY, 8th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Caesar and Prince, Negroes.

THE Prisoners having been capitally convicted on two several Indictments for
Felony, and being brought to the Bar, the Court proceeded to give Sentence;
which was passed by the Second Justice, as follows.

YOU Caesar and Prince, the Grand Jury having found two Indictments against
each of you, for feloniously stealing and taking away from Mr. Hogg, and Mr.
Meyers Coh^^, sundry Goods of considerable Value; to these Indictments you
severally pleaded, Not Guilty; and for your Trials, put yourselves upon God and
the Country: Which Country having found you Guilty; it now only remains for the
Court to pronounce that Judgment which the Law requires, and the Nature of your
Crimes deserve.

But before I proceed to Sentence, I must tell you, that you have been
proceeded against in the same Manner as any white Man, guilty of your Crimes
would have been: You had not only the Liberty of sending for your Witnesses;
asking them such Questions as you thought proper; but likewise making the best
Defense you could; and as you have been convicted by twelve honest Men upon
their Oaths; so the just Judgment of GOD has at length overtaken you.

I have great Reason to believe, that the Crimes you now stand convicted of,
are not the least of those you have been concerned in; for by your general
Characters you have been very wicked Fellows, hardened Sinners, and ripe, as
well as ready, for the most enormous and daring Enterprises; especially you,
Caesar: And as the Time you have yet to live is to be but very short, I
earnestly advise and exhort both of you to employ it in the most diligent and
best Manner you can, by confessing your Sins, repenting sincerely of them, and
praying GOD of his infinite Goodness to have Mercy on your Souls: And as GOD
knows the Secrets of your Hearts, and cannot be cheated or imposed upon; so you
must shortly give an Account to him, and answer for all your Actions; and
depend upon it, if you do not truly repent before you die, there is a Hell to
punish the Wicked eternally.

And as it is not in your Powers to make full Restitution for the many Injuries
you have done the Public; so I advise both of you to do all that in you is, to
prevent further Mischiefs; by discovering such Persons as have been concerned
with you in designing or endeavoring to burn this City, and to destroy its
Inhabitants: This I am fully persuaded is in your Power to do if you will; if
so, and you do not make such Discovery; be assured God Almighty will punish you
for it, though we do not: Therefore I advise you to consider this well, and I
hope both of you will tell the Truth.

And now, Nothing further remains for me to say; but

THAT you Caesar, and you Prince, are to be taken hence to the Place from
whence you came, and from thence to the Place of Execution, and there you, and
each of you, are to be hanged by the Neck until you be dead.

And I pray the Lord to have Mercy on your Souls.

Ordered, That their Execution be on Monday next, the Eleventh Day of this
Instant, between the Hours of Nine and One of the same Day.

And further Ordered, That after the Execution of the said Sentence, the Body
of Caesar be hung in Chains.

Court adjourned till Monday Morning next Ten o'Clock.

PEGGY was examined by the Judges touching the Matter of her Confession
delivered in Writing last Night, which she declared for Truth; and for the
greater Solemnity was sworn to it, after having been seriously admonished not
to dare to say any Thing but the Truth, or to accuse innocent Persons: She was
told, that we had dived so far into this Mystery of Iniquity already, that we
could easily discern whether she prevaricated or not; and that if she did, she
must not flatter herself with he Hopes of being recommended to Mercy; so that
such disingenuous Behavior would but deceive herself, and make her Case
desperate; or in Words to that Purpose: She put on the Air of Sincerity, as if
disposed to make a Discovery; but seemed to be under terrible Apprehensions.
What she said, corresponded with the Scheme of the Plot so far as we had got
Light into it, and in a great Measure confirmed what Arthur Price said in his
Deposition, NUMB. I before, with this Difference, that she shifted the Scene
from John Hughson's to John Romme's, and protested that she did not know that
the Hughsons were any wise privy to, or concerned in the Conspiracy.

At this Examination, she related a great many Particulars, which for want of
Time were not committed to Writing; but (...) further Examination deferred to
the next Day.

Romme at this Time absconded; Orders having been given for apprehending him
long before, upon Suspicion of his having received some of the Goods stolen
from Mr. Hogg's; and Peggy and her Advisers might think as he was out of reach,
she might safely shift the Scene to his House: Or this bloody Scheme might have
been brooding at both Places, and with her Knowledge; but one may be persuaded
from the Course of the Evidence, that Romme was apprized at least of the
Conspiracy carrying on at Hughson's.

Upon this Examination, Romme's Wife was apprehended and (...).

SATURDAY, 9th MAY.
Many Hours were taken up in Peggy's Examination Yesterday, and this Day; which
was committed to Writing, as follows.

EXAMINATION. Taken before the Judges.
NUMB. I.
MARGARET SALINBURGH, How she came by the Name Sorubiero, by which she stands
indicted we know not; she said she was married to one Salingburgh.
alias KERRY, says,

1. That some time last Fall she took Lodgings with one Frank, a Free Negro,
fronting the New Battery, within this City, about three or four Doors from the
House of John Romme, Shoemaker, and continued there till the Beginning of
February last, during which Time she employed the said Romme in making Shoes
for her; and on that Account became acquainted with him and his Wife, and used
often to go backwards and forwards to and from the said House; by which Means
she had the Opportunity of seeing many Negroes there at several different
Times, who used to resort thither to drink Drams, Punch and other strong
Liquors; the said Romme keeping a Public House* and that often Numbers of them
have continued at the said Romme's House till two or three o'Clock in the
Morning, to her Knowledge, drinking, singing and playing at Dice.

2. That on or about the Beginning of November last, on a Sunday Evening,
between the Hours of Eleven and Twelve, she (the Examinant) being returning
home to her said Lodging, by the Way of Whitehall, saw two Negroes coming
toward her with each of them a Firkin upon their Shoulders, and saw them turn
into Romme's Gate; and that presently after the same two Negroes returned from
the said Romme's House, and went by the Examinant (who stood under Hunt's Shed)
at some Distance toward the Waterside; and returned again by her, with each
of them one Firkin more upon each of their Shoulders, and went with them also
in at the said Romme's Gate; and returned by the Examinant a second Time, and
went toward the Waterside; and in the same manner made as many Turns, 'til
the Examinant counted that the said Negroes had carried into the said Romme's
Gate sixteen, of the said Firkins: And the Reason of the Examinant's staying
under the said Hunt's Shed to observe the Motions of the said two Negroes, was,
because she suspected them to be stolen Goods. These Firkins were said to have
been stolen out of Mr. Jeneau' s Sto^ehouse.


3. That one Evening some time about Christmas last, about Eight or Nine
o'Clock, she was at the House of the said John Romme, where she saw in Company,
together with the said Romme and his Wife, ten or eleven Negroes, all in one
Room; and the said John Romme was observing to the Negroes how well the rich
People in this Place lived, and said, If they (meaning the Negroes as she
understood) would be advised by him, they (meaning himself and the Negroes as
she understood) should have the Money: To which Cuff (Mr. PHILIP^E's Negro)
replied, How will you manage that? Well enough, said Romme, set them all a
light Fire; burn the Houses of them that have the most Money, and kill them
all, as the Negroes would have done their Masters and Mistresses formerly:
There was a Rising of the Negroes in this City in the Year 1712: On the 7 th of
April, about One or Two o'Clock in the Morning, the House of Peter Van Tilburgh
was set on Fire by the Negroes, who being armed with Guns, Knives, etc. killed
and wounded several White People as they were coming to assist in extinguishing
the Flames: Notice thereof being soon carried (...) the Fort, His Excellency
Governor HUNTER, Ordered a Cannon to be fired from the Ramparts, to alarm the
Town, and detatch'd a Party of Soldiers to the Fire; at whose Appearance those
Villains immediately fled, and made their Way out of Town as fast as they
could, to hide themselves in the Woods and Swamps: In their Flight they also
killed and wounded several White People; but being closely pursued some
concealed themselves in Barns, and others she^^^^ (...) in the Swamps or Woods;
which being surrounded and strictly guarded till the Morning, many of 'em were
then taken: Some finding no Way for their escape, that themselves. The END of
it was, that after these foolish Wretches had murdered eight or ten White
People* and some of the Confederates had been their own Executioners: Nineteen
more of 'em were apprehended, brought upon their Trials for a Conspiracy to
murder the People, etc. and were Convicted and Executed; and several more that
turned Evidences, were Transported.
That he (Romme) should be Captain over them (meaning the Negroes as the
Examinant understood) 'till they could get all their Money, and then he (Romme)
would be Governor. To which Cuff said, They could not do it: Yes, says Romme,
we'll do we I enough; we'll send into the Country for the Rest of the Negroes
to help, because he could write, and he knew several Negroes in the Country
that could read: And he encouraged them, and said, he would stand by them; and
that the Sun would shine very bright by and by, and never fear, my Lads: But
that if it should happen that any Thing should come out, he would make his
Escape, and go to North Carolina, Cape Fear, or somewhere thereabouts; or into
the Mohawks Country, where he had lived before; but besides, the D -- l could
not hurt him; for he had a great many Friends in Town, and the best in the
Place would stand by him. Or the said Romme expressed himself in Words to the
Effect before mentioned.

4. That during all the Discourse of the said Romme to the Negroes as
abovementioned, she did not observe any of the said Number of Ten or Eleven, to
make any Answer to Romme's Discourse aforesaid, excepting Cuffee (PHILIPSE's)
Curacoa Dick, PINTARD's Caesar, Will WEAVER's, since dead) and Mr. MOORE's
Cato; but Cuffee spoke the most, and said, The D -- l take the Failer; though
the other four seemed to be as forward* for the Plot as Cuff.

5. That the other Negroes that were present at the above Discourse, whose
Persons or Names she now remembers, were Patrick (ENGLISH's) Jack (BREASTED's)
and Brash (Mr. JAY's)

6. That at the same Meeting, there were several other Negroes, which made up
the Number Ten or Eleven, whose Names, or the Names of their Masters, she does
not now remember; but believes she should remember their Faces again if she
should see them.

7. That at the same Meeting, the said John Romme proposed to the said Negroes
present, To burn the Fort first, and afterward the City; and then to steal and
rob, and carry away all the Money Goods they could procure; and that they
should be brought to Romme's House, and he would take Care to hide them away.

8. That Romme said further, That if the Fire did not succeed, and they could
not compass their Ends that Way; then he proposed to the Negroes present, that
they should steal all that they could from their Masters; then he would carry
them to a strange Country, and give them their Liberty, and set them free.
After this, Romme asked them, If it would do? That is, whether the Negroes then
present liked his Proposals, (as she understood) To which Cuff answered,
There Is great Talking, and no Syder; and so they broke up: And the Negroes
remaining at that Time all departed; some of them, to wit, Brash, Patrick,
Jack, and the several other Negroes (whose Names the Examinant cannot at all
remember) having left the Company about an Hour before; but Cuff, Coracoa Dick,
WEAVER's Will, Gate and PINTARD's Caesar staid till the last.

9. That she well remembers, that Cuff, Curacoa Dick, WEAVER's Will, PINTARD's
Caesar, and Mr. MOORE's Cato; and also AUBOYNEAU's Prince, and VAARCK' s
Caesar, used much to frequent that House in the Evenings, and to stay often
late in the Night, drinking, and playing at Dice; but she never heard any
Discourse amongst them concerning burning the Fort, or setting Fire to the
Town, but the Time abovementioned.

10. That immediately after the Negroes broke up the Meeting before mentioned,
the said John Romme insisted upon this Examinant's being S^worn to Secresy,
that she would not discover any Thing that she knew had passed in his House,
either relating to the Butter, or the Fire, or Discourse at the said Meeting;
which she accordingly was, and kissed a Book; What Book it was, knows not,

11. That Romme's Wife was by, all or most part of the Time, during the Meeting
and Discourse aforesaid; and when Romme insisted that this Examinant should be
sworn as aforesaid, as well as his Wife; for that the said Romme, declared,
they were both sworn to Secrecy, and all the Negroes: But the Examinant says,
That the said Romme's Wife did not at all join in any of the Discourse before
mentioned.

Elizabeth Romme, Wife of John Romme, was sent for and examined concerning what
Peggy had declared to have passed at her House.

EXAMINATION.
1. SHE denied, That she knew any Thing at all about the Conspiracy for firing
the Fort and the Town, and murdering the People.

2. Denied There were ever such Companies of Negroes met at her House as Peggy
declared.

3. She confessed There had been some Firkins of Butter brought thither about
the Time mentioned by Peggy; but said, that they were received by her Husband,
and she knew Nothing of them.

4. Denied She ever heard or knew of any Oath of Secresy imposed by her
Husband; or administered by him to her or Peggy, or any other Person whatsoever,
with regard to Secresy concerning the stolen Butter, or any other Goods, or
concerning the Conspiracy.

5. Confessed, That a Negro (the Father of Mr. PHILIPSE's Cuffee) kept
Game-Fowls at their House, and used to come there to bring them Victuals, but
never used to stay long. Confessed that he was there about Christmas last. And

6. That the last Winter Cuff's Father brought then Sticks of Wood now and
then, and she believed he had them out of his Master's Yard.

7. Confessed, That Negroes used to come to their House to drink Drams, but
never used to stay; That Caesar (VAARCK's Negro) used to come Morning and
Evening often; AUBOYNEAU's Prince sometimes; Mr. MOORE's Cato once or twice,
and not oftener, (...) remembered; never saw BREASTED the H^tter's Negro there
at all; nor Mr. JAY's Brash; nor (...) (ENGLISH's Negro) but had seen Bastian
(VAARC^^^ Negro) there, and Mr. PINTARD's Caesar; but never (...) above three
Negroes at a Time th^^e, and that very (...); and that when there were three,
they were always Cuffee (PHILIPSE's) Caesar (VAARCK's) and Prince (AUBOYNEAU's)

This Afternoon Orders were given for apprehending the several Negroes
mentioned by Peggy to have been present at Romme's at the Time she said Romme
and the Negroes were talking of the Conspiracy; those of them whom she knew by
Name, and were not before committed, were soon found, and brought to Jail.

In the Evening the Judges came to the City Hall, and sent for Peggy, and had
the several Negroes brought one by one, and passed in Review before her, viz.
Patrick (ENGLISH's) Cato (Col. MOORE's) Curacoa Dick, Caesar, (Alderman
PINTARD's) Brash (Mr. JAY's) and Jack (BREASTEAD's) and she distinguished them
every one, called them by their Names, and declared, those were at the
abovementioned Meeting.

These Negroes were each of them seperately examined, and denied being at any
such Meeting, or that they knew any thing of the Conspiracy.

At first, Cork (ENGLISH's Negro) was brought by Mistake instead of Patrick;
and Peggy declared, he was not English's Negro which she meant: Cork was
unfortunately of a Countenance somewhat ill favored, naturally of a suspicious
Look, and reckoned withal to be unlucky too; his being sent for before the
Magistrates in such a perilous Season, might be thought sufficient to alarm the
most Innocent of them, and occasion the Appearance of their being under some
terrible Apprehensions; but it was much otherwise with Cork; and
notwithstanding the Disadvantage of his natural Aspect, upon his being
interrogated concerning the Conspiracy; he showed such a cheerful, open, honest
Smile upon his Countenance ( none of your fictitious hypocritical Grins) that
every one that was by, and observed it (and there were several in the Room)
jumped in the same Observation and Opinion, That they never saw the Fellow look
so handsome: Such an Efficacy have Truth and Innocence, that they even reflect
Beauty upon Deformity!

On the Contrary, Patrick's Visage betrayed his Guilt* Those who are used to
Negroes may have experienced, that some of them when charged with any Piece of
Villainy, they have been detected in, have an odd Knack or (it is hard to call
or how to describe it) Way of turning their Eyes inwards, as it were, as if
shocked at the Consciousness of their own Perfidy; their Looks at the same Time
discovering all the Symptom of the most inveterate Malice and Resentment: This
was Patrick's Appearance (...) and such his Behavior upon Examination, as
served to induce one's Credit to what Peggy had declared; so far at least, that
he was present at a Meeting when the Conspiracy was talked of, and was one of
the Persons consenting to act a Part in that infernal Scheme; so that he was
committed to Goal, and the Re^^ of them, whom Peggy declared, as they were
produced, to be the Persons she meant.

These Negroes impeached by Peggy, and committed upon her Information, and
which had passed in Review before her, were likewise shown to Mary Burton, who
declared, that she did not remember, that ever she saw any of them at
Highson's; which seemed to add Strength to what Peggy had declared in her
Examination, That this villainous Scheme was carrying on at Romme's as well as
Hughson's

DEPOSITION Taken before one of the Judges.
ABIGAL EARL, being sworn, Deposes,

That just before the Going in of the Afternoon Church, on the same Sunday that
Coals were found in Mr. Murray's Haystack Sunday 5 th April.
she saw three Negro Men coming up the Broad Way; that she was then looking out
of her Window up one Pair of Stairs in the House where Mr. Williams now lives;
and as they passed under the Window, she heard one of them say, viz. Fire,
Fire, Scorch, Scorch, A LITTLE, Damn it, BY-AND-BY* and then threw up his Hands
and laughed. That after the said Negroes were gone by, she went into Mrs.
George's House Which was the next Door.
and told her what she had heard; and about an Hour after, when Church was out,
she saw the same Negroes coming down the Broad Way; and then showed Mrs. George
the Negro that had spoke the aforesaid Words; whereupon Mrs. George said, That
is Mr. WALTER's Quaco.

LYDIA GEORGE, being Sworn, Deposed, That she heard the above-written
Deposition of Abigail Earl read, and knows, that all therein mentioned, which
any ways relates to her the Deponent, is true.

Upon these Depositions, Quaco was recommitted this Evening.

SUNDAY, 10th MAY.
A Young Negro Fellow of Mrs. Carpenter's had given some Information, That
Sarah (NIBLET's Negro Wench) had told him, that Sawney, alias Sandy (NIBLET's
Negro Boy, of about Sixteen or Seventeen Years of Age) had been concerned in
setting the Fort on fire; that he had likewise set Muchado's House, next Door
to his Master's, on fire; and had also thrown Fire over Alderman Bancker's
Fence into his Yard. This Negro Fellow was sent for, and likewise Sarah
(NIBLET's) and he declared before one of the Judges and others, to Sarah's
Face, to the same Purpose: The Wench seemed to be under great Terror, and
trembled much; but Nothing could be got out of her more than a peremptory
Denial that she had ever said any such Things to the above Negro.

Sarah was committed.

Sandy had then lately been sent away by his Master to Albany in order to be
sold; but Orders were immediately sent to bring him back.

Niblet the Master was sent for, and examined as to the Characters of these
Servants; but he said, he knew no Harm of them.

Supreme Court. MONDAY, 11th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second Justice.

Ordered, That the Gibbet on which the Body of the Negro Caesar is to be hanged
in Chains, be fixed on the Island near the Powder-House.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

CAESAR and Prince were executed this Day at the Gallows, according to
Sentence: They died very stubbornly, without confessing any Thing about the
Conspiracy; and denied they knew any Thing of it to the last. The Body of
Caesar was accordingly hung in Chains.

These two Negroes bore the Characters of very wicked idle Fellows; had before
been detected in some Robberies, for which they had been publicly chastised at
the Whipping-Post, and were Persons of most obstinate and untractable Tempers;
so that there was no Expectation of drawing any Thing from them which would
make for the Discovery of the Conspiracy; though there seemed good Reason to
conclude, as well from their Characters as what had been charged upon them by
Information from others, that they were Two principal Ringleaders in it amongst
the Blacks: It was thought proper to execute them for the Robbery, and not wait
the Bringing them to a Trial for the Conspiracy, though the Proof against them
was strong and clear concerning their Guilt as to that also; and it was
imagined, that as Stealing and Plundering was a principal Part of the Hellish
Scheme in Agitation, amongst the inferior Sort of these infernal Confederates;
this Earnest of Example and Punishment mig^^ ^^^ak the Knot, and induce some of
them to unfold this Mystery of Iniquity, in Hopes thereby to recommend
themselves to Mercy; and it is probable, that with some it had this Effect.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 12th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against John Hughson, and Sarah his Wife,

THE Prisoners John Hughson and Sarah his Wife, having been indicted for
conspiring, confederating and combining with diverse Negroes and others, to burn
the City of New York; and also to kill and destroy the Inhabitants thereof;
were set to the Bar and arraigned on the said Indictment.

And thereupon pleaded, Not Guilty.

Margaret Kerry was also included in this Indictment; but she being in a
Disposition, as 'twas thought at that Time, for making a Discovery; 'twas
judged proper to postpone her Arraignment.

Court adjourned to Friday the 15th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

Arthur Price having been found by experience to be very adroit at pumping out
the Secrets of the Conspirators, in the two Instances of Peggy and Sarah
Hughson the Daughter, before set forth; the Under Sheriff was ordered to put
Cuffee (Mr. PHILIPSE's Negro) into the same Cell with him, and to give them a
Tankard of Punch now and then, in order to cheer up their Spirits, and make
them more sociable: The^e Directions were accordingly observed, and produced
the desired Effects; and one of the Judges being acquainted that Arthur had
something to communicate, he went up this Morning in order to examine him.

DEPOSITION, Taken before one of the Judges.
NUMB. III.
ARTHUR PRICE being duly Sworn, says,

1 That having Discourse on Saturday Night last, with Cuffee, a Negro Slave
belonging to Mr. Philipse, he the said Cuffee, amongst other Discourse, said,
That he was one of the Geneva CLUB There was a Confederacy of Negroes, of which
Caesar (VAARCK's) and Prince (AUBOYNEAU's) both hanged Yesterday, and Cuffee (
Mr. PHILIPSE's) were the Heads and Ringleaders; who robbed, pilfered and stole
whenever they had an Opportunity: And it happened about Five or Six Years ago,
a Cellar of one Baker, a Tavern-keeper us this City, had one Night been broken
open, and robbed of some Geneva; many of the Parties concerned were detected,
viz. several Negroes, of which Caesar and Prince were two Principals; and all
that were discovered were chastised at the public Whipping Post: From thence
it may be supposed they became distinguished among each other by the Name of
the Geneva Club; for they used frequently to be junketting together at Nights
with Cuff, upon the Produce of the Spoils of their Pilfering. -- But it came
out upon the Examination of these Negroes, that they had before that Time the
Impudence to assume the Style and Title of FREE MASONS, in Imitation of a
Society here; which was looked upon to be a gross Affront to the Provincial
Grand Master and Gentlemen of the Fraternity at that Time, and was very ill
ACCEPTED: However from this Time the Negroes may be supposed to have declined
their Pretensions to this Title; for we heard Nothing more of them afterward
under that Style. But it is probable that most of this Geneva Club that were
sworn ( as Cuff said) were of the Conspiracy; and it is likely, that by the
Swearing, Cuff meant, sworn of the Conspiracy.
that was sworn; but being overcome with Sleep, he did not go to their Meeting
at that Time: That Cuffee asked the Deponent What could be the Reason that
Peggy was called down so often? She had been frequently sent for to be examined.
The Deponent replied, he thought Peggy was discovering the Plot about the
Fire; that he had heard she had discovered about the Fire at the Fort: Cuffee
replied, She could not do that unless she forswore herself, he knew; for that
he that had done that was sworn after she (Peggy) was in Prison: That he
(Cuffee) left his Master's House in the Evening, and went along the Wharffs to
the Fly-Market, and waited there 'till one Quack came out of his Master's
House; they two then went to the House of John Hughson, where they met no Body
but John Hughson, his Wife, and Daughter Sarah; that they (the two Negroes)
called for a Tankard of Punch; that Hughson swore Quack (...) Times; that they
only drank out their Punch, and then went down to the Fly. That this Deponent
then said, I believe I know this Quack, and that he lived with a Butcher.
Cuffee replied, No; he does not live with a Butcher; but he lived with a
Painter, who lived within a few Doors of a Butcher: Which Painter's Name he
understood to be Roosevelt, according to the best of his Remembrance.

2. That Cuffee told him, that Quack was married to a Negro Wench who is Cook
to the Fort, to the Governor as he understood; that they were all to meet at
Hughson's the Sunday after Quack was sworn; but some came and some did not.
That the Deponent, upon some further Discourse, asked Cuffee, How Quack could
do it? (meaning the setting fire to the House in the Fort) Cuffee answered, He
could not tell how he did it; but that Quack was to do it, and did do^^.

3. That Cuffee said, they were to meet, and have a Club at John Hughson's in
the Easter Hollidays; but that the d -- d Constables hindered them.

4. That he asked Cuffee, whether he did not think that the Firing would be
found out; he replied, No, by God, he did not think it ever would.

5. That he further asked Cuffee, if he was not afraid, that the two Negroes
who were to be executed on Monday would discover (the Affair about the firing
of the Fort and Town meaning) Cuffee answered, he was not afraid of that; for
that he was sure they would be burn^ to Ashes before they would discover it, he
would lay his Life on it.

6. That Yesterday the Deponent having some further Discourse with Cuffee, he
said, he wondered why they only took up the Long-Bridge Boys, and did not take
up those of the Smith's Fly; for he believed, if the Truth was known, They (the
Smith's-Fly Negroes meaning) were as much concerned as they (of the Long Bridge
meaning)

Upon this Deposition, Quack (ROOSEVELT's) was apprehended, and committed; who
was one of the Smith's Fly Boys, as Cuff called them.

WEDNESDAY, 13th MAY.
THIS being the Day appointed by the Lieutenant Governor's Proclamation, issued
the Tenth of April last, to be observed throughout the Provi^^^ as a Day of
public Fasting and Humiliation; the same was reverently and decently observed,
particularly in this City, by Persons of all Persuasions; the Shops were all
shut up, and Persons of all Ranks resorted to their respective Places of Divine
Worship, and seemed deeply affected with a Sense of the Calamities with which
we had of ^ate been visited: His most gracious Majesty, for the Vindicating the
Honor of his Crown, having declared War against the King of Spain; the
Visitation which the Province underwent with the Severity of the cold Weather
the last Winter, which reduced many Families to Extremity and Want by the Loss
of their Cattle, etc. the many Houses and Dwellings that had been fired about
our Ears, without any Discovery of the Cause or Occasion of them, which had put
us into the utmost Consternation: All these Distresses succeeding upon the
Heels of each other, were surely most likely to awaken us to our Duty, and a
due Sense of our Demerits.

DEPOSITION Before the Judges.
NUMB. II.
MARY BURTON, being duly sworn, deposed,

1. That a Day or Two after she was examined before the Grand Jury, she was
coming by Vaarck's Door in the Broad Street of this City, and saw a Negro of
the said Vaarck's who (now at the time of her Examination being produced)
called himself by the Name of Bastian, but used to be called by the Negroes,
Tom Peal, who asked the Deponent, whether she had discovered any Thing about
the Fires? To which the Deponent answered, No; To which he replied, D -- n you,
it was not best for you, for fear you should be burnt in the next.

2. That Quaco Roosevelt' s
the Negro Man now produced to her, she has often seen at Hughson's Door along
with PHILIPSE's Cuff, Caesar (VAARCK's) and Prince (AUBOYNEAU's) but never saw
Quaco within Hughson's House, as she remembers.

3. That she has seen Jack (SLEYDALL's, the Tallow-Chandler) very often at
Hughson's House, and believes he was very well acquainted with Hughson's eldest
Daughter Sarah; but does not remember she ever saw him there at the Times of
the Meetings of the Negroes, when they talked about Fires; but from the
Kindness shown to him by Hughson, his Wife, and Daughter aforesaid, she had
great Reason to think he was in their Secrets.

4. That she has oftentimes seen many Negroes at Hughson's House, she believes
Thirty together; especially on a Sunday; many of them playing at Dice; wh^^^
Faces she could remember if she saw them; and she believes there were Thirty of
them concerned in the Conspiracy about the Fires; and some Country Negroes,
particularly one Jamaica.

5. That Hughson and his Wife, and Peggy, and Sarah Hughson the Daughter, used,
at the Meetings of the Negroes, to be the forwardest of any of them in talking
about Fires (that is to say) That they would burn the Forts then they would go
to the Fly Toward the East End of the Town.
and burn the whole Town, and destroy all the People; to which all the Negroes
present were consenting; and by Name Cuff Philipse's.
Caesar and Prince Vaarck's and Auboyneau's.
Albany, Tom Peal, alias Bastian, amongst the Rest.

6. That she knows Hughson and his Family, and John Romme were very intimately
acquainted; and the Latter used frequently to be at Hughson's House, where they
used to retire to a private Room; where Peggy afterward lay in; and used to
have a great deal of Discourse together (...) but when the Deponent overheard
them, they were talking Dutch; but Romme used to tell Hughson, he was afraid of
the Deponent: To which Hughson replied, he need not be afraid of her; for that
she was bound to him, and she dared not tell; for if she did he would murder
her: And afterward Romme would be more free before the Deponent.

7. That she knows Jonneau (VAARCK's Negro) and has seen him at Hughson's House
a Drinking with other Negroes; but don't remember he was present at any Time of
the Discourse about the Fires, or killing the white People.

Jonneau, Albany and Bastian were immediately apprehended and committed.

THURSDAY, 14th MAY.
This Day Sandy, alias Sawney (NIBLET's Negro Boy) was brought down from
Albany, and committed to Jail.

DEPOSITION. Before the Judges.
NUMB. III.
MARY BURTON Deposed,

1. That at the Times when she saw the Meetings of the several Negroes at
Hughson's House, as mentioned in the Deponent's Deposition of Yesterday; the
said Hughson said, They were all sworn (meaning the Negroes and all the White
People present, as she understood) that is, Hughson himself, his Wife, and
Daughter Sarah, and Peggy, and she understood by Hughson, that the Purport of
the Oath was, That they were not to discover the Secrets about firing the Fort;
the Houses at the Fly, and the whole Town; and about murdering the white
People: And Hughson said to the Negroes present, which were Cuff, Caesar and
Prince; now you must take Care; for you are all sworn:* And the Deponent at the
same Time saw a Bible (as she took it to be) in Hughson's Hand; and when the
Deponent came into the Room, he laid it upon the Table: And then Caesar spoke
to the Deponent, and cautioned her not to tell; and Hughson made answer, that
she dared not: And Cuff said, D -- n his Bl -- d, if he would tell of any, if
he was burnt; and so said the other two Negroes; and so said Hughson, his Wife,
their Daughter Sarah, and Peggy.

2. That Hughson asked Caesar, if he could get any others (meaning the Negroes)
to help them? Caesar answered, he could get enough, who dared not but go if he
spoke.

3. That she saw Caesar pay Hughson Twelve Pounds, in Eight Shilling Spanish
Pieces, as Hughson said, after counting them; which was paid him, in order to
buy Guns; and that Hughson afterward went abroad with his Boat, and was absent
three Days, or thereabouts, and brought back with him seven or eight Guns,
three Pistols, and four Swords; which were hid away under the Boards in the
Garret Floor in Hughson's House.

EXAMINATION. Before the Judges.
NUMB. II.
MARGARET SALINGBURGH, alias KERRY, says.

1. That about a Fortnight after she came to lodge at Hughson's House (she
believes it was about the Beginning of February) John Romme came there, when
Hughson was gone into the Woods to cut Firewood; but Hughson's Wife being at
home^ Romme entered into Conversation with her, when the Examinant was present;
and she heard him say to her (after calling for a Mug of Punch, and after
observing how hard the Winter was) that he did not know how it was with them;
and though he had Money enough himself; yet he could not buy Wood for it; but
that he had a Parcel of Good Children (meaning the Negroes, as she understood)
who brought him Wood almost every Night; or Words to that Purpose; so that he
had done well enough hitherto. And the Examinant says, that the Reason why she
understood the said Romme to mean the Negroes by the Words, Good Children, was,
because she herself several Times saw Cuff (Mr. PHILIPSE's) and Caesar
(VAARCK's) and sometimes Cuff's Brother, and the White Boy called Yorkshire
Christopher Wilson.
bring Wood there a-Nights: That Hughson's Wife answered, that it was poor
enough with them; that he ( Romme) was a Gentleman, and could live without
Work: To which Romme said, that if Hughson would join with him, and take a
Quantity of Fifty or Sixty Firkins of Butter in; meaning, as the Deponent
understood, into Hughson's House, to conceal them; for Romme said, it was too
hard for him to conceal such a Quantity; but that Hughson in his large House,
might much easier make away with them, and conceal them: To which Hughson's
Wife said, She did not know; but she believed her Husband would not have any
Hand in it: Oh! says Romme, I want to talk to him myself; for that he knew how
Circumstances were with them: By and by toward the Evening he would come
again, and talk to him; for that he wanted a Load of Wood.

2. That she was afterward informed by Hughson himself, that Romme was
returning to Hughson's House in the Evening, and met Hughson with a Sleigh-Load
of Wood in the Street, which Hughson carried down to Romme's House.

3. That at the Time of Romme's discoursing with Hughson's Wife about receiving
Butter as aforesaid, he further said, that as to Butter, the Weather was so
hard, and the Ground so frozen, that he did not know how to hide them away; and
as no Vessels could go out, he could not ship them off; and he believed Gammons
would do better; that his Brother was going to Carolina; and that he could stow
them in his Cabin, when there could not be Room to stow there Fifty or Sixty
Firkins of Butter. And by the Discourse, the Deponent understood, that Romme
proposed to get the Butter and Gammons both from the Weigh-house, or some of
the Storehouses thereabouts.

4. That she has at several Times seen Goods of several Kinds brought to
Romme's House, that she suspected to have been stolen: And that after the Oath
of Secresy taken by the Deponent, and mentioned in a former Examination, the
said Romme would talk freely to her about such stolen Goods as she happened to
see brought to his House* and Romme's Wife used to help receive such stolen
Goods, and used to conceal them away.

From what had hitherto come to Light concerning this Mystery of Iniquity, it
was scarce to be doubted, but Peggy had it in her Power to unfold a great deal
more of it* as she lodged at Hughson's; which from the Course of (...) other
Evidence, was the principal Place the Conspirators resorted to for holding
their Consultations: And though what Peggy had already disclosed seemed to
merit something; yet it was not altogether satisfactory; and 'twas thought
proper she should be arraigned upon the Indictment for the Conspiracy, upon the
Supposition that this Step might probably be a Means of bringing her to a
Resolution of making a full Discovery of what she knew.

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 15th MAY.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING against, Margret Kerry, and others.

THE Prisoner Kerry being brought to the Bar and arraigned on an Indictment for
a Conspiracy, etc. pleaded Not Guilty.

Ordered, That her Trial, together with Hughson, and his Wife, be on Wednesday
next.

NOTE, This was the same Indictment upon which Hughson and his Wife were
arraigned the Twelfth Instant.

Court adjourned 'til Tuesday next the 19th Instant Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

SATURDAY, 16th MAY.
THE Examination of Sarah Hughson the Daughter, was deferred thus long, in
Expectation that Arthur Price might succeed further in drawing more Secrets
concerning the Conspiracy from her, as he had before done from Peggy, and the
Negro Cuffee; but Price being often sent for, it was apprehended, they began to
suspect him: For after Quack (ROOSEVELT's) was brought to Goal, none of the
Three beforementioned would hold any Discourse with him: And this being
understood to be the Case, Sarah was sent for, and interrogated upon the Matter
of the Conspiracy in general; and particularly as to what passed between her
and Arthur Price, as set forth in his Deposition of the 7th Instant; but she
positively denied that she knew any Thing of the Conspiracy; though Part of the
Conversation she confessed, as follows.

EXAMINATION, Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. I.
SARAH HUGHSON, Single Woman, acknowledges she had some Discourse with Arthur
Price. soon after she came into Goal. That she talked to him about some
Conversation passed between her and a Fortune Tellers, who said to her, that her
Father would escape narrowly with his Life, if he did escape at all; and that
if he did escape, he would go over the Water.

Owns That Price said to her, That if she knew any Thing about the Fire^, that
she had better tell it: To which she answered, if she knew any Thing she would
tell the Truth.

As Soon as this Examination was taken, Arthur Price was sent for to confront
with her; and he told all that had passed between him and Sarah, agreeable
almost Word for Word with his Deposition of the 7th Instant; most of which she
had denied very positively before he was brought into the Room; and after all,
when Price vouched the Things to her Face, she did but faintly contradict what
he said: And it being proposed to her to ask him any Questions; she answered,
she had no Questions to ask him; but at length denied in Gross all that Price
had charged upon her, which any Ways related to the Fires. The High Sheriff
being present, he perused Price's Deposition whilst he was telling his Story
before Sarah; and he declared, Price had repeated the Substance very exactly,
and almost Word for Word.

DEPOSITION Before one of the Judges.
NUMB. IV.
ARTHUR PRICE, being duly Sworn, says,

1. That Cuffee (PHILIPSE's Negro) told him, that he knew he was to suffer
Death, and wondered why they did not bring him to his Trial; for he was sure he
was to go ^he Way the other two went. Mea^ing Caesar and Prince hanged, as may
be supposed.


2. That after Quack (mentioned in this Deponent's Examination of the 12th
Instant) was committed, Cuffee never mentioned any Thing concerning the former
Discourse; but read sometimes, and cried much.

MONDAY, 18th MAY.
A Few Days ago John Romme was stopped and secured by a Magistrate at Brunswick,
in New Jersey* which he very prudently did, and notified to a Magistrate of
this City: Whereupon Romme was sent for, and this Day committed to our ^ail.

Romme, upon Examination, also confessed, as his Wife had done before, that
some Firkins of butter had been brought by Negroes to his House; and he was
even with his Wife, saying, they were received by her, that he had no Hand in
it: And he also positively denied, that he knew any Thing of the Plot* and that
any such Discourse had passed at his House, as before declared by Peggy in her
Examinations. He was remanded, and examined several Times afterward; but not a
Word would he own about the Conspiracy.

Then Romme's Wife was sent for down again to be further examined; but Nothing
more could be got out of her. But in the Course of her Examination some Hints
having dropped, that her Husband had acknowledged the Negroes brought the Butter
to their House, but that he knew Nothing of it, and said 'twas received by her;
she being remanded to her Prison, and going by her Husband's Apartment, and he
putting his Head out of the Wicket, she civilly saluted him with a smart Slap
o^ the Chops.

Supreme Court. TUESDAY, 19th MAY.
PRESENT, The Third Justice.

The Court opened and adjourned till Thursday Morning Ten o'Clock.

WEDNESDAY, 20th MAY.
EXAMINATION Before one of the Judges.
NUMB. III.
MARGARET SALINGBURGH says,

1. That as to the ^^tter brought by the Negroes to Romme's House, (...)
mentioned in one of her former Examinations; that Caesar was one of the Negroes
that brought the Butter, as Romme informed her himself; and that about a Week
before. (...) herself heard Romme making a Bargain with Caesar, to get him as
much Butter as he could, and he would give him Fifteen Shillings (...) Firkin
for (...) bu^ Caesar insisted on Twenty.

2. That the next Day she was asking Romme, Who those Negroes were that brought
the Butter in the Night before* and he answered, Caesar* but the other he did
not know* for that it was dark, and he did not care to light a Candle for fear
of being discovered.

3. That Romme said, he lay abed, and that his Wife was up and saw the Butter
put in the Yard; and that after the Negroes were gone, he himself got up and
stowed it away under the Wood in an old House in the Yard.

4. That Caesar told Romme in her Presence, that they had got the Butter from a
Frenchman's near the Long-Bridge; and that he thought it belonged to a
Countryman, who had left it in the said Frenchman's Storehouse till it could be
sold, o^ shipped off in the Spring: Or Words to that Effect.

5. That the Cloth Coat Romme has now upon his Back with a Cape to it, was
stolen by Caesar from a Countryman's Boat near Hughson's, as she heard Caesar
tell Romme; and heard both Romme and Caesar ^ay, that Romme gave Caesar Ten
Shillings for it.

6. That Caesar and Prince had stolen Twenty Pieces of Eight our of Ellis's
Boat, and a speckled new Shirt and a Pair of new Stockings; which were brought
by them directly to Romme's House; and the Money they delivered into Romme's
Hands; and they told Romme, in her Hearing, where they had got it; and (...)
Pieces of Eight ^^^iece they gave to Romme, and ^^e rest they were to leave in
his Hands to drink out.

For the greater Solemnity of the Matter, Peggy also swore to and signed her
three several Examinations.

This History of Peggy's contained in her three Examinations corresponds so
exactly as to the Persons of, and Charge against, such Negroes (mentioned by
others) which she brings in Question; and also with the Ma^ter and
Circumstances of the Conspiracy, which the Reader may hereafter perceive from
the whole Current of Depositions and Examinations of Whites and Blacks; that
one may be very apt to conclude, she only shifted the Scene and laid it in a
wrong Place.

Peggy very well knew that Romme had fled the Country upon the Enquiry about
the Robbery at Hogg's; and probably that, finding her own Life in Jeopardy
concerning that Felony, as well as the Conspiracy, which she now was sensible
had got Air, and was like to be detected (...) and partly by her own frank Talk
and Openness with her Fellow Prisoner Price; she therefore might think it high
Time to provide for her own Safety, if she could do it so cheap as by amusing
us with a Narrative of the Plot; which, though real and true in other (...),
nevertheless she charged the Confederacy and (...) about it to have been held
solely at Romme's, us to the Knowledge she had concerning it; and so screen'd
the other Confederates. Hughson, his Wife and Family, at whose House
principally these Miscreants associated; though what she declared might be true
as to both Places, and there seems to be too much Reason to mistrust it was so;
yet the absolutely denied to the last, that she had ever heard any such
Discourse at Hughson's, though frequently interrogated very strictly to that
Purpose, and admonished in the most solemn Manner to declare the whole Truth,
if she intended to do herself any Service, or induce the Judges to recommend
her as an Object deserving of Mercy.

However, though there was little Reason to think that Peggy had told all that
she knew of the Matter: yet that what she had said was, in the main, true,
there seemed no Doubt, as said before, from the Correspondence between her
Story and that of the other Evidences, so far as they had discovered with
relation to the Conspiracy* the only Question was, Whether it was carried on at
Romme's, as well as Hughson's? From her lodging and Intimacy with the
Hughson's, she might be inclined to favor them, and lay the Scene at Romme's
only, who was then thought to be out of reach; and so make Merit of a
fallacious Sort of Discovery. But we had great Hopes, that if she should be
convicted upon the Indictment for the Conspiracy, she would come to a
Resolution to make an ingenuous Confession in order to save herself: And with
this Expectation, and considering what she had confessed already, the Judges
were induced to recommend her to the Lieutenant Governor for a Pardon, on this
Condition nevertheless, that it should not pass the Seal till she should be
thought amply to have merited it.

And a Pardon was accordingly prepared for her, ready to pass the Seal when it
should be sent for by the Judges.

Supreme Court. THURSDAY, 21st MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices,

Court opened and adjourned 'till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock,

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 22d MAY. A. M.
PRESENT, The Second Justice. Court opened and adjourned 'til four o'Clock in
the Afternoon. P. M. PRESENT, As before. Court adjourned 'til Tomorrow Morning
Ten o'Clock.

THE Grand Jury having been informed that Sawney,

NIBLET's Negro Boy, was brought to Town and committed upon Suspicion of being
a Confederate in the Conspiracy, they requested the Court that he might be
brought before them; which being accordingly done; upon Interrogation Sawney
denied he knew any Thing of the Fires, or any Conspiracy concerning them. The
Grand Jury for a long Time argued with him, to persuade (...) to speak the
Truth; being convinced from the Evidence of Mrs. Carpenter's Negro, A young
Negro Man not accused of the Conspiracy.
who already had been examined by them, that he could give some Account of the
Fires: They told him, if he would speak the Truth, the Governor would pardon
him, though he had been concerned in them; and this was the Time for him to
save hi^ Life by making a free and ingenuous Confession; or in Words to this
Purpose. He answered, That the Time before Hin^ing at the Conspiracy in 1712,
before noted on Peggy' s Examination and Confession, NUMB. I. 9 th May
after that the Negroes told all they knew, then the white People hanged them.
The Grand Jury assured him, that it was false; for that the Negroes which
confessed the Truth and made a Discovery, were certainly pardoned, and shipped
off: [which was the Truth] And upon this Assurance he began to open, and gave
the following Evidence.

Examination of Sawney, (NIBLET's Negro) Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT about Three Weeks before the Fire at the Fort, Quack (Mr. ROOSEVELT's
Negro) asked him to assist him to set the Fort o^ fire: and that he answered,
No, he would not run the P^sque of being hanged* but that he might go to Hell
and be d -- d.

2. That he heard the said Quack and Mr. PHILIPSE's Cuffee say, they would set
fire to Mr. Philipse's Storehouse.

3. That Cuffee said, D -- m him, that hang him or burn him, he would set fire
to the Town.

4. That William (Capt. LUSH's Spanish Negro) told him, that if they did not
send him over to his own Country, he would ruin the City.

5. That Curacoa Dick said, he would set fire to Mr Van Zant's Storehouse; and
that he was to be a Captain.

6. That Juan (Capt. SARLY's Negro) said, he would set fire, or help to set
fire to Hilton's House; and was to be Captain of the Fly Company.

7. That Francis (Capt. BOSCH's Negro) threw Fire into Mr. Banker's Yard, and
told him so.

8. That Anthony (Mr. PETER DE LANCEY's Negro Spaniard) said, he would burn his
Master's House.

9. That Augustine (Mc MULLEN's Spanish Negro) said, he would burn his Master's
House; and was to have been an Officer.

10. That Jack and an old Man Cook
(GERARDUS COMFORT's) said, they would set fire to their Master's House, and
assist in their Designs.

11. That Cuffee (GOMEZ's) said, he would burn his Master's House; and was to
have been an Officer in the Fly Company; said so to a Country Fellow, and he
heard him.

12. That just by C^entjes Market he heard Patrick (ENGLISH's Negro) and Cato
(Col. MOORE's) say, they would set fire to their Master's Houses.

13. That Fortune (WILKINS's) was to set fire to his Master's House.

14. Sawney being asked, What the Negroes proposed by rising and doing all this
Mischief? He answered, That their Design was to kill all the Gentlemen, and
take their Wives, and that Quack Roosevelt' s
and Cuffee (PHILIPSE's) were particular Persons that talked so.

15. That while he was in Jail, Francis (Capt. BOSCH's) said, he would kill him
if he told any Thing; and that when Mr. Mills came for him, To bring him down
to be examined.
several Negroes winked as he came out.

16. Being asked if Quack (Mr. WALTERS's Negro) was knowing or concerned in the
Affair? He answered, No, Though he was always cursing the White People.

17. Being asked, if he had much Acquaintance with Danby, the Governor's Negro,
and if he knew any thing? He answered, he had very little; and believed he did
not.

18. That Caesar (VAARCK's) that was hanged, was concerned, and was to have
been Captain of the Long-Bridge Company. It seems that the Conspirators had
divided the City, as it were, into two Districts; and the Confederates in each
were distinguished by the Denominations of the Fly-Boys, and the Long-Bridge
Boys; being remarkable Places, the one toward the East, and the other toward
the West End of the Town. -- This may be drawn from Cuffee' s Confession to
Arthur Price, set forth in his Deposition, 12th May NUMB. III. 6. And in these
Districts, it should seem, were several Companies; for several of the Officers
were appointed, Captains, and others; as appears not only by this, but several
other Examinations, as well as Depositions; and this seems to strengthen the
Evidence given by Peggy in her Examinations, that the Conspirators held their
Caballs at Romme' s as well as Hughson' s; the Former being more convenient for
the Long-Bridge Boys, as Hughson' s for the Smith' s-Fly Boys, for the
Mustering the Companies, with regard to the respective Distances from these
Homes. And if Peggy told the Truth as to Romme; these were the two LODGES in
the two Districts (as may be concluded from the Course of the Evidence) where
the Conspirators met; though the Ringleaders or Heads of the Negroes* such as
Caesar (VAARCK'^) Prince (AUBOYNEAU's) and Cuffee ((...)) might resort to both
Places* for transacting th^^e Deeds of Darkness and Inhumanity, in Combination
with the most flagitious, degenerated, and abandoned, the S^^m and D^^^s of the
White People, and others of worse Hearts if possible because of abler Heads,
who entitled themselves to be ten times more the Children of BELIAL than the
Negroes themselves.


19. That about a Fortnight before the Fire at the Fort, at Comfort's House, he
overheard Jack and the old Man (Cook) in Company with four other Negroes he did
not know, talk about the Rising of the Negroes; and Jack said, that there was
not enough of them, and he would stay longer; or to that Purpose.

Fortune (WILKINS's Negro) was apprehended, examined and committed.

The Examination of Fortune, Negro of JOHN WILKINS: Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT Quack, the Negro of John Roosevelt, about a Week or Ten Days before
the Fort was burnt, desired him the Examinant, to take a Walk with him (being
Sunday Afternoon) and that he went with him into the Common; where Quack left
him a little while, and went down into the Swamp, near the Powder House, where
he gathered something, and soon returned to him again.

2. That when Quack came back, the Examinant asked him what he had got? To
which Quack replied, he would not tell him; but asked him the Examinant to go
with him to the Fort, and he would give him some Punch, and see his Wife: That
accordingly they went to the Fort; though the Examinant says, that he did not
go very willingly.

3. That when they came to the Fort, Quack carried him into the Kitchen, where
he kept him 'til it began to grow dark; and then the Examinant told Quack, that
he must be going; for that the Watch would take him up: To which Quack
answered, that there was no Danger of that.

4. That Quack gave him no Punch, but asked him to drink a Dram; which the
Examinant refused; and so both came from the Fort, keeping Company 'till they
came by the House of Captain Pearse, where they parted; the Examinant returning
home through Beaver-Street, and Quack (as the Examinant believed) went back to
the Fort.

5. That what is above recited was all that passed between them at their first
Meeting, on Sunday Afternoon; but that two or three Days after, Quack met him
at the Pump near the great Slip, but nothing was said, or passed between them
remarkable.

6. That about three Days after that, he met with Quack again, near the House
of Mrs. Carpenter, at which Place, he ( Quack) asked him, why he was in such
Have, when he was last at the Fort? To which the Examinant answered as before,
that he was afraid of the Watch: To which Quack replied again, that there was
no Fear of that; and invited him to come to see him again at the Fort; but the
Examinant refused, saying that he had promised him Punch before, and gave him
none.

7. That about two Days before the Fort was burnt, he met with Quack again,
near the House of Mrs Rickets, where he told the Examinant, That in, a few Days
there would be great Alterations in the Fort: On which the Examinant asked him,
What Alterations? To which Quack answered, That the Fort would be burnt: The
Examinant on that, asked him, who would do it? Quack replied, You may ask
Niblet's Negro, and he will tell you. That he did ask Niblet's Negro, Who was
to burn the Fort? To which he answered, Quack, himself, and Cuffee (GOMEZ's)
they would do it.

8. That next Day after the Fire, the Examinant m^t Sandy (NIBLET's) who said
to him, We have done the Business; and the same Day he met Quack, who likewise
said to him, The Business is done: That when Quack told him, that the Business
was done, he asked him, What Business? To which Quack answered, The Fort is
burnt; don't you remember that I told you, there would be great Alterations in
the Fort? And that he told him at the same Time, that he (Quack) NIBLET's
Sandy, and GOMEZ' s Cuffee had done it.

9. Being further interrogated, whether he knew of any other Negroes concerned
in burning the Fort, besides those above named? he answered, That he knew not
of any but Sandy Quack, and Cuffee.

10. Being further asked, if he knew any Person concerned in setting Fire to
any of the Houses in the Town? he answered, "No."

Jamaica (ELLIS's Negro, a Fiddler) apprehended and committed.

Supreme Court. SATURDAY, 23d MAY.
PRESENT, The Second Justice.

Court opened and adjourned 'til Monday Morning Ten o'Clock.

Examination of Fortune, (WILKINS's) Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. II.
MEMORANDUM, The Examination foregoing was read over distinctly to the Negro
Fortune, who acknowledged it to be agreeable to the Evidence which he gave
Yesterday.

1. THE Examination being continued, the Examinant was asked (since he had time
to recollect) Whether he did not remember some others concerned in the late
Fires, besides Quack, Sandy and Cuffee? Gomez' s.
If he did, it was expected he should name them, without any Regard to Persons,
be they white Men or Negroes: He answered in the Negative; only that Sandy told
him a Day or two before his Master sent him to Prison, that his Master was
going to send him to Albany: On which the Examinant asked him, For what? To
which Sandy replied, I set Fire to the House three Times, but my Master
discovered, and extinguished it; and therefore is resolved to send me away.

2. That on Sunday, the Day before the Storehouse of Mr. Philipse was set on
fire in New-Street, being sent toward the Evening by his Master, on an Errand
to their Apprentice Boy, who lived in the Broad Way, he went by Way of
New-Street, where he saw Cuffee (Mr. PHILIPSE's Negro Man) and spoke with him,
who said, that he was going to one of his Master's Storehouses; on which they
parted; and he went to the Broad-Way, and tarried there 'til 'twas duskish:
That he returned the same Way; and as he came by the House of Capt. Phoenix, at
the Corner of New-Street, he saw Cuffee, and two Negroes more at some small
Distance from him, but being dark, who they were knew not.

3. That he spoke with Cuffee, and asked him, What he did there so late? To
which Cuffee made answer, That he waited there for his Master, who wanted
Something out of the Storehouse; and that he was to come and bring the Key with
him; on which they parted: But he believes one of the two Negroes was a
Spaniard, because when he left Cuffee, he heard one of them call to him, Venez
a qui Seignior.

4. The Question being asked the Examinant, Whether he was acquainted with
Hughson or his Family? He answered, That he had been frequently asked by Caesar
Prince and Cuffee (PHILIPSE's) to go there, but never did go; but was told that
they had a Dance there every other Night.

5. Being asked if he ever went to Romme's House, or knew what Negroes
frequently resorted thither? He answered, That he never went there himself, nor
was he acquainted with those that did.

SUNDAY, 24th MAY.
THIS Evening Will, or Gill (LUSH's) and Cuffee (GOMEZ's) Negroes were
committed.

Supreme Court. MONDAY, 25th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

Court opened and adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Examination of Sawney, or Sandy, Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. II.
He said,

1. THAT going by Comfort's House one Sunday Evening, about a Month before the
Fort was set on Fire, Jack called him in, where were about Twenty Negroes, of
which he only knew the said Jack and the old Man (COMFORT's Negroes) Fortune
(VANDERSPIEGLE's) Caesar (PECK's) Cato (COWLEY's) Sarah, BURK's Negro Wench,
and the only Negro Woman there.

2. The upon his coming into the Room, they gave him Drink, and then asked him
to burn Houses; and he not giving a ready Answer, Sarah swore at him, and the
Negroes did also; and with Knives in their Hands, that they frightened him, and
he was afraid they would kill him; and upon it, he promised he would, and would
burn the Slip-Market; and soon after he went home.

3. That he saw in his Master's Yard, Mr. Machado's Negro Wench called Diana,
put Fire in the Shingles of Mr. Machado's House; and on his telling of it, and
saying that it might be laid on him, she gave him Four Shillings to hold his
Tongue.

4. That Sarah and Fortune (Vandersp^igle' s) were to have set Fire to the Meal
Market.

5. That at their Meeting at COMFORT's House, they swore to be true to one
another, on the OATH, That God Almighty would strike them dead with the first
Thunder.

6. That being asked, if he used Hughson's and Romme's Houses with the other
Negroes? he said, He never was at either of their Houses. And who told him of
what he had related? he answered, That Jack did, and of the Spanish Negroes who
were concerned. Also, that if he did assist in setting the Fort on fire? he
answered, No; only before it, Quack did ask him to help him, and he gave the
Answer before mentioned; and that then Quack said, he would do it.

7. That Diana (Mr. MACHADO's Negro) in a Passion, because her Mistress was
angry with her, took her own young Child from her Breast, and laid it in the
Cold, that it froze to Death.

Caesar (PECK's) Cato (COWLEY's) Sarah (BURK's) Fortune (VANDERSPIEGLE's)
committed.

Examination of Sarah, (Mrs. BURK's Negro Wench) Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. I.
AFter Abundance of Questions upon Sawney's Evidence she said, she knew Nothing
of the Matter; evaded about her being at Comfort's House; but on confronting
Sawney with her, and PECK's Caesar, she at last said, That Sawney had, at the
Pump in the Neighbourhood^ said, supposing his Master had been angry with him,
G -- d d -- n all the white People; that if he had it in his Power, he would
set them all on Fire.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 26th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

AN ORDINANCE published for enlarging the Town to the last Tuesday in June next.

Court adjourned 'til four o'Clock in the Afternoon.

P. M. PRESENT, The Second Justice.

The Court opened and adjourned 'til Thursday 28th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the
Morning.

Jack and Cook (COMFORT's Negroes) apprehended and committed.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 28th MAY.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Quack, ROOSEVELT' s. Cuffee, PHILIPSE' s.


THESE Negroes were arraigned upon two Indictments, for a Conspiracy to burn
the Town, and murder the Inhabitants; and for two actual Burnings, the House in
the Fort, and Mr. Philipse's Storehouse; whereto they pleaded Not Guilty.

Ordered, Their Trials be on Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Court adjourned 'till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 29th MAY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Quack, ROOSEVELT's Cuffee, PHILIPSE's
Negroes.

On Trial upon two Indictments.

The Prisoners brought to the Bar.

JURY called and sworn, viz. Samuel Weaver, John Shurmur, The Panel being
mislaid, no more of the Jurors could be recollected.
John Lashier, Charles Arding, George Wits, Thomas Bohenna, Daniel Bonett,
John Robins,


THE Negro Quack having been indicted for wickedly, voluntarily, feloniously
and maliciously conspiring, combining and confederating with Cuffee and with
diverse other Negroes, to kill and murder the Inhabitants of this City; and also
for setting on Fire, burning and consuming the House of our Sovereign Lord the
KING, then standing at the Fort in this City; contrary to the Form of an Act of
Assembly By an Act of Assembly of this Province, passed in the fourth Year of
his present Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for the more effectual preventing
and punishing the Conspiracy and Insurrection of Negro and other Slaves; for
the better regulating them, and for repealing the Acts therein mentioned
relating thereto. It is enacted, (inter alia) That all and every Negro, Indian,
or other Slave, or Slaves, who after the Publication of this Act, shall murder
or otherwise kill (unless by Misadventure or in the Execution of Justice) or
conspire or attempt the Death of any of his Majesty's liege People, not being
Slaves; or shall wilfully burn any Dwelling House, Barn, Stable, Out-house,
Stacks of Corn or Hay; and shall thereof be convicted before three or more of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County where such Fact shall be
committed, one whereof to be of the Quorum, who are hereby authorized to hear
and determine the same, in Conjunction with five of the principal Freeholders
of the County, without a Grand Jury, seven of whom agreeing, shall put their
Judgment in Execution according to this Act; or before any Court of Oyer and
Terminer, or General Goal Delivery; he, she or they so offending, shall suffer
the Pains of Death, in such Manner and with such Circumstances as the
Aggravation or Enormity of their Crimes, in the Judgment of the Justices of
those Courts aforesaid or as in the Judgment of seven of the said Justices and
Freeholders, shall merit and require.
in such Case made and provided, and against the King's Peace.

The Negro Cuffee having been also indicted for wickedly, and c. conspiring,
and c. with Quack and diverse other Negroes, to kill and murder the Inhabitants
of this City; and also for setting on Fire and burning an Out-house belonging
to Frederick Philipse, Esquire; then standing and being in this City; contrary to
the Form of the said Act of Assembly, and against the King's Peace.

To which Indictments each of these Criminals, upon their Arraignment, pleaded
Not Guilty.

The Attorney General having opened the Indictments, spoke to the Court and
Jury as follows.

May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury:

THIS is a Cause of very great Expectation; it being as I conceive, a Matter of
the utmost Importance that ever yet came to be tried in this Province;
wherefore, before I call the Witnesses to prove these two Negroes guilty, I
shall briefly mention to you something concerning this Mystery of Iniquity in
general, how and where it was formed and carried on, and what Share these two
Criminals had in it.

Gentlemen,

Not only these two Negroes, but diverse others, and several white People, as
will appear to you in the Course of our Evidence, have been concerned with
these wretched Offenders, in this most wicked and devilish Conspiracy.

Gentlemen,

You will hear from the Mouths of our Witnesses, that these two Negroes with
diverse others, frequently met at the House of one John Hughson, in this City:
-- It was there they were harbored: -- There was the Place of their general
Rendezvous; and there it was this hellish Conspiracy was brooded, formed,
consented and agreed to: -- It was there that these two Negroes, and the Rest
of the Conspirators, came to a Resolution of burning the King's House at the
Fort, and this whole Town; and of murdering the Inhabitnats as they should come
to extinguish the Flames. -- CRIMES, Gentlemen, so astonishingly cruel and
detestable; that one would think they could never have entered into the Minds,
much less the Resolution, of any but a Conclave of Devils to execute; and yet
such Monsters in Iniquity are these two Criminals and the Rest of their
Confederates.

Gentlemen,

It will likewise appear to you, by Quack's own Confession (as we shall in the
Course of our Evidence for the King upon their Trial show you) That, in
Prosecution of such their most abominable Conspiracies, the King's House was by
him (at the Instigation of the Rest of the Conspirators) set on Fire, burnt
down, and consumed.

And then as to Cuffee, we shall show You, that he is doubtless Guilty of the
Charge against him.

Gentlemen,

The Eyes of the Inhabitants of this City and Province are upon You, relying
on, and confiding in You; that by the Justice of your Verdict in this Cause
this Day, the Peace and Safety of this City and Province may for the Future be
secured to them; which at present (until some Examples are made) seem very
precarious.

Gentlemen,

It is in You, the People in general, place their Hopes and Expectations of
their future Security and Repose; that they may sit securely in their own
Houses, and rest quietly in their Beds, no one daring to make them afraid.

I shall now proceed to examine the Witnesses for the King, to support the
Charge against each of these Criminals* and can make no doubt, Gentlemen, but
when you have heard the Evidence against them, you will for your own Sakes,
your Oaths Sake, and for the Peace, Quiet, and Security of your Country, find
these two Negroes Guilty.

Mr. Murray and Mr. Smith, of Council also for the KING.

Witnesses for the KING, called and sworn,
Mary Burton, Sarah Higgins, Jacobus Stoutenburgh, Arthur Price, John Peterson,
Daniel Gautier, Isaac Gardner, Mr. Hilliard, James McDonald,
Negro Evidence.
Fortune (Wilkins' s) Sandy (Niblet' s)
Evidence agaiost Cuffee.

MARY BURTON said, That Cuffee, with Caesar and Prince, the two Negroes hanged,
used frequently to meet at her Master's ( Hughson's) House; and that she heard
them often talk of burning the Fort, and that they would go down to the Fly,
and burn the whole Town: And that her Master and Mistress said, they would aid
and assist them as much they could,

That in their common Conversation they used to say, That when all this was
done, Caesar should be Governor, and Hughson (her Master) King.

That Cuffee used to say, that a great many People had too much, and others too
little; that his old Master had a great deal of Money; but that in a short
Time, his Master should have less and himself should have more.

That at the Meetings of the said three Negroes, Cuffee, Caesar and Prince, at
her Master's House they used to say in their Conversations, That when they set
Fire to the Town, they would do it in the Night; and as the White People came
to extinguish it, they would kill and destroy them.

That she has known at Times, seven or eight Guns in her Master's House, and
some Swords; and has seen twenty or thirty Negroes at one Time there; and that
at such large Meetings the three aforesaid Negroes Cuffee, Caesar and Prince,
were generally present and most active; and used to say, That the other Negroes
durst not refuse to do what they commanded them; and that they were sure they
had a Number sufficient to stand by them: That the Negroes swore, that if ever
she published or discovered their Design of burning the Town, they would burn
her whenever they met her.

Court. Did the Prisoner Cuffee ever threaten you so?


M. Burton. Yes, he, Caesar and Prince, and the Rest.


That about three Weeks after she came to Hughson's, which was about Midsummer
last, the Negroes were there talking of the Plot, and some of them said,
perhaps she would tell; and Cuffee said, No, she would not, he intended to have
her for a Wife; and then run up to her; and she had a Dishclout in her Hand,
which she dabbed in his Face, and he ran away.

That at a Meeting of the Negroes at Hughson's House, Hughson said they were
all sworn, Negroes and white People present, as she understood; that is,
Hughson, his Wife, Daughter Sarah, and Peggy; and that (...) Purport of the
Oath was, That they were not to discover the Secrets about firing the Fort,
(...) Houses at the Fly, and the whole Town; and about murdering the White
People: And Hughson said to, the Negroes present, which were Cuffee, Caesar and
Prince, Now you must take Care; for you are all sworn; and at the same Time the
Witness saw a Bible, as she took it to be, in Hughson's Hand, and when the
Witness came into the Room he laid it upon the Table; and then Caesar spoke to
the Witness and cautioned her not to tell; and Hughson made Answer, that she
dared not; and Cuffee said, D -- n his Bl -- d, if he would tell of any, if he
was burnt; and so said the other two Negroes; and so said Hughson, his Wife,
Daughter, Sarah, and Peggy.

ARTHUR PRICE said, That soon after Cuffee, the Prisoner at the Bar, came to
Goal, ^he had some Discourse with him over a Bowl or Tankard of Punch, being
confined in the same Room together, and that, amongst other Things, Cuffee
said, That he was one of the Geneva Club See Note upon Arthur Price' s
Deposition NUMB. III. before, Letter (p) Tuesday 12th May.
that was sworn, but being overcome with Sleep, he did not go to their Meeting
at that Time; That Cuffee asked the Witness, what could be the Reason that
Peggy was called down so often; that the Witness answered, he thought Peggy was
discovering the Plot about the Fire at the Fort. Cuffee replied, she could not
do that unless she forswore herself, he knew; for that he that had done that
was sworn after she was in Prison. That he left his Master's House in the
Evening and went along the Wharffs to the Fly Market, and waited there 'til one
Quack came out of his Master's House; they two went then to John Hughson's,
where they met no body but Hughson, his Wife, and Daughter Sarah; that they
called for a Tankard of Punch; that Hughson swore Quack three Times; that they
only drank out their Punch, and then went down to the Fly: That the Witness
thereupon said to Cuffee, that he believed he knew that Quack, and that he
lived with a Butcher; Cuffee replied, No, he does not live with a Butcher, but
he lives with a Painter, who lives within a few Doors of a Butcher; which
Painter's Name was Roosevelt, to the best of the Witnesses Remembrance.

-- That Cuffee told him, that Quack was married to the Negro Wench who is Cook
to the Fort (to the Governor) as the Witness understood him.

-- That Cuffee said, they were all (the Negroes as the Witness understood him)
to meet at Hughson's the Sunday after Quack was sworn, but some came and some
did not.

-- That the Witness asked Cuffee, how Quack did do it? (meaning the setting
Fire to the Fort) That Cuffee answered, he could not tell how he did it; but
that Quack was to do it, and did do it. --

-- That Cuff said, they were to meet and have a Club at Hughson's in the
Easter Hollidays, but that the d -- d Constables hindered them. --

-- That the Witness further asked Cuffee, whether he did not think that the
Firing would be sound out? and Cuffee replied, No, by G-d, he did not think it
ever would.

-- That the Witness asked Cuffee, whether he was not afraid that the two
Negroes who were to be executed the next Monday, would not discover the Fires
about the Fort and Town? Cuffee answered, he was not afraid of that, for that
he was sure they would be burnt to Ashes before they would discover it, he
would lay his Life on it. --

-- That afterward, upon further Discourse with Cuffee, he said, he wondered
why they only took up the Long Bridge B^^s, and not those of the Smith's Fly;
for he said, he believed, if the Truth was known, the Smith's Fly Negroes were
as much concerned as the others. --

-- That Cuffee said to the Witness, he knew he was to suffer Death, and
wondered why they did not bring him to his Trial; for he was sure he was to go
the Way the other Two went; meaning (as he understood him) the Negroes Caesar
and Prince hanged. --

-- That after Quack, the other Prisoner at the Bar, was committed, Cuffee
never mentioned any Thing concerning the former Discourse to the Witness; but
read, sometimes, and cried very much.

SARAH HIGGINS said, That on Sunday Afternoon, the Day before Col. Philipse's
Storehouse was set on Fire, she saw four Negroes lurking about the Garden
behind that Storehouse, but she knew but one of them, and him only by Sight,
which was Cuffee, the Prisoner at the (...). --

-- That in the Dusk of the Evening, she saw four Negroes in the same Garden
again; and they seemed to keep mostly about Kipp's Brewhouse, which was on the
Side of the Garden opposite to the said Storehouse; they shuffled about as though
they would hide themselves: She distinguished Cuffee to be one See Fortune' s
Examination, NUMB. II. 2. 23 d May.
that he had on a blue Coat; she imagined they were upon some ill Design, and
therefore got Capt. Phoenix's Sons to go along with her with Small Arms (Swords
she meant) and they went in with her, and searched Kip's Brewhouse for the said
Negroes, but did not find them. --

-- The said Cuffee had come several Times to the House where she used to live,
but she did not know before then, who he belonged to. --

JOHN PETERSON said, That when Col. Philipse's Storehouse was on fire, he went
to assist there, and coming up to it, he met Cuffee (PHILIPSE's) coming out of
the Door of the Storehouse, and he asked Cuff, what he did there? Cuff swore a
great Oath, and said, The People were looking for Negroes. That the Witness had
a Bucket of Water in his Hand, and gave it to Cuff, and bid him hand it; and he
took the Bucket from the Witness: That Cuff had a blue Coat on lined or faced
with red; and he knew his Voice very well when he answered him. The Witness
said, he used to work for Cuff's Master, and knew the Negro very well. --

-- That after the Fire at the Storehouse was extinguished, and the People were
drawn away from thence by a new Cry of Fire, Mr. Philipse (Cuff's Master) and
Mr. Chambers were standing together in the Garden near the Storehouse; and some
body came up and told Mr. Philipse, that they had taken Cuff out of his House
and were carrying him to Jail; and that it was he that had set the Fire: Mr.
Philipse made Answer, How can that be; I left him at home at Work making a Vane
for the Boat? That he the Witness standing near by and hearing that, said, I am
sure I saw him here just now at the Fire and spoke to him, and he answered me;
and I handed him a Bucket of Water.

JACOBUS STOUTENBURGH said, That he had known the Prisoner (Cuffee) by Sight a
long Time, but did not know who he belonged to.

That he (the Witness) went to assist at the Fire at Mr. Philipse's Storehouse;
and when that Fire was extinguished, he was at the Top of the Roof, when there
was another Alarm of Fire, which drew most of the People away from thence; when
some Body cried out, there were Negroes in the Storehouse; and there being a
great many Shingles pulled off the Roof, he could see down into them, and he
espied out Cuff in the Storehouse next to that on fire; and he was letting
himself down through the Laths in order to catch him, but he was hindered by a
Nail catching hold of his Breeches, or he believed he had taken him; that he
saw him leap out of the Window at the End of the Storehouse, and so made haste
away, leaping over several Garden Fences, and made his Escape; that then the
Witness went back with the Fire-Engines toward the City-Hall, and he heard the
People say, they had got the Negro; and then he said, if it was the same Negro
he should know him again; and there was a great Crowd of People bringing him to
Jail; and when the Witness saw him, he knew him to be the same (Cuffee) the
Prisoner at the Bar.

ISAAC GARDNER said, he saw Cuffee, the Prisoner at the Bar, at the Fire at the
Fort; the^ were Rows made of People in the Garden, Negroes as well as white
Men, from the Water Side through the Sally Port, in order to hand Water along to
the Fire; and the Witness observed, that when the Buckets come to Cuffee,
instead of handing them along to the next Man, he put them upon the Ground, and
overse^ them, by which Means the Ground which was at first dry and hard, became
so wet, that the Witness, who stood next him, was almost up to the Ankles in
Mud; and that the Witness then observed Cuff when the Flames of the House
bla^ed up very high, he huzzah'd, danced, whistled and sung^ and that the
Witness said to him, You black Dog, is this a Time for you to dance and make
game upon such a sad Accident: and he only laughed and whispered to Albany
(Mrs. Carpenter's Negro) who stood next him on the other Side: Whereupon the
Witness seeing Col. Moore, he said to him, he wished he would speak to those
Negroes, who only laughed, and made Game whenever he forbid them oversetting
the Water; and that Col. Moore did speak to them; but after his Back was
turned, they went on again in the same Manner, and so continued 'til they broke
up from the Fire.

Evidence affecting both Prisoners.

DANIEL GAUTIER, Carpenter, said, That he was one of the first who went up to
the Fort upon the Alarm of the Fire; when he came up toward it, he observed
that great Part of the Outside of the Roof was covered with Smoke, but none for
a considerable Distance from the End next the Chapel; when he came upon the
Ramparts next the Chapel, he was asking how it came, and was told it was
occasioned by the Plummer's carrying his Fire-Pot into the Gutter, which he was
mending between the House and the Chapel (as it was a Leaden Gutter which the
Plummer had been foddering to stop a Leak) and some Sparks of the Fire had
blown out of the Pot and catched the Shingles; whereupon the Witness seeing a
Ladder set up against the Gutter, he went up, and looking in at the dormant
Window at the End of the House toward the Chapel, he saw the Inside of the
Garret Roof in a Blaze, but there was no Fire-within (he believes) Twenty Foot
of the End he looked in at; wherefore he was then of Opinion it could not have
been occasioned by the Plummer's working there; for when the Fire broke out at
the Top of the Roof, it was, as he thought, Twenty Foot from the End next the
Gutter; and he observed the Fire broke out in several Places further; and the
Witness said, that upon his first View of it, he gave the House over for lost.

HILLIARD the Plummer said, That he thought the Fire could not have been
occasioned by his working there; for that he was very careful of the Fire he
carried up, and he had a Soldier to attend him; that his Fire-Pot was set on a
Board which laid over the Gutter from the Chapel to the House, but was much
lower than the dormant Window; that he did not think that any Spark^ of Fire
did fly out of the Fire-Pot; for it was an enclosed Pot like a Dark Lanthorn,
with an Opening only before to put his Soddering-Iron in, and that he was
careful to place the Back of it toward, the Wind: That the Fire was on the
other Side of the Roof, not near where he was at work.

Mr. Murray observed, That by an Act of Assembly of this Province, as in all
other His Majesty's Colonies where there are Negroes, the Negroes Evidence is
good against each other; and he read the particular Clauses in the Act to this
Purpose, and further remarked upon the Reasonableness and Necessity of this Law.

[The Title of it is mentioned in the Note upon the Abstract of the first
Indictment in this Trial.]

Negro Evidence affecting Cuffee.

FORTUNE (WILKINS's Negro) said, That on Sunday the Day before Col. Philipse's
Storehouse in New-Street, was set on fire, being sent by his Master toward
Evening, on an Errand to their Apprentice Boy, who lived in the Broad-Way, he
went by the Way of New-Sreet, where (...) saw Cuffee, and spoke with him, and
that he said he was going to one of his Master's Storehouses; on which they
parted; and the Witness went to the Broad-Way, and tarried there 'til it was
duskish; that he returned the same Way, and as he came by the House of Capt.
Phoenix, at the Corner of New-Street, he saw Cuffee again, and two Negroes more
at some small Distance from him, but who they were knew not; that he spoke with
Cuffee, and asked him what he did there so late? he answered, he waited there
for his Master, who wanted something out of the Storehouse; and that he was to
come and bring the Key with him; on which they parted again: But the Witness
believed one of the other two Negroes was a Spaniard, because when he left
Cuffee, he heard one of them call him, Venez a qui Seignior.

The Witness said, That he had been often asked by Caesar (VAARCK's) Pri^^^
(AUBOYNEAU's) and Cuffee the Prisoner, to go with them to Hughson's; but that
he never did, but was told they had a Dance there every other Night.

Negro Evidence affecting Quack and Cuffee.

SANDY said, That he heard Quack and Cuffee say, that they would set fire to
Mr. Philipse's Storehouse.

That Cuffee said, D -- m him, that hang him or burn him, he would (...) fire
to the Town.

Evidence affecting Quack only.

MARY BURTON said, That she had often seen Quack at Hughson's Door, along with
Cuffee (PHILIPSE's) Caesar (VAARCK's) and Prince (AUBOYNEAU's) but never saw
him within the House.

Negro Evidence against Quack.

FORTUNE, (WILKINS's) said, That Quack, about a Week or Ten Days (...) the Fort
was burnt, (being on a Sunday Afternoon) desired the Witness to take a Walk
with him; and that he went with him into the Common; where Quack left him a
little while, and went down into the Swamp, near the Powder House, where he
gathered something and returned to him again.

That when he came back, the Witness a^^ed him what he had got? He answered, he
would not tell him; but then asked the Witness to go down with him to the Fort,
and said he would give him some Punch: That accordingly the Witness went with
(...) to the Fort; though he did not go very willingly.

That when they came to the Fort, Quack carried him into the Kitchen, where he
kept him 'til it began to grow dark; and when the Witness told him he (...) be
going; for that the Watch would take him up: Quack answered, there was no
Danger of that.

That Quack gave him no Punch at the Fort, but asked him to drink a Dram; which
he refused; and so both came away from thence together, keeping Company 'till
they came to Captain Pearse's House, where they parted; the Witness returning
home, and Quack, as the Witness believed, went back to the Fort.

This was all that passed between the Witness and Quack at their first Meeting,
on Sunday Afternoon.

That about three Days after that, the Witness met Quack again, near Mrs.
Carpenter's, where Quack asked the Witness, wh^ he was in such Haste when he
was last at the Fort* To which the Witness answered, that he was afraid of ^he
Watch: Quack replied, there was no Fear of that, and invited him to come to see
him again at the Fort; but the Witness refused, saying that he had promised him
Punch before, and gave him none.

That about two Days before the Fort (...) burnt, he met Quack again near Mrs.
Richets's, where he (...) the Witness. That in a few Days there would be great
(...) in the Fort: The Witness asked him, What Alterations? To which Quack
replied, That the Fort would he burnt: The Witness asked him who would do it?
Quack replied, You may ask (...) Negro, and he will tell you. That the Witness
did ask Niblet's Negro, Wh^^ was to burn the Fort? To which he answered, Quack,
himself (Sandy) and GOMEZ's Cuffee, they would do it.

That the next Day after the Fire at the Fort, the Witness met Sandy (NIBLET's
Negro) who said to him, We have done the Business; and the same Day the Witness
met Quack, who likewise said to him, The Business is done: Thereupon the
Witness asked him, Wh^^ Business? Quack replied, The Fort is burnt; don't you
remember that I told you, there would be great Alterations (...) the Fort? And
Quack told him at the same Time, that he himself, NIBLET's Sandy, and GOMEZ' s
Cuffee had done it.

SANDY, alias Sawney (NIBLET's Negro) said, That about three Weeks before the
Fire at the Fort, Quack asked him, to set the Fort on Fire? and he the Witness
answered, No, he would not run the Risque of being hanged; but that he might go
to H -- ll and (...) d -- d That then Quack said, he would do it himself.

Against Quack and Cuffee.

Sandy said, That they two particularly talked of killing the Gentlemen, and
taking their Wives to themselves; that he heard Quack say, since he came to
Jail, that he burnt the Fort.

Witnesses called at the Request of the Prisoners.
Jacob Bursen, Peter Jay, Lewis Parent, Gerardus Be^kman, Mr. Niblet, Capt.
Row, John Roosevelt, and his Son. Catharine Wells, Adolph Philipse, Esquire;
ADOLPH PHILIPSE, Esquire; ( Cuffee's Master) said, That all he could declare about
him was, That the Afternoon his Nephew's (Col. Philipse's) Storehouse was off
fire, he had left him at home not long before the Alarm of the Fire at work,
sewing a Vane upon a ^oard for his Boat; that as to his Character he could say
Nothing.

Quack's Master (Mr. ROOSEVELT) and his Son both declared, That Quack was
employed most Part of that Morning the Fort was fired, from the Time they got
up, i^ cutting away the Ice out of the Yard; that he was hardly ever out of
their Sight all that Morning, but a ^^all Time while they were at Breakfast;
and that they could not think he could that Morning have been (...) their House
so far as the Fort.

(...) M^ DONALD being called and ^worn so the KING, (...),

That the Day the Fort va^^fired, he stood Sentry at the Gate about Eleven
o'Clock in the Morning, a little before or after; and that Quack came up to the
Gate and offered to come in; the Witness said, he knew that the Governor had
some Time before forbid him coming to the Fort, and therefore he scrupled to
let him in; Quack answered, that he was free now and had Liberty to come; and
so he let him past.

That not long before that, the Witness was posted one Night at the same Gate,
and Quack (the Prisoner) came up in order to go to the Governor's House; and
the Witness knew that the Governor had before then lately forbid him coming
there; and therefore opposed his Entrance within the Gate; but Quack was
resolute, and pushed forward whether he would or no, ^and said he would go in:
The Witness then bid him take what followed, and clubbed his Firelock and
knocked him down: That then Quack got up again and collar'd the Witness, and
cried out Murder; and the Witness was going to strike him again, and the
Officer of the Guard hearing a Bustle, called to the Witness, and forbid him
striking him any more; and Quack then run in a-Doors into the Governor's
Kitchen; and they went and fetched him, and turned him out of the Fort.

CAPT. ROW and BEEKMAN said, Quack was employed last Year to work at the New
Battery, and that he minded his Business very well.

The other Witnesses called at the Request of the Prisoners, said nothing more
material.

The Prisoners being asked, what they had to offer in their Defense; they
offered Nothing but peremptory Denials of what had been testified against them,
and Pro^^^^^tions of their Innocence

Mr. Smith then proceeded to (...) up and remark upon the Evidence, and spoke
as follows.

May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury*

THE Part assigned to me on this Trial, is to sum up the Evidence which you
have heard: And in general it may be observed, that a most horrid Conspiracy
has been formed, to burn this City, and to destroy the White People.

That great Numbers of Persons have been concerned (...) Plot; some Whites, and
many Blacks, (...) the Place of their general Rendezvous was the House of John
Hughson. That there Thirty Negroes have (...) at a Time. That their Meetings
were chiefly on Sundays. That Hughson, as the Captain of this HELLISH BAND,
swore himself and others into this Dark Confederacy. That some Arms and
Ammunition were provided by Hughson for the Purpose. And that the Night Season
was agreed on for the putting it in Execution.

Gentlemen,

No Scheme more monstrous could have been invented; nor can any Thing be
thought of more foolish, than the Motives that induced these Wretches to enter
into it! What more ridiculous, than that Hughson in Consequence of this Scheme,
should become a King! Caesar (now in Gibbets a Governor! That the White Men
should be all killed, and the Women become a Prey to the rapacious Lust of
these Villains! That these Slaves should thereby establish themselves in Peace
and Freedom in the plundered Wealth of their slaughtered Masters! It Is hard to
say whether the Wickedness or the Folly of this Design is the Greater: And had
it not been in Part executed before it was discovered; we should with great
Difficulty have been persuaded to believe it possible, that such a wicked and
foolish Plot could be contrived by any Creatures in Human Shape.

Yet, Gentlemen, INCREC^BLE as such a Plot would have seemed to have been, the
Event has in Part proved it to be REAL. Whence else could so many Fires have
been lighted up all around you in so short a Time, with evident Marks of wilful
Design? A Design that could not be executed but by several Hands.

Now, Gentlemen, the Prisoners at the Bar stand charged with being principal
Parties in this TRAGICAL DESIGN, and two of the prime Incendiaries; Quack for
burning his Majesty's House in the Fort, and Cuffee for burning Col. Philipse'
s Storehouse.

Afterward Mr. Smith proceeded to observe on the several Parts of the Evidence
against each of the Prisoners; particularly to show, that Cuffee was one of the
first of the Negroes that were sworn into the Plot to burn and murder; That he
appeared one of the most forward and active in promoting it; That Mr.
Philipse's Storehouse by diverse Circumstances appeared to have been wilfully
set on fire; That the Prisoner declared that he would burn that Storehouse;
That he was seen there before the Fire broke out, in a suspicious Appearance,
and was present at the Time of it; and at the Cry of some Person, that Negroes
were in the Storehouse, the Prisoner jumped out of a Window, leaped over two
Fences and ran away, etc. That he seemed exceedingly well pleased with the Fire
at the Fort; overset the Buckets that were filled with Water, and did what he
could to prevent the Extinguishing of that Fire, etc. And then inferred from
the Facts proved, and Circumstances attending them, that there appeared violent
Presumption of Guilt, which the Law esteems FULL PROOF.

As to Quack he observed, that the Witnesses proved that Quack was sworn into
the Conspiracy, and particularly that he had agreed to burn the Fort; that he
repeatedly said he would do it; That the Fire where it broke out could not
easily be accounted for from any accidental Cause; That the Prisoner had
confessed the Crime both before he was apprehended and since he had been in
Jail: All which amount to FULL PROOF.

The particular Remarks on the Testimony of the Witnesses to the several Points
before mentioned, are here omitted for the Sake of Brevity, and because the
Substance of the Evidence is before related.

Then concluded,

Thus, Gentlemen, I have distinguished the several Points of the Evidence
against the Prisoners, and have repeated the Substance of what each Witness has
said to each Point, and shall leave it to you to determine whether the
Prisoners are guilty or not. I have endeavored to lay no more Weight upon any
Part of the Evidence, th^n it will well bear; and I hope I have not urged any
Consequence which the Fact proved will not fairly warrant.

Gentlemen, The Prisoners have been indulged with the same Kind of Trial as is
due to Freemen, though they might have been proceeded against in a more summary
and less favorable Way. The Negro Evidence, in the Manner in which it has been
produced, is warranted by the Act of Assembly that has been read to you: The
Law requires no Oath to be administered to them; and indeed it would seem to be
a Profanation of it, to administer it to a Heathen in the legal Form. You have
seen that the Court has put them under the most solemn Caution, that their
small Knowledge of Religion can render them capable of. -- The Being and
Perfections of an ALMIGHTY, ALL KNOWING and JUST GOD, and the Terrors of an
eternal World, have been plainly laid before them, and strongly pressed upon
them. Unless they were professed Christians, and had taken upon them the Bonds
and Obligations of that Religion, their Word with the Cautions that have been
used, I suppose will be thought by you, as satisfactory as any Oath that could
have been devised, But, Gentlemen, the Court has no Power to administer an Oath
but in the common Form: And if Pagan Negroes could not be received as Witnesses
against each other* (...) (...) legal Form; it is (...) that the greatest
Villainies would often pass with Impunity.

Before I conclude, I cannot help observing to you, Gentlemen, that by diverse
Parts of the Evidence, it appears that this horrid Scene of Iniquity has been
chiefly contrived and promoted at Meetings of Negroes in great Numbers on
Sundays. This instructive Circumstance may teach US many Lessons both of
Reproof and Caution; which I only hint at, and shall leave the Deduction of the
Particulars to every one's Reflection.

Gentlemen,

The monstrous Ingratitude of this black Tribe, is what exceedingly aggravates
their Guilt. Their Slavery among us is generally softened with great Indulgence.
They live without Care; and are commonly better fed and clothed, and put to
less Labor, than the Poor of most Christian Countries. They are indeed Slaves,
but under the Protection of the Law: None can hu^t them with Impunity. They are
really more happy in this Place, than in the Midst of the continual Plunder,
Cruelty and Rapine of their Native Countries: But Notwithstanding all the
Kindness and Tenderness with which they have been treated amongst us; yet this
is the second Attempt of the same Kind, that this brutish and bloody Species of
Mankind have made within one Age. Alluding to the Negro Plot in 1712, before
noted upon Peggy' s Examination, NUMB. I. 9 th May.
That Justice that was provoked by former Fires and the innocent Blood that was
spilt in your Streets, should have been a perpetual Terror to the Negroes that
survived the Vengeance of that Day, and should have been a Warning to all that
had come after them: But I fear, Gentlemen, that we shall never be quite safe,
'til that wicked Race are under more Restraint, or their Number greatly reduced
within this City. But I shall not insist further, but refer you, Gentlemen, to
the Direction of the Court; and if the Evidence against these Prisoners proves
sufficient in your Judgment to convict them, I make no doubt but you will bring
in a Verdict accordingly, and do what in you lies to rid this Country of some
of the vilest Creatures in it.

Then the Jury were charged, and a Constable was sworn to attend them as usual;
and they withdrew; and being soon returned, found the Prisoners Guilty of both
Indictments.

The Prisoners were asked, What they had to offer in Arrest of Judgment, why
they should not receive Sentence of Death? And they offering nothing but
Repetitions of Protestations of their Innocence;

The THIRD JUSTICE proceeded to Sentence, as follows.

Quack and Cuffee, the Criminals at the Bar:

YOU both now stand convicted of one of the most horrid and detestable* Pieces
of Villainy, that ever Satan instilled into the Heart of human Creatures to put
in Practice: Ye, and the rest of your Color, though you are called Slaves in
this Country; yet are you all far, very far, from the Condition of other Slaves
in other Countries; nay, your Lot is superior to that of Thousands of white
People: You are furnished with all the Necessaries of Life, Meat, Drink and
Clothing, without Care, in a much better Manner than you could provide for
yourselves, were you at Liberty; as the miserable Condition of many Free People
here of your Complexion might abundantly convince you: What then could prompt
you to undertake so vile, so wicked, so monstrous, so execrable and hellish a
Scheme, as to murder and destroy your own Masters and Benefactors? Nay to
destroy, Root and Branch, all the White People of this Place, and to lay the
whole Town in Ashes.

I know not which is the more astonishing, the extreme Folly, or Wickedness, of
so base and shocking a Conspiracy; for as to any View of Liberty or Government
you could propose to yourselves, upon the Success of burning the City, robbing,
butchering and destroying the ^nhabitants; what could it be expected to and in,
in the Account of any rational and considerate Person among you, but your own
Destruction? And as to the Wickedness of it, you might well have reflected, you
that have Sense, that there is a GOD above, who has always a clear View of all
your Actions; who sees into the most secret Recesses of the Heart, and knows
all your Thoughts; shall he not, do ye think, for all this bring you into
Judgment; at that final and great Day of Account^ (...) Day of Judgment, when
the most secret Treachery will be disclosed, and laid open to the View; and
every one will be rewarded according to their Deeds, and their (...) of that
Degree of Reason, which God Almighty has entrusted them with.

Ye that were for destroying us without Mercy; Ye abject Wretches, the Outcasts
of the Nations of the Earth, are treated here with Tenderness and Humanity;
and, I wish I could not say, with too great Indulgence also; for You have grown
wanton with Excess of Liberty, and your Idleness has proved your Ruin; having
given you the Opportunities of forming this villainous and detestab^^
Conspiracy; a ^cheme compounded of the foulest a^^ blackest Vices, Treachery,
Blood-thirstiness and Ingratitude. -- But be not deceived, God Almighty only
can, and will proportion Punishments to Men's Offenses; Ye that have shown no
Mercy here, and have been for destroying all about ye, and involving them in
one General Massacre and Ruin, What Hopes can ye have of Mercy in the other
World? For shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? Let me in Compassion
advise ye then; There are but a few Moments between ye and Eternity; Ye ought
therefore seriously to lay to Heart these Things; earnestly and sorrowfully to
bewail your monstrous and crying Sins, in this your Extremity; and if ye would
reasonably entertain any Hopes of Mercy at the Hands of GOD, ye must show Mercy
here yourselves, and make what Amends ye can before ye leave us, for the
Mischief you have already done, by preventing any more being done. -- Do not
flatter yourselves, for the same Measure which you give us here, will be
measured to you again in the other World: Ye must confess your whole Guilt, as
to the Offenses of which ye stand convicted, and for which ye will presently
receive Judgment: Ye must discover the whole Scene of Iniqu^^y which has been
contrived in this monstrous Confederacy, the chief Authors and Actors, and all
and every the Parties concerned, aiding and assisting therein, that by your
Means a full stop may be put to this horrible and devilish Undertaking. And
these are the only Means left ye to show Mercy; and the only reasonable Grounds
ye can go upon, to entertain any Hopes of Mercy at the Hands of GOD, before
whose Judgment Seat Ye are soon to appear.

Ye cannot be so stupid surely, as to imagine, That when ye leave this World,
when your Souls put off these Bodies of Clay, Ye shall become like the Beasts
that perish; that your Spirits shall only vanish into the soft Air, and cease
to be: No, your Souls are immortal; they will live forever, (...) to be
eternally happy, or eternally miserable in the other World, where you are now
going.

If ye sincerely and in earnest repent you of your abominable Sins* and implore
the divine Assistance at this critical*Juncture, in working out the great and
momentous Article of the Salvation of your Souls; upon your making all the
Amends, and giving all the Satisfaction which is in each of your Powers, by a
full and complete Discovery of the Conspiracy, and of the several Persons
concerned in it, as I have observed to ye before; then and only upon these
Conditions, can ye reasonably expect Mercy at the Hands of God Almighty, for
your poor, wretched and miserable Souls.

Here ye must have Justice; for the Justice of human Laws has at length
overtaken ye; and we ought to be very thankful, and esteem it a most merciful
and wondrous Act of Providence, that your Treacheries and Villainies have been
discovered; that your Plot and Contrivances, your hidden Works of Darkness have
been brought to Light, and s^opt in their Carreer; That in the same Not which
you have hid so privily for others* your own Feet are taken; That the same
Mischief which you have contrived for others* and have in Part executed, is at
length fallen upon your own Pates; whereby the Sentence which I am now to
pronounce, will be justified against ye* which is.

That you and each of you be carried from hence to the Place from whence you
came, and from thence to the Place of Execution, where you and each of you
shall be chained to a Stake, and burnt to Death.

And the Lord have Mercy upon your poor, wretched Souls.

Ordered, That the Execution of the said Quack and Cuffee be on Saturday the
30th of this Instant, between the Hours of One and Seven o'Clock in the
Afternoon of the same Day.

Court adjourned till Tuesday the ad of June next, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

SATURDAY, 30th MAY.
THIS Day Quack and Cuffee were executed at the Stake according to Sentence.

The Spectators at this Execution were very numerous: About 3 o'Clock the
Criminals were brought to the Stake, surrounded with Piles of Wood ready for
setting ^ire to; which the People were very impatient to have done, their
Resentments being raised to the utmost Pitch against them, and no Wonder. The
Criminals showed great Terror i^ their Countenances, and looked as if they
would gladly have discovered all they knew of this accursed Scheme, could they
have had any Encouragement to hope for a Reprieve. But as the Case was, they
might flatter themselves with Hopes; They b^th seemed inclinable to make some
Confession; the only Difficulty between them at last being, who would speak
first. Mr. Moore, the Deputy Secretary, undertook singly to examine them both,
endeavoring to persuade them to confess their Guilt, and all they knew of the
Matter, without Effect, till at length Mr. Roosevelt came up to him, and said
he would undertake Quack, whilst Mr. Moore examined Cuffee; but before they
could proceed to the Purpose, each of them was obliged to flatter his
respective Criminal that his Fellow-Sufferer had begun; which Stratagem
prevailed: Mr. Roosevelt stuck to Quack altogether, and Mr. Moore took Cuff's
Confession, and sometimes also Minutes of what each said; and afterward upon
drawing up their Confessions in Form from their Minutes; they therefore
intermixed, what came from each.

Quack's Confession at the Stake*
He said,

1. THAT Hughson was the first Contriver of the wh^^^ Plot, and Promoter of it;
which was to burn the Houses of the Town; Cuffee said, to kill the PEOPLE.

2. That Hughson brought in first Caesar, VAARCK's (...) then Prince,
AUBOYNEAU's; Cuffee, PHILIPSE's; and others, amongst whom were Old KIP's
Negro's Robin, CHAMBERS's; Cuffee, GOMEZ's; Jack, CODWEIS's; and another short
Negro, that Cooks for him.

3. That he Quack did fire the Fort; that it was by (...) lighted Stick taken
out of the Servants Hall, about Eight o'Clock at Night; that he went up the
back Stairs with it* and so through Barbara's Room; and put it ^^ar the Gutter,
betwixt the Shingles, and the Roof of the House.

4. That on a Sunday Afternoon, a Month before the Firing of the Fort, over a
Bowl of Punch, the Confederates at Hughson's (amongst whom were the
Confederates abovenamed, Albany, and Tickle alias Will, Jack and Cook,
COMFORT's; Old Butchell 'Twas not discovered who this Negro was.
Caesar, and Guy HORSFIELD's; Tom, VAN RANTS's; Caesar, PECK's; Worcester, and
others) voted him Quack, as having a Wife in the Fort, to be the Person who
should fire the Fort The Read^r may perceive hereafter that the whole Current
of the Testimony of the Witnesses, White and Black, do agree, that there was a
great Meeting of the Negroes at Hughson' s on a Sunday Evening, about a Month
before the Fort was burnt.
Sandy and Jack CODWEIS's; Caesar, and Guy HORSFIELD's; were to assist him in
it.

5. That Hughson de^^^ed the Negroes to bring to his House what they could get
from the Fire; and Hughson was to bring down Country People in his Boat to
further the Business; and would bring in other Negroes.

6. That forty or fifty to his Knowledge were concerned, but their Names could
not recollect [ the Mob pressing and interrupting]

7. That Cuffee, GOMEZ's; and Caesar, PECK's; fired Van Zant's Storehouse.

8. That Mary Burton had spoke the Truth, and could name many more.

9. Fortune, WILKINS's; and Sandy had done the same; and Sandy could name the
Spaniards, and say much more; Which Cuffee particularly confirmed.

10. Being asked what View Hughson had in acting in this Manner? He answered,
to make himself rich.

11. That after the Fire was over, Quack was at Hughson's House, Jack,
COMFORT's, a leading Man, Hughson, Wife and Daughter present, and said, the Job
was done; meaning the Fire: That he went frequently to Hughson's House and met
there Tickle and Albany.

12. Quack said his Wife was no Ways concerned, for he never would trust her
with it: And that Denby The Governor's Negro Boy, Quack's Wife was the
Governor's Cook.
knew nothing of the Matter.

13. Jamaica, ELLIS's, not concerned that he knew of; but was frequently at
Hughson's with his Fiddle.

14. Said, he was not sworn by Hughson, but others were. If this be true, then
he was sworn there by somebody else: But Cuff told Arthur Price, as he says,
That he (Cuff) went down with Quack to Hughson' s, and that Hughson swore Quack
three times. See Price's Deposition, NUMB. III. 1. 12 th May. Perhaps Cuff said
no more than that he saw Quack sworn there three times. From what had been
discovered of this Villainy at that Time, and for some Time afterward, it was
the general Opinion, that Hughson was the Contriver and chief Schemist of the
Conspiracy; and these two Negroes, it should seem, kn^w no better: And from
Quack' s being carried to Hughson' s, and sworn three times there, Price might
naturally enough conclude he was sworn by Hughson himself, and understand
Cuffee so. It will scarce be expected a Witness should depose precisely the
same Words which pass in a long Discourse, but the Substance of them only,
according to his own Apprehension and Remembrance. -- It was thought that the
false, ensnaring, damnable Notion ( which had no doubt with great Art and
Industry been instilled into these Wretches) of the Obligation of that Infernal
Oath, which had been so often administered to them by Hughson and other
principal Conspirators, was the true Reason of the Backwardness and Hesitancy
of these Criminals, and their alternately insisting upon the P^nctilio of the
others opening first. -- The Hopes and Promises of Paradise for doing the
Devil's Work, is no new Invention of worldly, wicked and bloodthirsty
Politicians, for involving such as they are pleased to style Heretics, in
Butchery and Destruction.

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum, (...) Fa^^^l




Mc DONALD (the Witness against Quack upon the Trial) at the Stake ^esired Mr.
Pinhorne to ask Quack, Whether he had wronged him in what he had said of him at
Court? He answered, No; it was true he did pass him at the Fort Gate, about
Eleven o'Clock that Morning.

The Witness then went up to him himself, and asked him the same Question; and
he answered the same as to Mr. Pinhorne, That he had not wronged him; and
further, That he Quack thought the Fort would have been on Fire the Night
before; for that he had taken a Firebrand out of the Servants Hall, and carried
it up into the Garret, on the Seventeenth at Night [ St. Patrick's] and when he
came up the next Morning into the Garret, he found the Brand alight, and blew
it, and then went away again. (...) may seem incredible: But those who have
experienced ^icco^y or Walnut Firewood, which has the Preference of all other
Firewood in this Country (amongst other Reasons for the Durableness of the
Coal) have affirmed, that they have known when a Fire has been laid up, and
Brands-ends or Sticks put by in the Chimney Corner, that they have mouldered
slowly away, and been often found alive Twenty-four Hours afterward; which is
much longer than this Brand lay upon the Beam inthe Garret at the Fort; and
this was in a Place where little or no Air came to quicken it; and where it lay
being upon a Beam next the Shingle Roof, 'twas possible there might have been
some Leak which had made it damp o^ wet, which by the Brand and the Ashes
mouldering from it, was at length dried by the Time Quack came up there the
next Morning about Eleven o'Clock, which was about eleven Hours after the Brand
was laid there, by Quack's Account; and the Ashes which in that Time had
moulder'd from the Brand, might possibly guard the Beam from the Fire 'til
Quack had blown them away, and enlivened the Brand, by which Means it might
afterward take Effect; though it was about an Hour and an Half after this that
the Smoke and Smother appeared on the Outside the Roof. But however it was,
these were declared by the Witness Mc Donald, to be Part of Quack's dying
Words* whatever Objections they may be liable to* -- And Quack it seems was the
Occasion of this Mischief.


Cuffee' s Confession at the Stake.
He said,

1. THAT Hughson was the first Contriver of all; and pre^^'d him to it: That he
Cuffee was one of the first concerned.

2. The Fire was first intended to begin at Comfort's Shingles, and so go
through the Town.

3. Old KIP' s Negro; Robin, CHAMBERS's; Jack, COMFORT's; and Cuffee, GOMEZ's;
were of the Conspirators; Albany and Tickle were concerned.

4. That he was sworn, and Caesar and Prince Vaarck' s and (...).
also by Hughson.

5. That Cuffee, GOMEZ's; and Caesar, PECK's; burnt Van Zant's Storehouse.

6. That Sandy set fire to Mr. Machado's House; Niblet's Negro Wench can tell
it; and Becker's Bess This Wench not apprehended.
knows it.

7. That he set fire to the Storehouse as sworn against him; that when his
Master went to the Coffee-House, he ran out of the other Door, and went the
Back-way into the Storehouse, having lighted Charcoal in his Pocket between two
Oyster Shells; he put the Fire between the Ropes and the Boards, and leaving it
on Fire, went home.

8. That Hughson's People were to raise a Mob to favor the Design

9. That the Evidence Peterson, did see him: That Fortune did see him the Night
before: See Fortune' s Evidence on the Trial and his Examination, NUMB. II. 2.
Saturday, 23d May. -- Also Sarah Higgins' s Evidence on the Trial.


10. That Fortune knew and was as deeply concerned as he; and Sandy was
concerned, and knew the Spaniards. i. e. The Spanish Negro Conspirators.
And (being asked) did confess there was a Design to kill the People, but not
told to all. So that Cuff was more in the Secret than others engaged.
And,

11. Said, There was about Fifty concerned; This seems to be a random Guess
under great Confusion; for it is most probable he knew more.
and that all were co^^^^^ed that a Constable who stood by North; the
Whits^ntide before he had interrupted a Number of Negroes feasting at Hughson'
s, and ^udgell'd them away.
had seen at Hughson's House.

After these Confessions were minuted down (which were taken in the Midst of
great Noise and Confusion) Mr. Moore desired the Sheriff to delay the Execution
-- ^il the Governor could be acquainted therewith, and his Pleasure known
touching their Reprieve; which, could it have been effected, 'twas thought
might have been a Means of producing great Discoveries: But from the
Disposition observed in the Spectators, 'twas much to be apprehended, there
would have been great Difficulty, if not Danger, in an Attempt to take the
Criminals back. All this was represented to his Honor: And before Mr. Moore
could return from him to the Place of Execution, he met the Sheriff upon the
Common, who declared his Opinion, that the carrying the Negroes back would be
impracticable; and if that was his Honor's Order, it could not be attempted
without a strong Guard, which could not be got time enough: And His Honor's
Directions for the Reprieve being Conditional and Discretionary; for these
Reasons the Execution proceeded.

Cuffee, from the Course of the Evidence, was one of principal Negroes who was
first initiated into this detestable Enterprise; one that Hughson, no doubt,
found so thoroughly qualified for his Purpose, that he might put more than
ordinary Confidence in him, and entrust him with a greater Share of this
Infernal Secret than others of his Color; but more especially as to the
Parties Blacks and Whites engaged in it. It was notorious Cuff had a great deal
of idle Time upon his Hands; perhaps more than a^^ Negro in Town; consequently
was much at large for making frequent daily or nightly Visits at Hughson's the
head Lodge, where these Deeds of Darkness and Inhumanity were brooding; and
therefore indeed must of Course have become personally acquainted with a
greater Number of the Conspirators, than others who had fewer of the like
Opportunities.

Quack had a Master who kept him (...) employed, a Days at least, and it seems
he was a much later Conve^^; for Cuff in his Discourse with Arthur Price about
^he Person that set Fire to the Fort. [ See Price' s Deposition again, NUMB.
III. 1. 12 th May: For the manner of this Secret's bolting from Cuff to a
Fellow-Prisoner, as there related, is somewhat remarkable, and may be very apt
to induce one's Credit] Price having told Cuff. That he had heard Peggy had
discovered about the Fire at the Fort, Cuff replied, She could not do that
unless she for swore herself, he knew; for he that had done that was sworn
[perhaps ^s meant into the Conspiracy also, but at least he must mean to do
that Fact] "after Peggy was in Prison." And so Cuff goes on and tells the
Circumstances of his meeting Quack (it should seem according to Appointment)
and carrying him down to Hughson's and Hughson's swearing (...) three Times (to
make sure of him) -- This could not (...) ^een long before the Fort was burnt
down. For Peggy was Committed on the 4th March, and the Fort burnt the 18th,
but intended for the 17th at Night; and by Cuff's saying, She could not do that
^^^less she forswore herself, he knew. i. e. ( Cuff must mean) She could not
discover the Person who set Fire to the Fort. -- Quack must therefore have been
engaged in this wicked Purpose, but a little before he put it in Execution; and
though Hughson and his Advisers, might have known long before, that Quack was a
fit Tool for them, and as such make very much of him, because he had
Pretensions to go to the Fort, and stay there a-Nights with his Wife; and though
probably he might have been engaged and sworn into the General Design of the
Conspiracy (which was the Artifice, it seems, they constantly practiced upon a
Negro's saying Yes. i.e. consenting to their abominable Proposals) yet they
might not think it so safe to attempt the Engaging him for this particular
Fact, long before the Time calculated for the Execution of it; for they might
apprehend some Danger in that: During a long Interval, there would have been
more Hazard of his talking of it, and perhap^ to his Wife; who, if she had any
Influence over him; and had happened to have a Grain of Honesty, or Gratitude
toward her Master and his Family, she possibly might have persuaded him to
make a Merit to them both, of detecting this infernal Confederacy; and
therefore, it seems most propable the Devil and his Agents deferred the
Attempting his Resolution upon this grand Article, till some short Time before
the Execution of it; if they found Quack of a pliable Disposition, they might
think if they could upon a Surprise, fix him in the Persuasion that such an
Oath was at all Obligatory; by the Reitterating of it, they might make the
deeper Impression upon him, and fix him the more firmly, and that there would
be less Hazard of his Failure in the Engagement, the shorter Time he had to
cool and deliberate upon it.

Both these Criminals declare their Opinions. That Hughson was the first
Contriver and Promoter of the Conspiracy, so far as they knew of the Matter:
(...) the first Promoter as to them, they were sure of: (...) Cuff (...) it
several years before, as will appear hereafter. But if the foregoing
Reflections are right, surely they import a (...) of Policy beyond what could
be expected from an (...) Cobbler, Hughson!

However, from these Confessions, there was another Satisfaction beyond these
Criminals Acknowledgment of their own Guilt, that the Testimony o^ Mary Burton,
Sandy and Fortune, Negroes, Witnesses upon their Trial, (upon the Credit
whereof chiefly these Criminals were convicted) was by them particularly and
expressly confirmed in the Midst of Flames, which is the highest Attestation:
And by Consequence from the Whole. Arthur ^^^ice's also; who was the First that
gave Information that Quack was the Person who set Fire to the Fort, and Cuffee
had told him so.

Upon the Confessions of these two Criminals, one of the Judges issued a
Warrant for apprehending the Negroes on Nassau Island by them impeached,
belonging to Mr Codweise, and the Hor^fields; and in Con^equence thereof, and
the Orders given to the Constables in Town, the following Slaves were committed
this Evening, viz.

Harry, KIPP's Tickle alias Will, Caesar, ISRAEL HORSFIELD's, Cambridge,
CODWEISE's, Guise alias G^lick, TIM. HORSFIELD's, Tom VAN RANTS's, Worcester,
VARIA^'s,
The other Negroes mentioned in the Confessions, were in Custody before.

MONDAY, 1st JUNE.
Examination of Sandy (Niblet's Negro) Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. III.
He said,

1. THAT he heard by Capt. Lushe's House, about (...) of the Spaniards (about
fourteen Days before the Fort was burnt) say, That if the Captain would not
send them to their own Country, they would ruin all the City; and the first
House they would burn should be the Captain's; for they did not care what they
did: He (Sandy) stood by A^dern's Door, and they did not (as he thought) see
him; and that (pointing to Lushe's House) they said, D -- m that Son of a B --
h, they would make a Devil of him; which was the first Time he ever heard of
the Conspiracy.

2. That the second Time, Quack Roosevelt' s Negro.
called to him by C^entjes Market, and told him, he wanted to speak to him; and
said, will you help to burn the Fort; and answered, as he said at the Trial,
and in (...)] Examination before the Grand Jury: Said, that Quack told him, the
first Time he met him, he would make an End of him.

3 That the third Time at Comfort's House, one Sunday, when COMFORT's (...)
called to him to come to him, and he went (...) Sarah (BURK's Negro Wench) d --
ned him and bid him drink, having before refused.

4. That there was a great Number of Negroes present, and about six Spanish
Negroes among them; but none of them were the same that he saw at Lushe's. --
That he did drink.

5. That COMFORT's Jack brought out about eleven Penknives, which were rusty;
some complained their Knives were dull and would not cut, which they went to
sharpen on a Stone: Jack (COMFORT's) said, his Knife was so sharp, that if it
came across a white Man's Head, it would cut it off: On which he ( Sandy)
said, if you want to fight, go to the Spaniards, and not fight with your
Masters.

6. That they asked him (and COMFORT's Jack in Particular) if he would help to
burn some Houses: He cried: On which Jack (COMFORT's) said, D -- m you, do you
cry? I Will cut your Head off in a Hurry; and surrounded him: On which Burk's
Wench said, he deserved it, if he will not say Yes; on which he consented, and
said Yes: Whereupon they did not threaten him; but bid him say nothing to Black
or White about it, and every one would do his Part, and take a Round, and fire
the Town.

7. That Jack (COMFORT's) said, they had not Men enough this Year, but next
Year would do it. Every one present was to set his Master's House on fire
first; and then do the (...) at once, and set all the Houses on fire in the
Town; which when they had done, they would kill all the white Men, and have
their Wives for themselves.

8. That Mr. MOORE's Cato, Caesar (PINTARD's Negro) Mr. JAY's Brash; Jack (that
is in Goal) knows him if he sees him: TODD's Dundee. CHAMBER^'s Robin, Patrick
(ENGLISH's) PECK's Caesar, a C^^^mantee, COWLEY's Cato, COMFORT's Maph alias
Ca^^, KIP' s Harry, and three Country Negroes, who called COMFORT's Jack,
Uncle, and Brother, and Cousin. [This Meeting was about a Fortnight before the
Fort was burnt] BEN MOORE's Tom, LEFFERT's Pompey, DUANE's Prince, COMFORT's
old C^rmantee Woman^* VAARCK's Caesar (hanged) were there also; the Root^ being
quite full.

9. That Augustine, and WILKINS's Fortune were to burn their Master's Houses;
which he heard them say, as they were talking by Frazier's Corner, about a
W^^l: before the Fort was burnt.

10. That at the aforesaid Meeting at Comfort's, Jack, the old Man, and the old
Woman, and Three of the Spaniards were sworn, to the Effect, That the first
Thunder that came, might strike them dead, if they did not stand to their Words.

11. That they asked him to come again the next Day to be sworn; the rest said,
they would come to be sworn the next Day.

The Negroes Tom, BEN. MOORE's; Prince, DUANE's* and Pompey, LEFFERT's,
apprehended and committed.

Examination of Fortune, (WILKINS's Negro) Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. III.
He said,

THAT Quack Roosevelt' s Negro.
one Sabbath Day Afternoon, asked him to walk into the Fields, and pressed him
to it: Third Meeting told him, he should see a great Alteration at the Fort;
and told him, that they were going to burn the Fort, threatened that some of his
Mates would poison him if he told.

2. That Niblet's Boy Sandy.
told him that GOMEZ's Negro was to assist in burning the Fort.

3. That he heard Quack talk to GOMEZ's (Negro) Cuffee on the Dock, that he
must meet him to burn the House; and if White People came, to shoot them with
Pistols; which was before the Meeting him by Mr. Rickets's.

4. That when he asked Sandy (NIBLET's Negro) who was to burn the Fort? He
answered, Quack, himself, and GOMEZ's Cuffee; that he asked him ( Sandy,
NIBLET's Negro) to be concerned; and that he said to Quack, he had no mind to
be hanged, he might go to H-ll, and be d -- d.

5. That he never talked to any Negro but Quack and NIBLET' s, about any
Conspiracy, or Design of Firing.

6. Never heard of a House where they met; nor knew Hughson. -- Cuffee however
has asked him to go down to a House by the North River, and dance with them;
but he never did.

Examination of Sarah (BURK's Negro Wench) Before One of the Judges, Mr.
Chambers, and others.
NUMB. II.
She said,

1. THAT one Sunday Afternoon, about Four or Five of the Clock, she was at
Comfort's House in the Kitchen, about five Weeks before the Fort was fired; a
great many Negroes sitting round the Table, betwixt Twenty and Thirty, amongst
whom were Dr. Fisher's *Harry, Bagley's *Jem^y, Widow Schuyler's tall slender
*Negro, Abeel' s Mulatto *Tom, Niblet's Sandy: She staid there about an Hour,
and Rum was there; Mrs. Clopper's *Betty, Robin (Chamber's Negro) Mr. Clark
on's * Tom, Groesbeck's Miak (an impudent Toad) Rowe's Father Tom, Old Frank,
Philiple's Cuffee, Teller's *Sarah, Vaarck's Caesar, Auboyneau's Prince,
Comfort's Jack, Comfort's cook, Comfort's *Jenny, Jack a busy Man, Patrick
(English's Boy) Hunt's Warwick, (a Negro that cut his Throat) Todd's Dundee,
Brinkerhoff's *Tom, Pintard's Caesar, old Kip's Harry, Teneyck's Bill,
Silvester's *Sambo, a tall Negro, living at John Dewit's (a Stranger)
Kierstead's Braveboy, John Hunt's *Jenny, the Long-Bridge Boys. Patrick
(English's Boy) used to say, let us go to Romer's For Romme's
-- Alsteyn's *Cato, Shurmur's Cato, Leffert's Pompey: Comfort's Jack, and
others sharpened their Knives, and said, they would go and set fire along the
Docks; Comfort's Jack proposed the Fort first; Cook said, No, they would find
them out if they did: Every one was to set their Master's House on fire;
Clopper's Betty carried her there: They swore, and said, They wished Thunder
might strike them to the Hearts if they told. Three Negroes, viz. Comfort's
Two, and old Harry swore; Cuffee was swore, and Caesar, Auboyneau's Prince; All
that made the right Bargain swore; the Rest were to come the next Day: De
Lancey's Anthony there, and Roosevelt's Quack: Comfort's Jack drew out his
Knife and threatened the Negro of Niblet, on which Sandy consented.

2. That they whetted their Knives on a stone, some complaining, that their
Knives were rusty and blunt; and some said, that their Knives were sharp enough
to cut off a white Man's Head: That they would kill the white Men, and have the
white Women for their Wives.

3. That on a Dispute between them, Quack was pitched upon to fire the Fort;
others having refused, Quack undertook it: Curacoa Dick there, and consented.

4. Confessed she threatened Niblet's Negro, and bid them cut his Head off, if
he did not drink.

5. That she believed there were Spanish Negroes there; and that Mr. Moore's
Cato was there, and consented.

Notwithstanding this Wench had brought so many Negroes in Question, at length
when the Examination came to be read over to her, she retracted, and excused
many Persons: saying, such a One, and such a One went away before ^^e Bargain
was made: i. e. Before they took this execrable Oath.
Those she so excused are marked with an *Asterisk. -- This was one of the
oddest Animals amongst the black Confederates, and gave the most Trouble in her
Examinations; a Creature of an outrageous Spirit: When she was first
interrogated upon this Examination about the Conspiracy, she absolutely denied
she knew any Thing of the Matter; threw herself into most violent Agitations;
foamed at the Mouth, and uttered the bitterest Imprecations, if ever she was at
Comfort's in her Life, or knew where his House was: But at length, being
apprized that there was positive Evidence against her, that she was at a
Meeting there amongst the Confederates, when they were talking of the
Conspiracy; and that she was one consenting and advising thereto; and some
Items also given her of her Behavior and Expressions with respect to Sandy;
See Sawney' s Examination. NUMB. II. 1, ^, 4. Monday, 25th May.
and that she could entertain no Hopes of escaping with Life, or recommending
herself to Mercy, but by making an ingenuous Confession and Discovery of the
whole Truth of what she knew of the Matter, and the Persons concerned; she
stood aghast and silent for some Time; but at last declared she would tell the
whole Truth, and began to open; and so by Degrees grew more calm, and seemed
abundantly easier after disburthening Part of the Secret: But her Conduct was
such upon the Whole, that what she said, if not confirmed by others, or
concurring Circumstances, could not deserve entire Credit. -- She, no doubt,
must have had extraordinary Qualifications to recomend her to the Confidence of
the Confederates; for she was the only Wench against whom there was strong and
flagrant Evidence of having consented to and approved this execrable Project.

About Noon this Day, the Undersheriff informed the Recorder, that John
Hughson wanted to speak to the Judges, and (as he had said) to open his Heart
to them, and they should know more; and was very urgent that some Body should
go to them to acquaint them therewith. Pursuant to Hughson's Desire, the
Recorder did go up to the City-Hall in the Afternoon, expecting he would make
some material Discovery; and having sent for him, he was asked, What it was
that he wanted with the Judges? Whereupon Hughson asked if there was a Bible,
and desired that he might be sworn: He was told, that no Oath would be
administered to him; if he had any Thing to say, he had free Liberty to speak;
but (...) wanted very much to be sworn: The Recorder thereupon reproached him
with his wicked Life and Practices, debauching and corrupting of Negroes, and
encouraging them to steal and pilfer from their Masters and others; and for
showing his Children so wicked an Example, training them up in the Highway to
Hell: He further observed to him, that (...) his Wife, and Peggy, then stood
convicted of a Felony for receiving stolen Goods of Negroes; and that now
nothing remained but to pass Sentence of Death upon them, and to appoint a Day
for their Execution for that Fact; but that it was now determined, that he, his
Wife and Daughter, and Peggy, should also be tried for being confederated in
this most horrible Conspiracy; that the Evidence would appear so strong and
clear against them in this Particular, that there was little doubt of their
being all convicted upon that Head also; that it would appear undeniably that
he was a Principal, and head Agent in this detestable Scheme of Villainy; the
chief Abettor, together with the rest of his Family, of this execrable and
monstrous Contrivance for shedding the Blood of his Neighbors, and laying the
whole City in Ashes, upon the Expectation of enriching himself by such an
inhuman and execrable Undertaking: He therefore admonished him, if he would
entertain the least Hopes of recommending himself to the Mercy of God Almighty,
before whose Tribunal he must soon appear, that he would ingenuously tell the
Truth, and lay open the whole Scene of this dark Tragedy, which had been
brooding at his House; and discover the several Parties he kn^w to have been
engaged in it; in doing which he would make some Atonement for his past
Villainies, by preventing that Slaughter, Bloodshed and Devastation which he and
his Confederates had intended; Or the Recorder expressed himself in Words to
this Purpose. But hereupon Hughson put on a soft smiling Air of Innocence upon
his Countenance, again desiring that he might be sworn; which was refused him;
and he then declared, he knew Nothing at all of any Conspiracy; and called God
to witness his Protestations, that he was as innocent with respect to that
Charge as the Child unborn, and also his Wife, Daughter, and Peggy for aught he
knew.

Whereupon the Recorder remanded him to Jail.

Whether the Man was struck with a Compunction, or flattered himself with
making a Merit by his Discovery, and thereby recommend himself to Mercy, and
that he should so save his Life; or whether he imagined, that if he could be
sworn, and then make the most solemn Protestations with the Sanction of an
Oath; that this would give such strong Impressions of his Innocence, as might
make Way for his Escape* what his View was ca^ only be guessed at: But several
who were by him in the Jail when he expressed his Desire of having the
Opportunity of speaking with the Judges, as above mentioned, concluded from his
Condition and Behavior at that Instant, that he was then really in Earnest to
lay open this Scene of Villainy; but 'twas thought that in two or three Hours
afterward, (...) Wife or others had got the better of him, and prevailed with
him to change his Mind, and desist from his former Resolution.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 2d JUNE.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices. Court opened and adjourned to Four
o'Clock in the Afternoon.

P. M.

PRESENT, The Second Justice.

The KING, against John Hughson, Sarah, his Wife, Sarah, their Daughter,
Margaret Sorubiero, alias Kerry.


THE Prisoners were arraigned upon an Indictment for a Conspiracy, for abetting
and encouraging the Negro Quack to burn the King's House in the Fort: To which
they severally pleaded, Not Guilty, etc.

Note, This is the first Indictment against Sarah the Daughter, and the Second
against the Rest.

Court adjourned to Thursday the 4th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 4th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, Sarah their Daughter, Margaret
Sorubiero, alias Kerry.


ON Motion of Mr. Attorney General, and Prisoners were brought to the Bar, and
arraigned on an Indictment for a Conspiracy, for counselling, abetting, etc.
the Negro Cuffee, to burn Mr. Philipse's Storehouse; and all pleaded Not Guilty.

Note, This was the second Indictment against the Daughter, and Third against
the Rest.

And this being the Day appointed for their Trials on the former Indictments,
whereof they had due Notice; the Court proceeded thereupon as follows.

The KING, against The Same, On Trial upon three Indictments:

Clerk in Court. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. O Yes! Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep Silence upon Pain of Imprisonment.


Crier. If any One can inform the King's Attorney General for this Province, or
the Inquest now to be taken on the Behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, of
any Treason, Murder, Felony, or any other Misdemeanour committed or done by the
Prisoners at the Bar, let them come forth, and they shall be heard; for the
Prisoners stand upon their Deliverance.


Clerk. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. O Yes! You good Men that are impannelled to enquire between Our
Sovereign Lord the KING and John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, Sarah Hughson the
Daughter, and Margaret Sorubiero, alias Kerry, the Prisoners at the Bar, answer
to your Names, etc.


Clerk. John Hughson, Sarah ^he Wife of John Hughson, Sarah the Daughter of
John Hughson, Margaret Sorubiero, alias Kerry, held up your Hands.

These good Men that are now called and here appear, are those which are to
pass between you and Our Sovereign Lord the King, upon your Lives or Deaths* if
you, or any; or either of you, challenge any of them, (...) must speak as they
come to the Book to be sworn, and before they are sworn.


Court. You, the Prisoners at the Bar, we must inform you, That the Law allows
you the Liberty of challenging peremptorily Twenty of the Jurors, if you have
any Dislike to them, and you need not give your Reasons for so doing; and you
may likewise challenge as many more as you can give sufficient Reasons for; and
you may either all join in your Challenges, or make them seperately.


The Prisoners agreed that John Hughson should challenge for them all.

[At Hughson's challenging (among others) a young Gentlemen, Merchant of the
Town, Peggy seemed out of Humor, and intimated, That he had challenged one of
the best of them all; which occasioned some Mirth to those within the Hearing
of it.]

T^^ ^^^soners having peremptorily challenged Sixteen, the following JURORS
were sworn.

Edward Man. Robert Benson. Henry Lawrence. Samuel Burdet. Charles Arding.
Thomas Wendover. John Lasher. John Troup. Frederick Becker. Francis Roswell.
Evert Byvanck. Peter Verger^^^.
Clerk. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. O Yes! Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep Silence upon Pain of Imprisonment.


Clerk. You Gentlemen of the Jury that are sworn, look upon the Prisoners and
hearken to their Charge.


The Substance of the Three Indictments follows.

The FIRST INDICTMENT sets forth, That Hughson, his Wife, and Kerry, and also
three Negroes, to wit* Caesar, Prince and Cuffee, had on the third Day of March
then last past, entered into a most detestable and felonious Conspiracy,
Combination and Confederacy with each other, (...) set on fire and burn the
House of our Lord the KING, which then was standing and being at the Fort
within this City; and also this whole Town, and to kill and destroy the
Inhabitants thereof: And that they had feloniously and of their Malice
aforethought, procured, abetted, counseled and encouraged diverse Negroes and
other Persons to the Jurors then unknown, to set on fire, burn and consume the
King's House, and diverse other Houses and Buildings within this City: And that
the said Negroes and other Persons then unknown, in Pursuance of their being so
procured, abetted, counseled and encouraged as aforesaid, by Hughson, his Wife
and Kerry, and Caesar, Prince, and Cuffee; voluntarily, feloniously and of
their Malice aforethought, and with Intent to burn down and consume the greater
Part of this Town; had set on fire the King's House; the Dwelling House of
Agnes Hilton; the Storehouse of Frederick Philipse, Esquire; and diverse other
Houses and Buildings within this City: And that the King's House being so set
on fire, ^^s burnt down and consumed; and that the said Dwelling House,
Storehouse, and other Houses, being so set on fire as aforesaid, were in Part
burnt down and consumed.

The SECOND INDICTMENT sets forth, That the Negro Quack, on the Eighteenth Day
of March, in the Fourteenth Year of his Majesty's Reign, did of his Malice
aforethought, wickedly, maliciously, voluntarily, wilfully and feloniously set
on fire, burn, and wholly consume and destroy a certain Dwelling House of Our
Lord the King, which was then standing and being at the Fort within this City:
And that Hughson, his Wife and Daughter, and Kerry, before the Felony and
Burning aforesaid was done and perpetrated, of their Malice aforethought,
wickedly, maliciously, voluntarily, wilfully and feloniously, did counsel,
abet, procure and encourage the said Quack, the Felony and Burning aforesaid
committed and perpetrated, to commit and perpetrate. And*

The THIRD INDICTMENT sets forth, That the Negro Cuffee, the sixth Day of
April, in the Fourteenth Year of his Majesty's Reign, did, of hi^ Malice
aforethought, wickedly, maliciously, voluntarily, wilfully and feloniously set
on fire and burn a certain House belonging to Frederick Philipse, Esquire; which
was then standing and being within this City: And that Hughson, his Wife and
Daughter, and Kerry, before the Felony and Burning aforesaid was done and
perpetrated, of their Malice aforethought, wickedly, maliciously, voluntarily,
wilfully and feloniously did counsel, abet, procure and encourage the said
Cuffee, the Felony and Burning aforesaid committed and perpetrated, to commit
and perpetrate, in most pernicious Example of all others in the like Cases
offending; contrary to the Form of the Statutes in such Case made and provided,
and against the Peace of Our Sovereign Lord the KING, his Crown and Dignity.

To which three several Indictments the Prisoners, Defendants in each The First
of these three Indictments for the Conspiracy was found against Hughson, his
Wife, and Kerry, soon after their Conviction of having received stolen Goods,
knowing them to have been such, and some Time before the Trial of the Negroes
Quack and Cuffee; and before it was discovered that Quack had set fire to His
Majesty's House in the Fort, or Cuffee to Mr. Phillipse' s Storehouse, or that
Sarah (Hughson' s Daughter) was known to be a Party concerned in the Conspiracy.
have been arraigned, and thereto pleaded, Not Guilty.

The Attorney General, after opening to the Court and Jury the Charge against
the Prisoners, proceeded as follows.

Gentlemen,

I SHALL, in the first Place, on the Trial of the Prisoners upon these
Indictments, show you, That the Negroes Quack and Cuffee, mentioned in the
Second and Third of them, have already been tried, found guilty, and executed
for the Felonies and Burnings which these Indictments charge them to have ^^en
guilty of: That they confessed the same at the Place of their Execution; And
that the Evidence which Mary Burton gave against them at their Trial, was true,
in every Respect.

In the next Place, Gentlemen, I am to show you, what Share each of the
Prisoners at the Bar had in these most horrible Felonies.

And, Gentlemen, as each of these four Criminals have acted their several Parts
in this black, this monstrous, and tragical Scene; I shall begin with opening
the Evidence against the Three last named, that I may conclude with my
Observations on the Charge against Hughson himself, and set him and his most
detestable Actions in their proper Colors before you.

First then, I shall prove to you, Gentlemen, from full and clear Evidence,
That these Prisoners are all Guilty of the whole Charge against them. -- That
they entered into a most wicked and hellish Plot to set on fire, and lay in
Ashes the King's House, and this whole Town; and to kill and destroy the
Inhabitants as they should come to secure their Effects, and extinguish the
Flames. -- That this dreadful Conspiracy took its first Rise at Hughson's House
in this City. -- That it was there formed, set on ^o^t, and carried on: From
what had hitherto come to Light, it could be supposed no otherwise, ^ut that
Hughson was the principal Contriver of this monstrous Scheme; but nevertheless,
it was there principally hatched and brought to Maturity, as may be gathered
from the Wh^le of the Discovery.
And that the Three last named Criminals, as well as Hughson himself, were all
present at diverse Meetings of great Numbers of Negroes, and the Rest of the
Conspirators there for that Purpose. -- That there these three Criminals were
all sworn into this abominable Plot, and at those Meetings, joined with Hughson
in exciting and encouraging Quack and Cuffee, and the Rest of the Negroes, and
other their wicked Confederates, to commit these execrable Felonies.

I shall now endeavor to represent to you the Part which Hughson himself has
acted in this Tragedy.

Gentlemen,

It will appear to you in the Course of the Evidence for the King upon this
Trial, That John Hughson was the chief Contriver, Abettor, and Encourager of
all this Mystery of Iniquity: -- That it was He, who advised and procured
secret and frequent Meetings of the Negroes, and the Rest of the Conspirators,
at his House, there to form and carry on these horrible Conspiracies. -- That
it was he that swore the Negroes Quack and Cuffee, with many others, and
himself too, into this direful Plot. -- That it was He who devised Firebrands,
Death and Destruction to be sent among you. -- That it (...) who received of
Negroes Twelve Pounds in Money -- stolen Money, no doubt (and what he could not
but know to be so) to buy Arms and Ammunition, to kill and destroy his
Neighbors: And that He, in Pursuance thereof, made a Journey on Purpose to
buy, and did procure Arms and Ammunition; and hid them in his House, against
such Time as this unnatural and bloody Scheme should be ripe for Execution.

Gentlemen,

Such a Monster will this Hughson appear before you, tha^ for sake of the
Plunder he expected by setting in Flames the King's House, and this whole City,
and by the Effusion of the Blood of his Neighbors* -- He -- Murderous and
Remorseless He! -- counseled and encouraged the Committing of all these most
astonishing Deeds of Darkness, Cruelty, and Inhumanity. -- Infamous Hughson! --

Gentlemen* This is that Hughson! whose Name, and most detestable Conspiracies
will no doubt be had in everlasting Remembrance, ^o his eternal Reproach; and
stand recorded to latest Posterity, -- This is the Man! -- his, that Grand
Incendiary! -- That Arch Rebel against God, his King, and his Country! -- That
Devil Incarnate! and chief Agent of the old Abaddon of the infernal Pit, and
Regions of Darkness.

Gentlemen,

Behold the Author, and Abettor of all the late Conflagrations, Terrors, and
Devastation that have befallen this City. -- Was not this Hughson sunk below
the Dignity of human Nature! -- Was he not abandoned to all Sense of Shame and
Remorse! -- To all Sense of Feeling the dreadful Calamities He has brought on
this City, and his fellow Creatures; He would from a Consciousness of his own
Guilt. -- His monstrous Guilt! -- be so confounded, as not able to look up, or
stand without the greatest Confusion of Face, before this Court and Audience;
but would openly confess his, and the Rest of his wretched Confederates Guilt,
and humbly ask Pardon of God, the King, and his injured Country.

Gentlemen,

We shall now call, and examine the Witnesses, who will prove the Crimes
charged upon each of these four Criminals; And when we have so done, I do^^^
^^t but you will find of them Guilty.

Of COUNCIL for the KING with Mr. ATTORNEY GENERAL

Esqrs.
JOSEPH MURRAY, JAMES ALEXANDER, WILLIAM SMITH, JOHN CHAMBERS,
These Gentlemen severally assisted in the Examining the Witnesses; taking down
their Evidence, and remarking such Things as they thought most material to be
observed upon to the Court and Jury.

WITNESSES for the KING.

Mr. GEORGE JOSEPH MOORE, Clerk in Court, and Mr. JOHN ROOSEVELT called and
sworn.

Mr. MOORE proved the Arraignment and Conviction of the two Negroes, Quack and
Cuffee, for burning the King's House in the Fort, and Mr. Philipse's
Storehouse.

Both Witnesses prove the Confessions of those two Negroes, taken in Writing at
the Stake, That they declared, That Hughson was the first Contriver and
Promoter of the Plot, and urged them into it; and that they should never have
thought of it, if he had not put it into their Heads, That Quack said, the Plot
was to burn the Houses.

Mr. MOORE proved Cuffee's Confession, more particularly taken in Writing by
him, That, as Quack said, The Plot was to burn the Houses of the Town; Cuffee
said likewise, that the Plot was to kill the People; And that both of them
declared, That what Mary Burton had given in Evidence upon their Trials, was
true; and that she could name many more [Persons] concerned: All which Mr.
Roosevelt confirmed. See the Confessions before annexed to the Trials of Quack
and Cuffee, 30th May.


Court to the Prisoners. Have you any Questions to ask these Witnesses?

The Prisoners answered Nothing.

JOSEPH NORTH, PETER LYNCH, and JOHN DUNSCOMB, called and sworn.

NORTH and LYNCH proved, That there was a Cabal of Negroes at Hughson's last
Whit^ontide was Twelve Months, Ten, Twelve, or Fourteen of them; which they
having Intelligence of, went down thither in order to disperse them; and when
they came there, they went into the Room where the Negroes were round a Table,
eating and drinking, for there was Meat on the Table, and (...) and Forks; and
the Negroes were calling for what they wanted; and at their Appearance the
Negroes were making off as fast as they could; and North laid his Cane about
them, and soon cleared the Room of them: They said, they thought that Peggy was
waiting upon them, and had a Tumbler in her Hand for them to drink in; that
they saw the Negro, who was then hanged in Gibbets Vaarck's Caesar.
at that Time waiting at the Door, in order to get in, as they took it: That
they had heard frequent Complaints of Hughson's entertaining Negroes there;
They said, that John Hughson was at the Door, and as they came away, they
reproached him therewith; and he answered them, that he could not help it,
'twas his Wife's Fault.

Court to the Prisoners* Have you any Questions to ask these Witnesses?


They had Nothing to ask.

MARY BURTON called and sworn.

She said, That there were many Negroes frequently at Hughson's at Nights, ever
since she came to the House, eating and drinking; that she has seen Twenty and
Thirty at a Time there; but most of a Sunday; that the Negroes used to bring
Provisions there, particularly Carpenter's Negro; His Mistress was a Butcher.
that Hughson, his Wife and Daughter, and Peggy, used, at such Meetings,
frequently to be amongst the Negroes; and that they talked of burning the Town
and killing the People.

[While Mary Burton was delivering her Evidence, Hughson and his Wife were
crying and bemoaning themselves, and embracing and kissing their Daughter
Sarah; and Hughson the Father intimated what Care they had taken in Catechizing
her, and the rest of their Children, and teaching them to read the Bible, and
breeding them up in the Fear of the Lord. And in order (as may be supposed) to
move Compassion in the Court and Jury, Hughson's Wife brought thither a Sucking
Child at her Breast, which was ordered to be taken away.]

Mary Burton further said, That at such great Meetings of Negroes at Hughson's,
Caesar (VAARCK's) and Prince (AUBOYNEAU's) Negroes (that were hanged) and
Cuffee (PHILIPSE's) were usually amongst them.

That Hughson SWORE the Negroes into the (...); and the Hughsons swore
themselves and Peggy; That one of Hughson's Daughters carried a Bible up
Stairs, and the Hughsons carried the Negroes into a private Room; and when they
came down again to the rest of the Negroes, Hughson said, they were all sworn;
but the Witness said, she did not see them sworn.

[Upon the Witness saying, that a Bible was carrid up Stairs, Hughson's Wife
interrupted, and said to her, as if much surprised, Now you are found out in a
great Lie; for we never had a Bible in the World: Which the Audience
(considering what her Husband declared but a little before) were much diverted
with.]

Mary Burton further said, That she saw VAARCK's Caesar pay John Hughson Twelve
Pounds in Silver Spanish Pieces of Eight, to buy Guns, Swords and Pistols, and
that Hughson thereupon went up into the Country; and when he returned, he
brought with him seven or eight Guns and Swords, and that he hid them in the
House; that she had seen a Bag of Shot, and a Barrel of Gunpowder there; that
the Negroes were sworn to burn the Fort first; and then they were to go down to
the Fly, and so burn the whole Town; and the Negroes were to cut their Masters
and Mistresies Throats; and when all this done, Hughson was to be King, and
Caesar (VAARCK's) Governor: That the Negroes used to say to Hughson, when she
(the Witness) was in the Room, and heard them talking of burning the Town and
Killing the People, that perhaps she (the Witness) would tell; and Hughson
said, No, that she dared not; and the Negroes swore, that if she did, they
would burn, or destroy her.

That the Hughsons often tempted her to swear, and offered her Silks and Gold
Rings, in order to prevail with her; but she would not. Some Time after the
Trial was entered upon, the Town was again alarmed by a Fire in the Lots behind
the Storehouses of Messrs. Philipses; a boarded Stable was set on fire on the
Outside, by some B^ands Ends being placed against it; but it was suppressed
before it had got to any Head, though the Incendiary was undiscovered. This was a
bold Attempt after all that had happened, and was conjectured to be a Scheme
contrived in Favor of the Hughsons, etc. upon a Supposition, that the Court
might be put into so much Confusion upon the Occasion, that those Criminals
might thereby have an Opportunity of making their Escape; or at least the Trial
be thereby interrupted and postpon'd: But if these were their Designs, they
were disappointed. -- This Note rather than it should be omitted remains here
misplaced, as it was at first; because some People had affirmed, (...) is Fire
happened upon the Hughson' s Trial for the Conspiracy; whereas upon further
Enquiry and Recollection, when the Printer had gone beyond it, 'twas found to
have been on the 6th of May, the Day the Hughsons were tried upon the Felony
for receiving stolen Goods.


[The Prisoners asked the Witnesses no material Questions, such only as seemed
rather to imply their Guilt; but some of them threw up their Hands, and cast up
their Eyes, as if astonished, and said, she was a very wicked Creature, and
protested all the said (...)]

ARTHUR PRICE called and sworn.

His Evidence was the Substance of his Depositions, NUMB. I. II. III. of the 3
d, 7 th and 12 th May, as to what passed in Conversation in the Jail between
him and Peggy, (...) Hughson the Daughter, and Mr. Philipse's Cuffee
seperately; and therefore to avoid Repetition, the Reader is referred to them.

JOHN SCUHLTZ, JAMES MILLS, PETER LYNCH, CORNELIUS BROWER, and -- DUNSCOMB,
called and sworn.

Schultz said, That Cuffee (PHILIPSE's Negro) being carried with Quack
immediately after their Conviction into the Prison, where Hughson, and his Wife
were, as he came in, said to Hughson, we may thank you for this, for this is
what you have brought us to; and that Cuffee owned the next Day to the Witness
that he had said so.

Mills said, That Cuffee said to Hughson, I may thank you for this, for you
have brought me to this.

Brow^ said, That Cuffee said, I thank you for this, you have brought me to
this.

Dunscomb, Schultz, Lynch and Mills, all said, That last Monday Hughson said,
he wanted to speak to the Judges, and open his Heart to them, and they should
know more, and was very urgent that some body should go to the Judges to
acquaint them therewith.

Court to the Prison^ (...) If you have any Questions to ask these Witnesses,
now is your Time to propose them; or if you have any Witnesses to produce to
your Characters, let them be called.

Witnesses for the Prisoners.

ELEANOR RYAN, Mr. BLANCK, and PETER KIRBY called.

Eleanor Ryan W^^^ of Andrew Ryan, a Soldier, afterward charged as one of the
Conspir^tor^, and committed.
said, That she and her Husband lodged two Months in Hughson's House last
Winter; That she saw no Negroes there but Cuff (Philips^'s) and the Negro that
was hung in Gibbets, three or four Times; That she never saw any Entertainments
there for Negroes; but said, that she lay sick in (...) Kitchen almost Day and
Night all that Time.

Mr. Blanck said, He saw Hughson give a Dram to a Negro, but that he thought
him a civil Man.

Peter Kirby said, That he knew nothing of the Character of Hughson's House,
but he never saw (...) Harm of him*

FRANCIS SILVESTER, called, and sworn for the KING.

He said, That when John Hughson lived next Door to him upon the Dock, he kept
a very disorderly House, and sold Liquor to, and entertained Negroes there* he
had often seen many of them there at a Time, at Nights, as well as in the Day
Time: Once in Particular he remembers, in the Evening he saw a great many of
them (...) a Room, dancing to a Fiddle, and Hughson's Wife and Daughter along
with them. That he often reproached Hughson with keeping such a disorderly
House, which very much offended his Neighbors; and Hughson replied to him,
that his Wife had persuaded him to leave the Country, wh^^^ he subsisted his
Family tolerably well by his Trade He was by Trade a Shoemaker.
and his Farm; but his Wife said, (...) would live much better in Town, though
then he wished they had returned to the Country again, for he found their Gains
were so small* and his Family so large, that they soon run away with that they
had got; That his Wife was the chief Cause of having the Negroes at his House;
and ^e was afraid some (...) would happen to him, and that he should come to
(...) End: Or that Hughson expressed himself in (...) to that Effect.

Court to the Prisoners, Have you any more Witnesses.

Prisoners. Yes, Sir; We desire that Adam King, and Gerardus Comfort, may be
called.

ADAM KING, and GERARDUS COMFORT, called.

Ki^^ said, That of late he took Hughson's House to be (...); for he saw whole
Companies of Negroes ^laying at Dice there; and that Winc^^p's Negro once
carried a Silver Spoon there that was (...) down; that he saw no Harm of (...)
himself.

Attorney General [to Hughson] Have you any more such Witnesses as this?

(...) said, That he says nothing amiss of him; his Business (...) and that he
was often abroad, and went very seldom to his House.

Court. Mr. Comfort, you are a next door Neighbor to Hughson; you live
opposite to him, and surely you must have seen Negroes go in and out there
often, as the Witnesses have testified, that there were frequent Caballing^
with the Negroes there; pray what have you observed of the House since Hughson
came to live there?

Comfort. I have seen nothing amiss; I have seen no Harm there.

Court. [to the Prisoners] Have you any more Witnesses? Hughson. We have no
more, Sir.

Court. Then now is the Time for you the Prisoners, severally to offer what you
can in your own Defense, that then the Council for the King may sum up the
Evidence.

Then the Prisoners severally spoke in their Justification in their Turns;
protested their Innocence, and declared that all the Witnesses said against
them was false; and called upon God to witness their Asseverations.

Mr. SMITH then proceeded as follows.

May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury;

YOU have heard the Charge against the Prisoners at the Bar contained in their
several Indictments, to which they have each of them pleaded Not Guilty. Mr.
Attorney has opened the Nature of the Evidence on the Part of the King, and the
Witnesses on both Sides have been heard, and I cannot think that one among you
is in any Doubt concerning what Verdict you ought to give upon the Oath which
you have taken.

Gentlemen,

Scarce any Thing can be conceived more horrid than the Crimes charged on the
Prisoners. A Scheme so black and hellish, as the Burning of this City and the
Murdering of the Inhabitants of it! One would hardly imagine could enter into
the Thought, much less be har^^^^ed in the Breast of any human Creature; but
more wonderful is it, that so great a Number, should unite and conspire in so
detestable a Piece of Villainy: And yet, Gentlemen, there seems Nothing wanting
to complete the Evidence that so barbar^us, unjust and cruel a Design has been
set on foot; of which we have had in Part an occular Demonstration, in (...)
late Fires that have been enkindled in diverse Parts of this City; several of
which have been lighted up in one Day, to the Amazement and Terror of the
People.

Gentlemen,

Though the Circumstances attending these Fires convinced every body that the
Most of them did not proceed from accidental Causes, but from a malicious and
wilful Design; yet it was long before any considerable Discovery could be made,
of the Authors and Abettors of this most wicked and destructive Undertaking:
Yet at length by the Blessing of Heaven, and the uncommon Diligence of the
Magistrates, we trust that (...) the principal Authors of this Mischief, and
the Ringleader of it, are now before you.

Upon this Mr. Smith proceeded to a distinct Consideration of the Charge, and
in observing upon the Evidence of the Witnesses (which was in Substance as
before set forth) distinguished the Proofs against each of the Prisoners; which
for Brevity sake are here omitted.

And then concluded,

THUS, Gentlemen, nothing remains to be considered of by you, but the Credit of
the Witnesses; against which I can see no reasonable Objection: If they are to
be believed, then the Prisoners are Guilty; and you now behold, at this Bar,
the Authors, Abettors, and Contrivers of those destructive Fires which your
Eyes have seen: Two of the immediate Agents of those Villainies, have already
suffered a deserved Punishment, and died confessing their Crimes. The Witnesses
declare the principal Contriver of those Mischiefs to be that wicked Man John
Hughson, whose Crimes have made him blacker than a Negro; the Scandal of his
Complexion, and the Disgrace of human Nature! Whose Name will descend with
Infamy to Posterity! Who could not be content to live by the Gains of an honest
Industry; but must be rich at the Expense of the Blood and Ruin of his fellow
Citizens! Miserable Wretch! How has he plunged himself and Family into that Pit
which he has dug for others, and brought down upon his own Pate that violent
Dealing which he contrived, and in Part executed against his Neighbors!
Gentlemen, Though the Crimes charged on the Defendants are such as merit a just
Indignation; yet in Matters that affect Life, you ought to have the most
convincing Evidence: The Trial of the Fact is your Province. In Matters of
Judgment to condemn the Innocent, and acquit the Guilty, is equally Criminal.
If you can, after what you have heard, think the Prisoners innocent, you ought
to acquit them; but if you find them guilty, you cannot acquit them without the
greatest Injustice and Cruelty to your Country and yourselves. Gentlemen, I
shall add no more, but leave you to the Direction of the Court and your own
Consciences.

Then the Third Justice charged the Jury as follows.

Gentlemen of the Jury.

IT IS needless for the Court to observe further to you, after what has been
said by the Council for the King, concerning the Nature and destructive
Tendency of so execrable a Piece of Villainy, as this Conspiracy now charged
upon the Prisoners at the Bar: It has been sufficiently and properly enlarged
upon; nor is it any more necessary for the Court to recapitulate the Evidence
given in the Case; for that has been very clearly stated, by the Gentlemen at
the Bar.

Now, Gentlemen, if you cannot credit the several Witnesses for the King, if
that can be the Case, you will then acquit the Prisoners of this Charge against
them, and find them not Guilty; but on the other Hand, as the Evidence against
them seems to be so ample, so full, so clear, and satisfactory, if you have no
particular Reasons in your own Breasts, in your own Consciencies, to discredit
them; if that, I say, is not the Case,; if you have no Reason to discredit
them; then I make no doubt, but you will discharge a good Conscience, and find
them Guilty.

A Constable being sworn to attend the Jury, they withdrew; and being returned
in a short Time, found Hughson, his Wife, and Kerry, GUILTY of all three
Indictments; and Sarah Hughson the Daughter, GUILTY of the Second and Third.

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 5th JUNE, A. M.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

Court opened, and adjourned 'til Four o'Clock Afternoon.

P. M. PRESENT, As before. Court opened, and adjourned till Tomorrow Morning
Ten o'Clock.

Examination of Sarah (Mrs. BURK's Negro) Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. III.
She said,

1. THAT the Company at Comfort's, who were there when they whetted their
Knives, and said, would burn the Houses, and kill the white People, were,

Jack, Cook, the old Man,
Comfort's Negroes. Sandy or Sawney, Niblet's. Robin, Chambers's. Harry, Old
Kipp's. A tall Negro, a Stranger, of Dewit's. Antonio, Curacoa Dick. Peter De
Lancey's.
Prince, Auboyneau's. Cuffee, Philipse's. Quack, Roosevelt's. Brash, Mr. Jay's.
Tom, (old) Rowe's. Warwick, Hunt's. Five or six Spanish Negroes.
2. That the following Negroes were at Comfort's also, but went away before the
Talk aforesaid.

Harry, Dr. Fisher's. Jem^y, Bagley's. A tall slender Fellow, Widow Schuyler's.
Tom, Abeel's. Betty, Clopper's: Went with Sarah to the House, and afterward
went away with Comfort's Jenny. Jenny, Comfort's. Tom, Clarkson's. * Mink,
Gro^^^^k'^* * Patrick, English's. Tom, Bri^^^rho^f's. * Bill, Ten Eyck's.
Sambo, Sylvester's. * (...), Kierstede's. Jenny, Hunt's. * Cato, Shurmur's. *
Pompey,Leff^rts's. Here she differs from her Examination, NUMB. II. before one
of the Judges on Monday last, as to the Persons she would excuse, by pretending
that they went away before the Talk of the Conspiracy* Those marked with an^
Asterisk here, were not excepted by her in the last.

3. At the same Time brought the Spanish Negroes following, before Sarah, who
said, before, Sandy, who said, Joseph or Will, of Filkins's, was there, was
not, Pablo, Benson's, was, was, Juan, Sarly's was not, was, Antonio, Mesnard's,
was not, was, Antonio, De Lancey's, was, was, Francis, ^^sch's, was not, was,
Ma^^el, Windover's, was not, was, Augustine, Mr. Mullen's, was not, was not,
John, Dr. Nicol's, was not, was.

Said Sarah declared also,

4. That Curacoa Dick and Comfort' s Jack were principal Speakers, that they
would burn the Houses and kill the white People; whetting their Knives, and
saying* they were sharp-enough for that Purpose.

5. That Curacoa Dick was the Person who asked her to go to (...) House; and in
going she met Clipper's W^^ch (...) also, and went in with her.

6. Th^^ Acc^, ^^^as Cook (Comfort's old Man) cursed her, and wished Thunder
might strike her, if she discovered.

7. Being asked if Cuffee (Gomez's) was at Comfort's? ^he said he was not.

8. That Antonio (De Lancey's Spaniard) seemed very forward when at Comfort's
and talked much to Curacoa Dick It was said, Curacoa Dick could talk Spanish,
and that Antonio could talk some English.


9. That the Meeting was at Comfort's Shop.

10. That they then there did talk of and resolve in particular, that Quack
should put the Fort on fire.

Supreme Court. SATURDAY, 6th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Jack, Cook,
COMFORT's Robin, CHAMBERS's Caesar, PECK's Cuffee, GOMEZ's Jamaica, ELLISON's


THE Prisoners being set to the Bar, were arraigned on an Indictment for
conspiring, combining and confederating with diverse Negroes, to burn the whole
Town and City of New York; and to kill and destroy the Inhabitants thereof; and
pleaded, Not Guilty: And for their Trials put themselves upon God and the
Country.

Court adjourned to Monday the 8th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

Supreme Court: MONDAY, 8th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices*

The KING, against John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, Margaret Sorubiero, alias
Kerry. Sarah Hughson the Daughter,


THE Prisoners being called up to Judgment upon their Conviction for the
Conspiracy, and placed at the Bar, the SECOND JUSTICE proceeded to pass
Sentence, as follows.

John Hughson, and you the rest of the Prisoners at the Bar.

YOU are now brought before this Court to receive that Sentence which the Law
has appointed for your Offenses; though I cannot ^ay the Punishment is adequate
to the horrid Crimes of which you stand convicted. The Roman Commonwealth was
established some hundred Years before any Law was made against Parricide; they
not thinking any Person capable of so atrocious a Crime: Yours are indeed as
singular, and unheard of before; they are such as one would scarce believe any
Man capable of committing, especially any one who had heard of a God, and of a
future State: For People who have been brought up, and always lived in a
Christian Country, and also called themselves Christians, to be guilty not only
of making Negro Slaves their Equals, but even their Superiors, by waiting upon,
keeping with, and entertaining them, with Meat, Drink, and Lodging; and what is
much more amazing, to plot, conspire, consult, abet and encourage these black
Seed of Cain, to burn this City, and to kill and destroy us all. -- GOOD GOD!
When I reflect on the Disorders, Confusion, Desolation and Havoc, which the
Effect of your most wicked, most detestable and diabolical Councils might have
produced (had not the Hand of our great and good God interposed) it shocks me!
for you, who would have burnt and destroyed without Mercy, ought to be served
in a like Manner: And although each of you have, with an uncommon Assurance,
denied the Fact, and audaciously called upon God as a Witness of your
Innocence; yet it has pleased him, out of his unbounded Goodness and Mercy to
us, to confound your Devices, and cause your malicious and wicked Machinations
and Intentions to be laid open and clear before us, not only to the
Satisfaction and Conviction of the Court, the Grand and Petty Jury, but
likewise to every one else that has heard the Evidence against you; all are
satisfied the just Judgment of God has overtaken you, and that you justly merit
a more severe Death than is intended for you, having, in my Opinion, been much
worse than the Negroes: However, though your Crimes deserve it, yet we must not
act contrary to Law.

And now I do most earnestly exhort you, and each of you, to a serious and
diligent Improvement of the little Time you have yet to live on this Side of
Eternity, duly and heartily to weigh and consider your past wicked and
ill-spent Lives, by bewailing, confessing and sincerely repenting of your Sins;
that thereby you may obtain Mercy and Forgiveness from our great and just God;
for without a sincere, as well as contrite Heart, you can neither expect Mercy
or Forgiveness for your manifold Offenses, both against God and your Neighbors.

I must now speak particularly to you John Hughson, and to you Sarah Hughson:
Look upon your poor unhappy Daughter, now standing by you, of whom you have
been the miserable Instruments of bringing into the World; after that, to
train, and bring her up in the School of the Devil, and now lastly, to the
Gallows. -- I say, consider and set her a good Example, in a Time when every
Moment is precious to you, that the great Deceiver of Mankind, may not have the
same Power over you all in the next World, as he seems to have had in this,

I must now proceed to the Duty the Law requires of me; which is to tell you,

That you, the Prisoners now at the Bar, be removed to the Place from whence
you came, and from thence to the Place of Execution, and there you, and each of
you, are to be hanged by the Neck 'til you are severally dead; and I pray God
of his great Goodness, to have Mercy on your Souls.

Ordered, That the said condemned Prisoners be executed on Friday the Twelfth
of June Instant, between the Hours of Nine and One of the same Day; and that
the Body of John Hughson be afterward hung in Chains.

The KING, against Negroes.
Jack, Cook,
COMFORT's Robin, CHAMBERS's Caesar, PECK's Cuffee, GOMEZ's Jamaica, ELLISON's


On Trial upon Indictment for the Conspiracy:

JURY called, and the Prisoner^ challenging none, the following Jurors sworn.

William Smith. Joseph Sacket. John Shurmur. Josiah Millikan. Isaac Van Dam.
James Tucker. Daniel Dunscomb. Isaac Twentyman. Sidney Breese. Peter Vandursen.
Benjamin Thomas. John Robins.
Of COUNCIL for the KING.
Mr. ATTORNEY GENERAL. JOSEPH MURRAY, JOHN CHAMBERS,
Esqrs.
The Attorney General, after having opened the Indictment against these six
Negroes, spoke briefly as follows.

Gentlemen,

IT will* I doubt not, appear to you, upon hearing our Witnesses for the King
on this Trial, that these six Negroes are some of the Conspirators who combined
with those principal Incendiaries, Hughson and his Family, to set on fire the
King's House, and this whole Town, and to kill and murder the Inhabitants.

But as I have already, upon the Trial of the Negro Quack, for burning the
King's House, and of another Negro called Cuffee, for burning Mr. Philipse's
Storehouse, and likewise on the last Trial of Hughson, his Wife and Daughter,
and Kerry, endeavored to set forth th^^ Heinousness of so horrible and
detestable a Conspiracy; and the Dangers this City and Province may still be
exposed to, until Examples are made of all such as have been concerned in this
most wicked Plot; I think I have no Need upon this Trial, to say any Thing
further on either of these Heads; not doubting but when you have heard the
Crimes which these Criminals stand charged with, proved against them, you will
find them Guilty.

Witnesses called for the KING,

Sworn. Mr. George Joseph Moore, Mr. John Roosevelt, Mary Burton,


Negroes: Sandy, Niblet's Sarah, Burk's Fortune, Wilkins's


Mr. Moore and Mr. Roosevelt proved the Confession of Quack (Roosevelt's) and
Cuffee (Philipse's) at the Stake.

Evidence affecting Jack and Cook (COMFORT's) one or both of them.
Quack's Confession, 4, 11. 30 th May. Cuffee's Confession, 3. 30 th May.
Sandy's Examination, NUMB. I. 22 d May. II. 25 th May. III. 1 st June. Sarah
(Burk's) Exam. NUMB. II. 1 st June. III. 5 th June.

Sawney said, upon the Trial, Jack was to be a Captain; that he asked him to
help burn Houses; and said as soon as the Fort was burnt, they would kill the
white Men: That Jack swore six Spaniards, [Spanish Slaves] and the rest were to
come next Day to be sworn.

That 'twas agreed among them that Cook was to be an Officer.

That this Meeting was of a Sunday when Comfort was not at home.

Mary Burton said, Jack and Cook used to be at the Meetings at Hughson's, when
they were talking of firing the Town and murdering the People, and were active
and consenting; but that she did not see them sworn.

Sarah (Burk's) said likewise, That 'twas agreed among them that Jack should be
a Captain.

Evidence affecting Robin (CHAMBERS's)
Quack's Confession, 2. 30 th May. Cuffee's Confession, 3. 30 th May. Sandy's
Examination, NUMB. III. 8. 1 st June. Sarah (Burk's) Exam. NUMB. II. 1, 3. ^ st
June. III. 1. 5 th June.

Sandy and Sarah both said* That Robin was at the Meeting at Comfort's
[mentioned in both their Examinations.]

Sandy said, Robin had a Knife there, and sharpened it; and consented to help
kill the white Men, and (...) take their Wives.

Mr. CHAMBERS examined the Witnesses against Jack, Cook and Robin, And summed
up.

Evidence affecting Cuffee (GOMEZ's)
Quack's Confession, 2, 7. 30 th May. Cuffee's Confession, 3, 5. 30 th May.
Sandy's Examination, NUMB. I. sect; 11. 22 d May. Fortune's Examination, I. 6.
22 d May. Sandy's Examination, III. 7, 8. 1 st June. Evidence affecting Caesar
(PECK's)
Cuffee's Confession at the Stake, 5. 30 th May. Quack's Confession, 4, 7. 30
th May. Sandy's Examination, NUMB. II. 1, 2. 25 th May. III. 8. 1 st June.

Sawney said upon the Trial, That Caesar declared, he would kill the white Men,
and drink their Blood to their good Healths: This about a Fortnight or Three
Weeks before the Fort burnt.

Evidence affecting Jamaica (ELLISON's)

Mary Burton's Deposition, NUMB. II. sect; 4. 13 th May.

She testified against him further, at the Trial, That he used to be very
forward at the Meetings at Hughson's in Talk about the Conspiracy; and that
particularly once when they [the Conspirators] were talking of burning the Town
and killing the People; Jamaica (being a Fiddler) said, he would dance [or play]
over them while they were roasting in the Flames; and said, he had been Slave
long enough.

Mr. MURRAY examined the Witnesses against Cuffee, Caesar, and Jamaica; And
summed up.

There was nothing material in the Defense of any of the Prisoners; they asked
the Witnesses now and then a few trifling Questions; and denied all that was
alleged against them.

The Jury being charged, and having withdraw^ (...), after a short Stay, being
returned, found the six Negroes GUILTY of the Indictment.

Then the Court, after Admonition to the Criminals, proceeded to pass Sentence
on them as follows, viz.

That Jack, Cook, Robin, Caesar, Cuffee and Jamaica, should be carried from
thence to the Place from whence they came, and thence to the Place of
Execution, where the said Jack, Cook, Robin, Caesar and Cuffee, should be
chained to a Stake, and burnt until they should be severally dead: And that
the said Jamaica should be there hanged, etc.

Ordered, That Jack, Cook, Robin, Caesar, and Cuffee, be executed on the
Morrow, the 9th Instant, between the Hours of One and Seven of the Afternoon of
the same Day: And that Jamaica be executed on Friday the 12th Instant, between
the Hours of Nine and One of the same Day.

The KING against Negroes.
Tom Peal alias Bastian, Francis, BOSCH's Albany, and Curacoa Dick.


THE Prisoners being placed at the Bar, were arraigned on an Indictment for
conspiring, etc. with diverse Negro Slaves and others, to burn the whole Town
and City of New York; and also to kill and destroy the Inhabitants thereof;
whereunto they severally pleaded Not Guilty; etc.

Court adjourned to Tomorrow Morning 10 o'Clock.

THIS Evening Capt. Jack (COMFORT's Negro) condemned, amongst others, to be
executed Tomorrow Afternoon, had caused to be signified to the Judges, that if
his Life might be spared, he would discover all that he knew of the Conspiracy:
From the Course of the Evidence there was Reason to conclude, that he had been
a most trusty and diligent Agent for Hughson; he lived very near him; and his
Master was frequently absent from home for Days and Weeks together, which left
him too much at Liberty; and there was a Well in his Yard whereto many Negroes
resorted every Day; Morning and Afternoon, to fetch Tea Water: And Hughson, no
doubt, thought he ^ad carried a great Point when he had seduced Capt. Jack to
his infamous Schemes; for this gave him the greatest (...) of corrupting his
fellow Slaves; and Jack (...), subtle Fellow, very well qualified for such an
(...), and might be captivated with the fine Promises and (...) given him of
being not only a Free, but a great (...) Commander in this Band of Fools; of
whom the great (...) perhaps (like Fools too) projected to make a Prey (...) It
was therefore thought p^^^er, as this Mystery (...) was yet but beginning to be
unfolded, so far to (...) Jack's Offer as to respite his Execution, 'til 'twas
so (...) well he would deserve further Favor.

Jack was examined before the Judges this Afternoon; and was under Examination
the next Day, when his fellow Criminals were carrying from the City Hall to
their Execution: He was advised not to flatter himself with the Hopes of Life,
without he would do the utmost in his Power to deserve it; and that would be by
telling freely all that he knew of the Matter, and discovering all the Parties
concerned to the best of his Knowledge: He was told we were already let so far
into this Secret, as to Persons and Things, as to be able to give a good Guess,
whether he spoke the Truth; and he would but deceive himself in the End if he
told Falsehoods. -- Jack looked very serious, and at length began to open; but
his Dialect was so perfectly Negro and unintelligible, 'twas thought, that
'twould be impossible to make any Thing of him without the Help of an
Interpreter. -- There were two young Men, Sons-in-Law to Jack's Master, who
were aware Jack would not be understood without their Aid; and they signified
their Desire of being by when he was examined, upon a Supposition, that they
might be of Service in interpreting his Meaning, as he had been used to them,
having often worked in the same Shop together at the Cooper's Trade, whereby he
was so familiarized to them, they could make a shift to understand his
Language; and they thought they had such an Influence over him, that they were
persuaded, they could also prevail upon him to make an ingenuous Confession;
and to do them Justice, they were very serviceable in both Respects; and the
Event well answered the Expectation they had given. -- But notwithstanding this
Assistance, his Examination took up as much Time of three successive Days,
Morning and Afternoon, as could conveniently be spared him from other Business.

Several Negroes concerned in the Conspiracy, having been discovered by Jack a^
this first Sitting, were apprehended the next Morning early, pursuant to Orders
then immediately given; but there was not Time to commit his Confession to
Writing this Evening^ (...) it is thought proper to set the same forth as of
this Day. -- Jack desired he might be removed from the Cell where his fellow
Criminals, condemned with him, were lodged, and his Request was granted.

Examination and Confession of Jack (Comfort's) Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT a little after New Year, on a Monday, about Four in the Afternoon, Ben
Jack' s Description of Ben: His Master live in Tall House Broadway. Ben ^id^ de
^at Horse.
(Capt. Marshall's Negro) came to Comfort's House to fetch Tea Water, where he
left his Cag in the Shop, and went to Hughson's House ( Hughson and his Wife
then gone into the Country) Ben staid about two Hours there, and then returned
to Comfort's, and told Jack, that he had met there Six Spaniards, among whom
were Anthony, and Wan Mr. Peter De Lancey's (See (...)) (...) Capt. Sarly' s.
(now in Goal) and said to him, Countryman, I have heard some good News: What
News, said Jack? Ben said, there were Spanish Negroes at Hughson's, who told
him, they had Designs of taking this Country against the Wars came: What would
they do with this Country, said Jack? To which Ben answered, Oh! you Fool,
those Spaniards know better than York Negroes, and could help better to take it
than they; because they were more used to War; but they must begin first to set
the House [i. e. the Houses] on fire.

2. That the Sunday following, Hughson and his Wife came home, and brought a
Goose, a Quarter of Mutton, and a Fowl home. That Been came a little after
Church out, in the Afternoon, to Comfort's, and told him, Brother go to
Hughson's, all our Company is come down: He went with Ben thither, and went
round the House, and went in at the back Door; when he came there, they sat all
round the Table, and had a Goose, a Quarter of Mutton, and a Fowl, two Loaves
of Bread: Hughson took a Flask of Rum out of a Case, and set it on the Table,
and two Bowls of Punch were made; some drink Dram; a Cloth was laid: Quash, H.
Rutgers's Negro. Caesar, Koertrecht's. Powlus, A Spanish Negro. Toby, or Cato,
Provoost's. Cato, Shurmur's. Cook, Comfort's. John, Vaarck's. York,) London,)
Marschalk's. Ticklepitcher, Carpenter's. Francis, Bastian alias Tom P^al
Bosch's. S^^pio, Mrs. Van Borsom's. Ben. Capt. Marshall's.
were all present, and also six Spanish Negroes, among whom were Wan and
Anthony, and a Negro lately belonging to John Marschalk, the Three others he
should know if he saw them: Hughson, and his Wife, and Daughter sat down on one
Side of the Table, and the Negroes on the other: Two or Three Tables were put
together to make it long: Hughson's Daughter brought in the Victuals, an just
as he came in, Sarah brought the Cloth and laid it^* Mary Burton did not come
into the Room; but Hughson said, she was above making a Bed: Peggy came down
Stairs, and sat down by Hughson's Wife at the Table, and eat with them; when
they were eating, they began all to talk about setting the Houses on fire; and
Hughson asked Ben, who would be the Head Man or Captain for to rise? Ben said,
Yes, he would stand for that; and said, he could find a Gun, Shot and Powder,
at his Master's House: That his Master did not watch him, he could go into
every Room: Ben asked Quash, What will you stand for? He said, he did not care
what he stood for, or should be, but he could kill Three, Four, Five White Men
before Night.

3. That Quash said, he could get two half Dozen of Knives in Papers, three or
four Swords; and that he would set his Master's House on fire, and when he had
done that, he would come abroad to fight.

4. That Marschalk's York said, That his Mistress had scolded at him, and he
would kill her before he went out to fight.

5. London (Marschalk's other Negro) said, That before he went out to fight, he
would set his Master's House on fire.

6. Scipio (Van Borsom's Negro) said, He would set his Mistress's House on fire
before he would go out to to fight.

7. Cato (Shurmur's Negro) said, He would set his Mistress's House on fire: and
that as the Houses stand all together, the Fire would go more far.

8. Cato alias Toby (John Provoost's Negro) said, He would get his Master's
Sword, and then set the House on fire, and go out to fight.

9. The Spanish Negroes he could not understand.

10. Caesar (Kortrecht's Negro) said, He would se^ his Master's Bakehouse on
fire.

11. Ben said (when it was proposed to burn his Master's House) No, if they
conqu^r'd the Place, he would (...) to live in himself.

12. That Curacoa Dick came in just as (...) done eating, ^ut (...) enough were
left for (...) he sat down and (...) When Dick had done (...) said, Every one
(...) to his Word; and (...) would get his (...), and after that (...) his
Stable on ^ire.

13. He (Jack) being asked to set his Master's House on fire; said no, he would
set his Master's Shingles on fire, and then go out to fight.

14. Hughson said, He would stand by what the Spanish and York Negroes should
do; and he would go before, and be their KING, and would mix them one amongst
another when they came to fight.

15. Hughson sat the Negroes upon this Discourse, and Design, at the said
Meeting; on which the Spanish Negroes agreed all to join with the York Negroes,
(...) Confessions of Quack and Cuffee, 30 th May,


16. That they all swore; Some said, D -- n; Some said, by G -- d, and other
Oaths: A Spanish Negro swear by Thunder; Hughson swore by G-d, if they would be
true to him, he would take this Country; and Jack swore by G-d, for his Part.

17. That Peggy went away after they had done eating, before they swore.

18. M^ry Furton took away the Dishes and Plates, and Sarah (Hughson's
Daughter) took away the Cloth: Sarah (Hughson's Wife) sat down by her Husband,
and continued there all the Time.

19. The Meeting broke up just after Sun down.

20. Tickle (Carpenter's Negro) said, his Mistress was cross, and he worked
hard, and could get no good Clothes; That he would murder his Mistress first,
because she was not good to him, before he went out to fight.

21. Bastian alias Tom Peal (VAARCK's) eat at Hughson's; Quash asked him if he
would stand to help? He said, Yes, he knew that; and that was the Reason he
came there.

22. Francis (JASPER BOSCH's) said, he would set his Master's House on fire,
before he came out to fight.

23. COMFORT's Cook went with him (Jack) to Hughson's; swore, and said, He
would set his Master's Storehouse on fire; and was to go fight too, and could
get a Penknife, or any Thing.

24. VAARCK's Jonneau stood at the Door a prretty while; but when the Meat
ready on Table, came in, and sat down at Table: York asked him, What will you
stand for? he said, he was not able to fight; but he would set his Master's
House on fire, and then his Neighbors, and so on.

25. Says, they agreed to wait a Month and half for the Spaniards and French to
come; and if they did not come then, they were to begin at Wenman's, next to
Mr. De Lancey's, and so on down the Broad Way.

26. That they waited till this Month and half was expired, and then the Fort
was burnt.

27. Says, that every Negro then present was to do what they engaged to do, on
one and the same Sunday, when Church was gone in of the Morning; and if all was
not done in that one Day, they were to go on the Saturday following: and so, if
the Spaniards and French did not come, they were to do all themselves.

28. That at this Meeting Anthony, belonging to Peter De Lancey, talked about
Stuff to put the Houses on fire, by ^linging it into the House, but heard no
other Negro but him talk of it; but he mentioned it every Time they met? but at
this Meeting for the first Time.

29. That same Sunday's Monday [the next Day] about Sun down, all the same
Negroes came to Hughson's again; some brought Money, and gave to Hughson for
Drink, and Dram: Ben played on the Fiddle: Hughson's Wife and Daughter danced
together in one Part of the Room, and the Negroes in another; staid there till
about Seven that Night: That they came there that Night to frolic, and merry
make, and did not talk about Fires; for they had agreed upon that the Day
before.

30. That then one Sunday passed, and no Meeting any where that he knows of.

31. The Sunday after that, there was a Meeting at his Master Comfort's; some
Negroes were in the Shop, and some in the Kitchen; That the Kitchen and Shop
join to each other; the Doors into each went out into the Street, or into the
Yard; so that to go from one to the other, you must go either into the Yard, or
on the Dock: Among whom were Marshall's Ben, Rutgers's Quash, Provoost' s Cato
alias Toby, Shurmur' s Cato, Marschalk's York, and London, Vanbo^som' s Scipio,
Carpenter' s Albany, Curacoa Dick, Kortrecht' s Caesar, Burk's Sarah, Niblet's
Sandy, Chamber' s Robin, Gomez' s Cuffee, Peck' s Caesar, Comfort's Cook,
Sleydall' s Jack, Anthony and Wan, two Spanish Negroes; Vanderspiegle' s
Fortune, Cowley' s Cato, Jay' s Brash, Bosch' s Francis, Furman' s Harry* and
Powlus: Which Negroes being met, they began all to talk of burning the Town,
and killing the People; And the general Conversation was to the Effect of that
at Hughson's, and the Fire to begin a^ aforesaid; every one being to set his
Master's House, or Stable on ^ire, and then go out to fight.

32. Furman' s Harry was to set his Master's Cowstable on fire.

33. This Conversation began, and was most talked of before Sandy came in;
Sandy came into the Kitchen first, being called in by him (Jack) but was loath
to come; Jack asked him to drink a Dram, Sandy said, No; Sarah Burk's Negro
Wench.
who was then present, said, he must drink, and made him drink; and having
drunk the Dram, Jack asked him, if he would stand to, and help them burn
Houses, and kill the white People? Sandy seemed afraid: They all drank a Dram
round, and then he (Jack) brought in nine clasp Knives in a Paper; those that
had not Knives before took Knives from the Paper; some went into the Shop, and
some came into the Kitchen, and all the Knives were distributed: Being asked,
how he came by those Knives, said, he asked Powlus, a Spanish Negro, about a
Week before this Meeting, to give him a Knife, Powlus said, he would get some
for him, and sell him. Powlus appointed him to meet him the Wednesday before
this Meeting at the Meal-Market about Dusk; that Powluscame, and he gave him
Two Shillings and Sixpence for them.

34. When they saw Sandy afraid, they whetted their Knives in order to frighten
him to say Yes, to stand by them; and Jack said, if he did not stand by them,
he would cut his Head off: To which Sarah said, he deserves it, if he don't say
Yes; Then Sandy said Yes. See Sandy' s Examination, NUMB. II. Monday 25 th May.


35. The Stone they whetted their Knives on, was a brown Stone that lay in the
Yard by the Door. About a Week and an half after this Meeting, the Fort was set
on fire.

36. Soon after Sandy had consented, it growing dusk, they parted.

37. Says, he thought the Bargain so sure made, that he did not make any more
Meetings before the Fort ^ired.

38. Says, that some Time after the Fort burnt, SLEYDALL's Jack came to
Comfort's House, and told the Examinant he had put fire to Mr. Murray' s
Hayllack.

39. That he met Provoost's Negro the Night that Hilton's House burnt, and
asked him, What News? for he had heard that there had been Fire at that End of
the Town? Provoost' s Cato alias Toby said, he had done it.

40. That Gomez' s Cuffee set Van Zant's Storehouse on fire.

Supreme Court. TUESDAY, 9th JUNE.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Bastian, Francis, BOSCH's. Albany, Curacoa Dick.


UPON the Motion of Mr. Attorney General; Ordered, That the Trial of the
Prisoners Bastian, etc. be deferred till Tomorrow.

Ordered, That the Execution of Jack (Comfort's Negro) be respited till Friday
next.

Court adjourned to Tomorrow Morning 10 o'Clock.

This Day Ben (Capt. Marshall's) Quash (H. Rutgers's) Caesar (Kortrecht's) Toby
alias Cato (Provoost's) Cato (Shurmur's) York and London (Marschalk's) Scipio
(Van Borsom's) and Harry (Furman's) were apprehended upon Jack (Comfort's)
Examination and Confession, and committed.

This Day also, The Negroes Cook, Robin (Chamber's) Caesar (Peck's) Cuffee
(Gomez's) were executed according to Sentence.

Examination and Confession of Pompey (Leffert's) Before the Grand Jury.
He said,

THAT Quash, Rutgers's, Quack, Roosewelt's, asked him one Sunday, if he would
do as they would do? And Pompey asked them, What? And Quash said, Quack would
tell him; and Quack said, they would set their Master's Houses on fire, if he
would set his Master's House on fire; and he agreed he would; and they then
told him, they would tell him when; and they would be all Free, and be free
from Trouble: He asked what they designed to do? Quack said, they would tell
him in Time, and would not tell him then.

2. Being asked when he was spoke to; he said, 'twas about a Fortnight before
Quack was taken up.

3. That Quash told him, two or three Days before he was sent to Goal, that Been
(Capt. Marshall's Man) knew of it.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sandy's Examination, NUMB. III. 8. 1 st June. Sarah (BURK's) Examination. II.
1 st June. Worcester (VARIAN's) Examination. 22 d, 30 th June.

Examination and Confession of Jack (Comfort's) Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. II.
HE repeated much to the same Purpose as in his Examination before the Judge;

1. But on repeating over the Persons who were at Comfort' s House, and
Hughson's, he observed, That Cato, (COWLEY's) was not at Hughson's at that
Meeting; and that Been, and Quash, and Pablo [alias Powlus] were not at
Comfort's at that Meeting; so that the following is a true List of each
Company, who was there, who are not executed, or indicted.

At Hughson's.
Quash H. Rutgers's. Cato, John Provoost's. York, London,
P. Marschalk's. Tickle, Carpenter's. Ben Capt. Marshall's. Spaniards.
Pablo or Powlus, Becker's. Antonio, P. De Lancey's. Juan, Sarly's. Augustine,
McMullen's. Antonio, Mesnard's.

At Comfort's.
Cato, Shurmur's. Cato, Cowley's. York, London,
Marschalk's. Scipio, Van Borsom's. Caesar, Kortrecht's. Jack, Sleydall's.
Fortune, Vanderspiegle's. Brash, Jay's. Harry, Furman's. Tom, B. Moore's.
Spaniards.
Antonio, De Lancey's. Juan, Sarly's.

Upon the Close of Jack (COMFORT's) two Examinations, the Judges thought proper
to recommend him to (...) Honor the Lieutenant Governor for a Pardon.

Supreme Court: WEDNESDAY, 10th JUNE,
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Bastian, Francis, BOSCH's Albany, Curacoa Dick.


On Trial on Indictment for a Conspiracy, to burn the City of New York, and
murder the Inhabitants:

Jury called, and the Prisoners challenged Ben Thomas. His House was attempted
to be set on Fire.
The following Jurors were sworn, viz.

John Dyer. Joseph Sacket. John Shurmur. Josiah Millikan. Isaac Van Dam.
Humphry Jones. Daniel Dunscomb. Thomas Bohanna. Isaac Twentyman. Peter Van
Dursen. John Robins. Peter Evo^tzse.
Of COUNCIL for the KING,
ATTORNEY GENERAL. JOSEPH MURRAY, WILLIAM SMITH,
Esqrs.
The Attorney General, after opening the Indictment to the Court and Jury,
proceeded as follows.

Gentlemen,

IT will appear to you by the Evidence for the King upon this Trial, that these
four Prisoners at the Bar are some of that great Number of Negroes that
frequently met at Hughson's House; where he privately entertained them, and
where they confederated with him, and the rest of the Conspirators, to carry on
this most wicked and dreadful Conspiracy to burn the King's House and this
Town, and to murder the Inhabitants. -- The most horrible and destructive Plot
that ever was yet known in these Northern Parts of America; of which Hughson
was here the chief Contriver and Director, with great Expectations of enriching
himself by the Ruin and Destruction of his Neighbors; as has been fully made
appear on the preceding Trials; wherefore it may justly be called HUGHSON's
PLOT. -- It will likewise appear to you in Evidence, that each of th^se Negro
Prisoners were sworn into this direful Conspiracy, and never to discover it, or
that Hughson was any way concerned in it.

Gentlemen,

Many of the Conspirators have already been tried, condemned and executed, for
the abominable Parts they have acted in this execrable Conspiracy: And Hughson
himself, his Wife, Daughter and Margaret Kerry, are under that Sentence of
Death which now awaits their Execution, the just Demerits of their heinous
Crimes.

Gentlemen,

As all the Prisoners at the Bar are Negroes, the Evidence of other Negroes is
made sufficient against them by a Law of this Province; which I thought proper
to observe to you, because we shall examine several Negro Witnesses to prove
what I have alleged against these Negro Prisoners; and when you have heard
their Charge proved against them, I cannot doubt but you will, for your Oath's
Sake, and for your own and this City and Country's Peace and Safety, find the
Prisoners Guilty.

We shall now call the Witnesses and examine them before you.

Witnesses for the KING called,

Sworn.
Mary Burton, Daniel Burgher, Nicholas Roosevelt, George Joseph Moore,
Negroes
Sandy Sarah
Edward Sherlock, Interpreter, Francis being a Spaniard.
JACK (COMFORT's) being set to the Bar, and asked what he had to say why
Execution of his former Sentence should not be awarded; he produced his
Majesty's most gracious free Pardon; and prayed that the same might be read and
allowed of: Which being read, was allowed by the Court accordingly. The said
Jack then proceeded to to give Evidence against the Prisoners.

Evidence against Bastian.

Mary Burton's Deposition, NUMB. II. 1, 5. 13 th May.

She said upon the Trial, That she had seen the Prisoner at Hughson's amongst
Twenty other Negroes; and he was consenting with the rest to burn the whole
Town, and destroy all the People.

Jack (Comfort'^) Examina NUMB I 2, 21. 8 th June. Sawney said, He saw Bastian
at the Meeting at Comfort's.

Evidence against Francis (BOSCH's.)
Sawney's Examination, NUMB. I. 7, 15. 22 d May. Jack (Comfort'^) Exam. NUMB.
I. 2, 22, 31. 8 th June.

Sawney said, He was one of the Spanish Negroes he heard talking before Lushe's
Door, when they were talking of burning the Town: That he was present and
consenting at the Meeting at Comfort's.

Mary Burton said, She saw him often at the Meetings at Hughson's when they
we^e talking of burning the Town and killing the People; and he seemed to ^e
consenting; he spoke a little English, and some other Language she did not
understand.

Evidence against Albany.
Mary Burton's Deposition, NUMB. II. 5. 13 th May. Jack (Comfort'^) Examina.
NUMB. I. 31. 8 th June. Confession of Quack, 4, 11. 30 th May. Confession of
Cuffee, 3 30 th May.

Proved by George Joseph Moore and John Roosevelt.

Evidence against Curacoa Dick.

Sawney's Examination, NUMB. I. 5. 22 d May.

Said, He saw him at the Meeting at Comfort's, and he consented to burn and
kill. etc.

Sarah (Burk's) Examina. NUMB. II. 3. 1 st June. III. 4, 5. 5 th June. Jack
(Comfort's) Examina. NUMB. I. 12, 31. 8 th June.

Witnesses called for the Prisoners.

Robert Hogg. Mrs. Carpenter, Albany's Mistress. Mr. Tiebout, Coracoa Di^^^'s
Master.
The Prisoner's Defense, as usual with the Guilty, turned upon the Negative;
they asked the Witnesses no material Questions; and the Evidence upon the Whole
being summed up, the Jury were charged, and withdr^w for a short Time; and
being returned, found them all GUILTY of the Indictment.

Court adjourned to Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 11th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Bastian, Francis, a Spanish Negro (Bosch's) Albany, Curacoa
Dick.


JUDGMENT being moved for against these four Criminals convicted, they were
brought to the Bar; and being asked what they had to say, why Sentence of Death
should not be pronounced against them?

Bastian (as was intimated by Somebody about the Jail he would) confessed his
Guilt; the rest protested their Innocence.

The Court then proceeded to Sentence against them, which was,

That they should be chained to a Stake, and burnt to Death. And Ordered, their
Execution should be the next Day, between Two and Eight of the Clock Afternoon.

After Sentence passed, the following Confession was immediately thereupon
taken from Bastian in Court.

He said,

1. THAT his Fellow Servants Caesar first acquainted him with it [meaning the
Plot] and carried him to Hughson's; that Hughson, his Wife and Daughter were
present, and swor^ him: That many Negroes were there; C^^^ (Cowley'^) Anthony
(De Lancey's) there: They were to burn the (...) and ^own, and kill the People.

2. That he th^eatn^d Mary B^rton, as sworn.

3. That they were (...) on a Bible.

4. That Hughson was to be the Governor or Ruler over them.

5. This Meeting was on a Sunday.

6. That they went there the next Night to ^^olick, and all the Negroes who had
been executed were in the Plot.

7. Quack burnt the F^rt* and he has ^ea^^ him say so.

8. Hughson was the first Encourager.

9. That Hughson was to have the Goods that were stolen from the Fire. C^^sar
was to be King.

10. This Meeting was at Hughson's about a Week and half after New-Year.

11. Hughson, and his Wife and Daughter, and Mary Burton there.

12. Came there about Four in the Afternoon: A great many Negroes there* about
Thirteen or Fourteen; the Daughter said the Cloth after he came in.

The KING, against Sarah Hughson, Daughter of John Hughson.

AS to this miserable Creature under Sentence of Death, to be executed with her
Father and Mother and Margaret Kerry Tomorrow; the Judges wished that she
would have furnished them with some Color or Pretense for recommending her as
an Object of Mercy; but they waited for it hitherto in vain: She was a Wretch
stupefied and hardened in Wickedness, and seemed void of all Sense of a future
State: However 'twas thought proper to respite her Execution to Friday, 19 th
June* which was Ordered accordingly; in Hopes, that after her Father and Mother
had suffered, she might be molified to a Con^ession of her own Guilt, and raise
some Merit by making a further Discovery; or at least, confirming what had
hitherto been unfolded concerning this accursed Scheme.

Court adjourned 'til Tomorrow Morning Ten o'clock.

Examination and Con^ession of Bastian, alias Tom Peal. Before one of the
Judges.
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT a little after New-Year Caesar (hanged) his Fellow Servants asked him
to go along with him down to Hughson's House: This was of a Sunday Afternoon,
before the Church was out: When he came there he found about Fifteen Negroes,
to the best of his Remembrance, in a Room with Hughson, his Wife and Daughter
(now under Condemnation) Caesar, hanged, was then present, and asked him the
Examinant (Caesar having a Pistol in his Hand, and clapping the same to the
Examinant's Breast) whether he would join along with them to become their own
Masters? The Examinant asked him, what he would have him join with him in?
Caesar answered him, in the Plot; for that they had designed to take the
Country, and said they had a Parcel of good Hands, Spanish Negroes, five or six
of them (then present) who would join with the York Negroes; that they expected
that War would be proclaimed in a little Time against the French; and that the
French and Spaniards would come here; and that they (meaning the Negroes
present and the Hughsons) would join with them to take the Place: At first the
Examinant answered No; and then Caesar said, if he did not join along with
them, swearing* he the Examinant should not go alive out of the House: Then he
offered the Examinant something to drink, and made him drink; and then Caesar
said, now he had got him; and the Examinant being affrighted, and very much
daunted upon Caesar's offering a Pistol at his Breast, was forced to consent;
Whereupon Caesar said to Hughson, the Examinant was but a weak-hearted Dog;
(...) ^et his Name down, It seems Hughson kept a List of the Confederates, and
used to put them down as they were sworn.
and I will encourage him up: Hughson answered, He would do it.

2. Says to the same Effect ^s Comfort's Jack[touching the Meeting and
Entertainment at Hughson's] with this further, that there was Veal, Ducks,
Geese, a Quarter of Mutton, and Fowls to the best of his Remembrance.

3. That Hughson, his Wife, and Daughter sat down to eat with the Negroes, with
this Difference, that they sat on one Side the Table, the Negroes on the other;
that the Cloth was laid on several Tables put together, and some Boards laid
upon Tubs.

4. That Peggy went in and out of the Room, but did not sit down with them; but
believes she must have heard them Discourse about the Plot carrying on, and
talked of at that Meeting.

5. That after they had done eating, the Maid and the Daughter helped take the
Things away; then John Hughson brought a Bible and laid it upon the Table; then
opened the Book, and seemed to read something out of it, which was in the
Nature of an Oath, That the first Thunder might strik^ them dead that
discovered, or did not stand to their Words to perform what they had engaged to
do: Hughson swore first; then his Wife; then his Daughter; and all the Negroes
present, as well as himself, and all kissed the Book* and Hughson pronounced
the Words they swore to, that is to say, To burn the Town, and murder the
People; but they were to stay till the Spaniards and French came, about a Month
and an half; and if they did not come in that Time, they were to begin
themselves; and that they were to begin with the Fort first.

6. That Capt. MARSHALL's Be^ (whom Hughson and the Negroes called Capt.
Marshall) was there when the Examinant came in: Jack (COMFORT's) came in before
the Cloth was laid, and after Caesar had clapped the Pistol to the Examinant's
Breast Compare this Examination with Jack, COMFORT's; 8 th June.


7. That Hughson took a Flask of Rum out of a Case, and put upon the Table, and
some Punch was made of it, and some drank dry Drams; and all the Negroes agreed
to what proposed as before. The Negroes then present [at Hughson's] were,
Caesar hanged. Prince hanged. Cuffee Philipse's. Quack Roosevelt's. Robin
Chambers's. Cuffee Gomez's. Jack Cook
Comfort's Caesar Peck's. York London
Marschalk's. Quash Rutger's* Ben, Capt. Marshall's. Powlus. Anthony P. De
Lancey's. Cato, Cowley's. Cato, Shurmur's. Harry, Kipp's Tickle Pitcher,
Carpenter's. Francis, Bosch's Cato or Toby Capt. Provoost whom they called
Capt. Provoost.
Every one to fire his Master's House, and th^^ fire the Fort; and to begin
next Mr. De Lancey's; And those that lived at the Fly, to burn Van Zant's
Storehouse, and begin the Fire there: Those at the Long-Bridge were to fire
there.

8. They broke up about Nine of the Clock, having made their Agreement. -- At
this Meeting was the first Discourse he heard about the Plot.

9. The Monday Night following he went to Hughson's, where they had a Frolic:
No Fiddle; and had the same Discourse again, all to stand true to their Words,
etc. Most Part of the same Company there again: Some he believes, could not
come out: They had agreed the Night before to meet again.

10. They met at Comfort's about a Fortnight after, on Sunday. Jack asked Sandy
to come in, etc. Sarah said he was an impudent Boy not to do as the Captain bid
him; Jack fetched Penknives, etc.

Negroes present at Comfort's.
He, Bastian, Curacoa Dick. Sandy. Sarah, Francis, Bosch's, Albany. Quack
[Roosevelt's] Robin. [Chambers's] Cook Jack
[Comfort's] Cuffee, Gomez's Harry, Kipp's Caesar, Peck's Ben, Marshall's
Anthony, [De Lancey's] Wan, Sarly's. Emanuel, Spanish Negro. [Wendover's] Cato,
Shurmur's. York, London,
Marschalk's Jack, Sleydall's.
11. Jack, COMFORT's, was to put his Master's Shingles on fire etc. To the
Purpose as Jack said See Jack' s Examination NUMB. I. 13, 8 th June.


BASTIAN seemed by his Looks and Behavior, upon his Examination, to be touched
with a Remorse for his Guilt, and was very ingenuous in his Confession*
insomuch. That he was thought an Object of Mercy, and would be a Witness worthy
of Credit; Therefore 'twas judged proper to recommend him to the Lieutenant
Govern or for a Pardon.

Supreme Court, FRIDAY, 12th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Bastian and Jamaica.

ORDERED, That the Execution of the Negro Bastian be respited till Friday the
19th Instant.

Some favorable Circumstances having been represented with re^pect to Jamaica;
The Court thought proper likewise to order his Execution to be respited till
Friday the 19th Instant.

The KING, against Negroes.
Quash, Ben, Cato, Fortune, Cato alias Toby,


THE Prisoners being set to the Bar, were arraigned for conspiring to burn the
whole Town and City of New York, and to kill and destroy the Inhabitants
thereof* And ^everally pleaded, Not Guilty.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning 10 o'Clock.

Examination and Confession of Will, alias Ticklepitcher, Negro, Taken before
One of the Judges.
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT he was one of the Company at Hughson's with (...) ^arcel of Negroes,
when North the Constable came, and interrupted them at a Feast.

2. That on the Sunday following, which was about Whitsontide Twelve Months,
Tom, belonging to Capta^n Row^* and Quamin^, belonging to the Estate of Harris,
in Stone-Street, asked him, Whether he would do as they would* The Examinant
asked them, what was that? Old Quamin^ answered, that they would set fire to
both Rows of Houses in Stone-Street, and he would find Powder, and Pistol and
Ball: The Examinant said, he would consider of it, he did not know whether he
would or no: Then Quamin^ pulled out a Razor and threatened to cut his Throat,
if he did not agree with them: Upon which he was forced to consent.

3. That about three Weeks after last New Year, One Day, about the Middle of
the Week, he (the Examinant) Albany, his Fellow Servant, the abovenamed Tom,
and the said Quamin^ were at the House of the said John Hughson, and had a
(...) of Punch, which Hughson brought to them.

4. That they, the said Negroes, together with Cato, Cowley's, Fortune,
Vanderspiegle's, Sarah, Burk's, London, Kelly's, (...), Varian's, (...) (...)
the Brewer, (...) Primus, (...) To^y, Latham^^, (...) Negro Fortune.
belonging to the said Latham. Capt. Lawrence's tall Negro Sterling.
Wan, called Indian Wan.
Low's yellow Fellow. Will, Bastian,
Vaarck's, Cuffee, Gomez's, Mink, Groesbeck's. Curacoa Dick, the Fiddler. Bill
or Will, (...) Sims's.
(in all he (...) between Twenty and Thirty) were all that he remembers to be
present at this Meeting at, Hughson's.

5. That the Day before this Meeting, the Negroes above named being (...)
present at Hughson's; h^ the said Hughson said to the Negroes* Now was a proper
Time to make a Plot, since there were so many of them together; that is to say,
They should undertake to burn the Town; to burn the Fort; ^o (...)
Stone-Street* Almost every one agreed, and underto^^ to burn their Master's and
Mistress's House; and to kill the white People as they came to extinguish the
Flames: He the Examinant wa^ to set his Mistress's House on fire; they pitched
upon him for it.

6. Hughson brought out a great Book to make them swear; Hughson swore himself
and Peggy ^^^st; and then swore all the Negroes; they p^^ting their Right Hand
every one upon the Book: The Purport of the OATH was, Damnation to Eternity to
the Failers, or those that brought out (i. e. discovered) what they had agreed
upon.

7. They were to bring all the Goods that they could get at the Fires to
Hughson's House; and after all over, Hughson was to carry them (the Negroes)
off^.

8. Hughson, to encourage this Meeting promised to give them a Barrel of Cider.

The Confession of Jack (Sleydall's) Before his Master and others.
He said,

1. THAT some Time after Christmas he was at the House of John Hughson, and
that there was a Supper there; and that Capt. MARSHALL's Ben, who sat at the
Head of the Table, Albany, Tickle,
Mrs. Carpenter's. Jack, Cook,
Comfort's. Mr. PECK's Negro. Caesar.
Quash, Rutgers's, Pedro, De Peyster's, Bastian, alias Tom Peal. Cato,
Cowley's, Caesar, Pintard's,
and several others were there; the Cloth being laid and taken away by Margaret
Kerry; -- after Supper, were dancing, and Mr. PHILIPSE's Cuff played on the
Fiddle; and that after they had done dancing, they made a Bowl of Punch; and
having for some Time drank, they said one to another, Let us set Fire to the
Town and kill the white People, and then we will make our Escape; and that they
all agreed to it, and swore on a Book, and kissed the Book; and that he the
said Jack told them, if they did it, he would try to help.

2. Being asked if Mr. JAY'S Brash was there, he said, He was not.

3. That he the said Jack, on a Saturday Night, took some Ashes and Coals from
his Master's House in a little Kettle, and put it under Mr. Murray's Haystack;
See (...) (Comfort's) Examination, NUMB. I. 3 (...). Monday, 8 th June.
that he was told to do it by Mr. DEPEYSTER's Pedro, who said, that after the
Stack was on fire, the others would set other Parts of the Town on fire.

THIS Day John Hughson, Sarah his Wife, and Margaret Kerry, were executed
according to Sentence.

The Undersheriff had often advised John Hughson to make a Confession about
the Conspiracy; but he always denied he knew any Thing of the Matter; said he
had deserved Death for receiving stolen Goods. The Wife was ever ^ullen; said
^^ttle or nothing, but denied all.

The Sheriffs observed John Hughson, when he was brought out of Jail to be
carried to Execution, to have a red Spot in each Cheek, about the Bigness of a
Shilling; which at that Time they thought very remarkable; for he was always
pale of Visage: These Spots continued all along to the Gallows: Amongst other
Discourse it seems he had said, he did not doubt but some remarkable Sign would
happen to him, to show his Innocence; concerning w^^ch more will be observed
upon hereafter: He stood up in the Cart all the Way, looking round about him as
if expecting to be rescued; as was by many conj^^^ured from the Air he appeared
in: One Hand was lifted up as high as his Pinion would admit of, and a Finger
pointing, as if intending to beckon.

At the Gallows his Wife stood like a lifeless Trunk, with the Rope about her
Neck tied up to the ^ree; she said not a Word, and had scarce any visible
Motion.

Peggy seemed much less resigned than the other two, or rather unwilling to
encounter Death: She was going to say something, but the Old Woman, who hung
next to her, gave her a Shove with her Hand, as was said by some, so Peggy was
silent.

But they all died, having protested their Innocence to the last, touching the
Conspiracy.

This Old Woman, as it has been generally reported, was bred a Papist; and
Peggy was much suspected of the same Persuasion, See Sarah Hughson' s
Confession, NUMB. II. 6. 22 d July.
though perhaps it may seem to be of little Significance what Religion such vile
Wretches professed.

Peggy had said several Times, as well after her Conviction as Condemnation for
the Conspiracy, as the Judges were informed by the Undersheriff, that she had
sworn alsly against John Romme; which was so gross a Prevarication, as
discouraged them from taking any further Pains with her, since there could be
no D^pendance upon what she should say: The Evening before her Execution she
sent a Message to Mr. Justice Philipse* signifying her Desire to speak with
him; he accordingly went to her; she declared to him, that she had forsworn
herself; for that all she had said about Romme and his Wife was false,
excepting as to their receiving the stolen Goods of the Negroes. -- From the
scanty Room in the Jail for the Reception of so many Prisoners, this miserable
Wretch, upon her Conviction with the Hughsons for the Co^^piracy, was put into
the same Cell with them; which perhap^ was an unfortunate Incident; for though
she had to the Time of their Trial screened them from the Charge of the
Conspiracy; yet there was Reason to expect, that upon the last Pinch, when she
found there was no Hopes of saving her own Life if she persisted, the Truth as
to this Particular would have come out: And indeed it was upon this Expectation
that she was brought upon Trial for the Conspiracy; for her several
Examinations before set forth, and what Arthur Price had sworn to have dropped
from her in accidental Talk in the Jail, had put it beyond Doubt, that she was
privy to many of the Hughson's Secrets concerning this detestable Confederacy;
but when she was admitted to the Hughsons, under the Circumstances of
Conviction and Condemnation for the Conspiracy, they most probably prevailed
with her to persevere in her Obstinancy, to the End to cover their own Guilt,
since they were determined to confess Nothing themselves; and they might drive
her to Desperation by subtle Insinuations, that the Judges she saw after they
had picked all they could out of her, whatever Expectations she might have
raised from her Confessions, or Hopes she flattered herself with of saving her
Life upon the Merit of them, yet after all, she was brought to Trial and
condemned for the Conspiracy, as well as they; and why should she expect Pardon
any more than they: And by such like Artifices it is probable they might stop
her Mouth, and prevent her making further Discovery; and not only so, but then
of Course prevail with her to recant, as to what she had confessed already.

John Hughson's Body was hung in Chains according to Sentence.

This Day also, Albany, Curacoa Dick and Francis, Negroes, were executed
according to Sentence,

The following Slaves were taken into Custody this Day, having been impeached
as Confederates in the Conspiracy: Mink, Groesbeck's. Quamino, Pemberton's.
Indian Wan, Low's. Mars, Becker's. Prim^s, De Brosse's. Tom, Rowe's. London,
Kelly's. Starling, Lawrence's. Bill, Ten Eyk's.


Supreme Court. SATURDAY, 13th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Antonio, DE LANCEY's: Antonio, MESNARD's. Pablo, alias
Powlus. Juan, alias Wan. Augustine.


THE five Prisoners being Spanish Negroes, lately imported into this City as
Prize Slaves, were put to the Bar; and arraigned upon an Indictment for the
Conspiracy, and thereto severally pleaded, Not Guilty, etc.

The KING, against Negroes.
Quash, Ben, Cato, COWLEY's Fortune, VANDERSPIEGLE's Cato alias Toby,


On Trial upon Indictment for the Conspiracy.

JURY called, and the Prisoners making no Challenges, the following Jurors were
sworn, viz.

Cornelius Clopper: Roger French. Coenradt Ten Eyck. Jacobus Keirstede.
Lawrence Garner. Henry Vandewater. Charles B^^kman. Elbert H^rre^. William
Bartlett. John Brewer. Richard Cook. James Jarrard.
The Attorney General having opened the Indictment proceeded as follows.

Gentlemen,

I SHALL show you, by the Witnesses for the King upon the Trial of these five
Negroes, that they, with many others, frequently met at Hughson's House, where
they entered into a Confederacy with and were sworn by him, to carry on this
most wicked and villainous Plot, and not to discover it, or that Hughson had
any Hand in it* and that they agreed to bring all their Booty to him, to enrich
him and make him great. -- Thus were these stupid Wretches seduced by the
Instigation of the Devil, and Hughson his Agent, to undertake so senseless, as
well as wicked an Enterprise; which must inevitably end in their own
Destruction, as now too late they find* and that in the Snares they laid for
us, they themselves are taken. -- Gentlemen, It cannot be imagined that these
silly unthinking Creatures (Hughson's black Guard) could of themselves have
(...), and carried on so deep, so direful and destructive a Scheme, as that we
have seen with our Eyes, and have heard fully proved they had prepared for us,
without the Advice and Assistance of such abandoned Wretches as Hughson was. --
That never-to-be forgotten Hughson, who is now gone to his Place, as did Judas
of old to his.

Gentlemen,

These Negro Prisoners being drawn into this abominable Conspiracy by others,
does not give them the least Umbrage of Excuse; they are equally as guilty as
if they themselves had devised it, by consenting to it, taking Oaths to proceed
in it, and in the mean Time to keep it secret.

Gentlemen,

The Number of the Conspirators is very great; for besides these five Negroes,
Fourteen others, and four white People, which I have been concerned in the
several Trials of* have already been convicted, and received Sentence of Death;
and we have still daily new Discoveries of many more; but have now, God be
thanked, Encouragement to hope, that we shall soon reach to the Bottom of this
Mystery of Iniquity.

Gentlemen,

Be pleased to observe, That all the Prisoners now to be tried, being Negroes,
the Evidence of one Negro against another, is, by a Law of this Province made
sufficient; which I thought necessary to put you in mind of, because several
Negro Witnesses will be examined against these five Negro Prisoners: And when
you have heard their Charge clearly proved against them; I doubt not but you
will, for your own Sakes, your Oath's Sake, and for the future Peace and
Security of this City and Province, find th^se Negroes guilty.

Witnesses for the KING.
Mary Burton, Sworn. Negroes.
Jack, Comfort's. Sawney, alias Sandy, Ticklepitcher, alias Will, Pompey,
Leffert's, Jack, Sleydall's. Bastian.

BASTIAN, being placed at the Bar, and asked, what he had to say why he should
not suffer Death according to the Sentence pronounced against him? he produced
a Pardon; which he prayed might be read and allowed; and the same being read,
was allowed of accordingly: Of COUNCIL for the KING, with
Mr. ATTORNEY GENERAL, Mr. MURRAY, Mr. CHAMBERS,
Who examined the Witnesses against the Prisoners.

MARY BURTON said, She had seen Capt. Ben, Quash, Cato (PROVOOST's) and Cato
(COWLEY's) amongst the Conspirators at the Meetings at Hughson's and that they
were all four consenting, and as forward as the Rest for burning the Town and
killing the white People. She did not remember that she had seen Fortune at
those Meetings; but thought she knew his Face.

Jack (COMFORT'S) said, he saw Capt. Ben, Quash, and Cato (PROVOOST's) at the
Meeting of the Conspirators at Hughson's on the Sunday; and that there they
talked of burning the Town and killing the white People, and that they were
consenting and as forward and busy as the rest. And that Fortune, Ca^^
(COWLEY's) and Ben were at the great Meeting at his House His Master's.
about Ten Days before the Fort burnt, where they had the same Talk of the Plot
as at Hughson's, and they were all consenting. -- Jack said he brought nine
Knives, and distributed amongst them at this Meeting, with which they were to
cut their Master's and Mistress's Throats: That he met Cato (PROVOOST's) in the
Street on Saturday Evening, who told him, he had done Business to Day; that he
had set Ben Thomas' s House on fire.

Sandy said, That he saw Fortune and Cato (COWLEY's) at Comfort's, at the great
Meeting there about a Fortnight before the Fort burnt; and that they agreed
amongst the rest, to burn the Town, and kill the white People.

Bastian confirmed Mary Burton's Evidence, and likewise Jack (Comfort's) That Been, Cato (Cowley's) and Quash, and also Fortune, were at the great Meeting on
a Sunday at Hughson's, when they were talking of burning the Town, and killing
the People. And further, That they were all sworn to do it, and to keep secret.
That he likewise saw Ben, Cato (Cowley's) and Quash at Comfort's on a Sunday
about a Fortnight before the Fort burnt, and the Talk was the same amongst them
there, and they all consented. He said there were two Rooms full of Negroes
there, the Kitchen and the Shop, as he was told, but he was only in the Kitchen.

Will, alias Tickle or Ticklepitcher, said he was at Comfort's at the great
Meeting about a Fortnight before the Fort burnt, and he there saw Fortune, Ben
and Cato (Cowley's) and spoke as to what passed there, as the foregoing
Witnesses Jack, Sandy and Bastian. And further that Cato (Cowley's) went to the
Pump to wash his Hands, and Fortune ^umped the Water for him.

Pompey (Leffert's) against Quash, said the same as in his Examination and
Confession 9 th June; and that Quash was to burn his Master's House* and he and
Quack (Roosevelt's) were to kill the white People; and that they preva^led upon
him to consent to do so too.

Jack (Sleydall's) said he was at the great Meeting of the Negroes at
Hughson's, on a Sunday about a Fortnight before the Fort burnt, where they were
talking of burning the Town and killing the People; and that Quash, Ben and
Cato (Cowley's) were there, and that they agreed and were sworn.

Note, These are all the Minutes of the Evidence that were taken at the Trial.

See the Negro Evidence more fully in the respective Negro Witness's
Examinations and Confessions, as follows.

Evidence particularly affecting Capt. Ben.
Jack (Comfort's) Exa. No. I. 1, 2, 11, 29, 31. 8 th June. Bastian's
Examination, I. 2. 11 th June. Jack (Sleydall's) Examination, 12 th June.
Tickle's Examination, No. I. 11. 12 th June. Evidence particularly affecting
Quash.
Jack (Comfort's) Exam. No. I. 2, 3, 21, 31. 8 th June. Pompey (Leffert's)
Exam. I. 9 th June. Bastian's Examination, I. 11 th June. Jack (Sleydall's)
Examination, 12 th June. Evidence particularly affecting Cato al. Toby.
Jack (Comfort's) Exam. No I. 2, 8, 31, 39. 8 th June. Bastian's Examination I.
11 th June. Evidence particularly affecting Cato.
Sandy's Examination, No II. 1. 25 th May. III. 8. 1 st June.. Jack (Comfort's)
Examine. I. 31. 8 th June. Bastian's Examination I. 11 th June. Tickle's
Examination, 4. 12 th June. Jack (Sleydall's) Examination, 12 th June. Evidence
particularly affecting Fortune.
Sandy's Examination, No II, 1, 2. 25 th May. III. 9. 1 st June. Jack
(Comfort's) Examine. I. 31. 8 th June. Tickle's Examination, I. 12 th June.

Witnesses called for the Prisoners, as to their Characters, Mr. Vanderspeigle
(Fortune's Master) Mr. Lodge. Isaac, Mr. Vanderspiegle's Servant.


The Prisoners asked the Witnesses no material Questions, but upon their
Defense denied all that was testified against them. Then

Mr. Murray summed up the Evidence against Ben, Quash, and Cato (COWLEY'S)

Mr. Chambers summed up the Evidence against Fortune, and Cato (PROVOOST'S)

Then the Jury being charged, withdrew for a little Time; and being returned,
found them all Guilty of the Indictment.

Court adjourned till Monday Morning Ten o'Clock.

This Day Pedro (DE PEYSTER'S) Fortune and Tony (LATHAM'S) Prince (GABRIEL
CROOKE'S) Negroes, were apprehended and committed.

Confession of Prince (Gabriel Crooke's) Negro, Taken before One of the Judges.
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT on the Day that Cuffee and Quack were executed, he the said Prince and
York (MARSCHALK'S) were at the Execution, and whilst they were looking on them
in the Flames, York said to him (Prince, having first taken Notice of the great
Numbers of white People present) That then was a fit Time for them (the
Negroes) to rise; to which he (Prince) answered, that he did not think so, for
as there were a great Number of the People, perhaps they might only kill one or
two, and then they should be taken, and hanged for it; that it was not a right
Time to begin now, there was too much Trouble in the Town; and York said no
more.

Tickle Pitcher's Examination and Confession, Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. II.
BEING asked who brought him into the Conspiracy, and when he went to Hughson's?

1. He said, He was carried there by Albany last Whitsontide was Twelve Months;
and the second Time was about three Weeks after Christmas, when several
Negroes present, Hughson, Wife, Daughter, and Peggy: When Hughson administered
the Oath on the Book, of Damnation to Eternity to them who failed or discovered.

Persons there (Negroes) were all sworn.
Will, Vaarck's. Caesar, hanged, Albany, Himself,
Carpenter's. London, Kelley's. Worcester, Varian's. Jack, Sleydall's. Old Tom,
Rowe's. Quamino, Pemberton's. [ Wan] Indian, Low's. Sarah. Burk's. Fortune,
Vanderspiegle's. Mars, Benson's. Primus, Debrosse's. Tony, and Fortune.
Another,
Latham's Curacoa Dick. Cuffee, Gomez's. Harry, Kipp's. Cato, Cowley's.
Sterling.
Lawrence' s tall Negro.
2. He said, That the following Persons were one Sunday Evening at Comfort's.
Jack, Cook,
Comfort's. Antonio, De Lancey's. Five other Spanish Negroes, whose Names not
known. Min^, Groesbeck's. Jack, Breasted's. Sawney, Niblet's. Sarah, Burk's.
Jack, Sleydall's. Ben, Capt. Marshall's. J^^^y
Comfort's Wench Cato, Cowley's. [St^rling] Lawrence's tall Negro. Dundee,
Todd's.
That the Talk there was the same as at Hughson's, of setting Houses on fire,
stealing of Goods, and carrying them to Hughson' s, who was to carry them off.

3. They all pulled out their Knives, whetted them, etc. as described by Sandy,
and took Notice of Sarah's threatening Sandy, etc.

4. That (...) were swo^^ at Comfort's, that is to say, Those who were not
sworn Hughson's; The Oath was given by Ben, something of Thunder.

5. That ROWE's Tom was to be a Drummer to give Notice on firing the Houses, to
kill the People, and Plunder.

6. Being asked to tell us more of the Names of the Negroes who were at
Hughson's and Comfort's, he said, he does not now remember their Names; there
were several more.

7. Says, the Spaniarde had black Stuff to set Houses on fire,

8. That the tall Man Antonio, and SARLY'S Juan had of it; and that Juan owned
to him in Company at Comfort's, that he set fire to the House of Ben Thomas.

9. That Cuffee (GOMEZ's) told him, he had done what be promised, he had set
Van Zant' s Storehouse on fire; and on which Tickle said, you should not have
done it, till we are all ready.

10. Being asked, if ever he had seen at their Meeting at Comfort's, and
Hughson's, Mr. MOORE's Cato, ^^^LISH's Patrick, TODD's Dundee, PINTARD's
Caesar, JAY's Brash; Capt. Lush's Negro, and the Governor's Danby; he answered,
he never saw any of them there but Dundee: Heard ENGLISH's Patrick's N^^^
called over at Comfort's, for they had a List of them on a Paper.

11. And being asked who had the List? He said, Ben had it; and that there was
a List of them at Hughson's, as well as Comfort's.

Supreme Court: MONDAY, 15th JUNE,
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Quash, Rutgers's. Ben, Marshall's. Cato, Cowley's. Fortune, Vanderspeigle's.
Cato alias Toby, Provoost's.


THE Criminals being placed at the Bar, were asked, what they had to say, why
Sentence of Death should not be pronounced against them; they offered nothing,
but Protestations of their Innocence.

Then the Third Justice proceeded as follows.

YOU, the Criminals at the Bar, hearken to what is now to be said to you.

You Ben, by the Course of the Evidence appear to have been a principal
Ringleader in this most horrid and devilish Conspiracy, this Mast-piece of
Villainy.

You, no doubt, (...) ^^steemed amongst these infernal Confederates, a deep
P^^^^^cian; and was therefore fixed upon to be an Officer, nothing less than a
Captain, a Commander of an Hundred at least.

And so exact a Man were you in your Business and Trust, that, it seems, you
kept a ^ist: You say you cannot read; but so active and forward have you
appeared in this Villainy, that a List of this black Band was committed to your
Care, as appeared in Evidence: And you gave sufficient Reasons for ga^ning
entire Credit with them; for you insinuated yourself into their Opinions, by
showing them how useful a Person you could be to them, from your Master's great
Indulgence and entire Confidence in you: You could go into any Room in his
House; you knew were his Gun^ and (...) Arms were, and could come at them; a
considerable Number, no less than Thirty where stored in a Room in (...)
Outhouse: You ^id, and used your Master's Horse oftener than he did himself,
(...) you said upon your Trial; and therefore could, no doubt, the sooner
mu^^er your Company, visit your Confederate^, and make Dispatch: These were
some Particulars of your Merits to recommend you to these Assa^^ins, these
Murderers.

Thou v^le Wretch! How much does thy Ingratitude enhance your Guilt! And your
hypocritical, canting Behavior upon your Trial, your Protestations of
Innocence, your Dissimulation before God and Man, will be no small Article
against you at the Day of Judgment; for ye have all Souls to be saved or to be
damned; your Spirits are immortal, that is to say, They will live forever, to
be either eternally happy or eternally miserable in the other World: And be not
deceived, God will not be mocked; he will not be baffled withal; he knows all
your Thoughts, and sees all your Actions, and will reward every one according
to their Works; those that have done good shall go into everlasting Rest and
Happiness; that is to say, into Life eternal; and they that have done evil, and
dye hardy and impenient, shall be thrown into the infernal Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, together with the Devil and his accursed Spirits, where the Worm
never dies; that is, the biting, gnawing Worm of Conscience will forever be
upbraiding you, and the Fire will never be quenched; but in this Torment you
must remain under the most bitter Weeping, Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, Time
without End.

If you would not have this your Portion, then let us tell you and admonish
you, in Compassion to your wretched miserable Souls, immediately to confess
your Guilt, your horrid Sins, before God and Man, and discover your
Accomplices, that you may prevent all further Mischief, which may otherwise
happen from this your hellish Conspiracy; sincerely and heartily bewail your
heinous and crying Sins, and entreat Forgiveness of God Almighty; for upon
these Considerations only, can you entertain any rational or well grounded Hope
of being received into the Arms of his Mercy.

And now, What is the End of all these your most wicked, detestable, and
horrible Devices? Why, you have succeeded so far as to put Part of your
accursed Scheme in Execution; You have burnt down and consumed the King's House
and Buildings in the Fort; the House of Van Zant, and have made Attempts to
burn several others, which God Almighty in Mercy and his wonderful and gracious
good Providence, has prevented, by suffering the Flames to be timely
extinguished; the Villainies of these diabolical Confederates have been
detected; many of them have already met with their Deserts, and are gone to
their long Homes, whither you are in a few Hours to follow them; for you are
now also delivered into the Hands of our Laws, and in this World you must have
Justice, and you are left to the Mercy of God in the next.

What has already been said, is applicable, most of it, to every one of you.

And, in as particular a Manner, Quash, may you be upbraided with the like
Reproaches for your Ingratitude; for as we have been informed, you have
likewise had a very indulgent Master, who has put great Trust and Confidence in
you; it may be presumed, from your having better Sense than the rest of his
Negroes; how vilely then have you abused his Indulgence! In return for
Kindnesses, you Wretches, would imbrue your Hands in the Blood of your Masters,
and their Families; you that would destroy without Mercy, with what Face can
you expect Mercy at the Hands of God, unless you acknowledge every one his
Guilt, and bewail it with hearty Sorrow, and sincere Tears of Repentance; and
beseech his Forgiveness; laying open the whole wicked Scheme, and discovering
your several Confederates and Accomplices, all the Parties concerned; so that
an effectual Stop may be put to all further Mischief: Upon these Conditions
only can you expect Mercy at the Hands of God Almighty.

As to you two Catoes, and you Fortune.

You appear, indeed, to have been inferior Agents; but your Hearts as corrupt
and ripe for Mischief as any of the Rest; You have all alike taken, that
hellish, execrable Oath, and equally bound yourselves in that villainous
Engagement; not only to burn and consume your Master's Substance; but to murder
and destroy their Persons and Families; you were as willing and ready as the
Ablest of them to act your Parts in this bloody Scheme.

It is a very irksome Task to pronounce that Sentence which the Law requires of
us; for we delight not in any Man's Blood; but the Law adjudges you unfit to
live.

Therefore the Sentence against you, is

That you, each and every of you, be carried from hence to the Place from
whence you came, from thence to the Place of Execution, where you Ben, and you
Quash, are to be each of you chained to a Stake, and burnt to Death.

And you Cato (Mr. PROVOOST's) you Cato (Mr. COWLEY's) and you Fortune, are
each and every of you to be hanged by the Neck until you be severally dead.

And the Lord, of his infinite Mercy, have Compassion upon your poor wretched
Souls.

Ordered, That the Execution of Cato (COWLEY's) Fortune and Cato alias Toby, be
on the Morrow the 16th Instant, between the Hours of Nine and One of the same
Day; And

That the Execution of Ben and Quash be on the Morrow the 16th Instant, between
the Hours of Three and Seven o'Clock of the Afternoon of the same Day.

The KING against Slaves.
Antonio, DE LANCEY's. Antonio, MESNARD's. Juan alias Wan, SARLY's. Pablo al.
Powlus, BECKER's. Augustine, McMULLEN's.


THIS being the Day appointed for the Trial of these Prisoners as Slaves upon
an Indictment for the Conspiracy, on which they were arraigned on Saturday
last, they were brought to the Bar in order to proceed thereon: But they
complained (as it is supposed, they were advised) that they had great Injustice
done them by being sold here as Slaves; for that, as they pretended, they were
Freemen in their own Country, and gave in their several Sir-names.

The Indictment was grounded upon an Act of Assembly 4 th GEO. II. For the more
effectual preventing and punishing the Conspiracy and Insurrection of Negro and
other Slaves, etc. before mentioned on Trial of Quack and Cuffee, 29 th May.
which enumerated several Offenses; and Conspiracies amongst the rest; and made
one Slave Evidence against another; so that this Fetch might probably be
calculated to take off the Negro Evidence: The Prisoners all protested they
could not speak English; and as Mary Burton was the only white Evidence against
them, and should it be credited that they could speak only in a Tongue which
she did not understand, how could she tell what passed between them in
Conversation at Hughson's? Thus their Advisers might think they would stand the
best Chance for the Jury to acquit them.

The Court deferred their Trial till Wednesday the 17th Instant.

Court adjourned 'til Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

The Examination of Fortune (Latham's) Negro. Before the Grand Jury.
He said,

THAT about five Months ago being at Comfort's on a Holliday, he met there Jack
and Cook (COMFORT's) and Harry (FURMAN's) and Comfort's old Negro Woman; That
Jack and Cook went out of the House and left him with Harry, who asked him if
he would not be concerned with them, in helping them to kill the white People?
Which was all that passed at that Time; and he never had any other Meeting with
them afterward; nor did any of them ever after talk with him on that Subject;
^^d that this is all that he knew of the Plot.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Tickle's Examination and Confession, 4. 12 th June.

Supreme Court. TUESDAY, 16th JUNE.
PRESENT. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
York, London,
MARSCHALK's. Harry, KIP's. Tom, B. MOORE's. Cato, SHURMUR's Mink, GROESBECK's


THE Prisoners being put to the Bar, were arraigned on an Indictment for the
Conspiracy, etc. and York, London, Harry and Cato, pleaded Not Guilty; and Tom
and Mink pleaded Guilty, and submitted themselves to the Mercy of the Court.

Court adjourned 'til Tomorrow Morning Nine o'Clock.

This Day the Negroes Cato (Cowley's) Fortune (Vanderspeigle's) Cato alias
Toby, Ben and Quash, were executed according to their respective Sentences.

Supreme Court: WEDNESDAY, 17th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Spanish Negroes.
Antonio, DE LANCEY's, Antonio, MESNARD's, Pablo, BECKER's Juan, alias Wan,
SARLY's. Augustine, Mc MULLEN's


THE Prisoners being set to the Bar, were arraigned upon a Second Indictment,
for counselling and advising the Negro Quack, to burn the Fort, etc* by the
Names of Antonio de St. Benedito, Antonio de la Cruz, Pablo Ventura Angel, Juan
de la Sylva, Augustine Gutierez; whereto they severally pleaded, Not Guilty,
etc.

Then the Court proceeded upon their Trials on both Indictments.

JURY called, and the following Jurors sworn, Viz.
John Bell. Robert Provoost. Charles Jand^ne. Andrew Jer^a^. John Dyer. Evert
Byvank. Tobias Stoutenburgh. Cornelius Bogart. Stenwick De^iemer. George
Burnet. Charles B^^kman, j^n. Samuel Dunscomb.
Esqrs. Of Council for the KING.
JOSEPH MURRAY, JAMES ALEXANDER, JOHN CHAMBERS,
Mr. Chambers opened the Indictment.

Mr. Gomez Sworn Interpreter.

Witnesses for the KING called.

MARY BURTON Sworn. She said, That she had seen many Meetings of the Negroes at
Hughson's, and especially about New-Year; and that it was the common Talk among
them and the Hughsons, that they would burn the Town and murder the People;
that Hughson swore the Negroes to be true to him, and to each other, and not to
discover; that they were to burn the Fort; then the Fly, and murder the People.
That Hughson said, they would burn Lush's House, and tie Lush to a Beam, and
roast him like a Piece of Beef: That there were several great Meetings there;
and that she had seen Anthony (De Lancey's) often there at Nights; that he was
there when they talked about Fires, and some of them said, the Spaniards could
fight well. -- That she thought the said Anthony was there about New-Year; but
was sure she saw him there often in March; and that he often spoke to her in
English; and that she had heard him say, While the York Negroes killed one, the
Spaniards could kill Twenty: That he used to come upon the Shingles and get
into Peggy's Window. -- That she had seen all the Prisoners at Hughson's, when
they were talking about the Plot, and they were consenting.

Sawney said, He knew Mr. De Lancey's Antonio, and heard him say, with five
other Spaniards, pointing to Capt. Lush's House, D -- m that Son of a B -- h,
if he did not carry them to their own Country, they would ruin the City, and
play the D -- l with him: That they spoke English, and this happened near Capt.
Lush's House: And Capt. Sarly's Negro [ Juan] said, he would first burn Lush's
House, and then his Master's. -- That one of them rolled something black in his
Hand, and broke it, and gave to the rest; which was to be thrown on the Houses,
to set fire to the Shingles in several Places. -- That the Brewer's Negro [
Pablo] was also there: That this was the first Time he heard any Thing about
the Plot. -- That one Sunday, going for Tea-Water, he saw Mr. Philipse's Cuff
at his Master's Storehouse, and he swore, that if he was hanged or burnt, he
would fire the Storehouse. That he then went to Comfort's, where there was many
Negroes, and six Spanish Negroes, amongst them Mc Mullen's Negro [ Augustine]
and Mesnard's [ Antonio] that they made him (the Witness) drink Rum; and they
whet their Knives, and said they were sharp, and would cut the white Men's
Heads off; and they agreed to burn the Fort and their Master's Houses; to kill
their Masters and take the white Women for Wives; and they swore upon the
Thunder to be true to each other: That this was on a Sunday Evening about a
Fortnight before the Fort was burnt: That what he heard near Lush's, was about
the Middle of last Summer: That he heard Mc Mullen's Negro [ Augustine] and
Wilkins's Fortune agree each of them to burn his Master's House, which was near
Mr. Smith the Tavern-keeper's, before the Fort was burnt.

Mr. GEORGE JOSEPH MOORE, called and sworn.

He proved the Confessions of Quack and Cuffee at the Stake.

He said, That they declared the Spanish Negroes were most of them concerned in
the Plot; that they did not name any Names but referred to Sawny, who, they
said, could name them all.

Jack (Comfort's Negro) said, That after New-Year there was a great Company of
Negroes at Hughson's on a Sunday Evening; that he went with Capt, Marshall' s
Ben thither, and he supped there, and all the Prisoners were present, which was
in February; that all present agreed to burn the Town, and they were all sworn.
-- That ten Days before the Fort was burnt, they had a Meeting at his Master's
[ Comfort's] and there they all swore to burn the Town, and kill the People;
that they were first to begin at Mr. De Lancey's, and so to go to the Fort;
that they sharpened their Knives, and he let nine have Knives that had none:
That he bought the Knives of Pablo for half a Crown: That there w as only two
Spaniards there, to wit, Antonio (Mr. De Lancey's) and Pablo (Becker's) and
that Mr. De Lancey's Negro, said he had Stuff to throw on the Houses to make
them get fire, which Hughson had talked about before: -- That they were to stay
a Month and an half for the Spaniards, and if they did not come, to begin
themselves.

Tickle Pitcher said, That about three Weeks after New-Year he saw all the
Prisoners at Hughson's on a Sunday Evening with one Spanish Negro more; and Mr.
De Lancey's Negro [ Antonio] had something black, which he said was to throw on
Houses to set them on fire; and he cut it in Pieces, and gave to several of the
Negroes. That he [the Witness] did not then stay at Hughson's, so did not hear
what they talked of. -- That afterward there was a great Meeting of the
Negroes at Comfort's, and he saw Juan and Augustine there; and it was agreed by
those present to set the Town on ^ir^, and kill the white People; and there
they sharpened their Knives. -- That Mr. Niblet' s Sawney was also there, and
Burk' s Sarah, who told him, that they were making a Plot to kill the White
People, burn the Houses, and to steal the Money and Goods, and go off* There
were two Rooms full of (...), some were in the Kitchen and some in the Shop.

Bastian said, He knew all the Prisoners, and had known them ever since the
Meeting at Hughson's, which was a little after New-Year, where the Prisoners
all were; that it was on a Sunday Afternoon, that Caesar and Hughson took him
aside, and Caesar asked him, if he would do as they did; which was to endeavor
to be their own Masters; that upon his refusing, Caesar put a Pistol to his
Breast, and threatened him, and then he consented. -- That then they went in the
Room to the rest of the Negroes, where it was agreed to burn the Fort first,
then by Mr. De Lancey' s, then in the Fly; and each to set fire to their
Masters Houses, and they were to murder the White People: That this Meeting was
three or four Weeks before the Fort was burnt. -- That Quack was pitched upon
to set fire to the Fort: That they were to wait a Month and an half for the
French and Spaniards, and if they did not come they were to begin themselves.
That Hughson put his Name in a Paper, when he consented: That afterward they
had a Meeting at Comfort's where they ground some clasp Knives. That Sawney
came there, and Comfort's Jack called him in and gave him a Dram, and at last,
after threatening him, Sawney agreed to be concerned in the Plot. That the
Prisoners Antonio, De Lancey's,; and Pablo, Becker's Spanish Negroes were then
there, and consented. That at Comfort's some were in the Kitchen, some in the
Shop. That Mr. De Lancey's Negro Antonio, had something black in his Hand,
which he cut and gave to other Negroes to throw on Houses to set them on Fire.
-- That Hughson proposed burning the Fort before any Thing else; because at a
former Rising, the white People run into the Fort; he said, if that was set on
fire it would blow up the Powder, etc.

RICHARD NICHOLLS, Esquire; Deputy Register of the Admiralty, sworn.

He said, That the Nineteen Negroes and Molattoes, taken and brought in by
Capt. Lush, were libelled in the Court of Admiralty, as Spanish Slaves, and
condemned as such in May 1740; and Pablo, Becker's, was condemned as a Slave
taken by Capt. Ki^rstead.

JOHN CRUGER, Esquire; Vendue-Master.

He said, That he afterward sold Antonio, De Lancey's; Antonio, Mesnard's; and
Juan, Sarly's at Vendue.

Capt. JOHN LUSH sworn.

He said, That Juan, Sarly's could spe^k English, and Antonio, De Lancey's,
could speak a little, so as to be understood.

WILLIAM DOUGLASS, sworn.

He said, He was taken in Capt. Hinman^s Vessel with Mr. De Lancey's Antonio's
Brother; that they were carried into the Havanna, and that a Gentleman there
bought Antonio's Brother as a Slave, and said he knew him and his Family at
Carthagana, and that they were Slaves.

Mr. BENSON, Partner with Mr. Becker, Pablo's Master, Sworn.

Being asked whether he had any such Clasp Knives as Jack (Comfort' s) had
described, and said he had bought of Pablo? He answered, That he had had a
Parcel of clasp Knives: but whether he had sold them, or whether he had them
still, he could not say; but that he would go home and see, if the Court
pleased.

[And he going accordingly; and being returned]

Said, That upon Search he found that he had none of those Knives left, but
one; that his Wife told him, that they had brought but three of them when they
came to Becker's. -- He said, That Pablo talked very broken English, but he
could make a Shift to understand him.

Witnesses for the Prisoner Antonio, (DE LANCEY's)

Mr. PETER DE LANCEY, Merchant, said,

That his Negro went to his Farm in the Country last Fall, and did not return
'til two Days after the Fire at the Fort* That he was not there all the while
himself, but was frequently there, and saw him lame, his Feet being frozen, and
he did not think he could have been in Town in that Time.

ABRAHAM PELTREAU said.

That Mr. De Lancey's Negro went up with him to the Farm before Chirstmass, and
came down with him after the Fort was burnt; and that his Feet were frozen
after the first great Snow, and does not know that he was in Town all the
Winter* That his Feet were well some time before he came down.

Witnesses for Antonio (MESNARD's)

Dr. DUPUY, senior, said,

That Antonio (Mesnard's) Feet were frozen, and that he dressed them during
December and January last.

Dr. DUPUY, junior, said,

That the latter End of November and December last, this Negro was (...) and he
saw his Toes in December, and then they were bad, so that he could not walk;
but he did not know whether he was able to walk in February or not: That he [
Antonio] came to his Father's House the Beginning or Middle of March, the Time
he could not exactly say, but it was before the Fire at the Fort.

GILBERT BUDD said,

That he dressed this Negro from the Middle of November to the 5th or 6th of
March last; that he thinks Mrs. Mesnard told him, that he came down Stairs
about the latter End of February, when his Feet grew bad again; for they had
been better before.

FRANCIS DUPUY said,

He thought the Negro was not able to walk in February; but believed he came to
his Father's House to be dressed while Mr. Budd was in Philadelphia, which was
between the 6th and 11th of March. -- That this Negro spoke to him in broken
English.

Mrs. MESNARD, this Negro's Mistress, said,

That he was not down Stairs from November 'til the 17th of March and she
believed it was not possible for him to be abroad at that time

Witness for Juan.

Capt. JACOB SARLY, his Master, said,

That when the Fire was at Mr. Thomas's, Juan his Negro first discovered it to
his Wife, as she told him; and that he never had a more faithful Servant; and
when he was at home, the Negro could not be out after Nine at Night. -- That
one Don Juan told him by an Interpreter that he heard that his Negro was free.

Further, That he was not always at home himself, but he did not believe his
Negro had been out.

Witness for Pablo.

FREDERICK BECKER, Pablo's Master, said,

That his Negro was brought into this Country by Capt. Boyd, in January last,
and was sick in his House 'til some time in March.

Witness for Augustine.

Mc MULLEN, his Master, said,

That his Negro was sick all the Winter, and did not know that he was abroad
all the Winter -- In February he had an Ague, as the Doctor said, that he kept
his Bed most of the Time, but not constant but about a Week. -- That he always
behaved very well, and Capt. Warren gave him a very good Character. -- That he
was brought by Capt. Warren into this Country* who offered to sell him to him
for 70 l. but they did not agree.

WILLIAM QUINLAND said,

He lived at Mr. Mc Mullen's, and that this Negro behaved very well; that he
did not know that he had been out all the Winter 'til Easter.

THOMAS PALMER said to the same Purpose.

The Prisoners upon their Defense denied all in general that was alleged
against them, and made great Protestations of their Innocence; and most of them
pretended to have been sick or lame, so that they were incapable of going
abroad from New-Year to the Time of the Fire at the Fort, [the Eighteenth of
March] neither could they speak English.

Antonio, (De Lancey's) said in particular. That his Master and the Overs^er
could prove that he had been lame, and was in the Country all the Winter, and
that his Master had him to Town a little after the Fort burnt; and that he had
not kept Company with any Negroes since he came to the Country.

Augustine said he had been sick ever since he came here; that he knew no
Negroes, kept no Company but Mc Mullen's Apprentices.

Pablo or Powlus said, That he kept no Company with Negroes since he came here;
he had not been used to keep Company with Negroes [ or Slaves] in his own
Country.

Juan or Wan spoke much to the same Purpose, he did not use to keep Company
with Negroes [ or Slaves.]

Antonio (Mesnard's) was sick and lame, etc.

Act of Assembly read, 4th GEO. II. For the more effectual preventing and
punishing the Conspiracy and Insurrection of Negroes, etc.

Act of Parliament read, 4th and 5th PH. and MARY, ^h 4^.

Mr. Chambers summed up the Evidence against Antonio (DE LANCEY's) Antonio
(MESNARD's) and Pablo.

Mr. Murray summed up against Augustine and Juan.

Then the Court charged the Jury as follows.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

THE Prisoners at the Bar stand charged upon two several Indictments, for
conspiring to burn and destroy this City, and murder the Inhabitants.

The one Indictment is grounded upon an Act of Assembly of this Province,
supposing them to be Slaves, by which Act the Testimony of one Negro Slave
shall be legal Evidence against another.

But it has been made a Question, whether these Prisoners, now before us, are
Slaves or not; and the Prisoners themselves pretend to be free Subjects of the
King of Spain, with whom we are now at War, from whom they have been taken, and
made Prize, and have been condemned, and adjudged as such in the Court of
Admiralty here, without any Plea being offered there, or so much as any Claim
or Pretense of the Prisoners being entitled to any Privilege, as being free
Subjects of Spain; and surely, there never could have been a more proper Time
and Season for them to have set up such Pretense, as when their Case was
depending before the Court of Admiralty, where they should have offered it by
Way of Plea; especially considering, that by their Neglect of that Opportunity,
they must well know the Consequence would be their being adjudged as Part of
the Goods and Chattels of the Subjects of Spain, would be condemned as lawful
Prize, and would also be sold as Slaves; but if this Pretense had been offered
there, (as it was not) and they could not have proved the Truth of the Plea, it
would not have availed them; but they must have been adjudged to be Slaves.

But they have made that Pretense in this Court; and what has been offered in
Support of it? Why, there has been several Witnesses that have spoke to the
Point; and what is the Amount of their Testimony? Why, it is no more than the
Hearsay of an Hearsay of a Person, who imagined or believed, that they, or most
of the Spanish Negroes taken by Capt. Lush were Freemen; but which of them
were, or were not, he could not say; nor does it appear, that the Prisoners at
the Bar, or any of them, are such of Capt. Lush's Prize-Prisoners, as that the
said Spanish Gentleman imagined were Free; for it was no more than his
Imagination, as to any of them being such.

You have heard the Adjudication and Decree of the Court of Admiralty read, by
which it appears, they were condemned as Prize; and that they were sold as
Slaves, has been proved by the Vendue-Master; therefore for what appears now
before the Court, it should seem, that they realy are Slaves: And as nothing
appears; no sufficient or proper Evidence appears to the Contrary; then if you
take them upon these Considerations, to be Slaves; all the Negro Evidence which
has been given upon this Trial against them, is legal Evidence; and so you are
to consider of that Testimony, and let it have its full Force; and if you
should have sufficient Reasons in your own Consciences to discredit them, and
that notwithstanding the Weight of that Evidence, you can think them, or any of
them, not guilty, you will then say so, and acquit them, or such of them as you
think Innocent as to the Charge of this Indictment, upon the Act of Assembly.

Gentlemen,

The Prisoners having started this Pretense, of being free Subjects of the King
of Spain, in case it should have happened upon this Trial, as we think it has
not, that there should be sufficient Evidence to show that the Prisoners were
Freemen; if we could take them to be such; is it fit, that Persons guilty of so
atrocious and enormous Crimes (let them be free or bond) such execrable
Villains should miss of their deserved Punishments and escape the Justice of
the Law? Surely, that would be very unbecoming, that such Wickedness should be
suffered with Impunity in any well regulated Government or Society: Therefore,
be they Freemen, or be they Slaves, the main Question before you is, whether
they, or any, or which of them are guilty of the Charge against them, in the
second Indictment, of conspiring with other Slaves and Persons to burn the
House in the Fort, to burn the Town, and murder and destroy the People.

To prove the Charge in this Indictment, there was the Testimony of Mary
Burton; I must observe to you, that her Testimony, as to the Charge in this
Indictment, is single; there is no other Witness; but nevertheless, Gentlemen,
one Witness is sufficient; and if you give Credit to her Testimony, you will,
no doubt, discharge a good Conscience, and find them Guilty; If you should have
sufficient Reason in your own Minds to discredit her Testimony, if you can
think so, you must then acquit them: The Prisoners seem all to be equally
involved, by her Testimony, in this unparalelled and hellish Conspiracy, and
there is no Room to make any Difference between them; therefore, you will
either acquit them all, or find them all Guilty.

Then the Jury withdrew, and in about half an Hour, returned, and found them
all GUILTY.

The KING, against Sarah Hughson, and Jamaica, a Negro.


THE Judges having advised with his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, Ordered,
The Execution of Sarah Hughson, and Jamaica be further respited 'til next
Friday Seven-night; though with respect to Sarah this was a mere Act of Mercy;
for she yet remained inflexible.

The Court adjourned to Friday the 19th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

THURSDAY, 18th June.
Confession of Mink, Negro of John Groesbeck, Before the Grand Jury.
He said,

THAT in the Winter Hughson met him in the Woods, and carried him to his House,
and gave him to drink, and asked him to join in the Conspiracy; and he
consented, and was sworn by Hughson on a Book; that Thunder and Lightning might
strike him dead, if he did not comply, etc.

He said, He was there in all, three Times; and named a few [Negroes] who were
executed [that were there] but none else.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sarah (Burk's) Negro Wench Exam. No II. 1 st June. Tickle's Examination, 4. 12
th June. York (Marschalk's) Examination, 6. 20 th June.

The Confession of Tom, Ben. Moore's Negro, Before the Grand Jury.
He said,

1. THAT Cuffee, Philipse's; was the first Man that engaged him in the
Conspiracy; that he went with him to Hughson's, where he treated him with
Punch; that this was about the Beginning of the Winter, when the cold Weather
was coming in, on a Saturday, and the first Time of his being at Hughson's
House; at which Time nothing was said or done remarkable.

2. That about a Week after he went there again on a Sunday, with the said
Cuffee, Prince, Auboyneau's; and Caesar, Vaarck's; That soon after they got to
Hughson's, Caesar and Cuffee went out of the House, and Prince asked him ( Tom)
if he would be concerned with them in what they were going about to do? On
which he asked, what that was? To which Prince replied, that he should know it
when Caesar and Cuffee returned.

3. That soon after Cuffee and Caesar came in, and then the same Question was
asked him again; to which he answered as before, by asking of them what they
were going about? Cuffee then replied, That they were going to burn Houses;
that he (Cuffee) would burn his Master's House, where there was Money enough;
that he ( Tom) should have a Share of it.

4. That he refused to be concerned with them, saying, That he durst not do it;
for the White People would play the Devil with them; but Cuffee answered, that
he needed not to fear that, for that he had got People enough to stand by them;
and then he (Tom) told them, he would consider on it; and then they broke up:
This being the second Meeting at Hughson's; at which, neither Hughson, nor any
other Person was present.

5. That about four or five Days after, he met Caesar in the Street, who told
him, that if he would go down yonder (meaning to Hughson's) he would come to
him; that he went down, and soon after Caesar came to him, and called for some
Punch; that when they had drank, Caesar asked him, if he would be concerned
with them in what they were going to do; that he answered, he would not, for he
did not like it: Caesar took the Punch, and drank to him again; and when that
Tankard was out, he called for another, and drank to him again; and then asked
him, why he refused to be concerned with them; telling him, that at their last
Meeting, he said he would consider of it; on which he (Tom) being heated with
Liquor, said, he would join with them; and then Hughson was called on, who came
with a Book, and swore him; the Purport of the Oath being to be secret, and
true to one another.

6. That the next Day after, he went again to Hughson's, in the Evening by
himself; but finding none of the Rest there, he returned speedily; and to the
best of his Remembrance, this was the last time that he went there.

7. That some Days after he met Cuffee in the Street, who asked him when he
would go down again to Hughson's? that he answered him, he would go there no
more; that he was sorry for what he had done; for what they were going about
was a very great Sin; that Cuffee then called him a Fool, and told him, that if
he thought it a wrong Thing, or a Sin, there was a Man that he knew, that could
forgive him: That while they were speaking, Caesar came to them, and then
Cuffee told him, that he (Tom) was going to leave them; on which Caesar cursed
him, and said if he did, or spoke a Word of what had passed among them, he had
a Pocket Pistol, and would be the Death of him; but Caesar as well as Cuffee
told him, that if he was in any Pain about what they were going to do, as a
Sin, there was AN OLD MAN in Town, who they know, that could forgive them.

8. That some time after, Caesar came to him on Bayard's Wharff, and threatened
to throw him into the River, if he fell off from them, or informed any body
what they were going to do; that he (Tom) was afraid, and told him, that he
would be true to them; and so they parted; and that ever after he shunned them,
and never was at any Time in Company with them, neither at public or private
Meetings.

9. That one Sunday he had a Mind to disclose this Design and Conspiracy to Mr.
Ogilvie, and went to him for that Purpose; that he told him, that he had
something to tell him, which was a very great Sin, and would surprise him; but
Ogilvie answered, that he was going to Church, and bid him come when the Church
was out, and he would hear him: That he did not go to Mr. Ogilvie after Church
was out, nor did he ever after say any Thing to him about it.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sandy's Examination, No III. 8. 1 st June. York (Marschalk's) Examination, 6.
20 th June. Pompey (De Lancey's) Examination, 5. 22 d June.

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 19th JUNE,
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
York, London,
MARSCHALK's. Harry, KIPP's, Cato, SHURMUR's.


On Trial upon Indictment for the Conspiracy.

JURY called, and the following Jurors sworn, Viz.
Lawrence Garner. Joseph Sacket. John Sayer. John Smith. Charles Arding. Peter
Evoutse. John Van G^lder. Thomas Grigg. John Bogart. James Charlton. Isaac Van
Hook. Johanni^ Roosbe.
Of COUNCIL for the KING.
Mr. MURRAY, Mr. CHAMBERS,
MR. Chambers opened the Indictment, and then both proceeded to examine the
Witnesses.

Jack, Comfort's Negro, told his whole Story of the Plot, from Ben's first
mentioning it to him at Comfort's; said that London, York and Cato were at the
great Meeting and Entertainment at Hughson's; and that after the Cloth was
taken away by Hughson's Daughter, and the Knives and Plates by Mary Burton,
Hughson began to talk to the Negroes, and said, that Negroes could do as well
as white People, and now was a good Time to make a Plot; others say, No, stay
one Month and a half 'til the Spaniards come, and if they did not come then
they would try for themselves: That they all present swore to the Plot; all to
set fire to the Houses, and kill the People: Some agreed to begin with their
Master's and Mistress's Houses. That Cato told him that he put Ben Thomas' s
House on fire, and that he struck fire with a Steel to do it. -- That York
said, he would kill his Mistress before he came abroad, As the Negroes told
their Story, they were first to kill their Masters and Mistresses, and then to
come abroad, (i. e. out in the Streets) to fight.
York was to be a Captain, and London to be an Officer under him. -- That a
Week and a Half after this, the Negroes had a great Meeting at his ( i. e. his
Master's) House; that he did not see Harry at Comfort's or Hughson's. -- That
York said at Comfort's, he had no Occasion for a Knife, he would get a Sword;
and London said at Comfort's, he did not care what he did, or what became of
his Master or Mistress.

Bastian said, He saw York and London at the two great Meetings at Hughson's
and Comfort's, each on a Sunday; and that the Negroes all present agreed to
burn their Master's Houses, and to kill the People; to burn the Fort first,
then to fire by Mr. De Lancey's. -- Ben swore them all. -- That by Direction of
Caesar, (hanged) Hughson put the Witness's Name down in a Paper, as a Person
engaged in the Conspiracy; Caesar said, he [the Witness] was a faint-hearted
Dog, but he would spirit him up: That London said, his Master would trust him
in his House more than York, and he could easier get into any Room, and murder
him. -- That both York and London ground their Knives at Comfort's; one had a
Knife of his own, the other took one of Jack's: That he saw Cato and Harry at
the great Meeting at Hughson's, where 'twas agreed, that the Negroes were to
get their Master's Arms, to burn their Houses, and to murder them. -- That this
Meeting was three or four Weeks before the Fort was burnt, the Meeting at
Comfort's; was the Sunday after. -- That he saw only Harry at Comfort's; he
took a Knife of Jack; the Negroes all whetted their Knives, and some said they
were sharp enough to cut the white Men's Heads off. -- This Witness gave an
Account of the Treatment of Sandy at Comfort's, that upon Sandy's denying Jack
to be concerned in the Plot, and telling him, that if they wanted to fight,
they might go and fight with the Spaniards, and not with their own Master's and
Mistresses; that thereupon Sarah (Burk's Negro Wench) told Sandy he was very
impudent to talk so to Capt. Jack, and that he deserved to have his Head cut
off.

Tickle, a Negro, said, He was at the great Meeting at Hughson's on a Sunday;
that Hughson said to the Negroes, Now there was so many met together, it was a
good Time to make a Plot; and he proposed to them, that they should set fire to
the Houses, steal as many Goods as they could and bring them to him, and as the
People came out of their Houses they were to kill them; so to fire the Houses
all around the Town. That he saw Harry at Hughson's, and he agreed to set his
Mistress's House on fire, and to kill the People. That Hughson swore all the
Negroes of the Plot at that Meeting, and then put their Names down on a Paper:
Th^^ he saw Cato, the Prisoner, at the Meeting at Comfort's.

Sandy, a Negro, gave the same Account as on former Trials concerning the
Negroes Meeting at Comfort's, and what passed there: Saw Harry (Kipp's Negro)
at the Meeting at Comfort's, but did not remember to have seen any of the other
Prisoners there.

Mr. GEORGE JOSEPH MOORE and JANE LOVELL sworn.

Mr. Moore proved the Confessions of Quack and Cuffee at the Stake the 30 th of
May, and said, That both the Criminals did there declare, that Harry (Kipp's)
was concerned in the Conspiracy.

Jane Lovell said, That the Day Mr. Philipse's Storehouse was on fire, Mink
(Groesbeck's Negro) was coming from his Master's Rope-Walk with a Coil of
Ropes, and he and the Prisoner Cato stopped by her House; and she said to them,
that all this Trouble was occasioned by them; to which Mink answered, he wished
all concerned were tied to a Stake and burnt; whereto Cato replied, he was a
Fool, if he knew as much as he did, he would hold his Tongue.

These were all the Notes that were taken upon this Trial: See the several
Negro Examinations and Confessions affecting the Prisoners.

As to London.
Jack, Comfort's, Examine. No. I. 2, 5, 31. 8 th June. Bastian's Examination, I.
7, 10. 11 th June As to York.
Jack, Comfort's, Exam. No. I. 2, 4, 24, 31. 8 th June. Bastian's Examination,
I. 7, 10. 11 th June. Prince (Crooke's) Examination. 13 th June. As to Harry.
Cuff, Philipse's, Confession at the Stake, 3. 30 th May. Quack, Roosevelt's,
Confession at the Stake, 2. 30 th May. Sandy's Examination, No III. 8. 1 st
June. Sarah, Burk's, Examination, II. 1 st June. III. 5 th June. Bastian's
Examination I. 11 th June. Tickle's Examination and Confession, 4. 12 th June.
As to Cato.
Sarah, Burk's Examination, No II. 1 st June. Jack, Comfort's, Exam. No I. 2,
7, 31. 8 th June. Bastian's Examination I. 11 th June.

The Prisoners upon their Defense stiffly denied all that had been testified
against them.

Act of Assembly, 4 th GEO. II. For the more effectual preventing and punishing
the Conspiracy and Insurrection of Negro and other Slaves, etc. read.

Then the Council summed up the Evidence against the Prisoners; and the Court
having charged the Jury, they withdrew; and, after a short Stay, returned, and
found the Prisoners GUILTY.

THE Lieutenant Governor having this Day issued a Proclamation with the Advice
of his Majesty's Council; the same was read in Court, taking Notice of the
Conspiracy which had been set on foot, abetted, encouraged and carried on by
several White People in Conjunction with diverse Spanish Negroes brought hither
from the West Indies, and a great Number of other Negroes within this City and
Country, for the Burning and Destroying this whole City, and murdering the
Inhabitants thereof; To THE END, That Mercy might be shown to such as might
merit the same, His Honor thought it necessary, and did thereby in His
Majesty's Name, offer and promise His Majesty's most gracious Pardon to any
every Person and Persons, whether White People, free Negroes, Slaves, or
others, who had been or were concerned in the said Conspiracy, who should on or
before the first Day of July then next, voluntarily, freely and fully discover,
and Confession make, of his, her or their Confederates, Accomplices, or others
concerned in the said Conspiracy, and his, her, and their Part or Share,
Actings and Doings therein; so that the Person or Persons making such Discovery
and Confession were not thereof before convicted, arraigned, or indicted for
the same.

The KING, against Negroes or Slaves.
Harry, FURMAN's Quamino, PEMBERTON's, Wan, Indian, LOWE's, London, KELLY's,
Worcester, VARIAN's,


THE Prisoners were arraigned upon an Indictment for the Conspiracy, whereto
Harry, Quamino, and Worcester pleaded Not Guilty; and Wan and Lon^^n Guilty.

Court adjourned to Tuesday the 23d Instant Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

Confession of Wan, Indian Man of Mr. Low, Before the Grand Jury.
He said,

1. THAT about twelve Months ago he met at the Waterside, John, a free Indian
late of Cornelius Co^ine, who carried him to Hughson's, where drank a Mug of
Beer, and paid for it; when John went away; but Hughson stopped him (Wan) and
told him a Law was made to sell no Liquor to Slaves, bid him not tell; Wan said
he would not; then Hughson bid him swear on a Book he held to him, to do what
he should tell him; and Wan said, he would; and he put his Hand on the Book,
and swore after what Hughson said, To burn his Master's House, and to kill his
Master and Mistress, and to assist to take the Town.

2. That Tickle Pitcher and Bastian were there when he swore; and being asked,
if any one else? He said, none.

3. That John the Indian met him afterward, and seeing him melancholy, asked
him what was the Matter? He (Wan) told him what he had done, on which John
said, it was good for him.

4. That Cuffee (GOMEZ's) and Francis (BOSCH's) told him, they were to set
their Master's Houses on fire; and one Day asked him if he was ready* and he
told them Yes.

5. That being asked what they were to do when they took the Town? He answered,
they were to kill the White People, the Men, and take their Wives to themselves.

Evidence affecting this Slave.

Tickle's Examination, 4. 12 th June.

Confession of Primus, Debrosse's Negro. Before the Grand Jury.
He said,

1. THAT a Week before Christmas he met Tickle-pitcher and Kelly's London, on
a Sunday at his Master's Still-house, and gave them some Punch; and then they
took a Walk, and they carried him to a House on the North River, and called the
Man Hughson.
for Liquor, and they drank; and the Man of the House took them down below, and
the Man told him (Primus) that he must help them to rise to kill the white
People; and must steal his Master's Gun, and must fight, and kill his Master
and Mistress first: He said he would help them, but cared not to kill his
Master and Mistress, as they were kind to him; and the Man put his Hand on a
Paper, which he told him was a List of the Names of those who were to rise; and
swore him to be true to come and help them, or the Devil-fetch him.

2. That he soon after sell sick, and was sick all the Winter.

3. That when the Fire was at Van Zant's, his Master sent him out for some
Things; and he went to the Fire and helped as well as he was able, for he was
weak; and then went home with his Master.

4. That about two or three Days after, he went out and met Caesar (Peck's) who
told him that he ( Caesar) and Cuffee (Gomez's) had set Van Zant's Storehouse
on fire.

5. Being asked, if he was at any other Time at the White Man's House? He said,
No.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Tickle's Examination, No, II. 1. 12 th June. Caesar, Pintard's, Examination,
4. 22 d June. London, Kelly's, Examination, 2 d July.

SATURDAY, 20th JUNE.
YESTERDAY Evening Mr. Marschalk sent to one of the Judges, to inform him, that
his Negroes York and London, convicted that Day, had signified that they would
make a Confession; and withal, that he was desirous of being by when they were
examined; and accordingly the following Confessions were taken in his Presence
this Morning.

Confession of York, Negro of Marschalk's.
1. HE acknowledged, That what the Witnesses said on the Trial Yesterday was
true.

2. That he went one Sunday Morning early above two Years ago, to Hughson's
House, with Kip's Samuel, who has been dead two Years, and bought a Quart of
Rum, and went with it to Mr. Bayard's.

3. That Comfort's Jack, about Christmas (...)* informed him first of the
Plot: Jack met him by his Gate, and told him of it, and appointed him to meet
him at Hughson's; that he went to Hughson's: Was there the Sunday the Feast
was, as mentioned by the Witnesses in Court.

4. Has been twice at Hughson's and once at Comfort's.

5. Was to be a Captain, and was sworn; that many Negroes were present, and all
sworn and consented.

6. Agreed to the Circumstances told of the Plot in general: Spanish Negroes
were there: Furman's Harry, Moore' s Cato; all the Prisoners who were tried
with him were there: Ben Moore's Tom and Mink there: Gabriel Crooke's Prince
there; Ben and Quash there.

7. Hughson, his Wife and Daughter, swore first; then those who were at the
upper End of the Table, near Hughson, swore upon the Book, and the others at a
Distance without Book, by Thunder, etc.

8. He agreed to set his Master's House on fire; but said he would not do it
'til he saw somebody else begin, and then he would; he was to kill his
Mistress: Went to Hughson's just after Church out.

9. That he believed that Meeting was about six Weeks before the Fort burnt.

10. London [his Fellow-Slave] was to be a private Man under him.

11. Comfort's Meeting was two Weeks after this: At Comfort's he and Kipp's
Harry were in the Shop: Above Twenty there; Gabriel Crooke's Prince there;
London there; Ben (Marshall's) there; Hermanus'^ Quash: Jack went backwards and
forwards from the Shop to the Kitchen; Furman' s Harry there.

12. Hughson proposed to them to get as many other Negroes (...) as they could.

13. Mr. Moore's Cato, Shurmur's Cato, at Comfort's; he did not go into the
Kitchen; but heard that a great many were there.

14. Hughson told them at his House, that the Spaniards knew better than York
Negroes how to fight; and they were all to stand by one another and assist the
French and Spaniards; they were to wait for them some time; if they did not
come, they were to do all themselves.

15. Every one in the Shop [at Comfort's] had Knives, and they were sharpening
of them; and they were to cut white Men's Heads off.

Confession of London, Negro of Marschalk's.
He said,

1. THAT what was said against him at the Trial Yesterday, was true.

2. Capt. Marshall's Ben Came to him and told him, that his Master's Negro
York, wanted him at the White Man's House Hughson's.
by the Waterside; he went there; this was of the Sunday that they Eat; Moore's
Cato, Pintard's Caesar, etc. six Spanish Negroes there; the Room full of
Negroes; when they had done eating, the White Man bring the Book to swear; the
Table was not big enough for them all to sit down at, so that some forced to
stand; the Spaniards sat altogether next to Hughson: When they had done eating,
Hughson said, the Country was not good, too many Gentlemen here, and made
Negroes work hard; they must set fire to their Master's Houses, and when they
came out, they must get their Guns, Swords, and knives; in two or three Weeks
the Spaniards and French would be here.

3. That when the Business was done, he would put them in a Ship, and carry
them into their own Country.

4. Those that stood next to Hughson put their Hands on a Book, swore and
kissed it; those who were on the other End of the Room did not swear on the
Book, but swore without.

5. That Hughson said, he must set his Master's Stable on fire, and he
consented, and agreed to do it; and York told him he must kill his Master, to
which he said, yes: York told him, that his Master love him (London) better
than him (York.)

6. That one or two Weeks after he was at Comfort's, York, a little young Negro
belonging to a Shoemaker in Pearl-Street, near opposite to Mr. Breastead's, and
Crooke's Prince were there: That Been came to his (London's) House one Morning
between Four and Five, and took a Coal of Fire out of the Bakehouse, and said,
he would go and set his Master's Stable on fire, and bid him (London) fire his
Master's House; this a Week after Philipse's Storehouse set on fire.

7. York was in the Shop; and he in the Kitchen at Comfort's: Jack brought the
Knives: but he said he had a Knife, and could get a Sword: Jack looked like a
Gentlemen. Jack told him he bought the Knives of a Spanish Negro.

8. The general Talk at Comfort's was to the same Effect as that at Hughson's,
viz.. To burn the Houses, and kill the People; they said, they agreed, and
swore to do this, as long as the White Man stand by them.

9. Did not see Sandy; saw five or six Spanish Negroes there.

MONDAY, 22d JUNE.
Confession of Pompey, Negro.(Mr. Peter De Lancey's.) Before One of the Judges.
He said,

1. THAT Sam, Negro belonging to Mr. Courtlan^^ at Yonkers, some time last
Fall, carried him (...) Hughson's to drink some Punch; when they came there,
Sam asked him before Hughson whether he would join with them about what they
designed to do: He asked them what that was? He answered, when you say Yes,
I Will tell you what it is; then he said Yes, then Sam said, they intended to
burn the Houses and kill the white People; he told him he would stand to it:
Then Hughson fetched the Book, and made him put his Hand on it, and said, he
wished he might never stir from the Place if he did not stand to help them, and
the D -- l d -- m him if he did not.

2. That before he put his Hand on the Book, Hughson told him, there were a
great many Negroes concerned in this Plot; and that they intended to burn the
Fort first, then Gerardus Comfort' s House, and so ^ound the Town, and to kill
the People.

3. That Hughson asked him if he could get Guns Swords or Pistols from his
Master; and he told him No, his Master locked up all those Things: Hughson then
said, if he could not get any, that he would find him some.

4. That Curacoa Dick told him, that the Spaniards could fight better than the
York Negroes.

5. That Quash, Rutgers's. Caesar Pintard's. Cato, Col. Moore's. Cato,
Shurmur's. Sam. Lowe's. Albany. Tickle. Prince, Auboyneau's. Cuffee,
Philipse's. Caesar, Vaarck's. Will, Ward's. Will, Capt. Lushe's.
all spoke to him about the Plot, and Tom, B. Moore's, and Jack, Breastead's;
Patrick, English's; all told him they were concerned in it; and Brash, Jay's,
upon his ( Pompey's) asking him whether he had heard what the Negroes were
about; answered, that Pintard's Caesar told him of it.

6. That he Pompeyasked Soumain's Tom, whether he would be concerned; told him
(Tom) that he had been down at Hughson's with Sam, Cortlandt's Negro; and that
Hughson and the Negroes were going to burn the Town, and the Fort, and to kill
the White People; and that he himself was sworn in the Plot; and Tom consented
that he would be concerned; but he never talked to Tom any other Time about it,
and knows not whether he was over sworn, or spoke to any Body else about it;
this Discourse between Tom and him, was a Fortnight before Christmas.

7. That Mrs. Stillwell's Pero spoke to him about it last Winter; Hermanus
Rutgers's Jacob likewise.

8. Othello, Chief Justice's Negro, spoke to him about it last Winter, and said
he was concerned.

9. That he spoke to Pompey (Mr. Samuel Bayard's) Negro, and told him he was
concerned in the plot, and was sworn at Hughson's; and Pompey (Bayard's) told
him, that he would be concerned.

10. He spoke likewise to Mrs. Gilbert' s Pompey about it, and he agreed he
would be concerned; likewise to Mr. Cruger's D^ptford; and he said, he would be
concerned; and Hanover, Mr. Henry Cruger's, and he agreed.

11. Chief Justice's Othello said he would be a Captain.

12. That he likewise spoke to Cato, the New Brewer's Negro, at the other End
of the Town, and he agreed to be concerned; but don't know whether any of those
went to Hughson's, and were sworn.

Sam, Col. Cortlandt's Negro, was immediately apprehended* and confronted with
Pompey, but he denied all, and was committed.

Confession of Caesar (Alderman Pintard's) Negro, Before One of the Judges.
He said,

1. THAT last Fall, soon after the Cuba Men were gone, Vaarck's Caesar carried
him down to Hughson's; and there asked him (...) the Presence of Hughson, Quash
(Rutger'^) Ben (Marshall's) Harry (Kipp's) Tickle and Albany, whether he would
join along with them to fight the White People; and Hughson asked him whether
he would burn his Master's House? To which he answered, he would help to fight
the White People, but would not burn his Master's House: Hughson (...) had
engaged to burn his Master's House, as well as (...) the White People, and why
could not he do so (...) they; but he told Hughson, he would not set any Man's
House on fire, that he would only fight and kill white People.

2. That then Hughson brought a Book like a Common Prayer Book, and swore him
that he should not speak of what they had agreed upon to any one, but those
concerned with them; and that he was to do what he had engaged himself to, upon
pain of Damnation forever: Hughson all the Time holding the Book in his Hand,
and made him kiss it.

3. That Been (Marshall's) Caesar (Vaarck's) and H^^^son, were to find Guns and
Swords.

4. That Hughson, after his swearing, put his Name down on a Piece of Paper,
and told him, he must g^t as many more Negroes as he could; but said, he never
speak to any but Tony Brazier's. York, (Shoemaker's in Pearl-Street.) Prince,
(Gabriel Crooke's) Bridgwater, (Van Horne's.) Bill, Teneyck's, whom he carried
to Hughson's, and saw him sworn; London, Capt. Roger French's: whom he also
carried to Hughson's, and saw him sworn. Fortune Vanderspiegle's, hanged.
London Wyncoop's Indian. Curacoa Dick. Caesar, Peck's. Mars, Benson's. Cato,
Provoost's. Cato, Cowley's,
both hanged. Bill, (Vaarck's) who told him he had been sworn already. Jack,
Breasted's. Primus, De Brosse's. Quack, Roosevelt's. Another Negro of Peck'


5. That those beforenamed, which he did not carry to Hughson's to be sworn, he
carried to Comfort's, on the Sunday the general Meeting of the Negroes there,
about a Fortnight or three Weeks before the Fort burnt, and there they all
swore to fire the Town, some to burn their own Master's House, and all to kill
the White People; they all swore before Jack, Comfort's; and he made Report to
Hughson, who put their Names down in a List.

6. That he knew Mr. Moore's Cato was concerned in the Plot about a Week before
the Supper at Hughson's; Cato was at the Entertainment; he was to have been
there himself, but was stopped by the Watch as he was going.

7. That he carried Jack, Comfort's, to Hughson's, to be sworn.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Peggy's Examination, No. I. 9 th Mar. Sawney's Examination, No III. 8. 1 st
June. Jack, (Sleydall's) Examination, 2. 12 th June. Pompey (De
Lancey's)Examination, 5. 22 d June.

Confession of Cato, Col. MOORE's Negro, Before (...) of the Judges.
He said,

1. THAT the first that spoke to him about the Conspiracy, was Hermanus
Rutgers's Quash and Ben, by Capt. Marshall's Stable, about a Fortnight after
Christmas, of a Sunday Morning; they asked him to go down to Comfort's with
them after Church out in the Evening; for that there was to be Company there.

2. That they told him, the Negroes were going to rise against the white
People; and asked him whether he would join with them? he told them at first*
he was not willing; he had no Occasion for it; for he lived well: Quash made
answer, that he himself lived as well or better than he; and Ben said, so (...)
he; but 'twas a hard Case upon the poor Negroes, that they could not so much as
take a Walk after Church-out, but the Constables took them up; therefore in
order to be free, they must set the Houses on fire, and (...) the white People;
and Ben asked him to set his Master's House on fire? he told him then he was
not willing to do that: They asked him to come down to Comfort's after Church
in the Evening; which he did; there was Rum there, and he drank a Dram; but he
did not see Jack this first Time: The Negroes he then saw at Comfort's were,
Ben, Quash, Robin, Chambers's Caesar, Peck's York, London,
Marschalk's. Cato, Shurmur's Prince, Cooke's York, Shoemaker's. York,
Crooke's. Sam, Lowe's Cuffee, Widow Fortune's Bridg^water, Van Horne's. Scipio,
Bound's Cato, Cowley's. Fortune, Vanderspiegle's. Cato, Provoost's, hanged.
Harry, Kipp's.
The same sort of Talk passed there as above mentioned; but they did not all
very well agree at that Time.

3. That about a Fortnight afterward, on a Sunday, he went with Pintard's
Caesar, in order to meet w^^h Albany, Tickle* Curacoa Dick and Bosch's Frank;
and they went down to Hughson's one after another; when they came there, they
went into a Room where were Hughson, his wife and Daughter, but the latter did
not stay in the Room; Hughson brought them Drams, which they paid for; and he
talked to them about the Plot for burning the Houses of the Town, and killing
the white People; and told them there were several Companie^ (...) Negroes to
be made up, and asked if they would be con^^^^ed? and some agreed at that Time;
but he and Pintard's Caesar did not, they came out of the House together after
staying about Half an Hour.

4. That the Sunday after this, he went to Hughson's again with Albany, and
Hughson carried Albany and him up Stairs, and swore them upon a Bible* after
having told them that there were a great many concerned in this Plot; that they
had agreed to rise against the Town, to murder the People; some to murder their
Masters and Mistresses, and to burn their Houses; and proposed to him to do the
same, and destroy the whole Family; which he was unwilling to agree to at
first; (...) at last consented; and then he was sworn and kissed the Book; and
Albany consented to kill his Mistress and the rest of the Family, and to burn
her House; and was sworn in the same Manner: That the Purpo^^ of the Oath was,
that they were to keep all secret, (...) to perform what they ^ad severally
engaged to (...)* and if they failed therein, they were to be damned for^^er.

5. That on another Sunday Evening about a Fortnight or three Weeks after that,
he went to a Supper at Hughson's according to his Invitation.

6. That the last Time he met Marschalk's York by Mr. De Lancey's, as he was
going; when he came there there were a great Number of Negroes, he believes
Forty or Fifty, among which were Cuffee, Fortune's Sam, Lowe's Scipio, Bound's.
York, Cha* Crooke's Bridg^water, Van Horne's. Will, Ward's. Prince, G. Crooke's
Caesar, Kortr^cht's Guy, Horsefield's.
That he did not sit down at the Table where Hughson, his Wife and Daughter
sat, but at a Side-Table with several others: After Supper Hughson talked to
them about the Plot; they were all to be true to one another; to keep secret;
and to perform what they had engaged to do: And Hughson had a Book, and swore
several upon it, and made them kiss it; but those that were at a Distance,
swore without Book.

7. That the Sunday Fortnight after that, he went to Comfort's, where were, he
believes, about Forty Negroes, where they talked of the Plot to the same
Purpose, and swore: There were Quash Ben Cuffee, Fortune's. London, Wyncoop's
Indian London, Capt. French's. Tony, (...). Guy, Horsefield's. Prince, D^ane's.


8. That Vaarck's Caesar (hanged) told him, David Provoost's Low was concerned
in the Plot; and that he was at Hughson's (...) that Supper on the Sunday; but
don't remember he saw him there.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Peggy's Examination, No. I. 9 th May. Sawney's Examination, I. 12. 22 d May.
III. 8. 1 st June. Sarah (Burk's) Examination, II. 5. 1 st June. Caesar
(Pintard's) Examination, 6. 22 d June. York (Marschalk's) Confession, 6. 20 th
June. Pompey (De Lancey's) Confession, 5. 22 d June. Jacob (Rutgers's)
Confession, 24 th June. Dundee's Confession, 9. 24 th June.

Confessions of several Negroes, Before one of the Judges.
Harry, (Furman's) said,

BEN (Alderman Bayard's) that goes to Sea, was conconcerned in the Plot; that
Jack was shaving Harry at Comfort's, and said, he could set his Master's
Bakehouse on fire, and might be at Work in it, and his Master would not know he
did it; he say, No; his Master do him good. That Jack said he would cut his
Throat if he did not agree to it; then Harry said if he would set his Master's
House on fire first, then he^d set his.

Jack (Comfort's) Confession 31 ^2. 8 th June. Fortune (^atham's) Confession 15
th June. York (Marschalk's) Confession 6. 20 th June.

Quamino, Pemberton's, said,

HE was sworn at Hughson's by him; he clapped (...) Hand upon a Book; there
were present Tom, Rowe's. Albany. Ticklepitcher. Caesar, Vaarck's.
John, Van Dam's, Was in the House when he came, but immediately went away.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Tickle's Confession, 2. 12 th June. Tom, Rowe's, Confession, 2 d July.

Worcester, Varian's, said,

THAT Leffert's Pompey first spoke to him to be concerned in the Plot about
Christmas last; that he was at the Supper at Hughson's, and was then sworn;
Hughson, his Wife and Daughter swore first, and then the Negroes; and he
consented that he would join with them in burning Houses and killing the
People; Hughson told him, after the Negroes had killed the white Men, they were
(...) marry the Gentlewomen.

Evidence affecting this Negro*
Quack, Roosevelt's, Confession at the (...) (...). (...) th May. Tickle's
Confession, 4. (...) th June.

Upon the several Confessions taken this Day, the following Negroes were
apprehended and committed to Jail.

Sam, Lowe's Tony, Brasier's Bridgwater, Van Horn's London, French's Low,
Provoost's. London, Wyncoop's York, Crooke's Cuffee, Widow Fortune's Scipio,
Bound's.
Supreme Court. TUESDAY, 23d JUNE
PRESENT. The Second Justice.

The KING, against Negroes.
Harry, FURMAN's Quamino, PEMBERTON's, Worcester, VARIAN's,


THE Prisoners desired Leave of the Court to withdraw their Plea of Not Guilty,
and to plead Guilty; Leave was given accordingly; and they pleaded Guilty, and
submitted to the Mercy of the Court.

Court adjourned to Ten of Clock Tomorrow Morning.

DEPOSITION.
THIS Day Stephen Evan of Westchester County, made Oath before one of the
Judges, That being at Jamaica on Long Island, about a Year ago, a Negro Man
called Will, belonging to Johannes Hardenb^^gh, Robin (Justice Willet'^) and
Jack (Dorland's) Negroes were at a House where he (the Deponent) was; and that
he heard Will say to Robin, What think you of Corlaer's Hook A Point of Land at
the East End of the City of New York, almost opposite Long Island Ferry
or of the Plot? D -- n it, replied Robin, I Will have nothing to say to it; if
they burn their Backsides, they must sit down on the Blist^rs; but said
further, Let them go on and prosper.

That this Deponent urged very hard to know what they meant; one of them (he
thought it was Robin) said, it was a Plot; and that if it went ^n, he (the
Deponent) should hear more of it, and could do no less than hear of it; but
would then say no more about i^ for fear of bringing himself in.

Confession of Starling, Mr. S. Lawrence's Negro, Before one of the Judges.
He said,

1. THAT he was one concerned in the Plot for burning and destroying this City,
and murdering the Inhabitants; and that Hughson swore him upon a Book, made him
put his Hand upon it and kiss it: And the Purport of the Oath was, That he
should not tell any white People of it; and that he was to do what he promised
to do; that is to say, to fire his Master's House, and kill his Master and
Mistress, etc. Hughson's Wife was in the Room when sworn.

2. That Albany and Tickle carried him thither, and there opened the Plot to
him; Hughson put a Flask of Rum upon the Table, and after making him drink,
asked him, if he would not help to kill the white People, and burn the Town? He
answered, Yes; then Hughson swore him, and put his Name on a Paper.

3. That Abrahamse's Scipio came down there the same Time, and he saw him
sworn; this was about Whitsontide was Twelve Months.

4. That Albany told him, that they were to wait 'til the Winter almost over;
and then when the Wind blew hard, they were to begin to set fire, and burn the
Fort.

5. That when the Governor had forbid Quack coming to the Fort last Summer,
Quack declared, that he would burn the Fort; Quack and Comfort's Jack came into
Hughson's the same Day, after he (Starling, was sworn, and there he heard him
say this before Albany, Tickle, the said Jack (Comfort's) and Hughson.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Tickle's Examination and Confession. 12 th June.

The following, supposed to be calculated for a Confession, was found amongst
the Papers, indorsed June, without the particular Day; and it is thought to have
been after the Proclamation of the 19th; because as we understood, Quack 'til
that Time stoutly denied that he knew any Thing at all of a Conspiracy;
therefore it is here placed.

The Confession of Quack, WALTER's Negro. By an unknown Hand.
NUMB. I.
THAT about fourteen Days before Quack, Roosevelt's, came to Prison, he and
Hermanus Rutgers's Quash were in the Wood-Yard, and called a Negro Man (of a
Sunday Morning) in, belonging to Mr. Leffert, named Pompey; they asked him, if
he would do as they would do? He answered, What Is that? If you will do as we
will, we'll tell you: -- He would.

Quash proposed, if he (Pompey) would set his Master's House on fire, that he
(Quash) would set his Master's House on fire; and Quack was to set his Master
Mr. Roosevelt's House on fire, likewise Mr. Va^derheul's House. -- Pompey said,
they might do as they would; if they did it he would not tell; and likewise
said, he would (...), his Master's House on fire. -- They Quack and Quash
promised him (Pompey) if he would do as he had promised; that is, to set fire
to his Master's House; they would assist him to escape, and be the Means of
making him free.

By this Confession, if it may be so called, Quack steers clear of charging
himself with any Privity to the general Conspiracy; he intimates no more by it,
than that he overheard this Discourse between the three Negroes he there
mentions, importing a Conspiracy between them to set those particular Houses on
fire: Quack does not say he was in Company with them, nor where he was. -- If
this was his own inditing, Quack w^^ no Fool; if it was provided for him, he
was not very wise that furnished him with it. -- But Quack was for coming off a
cheap as he could.

This Day the following Negroes were apprehended and committed upon the
aforegoing Confessions and Examinations, viz.

Pompey, Bayard's. Pompey, Gilbert's. Tom, Soumain's. Deptford, Cruger's. Cato,
Benson's. Jacob, Rutgers's.
Supreme Court: WEDNESDAY, 24th JUNE. A. M.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices,

Court opened and adjourned to Four o'Clock in the Afternoon.

P. M.

PRESENT, As before.

Court opened and adjourned to Ten o'Clock Tomorrow Morning.

Confession of Jacob (H. RUTGERS's) Negro* Before One of the Judges.

He said,

THAT some time, before Christmas last he was carried to Hughson's by
Roosevelt's Quack, where he gave him a Dram, and told him that they were about
a Plot, they were going to kill the white (...) burt the City; and asked him if
he would be concerned? That he was frightened at first; but Quack, bid him not
be afraid, there was no Body should hurt him; and by that Time they had drank
out half a Pint of Rum, he agreed to join with them; and he swore to Quack,
that he would not tell any Body of it; but that he would do as ^e said. -- He
did not see Hughson or his Wife, only a young Woman in the House, which he took
to be his Daughter; but he did not go into the House. Has talked to Mr. Moore's
Cato about the Plot, but no Body more, and knows of no other Persons concerned.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Pompey (De Lancey's) Confession, 7. 22 d June;

Confession of Dundee (TODD's) Negro. Taken by a Private Ho^^d
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT for three Summers past, (...) had fetched Water at Comfort's: That in
the Winter, by his Master's Orde^, he fetched it from the Fort: That some time
before the officers arrived for the Cuba Expedition, he was at Comfort's for
Water, in the Afternoon: that Jack asked him to come into the House to play
Papa; Jack, Cook, J^nny (Comfort's Negroes) and he ( Dundee) played about two
Half-hours; that Jack won about Two Shillings in Pennies of him; that after
Jack had won the Money, he asked him to go and drink; and carried him to
HughsoN's; when they came there, Jack called for a Pint of Rum, which HughsoN's
Wife brought, and Jack made Punch; that he (Dundee) got almost drunk, and Jack
helped him up with the Water, and that he heard Nothing that Time about the
Plot.

2. The second Time, being the next Afternoon, he was at Hughson's in Company
with Jack and Cook (Comfort's Negroes) that he called for half a Pint of Rum;
that Hughson brought it; that Mrs. Hughson came in and asked Jack, whose Boy
that was? Jack told her Mr. Todd's, and said, never fear him, he is a good Boy;
Hughson then asked him (Dundee) his Name; he told him Dundee; Hughson said,
stay a little while till I fetch a Book; that Hughson was gone about two
Minutes before he brought the Book; that he did not tell him it was a Bible;
Hughson asked him his Name a second Time; to which he answered as before; that
Hughson and Jack told him, he must lay his Hand on the Book; he asked them, for
what? They told him, that he must swear to help them set fire to Houses, and
that he would tell no Body of it; that he swore the D -- l fetch him, and the D
-- l d -- n him if he did, that then he asked, what he was to do? they told
him, he must set his Master's House on fire; that the Fort was to be burnt
first, and that Quack was to do it; that he must help burn the rest of the
Houses and destroy the People; to all which he consented; That Jack was to be
head-Captain, and he (Dundee) lower-Captain; that he was to cut his Mistress's
Throat in the Night, because she scolded him, when he staid of an Errand, or if
he did not mind his Business.

3. That Comfort's Jack was to kill Mr. Todd, because he once followed Dundee
to Comfort's House, when he went for Tea-Water, and made a Noise at him for
staying.

4. Jack told him he must bring Wine in the Cask as often as he came there for
Water; he answered, he had no Opportunity, or else he would.

5. Jack told him, there were too many Guns in the Fort, so they were to burn
that first; that they were to burn the Fort on St. Patrick's Day; and Dundee
was to fire his Master's House the same Evening after the Fort was destroyed;
but was afraid le^t he should be catched and hanged.

6. That when the whole City was on fire, they were all to meet together, and
destroy the People as fast at they came out; they were to have Pen-Knives to
cut their Throats, which Jack was to provide for them; that Jack offered him a
Knife, but he said he would buy one.

7. That the third Time he was there, Patrick (Mr. English's Negro) was with
him; Patrick said to Cook, You have not forgot what I told you of; No, says
Cook, I hope not yet. Dundee overheard their Discourse.

8. That Jack was at work in the Shop, but his young Master was there; and so
they could not speak together.

9. That the Day the Fort was burnt, Patrick, Dundee and Mr. Alderman MOORE's
Cato was on the Mount; that Dundee said, he was sorry the Governor's House was
burnt; Patrick said he was not but that he wished the Governor had been burnt
in the middle of it; that Cato was not present then, but came just after, and
said, By-and by this will be put in the News that the Fort's burnt, and then
the Spaniards will come and take us all.

Confession of London, (Mr. French's) Negro, Taken before his Master by a
private Hand.
He said,

1. THAT when the Forces were raised to go to Cuba, he worked on board Capt.
Bayard's Vessel; that he was sent ashore for Water, and that he went to
Comfort's; that Jack asked him, if he would be one of them? The Prisoner asked
him, one for what? Jack told him, that the Negroes were going to rise in a Body
to (...) this Country, to fire the Houses and kill the People; he answered, he
was going to Sea with his Master, and that he could not; Jack told him, if he
would consent, he would set his Name down with the rest; he answered, that if
he did not go to Sea he would help them to do what they proposed: Jack asked
him to swear, which he did; which Oath was, That he wished Thunder might strike
him down, if he did not help them, in case his Master did not go out to Sea.

2. That the Prisoner fetched Sand some where near Comfort's this Spring, and
again saw Jack, who asked him if he remembered his Promise, and would stand to
it? he answered, Yes; Jack told him, they were to set fire in the Broad-Way;
and that he (the Prisoner) should set his Master's Storehouse on fire in the
New-Street; which the Prisoner consented to.

3. That Jack told him, there was a House near by where they would provide
Arms, and what was necessary; and that he would find for him what he wanted.

4. That when the City was on fire, the Negroes were to meet at the End of the
Broad-Way next to the Fields.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Caesar, Pintard' s, Confession, 4. 22d June. Cato, Moore' s, Confession, 7.
22d June.

INTIMATION having been given for some Time past, that there had of late been
Popish Priests lurking about the Town, diligent Enquiry had been made for
discovering them, but without Effect; at length Information was given, that one
URY, alias JURY, who had lately come into this City, and entered into
Partnership with Campbell, a School Master, pretending to teach Greek and
Latin, was suspected to be one, and that he kept a private Conventicle; he was
taken into Custody this Day; and not giving a satisfactory Account of himself,
was committed to the City Jail.

Confession of Jack, (J. Tiebout's) Negro, Before Alderman BANCKER.
HE declared, That in Easter Hollidays Ward's Negro (...) desired him to drink
a Dram with him at Mrs. Wendell's; and also desired him to make him two or
three Sticks of about three Foot long, and an Hole of about twelve Inches bored
in them, which was to make a Light that no Body should see it, because Mr. Va^
Horn would not allow a Candle: And afterward he was in Company with him again,
and then told him, Mr. Van Horn would not allow him to come to his Wife, but
before it was long he would show him a Trick; and that the Negroes here were
Cowards; for that they had no Hearts as those at Antigua: And that Mr.
Pintard's Negro was a Fool; for that he had undertaken a Thing which he could
not go through with; for that he had given him the Gun (that was found under
the Market) to take Care of: There was a Gun found under the Market by a
Soldier, not long after the Fort fired, and no Owner for it discovered.
When Mr. Philipse's Storehouse was extinguished* he said to him (Jack) he
would sooner see all the Houses burnt down to the Ground, before he would lend
an Hand to it.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 25th JUNE.
PRESENT The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Jamaica, a Negro, and Sarah Hughson.

ORDERED, That the Execution of these two Criminals be respited 'til Tomorrow
Seven-night.

The KING, against Negroes.
Emanuel, WENDOVER's Patrick, ENGLISH's Br^sh, JAY's Jack, BREASTED's Will,
alias Bill, VAARCK's Will, LUSH's


THE Prisoners having been indicted for conspiring, etc. to burn the whole Town
and City of New York, and to kill and destroy the Inhabitants thereof, were
arraigned, and pleaded Not Guilty.

The KING against Negroes.
York, PECK's. Prince, DUANE's Scipio, VAN BORSOM's Tony, LATHAM's Low,
PROVOOST. Will, WARD's


THE Prisoners having been arraigned on the same Indictment, York, Scipio and
Will pleaded Guilty, and Prince, Low and Tony pleaded Not Guilty.

The Court adjourned 'til To morrow Morning Nine o'Clock.

DEPOSITION of MARY BURTON, Taken before one of the Judges.
NUMB. IV
MARY BURTON being duly Sworn, deposed,

1. That the Person Yesterday shown to her in Prison, lately taken into Custody
on Suspicion of being a Roman Catholic Priest, is the same Person she has
often seen at the House of John Hughson: That to the best of her Remembrance
she saw him there first, some time about Christmas last; and that then for a
Fortnight together he used to come there almost every Night, and sometimes used
to lie there, but was always gone in the Morning before she the Deponent got
up; but she well remembers he used to go by different Names, but whether by the
Name of JURY or URY, or DOYLE, she cannot now depose positively; but to the
best of her Remembrance, some of his Names consisted only of one Syllable, and
believes she has heard him called by all the said three Names.

2. That after the said Fortnight, she believes the said Person did not come to
Hughson's for about a Week; that then he used to come again frequently almost
every Night, until the Time of the Stealing of Hogg's Goods: He used to strip
himself and go to Bed, as if he was to lie there all Night; but was always gone
in the Morning when this Deponent got out of Bed.

3. That when he came to Hughson's, he always went up Stairs in the Company of
Hughson, his Wife and Daughter, and Peggy, with whom the Negroes used to be at
the same Time consulting about the Plot; and that she has often heard Hughson,
the rest of the white People, and the Negroes, talk in the Presence of the said
Jury, about setting fire to the Houses, and killing the white People of this
City; and has often, when such Conversation was going on, seen the said Jury,
alias Ury, whispering to Hughson, his Wife, etc. and the Negroes, which she
understood to be joining in the Conspiracy with them; she thought it looked
very like it; though she cannot say she ever heard him speak out; but said, she
esteemed his Actions and Behavior to signify his Approbation and Consent to
what was carrying on by the Company, touching this Conspiracy; and this not one
Time in particular, but a great many.

4. That the Conspirators before mentioned generally went into a Room above
Stairs to hold their Consultations, and the Deponent (being a Servant in the
House) used often to go into that Room to carry such Things as they wanted; and
often came in upon them at such Seasons, when (as she believes) they would
rather have excused her Appearance; for she has observed, that her coming in
has sometimes made Jury uneasy; that they used generally to call up Mary
Hughson the Daughter, to bring what they wanted; but when she was out of the
Way, the Deponent used to go up: She believes the said Mary was likewise in
their Secrets: Never heard her say any Thing of the Plot, but has heard the
rest talk of it often before her the said Mary.

5. That Hughson, his Wife, Daughter Sarah, and Peggy, and the said Ury, when
this Deponent has come into the Room amongst them to bring what they wanted,
have several Times turned out all the Negroes present, and then have all joined
in tempting this Deponent to take an Oath; but upon her asking them for what?
they would not tell her; but said, she must swear first, and then they would
tell her; but this she absolutely denied over and over; at which Refusal they
were angry, and turned her out of the Room; and Ury said to her, had not you
better swear and go fine, than go as she did; for they all (the Hughsons, Peggy
and Jury, had when they proposed to her to swear) offered her Silks, and a deal
of fine Things, if she would comply with their Requests; and Peggy said she was
a great Fool if she did not.

6. That about a Fortnight or three Weeks before Hogg's Goods were stolen, she
has observed Campbell (with whom she has heard Jury used to keep School) come
to Hughson's of a Sunday, sometimes one Garr^t Van Emborough with him; and that
Campbell used to go into the Room below with the Hughsons, Peggy, and Caesar,
Prince and Cuffee, (Negroes) and when these were met, the Hughsons used to turn
the Deponent up Stairs: But she cannot say she ever heard them talking of the
Plot before Campbell, but she strongly suspected that he knew of it, from his
keeping Company with the Hughsons, and the said three Negroes, whom she looked
upon to be the principal Heads of the Negroes in the Conspiracy.

7. That during the Time there was Snow upon the Ground, all last Winter, she
has often known Hughson to go out of Town Adays, upon the Pretense of fetching
Firewood from the Commons, with his Sleigh; and that he has not returned Home
'til Eight, Nine, Ten or Eleven o'Clock at Night, at different Times, and has
brought Negroes to Town to his House; and that he has carried them back again
in his Sleigh after Midnight, One, Two or Three o'Clock, and has not returned
Home again sometimes till Seven or Eight o'Clock in the Morning.

8. That she has several Times seen Mr. Peter De Lancey's Spanish Negro Antonio
at Hughson's, when he (Hughson) has come Home late out of the Wood^; and that
she has seen him many Times get into Hughson's Sleigh late in the Night; and
that Hughson has not returned Home '^il Six, Seven or Eight the next Morning:
But at that Time this Deponent did not know where the said Spanish Negro lived,
whether in Town or Country.

9. That one Day at Hughson's, some of the Negroes had behaved rudely toward
her, and being in a (...) she was provoked to swear at them in the Presence of
Jury, alias Ury, above mentioned, and upon recollecting herself she said, God
forgive me: whereupon the said Ury answered her, That was a small Matter; be
could forgive her a great deal more Sins than that; that was Nothing.

10. That at another Time when the Negroes had provoked her, she wished those
black ^oads at the Devil; Oh, says Jury, let them be black, or what they will,
the Devil has nothing to do with them; I can forgive them their Sins, and you
yours too.

Confession of London, a Spanish Indian (Wynkoop's) Before one of the Judges.
1. HE said, That last Whitsontide was Twelve-Months, on the Monday Afternoon,
he went out and met in the Street, Peter Low's Sam, Obadiah Hunt's Warwick,
Mrs. Ellison's Billy; That they asked him to go and drink Beer at a House; and
Billy said he would carry him to a House that belonged to his Mistress, and
that he carried them all to Hughson's: That they called for Beer and Cider;
that Hughson himself brought it; that himself and two (...) had but three Pence
apiece about them; that Billy told them he would make up the rest: They had
four ^luggs; that the Prisoner was almost drunk; that he had drank Rum at a
House before he came there; that Hughson sat down and drank with them, and
talked for some time; and that he went out for a Book which he brought; that he
told them they must keep secret that he sold Liquor to Negroes; that they must
not tell any Thing they saw or heard at his House; that if they would swear to
keep secret his Proposal, they should always have Liquor at his House; that
they had better suffer Death than tell any Body: That they all agreed to what
Hughson said, and did swear and kissed the Book; that Hughson had a List on
which he set their Names; that Hughson was to provide Guns, Swords and Knives:
That he told them, the Fort should burn first; and that when they saw that, all
the Negroes should set fire to their Master's Houses; and that as fast as the
People run out, they should stab the first they met wi^h, and kill as many as
they could.

2. That some time after the Prisoner was at Comfort's, Jack asked him, whether
he knew not what some Negroes were going to do? Yes, Yes, says the Prisoner, I
know well enough. Jack told him he must be sure not to tell any Body, nor make
any Talk about it; for, said he, they know it as well as we. The Prisoner has
talked with Sam and Warwick about it in the Street sometimes when ^he met them.
The Prisoner was to burn his Master's House, and to shoot or stab his Master
before he came out. Hughson was to find Guns, Powder, Balls, Knives, and every
Thing they wanted: Hughson told them he was to be Governor.

Evidev^^ affecting this Negro.
Caesar (Pintard's) Confession, 4. 22d June. Cato (Col. Moore's) Confession, 7.
22d June. Dick (Ten Eyck's) Confession, 30th June. Warwick (Hunt's) Confession,
1st July.

Confession of Brash, Mr. PETER JAY's Negro, Taken before one of the Judges.
He said,

1. THAT about this time Twelve Months, he and his old Master's Negro (Ben) had
been down at the North River, hawling up Timber from the Waterside, in order to
be carried to his Master's Garden there; and John Hughson had been helping them
a little; and when he and Ben came to the Garden, Ben told him, that Hughson
had bid him ask him (Brash) to come to his House and drink.

2. That they went to Hughson's; and when they came there they were both
carried up Stairs, and there Hughson told them, that about three Days
afterward he was to have a large Company of Negroes, and would give them a
Supper; that they were going to rise against the Town, (...) burn the Houses
and to kill the People; and Hughson asked them if they would be concerned with
them? And, after having drank, they both consented: Then Hughson brought a
Book, and told them they must both swear that they would set their Master's
Houses on fire, and murder their Masters and Mistresses; to which they both
consented; put their Hands on the Book and kissed it: Hughson told them they
must not tell it to any Body but those that were concerned, who were to be
there at Night; that they were all to begin together; and Hughson said he would
tell Ben, and Ben was to tell him; but he told Hughson he could not come to
Supper; nor did he go.

3. That a Day or two after this, he and Mr. Murray's Jack went for Tea-Water
to Comfort's, and he (Brash) carried Jack to Hughson's, and Hughson carried
Jack up Stairs, and swore him of this Plot, who laid his Hand upon the Book and
kissed it; and Jack agreed to burn his Master's Stable, his House, and to
murder his Master and Mistress.

4. That he was at the great Meeting at Comfort's on Sunday about three Weeks
before the Fort burnt, and was in the Shop, where he saw Marschalk's two
Negroes London and York, and many others; and Toby belonging to Breasted the
Cooper, next Door to Kortrecht's.

5. That Hughson told him, if he could get any Negroes to come in, he should
bring them down to him; and that besides what before named, that he carried
thither Fortune belonging to Mr. David Clarkson, Jack Mistake for Tom.
young Negro of Capt. R. Livingston, Cajoe belonging to Mordecai Gomez, and Tom
belonging to Hyer the Cooper in Stone Street, and he saw them sworn.

6. That when Ben and he (Brash) were sworn at Hughson's, Hughson gave Ben a
Pistol to be carried to the Gunsmith's to be mended, and told him, if any
should ask whose it was, he should tell them it was his Master's.

7. That Hughson told him and Ben, that they should get what Guns, Swords and
Pistols they could from their Master's, and bring them to his House; but if
they could not get any, that he could furnish them with them himself.

8. Confesses that he had a Knife from Comfort's Cook; but he took it upon
Account of Ben, instead of Pennies due from Cook to him, which Ben desired him
to ask for.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Peggy's Examination, No. ^I. 9th May. Sandy's Examination, III. 8. 1st June.
Sarah (Burk's) Examination, III 5th June. Jack (Comfort's) Examination, 31. 8th
June. Pompey (De Lancey's) Examination, 5. 22d June.

This Day the following Negroes were apprehended and committed as Confederates
in the Conspiracy, viz.

Billy, Ellison's. Fortune, Mr. Clarkson's. Jack, Mr. Murray's. Scipio,
Abrahamse's. Toby, Breasted's. Warwick, Hunt's. Windsor, Meyers Cohen's.
Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 26th JUNE, A. M.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Emanuel, WENDOVER's Patrick, ENGLISH's Brash, JAY's Jack, BREASTED's Will,
alias Bill, VAARCK's Low, PROVOOST's Will, LUSH's Prince, DUANE's Tony, LATHAM's


THE seven first of the above Negroes desired Leave of the Court to withdraw
their Plea of Not Guilty, and to plead Guilty; which being granted, they
pleaded Guilty, and submitted to the Mercy of the Court.

The Court then proceeded to the Trial of Prince and Tony, upon the Indictment
for the Conspiracy.

JURY called, and the following Jurors sworn, viz.

Isaac Van Dam. Cornelius Clopper. Josiah Milliken Humphry Jones. James Tucker.
Edward Man. Peter Fresneau. Patroclus Parmyter. Daniel Dunscomb. John Hunt.
John Robins. John Van Gelder.
Of COUNCIL for the KING.
Mr. MURRAY, Mr. CHAMBERS,
MR. Chambers opened the Indictment, and proceeded to examine the Witnesses.

MARY BURTON called and sworn: She gave an Account of the GREAT MEETINGS of the
Negroes at Hughson's, and the CONSPIRACY carrying on there, as upon former
Trials: That Arms were to be provided and kept by Hughson; that the Fort was to
be first burnt, and then the Fly and the whole Town, and the People were to be
murdered; and that this was the common Talk betwixt the Hughsons and the
Negroes at such Meetings; and they were to begin to set fire about the Time
that Hogg's Goods were stolen: That she has seen the Prisoner Tony there
several Times at those Meetings; but cannot say she particularly heard him talk
about the Fires; that he had been above Stairs, and came out of Peggy's Window.
-- That she had seen the Prisoner Prince there several Times, and had heard him
and other Negroes together talk about the Plot; to which he consented, and
promised to do what he could to help them.

Caesar (Alderman PINTARD's) Negro, said, That he was to have been at the GREAT
SUPPER at Hughson's, but was prevented by the Constables; but that he went
there the next Day, when Hughson told him Mr. Duane's Prince was there at
Supper, and was sworn, and was to burn his Master's House; and that he had put
him down.

Cato (Col. MOORE's) Negro, said, he was at the GREAT SUPPER at Hughson's when
the Prisoner Prince was there and was sworn, and* he was to burn his Master's
House and kill his Master. That he was at the GREAT MEETING at Comfort's on a
Sunday, and saw Tony there amongst the Negroes talking about the Plot; and Tony
consented.

Sandy said, he was at Comfort's at the GREAT MEETING on a Sunday, when he saw
Prince the Prisoner there, and he was sworn (amongst the rest) of the Plot:
This was about a Fortnight before the Fort burnt.

Tickle said, he was at the GREAT SUPPER at Hughson's; that the Prisoner Prince
was there, and was sworn of the Plot amongst many others; and that Tony and his
Fellow Servants Fortune were to kill their Master, burn his House, and bring the
Goods to Hughson's.

Jack (SLEYDALL's) said, that he was at the GREAT SUPPER at Hughson's after
Christmas, and saw the Prisoner Tony there, and he was sworn of the Plot, and
agreed to burn the Houses and kill the white People.

The Prisoners asked the Witnesses no material Questions; upon their Defense,
they only denied what had been testified against them.

And the Evidence being summed up, and the Jury charged, they withdrew; and
soon returned and found the two Prisoners Guilty.

Court adjourned to Four o'Clock in the Afternoon.

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 26th JUNE. P. M.
PRESENT The Second Justice.

The KING, against Negroes.
Guy T. HORSEFIELD's York THOMPSON's Sam LOWE's Scipio BOUND's York C. CROOKE's
Tony BRAZIER's London WYNKOOP's Caesar HORSFIELD's


THE Prisoners having been indicted for conspiring to burn the Town, etc. were
arraigned, and all severally pleaded Guilty, and submitted themselves to the
Mercy of the Court.

The KING, against Negroes.
Tom, SOUMAIN's Jacob H. RUTGERS's Pompey, GILBERT's Deptford, J. CRUGER's
Cato, BENSON's Pompey, S. BAYARD's Sam, COURTLANDT's


THE Prisoners Tom, etc. having been indicted for the said Conspiracy. were
brought to the Bar and arraigned; and Tom, Jacob, Pompey (Gilbert's) and
Deptford pleaded Guilty, and Cato, Pompey (S. Bayard's) and Sam Pleaded Not
Guilty.

Court adjourned to Monday Morning Eight o'Clock.

Confession of Tom, (SOUMAIN's) By a private Hand.
He said,

1. THAT some time last Summer after the Cuba Forces were gone from York, he
went in Company with Mr. Rutger's Quash and Mr. Roosevelt's Quack to Hughson's;
that it was on a Sunday Morning; and that Quack and Quash called for Liquor;
and that Hughson brought three Half-pints of Rum, and sat down and drank with
them; but said Nothing to him that Time, except to tell him, that he must come
there again the next Sunday.

2. That the next Sunday Morning he went again, and met with the same Company;
that they again called for Rum, which Hughson brought; that he sat down in
Company with them; and after they had drank their Liquor, Hughson asked the
other two, whether he (Tom) would join with them? The Prisoner asked for what?
Quash said, to rise and burn down the Town, and kill the white People; that
Quack said, I my self intend to have the Fort down before long: That they put a
Book upon his Breast and forced him to swear; that Hughson told him he must
wish the Thunder to strike him down if he ever discovered it; that he repeated
Hughson's Words and kissed the Book.

3. That Hughson asked the Prisoner, Whether his Master had Guns, Swords or
Cutlasses? he answered No, but that his Master had Sword Blades; but said, that
he never carried any there.

4. That Hughson told him, he must kill his Master and all the Family, and that
he must burn the House. That he said his Master was too good to kill; but
consented to kill any Body else, and to do what other Mischief he could.

5. That Hughson told him he must do this when he saw a great many Houses on
fire in the Night, and great Hurry and Noise of the People, that he should come
out and join with the rest: That he must get a Knife; to which he answered, he
would get a Sword Blade which would do better; that Hughson told him, if he
would come in the Afternoon, he might see a great Number of Negroes who were
concerned. -- Said, that he could no go out in the Afternoon.

That he went a third Time of a Sunday Morning with the same Company as before;
and that they again drank Rum, and had much the same Discourse as the former;
that Hughson was very ^arnest in the Affair.

7. That once since he heard something of the Negroes rising by Mr. De Lancey's
Pompey, who came to Mr. Soumain's Door, and asked the Prisoner whether he had
heard any Talk of the Negroes rising? he answered, not I; why, have you?

8. That Hughson told him, Quash and Quack, that after they had conquered, then
they would know what it was to be free Men; and then he would tell the Prisoner
what Post he was to (...).

Evidence affecting this Negro. Pompey (De Lancey's) Confession 6. 22d June.

Examination and Confession of Jack, Mr. Murray's Negro, Before one of the
Judges.
He said,

1. THAT soon after New-Year Hollidays he went to Comfort's to fetch Tea-Water;
and as (...) was coming from thence he saw Vaarck's Caesar standing at
Hughson's Door, who called to him (...) come thither; and when he came to the
House, he s^^ John Hughson in the Entry, who asked him to come in; and he went
in, and Caesar followed him; and Hughson asked him to set his Cag of Tea-Water
down, and stay there a little; but he (Jack) said that he could not stay;
Hughson then told him, that he had better carry his Cag of Tea-Water ^ome, and
then return again, and bring a Gun and Powder and Bullets, and some Negro with
him, and then asked him to drink some Punch; and he drank a small Draught, and
was then going; but Hughson made him promise to come back, and said, when he
returned they would (...) about a Pl^^; and so he went away: There were present
in the Room at this Time, Hughson, his Wife and Daughter, and Peggy, Vaarck's
Caesar, Walter's. ^ack Pintard's Caesar, old Mr. Jay's Ben, Prince
(Auboyneau's) Cuffee (Mr. Philipse's) and the Chief Justice's Othello, and
three Spanish Negroes.

2. That as he was going home with the Tea-Water he met Adam, his
Fellow Servants, by old Mr. De Lancey's House, and he told Adam where he had
been and what had been talked of, and what Company was at Hughson's, as before
mentioned; Adam thereupon ordered him to set his Cag down; which he did, and
gave it in Charge to one of Mr. De Lancey's Negro Wenches, and said they would
go down there and drink some Punch; and they went accordingly.

3. When they came to Hughson's, the^ found the same Company Jack had left, and
the Cloth was laid and the Supper getting. He heard them talking when he came
into the Entry, of burning the Houses and killing the white People, and of
taking all the Gentlewomen for their Wives.

4. That when Adam and he came into the Room, Hughson asked them, Whether they
would do as they were going to do; which he said was to set the Town on fire,
and to kill the white Men and to keep the white Women for their Wives; to get
all their Master's Guns and Swords and Pistols, and when their Masters came to
out ou^ the Fi^es, to kill them all? Adam answered, he would do the same; and
he, Jack, said he would do the same: Then Hughson carried Adam and him up
Stairs, and brought a Book to swear them; but he, Jack, would not swear by the
Book, but kissed his Hand, and said that he would stand to it; but Adam put his
Hand (...) the Book and kissed it, and said he would stand to it: Then Hughson
produced a Paper, and said it was an (...) to kill the white Folks; and ((...)
put his (...)) (...) Adam' s Names down in it, as (...) Jack understood him.

5. That (...) his (...) went down S^^irs again to the rest of the Company, and
there they found two Negro Men a fiddling to them, before whom Hughson and the
Blacks talked of the like Discourse: One Fiddler belonged to HOLT named Joe, the
other Kierstede's Braveboy: The Negroes shook Hands with Adam and him, and
wished them Joy; and Hughson did the like to them up Stairs; and they all said,
they must keep every Thing secret and stand to their Words.

6. They said they expected the French and Spaniards here, and then they would
fire and plunder the Houses and carry all to Hughson's, who was to carry them
off into another Country, and make them a free People; but they were to stay
about two Months before they began to set fire, and then all of them were to
begin at once.

7. That he (Jack) and Adam staid and eat some Supper and drank some Punch, and
as soon as they had supped, went home together, and left the rest of the
Company behind: This Meeting was of a Sunday Evening.

8. That he Jack went afterward to Hughson's several Times as he went to fetch
Tea-Water, and was there twice afterward with Adam; that they always talked
with Hughson and the Negroes present about the Plot, and when was the Time to
begin.

9. That Jay's Brash carried him (Jack) once to Hughson's, and another Time
Pintard's Caesar; and that it was usual for them at such By-Meetings to swear
without Book, that they all stand to their Words and keep all Secret.

10. That on Easter Sunday he (Jack) and Adam went down to Hughson's after
Church in the Afternoon (...) he (Jack) was to go to Comfort's for Tea-Water
Adam went in before, and he, Jack, went to Comfort's and left his Cag there,
and soon followed him thither after he had filled his Cag; and there they met
with Walter's Quack, Pintard's Caesar, Ward's ^ill, Jay's Ben, Cuffee,
Philipse's, Auboyneau's Prince, Brash, Caesar, Vaarck's, Billy, Mrs. Sims's,
Albany, Othello, Hughson, his Wife and Daughter Sarah; and then John Hughson
proposed to all the Negroes last mentioned, and to him (Jack) and Adam, That
they should meet at Mr. Murray's House that Night; that he (Jack) was to be in
the Kitchen, and to open the Back Gate, whereat all those Negroes were to come
in, and Adam and he were to come down Stairs to them; and then they were to
proceed to set Fire to the House, murder his Master and Mistress, and all the
white People in the House: But he was interrupted by Mrs. Dimmock's Mr.
Murray's Housekeeper.
accidentally coming down into the Kitchen, and sending him up to Bed.

11. That after Mrs. Dimmock discovered him in the Kitchen and sent him up to
Bed, a second Time he came down again, went into the Yard and opened the
Back-Gate, and staid in the Yard Half an Hour, expecting the aforesaid Negroes
coming according to the Appointment aforesaid; and they not coming, after his
waiting so long Time, he (Jack) went up to Mr. CRUGER's (the Mayor's) Corner,
and there saw Quack (Walter's) and the other Negroes who had engaged to come to
his Master's House as before mentioned; but they said they could not come then,
for they must go down to Hughson's; and he (Jack) returned home, and went in at
the Kitchen Window and there slept; and staid 'til the first Cock-crowing, and
then opened the Kitchen Door and fetched in Wood to make the Fire; intending
thereby to make the Family believe that he got up early and came down Stairs to
make it.

12. That Hughson at the same Meeting proposed to the said Negroes, that they
should destroy Mr. Murray, Mrs. Murray, and all the Family, with Knives; and
Hughson asked, them all if they had get Knives? and they all said they had; and
pulled them out of their Pockets; and Adam pulled out a long Knife, and all the
rest had long Knives; but he, Jack, had a short one, which he calls a
Penknife, a clasped Knife which he eats his Victuals with; he had seen Adam's
before, he was whetting it one Day upon the broad Stones in the Yard, and made
it very sharp, and eat Meat with it in his Master's Kitchen before all the
Servants; but he observed he generally kept it in his Chest, and it was the
same Knife which was found upon the general Search for stolen Goods. There was
such a Knife found in Adam's Chest upon the general Search, mentioned F^llo 10.
Col. 1.


13. That when the Snow was upon the Ground about Christmas last, he was at
Hughson's, having been at Comfort's for Tea-Water and Caesar (Vaarck's)
standing at Hughson's Door, called him in to drink; Prince (Auboyneau's) Cuffee
(Philipse's) Quack (Walter's) and Bill (Sims's) were in the Entry: Hughson
called him (Jack) aside, and told him, after he (Jack) and Adam had murdered
the whole Family, that he (Jack) should steal the Plate out of the Beausets,
the Kitchen Furniture, Wearing Apparel, Linen, Guns, Swords, and every Thing
that was of Value, and bring them to his (Hughson's) House; that the abovesaid
Negroes should assist him to bring them, and that the, should bury them under
Ground: Hughson and his Wife were both together with him (Jack) when he
received these Directions. Jack was unwilling at first, but at length consented
to undertake it.

14. That Adam was to kill his Master and Mistress, Mrs. Dimmock and her
Daughter; and that he, Jack, was to kill Caesar, Cong and Dido Three other of
Mr. Murray' s Negroes.
and after that they were to (...) the above mentioned Goods and carry them to
the (...) appointed; after which they were to return to the House and set fire
to it; then go down again to Hughson's, and make ready for the General Attack.

15. That this Proposal last abovesaid was made by Hughson before that of the
Easter-Sunday before mentioned S^^. 10. of this Confession.
and that Adam was not then present.

The following Negroes were apprehended and committed upon the Examinations of
Yesterday and this Day, viz.

Adam, Tom (Capt. R. Livingston's) Tom, Hyer's, and Cajoe, Gomez's.

This Day also, Judy Pelham made Oath before John Haight, Esquire; one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the Manor of Cortland^, in the County of
Westchester, That she heard Thomas Plumstead, a Soldier, say, about three
Months ago, That there would be bloody Times in York before Harvest, and that
he must be in the Midst of it; and that there would be no Time granted to take
Leave of Wives of Children.

This the Justice certified in a Letter to a Gentleman in this Place; but the
Fellow was not found.

SATURDAY, 27th JUNE:
Examination and Confession of Adam, Negro of JOSEPH MURRAY Esquire;. Taken before
one of the Judges.
NUMB. I.
He said,

1. THAT about last New-Year was three Years, there was a Match of
Cock-fighting at the House of Adolph Philipse, Esquire; in the Evening, amongst the
Negroes, at which John Hughson (who then lived upon the Dock next Door to
Silvester the Cooper) was present, and the following Negroes. viz. Cuffee,
Philipse's Caesar, Vaarck's Prince, Auboyneau's Caesar, Pintard's York,
Duyckin^^'s Brash, Jay's Quack, Goelet's Jack, Roerback's Quack, Walter's
Othello, Chief Justice's
And Ventour (Mr. Philipse's) old Negro Man and the old Wench were in the
Cellar-Kitchen, but saw them all there.

2. That the Company broke up about eight o'Clock, and as they were all going
out of the Gate, Hughson stopped him and asked him if he would join with him,
and the Negroes in what they were going about? Adam asked Hughson what that
was? Hughson said they were going to set fire to the Houses of the Town, and to
kill the white People: He answered that he would be concerned with them: Then
Hughson asked him to come to his House, and talk further upon it.

3. That accordingly he went to Hughson's House two or three Days afterward,
and drank a Bowl of Punch with him there; Hughson having carried him up Stairs;
over their Liquor the Conversation ran upon the intended Plot; and Hughson
asked him several Times, whether he would engage in it? And he as often
answered him Yes: But Hughson seemed to distrust him, and brought a Book, which
he took to be a Common Prayer Book, and would have had him swear to it; but he
refused to swear to it at that Time, and went away in Half an Hour: Hughson
told him at the same Time, that Vaarck's Caesar, Philipse's Cuffee and
Auboyneau's Prince, and a great many more were to be concerned with them. If
what this Negro says, it true, this hellish Plot was some Years a brooding
before they attempted the Execution of it; and those Negroes last mentioned
were some of the Heads and Principals of their Color that were concerned in it.


4. That he used afterward to go to Hughson's House whilst he continued to
live upon the Dock; and Hughson and he used to talk now and then about the
intended Plot, and Hughson used to say, he would find Arms and Powder, but
desired he would get some too; to which Adam answered, he had no Money to buy
them: Hughson thereupon advised him to steal some for that Purpose.

5. That about four or five Days after drinking the Bowl of Punch as aforesaid,
he met Cuffee (Philipse's) who said, that Hughson had informed him that he
(Adam) had engaged in the Plot; Cuffee said that he had a Key of his Master's
Things, and he could come at what he pleased, and he could get some of his
Master's Swords and Guns; but he (Adam) being in haste, heard no no more at
that Time.

6. That he has often seen Cuffee and Prince have plenty of Money about them,
Silver and Gold; Cuffee had once two Doubloons, and offered to fight a Cock for
one of them; and Prince had once eight or nine Spanish Dollars about him.

7. That soon after Hughson removed to his House at the North River He removed
thither in May, 1738. This House was more out of the Way, private and fit for
Hughson's Purposes on all Accounts for caballiug and Entertainment of Negroes,
and with respect to receiving stolen Goods; it was said to be built with such
Privacies in the several Rooms and Cellars as might conceal run Goods.
he, Adam, used to resort thither; and upon his Enquiry concerning the Plot,
Hughson told him, that several white Men were concerned with him in it, and a
great many Negroes; and that he kept a List.

8. That soon after New-Year Hollidays last, of a Sunday Afternoon (Church just
going out) he, Adam, was walking by old Mr De Lancey's, and met Jack his Fellow
Servant, coming from Comfort's with a Cag of Tea-Water; they stopped, and Jack
told him he was just come from Hughson's, and that there was Company there:
Adam asked Jack to go back with him to drink a Dram there; and they went there
together; and when they came into the House, he saw there in Company, Hughson,
his Wife and Daughter, and four or five white People more (whose Faces he
believes he should remember if he saw them) and the following Negroes, that is
to say, Caesar, Pintard's, Caesar, Vaarck's, Prince, Auboyneau's; Brash, Jay's;
Pompey, P. De Lancey's: Hughson carried him and Jack into another Room, and his
Wife and Daughter came in there; Hughson swore him and Jack, and made them put
their Hands on a Book, which he took to be a Common Prayer Book, and made them
kiss the Book; The Purport of the Oath was, That they were to be true to those
concerned in the Plot; that they were to keep all secret, and perform what they
had engaged to do; and if they discovered to any Body, that they might be split
with Thunder and Lightning: They were to murder their Masters and Mistresses,
kill all the white People, and to burn the Houses: After they were sworn,
Hughson shook them by the Hand and wished them much Joy. This agrees with Jack'
s Account in the preceding Examination, 2, 3, 4, 5. and these Negroes were
examined apart, and had no Opportunity of being or talking together after they
were committed.


9. That when Hughson first proposed the Swearing, he was scrupulous about
being concerned in the Plot, and thought it was a great Sin to do any such
Thing: But Hughson told him, there was a Man that he knew that could forgive
him all his Sins Whereupon he took the Oath. And when Jack and he had drank
their Dram out, they came away together,

10. That after this Meeting at Hughson's, he saw a little short Man John Ury
the Priest
four or five Times at Hughson' s, who used to teach School at Campbell' s, who
has just now been shown him in Prison, who Hughson told him was one of the TWO
PRIESTS who could forgive Sins; that he saw him twice in the Room at Hughson's,
whispering and talking with him, when many Negroes were present; and he, Adam,
then suspected that the little Man knew of the Plot, and was concerned in it;
but does not remember that Hughson or the Negroes talked out concerning the
Plot when that Man was present: This agrees with Mary Burton' s Deposition
concerning Ury, NUMB. IV.. 3, Thursday, 25th June.
Duane's Prince and Latham's Tony were there at the same Time, and Cowley's
Cato.

11. That he has heard Hughson and the Negroes met at his House, talked of the
Plot when John Romme was present: That the first Time Hughson proposed it to
Romme to be concerned, as Cuffee (Philipse) told him (Adam) Romme seemed to
decline it; but afterward he promised to join with them, and seemed very
forward for it.

12. That he saw Holt, the Dancing Master, at Hughson's about New-Year
Hollidays, at a Meeting of the Negroes, and another white Man belonging to him,
whom they called Doctor Hamilton, a pretended Doctor who lodged at Holt' s
and lodged at Holt's, whose Name he knows not: There was likewise Holt's Negro
Joe with them; and the Discourse amongst them was about the Plot; and he, Adam,
took Holt and the other white Man to be concerned. At last he saw Hughson bring
a Book to swear them; and they laid their Hands upon it, and Hughson pronounced
the following Words, or something to the same Effect, That they should be true
to one another, and aid and assist in the Plot, and not discover any Secrets;
and then they kissed the Book: And then Holt's Negro Joe was sworn to the same
Purpose and in the same Manner; and Holt commanded Joe that he should set fire
to the Playhouse at such Time as he should tell him: Holt's Joe had before
this been telling him (Adam) that his Master was concerned, was to be one of
them, and would go down such a Night to Hughson's to be sworn; and he asked him
(Adam) to go down to see him sworn; which was the Reason that carried him to
Hughson's that Night.

13. That Holt told Hughson that he had Guns of his own, and Powder he said. he
had not enough: Hughson answered, he need not make himself uneasy about that,
he had seven or eight Barrels.

14. That Holt promised his Man Joe to give him Pistols, and asked him (Adam)
whether his Master had any Arms? he, Adam, answered, he had some Pistols; Holt
advised him to get some; and he said he would, but Powder he said he could not
get; But both Hughson and Holt promised to supply him therewith.

15. That one of the four or five white Men before mentioned to have been seen
by him one Time at Hughson's was one of Hughson's Brothers, a Boatman (as he
now recollects) he had a Boat there; and he saw John Hughson give him a small
Box to put into it, to carry up the River.

16. That some time last Summer, he, Adam, helped Quack (Walter's) ride his
Master's Coach-Horses out; and they came down to Hughson's and went into the
House; and Hughson carried them up Stairs, and swore Quack of the Plot in the
same Manner, and the Oath to the same Purpose as Holt, etc. He, Adam, only went
down there in order to drink a Dram; and Hughson asked Quack to be concerned in
the Plot; and he directly answered Yes, and was sworn, as before; Hughson told
him, that they were to burn the Houses and kill the white People; and Quack
then undertook to burn his Master's House and cut his Throat; and that Quack
was as great a Rogue as any of them.

17. That Holt's Joe told him (Adam) not once, but an hundred and an hundred
Times, that he, Adam, need not be afraid; for that his (Joe's) Master was
concerned in the Plot; and that he had spoke to Hughson for the biggest Room he
had there, to hold a Free Mason's Lodge. (...) a Free-Mason,


18. That he has heard of the Great Feast of a Sunday Evening at Hughson's but
was not there; but believes it was a Month or six Weeks before the Fort burnt.

19. That he, Adam, was at a Meeting at Comfort's, which he believes was about
a Fortnight after that at Hughson' s last mentioned; where were met a great
Number of Negroes in the Kitchen and Shop; he, Adam, was in the Shop: This was
also of a Sunday Afternoon Church just out; and there were present, his
Fellow Servants Jack, Marschalk's Diego, P. De Peyster's Pedro, Othello, Caesar
(Pintard' s) Cato (Col. Moore's) Patrick (English's) Ben (Marshall's) Albany,
and Kierstede's Braveboy: There they all talked about the Plot; but he, Adam,
staid but a little Time.

20. That he has been acquainted with Quack (Walter's) from their Childhood,
used to play Marbles together; and that he has often talked with him about the
Plot, before the Frolic in the Bowry-Lane which Curacoa Dick told him of; and
he always seemed (...) be as active and forward in it as any Body.

21. That one Sunday Morning last Summer, he and Pompey (P. De Lancey's) were
taking a Walk, and they met at a Well by the New Dutch Church Othello and
Braveboy, who were both very drunk; and Adam asked them where they had been?
they said, they had been a frolicking in the Fields (he understood they had
been at some free Negro's House in Bowry-Lane) at which Frolic Othello said
that Robin and Sussex (Mrs. Bichley's Negroes) were present, and Tiebout's
Curacoa Dick.

22. That the same Sunday Morning he afterward met the said C^racoa Dick, who
said they had been dancing at the (...) and he fiddled; and that Sussex paid
him therefore two Pieces of Eight, which he called Dutch Dollars; he told him
so before Mr. Cruger's Coachman Hanover; and the said Dick called him aside
from Hanover, and told him that they had been talking there about the Plot, and
said that Quack (Walter's) was there. And he, Adam, saw Quack (Walter's)
leading a Horse into a Stable near the New Dutch Church, a little before he met
Curacoa Dick, and he believes Pompey saw him also, but he and Pompey were
parted before he, Adam, met Curacoa Dick; he, Adam, and Pompey being going to
their respective Master's Stables: He, Adam, observed that Quack was very
drunk; just turned his Master's Horse into the Stable, and shut the Door and
went away.

23. That when he met Curacoa Dick, he said, Mate, we wanted you very much last
Night at a Frolic out of Town; that they had a free Dance and were very merry;
and he pulled two Dutch Dollars out of his pocket, which Sussex had given him
for fiddling, and showed them to him; and said no Body else had given him any
Thing: He leaned upon the Post, and shook his Head when he, Adam, came up to
him; and he, Adam, said, Dick, you have some ill Thoughts in your Head: Dick
answered, he was not afraid to tell him; he would tell him the Truth; he then
said, that Othello and Quack (walter's) both knew of the Plot; and that at this
Frolic they all talked of it; and that there were present at that Meeting the
Negroes following, Othello, Quack (Walter's) Braveboy, Robin, Sussex: This Dick
told him before Hanover, Mr. Cruger's Coachman.

24. That Cuffee (Philipse's) told him, that he used often to talk to John
Romme, about the Plot; and that he had promised him a great While to get an old
Sword or two for him (Romme) and this he said when he, Adam, met him carrying
an old Sword under his Coat to Romme's; and he knew that Cuffee used frequently
to go thither.

25. That it was a great While ago since Quack (Walter's) told him that Othello
was concerned in the Plot; that he has frequently talked to him about it; and
he was to do the same that he and Jack were to do; that is to say, to kill his
Master and Mistress, and the rest of the Family; and he, Adam, and the rest of
them who were to murder Mr. MURRAY's Family, were to assist in murdering the
Chief Justice's. See Jack's Examination, 26th June. 10.


26. That he recollects, that he (Adam) spoke to Othello about the Plot, a few
Days after Hughson had proposed it to him at the Cock-fighting at Mr.
Philipse's House; and he (Adam) asked him to be concerned; he (Othello) said,
he would, and laughed, and seemed by his Behavior to have known of it before.

27. That since the Fires began to break out, after the Fort burnt, he once
said to Sussex, at Mr. Murray's, ^ow came the Fort to be fired? Sussex
answered. Lord have Mercy upon us! What will become of us (...)? Adam replied,
he did not know.

28. That Jack his Fellow Servants and he (Adam) have been very intimate ever
since Mr. Freeman's Time; and that soon after his coming to Town after Mr.
Freeman's Death, he (Jack) mentioned the Plot first to him (Adam) and told him
that Quack (Walter's) first mentioned it to him (Jack) and asked him to be
concerned.

29. That on Easter Sunday last, he and Jack his Fellow Servants went down to
the North River together; Jack was to fetch Tea-Water at Comfort's: He went to
Hughson's House, and Jack left his Cag at Comfort's and followed him to
Hughson's; when they came there, they found in one Room, John Hughson, his Wife
and Daughter Sarah, and Peggy, and the following Negroes, viz. Walter's Quack,
Othello, Pintard's Caesar, Ward's Bill, Cuffee Philipse's, Prince Auboyneau's,
Brash, Caesar Vaarck's, Billy Mrs. Sims's (now Ten Eyck's) and Albany; and John
Hughson then proposed to the said Negroes, in Presence of the said white
People, That they should meet at Mr. Murray's House that Night; and that Jack
was to be in the kitchen, and open the Back-Gate, where all those other Negroes
were to come in, and he, Adam, was to come down Stairs to them; and then they
were to proceed to set fire to the House, murder his Master and Mistress, and
all the white People in the Family; and he, Adam, was to murder Congo, and Jack
to murder Caesar (two other of his Master's Negroes) and then all the said
Negroes were to go out and kill all the white People that should come to
extinguish the Fire: The Murder was to have been committed with Knives, and the
Knife found in his (Adam's) Chest upon the general Search, was kept for that
Purpose; but the Negroes so appointed, did not come that Night, though they all
agreed and promised Hughson so to do, and upon which Hughson gave them a Bowl
of Punch. See Jack' s Examination, 10, 11. Page 100, 101


30. That he and Jack have always been very intimate; they never talked any
Thing before Congo or Caesar, their Fellow Servants; they always talked by
themselves, and don't believe they know any Thing of it; nor ever heard Jack
say that they did; he believes that if Jack had spoke to them about it, to be
sure he would have told him of it.

31. That when Jack returned from fetching Water at Comfort's, he was generally
drunk; and from that suspected that he had been at Hughson's.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Jack (Murray's) Confession, 26 th June. Tom (Livingston's) Confession, 4. page
112.

This Negro, Adam, was very willing to lay hold of the Benefit of the
Proclamation beforementioned, but would entitle himself to it by saying as
little as possible to enlarge the Discovery of the Confederates in this dark
Scheme: He was under Examination several Hours, several Days running; the
Information that he gave came from him slowly and by piece-meals, which was
very tiresome; and gave so much Trouble, that he was several Times remanded to
Jail, and told that what he said would do him little Service; but as the
Constable was taking him away, he would beg to stay, and say he would tell of
all he could recollect. While he was under Examination this Day, it was told
before Adam, that the Chief Justice's Negro Othello was brought from Rhode
Island, and carrying to Jail, and hearing that, he immediately said, Othello,
was concerned in the Plot; as if naturally concluding that some Body else had
impeached him; for till this Accident, he had not mentioned his Name. This Adam
had a general Acquaintance amongst the Negroes, and idle Time enough for doing
any Mischief; and 'twas supposed, that he must have known most of the Negroes
concerned; though he mentioned very few but what we were apprized of before,
and had already been either executed or apprehended.

It was observed by several in Mr. Murray's Family, some Time before Adam's
Commitment, that his Behavior was such as betokened strong Symptoms of Guilt;
he appeared very uneasy and disturbed in his Mind; and much more so when Jack
his Fellow Servants was taken up as one concerned in the Conspiracy; for the
next Morning he came several Times into the Clerk's Office, with a seeming
Intention to disclose some Secret; the young Gentlemen at last took Notice of
it, and shutting the Door too, asked him, Whether he knew any Thing of the
Plot? He denied he did; but said, he was afraid some Dog or another would own
him a Spite, and bring him in; for that People talked a great Deal of him.

In the Afternoon, Mr. Murray having been present and assisting at his Negro
Jack's Examination, upon his Return home, found Adam running backwards and
forwards like a distracted Creature; he called him into his Study, and charged
him as one concerned in the Conspiracy; which he absolutely denied, and
protested his Innocence: His Master endeavored, and used many Arguments, to
prevail with him to confess if he was guilty, but to no Purpose; and then he
delivered him to the Constable.

In the Evening two of Mr. Murray's Clerks went to see Adam in the Jail, to try
how far they could prevail upon him: and as soon as he knew they were come, he
desired Leave to speak with them Privately; which being granted, he began with
Exclamations, and Protestations of his Innocence, declaring that it was Nothing
but damned Lies that brought him there; that he knew who was the Author of
them, and would be revenged if he died for it. The young Gentlemen reasoned
with him, telling him if he was innocent to insist upon it, and not be afraid;
for he might be assured of having Justice done him; but if he was guilty, his
denying it would signify Nothing; for that they knew as much of the Plot, as
they that were concerned in it; and the only Way to recommend himself to
Favor, was by making a full Confession: He then considered a while; and
desired to know his Accuser; they told him, they believed it was Jack; which
as soon as he heard, he said, then I am a dead Man; striking his Head against
one of the Beams of the Jail; and said further, he was afraid the Dog would
have served him so. Then he gave the young Gentlemen his Shoe-and Knee-Buckles
[being Silver] and some other Things, desiring they might be delivered to his
Brother Caesar [another Negro of Mr Murray's.] In this Manner they parly'd with
him a full Hour, 'til at length, tired with his Obstinacy, they concluded to
leave him; but he pressed them to stay, still giving them some Hopes of his
Confession: They told him they had no Occasion to stay to hear him repeat the
same Things over again: He then asked them, what they would have him to say?
Upon which they told him, they would have him speak sincerely, whether he was
guilty or not: Why then said he, to speak sincerely, I am guilty.

Confession of Harry, KIP's Negro, under Conviction. Before one of the Judges.
HE said, That all that the Witnesses testified against him in Court on his
Trial was true: Bastian was the first that told him of it; he went to Comfort's
for Tea-Water; saw a great many Negroes there; talked about the Conspiracy; he
drunk Drams, and consented to burn the Houses, and kill the People; he was only
in the Kitchen which was very full, and they soon made him drunk, and said he
must burn his Mistress's House, which he consented to: Derrick Cook's Negro was
there; Moore's Cato was there; Starling, Mr. Lawrence's Negro there; Dick, Mr.
Ten Eyck's by Coentjes Market there.

Confession of Cato, Mr. Shurmur's Negro, under Conviction. Before one of the
Judges.
He said,

1. THAT all the Witnesses who spoke against him at his Trial, spoke the Truth.

2. Jack Comfort's.
was the first who told him of the Plot, and said, Cato, if I tell you any
Thing, will you stand to it? he said he would: Jack then told him, there are
great Companies to be made up to take this Town: Cato then asked him, where
they must come to consult of it? Jack told him he must come to his House, and
if he did not find him at home, he must go to Hughson's. This was last Summer.

3. York, London, Marschalk's.
and he went to Hughson's, and called for half a Pint of Rum; Hughson not at
home, but saw the Wife and Daughter there; Jack was not there, and so they went
away again.

4. Talked with Jack several Times in the Street about it afterward;

5. He was at the Great Meeting at Hughson's. when they had the GREAT SUPPER,
about four or five Weeks before the Fort burnt. and there the Plot was talked
of, as mentioned by the Witnesses: See Jack, Comfort's, and Bastian' s Evidence
on the Trial, page 85.
They swore. That some when they were there went down into the Cellar; 40 or 50
Negroes there; the Room not big enough to hold them all, and some in the Yard;
not could all sit down to Table; he did not see any Book there, but they all
swore to do as engaged; which was To burn the Fort first, and then all the
Houses in the Town; every one to fire either their Master's Houses, or some
other Houses, and kill the People: He was to set the Neighbor's Houses on
fire, and not his Master's. His Master lived in Ben Thomas' s Neighborhood.


6. That he met Gomez's Cuffee, and told him he had promised Jack to set the
Neighbors House on fire, Probably at the great Meeting at Capt Jack's: for all
the Negroes present, it seems promised him to do something; See Jack,
Comfort's, Confession, Page 65. 31.
and asked Cuffee if he had his Tinder-Box about him? (for he knew he smok'd,
and had a new one, and he, Cato, had none) he said he had one; Cato then told
him, if he would go and set fire to Ben Thomas's House, he would give him half
a Pint of Rum: He agreed to do it, and said he would watch his Opportunity when
no Body saw him: That he [Cuffee] did go and do it, and returned and told him
so; and immediately Fire was cried out: He gave him the Rum. That Evening he
[Cato] met Jack, Comfort's, as witnessed against him, and told him (...) [Cato]
had done the Business, Meaning the setting fire to Ben Thomas's House.
concealing that Gomez's cuffee had done it, lest Jack should blame him for not
doing as he promised. Furman's Harry he saw at Comfort's; Ward's Will (a Watch
maker's) at Hughson's, and [he Will] swore Peter De Lancey's Pompey (lives
sometimes in Town and sometimes in Country) at Comfort's, [he] swore, a Knife
in his Pocket; Kortrecht's Caesar at both Houses, and [he] swore.

7. 'Twas agreed at Hughson's, that the Fort was to burn first, and that Quack
should do it, because he had a Wife there; then they agreed after that done,
they should all set fire as they could.

8. That when they went about the Swearing, Hughson told the Negroes present,
that they must not attemp^^ draw in any one that was not their Countryman: That
if they met with any Countrymen, they must tell them so; and if they found they
were likely to come in, then they might tell them of the Plot; and those that
were willing, they were to bring to Hughson's to be sworn. These two last
Confessions should have been placed the 20th June; for they were then taken,
being the next Day after the Conviction of these two Criminals; but being
mislaid, and not coming to hand before the Printer had got beyond that Day,
occasioned their being inserted here.


Now many Negroes began to squeak, in order to lay hold of the Benefit of the
Proclamation; some who had been apprehended but not indicted; and many who had
been indicted and arraigned, who had pleaded Not Guilty, were disposed to
retract their Pleas and plead Guilty, and throw themselves on the Mercy of the
Court; so that Confessions were like to be numerous, and Business to multiply
upon our Hands; which made it necessary to call in some Gentlemen of the Law to
our Assistance upon the Occasion, who very readily undertook the Task.

Before the issuing of the Proclamation of the 19th Instant, for the
Encouragement of the Conspirators to come in, and make voluntary and free
confession and Discovery, etc. there were betwixt Sixty and Seventy Negroes in
Jail. who had been already impeached; many of whom after publishing the
Proclamation, not only confessed their own Guilt, in order to entitle
themselves to the Benefit of it, as may appear by the foregoing Examinations;
but also discovered many of their Accomplices who were at large; who were
thereupon immediately taken into Custody, by Order of the Judges, or Grand
Jury, as the Case happened before whom such Confessions were made; so that
between the 19th and this Day, there were upwards of Thirty Slaves more added
to the former, insomuch that the Jail began to be so thronged, 'twas difficult
to find Room for them: and we were apprehensive, that the Criminals would be
daily multiplying on our Hands; nor could we see any Likelihood of a Stop to
Impeachments; for it seemed very probable that most of the Negroes in Town were
corrupted.

The Season began to grow warm, as usual; and 'twas to be expected that the
Heat would be increasing upon us daily; so that the Judges found there was a
Necessity of bethinking themselves of taking such speedy Measures; as should
upon Deliberation be thought most advisable, for ridding the Jail of such of
them as should by their Confessions be thought most deserving of Recommendation
to Mercy; for 'twas feared such Numbers of them closely confined together,
might breed an Infection; and they must needs have been very offensive to the
poor Debtors imprisoned in the City-Hall, which from the Necessity of the Case
could not have been prevented or remedied: Therefore the Judges associated to
them the several Gentlemen of the Law that were in Town, viz. Messieurs MURRAY,
ALEXANDER, SMITH, CHAMBERS, JAMISON, NICHOLLS and LODGE, in order to consult
about this Matter, and come to some Resolution upon the Emergency.

The Result of the Meeting was, those Gentlemen unanimously agreed to bear
their respective Shares in the Fatigue of the several Prosecutions; and settled
among themselves the Part each should take: Messieurs MURRAY, ALEXANDER, SMITH
and CHAMBERS, were to assist in their Turns, as Council upon the several
Trials, as it should best suit their respective Convenience, and Messieurs
NICHOLLS and LODGE, to take the Negroes Confessions, and abstract them and the
other Evidence into Briefs, (...) Council upon the Trials. [Mr. JAMISON being
High Sheriff of the City, had other sufficient Business upon his Hands.]

The Gentlemen thus assigned for taking the Confessions having attended most of
the Trials of the Conspirators already passed, and likewise several
Examinations of Criminals, were well acquainted (...) the Account of the Plot,
according to the Course of the Evidence concerning (...) which had hitherto
been brought to Light; and as 'twas to be expected, they would have their Hands
full of that kind of Business, 'twas necessary that some Scheme should be
settled for the more ready Dispatch of it: Accordingly a Method was proposed,
and appoved amongst us; a Draught with several Columns, viz. One for the Name
of each Negro; another for his respective Owner; another for the Matter or
Substance of the Confession; another for the Negroes they accused; and two
others for the Place where sworn at, viz. Hughson's or Comfort's; for Jack,
Comfort's Negro, was a principal Agent for Hughson, and (as may already have
been observed from the Course of the Evidence) had corrupted many Negroes, and
administered the Conspirators Oath to them.

The Negroes in general that came to a Confession agreed in the Impeachment of
Hughson and his Family; that the Drift of the Plot was to burn the Town and
destroy the Inhabitants; that they were sworn into the Confederacy at
Hughson's, or by Hughson, or some Person entrusted by him for that Purpose.

As this was already discovered to be the execrable Purpose of the Conspiracy,
these Gentlemen (considering the great Number to be examined) for the Sake of
Dispatch, dropped what was at this Time least material, and only minuted down the
Persons accused, the Matter affecting them, where and by whom sworn, and what
else came from their Examinant which they judged to be most significant; which
is the Reason that the Examinations and Confessions taken by those two
Gentlemen are so concise.

But further; in order to save Room, and avoid drawing out this JOURNAL to an
unnecessary Length, which of itself is like to spin out to a Degree beyond
Patience; the Compiler chose not to set them forth in the same Manner they were
taken, but made them yet shorter, by incorporating the Substance of the several
Columns into the Form in which they now appear.

Confessions taken this Day by Mr. Nicholls and Mr. Lodge, of the Fifteen
following Negroes.
NUMB. I.
JACK (Breasted's) said, That Caesar Vaarck' s, hanged.
carried him to Hughson's; that Hughson told him he must join with them in a
Plot they were making, and swore him to set his Master's House on fire, and to
cut his Mistress's Throat.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Pompey (De Lancey's Confession, 5. 22 d June.

NUMB. II.
PATRICK (English (...) said, That Cato (Moore's) listed and to swore him, at
Mr. Moore's Garden, to be his Boy; and to go a Frolic with him; that it was
after ^he Fort burnt.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Peggy's Examination, No. I. 9 th May. Sandy's or Sawney's Examination, I. 12.
22 d May. III. 8. 1 st June. Sarah, Burk's, Examination, II 1 st June. Tickle's
Examination, II 10. 3 th June. Pompey, De Lancey's, Examination 5. 22 d June.
Dundee's Examination 7, 9 24 th June.

NUMB. III.
LOW (Provoost's) said, That Hughson gave him the Book to swear to stand by
them to overcome the City.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Cato, Col. Moore's, Confession, 8. 22 d June.

NUMB. IV.
YORK (Peck's) said, That Hughson swore him, and promised to furnish him; that
Hughson's Daughter was present when he was sworn.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Caesar, Alderman Pintard's, Confession, 2. 22 d June.

NUMB. V.
GUY (Horsefield's) said, That Quack and Albany swore him at Hughson's.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Quack's Confession at the Stake, 4. 30 th May. Cambridge's Confession 30 th
June.

NUMB. VI.
WILL (Lush's) said, That Albany asked him to go and sup at Hughson's; where
they went; that Hughson brought him Punch and Drams; that he swore him, Will,
and told him he would furnish him with a Gun.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sandy's Examination. No IV. 4. 22 d June. Pompey, De Lancey's, Confession 5.
22 d June.

NUMB. VII. Second Confession.
MINK (Groesbeck'^) said, That Hughson swore him in the Plot in February last.

See before 18th June, Notes of Evidence affecting him, adjoined to his first
Confession.

NUMB. VIII.
JEFFERY (Capt. Brown's) said, That last January, Hughson swore him into the
Plot; and that the first of April the whole Company was to be mustered.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Mars, Benson's, Confession, 29 th June.

NUMB. IX.
YORK (Thompson's) said. That some time last Winter, Furman's Harry carried him
to Hughson's with Woolf's Dick, and told the Prisoner of the Plot, and not to
tell any Body; That London (A. Van Horn's) was told by the Prisoner of the
Plot, and he agreed to be one: There were present at the same Time at
Hughson's, besides the beforementioned; Jack, Comfort's, and Warwick, Hunt's.

NUMB. X. Second Confession.
TOM (Soumain's) said, That Hughson told him he must fire his Master's House,
and kill his Master. There were present at Hughson's at the same Time, Quack,
Roosevelt's and Quash, Rutgers's.

See Notes of Evidence affecting this Negro adjoined to his Confession, 26th
June.

NUMB. XI.
SCIPIO (Abrahamse's) said, That he was a^ Hughson's at the Great Supper; that
Hughson swore him to burn the Houses and kill the People.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Starling's Confession, 3. 23d June.

NUMB. XII. First Confession.
TOM Livingston's said That last Summer he met Lewis (Schuyler's) in the
Fields; that Lewis told him, he must kill his Master and Mistress, and carried
the Prisoner to Hughson's; that Hughson swore both of them, and to keep it
secret; and that he afterward wanted to fight Lewis for not doing what Hughson
bid him.

See Evidence against this Negro referred to under his second confession, 28th
June.

NUMB. XIII.
DEPTFORD (Cruger's) said. That Pompey, De Lancey's and Caesar, Pintard's,
first engaged him to be concerned in the Conspiracy, and Will, Ward's,
afterward.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Pompey, De Lancey's Confession, 10. 22d June.

NUMB. XIV.
POMPEY (Gilbert's) said, That Diego, Hildreth's, engaged him first to be
concerned, and to burn his Mistress's House, and to get a Gun to kill the White
People; and pressed him to go to Hughson's. That afterward he was at
Hughson's, and drank Beer, and saw many Negroes.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Pompey, De Lancey's Confession, 10. 22d June.

NUMB. XV.
PRINCE (Gabriel Crooke's) said. That Mrs. Stillwell's Pedro carried him to
Hughson's, and Hughson swore them to stand by him, to kill the white People and
fire the House. This is the Negroes Dialect signifies Houses, i.e. the Town.


2. That Marschalk's York, when the first Negroes were burning, told Prince,
that now it was a fit Time to kill the white People; but Prince answered, No,
there were too many Whites to attempt it.

3. That Titus, Mr. Phoenix's Negro, was one Day, last Fall on the Dock with
the Prisoner, at one Myers's a Gunsmith; that Titus asked Myers to sell him a
Gun to shoot Patridges with? but Myers would not sell him one; that afterward
he saw Titus, and asked him what he wanted to buy a Gun for! that Titus told
him, he had been at Hughson's, and they were to rise and kill the white People.

4. That some time before the Fort was burnt he was at Mr. Marston's; that
Catline, Mr. Marston's Negro was drunk talking to himself in the Yard, that the
Negroes were Fools to do here as they had done in the hot Country; for they all
burnt and hanged for it in the hot Country. Probably alluding to the Conspiracy
at Antigua, for which many Negroes were executed four or five years ago.


5. That there were present at the same Time at Hughson' s York of Gabriel
Crook, Titus of Phaenix, Cato, Mr. Moore's, Harry, Kip's and Harry, Furman's.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Caesar (Pintard's) Confession, 4. 22 d June. Cato (Col. Moore's) Confession,
2, 6. 22 d June. York (Marschalk's) Confession, 6. 20 th June. London
(Marschalk's) Confession, 6. 20 th June.

Confessions of the four following Negroes taken by Mr. George Joseph Moore.
NUMB. I. Quack, Walter's, Second Confession,
QUACK (Mr. Walter's Negro) said, That one Wednesday or Thursday he was at
Hughson's, between five and six of the Clock in the Afternoon, he went with
Vaarck's Caesar and Philipse's Cuffee, and Prince, and Van Dam's John, they
called for a Tankard of Egg-Punch; they drank it, and Caesar asked him, if he
(the Prisoner) would conclude along with them to set a great many Houses on
fire? and Caesar said, then they would make their Escape; for he had an
Opportunity to go: The Prisoner then told him he believed he would; but would
consider of it, and give him an Answer.

NUMB. II
BRIDGEWATER (Mr. David Van Horn's) said, That a little before Christmas on a
Sunday Morning, Cowley's Cato called to him as he stood at Mr. Van Horn's Door,
and asked him to drink a Dram? he the Prisoner went with him to Hughson's; a
white Woman gave them a Dram; Hughson was gone out; they came from Hughson's
and went to the New-Dock; Cato there said, Countryman, will you help? Help
what? said the Prisoner; he answered, to set Houses on fire, and kill white
Folks: The Prisoner said, that could not be done, and it was wrong; to which
Cato answered, there are a great many that will help: Who are they? Cato
answered, there are many Spanish Negroes, Cook, Francis. To which the Prisoner
said, if you have so many, I will be (...), and try what I can do. In the
Afternoon Cato called again on the Prisoner, and asked him to go to Comfort's?
he went to see Jack; Jack was not (...) home; Cook asked him, what are you come
to help too he answered, Yes; it is very well, said Cook: He went away; and
this is all he knows.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Caesar (Pintard's) Confession, 4. 22 d June. Cato (Moore's) Confession, 2, 6.
22 d June.

NUMB. III.
YORK (Chapter Crooke's) said, That on the second Day of Christmas he took a Walk
to the Meal-Market; met with Comfort's Jack, who called to him and asked him to
go and drink Dram; went with him to Hughson's House: Jack (...) told him there,
the Negroes were going to rise; he had got Guns, Powder, Knife, but said, they
wanted Hands, for they had not got many yet; to which York answered, he would
be one: Hughson asked to drink a Dram? the Prisoner said thank you, and drank;
Hughson said, Boy will you stand by it? to which the Prisoner answered, he
would: Hughson said, if he would not be true he would stick him with a ^word,
and pointed to one in a Corner of the Room; Hughson said, Boy if you will stand
by it, you must kiss the Book; the Prisoner did; and said, he would stand by
it, and would not be a Coward: Hughson then said, if you will, you shall be
always welcome to my House, come at any Time. This was in the Kitchen, Jack,
Hughson and he only present. Hughson made him so drunk that he could not stand;
several Negroes were in another Room; does not know them; for he did not see
them, only heard their Tongues.

2. Had been at Comfort's very often, and talked of it with Jack and Cook; saw
Sam, Low's Negro there, Marschalk's two Negroes, Cowley' s Cato, Col. Moore's
Cato. Peck's Caesar. Hughson said, stand by it Boys to fight and take this
Place. Jack told him at his (...) Shop one Day, that he must get a Knife; the
Prisoner said his Master had got Knives enough, and he could get one.

3. Knows no more; never was at Hughson's afterward; Hughson asked him to stay
Supper there, and eat a Mouthful; York asked for Bread and Butter and Cheese;
Hughson fetched him some. He kept out of the Way ever afterward.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Cato (Moore's) Confession, 2, 6 22 d June. London (Marschalk's) Confession, 6.
20 th June.

NUMB. IV.
CAESAR(Horsefield's) said, That Roosevelt's Quack, about New York of a working
Day, met him in the Meal-Market, and told him he must go with him to some
Company on the North River: He went there and drank, and Quack asked him to
stay Supper; he consented; they supped; had a Goose and some Mutton; the Supper
on the Table before they went there. Albany and Caesar, Vaarck's, were there.

Being asked several Questions about this Meeting, and not answering so as to
be believed, nor making out any Thing, he seemed very much concerned, and said,
he understood that Quack (Roosevelt's) had used his Name at the Fire, and
therefore thought he should be condemned; but declared that what he had before
said, he did because he was afraid of his Life, and that he should die if he
did not lay something; but could not tell what to say, not knowing any Thing at
all of the Plot.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Quack's Confession at the Stake, 4. 30 th May. Cambridge's Confession, 30 th
June.

Confession of Emanuel, a Spanish Negro, belonging to Thomas Wendover. Taken by
a private Hand.
He said,

1. THAT about New-Year last he went to walk behind the English Church by the
Waterside, on a Sunday Evening, when the Drum was beating at the Fort, and
there he met with Rutger's Quash and another Negro; that they asked him to go
to Hughson's; that he did go, and saw a great Number of Negroes there; among
which were Wan belonging to Capt Sarly* Wan whose Master is dead, who was a
Sail-maker, Peter Van Rantz's
that he talks English very well.

2. That Hughson asked Quash, whose Negro he, the Prisoner, was? Quash told
him, Wendover's* that Hughson asked, whether he was a good Boy? Quash answered,
Yes; that the Negroes were all at Supper at a long Table; That he saw Hughson
amongst them, but no Woman; That Capt. Marshall's Ben sat at the Corner of the
Table, which was very long, and Hughson at the other End, with a Book by him:
That he did not go into the Room, but only looked in at the Door; and that the
Room was so full that several of the Negroes stood.

3. That Quash told the Prisoner to come in and eat; that Hughson said. don't
you see the Room is too full already, let him stay there. The Prisoner saw
Comfort's Jack and Cook there. That Quash brought him Punch, and some Bread and
Salt Pork; that he eat and drank what Quash gave him.

4. That he saw another Room, but the Door was shut, and (...) not know whether
there was any Body in the Room.

5. That the Prisoner told Quash, he must go home and give Victuals to the Cow;
Quash said, stay a little; that he Quash came out to the Door to him, and told
him, the Negroes were going to rise and cut the white People's Throats with
Knives; that when he had done his Business at home, he must come back, and then
Quash was to tell him a great deal, and to give him a knife; and that he must
be sure to tell no Body of it.

6. That the Prisoner agreed to kill the white People, and not to discover; but
told him he must go home, and he would come back directly.

7. That his Master when he came home would not let him go out again.

8. That he went there early the next Morning, but the Doors being shut, he
returned home; and that he never went there afterward.

9. That he has met Quash in the Street several Times afterward, who asked him
the Reason why he did not come there; he told him his Master would not let him
go out: Quash told him, he must come; for they wanted him very much; for all
the Negroes he saw there, had Knives to kill the white People; and next Time he
went there he would tell him all.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Bastian's Examination, No 1. 10. 11 th June.

This Day the following Negroes were apprehended and committed, viz. John,
Widow Van Rantz's; Lewis, Mr. Adonish Schuylers; Diego, Van Dursen's; Titus,
Phaenix's; Scotland, Marston's; Braveboy, Kierstede's* Frank, Mr. Philipse's.

SUNDAY, 28th JUNE:
Confession of Cajoe, alias Africa, (GOMEZ's) By a private Hand.
He said,

1. THAT about August last he went to the House of The Wife of Jeffery lived
there.
in Company with three Negroes belonging to Capt. W^lls; that Jeffery (Capt.
Brown's) and James and Frank, three Country Negroes, were there when they went
in; that Been (Capt. Marshall's) and his Wife came there after him; that Been
said, when he first came in, How do you do, How d' ye do, my Friends? I hope
you will all be my Men in a short Time.

2. That they sat down and drank together some time; after which Ben told him,
that he had some Business to do down by the Waterside, and when he went out,
said Farewell Brothers. This is all he remembers to have heard that Time; but
took no Notice of what Ben said, as to being his Men, not knowing what he meant.

3. The Saturday after New-Year, Mr. Gomez's Cuffee asked him to go down to the
North-River Side, to a House there where there were Negroes dancing and
fiddling; That accordingly he went with Cuffee into Hughson's; and Cuffee
called to Hughson, and bid him make a Mug of Punch; that Hughson brought it,
and had, as the Prisoner says, put above two Thirds of strong Rum, and made it
so sweet, that he did not immediately feel the Strength of it.

4. That Mr. Roosevelt's Quack, Rutger's Quash, Vaarck's Caesar, Auboyneau's
Prince, and Philipse's Cuffee, came there while they were drinking; they all
went up Stairs (where there were Negroes dancing) except the Prisoner and
Cuffee, who sat drinking their Punch.

5. That he does not know who was there except those he saw go up.

6. That Hughson when they had drank their Liquor, asked the Prisoner, if he
would stand his Friend; he said what to do? Says Hughson, you must first swear,
that you will not discover what I am going to tell you: Says the Prisoner, must I
swear to a Thing that I don't know what it is? Said Hughson, come drink about:
After he had drank, then Hughson again told him, he must swear; that if he did
not, he should not go out of the House again: Cuffee told him, he must swear;
but that if he had no Mind to do it, that he must tell no Body any Thing about
it. The Prisoner damned his Soul to Eternity if he ever told any Body living;
and Hughson read something in a Book, which he does not remember, but believes
it was an Oath; after which he kissed the Book; then Hughson told the prisoner
he need not be afraid; that he had got a great many Hands, and would get a
great many more; and that the prisoner should bring as many there as he could;
that they were to rise, and burn the Houses and kill the white People; and told
him he must get his Master's Small-Arms, and bring them there; and that he
might set his Master's House on fire, and kill any Body he could meet with,
Master first.

7. That he agreed to whatever they said, in order to get away from them.

8. After which Hughson brought Ben, and drank Good Success to their
Undertaking; which Health Cuffee and he drank: After which the Prisoner ^ad
them good Night, and went away sorry for what he had done. -- That he never
went there afterward.

9. Hughson told him the Fort was to be burnt first, some Time in the Spring,
and when he saw that, every one must prepare.

10. That about a Week after the Fort was burnt, he was going to the
Post House, and met with Ben (Capt. Marshall's) by his Master's Door; that Been
told him, he must see if his Master had any Swords, or Guns, or Pistols; the
Prisoner asked him for what? Ben said, you see the Fort is burnt already,'it is
now Time for every Man to prepare: The Prisoner said, don't be a Fool to
undertake such a Thing; for I will have no Hand in it; if you should be found
out, don't call my Name, for I Will have Nothing to do with you.

11. That nothing further was said; and no Body else spoke to him after that
Time.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Brash's Confession, 5. page.97.

Confession of Tom, Mr. R. LIVINGSTON's Negro: Before one of the Judges.
NUMB. II.
He said,

1. THAT Lewis, a Negro living with Edward Man, Mr. Adoniah Schuyler' s
Venture, Tiebout's; Gosport, belonging to Bound the Quaker; Jack, Abrahamse's,
Wall-Street; Fortune, Capt. Walton's; Hanover, Mr. Henry Cruger's, and himself,
were at Hughson's last Summer, where Hughson talked to them of the Plot; he
told them they must kill the white People, and steal their Goods and bring them
to his House, and they must kill their Masters and Mistresses; which they all
agreed to and were sworn, and put Hands on Book to perform it, and keep all
secret: They were not so much as to tell a Cat or a Dog.

2. Hughson told them, they were to begin to kill about two Months after
New-Year; but they were to come to him first for Orders.

3. That Prince, Kortrecht's Negro, told him the Day Philipse's Storehouse was
burnt (as they were screening Wheat) that he had been at Hughson's, and was
sworn of the plot.

4. That Adam (Murray's) told him, he had been sworn at Hughson's, Page.109.
col. 1.

See this Negro's Confession 27 th June, before Mr Nicholls and Mr. Lodge. No
XII.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Brash's Confession, 5. pa. 97. Dick (Ten Eyck's) Confession, 30 th June

This Day the following Negroes were apprehended and committed; Venture,
Tiebout' s; Jack, Abrahamse's; Fortune, Capt. Walton's; Jack, Roerback's.

Supreme Court: MONDAY, 29th JUNE.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Jack, DORLAND's Will, HARDENBERGH's


JOHN DORLAND and Johannes Hardenbergh entered into Recognizance for the
Appearance of Jack and Will, two Negroes, at the next Court of Oyer and
Terminer and General Goal Delivery for Queens County, thereon Ordered, That the
Sheriff of Queens County do discharge out of his Custody the said Negroes. See
Deposition of Stephen Evan, page 91.


His Majesty's ORDINANCE for the further Enlarging the present Term until
Saturday the 25th Day of July next, published.

Court adjourned to Ten of Clock Tomorrow Morning.

Confession of Pedro (DE PEYSTER's Negro.) By John Schultz.
He said,

1. THAT last Fall he went out one Sunday Morning with Mrs. Carpenter's Negro
Albany; that as they went along the Broad-Way, they met with Mr. Slydall's
Jack, who was going to Comfort's for Tea-Water; that at the Market near Mr. De
Lancey's House they met two other Negroes; and that Albany asked them all to go
down to Hughson's and drink with them: That they first drank Cider, then raw
Drams: That Hughson sat down and drank with them; that after their Liquor was
all out, Hughson called Albany aside; when Albany returned, he asked Pedro,
Jack, Kid and Caesar Dr. Henderson' s.
if they would consent to become their own Masters? they all answered Yes: Then
he told them they must help burn the Town and kill the white People; which they
consented to readily; having all drank pretty much. Albany told them they must
swear to be true to one another, and not to discover any Thing: That Albany had
a little Book on which they swore: That their Oath was, they wished the Thunder
might split them to Pieces on the Spot where they first spoke of it. Hughson
was in the Room when they swore, and afterward told them, that when the Time
came that they should be wanted, he would take care that they should be sent to.

2. That Kid told Hughson his Master had Arms enough, and that he would get
some of them; and that he would kill his Master and Mistress and fire the
House; that after that he would go into the Street, and help kill the People
there. Caesar was to act in the same Manner.

3. Jack said his Master was too cross, and that he would kill him.

4. Pedro said, he did tell Jack (Slydall's) to set Mr. Murray's House on fire;
which he promised to do; but afterward fired the Hay-Stack.

5. That the Reason why they provided Knives and Cutlasses, was, That the
Report of a Gun would immediately alarm the People, and they thought they might
st^^ many before they were found out.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Jack, Slydall's, Confession, 1. pa. 72. Adam's Confession, 19. pa. 104.

Confession of Jeffery (Capt. Brown's) and Ma^^ (Benson's) Negroes: Before the
Grand Jury.
1. JEFFERY said, That about Christmas last he went for Tea-Water, and called
for a Dram at Hughson's, when Hughson desired him to swear he would do what he
desired him; but at that Time he would not.

2. Some Days afterward 24 th January.
he went there again, and at length was persuaded by Hughson, to swear to do
what he asked him, and to keep it secret; and he did swear; and upon it Hughson
told him he was to take the Town, and told him of Negroes concerned; and that
they were to meet the first Day of April, viz. to kill the People and take the
Town.

3. Persons there were, Caesar, Vaarck's; Prince, Auboyneau's, and Albany, and
were to be concerned.

4. That Holt's Negro told him his Master was to be concerned.

Mr. BENSON' s Mars said, That he heard Gomez's Cuffee and Peck's Caesar say,
that Jeffery above was concerned.

Confession of Scotland, Mr. MARSTON's Negro, Before one of the Judges.
He said,

1. THAT a little before Christmas last he met with Ben (Marshall's) and he
asked him to take a Walk; and he carried him down to Hughson's, where they
drank Punch: Hughson fetched Water and Rum, and Sugar was upon the Table; Ben
made the Punch: Ben asked him whether he would do as they were going to do? he
asked him What that was? Ben answered, they were going to rise (meaning the
Negroes) and to kill the white People; he, Scotland, replied, that the White
People were too strong for them, they could not do it: So they drank out their
Punch, and nothing further passed between them at that Time. Hughson went in
and out of the Room all the Time he, Scotland, and Ben were there; but whether
he attended to, or heard their Discourse, he cannot say. This was of a Sunday
Afternoon, Church out, and no other Negro there at Hughson's as he saw.

2. The Sunday after this, Ben and he went again to Hughson's, and drank Punch
there; Hughson was at home; and after Ben had talked of the Plot to him, and
the Liquor had made him drunk, he consented to join in it, that is to say, to
help burn the Houses and to fight the white People; Hughson brought the Book in
order to swear him, and Ben told him he must put his Hand on the Book; he asked
Ben, how far he must swear? Ben said, he must wish that the first Thunder that
came must split him to Pieces if he told him any Thing of it, or did not stand
to his Word; and he put his Hand on the Book, and took the said Oath; and then
they went away, and he never went there again; nor had he ever any more
Discourse with Ben about it.

This Day the following Negroes were apprehended and committed, viz. Gosport,
Bound's; caesar, Col. Moore's; Hanover, Mr. Cruger's; Tony or Tonio, Mr.
Courtlandt's; Hereford, Myers Cohen's; kid, Mr. C. Van Horn's; Caesar, Dr.
Henderson's.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 30th JUNE.
PRESENT The Second Justice.

Court opened and adjourned 'till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

Confession of Braveboy (Mrs. KIERSTEDE's) Before one of the Judges.
He said,

1. THAT some Time last Summer, Carpenter's Albany came to his Mistress's House
to bring Meat, and called him into the Yard, saying he wanted to speak with
him; and then asked him Whether he would join with them? saying they were going
to have a small Fight, and if he would be on their Side, he should not loose by
it; and that they would have him because he was a Fiddler, and he must then be
sworn to to join with them: And he swore that he wished the I ^evil would fetch
him away if he did not join with them and keep all secret. Then Albany told
him, he would help him to a Gun to Kill his Master; at which he was so struck,
that he did not know whether he stood upon his Head or his Heels, and said, In
the Name of God, if you are going upon such Business, you may do it by
yourselves; for he would have no Concern in it: Upon which Albany made him
promise to keep secret what he had said to him, and not to tell it to Black or
White.

2. That Albany had told him at the same time, that Prince (Auboyneau's) Cuffee
(Philipse's) Caesar (Vaarck's)
Prince, Cuffee and Caesar were concerned in this Design.

3. That about a Week after Albany had ^poke to him as above, Prince carried
him to Hughson's of a Sunday Afternoon in Church-time; Hughson was at home, and
in Company with Caesar (Vaarck's) Cuffee (Philipse's) and Albany: Hughson at
coming in gave him a Dram, and then went out of the Room and brought in a Book,
and asked him to swear upon it? but he refused to swear, telling Hughson, that
he had already been sworn by Albany, and upon that hasted away, Hughson calling
him back, and charging him to keep all secret, and said if he did not, he would
fare the Worse for it; but he did not return; nor had ever been there since, or
talked to any one about it.

4. Braveboy's Account of the Frolic at the Bowry. Mentioned by Mr. Murray's
Adam, in his Confession.
That he was at a Free Negroes (the Negro Man and his Wife Isabella present) at
a House between Mr. Bayard's Land and Greenwich Lane:

PRESENT, Men.
Robin, Sussex,
Mrs. Bickley's Fortune, Cruger's Both Mr. Haines's Slaves, one (...) the other
a Negro. Othello. Quack* Walter's. Cora^^a Dick, who played on Braveboy's Fiddle
Wenches.
Lucena, Mr. Franks's Mr. Richard's, Quack's Wife. Maria, Sarah, and Hannah,
Three free Negroes


Mr. Henry Cruger's Neptune came there late about eleven at Night, but the
Wenches turned him away.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sarah (Burk's) Examination and Confession, No II. P. 50. Jack (Murray's)
Examination and Confession, 5. p. 100. Adam's Examination and Confession, No.
I. 19. p. 104.

Confession of Windsor (Samuel Myers Cohen's Negro) Taken by John Schultz.
He said,

1. THAT about two Years ago, when the Corn was ripe, he had been of an Errand
to Greenwich, in Company with a Negro belonging to Alexander Allair, who is
since dead; that they, when they came back, went into Hughson's, and the other
Negro called for Rum; that Hughson brought a whole case-Bottle full, and told
them they might drink as much as they pleased: Windsor offered Hughson three
Pence; but he told him, he would take no Money, that he was welcome: Allair's
Negro told Hughson, this is the Man I promised you, he is a good Marksman: That
Hughson liked him very well, and got up and took a Book off a Shelf and laid
down on the Table by him; that he (the Prisoner) put both his Hands on it; that
Hughson then told him, the Negroes were to rise and set the Town on fire, and
kill the white People; that he must set his Master's House of fire, and kill
his Master and Mistress before he came out; which the Prisoner refused, saying
he could not do it; that he did not care to set fire to any House, but would
help them to fight.

2. Hughson told him, it is to be done in the Spring; that Mr. Allair's Negro
should tell him the Time; and that if he would come to him, he would find him a
Gun and Sword; that he must swear to Secresy; which he did by Force; that
Hughson put a Book upon his Breast, and swore some Words Which he has forgot.

3. That as they came back, the Negro of Mr. Allair's told him, that Mr.
Valet's Tom, and Mr. Nicholas Bayard's Phaeton, formerly belonging to Mr.
Valet, Mr. Jay's Brash, Mr. Pintard's Caesar, Mr. Auboyneau's Prince, Mr.
Philipse's Cuffee and Mr. Vaarck's Caesar, were all sworn, and belonging to one
Company.

4. That he has been at Hughson's three or four times alone to drink, and once
with Mr. Allair's Negro, which was the first time when he was sworn.

The Confessions of the seven Negroes following, taken by Mr. Nicholls and Mr.
Lodge.
NUMB. I.
WORCESTER (Varian's) said, That in Christmas Holidays Pompey (Lefferts's)
carried him to Hughson's, where were many Negroes at Supper; that they had
Punch, etc. and after Supper, Hughson, his Wife and Daughter, swore to a Plot
against the white People; and that he, (Hughson) swore most or all of the
Negroes then Present, among whom the Prisoner was sworn; that some swore by one
Thing, and some by another. There were present the following Negroes, viz.
Pompey, Lefferts's; London, Kelly's, Tickle and Albany, Carpenter's, and
Bastian.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Quack's Confession at the Stake, 4. pa.46. Tickle's Confession, 4. pa.71.

NUMB. II.
CAMBRIDGE (Codweis's) said, That on Christmas Sunday Evening Cajoe (Baker's)
carried him to Hughson's, who swore them both in the Plot in the Presence of a
white Girl. That he, Cambridge, afterward asked Caesar and Guy, Horsefield's,
about it, who both confessed they had been sworn at Hughson's; and told him,
when the Work was going forward at York, they would give the Prisoner Notice,
and take him over with them in a Canoe to assist them; The Masters of these two
Negroes were Butchers who lived over the Water on Long Island, opposite to this
City.
and Cajoe told them. they were to kill such of the Negroes as would not assist
them.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Quack's Confession at the Stake, 4. pa.46.

NUMB. III.
POMPEY (Bayard's) says, That Mr. De Lancey's Pompey (...) to his Mistress's,
to fetch her to Mrs. De Lancey's Lying-Inn; that he and Pompey got gaming
together, and then Pompey told him of the Plot, and asked his Consent to be one
among them; and that he consented to it. That afterward he went to Mr. Peter
De Lancey's, where he saw the said Pompey, Caesar, Pintard's; Cato, Moore's,
and a Spanish Negro of Capt. Cunningham.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Pompey (De Lancey's) Confession 9. pa.89.

NUMB. IV.
TOBY (Widow Breasted's) said, That Christmas Hollidays Cook, Comfort's,
carried him to Hughson's, where he saw Ben, Mr. Jay's; Ben, Capt. Marshall's,
and some others, who all supped there; That he saw Hughson, his Wife, etc.
there. That Been, Jay's, prevailed on him to kiss the Book; that he accordingly
did kiss it; that thereupon Ben said, he was his Man, and should stand to him,
but did not tell him for what; but seeing him afterward, he told him, he had
swore to fight the white People, and stand by him: That the Prisoner promised,
and Ben bid him bring him a Pistol to Mr. Jay's Garden, and told him that they
had bought some Arms already, and by and by they would rise. The Negroes then
present [besides] were Cook, Comfort's; Cato, Cowley's; Cuffee, Philipse's;
Quack, Roosevelt's.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Brash's Confession, 4. pa.97.

NUMB. V.
WILL (Ten Eyck's) said, That Albany carried him to Hughson's; that Albany
there talked of the Number of Cuba Men gone off, and said, he believed an
Hundred and Fifty Men might take this City; and after some Discourse, told him
of the Plot, and swore him by the Thunder and Lightning to join in the Plot,
and burn his Master's House: That Caesar had given Hughson Money to buy Arms
and Powder to furnish the Negroes with, and to appoint the Time for the
Enterprise. The Negroes then present were Albany, Bastian, and Jonneau,
Vaarck's.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sarah, Burk's, Examination, No II. pa. 50. Caesar, Pintard's, Confession, 4.
pa.89. Tickle's Confession, 4. pa. 71. Jonneu's Confession, pa. 121.

NUMB. VI.
TITUS(Phaenix's) said, That going one Day for Yeast to Mr. Rutgers's, Quash
(Rutgers's) swore him to burn his Master's House, and kill his Master and
Mistress; that he agreed to burn the House, but refused to kill his Master and
Mistress.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Prince, Gab. Crooke's, Confession, 3, 5. pa.109.

NUMB. VII.
DICK (Ten Eyck's) said, That Albany, Carpenter's, carried him to Hughson's,
where he was sworn into the Plot. That Toby, Wendover's, afterward informed
him of the Plot, and asked him to go to Hughson's House; but he refused, having
been there before. That Frank, Ryker's also told him of the same, and asked him
to be engaged. That the Negroes then present were Toby, Wendovers; Tom,
Livingston's; Jack, Slydall's; Frank, Ryker's; Albany, Carpenter's; London,
Wyncoop's.

Upon the several Examinations taken this Day, the following Negroes were
committed this Evening.

Tom, Valet's. P^^^^ton, Bayard's. Cajoe, Baker's, Tom, Wendover's. Frank,
Ryker's.
Minutes of Othello's Examination and Confession, Taken before one of the
Judges the 29th and 30th June.
29 th June.
He said,

1. THAT at a Meeting of several Negroes at Coentjes Market about this time
Twelvemonth, present, Albany, Cuffee, Philipse's; Prince, Auboyneau's; Adam,
and Pompey, De Lancey's; Adam and Albany mentioned the Plot to him, and he
agreed to join to burn and kill, etc. and swore.

concerned
Quash, Rutgers's Cato, Cowley's
Hanover, belonging to Mr. John Cruger, from Curacoa, Albany said he was
concerned.

2. Othello was at a Feast at Hughson's with a Parcel of Negroes, when North
the Constable came and drove them away; present then, Albany, Quamino,
Pemberton's, and many others.

3. Othello being asked, Why he so positively denied on Saturday, that he knew
any Thing about the Plot; though he was warned of the Proclamation, and that
the Time therein limited for the Confederates to come in and make voluntary
Confession and Discovery, would expire as Tomorrow; and notwithstanding he was
told, that there was full and clear Evidence against him, Why he did not take
the Recorder's Advice, and confess then what he had done now? He answered with
a Smile, Why, Sir, I was but just then come to Town. i. e. He was willing to
spy the Land first, to see how it lay, to inform himself how Masters stood,
what had been doing, and to consider whether there could be Room for his Escape.


30 th June.

4. Othello was at a Frolic in the Bowry last Summer, at which were present,
See Adam's Confession, 21, 22, 23. pa. 104. Braveboy's Confession 4. pa. 114.


Quack, Walter's. Braveboy. Curacoa Dick. Ancram, Mulatto Pompey,
Mr. Haines' s. Tom, Ben. Moore's. A white young Man who married a Mulatto
Girl; Braveboy can tell best. A free Negro, lives at Kips's-Bay; Braveboy knows
his Name. Mr. Richard's Cato Mr. Searles's Pompey. Mrs. Jenny's. Mr. Faviere's
Cajoe.
Supreme Court. WEDNESDAY, 1st JULY.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

THE five Spanish Negroes convicted of the Conspiracy on the seventeenth of
June last, were this Day called up to Judgment, viz.

Antonio, Mr. DE LANCEY's. Antonio, MESNARD's. Pablo, BECKER's. Juan or Wan,
SARLY's. Augustine, Mc MULLEN's.
And having Nothing to offer in Arrest; but Protestations of their Innocence,
Mr. Gomez He had been Interpreter upon the Trial.
was directed to interpret what the Court delivered.

Then the THIRD JUSTICE proceeded as follows.

Mr. Gomez, Pray tell the Prisoners at the Bar, that the Court observes,

1 st. THAT they were taken with some Spaniards by an English Privateer; were
brought into this Port, and condemned as lawful Prize, being supposed to be
Slaves belonging to the Subjects of the King of Spain; and Nothing appeared to
the Court of Admiralty (which is the Court, to which Jurisdiction concerning
Things of this Nature does properly belong) to show that they were Freemen; and
they having made no Pretense or Claim in that Court to be such, they were
therefore adjudg'd to be Slaves.

2 dly. That the Court of Admiralty having so adjudg'd them to be Slaves, they
had been severally sold and disposed of; by which means they were discharged
from Confinement in Prison; and thereby have had the Opportunity of caballing
with other wicked, mischievous and evil disposed Persons, as well White-Men as
Slaves, and have confederated themselves with them, in a most diabolical
Conspiracy, to lay this City in Ashes, and to murder and destroy all the
Inhabitants; whereas had they appeared to have been Freemen, they would have
been prevented this Opportunity of venting and gratifying the Rancour of their
Hearts, by being closely confined as Prisoners of War.

3 dly, If notwithstanding they were Freemen, they ought in all Reason to have
waited the Event of the War, and suffered patiently under their Misfortune; and
when Peace should have been concluded, they might have made the Truth of their
Pretensions appear, and then Justice would have been done them.

But now, as they are found Guilty of this most horrid and villainons
Conspiracy, by the Laws of our Land, Nothing remains but to pronounce Sentence
of Death against them.

Accordingly they were Sentenced to be hanged.

The KING against Negroes.
Prince, DUANE's Tony, LATHAM's Cato, SHURMUR's York, MARSCHALK's Harry, KIPP's.


THE Prisoners having been convicted of the Conspiracy, were brought to the
Bar, and having Nothing to offer in Arrest of Judgment, the Court passed
Sentence on them to be hanged: And

Ordered, their Execution to be on Friday the third Instant; and that the Body
of York should be afterward hung in Chains on the same Gibbet with John
Hughson.

The KING, against Sarah Hughson.

THIS Criminal continuing inflexible, it was Ordered, she should be executed,
according to her Sentence, on Wednesday the eighth Instant.

The KING, against Negroes.
Cato, BENSON's Pompey, S. BAYARD's


THESE Prisoners having desired Leave of the Court to withdraw their Plea of
Not Guilty, and to plead Guilty; it was Ordered accordingly; and they pleaded
Guilty, and submitted to the Mercy of the Court.

The KING, against Negroes.
Jeffery, BOUND's Toby, BREASTED's Fortune, CLARKSON's Warwick, HUNT's Windsor,
MYERS COHEN's Billy, ELLISON's


THE Prisoners were brought to the Bar and arraigned on an Indictment for the
Conspiracy; and Jeffery, Toby, Warwick and Windsor, pleaded Guilty, and Fortune
and Billy, Not Guilty.

The KING, against Negroes.
Jack, MURRAY's Cajoe, GOMEZ's Tom, HYER's Lewis, SCHUYLER's Venture, TIEBOUT's
Jasper, BOUND's Jack, ABRAHAMSE's Fortune, WALTON's


THE Prisoners were arraigned on an Indictment for the Conspiracy; and Tom,
Venture, Jasper and Fortune, pleaded Not Guilty; and the two Jacks, Cajoe and
Lewis, pleaded Guilty, and submitted to the Mercy of the Court.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

The two following Negro Confessions were this Day taken by Mr. Nicholls and
Mr. Lodge,
NUMB. I.
WARWICK (Hunt's) said, That London, Wyncoop's Negro, went with him to
Hughson's about two Years ago; that Hughson swore him, in the Presence of his
Daughter, to kill his Master and Mistress; that he ordered the Prisoner to
steal what Money he could and bring it to him, to buy Arms and Powder; that he,
Hughson, had three Barrels of Powder, but wanted more: That he [ Warwick] was
there [at Hughson's] last christmas, at the GREAT SUPPER; but did not see all
the Negroes that were there; he being in the Cellar, and in Liquor.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sarah, Burk's, Examination, No II 1. pa. 50. London, Wynkoop's, Confession, 1.
pa. 96.

NUMB. II.
LEWIS (Mr. Ad. Schuyler's) said, That on a Saturday Afternoon, Mr. Roosevelt's
Quack and Rutgers's Quash, carried him to Hughson's; that they drank Punch
there; that he heard Nothing of the Plot at that Time; but Quack engaged him to
come to him the next Day, which be did, at Mr. Rutgers's Brew house, where
Quack swore him, to fire his Master's House, and kill his Master and Mistress:
That he afterward set fire to some Heading; but it being green, would not take
fire. Knows of no others concerned.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Tom (Livingston's) Confession, No I. page 109. II. page 112.

Confession of Sam, Negro of Col. FREDERICK CORTLANDT, Before one of the Judges.
1. HE said, That some time last Fall, being at the House of John Hughson, he
asked the Examinant, whether he would be concerned with him to burn the Town,
and kill the white People? That the Examinant consented: That thereupon he gave
the Examinant a Dram, and told him, he expected he would be as good as his
Word; he answered yes.

2. That about a Fortnight after he met with Pompey (Mr. P. De Lancey's Negro)
and carried him to Hughson's; and when they were there, they and Hughson drank
a Mug of Punch; after which Hughson asked Pompey, whether he would consent to
stand on his Side against the white People, and c. which he consenting to do,
Hughson swore the said Pompey, in Presence of the Examinant and Hughson's Wife,
to be true: Compare Pompey' s Confession with this, page 88.
That the Examinant told Pompey, he had drank a Dram to bind him, which was as
good as swearing.

3. That the Examinant never spoke to any other Negro about the Plot; nor has
any other Negro at any time spoke to him about it.

Evidence affecting this Negro.

Pompey (De Lancey's) Confession, 1, 6. pa. 88:

DEPOSITION. NUMB. I.
JOHN SCHULTZ made Oath, That whereas by the Judge's Orders he took a
Confession in Writing from the Mouth of Pedro, belonging to Pierre De Peyster,
wherein he accused two Nogroes, the one belonging to Cornelius Van Horn, called
Kid, the other to Dr. Henderson, called Caesar; that they Kid and Caesar, with
some other Negroes and him the said Pedro, were sworn at Hughson's, and there
agreed to set Fire to Houses, and destroy the People inhabiting this City: And
whereas the said Pedro did, on the 30th of June 1741, acknowledge voluntarily
to the said John Schultz, Francis Barrow being present, and likewise in the
Evening of the same Day, John Schultz, Pierre De Peyster and Stephen Courtlandt
being present, That the Words which he spoke relating to himself and the others
which he had said were present and all sworn at Hughson's, viz. Kid, Caesar,
and c. was not true; and that Will, a Negro belonging to one Ward, a Watch
maker, being in the same Prison with him, had told him, That he understood
these Affairs very well, and that unless he the said Pedro did confess and
bring in two or three, he would be either hanged or burnt, and did likewise
name the aforesaid Negroes as proper ones to be accused; and he the said Pedro
did say, that Will was the Cause of his making that false Confession; which he
can prove by four Negroes which are in the same Prison with him.

DEPOSITION. NUMB. II.
JOHN SCHULTZ made Oath, That a Negro belonging to Henry Breasted, called Jack,
did, after he had made Confession, send for him to the Prison, and told him, he
had recollected two more Negroes, viz. Hereford belonging to Samuel Myers
Cohen, and Tonio belonging to Counselor Courtlandt; which were afterward
committed by Order of the Judges, for being concerned in the Conspiracy. And
whereas it was desired by the Master of the said Hereford, that he should be
examined; which he afterward was by the said John Schultz and Samuel Myers
Cohen, and did declare his Innocence of what he was charged with; and the said
Hereford being a young Boy, did give the aforesaid Schultz a Suspicion that he
was impeached wrongfully; for which Reason he the said John Schultz did again
go to the Prison, and in the Presence of Lancaster Green and Katharine Mills,
did ask the aforesaid Jack, whether the said Hereford had certainly been
concerned? that he should take Care not to accuse any one unjustly; and if he
had so done, to declare in then; to which the said Jack made Answer, That he
had told a Lie about Hereford, and that he was innocent as far as he knew; and
repeated before Lancaster Green what he had said when he accused them.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 2d JULY,
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES DE LANCEY, Esquire; Chief Justice. The Second and
Third Justices.

The KING, against Jamaica, a Negro.

UPON the former favorable Circumstances concerning this Criminal, the Court
Ordered his Execution be further respited for fourteen Days.

The KING, against Will, WARD's Negro.

THIS Negro being set to the Bar to receive Judgment, and there having been
credible Information, that this Criminal has within a few Years past, been
concerned in two Conspiracies in the West Indies, the first at St. John's, the
last at Antigua in the Year 1736, where (as 'twas said) he became an Evidence,
and from thence was shipped to this City, from hence to Providence, but
returned hither again, and was here sold: WHEREFORE it was thought high Time to
put it out of his Power to do any further Mischief; and having pleaded Guilty
upon his Arraignment as before, the Court sentenced him to be burnt at a Stake,
on Saturday the fourth Instant.

The Court adjourned to Ten o'Clock Tomorrow Morning.

The eight following Negro Confessions were taken this Day by Mr. Nicholls and
Mr. Lodge.
NUMB. I.
SCIPIO (Bound's) said, That last Christmas Hollidays Jack (Comfort's) carried
him to Hughson's, where there were a great Number of Negroes, near Thirty; that
they all supped there, and after Supper Hughson got a Bible, and told them
there was a Plot going forward against the white People of the Town; that the
French and Spaniards were expected, and th^n would be a fair Opportunity; that
those that would swear to him to be of his Side, should be his Men; that they
might be ^ll free Men: That he [ Hughson] swore himself his Wife and Daughter,
and afterward swore several of the Negroes: That he heard Spanish talked among
the Negroes, but knows not what Negroes they were: That he swore them all to
Secresy, and said he would provide Arms for all of them; That he, Scipio, was
to kill his Master and Mistress. That he was afterward at Comfort's, and saw
Jack there sharpening Knives, which he said were to be used to kill the white
People: That several Negroes were there; and afterward Jack told him, there
was to be a General Feast at Hughson's. That when he supped at Hughson's, the
Daughter of Hughson took the Cloth from the Table.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Cato (Col. Moore's) Confession, 2, 6. pa. 90.

As Soon as Scipio was brought before Mr. Nicholls and Mr. Lodge to be examined,
He was asked who his Master was, and what was his Name? he answered, Master,
don't you know me? I am Scipio belonging to Mr. Robert Bound, and formerly
belonged to Dr. Nicols: And it being then demanded of him, how he came to be
concerned in the Conspiracy? (he being a Fellow that did not want Sense, and
had had a better Education than most of his Color) he answered, It Is true,
Sir, I ought to have known better; my first Master, Dr. Nicols, brought me up
from a Child, sent me to School, and had me taught to read; he intended to give
me to his Son, who was bred a Merchant; for which Reason he put me to a Cooper
to learn that Trade; but his Son going to live in the Country, he had no Use
for me in that Business; my old Master therefore sold me to my present Master
Bound, who has likewise been very kind to me; but it was with me as it is with
all my Color, who are never easy till they get a Dram, and when they have one
want more; This was my Case on my meeting with Comfort's Jack, who carried
(...) to Hughson's, where from drinking one Dram I drank more, till I was
bewitched with it, and c. as in the Examination above.

Those Gentlemen declared this Fellow seemed to be the most sensible of any
they examined, and appeared very penitent and sorry for what he had done; he
had when examined, his Bible in his Bosom, which he said he read in Goal as
often as he could.

NUMB. II.
LONDON (Kelly's) said, That last Christmas he with Tickle (Carpenter's)
Primus (Desbrosse's) to take a Walk; that they went to Hughson's, drank Punch
and Beer* That after they had drank, Hughson told him, now was the best Time to
do something, if they intended to do it, it being War-time; that London asked
What? that he said, he should swear; and g^t a Book and swore him not to tell
any Body of what he would tell him; and then told him, the Negroes were going
to rise to ^ill the white People; and that he would find Guns for them.

That ten or fourteen Days after, Fortune acquainted York (Ludlow's) Qu^^^ (L^
Roux's) and Jack (Judah Hays's) of the Design, and asked them if they would be
concerned in the Plot^? and they said they would with all their Hearts; but
does not know they went to Hughson's.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Tickle's Confession, 1. pa. 75. Primus, Desbrosse's, Confession, pa. 86.
Worcester, Varian's, Confession, pa. 115.

NUMB. III.
TONY (Brazier's) said, That last Summer Capt. Marshall's Ben carried him to
Hughson's, where they drank Rum; and Ben there told him he must burn his
Mistress's House; but he said nothing to it, but went away.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Caesar, Pintard's Confession, 4. pa. 89. Cato, Col. Moore's, Confession, 7.
pa. 90.

NUMB. IV.
TOM (Capt. Rowe's) said, That Whitsontide last Year he was at Hughson's, with
Albany and Quamino (Pemberton's;) That after they had drank Beer and Rum,
Hughson (...) Book and swore him and Quamino not to tell any Thing about what
he would tell them; and then told them the Negroes did intend to rise against
the white People; and that he had some white People in the Country, that would
help him and the Negroes; that the Town was to be set on fire; and when it was,
Tom, being an old Fellow, should run to him, to be a Drummer, not being ^it for
any Thing else.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Sarah, Burk's, Confession, No II. pa. 50. III. pa. 59. Tickle's Confession, 2.
pa. 71. Quamino, Pemberton's, Confession, pa. 91. col. 1.

NUMB. V.
FORTUNE (Mr. D. Clarkson's) said, That some time about Christmas last, he was
going to Comfort's for Tea-Water, where he saw Ben. (Capt. Marshall's) Quash
(Mr. Rutgers's) and Fortune (Mr. Vandersp^^gle's) on the Hill at Comfort's;
that they carried him to Hughson's, where they had one or two Bowls of Punch;
that Hughson drank with them and told them they should never want for Liquor
whether they had Money or not; that after they had drank, Hughson made him
(...) and Kiss a Book, and say, D -- n my Soul to (...) any Body; and told him,
he must fire his Master's (...) and kill the Family, or else he would kill him;
then he promised he would.

2. That he has been at Hughson's three (...) since and once heard Hughson say,
they were to get some white people out of the Country to help them.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Brash's Confession, 5. pa. 97.

NUMB. VI
CAESAR(Kortrecht's) said, That last Christmas he went with Jack (Comfort's)
to Hughson's; that he was in the Shop, and much in Liquor; that he saw (...)
Room full of Negroes eating and drinking, but does not know who they were,
being the whole Time in the Shop; that Comfort's Jack coming out with the
Prisoner told him, the Spaniards were coming here, and that the Negroes were
going to rise, and would help the Spaniards; that he offered him (Caesar) a
Knife to fight with against the white People; but he refused it, having one in
his Pocket; That then Jack swore him to be one among them, and he promised them
he would.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Cato, Col. Moore's, Confession. 6. pa. 90. Jack,Comfort's, Examination, (...)
10. pa. 64.

NUMB. VII.
JOHNEAU said, That last Fall he met Caesar (Vaarck's) Cuffee (Philipse's) and
Albany, and they went to the House of Frans a free Negro, to drink a Dram; that
Caesar took him aside, and told him the Negroes were to rise and take the Town,
and asked him to be one; that he then declined it; but afterward he met with
those three, who carried him to Hughson's, where they drank much Liquor; and
then Caesar again asked him to be concerned, that the Thing might be done, and
he would provide Arms, Powder and Shot; that he then consented; and Caesar
swore him into the Plot, and to Secresy. That he has afterward s^^n Ten Eyck's
Billy sworn there on a Book by Hughson, with another Negro he Knew not, but he
was a Drummer, and wore a laced Hat: That they were at the free Negro's; he
does not know whether the free Negro could overhear the Proposal Caesar made to
him when he took him aside.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Mary Burton's Deposition, No II. 7. pa. 28^. Jack^ Comfort's, Confession, I.
2, 24. p. 64, 65.

NUMB. VIII.
JACK (Abrahamse's) said, That a little before Christmas, Jack (Comfort's) and
Cato (Cowley's) Carried him to Hughson's, where they drank Punch; that then
Hughson asked him* whether he would be concerned with him to kill the white
People? that he consented; and then Hughson told him he must swear, (...) got a
Book, and swore the (...) take him if he told any Body white or black; that
wh^^ (...) should hear Fire cried (...) Night, he should kill his Master and
Mistress, and (...) to him, and he would (...) him a Gun and (...). That ^here
was a Woman (...) the (...) smoking, that saw (...) sworn, but don't know
whether she were Hughson^ (...) or who else.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Tom, (...), Confession, No II. Pa. 112.

This Day (...) Grand Jury recommended the following Negroes to the (...) to be
discharged, they finding no sufficient Evide^^^ against them whereon to found
an Indictment, viz.

Tom, Vanzant's; Kid, Cornelius Van Horn's. Hereford, Myers Cohen's*
And they were discharged accordingly.

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 3d JULY.
A. M.

PRESENT. The Second Justice.

Court-opened and adjourned to Four o'Clock in the Afternoon.

P. M.

PRESENT The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Caesar, PINTARD's Dundee, TODD's. Caesar, KORTRECHT's Will, or Bill, TEN
EYCK's Tom, ROWE's Starling, LAWRENCE's


THE Prisoners being arraigned upon an Indictment (...) the Conspiracy; all
pleaded Guilty, and submitted (...) the Mercy of the Court

The KING, against Negroes.
Mars, London, FRENCH's Primus, DEBROSSE's Bridgewater, Pompey, LEFFERTS's


THE Prisoners being arraigned upon an Indictment for the Conspiracy; all
pleaded Guilty, and submitted to the Mercy of the Court.

Court adjourned to Monday the 6th Instant Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

Dundee (TODD's) Confession.
NUMB. II.
He said,

1. THAT the first Time he was at Hughson's ^e, Jack and Cook (Comfort's) drank
a Pint of Rum together, and the Rum they bought at Hughson's with the Money he
had lost [at Play.]

2. That the next Time the Prisoner bought an Half-Pint of Rum, and drank it
with the same Cook and Jack; and then Doctor Hamilton and Hughson called Jack,
and asked him, what Boy that was? Jack answered, Todd's; then the Doctor and
Hughson called the Prisoner and asked him to swear upon a Book; which he
refused, and Jack told him, he must do it; and that he did swear; the Doctor
held the Book, and Hughson read something out of it; and after he had sworn,
the Doctor took his Name down upon a Piece of Paper; That the Doctor, Hughson
and Jack told him not to tell any Body of it; and Jack told him to kill his
Master and Mistress; and that the Doctor told him, he should be under Captain
Jack: That then he asked to go, and they told him he might.

3. That after he had left Hughson's House, he asked Jack, what it was he had
sworn? Jack told him it was to burn the Town, and to begin at the Fort first;
and that Roosevelt's Quack was to set fire to the Fort; and then he went home.

4. That when the Fire was in the Smith's Fly, Patrick, Mr. English's Negro
told him, the Fires in Town were not half done yet; upon which the Prisoner
asked Patrick, why he said so? he said because he knew it.

See his Confession before, page 93.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Arthur Price's Deposition, No II. 2. pa.19. Sandy's Examination, III. 8. pa.
49. Sarah, Burk's, Examination, II. 1. pa. 50.

The three following Negro Confessions were taken this Day by Mr. Nicholls and
Mr. Lodge.
NUMB. I.
MARS said, That some time about Christmas last, Cuffee, Gomez's, and Peek' s
Ceasar, informed him of the Plot behind old Het's on the Dock, and told him
they were to burn the Houses in the Town, and fight with the white People; and
asked him if he would join with them? That they swore him by the Thunder, not
to discover any Thing about it. That after the Fort was burnt he saw Caesar
(Peck's) and Cuffee (Gomez's) and they told him one Job was done.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Tickle's Confession, No I 3, 4. pa. 71. col. 2. Caesar (Pintard's) Confession,
II. 4, 5. pa. 89. col. 2.

NUMB. II.
Second Confession.
PRIMUS (De Brosse's) said, That Sunday before Christmas, Tickle(Carpenter's)
and London (Kelly's) carried him to Hughson's, where they drank; and Hughson
asked him, if he would stand by him to kill the white People of the Town; That
the French and Spaniards were coming, and would take the Town, and they would
help the Spaniards? he told him, Yes; and then Hughson swore him, the D -- l
fetch him if he told any Body or did not help them; he said yes: That Hughson
told him, that when he heard a Noise in the Town, he must steal his Master's
Gun, and come to his House; and that he should kill his Master and Mistress;
but he said he would not.

2. That two or three Days after Van Zant's Storehouse a fire, he met Peck's
Caesar, who told him, he had set the Storehouse on fire.

See his Confession before, Page.86.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Tickle's Confession, No II. 1. pa.75. Caesar, Pintard's, Confession, 4. pa.
89. London, Kelly's, Confession, pa. 120.

NUMB. III. First Confession.
SAM (Lowe's) said, That on Easter Hollidays was a Year, he went to Hughson's
with Comfort's Jack, where he saw Mr. Philipse's Frank and Hyer's Tom* that
Frank was drinking Beer; that Hughson carried him into another Room, and asked
him if he would be concerned with him in taking the Town? he said he would, if
it could be done; that Hughson told him it could; and then he swore him, and
told him, that when the Houses were on fire, he should come to him, and he
would furnish him with Arms.

Evidence affecting this Negro.
Pompey (De Lancey's) Confession, 5. pa. 88* Cato (Col Moore's) Confession, 2,
6. pa. 90. London (Wynkoop's) Confession, 1, 2. pa. 96.

DEPOSITION.
WILLIAM NAIL, Servant to Thomas Cox, of the City of New York, Butcher, being
duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, deposes and says, That
he the Deponent having Discourse with one London, a Negro Man Slave belonging
to Edward Kelly, Butcher, concerning Negroes that were taken up on Account of
the Plot, heard the said London swear, by G -- d, that if he the said London
should be taken up on Account of the Plot, he would hang or burn all the
Negroes in York, whether they were concerned or not. It Is not improbable but he
might know that most of 'en^ were concerned.


This Day Prince, Duane's: Tony, Latham's; Cato, Shurmur's; Harry, Kip's; and
York, Marschalk's, Negroes, were executed at the Gallows, according to
Sentence; and the Body of York was afterward hung in Chains, upon the same
Gibbet with John Hughson.

Some few Days before this, the Town was amused with a Rumor, that Hughson was
turned Negro, and Vaarck's Caesar a White; and when they came to put up York in
Chains by Hughson (who was hung upon the Gibbet three Weeks before) so much of
him as was visible, viz. Face, Neck, Hands and Feet, were of a deep shining
Black, rather blacker than the Negro placed by him, who was one of the darkest
Hue of his Kind; and the Hair of Hughson's Beard and Neck (his Head could not
be seen, for he had a Cap on) was curling like the Wool of a Negro's Beard and
Head; and the Features of his Face were of the Symmetry of a Negro Beauty; the
Nose broad and flat, the Nostrils open and extended, the Mouth wide, Lips full
and thick, his Body, (which when living, was tall by the View upwards of six
Feet, but very meagre) swelled to a Gigantick Size; and as to Caesar (who, though
executed for a Robbery, was also one of the Head Negro Conspirators, had been
hung up in Chains a Month before Hughson, and was also of the darkest
Complexion) his Face was at the same Time somewhat bleach'd or turned whitish;
insomuch that it occasioned a Remark, That Hughson and he had changed Colors.
The Beholders were amazed at these Appearances; the Report of them engaged the
Attention of many, and drew Numbers of all Ranks, who had Curiosity, to the
Gibbets, for several Days running, in order to be convinced by their own Eyes,
of the Reality of Things so confidently reported to be, at least, wondrous
Phaenomenons; and upon the View they were found to be such as have been
described: Many of the Spectators were ready to resolve them into Miracles;
however, others not so hasty, though surprised at the Sights, were willing to
account for them in a natural Way; so that they administered Matter for much
Speculation.

The Sun at this Time had great Power, and the Season as usual very hot, that
Hughson's Body drip'd and distilled very much, as it needs must, from the great
Fermentation and Abundance of Matter within him, as could not but be supposed
at that Time, from the extraordinary Bulk of his Body; though considering the
Force of the Sun, and the natural Meagreness of his Crops, one would have been
apt to imagine, that long 'ere this, it would have been disencumbered of all
its Juices. At length, about ten Days or a Fortnight after Hughson's Mate,
York, was hung by him, Hughson's Corpse unable longer to contain its Load, burst
and discharged Pails full Which may be understood to mean a surprising Quantity.
of Blood and Corruption; This was testified by those who were near by, fishing
upon the Beach when the Irruption happened, to whom the Stench of it was very
offensive.

Those who were inclined to account in a natural Way, for what was by some
esteemed almost miraculous, by all very surprising, observed, that by the
written Evidences of Witnesses, both Black and White, Information was given of
Poison being distributed amongst the Conspirators, See William Kane 's
Examination. 16. pa. 128.
and of the Use their Principals intended should have been made of it; Harry, a
Negro Doctor, was to bring the Negroes Poison to use (if they were discovered
and taken) before they were executed; Kane had seen him give Poison (as they
called it) to Walter's Quack for that Purpose, in Papers; Quack said, he should
not be suspected, he might go to the Prison to carry Victuals; and so could
give the Poison to those that were condemned, to prevent their Execution This
Office we may suppose was to be administered by Quack, without the Knowledge of
the Patients (and he speaks as if they had a Confidence in him) in order to
^^^patch them, and prevent their telling Tales: For when they found themselves
in Jeopardy there might be danger of their speaking the Truth, and discovering
their Principals, in hopes of saving their own Lives by it.
Kane, saw Doctor Harry give a large Quantity [of it] to Hughson.

Mary Burton speaks of their having Poison amongst them In her Evidence upon
Trial of eight Negroes 15th of this Month, viz. her Testimony against Doctor
Harry.
she says, She had seen three or four Papers of Poison in Hughson's Drawers,
which she understood he had of some Negro.

It has been related already Page 72.
that Hughson when he was brought out of Jail to be carried to his Execution,
had a red Spot in each Cheek, about the Bigness of a Shilling, which at that
Time was by some thought very remarkable, because he was always pale of Visage;
and the Sheriff (who observed it) did not believe, from the Care that had been
taken, he could have drank any strong Liquor in Jail; which was an additional
Reason why they took so much Notice of it.

Upon the Supposition that Hughson had taken Poison, it has been made a
Question, whether that might not have occasioned the Swelling of his Corpse to
so amazing a Bulk? Nay his Arms, Legs, and Thighs, were enlarged in Proportion
to the Body; this is submitted to the Consideration of the Curious and
Connoisseurs in Physic.

As to the Change of Complexions in Hughson and Caesar, some imputed it to the
Influence of the Sun; but to that it was objected, it would be strange indeed,
that the Sun should have two such different Effects as to turn Hughson [a
White] black, and Caesar [a Negro] whitish.

As to Hughson's taking Poison, that by some was thought very improbable; for,
as it is said, in the Account of his Behavior at, and going to his Execution,
his Actions were observed to be such, as betokened his Expectation of being
rescued; he held up his Hand as high as his Pinion would admit of, and seemed
to beckon with his Finger, as one expecting Deliverance; and if that was his
Persuasion, he would not have taken Poison, which was certain Death; and
besides, if he had taken any, he would have taken a sufficient Quantity, and
Time enough, to have answered the Design of it, which must be supposed to be,
to destroy himself to prevent his Execution.

To this it was answered, that though he might be determined to take Poison to
destroy himself, and did take some, yet he might do it with so much Reluctance,
as not to take the Quantity prescribed sufficient to answer the End; which though
he might not be aware of, but expect certain Death from it, yet the nearer he
approached the Gallows, the more his Thoughts might be confused, and Nature
prevailed; as long as there is Life, there is Hopes, and his Deliverance might
be uppermost in his Mind; he would willingly have avoided the Infamy of
Hanging, and stand the Chance of saving his Life into the Bargain.

Whatever were the Causes of these Changes, the Facts are here related, that
every one may make their own Conectures upon them.

But Hughson it seems, let the worst happen to him in all Events, declared as
he was going to mount the Cart which was to carry him to Execution, that he did
not doubt but some remarkable Sign would happen to him, to show [or signify]
his Innocence, and if his Corpse becoming monstrous in Size, and his Complexion
(for once to use a vulgar Similitude) as black as the D -- 1, can be deemed
remarkable Signs or Tokens of his Innocence! then some may imagine, it has
happened according to his Expectation.

SATURDAY, 4th JULY.
THE Jail being now thronged with Negroes committed as Confederates in the
Conspiracy, many whereof had made Confessions of their Guilt, in Hopes of
Pardon in Consequence of the Proclamation, and others who were pardoned and
turned Evidence; it was feared, considering the Season of the Year, that such
Numbers closely confined might be apt to breed an Infection; therefore the
Judges thought it was proper to examine the List of them, and to to mark out
such as should be thought proper to recommend to his Honor the Lieutenant
Governor, to be pardoned, upon Condition of Transportation to be therein
limited by a short Time, and to distinguish which of them who had been made Use
of as Witnesses, might be necessary to reserve for some Time; and for this
Purpose they associated to them Mr. Nicholls and Mr. Lodge, by whose Assistance
the following List was accordingly settled, which the Judges reported to his
Honor, and submitted to his Consideration.

A List of Negroes recommended this Day by the Judges to his Honor the
Lieutenant Governor, for Transportatio^.

Quamino, Pemberton's. Toby, Widow Breasted's. Willor Bill, Ten Eyck's.
Warwick, Hunt's. 5 Tom, Soumain's. Dept^ord, Cruger's. Will, Lush's. York,
Peck's. Scipio, Van Borsom's. 10 Guy, Horsefield's. Cato, Benson's. Tony, Widow
Brazier's Scipio, Bound's. Caesar, Kortrecht's. 15 Jack, Abrahamse's. Dundee.
Todd's. Starling, Lawrence's. York, Crooke's. Bridgwater, Van Horn's. 20
London, French's: Mars, Becker's. Primus, DeBrosse's. Jacob, Rutger's. Mink,
Groesbeck's. 25 Titus, Phaenix's. Lewis, Schuyler's. Jonneau, Vaarck's.
Scotland, Marston's. Worcester, Varian's. 30 Jamaica, Ellison's. Patrick,
English's. Scipio, Abrahamse's. Fortune, Clarkson's. Caesar, Pintard's. 35
Fortune, Wilkins's. Tom, Moore's. Pompey, Lefferts's. London, Marschalk's. Wan,
Low's. 40 Will, Vaarck's. Fortune, Latham's. Sarah, Burk's.
This Day Will, Ward's Negro, was executed according to Sentence, and made the
following Confession at the Stake.

1. HE said, That William Kane, a Soldier belonging to the Fort, knew of the
Plot; and he heard the said Kane say, he did not care if the Fort was burnt
down: That since the Plot was discovered he told Kane he would make a
Discovery; on which Kane gave him three Pounds in Bills, and told him, not to
discover; Part of which Money his young Mistress found in his Chest.

2. That his Mistress lost a Silver Spoon, which he, Will, stole and carried to
Kane's Wife, who gave it her Husband in his Presence, and he sold it to Peter
Van Dyke, a Silver-Smith, and gave him [ Will] eight Shillings of the Money.

3. That Kane and Kelly Both Soldiers belonging to the Garrison, and reputed
Papists.
asked Quack to burn the Fort, and said if that was done, they (the Soldiers)
would have their Liberty; and Kelly said, you must do it with some wet Cotton,
and that will make no Smoke.

4. That he has talked of the Plot with Kane and Kelly often, and has been at
Kane's House, and has heard that other Soldiers were concerned, but does not
know them. That he has seen Quack (Walter's) there, Ryndert's Tom, Governor's
Jack, Cuyler's Pedro; This Negro not apprehended.
and John (Vanzant's) went round, who received some Money in his Hat, collected
at a Meeting at Kelly' s, which Money was to be paid to Hughson.

5. That Quack, Goelet's, and Will, Tiebout's, drew him in; and called on their
Names to the last.

6. That Pedro (De Peyster's) is innocent for what he knows.

7. That Moore's Cato advised him and Pedro, to bring in many Negroes, ^elling
Pedro, that he would be certainly burnt or hanged if he did not confess; but
that if he brought in a good many, it would save his Life; for he had found it
so himself; and must say, he was to set his Master's House on fire, which would
make the Judges believe him. Pedro by Schultz' s Deposition of the first
Instant, charges Will himself with giving that Advice: But these are Will' s
dying Words in the Midst of Flames, and may be supposed to come from him upon a
Question put, Whether he had not advised Pedro so? So rare is it to get the
Truth from these Wretches!


8. That Pintard's Caesar said much the same; and Comfort's Jack advised Cato;
but that Jack was a true Evidence.

The Pile being kindled, this Wretch set his Back to the Stake, and raising up
one of his Legs, laid it upon the Fire, and lifting up his Hands and Eyes,
cried aloud, and several Times repeated the Names, Quack Goelet and Will
Tiebout, who he had said brought him into this Plot.

This Evening William Kane, Soldier, Quack, Goelet's, and Will, Tiebout's,
Negroes, were apprehended and committed.

After we had several of the Fires mentioned in the Introduction to this
JOURNAL, Quack, Goelet's, was had up and examined before the Magistrates, for
some suspicious Words overheard to be uttered by him, to another Negro, which
seemed to import strong Hints as if he had been privy to the Occasion of them;
but nothing could be made of it, and was therefore discharged. But this was
long before we had the least Intimation of a Conspiracy.

SUNDAY, 5th JULY:
Examination of William Kane, Soldier: Taken before the Chief and Third Justice.
NUMB. I.
1. HE said That he was born at Athlone in Ireland; had been in this Country
four and thirty Years; aged about Forty.

2. That he never was at Hughson's House, nor did he know where it was.

3. That some Time last Summer, when the Cuba Men Meaning the Soldiers raised
in this Province for the Expedition to the Spanish West Indies.
were here, his Wife brought home a Silver Spoon out of the Fields, which she
had of one of the Cuba Men: This was about the Time of their embarking: That he
believed his Wife could tell the Name of the Man.

4. That he carried the said Spoon to Van Dyke the Silver-Smith, to sell; the
Spoon was battered up, and he told Van Dyke he believed it was a stolen Spoon;
but he answered, that he would buy it for all that; his Son endeavored to open
the Spoon, to see if he could discover the Name, and broke it to Pieces: Van
Dyke bought it of him, and gave him a milled Spanish Piece of Eight, and he
thinks, to the best of his Remembrance seven or eight Shillings in Pennies: It
was about fourteen Days Time between his Wife's bringing the Spoon to him, and
his carrying it to Van Dyke's.

5. Never was at Kelly's the Soldier's House in his Life.

6. Had no Acquaintance with John Romme; never was at his House at the Battery
in his Life.

7. That he never was in Company with Jury, alias Ury, now in Jail; nor had he
any Acquaintance with him; nor was he ever at any Congregation or Meeting where
the said Jury, alias Ury, either preached or prayed.

8. That he has no other Acquaintance with Connolly, now in Jail, than common
for one Brother Soldier with the other; never was at his House in his Life.

9. Professed himself a Protestant of the Church of England; and said, that he
never was at any Roman Catholic Congregation in his Life.

10. That he has heard Thankful Sp^tten, Wise of James Spotten (both Lodgers at
his House) say, that she once saw a large Company of Negroes at Kelly's House,
dancing to a Fiddle; she said she then lodged at Kelly's; came home about eight
of the Clock at Night, and one of the Negroes (a tall one) asked her what
Business she had there? and threatened to kick her into the Fire, if she did not
go away: Kelly's Wife asked her to go up Stairs, and see the Negroes dance;
then she was going down Stairs, and she met Mr. Kennedy's Mulatto coming into
the Room, who hufft the Negro Fellow, and bid her sit down again.

While Kane was under Examination, the Undersheriff came and informed the
Judges, that Mary Burton had declared, that she had often seen him at
Hughson's, amongst Hughson, his Wife, and c. and the Negroes, when they were
talking of the Conspiracy, and that he was one of the Confederates: Whereupon
she was ordered to be brought in; and being confronted with Kane, she
immediately declared to the Effect in the following Deposition: The Chief
Justice, who was a Stranger to the Transactions concerning the Detection of the
Conspiracy (having been absent attending the Execution of his Majesty's special
Commission at Providence) he thought proper to admonish the Witness in an awful
and solemn Manner, concerning the Nature of an Oath, and the Consequences of
taking a false one, more especially as it affected a Man's Life: She answered,
she was acquainted with the Nature of an Oath very well, and that she would not
take a false one upon any Account; and repeated the same Charge against Kane
over and over, and persisted in it, that what she said was Truth; all which
Kane as positively denied; whereupon she was sworn, and the following Evidence
taken.

DEPOSITION.
NUMB. V.
MARY BURTON being duly sworn and produced before William Kane, Soldier, said,
That she had seen the said Kane at Hughson's very often, talking with Hughson,
his Wife and Daughter, Peggy Salingburgh alias Kerry, Caesar, Vaarck's;
Galloway, Rutgers's; Prince, Auboyneau's, and Cuffee, Philipse's, Negroes; and
the Discourse amongst them was, That they would burn the Town; the Fort first,
the Governor and all his Family in it, and kill all the white People; and that
she heard the said William Kane say, that he would help them all that lay in
his Power.

Then Mary Burton was ordered to withdraw, and Kane was apprized of the Danger
he was in, and told he must not flatter himself with the least Hopes of Mercy,
but by making a candid and ingenuous Confession of all that he knew of the
Matter, or to this Purpose; but he still denied what had been alleged against
him by Mary Burton; 'til upon most solemn Admonition, he began to be affected;
his Countenance changed, and being near fainting, desired to have a Glass of
Water, which was brought him; and after some Pause, he said he would tell the
Truth, though at the same Time he seemed very loath to do it; but after some
Hesitation began to open; and several Hours were spent in taking down Heads of
his Confession, which were afterward drawn out at large, and distinctly read
over to him, and being duly sworn, he made Oath that the same was true, and
(not knowing how to write) he put his Mark to it.

Further Examination and Confession of William Kane, The same Day.
NUMB. II.
1. HE said, There was one Jerry Corker who tended in the Governor's Stable,
near before Christmas last, when he was Sentry at the Governor's Door. he came
out, and he, Kane, being dry, asked him for some Beer; he said he would get
some, and had Rum in his Pocket and would make Flip; which he did in a Copper
Pot with Loaf-Sugar; that he, Kane, drank a Draught; and when he was relieved
at Nine at Night, Corker came into the Guard-Room, and asked him if he would go
to Croker's at the Fighting Co^ks, where there was to be a Christ^ning by a
Romish Priest? When they were there the People did not come that Night; they
staid 'til past Ten: The next Night they went again, and they were not there:
The third Night they went to New-Street, to the House of one Coffin a Pedlar;
there they had a Child, and christ'ned it, and three acted as Priests, and
handed the Book about.

2. That about four Days after, Corker and he were upon Guard, and Corker said,
by G -- d, I have a Mind to burn the Fort. Corker went away some Time after the
Fire at the Fort, to work in the Country; he believed about the White Plains.

3. That he had heard Corker, John Coffin and Daniel Fagan talk about burning
the Town, before they went away.

4. One of those who acted as Priest, was a little Man that lodged at Croker's.
Ury lodged there 'til he removed to Campbell' s, to keep School with him.


5. That Fagan, Corker and Coffin drew him, Kane, behind the Church to a
Meeting; and would have had (...) to rob Houses with them and go off.

6. That he was at two Meetings at Hughson's about the Plot; the First was the
second Day of Christmas, and the Second the last Sunday in February, before
the Fire at the Fort: This agrees with the Negro Account of the great Meeting
there.
Corker, Fagan and Coffin were at the first Meeting: At the second he, Kane,
was sworn to Secresy by Hughson; he first who discovered it was to be hanged at
Low Water Mark; his Privy-Parts were to be cut out and thrown in his Face; his
Belly ripped open, and his Body eaten by the Birds of the Air: Hughson 's Father
and three Brothers, and an old white Woman they said was crazy, Probably
Luckstead, Hughson 's Mother-in-Law, who pretended to tell Fortunes.
were present: At the second Meeting he, Kane, and those Men, and Sarah Hughson
the Daughter, were sworn together: They were to burn what they could of the
City, and get what Money and Goods they could and carry them to Mr. Alexander's
House, which was to be reserved for Hughson: We were to kill the principal
People.

7. That if any People came from the Country or West Indies, to conquer them;
they were to kill the People belonging to the Vessels here, and go to Spain:
Their Design was to wait for the French and Spaniards, whom they expected; and
if they did not come in six Weeks, then they were to try what they could do for
themselves This also agrees with the Negro Account. See Jack, Comfort's,
Confession, 25. pa. 65.
Most of the Negroes he believed would join them if they were like to succeed:
This he learnt from Hughson and Corker. Hughson was to be King, and Caesar
(Vaarck's) the Chief among the Negroes.

8. That he has heard several Negroes say, that Chief Justice's Othello was
concerned; Comfort's Jack said so since the Fire at the Fort, and since the
Chief Justice went to New England.

9. That Corker, who attended the Plumber the Day the Fort was burnt, was at
Hughson's several Times before he, Kane, was there, and brought him there: The
Priest, the little Man that lodged at Croker's, was several Times at Hughson's,
and many Negroes were christ'ned there by him: He has endeavored to seduce
him, Kane, to the Romish Religion And it is said Kane was always reputed a
Papist.
at Coffin's House; he, Kane, was asked whether he could read Latin? he said
No; then whether he could read English? he said No; then Coffin read, and told
him, Kane, what a fine Thing it was to be a Roman; that they could forgive
Sins, and should not go to Hell; he, Kane, answered, he would not believe that
on any Man's Word; and there happened a Squabble; and he, Kane, went away, or
else lie don't know, but they would have seduced him, the Priest and Coffin
pressed him so. He has not heard the Priest say any Thing of the Conspiracy;
but from Corker's Account, he, Kane, believes he knew it.

10. That Connolly, on the Governor's Island, has owned himself to have been
bred up a Priest, to him, Kane; and was often in Company with Jury: Kelly is a
Roman; Connolly and ^e were intimate.

11. That Kelly asked him, Kane, about New-Year, if he would go to Hughson's?
He asked for what? He, Kelly, said something was to be done there; he, Kane,
asked what? He, Kelly, said something you have heard of before; he, Kane, asked
what is that? He, Kelly, said, don't you know what Jerry Corker said to you
before Christmas about burning the Fort? What said he, Kane, is that in
Agitation still; Yes said he, Kelly, and ever shall be 'til the Fort be burnt
down.

12. That Campbell had an Opportunity to come to him, Kane, Yesterday in Goal,
and said, though he could pay the Debt he was in for, yet he believed they
would not let him out, on Account of the Priest that lodged at his House Ury.


13. That he had seen Holt's Joe at Hughson's at the two Meetings, and he said,
he would do his Endeavors with the best.

14. That Holt Holt, a Dancing Master likewise; he came to this City from
South Carolina about 4 or 5 Years ago, of what Religion we know not; but soon
after the Fire at the Fort, he thought proper to ship himself off to Jamaica,
where he s^^n after died, and spared the Han^man Labor.
had (the Year he left Mr. De Lancey's House, before he left it) whipped his
Negro Joe very severely; and Joe meeting him ( Kane) the next Day, when he,
Kane, told him of his Whipping; he said that cursed Dog my Master, is the
greatest Rogue in the World; he would burn all the Town to get Money; if you
knew what was between him and Hughson it would make you stare: And this he
repeated the next Day.

15. That Walter's Quack has often said, he would ride in the Coach, after he
had destroyed his Master: He was sworn by Thunder and Lightning, G -- d's Curse
and Hell Fire fall on them that first discovered the Plot, which was the
Negroes Oath.

16. Some black Stuff was cut among the Negroes, which he did not know, but
heard it was to set Fire to the Roofs of Houses in dry Weather; he has seen one
Harry a Negro Doctor that lives on Long Island bring that Stuff, and has seen
him several Times at Hughson's, and at the two Meetings: He, Harry, was to
bring the Negroes Poison to use (if they were taken) before they were executed:
He, Kane, has seen him give Poison (as they called it) to Walter's Quack for
that Purpose, in Papers, which he, Harry, took out of his Pocket; Quack said he
should not be suspected, and he might go to the Prison and carry Victuals, and
so could give the Poison to those that were condemned, to prevent their
Execution: He, Kane, has seen Doctor Harry give a large Quantity to Hughson.

17. That Niblet's Sandy was at Hughson's at the first Meeting; he, Kane, never
was at Comfort's, but has seen the Negroes there of Sundays, and come to
Hughson's; and has seen three Spanish Negroes at Hughson's, but does not know
whose they are, except one of Captain Sarly's; he should if he saw them know
them again.

18. That at the second Meeting he was at Hughson's about the Plot, there were
present about eight Negroes, viz. Quack, Walter's; Caesar, Vaarck's; Cuffee,
Philipse's; Prince, Auboyneau's; Albany, Carpenter's; Robin, Chambers's; Jack,
Comfort's; and Niblet's Sandy Though Sandy always denied he ever was there.
he saw all the Negroes sworn, and the following Ceremony was used; there was a
black Ring made made on the Floor about two Foot and a half Diameter; and
Hughson bid every one pull off the left Shoe and put their Toes within the
Ring, and Mrs. Hughson held a Bowl of Punch over their Heads as the Negroes
stood round the Circle, and Hughson pronounced the Oath abovementioned, and
every Negro severally repeated the Words after him, and then Hughson's Wife fed
them with a Draught out of the Bowl.

19. That Corker told him, Kane, that Hughson and he had designed to burn the
English Church last Christmas Day, but that Ury the Priest said, they had
better let it alone 'til better Weather, that the Roof might be dry, and a
larger Congregation. Their full Design was to burn the English Church; they had
a greater Spite against that than any other, especially this Jury.

20. That at the Time that the eight Negroes last mentioned were at Hughson's,
he saw several other Negroes in the House,

21. That at the first Meeting that he was at Hughson's, about the Plot, he saw
Galloway there, and Galloway was very talkative and active about the Plot, and
said he would lend a brave Hand, he would take care of his Master, and soon
make him Breeches He formerly belong^d to a Leather Dresser and Glover.


The above Examination having been distinctly read over to the said William
Kane, he, being duly sworn, made Oath, that the same was true, and signed his
Mark for his Name.

Supreme Court. MONDAY, 6th JULY.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES DE LANCEY, Esquire; Chief Justice. The Third Justice.

Court opened and adjourned 'til Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

THIS Day John Coffin, Pedlar, was apprehended, and immediately brought before
two of the Judges, who examined him concerning the Charge against him as one of
the Confederates in the Conspiracy; the Fellow seemed to be under terrible
Apprehensions, trembled and cried, but denied every Thing alleged against him
by Kane; particularly, he protested that he did not know, nor was any wise
acquainted with John Hughson, or ever saw him 'til he was hanged; that he never
had any Acquaintance with Kane, nor was ever in his Company but once, and then
he drank a Mug of Beer with him at Eleanor Wallis's.

Coffin was committed.

Quash (Le Roux's) Jack (Judah Hays's) Negroes, were this Day discharged by the
Third Justice, pursuant to the Recommendation of the Grand Jury, who did not
credit the Evidence of the Negro London (Kelly's) which impeached them.

Evidence affecting these two Negroes.

London (Kelly's) Confession, 2. pa. 120.

This Day also Doctor Harry, a Negro, was apprehended and committed.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 7th JULY. PRESENT,
The Chief Justice: The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Titus, PHAENIX's. Jonneau, VAARCK's Scotland, MARSTON's Fortune, WILKINS's
Fortune, LATHAM's Sarah, BURK's


THE Prisoners having been indicted for the Conspiracy, were thereupon
a^^aigned, and pleaded Guilty, and submitted to the Mercy of the Court.

The KING, against Sarah, BURK's Negro.

THE Prisoner having pleaded Guilty, the Court passed Sentence upon her to be
hanged.

Ordered, That the said Sarah be executed on the Morrow between the Hours of
Nine and One of the same Day.

Court adjourned to Thursday the 9th Instant Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

The Reason of the Resolution for executing the Negro Wench Sarah, was, that
upon the Trial of Cuffes, Gomez's; Robin, Chambers's; Caesar, Peck's; Jack and
Cook, Comfort's, and Jamaica, Ellison's, six of the Negro Conspirators, she was
found endorsed upon the Indictment as a Witness against every one of them,
excepting only Jamaica; and when she was called to give her Evidence, she
prevaricated grossly, and differed so widely from what was penned down from her
in her several Examinations, that the Court could give no further Credit to her
Evidence: so that she deservedly drew the Rope about her own Neck.

Adam's Examination and Confession. Before one of the Judges.
NUMB. II.
1. HE said, That he saw the Negro Doctor Harry at the House of John Hughson,
about a Week before Christmas last; there were present at that Time, Hughson,
his Wife and Daughter, Peggy, and Mary Burton: The Doctor was then sworn of the
Plot; his Hand upon the Book and kissed it; he was to do as the rest, kill the
white People and burn Houses: That he had seen Doctor Harry at Hughson's four
or five Times since.

2. That of a Sunday Afternoon he saw the said Harry cross from the City-Hall
down the Church-Street, and so round the English Church Yard down to Hughson's;
and he, Adam, went down to Hughson's, and saw him there.

3. That he has seen him once in Town about three Weeks before the Fort fired,
and once going down to Hughson's, since the Fort burnt. -- That he had heard he
came over in a little Canoe. He lived upon Nassau, alias Long Island.


Doctor Harry was sent for by two of the Judges; and being charged with what
alleged against him as one of the Conspirators, he stiffly denied all, and
declared, that he never was at Hughson's, nor had he been in Town since he was
ordered out by the Magistrates.

Then he was confronted with Kane and Adam, who severally repeated the
Substance of what they had before declared in their Examinations concerning
him; but the Doctor was stout, denied all, and was remanded.

The Doctor was a smooth soft spoken Fellow, and like other Knaves, affected
the Air of Sincerity and Innocence; but was of a suspicious Character; well
known to the Magistrates of this City; had a few Years before been forbid the
Town for Male Practice in Physic, upon the Penalty of being severely whipped,
if he was seen here again.

Examination of Sam, P. Low's Negro. Second Confession.
HE said, That last Easter was Twelve Months he went with Jacob, Abrahamse's
Scipio to Hughson's House; that when he wen^ in, he saw Judge Philipse's Frank
and the Widow Hyer's Tom, drinking a Mug of Beer; that he did not speak to
Frank nor to Tom at that Time: that he does not know they ever have been told
of the Plot by either White People or Negroes* and that they never mentioned
the Plot to them, nor they to him; but confesses that he, Sam, was sworn as one
of the Conspirators: The rest he refers to his former Examination. 3d July, pa.
122. col. 2.


A List of the Negroes recommended this Day by the Judges to his Honor the
Lieutenant Governor, to be pardoned in order for Transportation.
Patrick, English's. Will, Vaarck's. Worcester, Varian's. Jamaica, Ellison's.
Scipio. Abrahamse's. Caesar, Pintard's. Fortune, Clarkson's. Fortune,
Wilkins's. Tom, BenMoore'^. Pompey, Lefferts's. London, Marschalk's. Wan,
Low's. Fortune, Latham's.
WEDNESDAY, 8th JULY.
THE Sentence of Sarah Hughson the Daughter, having been respited for upwards
of three Weeks since the Execution of her Father and Mother, and she in that
Time often importuned to confess what she knew of the Conspiracy, did always
peremptorily deny she knew any Thing of the Matter, and made Use of many wicked
Imprecations, in order to move Compassion in those that moved it to her, after
the Manner of her Parents, whose constant Practice it was, whenever spoke to
about the Plot: And this being the Day appointed for Sarah's Execution, she was
this Morning brought up to Mr. Pemberton, who came to pray by her, and after
all his Admonitions, still denied her Guilt; and being carried back to her
Dungeon where was the Negro Wench Sarah, under Sentence also to be executed
this Day; Sarah Hughson at last owned to her, that she had been sworn into the
Plot. -- This Negro Wench (thinking as may be supposed to make a Merit of it)
soon after, told what had passed between them to the Undersheriff, who
acquainted the Judges with it; and they sent for Sarah Hughson, who confessed
before them her Knowledge of the Conspiracy; whereupon the Execution of both
Criminials was further respited.

Examination of Sarah Hughson under Condemnation. Before the Chief Justice,
Second Justice, and others.
1. SARAH HUGHSON being examined, said, she saw William Kane sworn Meaning into
the Conspiracy, which wa^ the subject Matter she was examined upon.
one Sunday Evening, sometime before Christmas, she cannot tell exactly; That
he threatened to kill her if she discovered, and the Negroes threatened her the
same; her Father charged her to say nothing about it: They were first to begin
with burning the Fort with a good Wind; after that they were (...) ^^gin at the
Hoper End of the Town, with an East Wind* so as to burn the whole Town; (...)
destroy the White^; and after, to keep the Town and send Notice to the
Spaniards, that they might come and hold it, so that it could not be taken from
them again: She thinks her Mother knew of it.

2. The first Time she saw Jury Alias Ury, the Priest.
was with Campbell, about a Fortnight before May Day, when they came to see the
House; there were several Negroes there concerned: Walter's Quack, Philipse's
Cuffee, Fork's Vaarck's.
Caesar. Comfort's Jack, Bastian, Negroes, used to come after dark; she cannot
remember them, but should know them if she saw them; has seen a middle sized
white Man that called himself a Doctor, with black Hair always cut, of a sharp
Chin, Probably meaning Schutz, whom the Description seems somewhat to (...).
often talking with the Negroes, and drinking with them: Peggy used to say that
Quack, Walter's, was her Sweetheart, and she thought him the Handsomest among
them: Thinks ^he has heard the Name of one Coffin; he is a fresh colored long
haired Man, who was often at Hughson's among the Negroes.

This Confession was so scanty, and came from her after much Difficulty* with
great Reluctance* that it gave little or no Satisfaction; and notwithstanding,
(it was said, after she returned to Jail) she retracted the little said, and
denied she had any Knowledge of a Conspiracy: So that after all, the judges
thought themselves under a Necessity, of Ordering her Execution, as the last
Experiment, to bring her to a Disposition to (...) this Infernal Secret; at
least, so much o^ it, as might be thought deserving a Recommendation of her, as
an Object of Mercy.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 9th JULY,
PRESENT. The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Negroes.
Scipio, Fortune,


SCIPIO and Fortune being brought to the Bar, desired Leave to retract their
Plea of Not Guilty: Leave was given, and they pleaded Guilty, and submitted to
Mercy.

The KING, against Quamino, and Forty One ^^her Negroes.

THE following Negroes having been severally convicted of the Conspiracy, were
put to his Ear, viz.

Quamino, Pemberton's. Toby, Breasted's. Will, Ten^yck's. Warwick, Hunt's. 5
Tom, Soumain's. Deptford, Mr. Mayor*'s. Will, Lush'^. York, Peck's Scipio, Van
Borsom's. 10 Guy, Horsefield's. Cato, Benson's. Tony, Brazier's Scipio,
Bound's. Caesar, Kortrecht's 15 Jack, Abrahamse's. Dundee, Todd's. Tom, Rowe's.
Starling, Lawrence's. York, Crocke's. 20 Bridgwater, Van Horn's. London,
French's* Mars, Benson's. Primus, DeBrosse's. Titus, Phaenix's. 25 Lewis,
Schuyler's. Jonneau, Vaarck's. Scotland, Marston's. Worcester, Varian's.
Jamaica, Ellison's. 30 Patrick, English's. Scipio, Abrahamse's. Fortune,
Clarkson's. Caesar Pintard's. Fortune, Wilkins's. 35 Tom, Moore's. Pompey,
Lafferts's. London, Marschalk's. Wan, Low's. Will, Vaarck's. 40 Fortune,
Latham's. Mink, Gro^sbeck's. Jacob, H. Rutgers'^.
And being asked what they (...) to say, why Sentence of Death should not pass
against them according to Law? They all pleaded his Majesty's most gracious
Pardon upon Condition of Transportation, and prayed that the same might be read
and allowed (...) and (...) was read, and,

Ordered to be allowed; and that the Masters of the said Negroes or some one
for them, do enter into Recognizance before one of the Justices of the Court,
in the Penalty of Fifty Pounds each, to transport their Negro according to the
Proviso in the Pardon mentioned; and that the said Recognizance be entered into
before such Negro be taken out of Goal.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

EXAMINATION Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. III.
WILLIAM KANE being duty sworn, says, That he knows Edward Murphy, now in Goal,
(...) seen him several Times at Hughson's, and know^ he was concerned in the
late Conspiracy to burn the Fort and Town, and kill and destroy the
Inhabitants; and has heard the said Murphy ^^y, some Time before the Fort was
burnt, when the Negroes were talking at Hughson's about the Conspiracy, D -- n
^^m, if he would not (...) Hand to the Fire as soon as any Body.

DEPOSITION Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. VI.
MARY BURTON being duly sworn, says, That she has often seen Edward Murphy
(now present) at the House of the late John Hughson, on Hudson's River* That
she has often seen the said Murphy among the Negroes at the said House, whilst
they (the Negroes) were Plo^^ing and Conspiring to burn this City, and to kill
and murder the Inhabitants thereof; That she has heard the said Murphy say,
That he would help the said Negroes and Hughson, to burn and destroy this City
and Inhabitants, and would give them the said Hughson and Negroes all the
Assistance in his Power.

Confirmed upon Examination before the Grand Jury.

DEPOSITION Before the Chief Justice.
NUMB. IV.
WILLIAM KANE being duly sworn, sa^^^, That he has often seen David Johnson,
Harter (now shew^ to him) at Hughson's, particularly since las^ Christmas,
when there were several Negroes present's that he was called from the Company
that came with him, into a Room by Hughson and Jury the Priest, and staid in
the Room a considerable Time; and Jerry Corker told him the Day the Town was to
(...) ^^^ed; that (...) said, Damn him if he would not be as ready as any
other, and do his Endeavor; and that the said Corker told him, that he had
said so to Johnson: That the Fire was to be on St. Patrick 's Night, if they
could get their Hands together.

DEPOSITION Before the Chief Justice.
NUMB. VII.
MARY BURTON being duly sworn, says, That Andrew Ryan lodged at Hughson's some
time last Winter, and she has seen him with Hughson, some white Folks, Caesar
(Vaarck's) Cuffee (Philipse's) and other Negroes, when the Discourse was of the
Plot; and heard him say he would help them all he could.

Confirmed before the Grand Jury.

DEPOSITION Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. VIII.
MARY BURTON further deposed,

1. That of white People who used to frequent Hughson's, were Holt, the Dancing
Master (...) little Man (as she believes is him) has seen him in Court on the
Trial of the Negroes.

2. John Earl (...) to her, when Hogg's Goods were found, he had rather have
given Twenty Pounds than it was known, and threatened to kill her if she
discovered about the Fire.

3. That Murphy once brought six or seven Gold Rings, and a Gold Locket or two,
and gave them to Hughson's Wife.

4. That she has seen about SEVENTEEN SOLDIERS at Hughson 's with John Earl,
and used to go up Stairs and be with the Negroes.

5. That John Coffin used also to be there.

Examination of William Kane, Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. V.
AT the Christ'ning; the Priest, a Countryman, Coffin, another Man, three Women
and Corker: The Priest sprinkled the Child, and had Salt on a Plate. and rubbed
the Child's Mouth with it. Ury, Coffin, and the other Man acted as Priests.

That Coffi^ last Saturday on the Dock meeting him, asked him If he would not
go on board the Privateer, for all would come out? To which Kane answered, That
not he; for no one would tell, unless some blobbing Rascal might.

Quack (Walter's) handed a Knife to the Priest [ Ury] half unclasped, who took
it into the Room with him, and afterward returned to Quack.

Supreme Court. FRIDAY, 10th JULY.
PRESENT. The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Sarah Hughson:

ORDERED, That Sarah Hughson be executed on the Morrow, according to her former
Sentence, between the Hours of Nine and One of the same Day.

The KING against Sarah, BURK's, Negro.

ORDERED That the Execution of Sarah (Burk's) Negro, be respited till Saturday
the 18th Instant.

The KING against Negroes,
Quack, WALTER's, Othello, Brave-Boy, LIVINGSTON's, Galloway, RUTGERS's, Harry,
MIZERALL's.


THE Prisoners having been indicted for the Conspiracy, were arraigned, and
Othello, Quack, and Braveboy, pleaded Guilty, and Galloway and Harry, Not
Guilty.

The KING against Negroes.
Cambridge, CODWEISE's, Caesar, HENDERSON's, Frank, RYKER's, Toby, H.
WENDOVER's,


THE Prisoners were arraigned on the same Indictment, and Pleaded Not Guilty.

The KING against Negroes.
Quack, WALTER's, Othello, Braveboy, LIVINGSTON's,


THE Prisoners having pleaded Guilty, were set to the Bar, and the Court
proceeded to pass Sentence; which was, That Quack and Othello should be burnt,
and Braveboy hanged.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock.

DEPOSITION Taken before the Chief Justice.
JOHN SCHULTZ makes Oath, That a Negro Man Slave, called Cambridge, belonging
to Christopher Codwise, Esquire; did on the Ninth of June last, confess to this
Deponent in the Presence of the said Mr. Codwise and Richard Baker, That the
Confession he had made before Messrs. Lodge and Nicholls, was entirely false,
viz. That he had owned himself Guilty of the Conspiracy, and had accused the
Negro of Richard Baker, ^alled Cajoe, through Fear; and said, that he had heard
some Negroes talking together in the Jail, that if they did not confess, they
should be hanged; and that was the Reason of his making that false Confession:
And that what he had said relating to Horsefield's Caesar was a Lie. That he
did not know in what Part of the Town Hughson did live, nor did not remember to
have heard of the Man 'til it was a common Talk over the Town and Country, that
Hughson was concerned in a Plot with the Negroes. A Criminal confesses himself
guilty at his own Peril; it may be the only Chance he has for saving his Life;
if he denies all, and the Crime is proved upon him, his Case becomes desperate:
But when once he confesses his Guilt, it will be standing Evidence against him.
-- The Remark upon Negro Recantations once for all, is, That one can scarce be
thoroughly satisfied when it is that they do speak Truth, unless what they say
be confirmed by concurring Circumstances; and the very Sight only of their
Masters may make them change their Notes at any Time, if they give them not
Advice and Instruction with Respect to their Conduct, which there was too just
Reason to believe some of them did; and perhaps many of these Wretches buoyed
themselves up with the Notion, that their Masters would at all Hazards save
them from the Gallows, or Transportation, if they could; especially such of the
Slaves as had been bred up to Trades or Handicrafts; they might flatter
themselves that the Want of them would be a great Prejudice and Damage to their
Owners; at if for their Sakes, vile Wre^shes, the whole Town must run the
Risque of their Houses being fired about their Ears, and having the Inhabitants
butchered: But their having once confessed their Guilt, a Recantation and
Denial of it afterward, will scarce be thought an Argument of sufficient Force
to prove their Innocence. -- The Commissioners who tried the Negro Conspirators
upon the Detection of the Plot in Antigua, in the Year 1736, in the Report of
their Proceedings to their Governor, have the following Clause a propos to the
aforegoing Observations, 20, say they, There were some Steps not of a common
Kind taken by us in the Course of our Enquiry, which possibly might have been
excepted to; Two Particulars; One, the Trying the Criminals privately,
excluding all white Persons (more particularly the Masters of Slaves) excepting
the Constables guarding the Prisoners, and excepting twice or thrice where some
Gentlemen of Figure (not Masters of any Slaves under Trial) were accidentally
present; [ the other not being material to the present Purpose is omitted] It
goes on, -- As to the first, we had experienced the contrary Method in the
Beginning, by trying some of the Criminals openly; but the Business being of a
Nature requiring the utmost Dispatch, we found our Proceedings much retarded by
the Spectators asking many Questions of the Prisoners and Witnesses, and some
of them not proper; we soon discovered too (by some Things that happened) how
much Masters were prone to countenance and excuse their Slaves, and that Slaves
were emboldened by their Master's Presence, and Witnesses intimidated; besides
we found Secresy necessary, which even Oaths of Secresy might not have
effectually procured, considering human Frailty and Forgetfulness, and the
common Unguardedness of Speech most Persons are liable to; for sometimes a
dangerous Criminal might be mentioned by Witnesses as Parties accused in the
Course of the Trial, and this might be talked of abroad, and occasion Flights
and Concealments, and other Inconveniences not to be foreseen. In our own Case,
Masters and Owners of Slaves were admitted as Witnesses, which, all Things
considered, perhaps was too great an Indulgence: It is a known Rule of Law in
civil Cases, That a Party interested in the Event of a Suit cannot be a
Witness; and by a Parity* of Reason it may be concluded, that Masters of Slaves
in criminal Cases, should not be Witnesses, especially in Matters of so much
Consequence to the Public; and if any such like Case should hereafter happen,
which God forbid, upon the Reason of that Rule, and the Inconveniences which
have happened from this Indulgence, it may be judged necessary to vary from
that Practice.


The Examination of Sarah Hughson the Daughter, continued from Page 130. col.
2. 2. Before the Chief Justice, the Second Justice, and others.
3. SHE believes the first Time she heard of the Plot, to burn the City, and to
murder Master and Mistress, and if they could not prevail to murder, then to
burn them up, was when they lived at Ellis's Dock, about a Year ago; the
Negroes said they had white People to help them; Kane was there often, and came
with several Negroes.

4. Said she had seen John Ury the Priest often there when the Negroes were
there, and speak to them; tell them to keep Secresy, and to be true, and not
tell of one another, if they were to dye for it, that they should burn the Town
down; and in the Night cut their Master's and Mistress's Throats with Knives
they should get; told her not to discover what he said, if she did, he would be
the Death of her.

5. He christened Caesar, Vaarck's; and others.

6. She was sworn by Jury Meaning again, into the Conspiracy: At the Beginning
of her Examination on Wednesday the 8th Instant, she only says, she saw
[William] Kane sworn one Sunday Evening; and now this agrees with Kane's
Examination No 11. 6. p. 127. who says they were sworn together at the second
Meeting which was of a Sunday; and she could scarce known that he had given
such Information; for he had done so but two or three Days before, and his
Examination was not out of the Judges or Grand Jury's Hands; Kane and Sarah
were confined in Cells separate and distant from each other: But though her
owning to the Negro Wench, that she was sworn into the Conspiracy, was the
Occasion of the Respite of her Execution, and her being sent for, and examined
by the Judges; yet she owned no such Thing upon her first Examination; but now
she does it with such Circumstances, concurring with other Evidence, as puts
the Truth of the Matter beyond Doubt, and thereby adds Credit to the rest of
her Confession.
when Kane was, of a Sunday Night, as Things were generally done on Sunday
Nights.

7. Did not known that Andrew Ryan was concerned, or David Johnson,

8. Had seen Murphy often at the House since Christmas, when Caesar, Vaarck's;
asked him to drink a Dram.

9. Had often heard the Negroes, when they stood round a Circle made with Chalk
Kane's Examination, No II. 18. p. 128. gives an Account of this Ceremony of
swearing the Negroes in a Circle drawn upon the Floor; Kane there indeed calls
it a Ring, a Black Ring, and with him agrees Mary Burton in her Evidence upon
Ury' s Trial, the 29 th of this Month, who (as she had done at some of her
Examinations before) spoke of a Black Ring or Circle upon the Floor, with a
Circumstance attending it which at first seemed to be trifling, and not worth
Notice, therefore was not taken down. -- See hereafter Note upon her Evidence
at Ury' s Trial
say, the Devil fetch him, and burn him that discovered.

10. Quack, Walter's; swore several Times; the Negroes swore without Book; the
Whites swore by a Bible This the Reader may observe so many Witnesses agreeing
in, that Reference to the particular Places would be endless; not but that many
Instances also may be noted of the Negroes swearing upon a Book, according to
the legal Ceremony; which if not a Bible, no doubt was intended to pass for
one: But perhaps that Formality was used with such of the Negro Confederates
only, as had Education and Learning* as for the Illiterate and Ignorant, no
doubt these infernal Politicians, were of Opinion, their swearing by Thunder
and Lightning (which are the terrible Oaths commonly used among themselves)
would as effectually engage them to their bellish Purposes.


11. Jury the Priest told her, and her Father, he could forgive their Sins, if
they did not discover. But if they did discover -- So that according to this
Diabolical System, no Oaths are available to hold their Votaries -- but such as
bind themselves in a Curse to do Iniquity.


12. Peggy [executed] was sworn, and was a Roman.

13. Jury told us all, that he could forgive our Sins, if we did any
Misdemeanour; and said if she would confess to him, he would forgive her her
Sins, which was done; and he could forgive all of them, what they were to do in
this BUSINESS of the Plot; and thinks he made her Father and Mother Papists. He
used to christen Negroes at several Times.

14. Negroes said they went to him, and said he prayed for them.

15. Jury said, if they discovered all their Sins to him, he could forgive
them; she said that none but God could, if they prayed to him; he said a Priest
could, as well as G-d.

16. John Coffi^ being shown to her, she said she had not seen him before.

SATURDAY, 11th JULY.
SARAH HUGHSON being brought before the Chief Justice, Mr. Justice Philipse*
and Mr. Chambers, this Morning, in order for further Examination; she denied
all she had confessed, and was taken down from her, as before on the 8th and
10th Instant: She said ^he had seen Negroes at her Father's House, but did not
know of a Plot. -- She being immediately thereupon exhorted by those Gentlemen
to speak the Truth, then declared every Particular in the foregoing Examination
(Except the Retractation which was minuted upon it) to be true, as the same was
distinctly read to her by Mr. Chambers, and the Question particularly put to
her.

Supreme Court. PRESENT The Second Justice.

The KING against Sarah Hughson.

ORDERED, That the Execution of Sarah Hughson, be respited till Friday next.
From the untoward Behavior of this Wretch upon her Examinations, the Reader
will be apt to conclude, there could be little or no Dependence upon her
Veracity, or her Evidence at best would deserve but very slender Credit: and
indeed the Case would have been so, if her Testimony had stood single, and not
corroborated by many other Witnesses to the same Facts, and concurring
Circumstances attending them; though from her stubborn Deportment, it must be
owned, very small Service was expected from her; for she discovered so
irresolute untract^ble a Temper, that it was to be expected she would recall
again and again, as she had done already, what she seemed to deliver at Times,
with some Composure and Appearance of Sincerity.


The KING against Sam, Col. COURTLANDT's Negro.

THE Prisoner Sam, desired Leave of the Court to withdraw his Plea, and plead
Guilty; which being granted, he pleaded Guilty, and submitted to the Mercy of
the Court.

Court adjourned till Tuesday the 14th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

Yesterday Evening and this Day, Thomas Hughson, Yeoman (Father of John
Hughson) and his four Sons, viz. Nathaniel, Walter, William, and Richard, were
taken up and committed to West Chester County Goal, being charged as
Confederates in the Conspiracy; one Son only out of six standing clear of
Impeachment upon this Occasion.

SUNDAY, 12th JULY:
Othello's Confession, under Sentence of Death, Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. II.
1. HE said, That about the Beginning of last Summer, Albany brought Meat to
his Master's House. and asked him to go and drink a Dram with him, which he
consenting to, Albany carried him to Hughson's, where Albany called for Liquor;
and as Hughson did not bring it to them immediately, he, Albany, went into the
House, and brought out a Two-penny Dram to Othello in the Yard; Albany told him
that Hughson desired him, Othello, to stay a little, for he wanted to speak
with him; Othello said he could not stay then, but that he would come there in
the Evening.

2. He went again about Dusk in the Evening, and Albany was not there; Hughson
and Othello began to talk about the Plot; and Hughson would fain have made him
swear; but he refused, saying, another Time would do as well: Hughson told him,
if he would swear, he should never want for Liquor, it should not cost him any
Thing; and desired he would bring his Acquaintance with him, and he would make
them welcome: he thanked him, and went home: Was at Hughson's about an Hour.

3. The 30 th of October last, Albany brought Meat to his Master's House, and
then asked Othello whether he would go to Dinner at Hughson's, the Drummers
being to have a Feast there that Day? The Militia Drummers, who were Negroes,
idle Fellows no doubt; Fiddlers of that Color, many Drummers, and others, were
tempted by Hughson' s great Hospitality: It Is somewhat amazing! how Hughson, a
poor Cobbler, with a Wife and House full of Children, and scarce any visible
Business, or Means of Subsistence, should be able to support such extraordinary
Generosity.
He answered, that his Master was to be at home that Day, and that he could not
go.

4. Albany often brought Meat there, and would always ask him to go and drink
at Hughson's; and as Opportunity served, sometimes he went, and sometimes not.

5. About a Year ago he went one Evening down to the North River to swim, and
there met with Albany; they went into Hughson's, and he made them a Tankard of
Punch; Hughson, endeavored again to make them swear, and brought a Book to
him; he still put it off; then Hughson told him if he would not, he, Othello,
must not tell any body what he had been talking about.

6. He has seen many Soldiers at Hughson,s at different Times, very great with
Hughson, but cannot tell whether they knew or were concerned in the Plot; but
knows that Kane was one of them, And Kane it seems knew well that he was.
and believes he, Kane, can name the Rest: Hughson promised Othello to find him
a Gun and Cutlass, and told him, if he did any Damage, he would commit no Sin
thereby: Othello understood, it would not hinder him from going to Heaven.

7. Vaarck's Caesar told Othello, that Rutgers's Quash was to find Arms: Mr.
Philipse's Cuffee was likewise spoke to by Othello, about the Conspiracy, and
asked whether he was sworn? Cuffee answered Yes, are not you? Othello said No,
I have only promised to keep the Secret. Said, he had not spoke to any one
since about it.

8. Adam told Othello (since their being in the Jail) that he, Adam, was to
have killed his Master and Mistress sure enough; and advised Othello to
confess, that he was to have killed his Master and Mistress, that that would be
a Means of getting him off.

Confession of Quack, WALTER'S Negro, Under Sentence of Death. Before one of
the Judges.
NUMB. III.
1. HE said, That Cuffee, Philipse's Negro, Caesar, Vaarck's Prince,
Auboyneau's, and himself, went down to Hughson's; That Caesar called for a Bowl
of Punch; they drank it together, and Cuffee, Caesar and Prince, afterward
went out together and talked, while he ( Quack) stood upon the Threshold of the
Door; Quack called to them, and asked if they would go, for it was almost
Night? they said they had some Business to do; Quack went away: This was last
May was Twelve Months.

2. That another Time he went to Hughson's by himself, and met the three same
Negroes as before; Cuffee was playing on a Violin; they had one Tankard of
Egg-Punch, and another of Water, Sugar and Rum; they sat in the Parlour;
Vaarck's Caesar called for a Pack of Cards; they played a considerable Time,
and Quack won two or three Bowls of Punch, which Mrs. Hughson made, and Peggy
paid for: They got pretty merry with drinking: Judge philipse's Frank came in
and called for a Mugg of Beer, but did not stay, his Boat being at the Dock
just by: Mr. Van Dam's John came in, and sat a While and drank with them, and
afterward went away: As Soon as Frank and John were gone. Caesar, Vaarck's,
said, Come Quack, I want you for something; but you must swear not to tell it;
Quack said, I Will be cursed if I do; They said, they did not care to trust Frank
or John, nor many others, who were all apt to talk; but if he would agree to
their Proposal, it would be better for him; and that when he came there he
should never want Liquor; Peggy was present during this Discourse, and went out
to call Hughson; Hughson then came into the Room, and swore Quack; Hughson
himself, Caesar, Cuffee and Prince, swore at the same time, to encourage him to
swear; they all kissed a Book; They then told Quack of the Plot; and Hughson
asked him, if his Master had any Guns? Quack answered two, which he could get:
Hughson told him, he had Powder and Shot enough, and that he had bought some
Guns, and had Money to buy more; and told him there were People up the River,
and on the other Side [ the water] that were to come and help: Quack asked
whether they were Blacks or Whites? Hughson said, he knew them, and that was
sufficient: Quack understood by his Discourse, they were Whites.

3. Quack remembers to have seen a Gun hanging up at Hughson's, likewise a Bag
of large shot, about five Inches high and four broad.

4. They had another Bowl of Punch, which Hughson treated with, and at the same
Time told Quack, that if he would bring any Company there with him, he would
make them welcome. This Meeting was in the same Month as the first Meeting:
'Twas on a Saturday Night; he went in about dusk, and staid till Twelve.

5. Two Sundays after, Caesar, Quack [himself] and one other Negro (who he did
not know) were at Hughson's, but talked Nothing of it at that Time.

6. Capt. Marshall's Ben asked him, eight or nine Times, to go to Hughson's
with him; but says he never went with Ben any where.

7. Since New- (...) Albany told Quack, that they had a Supper at Hughson^ and
that a great many Negroes were there present.

8. Some time thi^ ^pring Adam sent Jack to invite Quack to come to (...)
Master's, that Adam wanted very much to speak to (...) Quack being at Mr.
Richard's with his Wife, refused to (...); but knew not what Business Adam had
with (...)

9. While Quack was (...) Jail, Vaarck's Caesar who was also in the same Jail
told Quack, that Hughson, Peggy, and himself, had (...) Supper at the House of
one Saunders, upon the Dock; (...) from Caesar's Discourse, he, Quack,
understood th^^ (...) was concerned in the Plot. This Fellow never apprehended.


10. Caesar likewise told (...) had buried Money somewhere near Hughson's, but
(...) knew of it but himself.

MONDAY 13th JULY.
The four following Examinations were taken this Day before one of the Judg^^
Mr. Nicholls and Mr. Lodge present, when the (...) Negroes they affected were
passed in Review (...) and picked out by the Witnesses.

Examination taken (...) against Quash, LEROUX's.
I. William Kane, (...) Tickle, and Sandy, said, That Quash was (...) at
Hughson 's, and at Comfort's too, into the Plot.

Examination taken against Tom, VALET's.
II. Kane, Burton and Bastian, said, That Tom was often at Hughson's wh^^ they
talked of the Plot, and consented, and was (...) there in Kane's Presence.

Examination taken against Jupiter, Capt. WALTON's.
III. Kane, Burton and Bas^^^, said, That Jupiter was often at Hughson's when
they talked of the Plot, and consented, and was active.

Examination taken against Dublin, Capt. WALTON's.
IV. Burton said, That Dublin was at Hughson's when talked of the Plot, and
that he ^^^sented.

Examination of Bastian, Negro, Before One of the Judges.
NUMB. II.
1. BASTIAN being further examined, says, That when he was at that great
Entertainment at Hughson's, on the Sunday about a Month or six Weeks before the
Fort burnt, he heard Hughson call over Quack (Walter's) Name in a List; and
said that he was to have been there; he also heard Cuff (Jamison's) Name twice
called out of the said List, This Negro also escaped us.
but he did not appear. Hughson called all the Negroes Names over by a List, and
the Negroes present answered thereto; and whenever Hughson made any particular
Appointment of a Meeting, it was usual for him to call over their Names by the
List, and those present answered.

2. That he has seen the said Quack at Hughson's several Times, and once in
Particular, some Time last Summer, when Hughson, his Wife and Daughter Sarah,
and Peggy were present, and also Vaark's Caesar; and Quack was complaining to
Hughson and them, that he had brought to Hughson's Fourteen or Fifteen Firkens
of Butter, which Peggy was to receive the Money of Hughson for (he being to
sell the Butter, and as he Bastian understood, had sold it to the Cuba Vessels)
and that he, Quack, was cheated out of that Money; and that he had also given
Peggy a Five Pound Bill to change; and she had likewise cheated him out of
that; and Quack was very angry about it; and Peggy said, she had given the
Money to some of his Consorts to give him (to a white Man) that he knew very
well, but that he was gone off with it.

3. That he knows one Frans Nor was this Negro over taken up.
a Free Negro, a Butcher, that lived at Mr. Bayard's Farm at Hoboeck, he saw
him at Hughson's several Times; and Particularly he was at Hughson's at the
Entertainment above mentioned, when they were all talking about the Plot, and
he joined with them, and talked as much about it as any of the rest, but don't
know whether he was sworn of it.

4. That he has seen Kane the Soldier at Hughson's several Times when Negroes
were there; and once, shortly after New-year, he saw the said Kane and Hughson
a Writing in Company of Negroes, and as far as he could understand, they were
Copying over a List of the Persons concerned in the Conspiracy; but said, that
generally when he came to Hughson's, and white People were there, he used to go
away: But one Day seeing Kane at Hughson's, and having seen him there several
Times before, he asked Hughson's Wife what that Man did there? She answered,
that he need not be afraid of him, he would not betray them in any Thing.

5. Has heard Billy (Ward's Negro, executed) say, that they (the Negroes) had a
Frolic in the Broad Way at a Soldier's, where were present, a Roman Priest,
and Quack (Walter's) amongst other Negroes; and that the Priest swore the
Negroes of the Plot; and said, he could forgive them all the Sins that they did.

6. That the Negro Boy Cato, Mr. Richard's; and Neptune, Mr. Cruger's; (as
Bill, Ward's, told the Examinant) were at the last mentioned Meeting.

The following Notes were taken upon the Examination of Mary Burton and
Willliam Kane this Day, before one of the Judges, which in the Hurry of
Business were omitted to be drawn up in Form.

MARY BURTON said,

1. John Earl who lived in the Broad Way used to come to Hughson's with nine or
ten Soldiers at a Time.

2. Hughson used to go to Kelly's [the Soldiers] House, and has seen Kelly at
Hughson's, and used to be amongst the Negroes, when they were talking of the
Fires.

3. An old Man, a very old Man, believes not a Soldier, in old Clothes,
sometimes a red Jacket, does not know his Name, he used to be great amongst the
Negroes, when talking about Fires.

4. The white Men were to have Companies of Negroes under them, and Hughson
told them they might order their Companies as they thought fit; and Jury [ Ury]
the Priest, used to be with them.

5. A Soldier lives at the House behind the English Church Yard was concerned
in the Plot; This Man never taken, though the Description of him very
Circumstantial.
the Soldiers used to come to his House; and Hughson used to go up there and
fetch them down to his.

6. A Man by the Mayor's Market, lived at the Shop where she used to fetch Rum
from, such another as Kane, and dressed like him, but of a Sunday Sunday was
generally the Day, as the Reader may have observed from the Course of the
Evidence, that the Conspirators met at Hughson's, which his Daughter Sarah
confirms in her Examination.
(...) to have better Clothes; don't know his Name, lived (...) Sort of a
Cellar opposite the Market.

7. She has gone with Sarah (the Daughter of Hughson meaning) to a House beyond
Capt. Marshall's, a Soldiers, for to fetch Soldiers down to Hughson's; the old
Soldier himself, not concerned as she knows.

8. John Earl, at the Time (...) Hogg's Goods were discovered met her in the
Street and said, he had rather have given Twenty Pounds tha^ that the Discovery
had been made of them; but that, if she (Mary Burton) discovered any Thing
about the Fires, (...) would be the Death of her This Fellow never taken.


9. A Doctor that lived by the Slip, she took him to b^ a Scotchman, used often
to beat Hughson's since the Cuba Men gone.

10. That she had seen another Dancing Master along with Holt, and Kane, at
Hughson's, talking about the Plot, above Stairs, and (...) several Negroes with
them.

[She stammered at his Name, and pronounced, a C several Times, which she said
she believed was the first Letter of his Names and though it was known by the
Judge, and (...) that were present, whom she must necessarily ^ean, yet (...)
chose she should recollect the Name if she could; at last she said he lived --
[This ^^ing in the Assembly Room, she pointed to the Street] in Wa^^ Street
--;she said she should know his Name if she heard it; and we not knowing of any
other Dancing Master in Town, or any that pretended (...) professed themselves
to be such, but this Man, who did live in that Street; she was asked whether
his Name was Corry? And she readily answered, That was his Name; and that she
should know him again, if she saw him.]

Then Mary Burton was sent (...) the next Room, and William Kane sent for.

WILLIAM KANE being asked whether he knew of any other Dancing Master besides
Holt (mentioned by him several Times before) that was amongst them at
Hughson's, when they were talking of the Plot? Kane instantly answered, There
was Piers's Son in-Law, who lived in that Street [pointing also to Wall Street]
who used to be amongst them, and was concerned in the Plot. --

Then Kane was sent away.

Both these Witnesses were sworn to the Truth of what they declared.

Whereupon a Constable was dispatched for Corry, who was soon brought, and the
following Examination taken down, which Corry signed.

EXAMINATION Before One of the Judges.
JOHN CORRY being examined says, That he never was at Hughson's House in his
Life.

Never spoke a (...) to Holt in his Life, never was in his Company Though as the
Proverb is, Two of a Trade can seldom agree, it is much, very much, that these
two Dancing Masters, living in the same Town, for 4 or 5 Years together, should
not have had one Wrangle, or exchange one Word neither in Anger or Civility, in
all that Time. -- Surely he endeavors to prove too much, for they might,
possibly have talked together very innocently.


S -- h he was acquainted with, and has been in his Company several Times, but
never at Hughson's, nor any other Place (...) North River, within this City.

John Corry

Then Mary Burton was sent for, and when she came, she shook her Head at the
Sight of the Man, and being asked upon the Oath she had taken, whether she had
seen that Man before, and what (...) knew of him? She declared to his Face to
the Effect of the 9 of the aforesaid Notes of her Examination concerning him.
But Corry stoutly denied all she said, and declared he had never seen her
before, at which the Girl laughed.

Then Mary was dismissed and William Kane sent for, and confronted with Corry,
(...) charged him with the same he had declared before; but Corry knew him not.

Corry was committed.

The following Negroes committed this Day, viz. Jupiter and Dublin, Walton's:
Quash, L^ Roux's, recommitted, who had been enlarged upon the Grand Jury's
Recommendation the 16th Instant, as not finding sufficient Evidence at that
Time whereon to form an Indictment against him.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 14th JULY.
PRESENT. The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against WALTERS's Negroes.
Quack, Othello,


ORDERED, That the Execution of Quack and Othello be on Thursday next, the
sixteenth Instant, between the Hours of two and seven of the Afternoon of the
same Day.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Nine o'Clock.

Examination of John Ury, before the Chief Justice and Third Justice,
apprehended upon Suspicion of being a Romish Priest, and a Confederate in the
Conspiracy.
JOHN URY Schoolmaster, denies being any wise concerned in the Conspiracy for
burning the Town and killing the Inhabitants: Says, That he never was any wise
acquainted with John Hughson, or his Wife, or Margaret Kerry, nor did he ever
see them in his Life, to his Knowledge.

John Ury.

DEPOSITION.
NUMB. IX.
MARY BURTON, before the Grand Jury, being first sworn, said, That white People
that used to come to Hughson's, and being in Company with those who talked
about the Fires, and c. were Corry the Dancing Master

Alanor Who this meant is not discovered.
an old Man. Once he ^ought with one Butchell there, and the Negroes asked him
to be concerned, and he said, Yes; but she thought he might be in Liquor.

EXAMINATION. Before the Grand Jury.
NUMB. V.
WILLIAM KANE, being duly sworn.

1. SAID, That Edward Murphy he had seen many Times at Hughson's, when they
were talking of the Fires and burning of the Town, and that he swore D -- n
him, if he would not lend an hand to the Fire as soon as any body; and that at
the same Meeting all the Company were speaking about killing the white People.

2. That David Johnson came one Evening to Hughson's, with three Women, a
little (as he imagined) in Liquor. That Ury, the Priest, took Johnson by the
Shoulder when he came in, and carried him to another Room, where some Negroes
were. That he ( Johnson^) came in a short Time out of the Room, and took the
Examinant by the Shoulder, and said, D -- n ye, don't be down-hearted, never
fear, for we shall have Money enough by-and-by; and that immediately he s^^^re,
in the Room that he came into, in the Presence of the Company, that he would
help to burn the Town, and kill as many white People as he could; and that both
Murphy and Johnson were that Night sworn into the Plot; and that Old Hughson,
and three of his Sons were sworn the same Night.

3. That one Corry, a Dancing Master, was frequently at Hughson's, and often in
Company with the Priest: That he has heard Corry say, That he would assist to
burn the Fort; and that he was frequently in Company with the Negroes, when
Hughson and they used to talk of burning the Town and killing of the white
People.

4. That Hol^, the Dancing Master, was frequently at Hughson's, in Company with
the Priest: That he never heard any of them say, that they would assist at
burning of the Houses and killing of the People; but that both were in the Room
where some Negroes were sworn, and where burning of the Town and killing of the
People was spoke of in so free and public a Manner, that he had Reason to
believe that both of them heard all that (...) said on that Subject.

5. That John Coffin, Jerry Corker, Daniel Fagen, John Ury the Priest, Thomas
Hughson the Father, and his three Sons, were all in the Conspiracy.

6. That a young Gentleman with a Pigtail Wig, used frequently to come there
with Corry, Ury the Priest, and Holt; but never saw him in Company with any
Negroes, as those other white People used to be, when he was absent.

Supreme Court: WEDNESDAY, 15th JULY, A. M.
PRESENT. The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING against Negroes.
Cato, Col. MOORE's, Dick, TEN EYCK's, Prince, CROOKE's, Pompey, DE LANCEY's,
Cuffee, VAUGHTON's.


THE Prisoners were arraigned on an Indictment for the Conspiracy, and thereto
pleaded Guilty; and in Arrest of Judgment produced his Majesty's most gracious
Pardon on Condition of Transportation; which was read and allowed of.

The KING. against Negroes.
Brash, JAY's Pompey, BAYARD's Cajoe, GOMEZ's Emanuel, WENDOVER^ London,
WINCOMB's Brave Boy, LIVINGSTON's Pompey, GILBERT Sam, COURTLANDT's Sarah,
BURK's


THE Prisoners being brought to the Bar* and asked what they had to say, why
Ju^^ment of Death should not pass upon them; they produced and severally
pleaded his Majesty's most gracious (...); which being read, was allowed of.

Court adjourned three o'Clock in the Afternoon.

P. M.

PRESENT, As before.

The KING, against Negroes.
Tom, HYER's Venture, TIE^O^^^'^ Jasper, BOUND's Fortune, WALTON^ Dr Harry,
MIZERALL's Galloway, RUTGERS's Frank, RYKER's Toby, WENDOVER^


On Trial upon Indictment (...) the Conspiracy.

JURY called a ^worn, viz.
Joseph Sacket. Thomas Willet. Richard Langdon. John Provoost. Charles Arding.
Adrian Banker. Cornelius Clopper* Alexander Allairs* John Smith. Peter Evoutse.
Patrick Jackson. ^^^^nwick Deriemer.
Witnesses for the KING.
Sworn.
MARY BURTON WILLIAM KANE
Negroes.
Brash, Tom, Livingston's. Bastian, Tickle, Dick, Ten Eyck's Adam.

Witnesses for the Prisoners.
Jacob Walton, Fortune's Master. Harma^us Wendover, Toby's Master:
(...) COUNCIL for the KING.
Mr. MURRAY, Mr. SMITH, Mr. CHAMBERS,
MR. Murray, afte^^ (...) Indictment was opened, examined the Witnesses (...)
Tom, Venture and Jasper.

Notes taken of the Evidence upon this Trial.
MARY BUR^^^ said, That Tom was at Hughson's when th^^ ^ere talking about the
Fires* but did not remember w^^ther he talked to them. She saw him there twice
or (...). He went Up-stairs with Hughson once; did no^ know what he did there.

That she had seen Venture at Hughson's talking about the pl^^ several Times*
(...) ^ould (...) the Houses a Fire, and (...) was to have (...).

That she did not know (...) had seen Jasper at Hughson's.

Brash said, That he (...) Tom, and Mr. Jay's Ben to Hughson's, (...) they went
Up-stairs; and saw Tom sworn of the (...) viz. To burn the Town and destroy the
white (...)* that he (Brash) asked Tom first if he would be concerned, and he
said, Yes; and he (Brash) told (...) so; and so Tom was sworn.

That he did not (...) any thing of Jasper or Venture.

WILLIAM ^^NE upon his Evidence gave a general Account how (...) was ^et into
the Plot, about Jerry Corker, and his going (...) a Romish Christ'ning as in
his Examination of the (...) Instant.

Said, He had (...) Tom at Hughson's, and he was sworn of the Plot. (...) seen
him two or three Times there. He was sworn to burn the Town and kill the white
People: He was sworn by Thunder and Lightning, that if he divulged the (...),
that might strike him dead.

That he had see^ Venture at Hughson's when they were talking about (...) Plot;
and he was to help; but he did not see him sworn. That he saw him several Times
the^^^ since Christmas.

That he had likewise seen Jasper at Hughson's when they were ta^^ing about the
Plot. He saw him there the last Sunday in February. Did not see him sworn; he
(Kane) was drinking there; nor did he hear him consent.

Tom (Livingston's) said, He told Venture that the white Men wanted him to join
to help to kill the white People; and he answered Tom, He would go down to
Hughson's. He said, this was last Spring was Twelve Months that he told Venture
(...)

That Jasper (asked to him (...) Witness) about Killing the white People, and
promised to go to Hughson's to swe^^ to kill the white People; but he did not
see him afterward.

(...) said, He saw Venture at Hughson's several Times playing at Dice; and he
was talking about the Conspiracy to set the Town on Fire, and to kill the white
People, and he consented, and was to have a Gun of Hughson.

Mr. Smith examined the Witnesses against Fortune, Dr. Harry and Galloway.

Tom, Livingston's, said, He asked Fortune to go to Hughson's to see the Fun
there; he answered, he would go if he had Time.

Kane said, He had seen Fortune at Hughson's when they were talking about the
Plot, but did not see him sworn, nor did he hear him consent; there was a Dozen
or Fourteen Negroes there Dancing; Hughson proposed the Plot to the Negroes
present, to kill the White People, and burn the Town, in the Hearing of
Fortune, but whether he consented or not, he did not know.

Kane said, He saw Doctor Harry sworn at Hughson's, into the Plot; that he
swore at all Meetings; and he resolved to help the Negroes to combustible
Matter to fire the Houses, and did help them to some black Stuff for that
Purpose; he (...) to furnish them with Poison; he gave Hughson some, and some
to Quack (Walter's) and the Doctor cried, Hurrah for Guanas Boys, for he had
Guanas The Name of the Place where the Doctor lived,
Boys enough.

Kane said, That the Time appointed among them to set the Town on Fire, was the
17th Day of March at Night; St. Patrick's Day.

Kane said, Hughson used the Ceremony of Swearing Negroes into the Plot, by
making a Circle on the Floor with Chalk, or something, and then he made the
Negroes pull off their Shoe off the left Foot, and put their Toes into the
Circle, and as a Negro was sworn, Hughson's Wife fed the Negro with a Draught
out of a Bowl of Punch.

Kane said, He had seen Galloway several Times at Hughson's; that he said he
would lend a Hand, D -- n him if he would not, to destroy the Town, and murder
the Inhabitants, and would make Breeches for his Master, that he understood
from some Negroes, that Galloway was sworn of the Plot, but Kane did not see
him Sworn.

Bastian said, He heard Fortune say at Hughson's, before all the Company, that
he would join in the Plot (...) soon after New-year, there were fourteen or
fifteen Negroes there) (...) set the Town on fire, and kill the People; Bastian
heard him talk to Doctor Harry, and tell him there was a particular House,
where all the Negroes concerned in the Conspiracy met, and could have Victuals
and Drink for nothing.

That he saw Galloway at Hughson's, and he there promised to help set the Town
on Fire, and kill the White People.

MARY BURTON said, She had seen three or four Papers of Poison, in Hughson's
Drawers, which she understood he had had of some Negro; that she heard Caesar
(Vaarck's) and Cuff (Philipse's) and Prince (Auboyneau's) say, that Galloway
was sworn in the Plot.

ADAM said, He heard Doctor Harry talk to Hughson about Poison that he would
give him; that Doctor Harry consented to the Burning the Town and killing the
People in Adam's hearing^; that he saw Doctor Harry four Times at Hughson's,
twice he was in the House with him, and twice he saw him go in; That he saw him
sworn the first Time, by Hughson.

Tickle said, He saw Galloway sworn at Hughson's, he was to help set Houses on
Fire, Hughson was to find him a Gun, and he was to kill the People.

Mr. Chambers examined the Witnesses against Frank and Toby.

Dick, Ten Eyck's, said, He told both Frank and Toby about the Plot, and asked
them to be concerned, and they say Yes, they agree to it; and he [the Witness]
was to call them to go to Hughson's, but never did; he was to call them to go
to Hughson's, when the Time of the Fires was to come.

MARY BURTON said, She had seen him at Hughson's, heard him say, he would help
to burn the Town, and destroy all the People.

That she had seen Toby several Times at Hughson's, and he said much the same
as the other, be consented to be one of the Plot.

Bastian said, He had seen (...) at Hughson's several Times heard him say, he
would (...) to burn the Town and destroy the White People, this at (...)
different Times.

Kane said, He had seen (...) often at Hughson's, saw him sworn of the Plot;
(...) with Ury; he was to burn the ^ity, and kill the People; there were
several other Negroes with the Pr^^^: This was last Winter; Galloway and Doctor
Harry ^ere with him at the same Time; Frank used to say (...) would be Capt.
Holland.

Mr. Walton, Witness on half of Fortune, said, That he had one Day desired
(...) Burton to go up Stairs to see his Negro Fortune, (...) that upon viewing
of him, she declared that the (...) seen him at Hughson's.

Note, The Girl (...) Evidence against him; but it was no (...), that because
she had not seen him there, that (...) body else did. -- But this seemed to be
made an (...), as if Burton had given some Evidence against (...)

The several Council ^^mm'd up the Evidence of the Witnesses, which they
respectively examined; the Prisoners said nothing material (...) ^^eir Defense,
but denied all alleged against them.

The Court charged the Jury who withdrew, and being soon returned, found the
Prison^^^ all Guilty.

The KING against John Ury, alias (...)

THE Prisoner having been (...) for counselling, abeting and procuring, etc. a
Negro Man Slave called Quack, to set Fire to the King's House in the Fort, in
Pursuance of which the said House, etc. was burnt: He was brought to the Bar
and (...) thereon, and thereon pleaded, Not Guilty..

The KING against The Same.

THE Prisoner having been indicted a Second Time, on an Act of the General
Assembly of the Province, passed in the Eleventh Year of King WILLIAM the
Third: For that he being an ecclesiastical Person, made by Authority pretended
from the (...) of Rome, did after the Time limited in the said Act, come into
this Province and City of New York, and there remain for the Space of Seven
Months, and did profess himself to be an ecclesiastical Person, made and
ordered by Authority from the Sea of Rome; and did appear^^ to be, by
celebrating Masses, and granting Absolution, and(...) On which Indictment he
was also arraigned, and ther^^o pleaded, Not Guilty. Entitled, An (...) against
Jesuits and Popish Priests. By the second Clause^ (...) ^his Act, It is
Enacted, That all and every Jesus, Seminary, Priest, Missionary, or other
Spiritual (...) Ecclesiastical Person, made or ordained by an^ Authority, Power
or Jurisdiction, derived, challeng^^ or pretended from the Pope, or See of
Rome, or that shall profess himself, or otherwise appear to be such, by
practicing and teaching of others to say any Popish Prayers, by celebrating
Masses, granting of Absolutions, or using any other of the Romish Ceremonies,
and Rites of Worship, by what Name, (...) or Degree soever, such Person shall
be called or known, who shall continue, abide, remain, or come into this
Province, or any Part thereof, after the first Day of November aforesaid [1700]
shall be deemed and accounted an Incendiary and Disturber of the Public Peace
and Safety, and an Enemy to the true Christian Religion, and shall be adjudged
to suffer perpetual Imprisonment. And if any Person being so sentenced and
actually imprisoned, shall break Prison and make his Escape, and be afterward
retaken, he shall suffer Pains of Death, Penalties and Forfeitures, as in Cases
of Felony.


The Prisoner the^^ (...) a Copy of each Indictment; but the Court refused a
(...) of the First, and ordered him a Copy of the Second.

Then Ury prayed the (...) Pen, Ink and Paper; which was granted.

Ordered, That the Trial (...) the said Ury be on Tuesday next.

The KING, against Sarah Hug^^^^

ORDERED, That the (...) of Sarah be further respited until Tuesday (...).

Court adjourned till Friday Morning 10 o'Clock.

An Extract taken this Day (...) (...) Grand Jury, from Ury the Priest's
Journal, (...) upon his Commitment,
[He] Arrived at Philadelphia. 17th Feb. 1739. At Lundinum. London, a Town in
Pennsylvania, upon the Borders of Maryl^^d.
5th Mar. 1739. To Philadelphia. 29th April 1739. Began School a^ Burlington,
In New Jersey.
18th June 1739. Occulto, What was done privately or covertly between Ury and
him is like to remain a Secret.
Jacobus Atherth^ait. 28th July 1739. Came to the School at Burlington. 23d
Jan. 1740. [ He] Saw -- 7th May 1740. At 5 he went to Burlington, to Piercy the
Madman. Went to Philadelphia. 19th May 1740. Went to Burlington. 18th June
1740. At 6 in the Evening to Penefack, i.e. Pennypack in Pennsylvania.
to Joseph Ashton. Begun School at Dublin There are two Dublins, Upper and
Lower in Pennsylvania, supposed to be so named from Irish Settlers.
under Charles Has^ee, at 8 L. a Year. 31st July 1740. 15th Octo. 1740. 27 th
Ditto. Came to John Croker (at the Fighting Cocks) New York. 2d Nov. 1740. I
boarded Gratis with him. 7th Nov. 1740. Natura Johannis Pool. 26th Dec. ditto.
I began to teach with John Campbell. 6th April 1741. Baptized Timothy Ryan,
born 18th April 1740. Son of John Ryan and Mary Ryan. What Family this was we
know not, unless the Priest is mistaken in the Christian Names of the Father
and Mother of the Child: There was one Andrew Ryan accused by William Kane, as
one of the Conspirators, which will appear hereafter, who lodged with Eleanor
his Wife, at Hughson 's, all the Winter, before the Conspiracy broke out, whom
Kane affirmed to be a professed Papist, and it has been credibly reported that
Kane was one himself, and always professed himself so, till accused as a
Confederate in the Conspiracy; it was said he would not so much as suffer his
Wife to keep a Protestant Book in the House, so great a Devotee was he;
therefore as he was also of the same Persuas^^, he could best discover his
Brethren. -- There was another Ryan, a married Man (at that Time also an
Inhabitant of this Town) a professed Papist who has it seems since withdrawn
himself, but neither his, nor his Wife's Name answers Ury' s Minute. But
whosoever the Infant belonged to, its being kept so long from Baptism, in a
Place where there are so many Protestant Clergy of of many Denominations ready
at Hand, gives Umbrage to the Conjecture, that this Office was reserved for a
Popish Priest.
18th May 1741. Pater Confessor Butler, 2 Anni. non Sacramentum non Confessio.
Who, Father Confessor Butler was, also remains a Secret as to us. Suppose some
Reverend Gentleman residing in a neighboring Colony: Ury minutes it, as if
^^were something observable, that there was neither Sacrament, nor Confession
for two Years, i. e. in the P^^^^h Way of Ceremony, as may be presumed.


This Day the following List of Negroes were recommended by the Judges to His
Honor the Lieut. Governor, to he inserted in a Pardon in order for
Transportation, viz.

14 Negroes.
Brash, Peter Jay's. Pompey, De Lancey's. Braveboy, Livingston's. Pompey,
Gilbert's. Cajoe, Gomez's. Cato, Col. Moore's Dick, Ten Eyck's. Prince, G.
Crooke's Cuffee, Vaughton's. London, Wyncoop's. Pompey, Bayard's. Sarah,
Burk's. Sam, Van Courtlandt's. Emanuel, Wendover's.
Most of which had been made Use of as Witnesses.

THURSDAY, 16th JULY.
QUACK, Mr. Walter's, Negro, having been convicted upon his own Confession, as
a Confederate in the Conspiracy, and thereupon sentenced to be burnt; great
Solicitations were made to his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, for saving his
Life; or at least, if that could not be done, that his Sentence might be
changed from burning to hanging.

Othello, the Chief Justice's Negro, being in the same Condemnation, His
Honor, for his further Information and Satisfaction, directed the other two
Judges to report their Opinions concerning these two Criminals.

The Judges accordingly reported, That considering the Circumstances they stood
in before the Court, they were of Opinion, That they did not come within the
Intent, nor did they think them entitled to the Benefit of His Honor's
Proclamation lately published, offering Mercy to such Persons, Whites or
Blacks, as were concerned in the Conspiracy, who should make a full and free
Confession of their Guilt, etc. by the Time therein limited.

Supreme Court. FRIDAY, ^^th JULY:
PRESENT. The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING against Negroes.
Othello, Quack, WALTER's.


HIS Honor the Leiutenant Governor, by and with the Advice of the ^^^ncil,
having recommended to the Judges of the Court (...) change the Sentence
formerly passed against these C^^^^^als, to that of hanging, the Court Ordered
it accordingly.

Ordered, That the (...) of the said Othello and Quack be on the Morrow,
^^^^een the Hours of Nine and One of the same Day.

The KING against Negroes.
Tom, HYER's Venture, TIEBOUT Fortune, WALTON Harry, MIZERAL Galloway, RUTGER
Frank, RUTGER^


THE Court proceeded to pass Sentence on the Prisoners, which was, That Harry
should be burnt, and the other Five hanged.

Ordered, That the Execution of Tom, Venture, Fortune, Galloway and Frank, be
(...) the Morrow between the Hours of Nine and One of the same Day; and that
the Execution of Harry be on the Morrow, between the Hours of Two and Seven of
the Afternoon of the same Day.

Court adjourned till Monday the 20th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

SATURDAY, 1^^h JULY.
SCHULTZ the High-Constable, having signified to the Recorder, late (...)
Night, that Othello had informed him, he could make very considerable
Discoveries relating to the Conspiracy, which he had a Desire to communicate to
him. The Recorder went up early this Morning to the City-Hall, and sent for
him, and the following Confession was taken before him.

Othello's Confession.
NUMB. III.
1. HE said, That some Time last Fall, he saw TOM EVANS, a Soldier, at
Hughson's, and also JAMES OBRIEN* a Soldier, at different Times, talking to
Hughson, and after they were gone, Hughson told him, That they were both
concerned in the Plot, and that there were as many white People concerned as
Negroes.

2. That some Time after he met Obrien, and he advised him (Othello) to steal
his Master's Waistcoat and Breeches, and to bring them to him, and he would
satisfy him very well; but he never did it.

3. That Hughson promised to give him a Gun and a Cu^lass, but as to Pow^^^, or
what Quantity of Arms or Ammunition Hughson had, he never told Othello.

4. That he does not know of any other Whites or Blacks that he has ^^^rd or
knows, of his own Knowledge, to have been concerned.

5. That he did not know that the Fort was to be fired, nor when they were to
begin to set fire to the Town; Hughson said Albany should tell him, who was the
first that told him of the Plot, and that was the first Time he carried him
down to Hughson's, in June was Twelve Months, just about the Time the Cuba
People came here.

6. That Col. Philipse's Frank carried him down to Hughson's to drink a Dram;
his Boat lay by Hughson's Dock, and he treated him; but nobody said any thing
at that Time of the Plot, nor did he ever speak to Frank about it, or Frank to
him, nor does he know that Frank knew of it.

7. Hughson asked him, if he could not get some of his Master's Guns; but he
told him, that he could not come at them.

8. That Adam persuaded him, since he came in Jail, to say, that he had agreed
to kill his Master and Mistress; and that by saying so, he would get clear: But
this was all false, he never engaged to do any such Thing, nor was it ever
proposed to him by Hughson, or any one else; only Hughson told him, he must
rise with the Mob, and kill the People in general, as the rest were to do.

9. That he never engaged with any Negroes, or others, to go to Mr. Murray's
House to kill or assist in the killing Mr. Murray, Mrs. Murray, and Family. All
this he says as he is going to answer it to God Almighty.

10. That Quack, Walter's, denied, before Mr. Charlton, that he ever engaged in
any such Design to kill Mr. Murray, etc. but that Adam sent for him to come and
sup at Mr. Murray 's that Night; If this was true, it is much (as Quack
pretended to be ignorant of this Engagement) that he should remember the very
Night, and send so rude an Answer to a civil Invitation, as that he would not
come: His Pretense of Sickness would have been a sufficient Excuse for a
Disappointment in a Matter of lesser Consequence than this intended savage
Butchery.
but Quack said he was sick and would not come. Jack came of the Message with a
Lanthorn for him, and told him there was to be Company there, and good Liquor.

11. He solemnly Protests to God Almighty that he never talked to Adam, or Adam
to him of the Plot, nor did he know that Adam was concerned in it 'till after
he came. But this is a gross Falsity! See Minutes of Othello 's Confession 1.
29 and 30 June. He had forgot, surely, what he had said before, That Adam and
Albany mentioned the Plot to him, and that he agreed to join to burn and kill,
etc. and was sworn it should seem by Adam and Albany.


This Negro behaved upon this Occasion with a great deal of Composure and
Decency; with an Air of Sincerity, which very much affected the Recorder: For
from the Intimacy he had the Honor of with his Master, he had frequent
Opportunities of seeing this Negro at his House, and Othello's Case, could not
but move some Compassion; but all Things considered, when calmly reflected
upon* one could not yield entire Credit to his Protestations, more particularly
as to the last Article: For Adam and he were well known to be familiar
Acquaintances; and as they were both, by their own Confessions. sworn into this
execrable Engagement, this diabolical Conspiracy, it will scarce be believed
but they knew each other were concerned; and not only so, but must have had
frequent Discourse about it.

Othello being remanded, Quack, Walter's Negro, was sent for; and the Recorder
asked him many Questions, and exhorted him to tell the Truth in what he should
say, as he was in a f^w Moments to answer for his Words and Actions before God
Almighty: But Quack said he knew nothing more of the Matter than what he had
already declared in his Confessions; so he was remanded.

Evidence affecting Othello.
Pompey (De Lancey's) Confession 8, 11. p. 89. Jack (Murray's) Confession, 1,
10. p. 100. Adam's Confession, 19, 23, 25, 26, 29. p. 1^^, 105. William Kane's
Examination, No II. 8. p. 12^. Othello's own Confessions, p. 116, 135. Evidence
affecting Quack.
Abigail Earl and Lydia George's Depositions, p. 24. Sandy* or Sawney's
Examination, No I. 16. p. 33. Jack (Murray's) Confession, 1. 10. p. 100. Adam's
Confession, 16. 22. 23. 25. 28. 29. pa. 103. 104. 105. William Kane's
Examination No II. 15. 16. 18. p. 128. V. p. 132. Sarah Hughson's Examination,
2. 10. p. 130. 134. Quack's own Confessions, p. 92. 109. 136.

As to the Circumstances attending these two Negroes, as they appeared before
the Court.

THE Characters of these two miserable Wretches were well known: They had more
Sense than the common Rank of Negroes; they had both, kind, indulgent Masters*
they were two of the Head Negroes in Town; both ^^^lows of high Spirits; had
both general Acquaintance, and great Influence amongst the inferior Sort of
Negroes; their Confessions were neither voluntary nor free, but came from them
very unwillingly, and after much Persuasion; nor could the Judges lock upon
them to be f^ll; so that these Criminals were deficient in all the Particulars
required by the Proclamation, as Essentials in a Recommendation to Mercy: They
indeed acknowledged their Guilt in general, by their Plea, and by their
Confessions, in a few Particulars, thinking thereby, as it may well be
inferred, to come off as cheap as they could; for, perhaps, they might flatter
themselves, that by Confessing what they did they should save their Lives: What
they did say was very sparing, and of little or no Significance, more
especially what came from Quack; and there was great Reason to conjecture they
both had it in their Power to make very considerable Discoveries.

Quack had been committed upon Suspicion, and was in Confinement some Time
before any Evidence came to Light, which directly charged him as a Confederate
in the Conspiracy; and he held it (...) stoutly, till the Proclamation of the
19th of June ^^^^d, protesting he knew nothing at all of the Matter* 'Twas well
known how much idle Time Quack had, (...) at his own Disposal, as if he were
his own Master (...) and now at length, the Proofs that he was one of the
Conspirators, came out to be strong against him; and (...) been impeached for a
long while before indicted; (...) pretended to call Confessions, were of little
(...) as before observed; the first of them, viz. 23d June, ^^arged nothing
more upon himself, than a bare Head knowledge (to use a modern cant Word) that
there was a Con^piracy on Foot, to burn Houses* which he by Accident, as it
should seem, overheard Negroes a (...) of; not that he was any ways concerned,
or had agreed to, and engaged in it: In the second (...) ^^th June, indeed he
goes a Step farther, and says, (...) Day he was at Hughson's, and Vaarck's
Caesar asked him, (...) he would conclude along with them, to set a great (...)
Houses on Fire. Quack readily (but it may be observed (...) ^he Way, in such a
Manner, as if he was no such Strang^ to the villainous Enterprise) told him, He
believed he ^ould, but would consider of it, and give him an (...) So that yet
there was no Acknowledgment of Quack's engaging himself, even in the Purpose of
burning Houses (...); not the least Hint that he so much as knew, or heard of
any Design to murder and destroy the People.

The Liberties Quack took, ^^ere very notorious, not forgetting his Expressions
and (...) on Sunday 5th April, in the Midst of the many Fires that alarmed and
terrified us, upon which he was first committed and then recommitted, after
Enlargement for some (...) and yet he still obstinately insisted on his
Innocence; but at last, when Confessions became fashionable amongst them, and
Quack had Reason to apprehend himself in Jeopardy, and that he had but one
Chance to save his Neck; then comes his third Confession of the 12th Instant,
which pretends to discover nothing but what was well known b^^o^e, excepting
one Piece of Hearsay 9. Th^^ Vaarck's Caesar, who was also a Prisoner in the
same Jail, told him that Hughson, Peggy, and himself, had had a Supper at the
House of one Saunders, upon the Dock; and from Caesar's Discourse, he, Quack,
understood, that Saunders wa^ concerned in the Plot; It Is surprising that these
deluded Wretches did not discover all the White People they knew to be
concerned, who had, no doubt* been the chief Cause of bringing them to such
untimely End.
but not one Negro does Quack impeach, notwithstanding his general Acquaintance
among them; and notwithstanding what Ward' s Will declared to Williams: (and
Will was very expert at Plots, for this was the third Time he had engaged in
them) He believed there were not ten grown Negroes in York, but what knew of
it, It seems most probable upon the Whole, that this was the Truth
Quack's Insolence and Ingratitude toward his Master, were very remarkable, as
declared by William Kane: See Kane's Examination, NUMB. II. 15. 5 th July.
What Virtues he might have had are best known to the Family he belonged to, if
he had an^ (...) but it seemed agreed on all Hands, that Quack was always much
better fed tha^ taugh^^^^

Othello had been waiting upon his Master in New England all this Summer, who
left this Place soon after the Fire at the Fort, and had been attending at
Providence, in Rhode Island Government, (...) his Majesty's especial
Commission: The Chief Justice it seems had many Times taken him to task there,
after he was informed what had been doing amongst us, and well knowing the
Nature and Disposition of Othello, he concluded if there was a Plot, he was
very likely to have had a Hand in it; and he took a great ^eal of Pains with
him, endeavoring to persuade him to confess, if he was any ways engaged in it,
or knew any Thing about it, assuring him at the same Time, that if he was
Guilty, and would embrace that Opportunity, by making an ingenuous Confession,
he would use his Interest with the Governor to save his Life: But on the
Contrary, that if he went to New York, and was tried and convicted, he would
leave him to Justice without Mercy: But Othello withstood it all,
notwithstanding his Master endeavored several Times to prevail with him; and
then, when the Chief Justice was advised of his being impeached, he took the
first Opportunity of sending him by Water hither, in Irons; and immediately
upon his Arrival, he was brought before, and examined by one of the Judges, who
warned him of the Proclamation, and that the Time limited for making
voluntary, free and full Confession and Discovery, was to expire within two or
three Days, and admonished him to embrace that Opportunity; but nevertheless,
he obstinately persisted in Protestations of his Innocence, and was committed;
but the next Morning, when he had had Time to enquire of his Brother Criminals
how Matters stood, he bethought himself, that 'twas proper for him to make some
Confession and intimated that he would to one of the Chief Justice's Brothers;
and the Day after that, the Judge sent for him down, and took the Confession
Monday 30th June. p. 116.

The Aptness and Alacrity of these two Criminals for Mischief was monstrously
remarkable, as declared in Evidence upon the Confessions of two of their own
Color and Accomplices, in the same savage* cruel and bloody Purpose; though
Quack and Othello denied it to the last See Jack, Mr. Murray 's Negro's
Examination, 10. 11. 12. pa. 100. 101. Adam 's Examination, 29. pa. 105. and
the Agreement of these two Negroes Examinations concerning this Particular, as
well as many others, upon Comparison, seems very remarkable* they did not see
one another after they were sent to Jail, for they were kept a part 'til after
these Confessions were taken, nor could they so much as see one another till
there was Occasion to make Use of them as Witnesses.
That the Scheme was proposed by Hughson to a Set of Negroes at his House, and
consented to by them, of which Othello and Quack were ^^o of the Chief; and the
very Night was fixed upon for their being admitted by Mr. Murray's Jack into
his Master's House: and in Conjunction with him, and Adam, his Fellow Servant,
these Ruffians were to butcher that whole Family in their Beds, then to set the
House on fire, after they had plundered it* and were to carry their Spoils to
Hughson's: If this was true, surely the Masters of these two bloody Villains
had nothing less to expect from them in their Turns, than a Share in the like
Fate; and certainly it were not fit that two such Canibals, who could cooly
engage to imbrue their Hands in the Blood of innocent Persons* (...) wholesale,
who could never have offended them, should be suffered any longer to breath,
when the Justice of the Law had overtaken them: The Judges could by no Means
think them proper Objects of Mercy; and had they recommended them to the
Governor as such, and his Honor had pardoned them, such Lenity toward them,
might have been deemed Cruelty to the People. The other Negroes concerned in
this horrible Undertaking, were likewise of the Head or chief Slaves in Town,
and principal Agents* no doubt, amongst the Conspirators of their own Color;
some, perhaps may object* why were not all, or at least Mr. Murray's own
Negroes, made Examples o^, as well as these two Criminals, for (may they ^a^)
they equally deserved it? -- Though one is not always obliged to give an Answer
to every one that asks a Question* yet for once to oblige ( if there should be
any) such -- It Is very true, they all deserved m^st exemplary Punishment; but
if all the Conspirators in Town had been executed, perhaps this would have been
carrying the Argument further than the Objectors would have chosen it would,
especially if any of their own Slaves had happened to have been detected; though
indeed it were much to be wished, that every Negro in Town concerned were
transported, or the Place rid of them almost at any Rate; and if so, it is
probable there would be very few left to trouble us. But more particularly. --
This black Band of Ruffians consisted of no less than twelve according to Adam;
Jack agrees to all the same Persons, and adds one more which Adam had omitted,
viz. Ben, JAY's, who had been sent off to the Madera's the Spring before the
Plot broke out; and all the rest excepting Caesar, PINTARD's; Brash, Bill, TEN
EYCK's; Adam and Jack, MURRAY's; had been executed already; and these last five
had made large Confessions, and considerable Discoveries, more especially
Caesar, Brash, Adam and Jack, insomuch that it was judged necessary to make use
of them as Witnesses; for which Reason, considering the Pledge of the public
Faith, and as they made those large Confessions and Discoveries, conformable to
and relying upon the Proclamation for their Indemp^ity with regard to their
Live^, their Escape could not be avoided, though their Crimes merited a more
severe Fate.


About Noon Othello, and Quack, Walters's; Venture, Frank, Fortune, Walton's;
and Galloway, Negroes, were executed according to Sentence.

Othello being asked some Questions at the Gallows about the Plot, answered, he
had Nothing more to say than what he had this Morning declared to one of the
Judges.

Fortune, Waltons; behaved at the Gallows like a Mountebank's Fool, jumped off
the Cart sever^^ Times with the Halter about his Neck, as if sporting with
Death; some conjunctured he was intoxicated with Rum.

Tom, Hyer's Negro, was reprieved.

This Afternoon Harry the Negro Doctor was executed according to Sentence; in
the Way from the Jail to the Stake, there were several endeavored to persuade
him to make a Confession; but Harry's Heart was hardened, he would discover
Nothing, as he had no Hopes of benefiting himself by it in this World: Perhaps
he might have been persuaded of having fine Things in the next, upon Condition
of his keeping all Secret here: However, at length the Terrors of Death, and
the lighted Pile affrighted him so, that it seems he let drop some ungarded
Expressions, from which his Guilt might be inferred, and that he could have
made some Discovery if he had thought proper; so much as was minuted down, as
may be thought to have any Relation to the Conspiracy, follows.

Minutes of Doctor Harry's Confession at the Stake, Taken by Mr. John Sprat.
1. HE said, James Co^yn's Negro, told him ( Harry) when they had some
Difference, That he would be soon hanged or burnt.

2. That he knew nothing of the Plot of his own Knowledge; that if he did, he
would discover it to save his Soul.

3. That he did not remember one Negro upon Long Island, that was concerned.

4. Being asked about the combustible Stuff for burning Houses, and about the
Poison for Negroes; he said he knew nothing of it, and that it signified
nothing to confessed.

Supreme Court. MONDAY, 20th JULY, 1741:
PRESENT The Second Justice.

The KING against Sarah Hughson.

ORDERED, That the Execution of Sarah Hughson be respited until Wednesday
(...)night next.

Court adjourned 'til tomorrow Morning 10 o'Clock.

A List of Negroes recommended this Day by the Grand Jury to the Judges, to be
discharged; th^^ finding no sufficient Evidence to accuse them, viz.
Caesar, Col. Moore's. Robin, Sussex,
Mrs. Bickley's* Frank, Col. Philipse's. John, Rip Van Dam's, Esquire; Pedro, Peter
De Peyster's. Jack, John Roerback's. Will, Mr Filkin's. John, Widow Van
Rantz's.
And they were discharged accordingly.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 21st JULY.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against John Ury.

MR. Chambers, of Council for the KING in this Prosecution, moved to put off
the Trial of the Prisoner Ury, until the next Term.

Ordered accordingly; and that the Prisoner have sufficient Notice of Trial.

Ordered, That the Persons indicted for selling Spirituous Liquors to Negroes,
and for keeping disorderly Houses, do attend the Court on Thursday next Ten of
the Clock.

Court adjourned till to Morrow Morning Eleven o'Clock.

Examination of William Kane, Before one of the Judges.
NUMB. VI.
WILLIAM KANE being duly sworn, and asked, Whether he knew one Thomas Evans? he
answered he did not; but that he knew one Griffith Evans, a Soldier, who was
burnt in the Fire at the Fort.

He was then asked, Whether he knew that James Obrien, a Soldier, was concerned
in the Plot? he answered he did not.

But at last he said, he recollected one Thomas Evans who was out upon a
Furlow, but was in Town all last Winter, and very great with Obrien; he said,
if Obrien was appehended, perhaps he might tell.

Supreme Court. WEDNESDAY, 22d JULY.
PRESENT The Chief Justice. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING against John Ury, alias Jury.

JOHN URY was arraigned on a new Indictment, for being an Ecclesiastical Person
made by Authority pretended from the Sea of Rome, and coming into and abiding
in this Province after the Time limited by the Act of Assembly made the
Eleventh of WILLIAM the Third, etc. as in the other Indictment; [in the former
Indictment there having been a Mistake] and pleaded, Not Guilty, etc.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Eleven o'Clock.

The further Examination of Sarah Hughson. Before the Chief Justice.
NUMB. II.
1. SHE said, That she had often seen Ury the Priest at her Father's House, who
used to come there in the Evenings and at Nights; and has seen him in Company
with the Negroes, and talking with them about the Plot of burning the Town and
destroying the White People.

2. That she has seen him several Times make a round Ring with Chalk on the
Floor, and make all the Negroes then present stand round it, and he ( Ury) used
to stand in the Middle of the Ring, with a Cross in his Hand, and there swore
all the Negroes to be concerned in the Plot, and that they should not discover
him, nor any Thing else of the Plot, though they should die for it.

3. That William Kane used often to come there with the Negroes; and once, as
she remembers, he came there with Ury the Priest, who swore him into the Plot,
with several Negroes, in particular, Caesar, Vaarck's; Comfort's Jack, Prince,
Auboyneau's; Quack, Walter's; Cuffee, Philipse's; Peggy, and the Examinant
herself* and her Father and Mother: That all this was done the last Winter, and
^he thinks before Christmas.

4. That she saw him the said Ury, baptize the abovenamed Negroes or some of
them, and told them he made them Christians, and forgave them all their Sins,
and all the Sins they should commit about the Plot; and preached to the
Negroes: Kane being there also.

5. That she has heard Caesar, Vaarck's; Philipse's Cuffee, and other Negroes
say, that they used to go to Ury's Lodging, where they used to pray in private
after the Popish Fashion; and that he used to forgive them their Sins for
burning the Town, and destroying and cutting of the People's Throats.

6. That Ury afterward told the Examinant that she must confess what Sins she
had been guilty of, to him, and he would forgive her them; That she told him
that she had been guilty of no other Sins but Cursing and Swearing (...)
Passion; upon which he told her, as she had taken the Oath to be concerned in
the Plot, he pardoned her her Sins; she replied, that she did not believe any
B^^^ could forgive her her Sins but God; and he said, Yes, he and all Priests
could, if the People did but do what the Priests bid them, and followed their
Directions. That Peggy used to confess in private to Ury; and she heard him
tell her, if she would confess all the Wickedness she had done in the World, he
would forgive her, and particularly about the Plot: And she says that Peggy has
often told her she was a strong Papist.

7. That several of the Soldiers used often to come to their House and call for
Liquors, but she does not know whether they knew of, or were concerned in the
Plot, or not.

Minutes of Examinations, taken before the Grand Jury, of Negroes not indicted.
YORK (Thomson's) said, that Dick (Wolf's) was sworn with him at Hughson's.

Quash, of ^^ Roux, is accused by Tickle, Bastian and Sandy, all three very
clear and positive in their Evidence, and likewise by Kane.

Jupiter (Walton's) is accused by Bastian clearly, fully; and by Kane.

York (Van Rant's) (...) at Hughson's, by the Evidence of Tom (Livingston's)
and to kill the White People.

Prince (Kortrecht's) was sworn at Hughson's, and promised to kill the White
People, as appears by the Evidence of Tom (Livingston's.)

Diego (Abraham Marschalk's) accused by Murray's Adam, who says he saw him at
Comfort's; where were many Negroes talking of killing of the White People* but
cannot say that he heard Diego say any Thing.

Adam says further, that Murray's Jack told him, that he had seen Diego at
Comfort's, and Jack an Examinant denied it.

Bastian says, That the free Negro called Franck or Frans, that he accuses,
lives at Ho^^ck, on Mr. Bayard's Farm; and that he has seen him at Hughson's
among the rest of the Negroes at Supper, when they were talking of the Plot.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 23d JULY.
PRESENT. The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against William Whitefield

On Indictment for keeping a disorderly House.

WILLIAM WHITEFIELD having pleaded Guilty to the Indictment for keeping a
disorderly House, entertaining Negroes, etc.

Ordered, That for the said Offense, the said William Whitefield be fined Eight
Pounds, and stand committed until he pay his Fine.

The KING against Stephen Burdett, On the like. The like; and fined Forty
Shillings. The KING against Israel Shadwick, The like; and fined Ten Shillings.
The KING against John Chri^tian, The like; and fined Five Pounds. The KING
against Nicholas Burger, The like; and fined Forty Shillings. The KING against
Michael Breton, The like; and fined Five Pounds. The KING against Elizabeth
N^vill, The like; and fined Ten Shillings. The KING against Eleanor Cav^ll^er,
The like; and fined Ten Shillings. The KING against Sarah Hales, The like; and
fined Ten Shillings. The KING against Robert Saunders, This supposed to be the
Man that Quack, Walter's, understood from what Vaarck's Caesar said to him* to
be concerned in the Plot. See Quack's Confession. 12 th July. 9. pa. 137. but
this not thought of at that Time.
The like; and fined Six Pence; and Ordered to be discharged out of Custody,
paying his Fees.
The following Negroes discharged this Day out of Jail, the Grand Jury not
finding sufficient Evidence to indict them.

John Francois, A free Negro. Tom, Valet's. Dick, Robins's. Dublin, Walton's.
Quack, Goelet's. Will, Tiebout's. Jonio, Courtlandt's. Diego, Abraham
Marschalk's. Diego, Vandursen's.
Supreme Court. FRIDAY, 24th JULY:
PRESENT. The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

Court opened and adjourned till Tomorrow Morning, Nine o'Clock.

DEPOSITION, Before one of the Judges.
ELIAS DEBROSSES, of New York, Confectioner, being duly sworn, deposes, That
John Ury, now in Jail, said to be a Popish Priest, came to this Deponent's
House about three Months since, along with one Web, a Carpenter, and asked if
he had any Sugar Bits or Wafers to sell? (the Bits are usually made, as the
Deponent apprehends, in Imitation of Spanish Silver Coin) This Deponent showed
the said Ury some Confectionary in Imitation of Dogs, Hawks, Owls, Lambs and
Swans, supposing that he wanted them to give away to please Children, but told
him he had no Bits or Wafers: Then the said Ury asked the Deponent, whether the
Lutheran Minister had not his Wafers o^ him? or whether that P^ste which the
Deponent showed him, was not made of the same Ingredients as the Lutheran
Minister's? or asked the Deponent some Question to that Purpose: Then the
Deponent told him the said Ury, that if he had a Congregation, and wanted any
such Things, that he might get a Mould made by any Joiner for that Purpose: The
Deponent asked the said Ury (supposing him to be a Professor of some particular
Sect) where his Congregation was? and this he asked him two or three Times; but
the said Ury waved giving the Deponent any Answer thereto.

A List of seven Negroes indicted by the Grand Jury, who are not to be found.
Hanover, Mr. Henry Cruger's. London, Abraham Van Horn's. Ben, Stephen
Bayard's. Pedro, Richard Stilwell's. Ben, Augustus Jay's. Jack, Mrs.
Governeur's. Joe, Henry Holt's.
Supreme Court: SATURDAY, 25th JULY, 1741.
PRESENT The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

THE GRAND JURY came into Court, and being called over, presented (amongst
other Bills) a Bill against Pedro, Pierre De Peyster's Negro, for the
Conspiracy.

Then the Grand Jury were discharged, with the Thanks of the Court for (...)
great Service they had done their Country.

The Court adjourned to Tuesday the 28th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the Morning,
being the first Day of the ordinary July Term.

MONDAY, 27th JULY, 1741.
DEPOSITION, Taken before One of the Judges.
1. JOSEPH WEB, of the City of New York, Carpenter and House Joiner, being duly
sworn, deposed, That some Time last Fall, about the latter End of October or
Beginning of November, to the best of his Remembrance, he was at Work at John
Croker's at the Fighting Cocks, and there became acquainted with John Ury; and
hearing him read Latin and English to some People in the House, and thinking
that he read very well, he enquired of Croker who he was; and he informed him,
he was a Schoolmaster lately come from Philadelphia, and taught his Children
to read: That after this, he became acquainted with the said Ury, and asked him
if he would teach a Child of his? And he said he would, if Croker would give
him the Liberty o^ coming to his House; and Croker agreed to it; and he sent
his Child to him,

2. That afterward, this Deponent, and Ury growing more intimate, and Deponent
observing a poor and mean Appearance in his Clothing, he thought his Pocket
answerable thereto, and gave him an Invitation to hi^ House, and told him he
should be welcome to his Table Noon and Night at any Time, when he saw proper;
and Ury accordingly came to this Deponent's House frequently, all the Winter
afterward; and in their Conversations he understood by the said Ury, that he
protest himself a Nonjuring Minister; and that he had been taken into Custody
in London, for a Book that he wrote and printed, that some Critics picked a
Ho^e in it, and construed is Treason, which was contrary to his Intent and
Meaning; but by Means of some Friend ((...) Great Man) who knew his Family very
w^ll, and had a Regard for him, he had his Liberty, and got away: And that by
leaving England, he lost a Living, (as the Deponent understood him) Church
Preferment, of 50 L. a Year Income.

3. That the (...) Ury told the Deponent in some of their Conversation, that in
the Time of the late King WILLIAM the Third, the said King offered to a certain
Bishop (whose Name he does not now remember) a Bishopric of about Nine
Thousand Pounds a Year, if he would take the Oaths; but that the said Bishop
refused to comply therewith; or that the said Bishop was in Possession of that
Preferment, and was ousted, upon refusing to take the Oaths; or the said Ury
expressed himself to one or other of those Purposes; and the Deponent asked him
the said Ury, how they did then, when that Bishop was dead? Why said Ury they
take it by Seniority in a regular Succession: And Ury declared, that he himself
was ordained by a Bishop, who took his Bishopric by Seniority and regular
Succession, or expressed himself to that Purpose, as the Deponent understood
him,

4. That Ury in some of his Conversations with him upon Religious Topics,
expressed himself in such a dark, obs^^re and mysterious Manner, that the
Deponent could not understand him; he would give Hints that he could make
neither Head nor Tall of.

5. That some Time in May last, since the said Ury went to live at Campbell's,
in the House where Hughson lived, the said Ury asked the Deponent, whether he
knew of any Confectioner? And the Deponent carried him to Mr. De Brosse's; and
when he came there, he asked De Brosse to show him some Confectionary; and Ury
likewise asked De Brosse, whether the Lutheran Minister had his Wafers of him?
And De Brosse said no, he had not them of him: That De Brosse showed Ury
Confectionary in different Shapes (that is to say) some Lions, some Dogs, and
Cocks (as Deponent thinks) but Ury said they would not suit him, and so went
away.

6. That one Day the Conver^^^^^^ between Ury and Deponent was about Negroes;
Deponent having said they had Souls to be saved or lost as well as other
People: Ury said, they were not proper Objects of Salvation; Deponent replied,
What would you do with them then; What would you damn them all? No says Ury,
leave them to that Great Being that has made them, he knows best what to do
with them; says Ury, they are of a slavish Nature* it is the Nature of them to
be Slaves, give them Learning, do all the Good you can, and put them above the
Condition of Slaves, and in return they will cut your Throats. Ury seemed to be
well acquainted with the Disposition of them.


7. That after Campbell removed to Hughson's House, Ury removed thither about a
Week or ten Days after him; and the Deponent went thither three Times, and
heard him read Prayers, in the Manner of the Church of England, but in the
Prayers for the King, he only mentioned our Sovereign Lord the King, and not
KING GEORGE: The Drift of his first Sermon was against Drunkenness and
Debauchery of Life, and against Deists. The first Part of his second Sermon was
much to the same Purpose with the former, and the latter Part was an Admonition
to every one to keep to their own Minister; they that were of the Church of
England, to the English Minister, those that were of the Lutheran Persuasion to
keep to that, and those of the Presbyterians to keep to their Ministers, and
not to have itching Ears to run after every New Minister: That he did not
propose to set up a Society for Preaching to them; that he only gave a Word of
Admonition at the Request of the Family where he was.

8. That at his third Sermon, Mr. Hildreth was present; and Ury therein took
Notice of two Ministers that had lately preached in this City, whose Doctrine
he condemned; The Particulars that the Deponent remembers he took Notice of,
were their Preaching up, that Faith without Works were sufficient for
Salvation; he said that this destroyed two grand Attributes of God Almighty,
his Justice, and Mercy; (as he thinks) and insisted that there must be good
Works: This was the Sunday before the King's Proclamation Day; and at the Close
he warned the Persons present; that on the King's Proclamation Day, at five of
the Clock in the Evening, he intended to preach upon the following Words, among
others: Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, (concerning St. Peter) and these other Words, Whosoever
Sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whosoever Sins ye retain, they are
retained. This is to the best of Deponent's Remembrance; but Deponent has not
heard that he preached according to that Warning.

9. That the Deponent has heard Ury say, that such a Time and such a Time was
his Sacrament Day, and that he must receive the Sacrament; and he thinks he has
heard him say, that he must administer the Sacrament, but cannot be positive.

The Judges of the Supreme Court having for some Time past, had under
Consideration the Case of Sarah Hughson, Daughter of John Hughson and Sarah his
Wife, all lately convicted as Accomplices in the Conspiracy; the Circumstances
of her Misfortune, of having been trained up under the Influence and evil
Example of such wicked disposed Parents, bore great Weight with them; they were
therefore inclinable (if she could be prevailed upon to give some Color for
it) to recommend her to his Honor the Lieutenant Governor as an Object of
Mercy; and in this Expectation, her Executi^^ (which by order of the Court was
proposed to have been (...) the same Time with her Father and Mother) had been
from time to time respited; but, after their Execution, she remained for some
time very obstinate; and though there was great Reason to expect that it was in
her Power to give a further Insight into this Scene of Iniquity; yet she
remained inflexible after several Examinations, and would discover nothing;
till at length, they were under a Necessity of calling her up to Sentence, and
appointing a Day for her Execution, proposing this as the last Experiment to
bring her to a Confession, which happened to have the intended Effect; and if
there could be any Dependence upon her Veracity in what she had declared (and
that she has discovered some Truths not before brought to light, they judged
from the Nature of the Conspiracy, so far as it has been unfolded) and if she
could be affected with a Sense of Gratitude for saving her Life upon so small
Merit, and kept to her History concerning John Ury then in Custody, and soon to
be tried as an Accomplice in the Plot, and also as a Roman Catholic Priest,
they thought she would be a very material Evidence against him; On these
Considerations they thought fit this Day to recommend her to his Honor for a
Pardon, as an Object of Mercy.

Supreme Court. TUESDAY, 28th JULY.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

Court opened with the usual Forms.

GRAND JURY called, and the following appeared and were sworn.

Merchants Messrs.
Joseph Robinson, James Livingston, Hermanus Rutgers, jun. Charles Le Roux,
Abraham Boelen, Peter Rutgers, Jacobus Roosevelt, John Auboyneau, Stephen Van
Courtlandt, jun. Abraham Lynsen, Gerardus Duyckinck, John Provoost, Henry Lane,
jun. Henry Cuyler, John Roosevelt, Abraham De Peyster, Edward Hicks, Joseph
Ryall, Peter Schuyler, Peter Jay,
THE CHIEF JUSTICE charged the Grand Jury to prosecute the Enquiry for the
Detection of the Conspirators, and to present all Crimes and (...) from
Treasons down to Trespasses.

A LIST of eighteen Negroes recommended by the Judges this Day to his Honor
the Lieutenant Governor, to be inserted in a Pardon, in order for Transportation
Jack, Joshua Sleydall's. Jack, Henry Brestead's. Sandy, Thomas Niblet's.
Caesar, After the Secret of the Plot had got Air, it was observed by several,
as they declared afterward, that the Behavior of many Negroes was wild and
confused, though the Cause of such Extravagance was not accounted for, till
those Wretches were impeached, and taken into Custody: All the Negroes
arraigned upon the Indictment for the Conspiracy on the 26th of June, with
Caesar, had pleaded Guilty; but Caesar was hardy, insisted upon his Innocence,
and pleaded, Not Guilty. Some Endeavor was used by the Council at the Bar, who
kn^w the Evidence affecting Caesar, to prevail with him to confess his Guilt,
but in vain; till at length, one of those Gentlemen inspecting the Indictment,
observed Cato, Col. MOORE's Negro to be indorsed thereon, as a Witness against
him, whereupon he asked Caesar, whether he was acquainted with that Cato? At
which Caesar seemed confounded, and immediately answered, Guilty.
Israel Horsfield's. Tickle, Elizabeth Carpenter's. Harry, John Furman's,
London, Edward Kelly's. Low, David Provoost's. Jeffery, Capt. Brown's. York,
Thomas Thomas's. Sam, Peter Low's. Windsor, Samuel Meyer's Cohen. Jack, Adam,
Mr. Murray's. Tom, Robert Livingston's. Gosport, Robert Bound's Toby, Hercules
Windover's. Tom, Widow Hyer's.
The six following had been indicted for the Conspiracy, but their Masters
agreed to enter into Recognizance to transport them forthwith.
Dick, -- Wolf's. Caesar, Dr. Henderson's. Prince, Cornelius Kortrecht's. York,
Widow Vanzant's. Quash, Charles La Roux. Jupiter, Capt. Walton's.
The TRIAL of JOHN URY alias JURY.
Supreme Court: WEDNESDAY, 29th JULY.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against Sarah Hughson, the Daughter.

THIS Criminal Convict being set to the Bar, the Court demanded of her, What
she had to say, why Execution of her former Sentence should not be awarded
against her? She thereupon produced and pleaded His Majesty's most gracious
Pardon; and the same being read, was allowed of.

The KING, against John Ury alias Jury.

THE Prisoner was brought to the Bar, and the Court proceeded upon his Trial,
as follows.

Clerk in Court. Crier, make Proclamation for Silence.


Crier. O Yes! Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep Silence, upon Pain of Imprisonment.


Crier. If any one can inform the King's Justices, the King's Attorney General
for this Province, or the Inquest now to be taken on the Behalf of our
Sovereign Lord the King, of any Treason, Murder, Felony, or any other
Misdemeanor committed or done by the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come forth,
and they shall be heard; for the Prisoner now stands upon his Deliverance,


Clerk. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. O Yes! You good Men that are impanelled to enquire between our
Sovereign Lord the KING, and John Ury alias Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar,
answer to your Names.


Clerk. John Ury alias Jury, hold up thy Hand.


These good Men that are now called, and here appear, are those which are to
pass between you and our Sovereign Lord the King, upon your Life or Death: If
you challenge any of them you must speak as they come to the Book to be sworn,
and before they are sworn.

[The Court apprized the Prisoner of the Nature and Extent of that Liberty the
Law allowed him, for making his Challenges to the Jurors.] The Prisoner
challenging none, the Court proceeded; and the Jury were sworn, to wit, William
Hammersley. Gerardus Beekman. John Shurmur. Sidney Breese. Daniel Shatford.
Thomas Behe^na. Peter Fres^eau. Thomas Willet. John Breese. John Hastier. James
Tucker. Brandt Schuyler.


Clerk. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. O Yes! Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep Silence, upon Pain of Imprisonment.


Clerk: You Gentlemen of the Jury, that are now sworn, look upon the Prisoner,
and hearken to his Charge.


THE Prisoner stands indicted, for that, Whereas a Negro Man Slave, called
Quack, belonging to John Roosevelt, of the City of New York, Merchant, on the
Eighteenth Day of March, in the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, etc. at the City
of New York, into a certain Dwelling House of our said Lord the King, which
then was standing and being at the Fort in the said City of New York, and was
then in the Possession of the Honorable GEORGE CLARKE, Esquire; His Majesty's
Lieutenant Governor of the Province of New York, did enter, and of his Malice
afore-thought lighted Fire, then and there wickedly, maliciously, voluntarily,
wilfully and feloniously did put, and with the said lighted Fire he the said
Negro Man Slave called Quack, the Dwelling House aforesaid then and there
wickedly, etc. did set on fire, and burn, and wholly consume, and destroy,
against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the KING. His Crown and Dignity:
And that John Ury alias Jury, private Schoolmaster, on the Twenty-second Day
of February, in the said Fourteenth Year of the Reign of our said Lord the
King, and diverse other Days and Times before the Felony and Burning aforesaid,
in Form aforesaid, done and perpetrated at the City of New York, of his Malice
afore-thought, wickedly, maliciously, voluntarily, wilfully and feloniously did
counsel, abet, procure and encourage the aforesaid Negro Man Slave called
Quack, the Felony and Burning aforesaid, in Form aforesaid committed and
perpetrated, to commit and perpetrate, in most pernicious Example of all others
in the like Case offending, contrary to the Form of the Statutes in such Case
made and provided, and against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Crown and Dignity.

Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, and has pleaded thereunto, Not
Guilty; and for his Trial has put himself upon God and his Country; which
Country you are.

YOUR CHARGE is to enquire, Whether he be Guilty of the Felony whereof he
stands indicted, or not Guilty. If you find him Guilty, you are to enquire what
Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements he had at the Time when the Felony was
committed, or at any Time since: If you find him Not Guilty, you are to say so,
and no more: And hear your Evidence.

Of Council for the King.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, Mr. MURRAY, Mr. ALEXANDER, Mr. SMITH, Mr. CHAMBERS.
The Attorney General RICHARD BRADLEY, Esquire; addressing himself to the Court and
Jury, opened the Indictment; and proceeded as follows.

IN order to maintain the Charge against the Prisoner, upon this Indictment, we
shall produce to you the following Evidence, to wit.

That the Prisoner was actually concerned in the Plot to burn the King's House,
and this City, and murder the Inhabitants.

That he has frequently been at Hughson's House, in Company with Hughson, his
Wife, and Daughter, and Kerry, and with diverse Negroes, talking with them about
the Plot, and counselling and encouraging them to burn the King's House, and
the Town, and to kill and destroy the Inhabitants. -- That the Negro Quack, who
burnt the King's House, was present at one or more of those Times, when the
Prisoner counseled and encouraged the Negroes as aforesaid. -- That he advised
them what would be the fittest Time to set the English Church on fire; and that
the Prisoner, as a Popish Priest, baptized Hughson, his Wife, and Daughter, and
Kerry, and also diverse Negroes, and told them then, and at several other
Times, That he could forgive Sins, and that he forgave them their Sin^ relating
to the Plot.

That when he was with the Negroes at Hughson's House, he used to make a round
Ring on the Floor with Chalk, or some other Thing, and stand in the Middle of
it with a Cross in his Hand, and swear the Negroes into the Plot; and that they
should not discover either the Plot, or him, or any other Pers^^ ^^ncerned in
it, THOUGH THEY WERE TO DIE FOR IT

That some time last Winter, (...) (at Hughson's House) swore Hughson, his
Wife, and Daughter, and Kerry, and several Negroes into the Plot.

That he went by several Names; and that when he baptized the Negroes, or any
of the Conspirators, he used to tell them, he forgave them all the Sins they
should commit ABOUT THE PLOT.

We shall likewise produce to you a Letter from General Oglethorpe to his
Honor our Governor, whereby it appears, That some time before the Plot broke
out here, the Spaniards had employed Emissaries to burn all the Magazines and
considerable Towns in the English North America: And that many PRIESTS were
employed, under pretended Appellations of PHYSICIANS, DANCING-MASTERS, and such
like Occupations; and under such Pretenses to get Admittance into, and
Confidence in, Families.

This, Gentlemen, was their hellish Device to set on foot and carry on the late
dreadful Conspiracy among us; and the Prisoner, in Conjunction with Hughson (as
we now have Reason to believe) drew in the rest of the Conspirators.

Gentlemen, What I have alleged, and much more, you will hear fully proved
against the Prisoner by the Witnesses for the King, on this Trial* But before
we enter upon their Examination, give me Leave to say a few Words concerning
the Hainousness of this Prisoner's Offenses, and of the Popish Religion in
general; which I shall speak but very briefly to, as there are several other
Gentlemen of Council for the King on this Trial, and as I have not had either
Health or Leisure to prepare to say much on this Occasion.

Gentlemen, The late dreadful Conspiracy to burn the King's House, and this
whole Town, and to kill and destroy the Inhabitants, which the Prisoner, as
well as Hughson advised and encouraged, and swore many of the Conspirators to
join and bear their Parts in, are Crimes of too black and inhumane a Nature ^o
need any Aggravation; and, no doubt, the Prisoner's engaging, at the Peril of
his own Life, in so destructive, so bloody and dangerous an Enterprise,
proceeded from his being employed in it by other Popish Priests and Emissaries,
and his Zeal for that murderous Religion: For the Popish Religion is such, that
they hold it not only lawful but meritorious to kill and destroy all that
differ in Opinion from them, if it may any ways serve the Interest of their
detestable Religion; the whole Scheme of which seems to be a restless Endeavor
to extirpate all other Religions whatsoever, but more especially the Protestant
Religion, which they maliciously call the Northern Heresy: And to attain this
wicked End, their first Trick is, by subtle Arguments to persuade the Laity out
of their Senses, by show it? them a seeming Necessity for their believing as
their Church believes, if they tender their own Salvation; and this, with many
more Frauds, the Church of Rome has artfully devised to get an absolute
Dominion over the Consciences, that they may the more easily pick the Pockets
of credulous People: Witness the pretended Pardons and Indulgencies of that
crafty and deceitful Church, and their Masses to pray Souls out of Purgatory,
which they quote (or rather wrest) Scripture for, when no such Thing is to be
found there, but is a mere Invention and Cheat of their own to gull the Laity
of their Money.

Then they have their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which is so big with
Absurdities that it is shocking to the common Sense and Reason of Mankind; for
were that Doctrine true, their Priests, by a few Words of their Mouths, can
make a God as often as they please; but then they eat him too; and this they
have the Impudence to call honoring and adoring of him. -- Blasphemous
Wretches! For hereby they endeavor to exalt themselves above God himself,
inasmuch as the Creator must necessarily be greater than his Creature.

These and many other juggling Tricks they have in their Hocus Pocus, bloody
Religion; which have been stripped of all their wretched Disguise, and fully
exposed in their own Colors by many eminent Divines, but more particularly by
the great Dr. Tillotson, whose extraordinary Endowment^ of Mind, his inimitable
Works, and exemplary Piety and Charity have gained him such universal Esteem
and Applause throughout all the Protestant World, as, no doubt, will endure as
long as the Protestant Name and Religion lasts, which I hope will be to the End
of Time.

Gentlemen,

When you have ^eard the Witnesses prove to you what I have alleged against
the Prisoner, I make no Doubt but you will, for your Oath's Sake, and for your
own Country's Peace and future Safety, find him Guilty.

WITNESSES for the KING.

Mr. GEORGE JOSEPH MOORE, Clerk in Court, sworn.

He proved the Arraignment and Conviction of Quack, on the Twenty-eighth and
Twenty-ninth Days of May last, who set fire to the Fort.

MARY BURTON sworn.

Mr. Chambers. Mary, give the Court and Jury an Account of what you know
concerning this Conspiracy, to burn down the Town, and murder and destroy the
Inhabitants; and what Part you know the Prisoner at the Bar has acted in it:
Tell the whole Story from the Beginning, in your own Method, but speak slow,
not so hastily as you usually, do, that the Court and Jury may the better
understand you.


Mary Burton. Why, I have seen Ury very often at Hughson's, about Christmas
and New-Year, and then he staid away about a Fortnight or three Weeks, and
returned again about the Time that Hogg's Goods came to our House. I have often
seen him in Company with Hughson, his Wife and Daughter, and Peggy, and several
Negroes, talking about the Plot, burning the Fort first, then the Fly, and then
the Dock: And upon some of the Negroes saying, they were afraid of being damned
for being concerned in the Plot; I heard Ury tell them* they need not fear
doing of it, for that he could forgive them their Sins as well as God Almighty,
and would forgive them. They were to burn the whole Town and to kill the
People; Ury was to be Captain of a Company of Negroes, and he was to begin the
Fire where he lodged; At Croker 's, near the Coffee-House, by the Long Bridge.
That when they were once together above Stairs, Ury, Hughson, his Wife, and
Peggy; they called Mary, and I went up; but when I came up Stairs, Ury had a
Book in his Hand, and bid me go away, and asked me what Business I had there,
and said, they did not call m^* they called Mary Hughson; and he was angry, and
shut the Door too again; and I looked under it; and there was a black Ring upon
the Floor, and Things in it, that seemed to look like Rats, I don't know what
they were See Sarah Hughson 's Examination, page 134. 9. and Note letter (f)
thereon. What Mary saw, was by looking under the Door, which it may be
supposed, afforded but an obscure View, and the Negroes perhaps pulling their
black Toes backwards and forwards, Mary might be puzzled what to make of them.
But Sarah Hughson and Kane agree with Burton, that there was a Ceremony used
with a Ring or Circle upon the Floor, at swearing the Confederates.
That another Time I heard him talking with the Negroes, Quack and others,
about the Plot; and he turned the Negroes out of the Room, and asked me to
swear? and I said I would swear, if they would tell me what I was going to
swear; but they would have me swear first; And Hughson, and his Wife, went and
^^^ched Silks and Gold Rings, and offered them to me, i^ case I would swear;
but I would not, and they said, I was a Fool; And Ury then told me, He could
forgive Sins as well as God; I answered, I thought that was out of (...) Power
-- That one Night, some time about New-Year, I was listening at the Door of the
Room upon the Stairs, where there was Ury, Hughson, his Wife and Daughter
(...), Caesar (Vaarck's) Prince (Auboyneau's) Cuff ((...)) and other Negroes;
and (...) looked through the Door and saw upon the Table a black Thing like a
Child, and Ury had a Book in his Hand, and was reading, but I did not
understand the Language; and having a Spoon in my Hand, I happened to let it
drop upon the Floor, and Ury came out of the Room, running after me down
Stairs, and he fell into a Tub of Water, which stood at the Foot of the Stairs,
and I ran away. -- When they were doing any Thing extraordinary at Nights, they
would send me to bed.


Prisoner. You say* you have seen me several Times at Hughson's, what Clothes
did I usually wear.


Mary Burton. I cannot tell what Clothes you wore particularly.


Prisoner. That is strange, and know me so well.


M. Burton. I have seen you in several Clothes, but you chiefly wore a riding
Coat, and often a brown Coat, trimmed with black.


Prisoner. I never wore any such Coat.


Prisoner. What Time of the ^^y did I use to come to Hughson's?


M. Burton. You used chiefly to come in the Night Time, and when I have been
going to bed; I have seen you undressing in Peggy's Room, as if you were to lie
there; but I cannot say that you did, for you was always gone before I was up
in the Morning.


Prisoner. What Room was I in when I called Mary, and you came up, as you said?


M. Burton. In the great Room up Stairs.


Prisoner. What Answer did the Negroes make, when I offered to forgive them
their Sins, as you said?


M. Burton. I don't remember.


WILLIAM KANE, Soldier, sworn.

Mr. Chambers. Kane, will you give the Court and Jury an Account of ^^at you
know of the Prisoner at the Bar, and of his being concerned in the Conspiracy
for burning the Fort, and the ^own, and murdering the Inhabitants? Give the
whole Account at large.


William Kane. I know the Prisoner very well, I have seen him at Croker's, at
Coffins, and Hughso^'s; and particularly with Daniel Fagen, Jerry Corker, and
one Plum^^r, and several Negroes, at Hughson's. Jerry Corker was one of the
First that brought me into the Plot. One Day before Christmas last, I was
standing Sentry at the Governor's Door, and Jerry Corker coming out, I being
dry, asked him for Beer; Jerry said he would get some; that he had Rum in his
Pocket, and would make Flip; and then he went in and made it in a Copper Pot,
and told me it was with Loaf S^gar; I drank a Draught of it; and when I was
relieved at Night, Corker came into the Guard Room, and asked me if I would go
to Croker's at the Fighting Cocks, where there was to be a Christening by a
Romish Priest; we went thither, and staid till past Ten o'Clock, but the People
did not come that Night: The next Night, Corker and I went there again, but the
People were not there: The third Night we went to New-Street, to the House of
one Coffin a Pedlar; there they had a Child, and Ury christened it, and read
Latin; three acted as Priests, and handed the Book about; Ury put Salt in the
Child's Mouth, sprinkled it thrice, and crossed it. That Ury and Corker there
endeavored to persuade me to be a Roman Catholic; Ury said, 'Twas best to be
a Roman, they could forgive Sins for any Thing ever so bad; I told him, I did
not believe him; and Corker told me that Ury and all Priests could forgive
Sins. That Ury was present at Hughson's, when John Hughson swore me and his
Father and Brothers into the Plot; there was Quack and Forty or Fifty Negroes
there at the same Time; we were to burn the Town, and destroy the People. David
Johnson was there, and Ury tipped him on the Shoulder, and they went into a
Room together, and staid a Quarter of an Hour; and when they came back, Johnson
said, D -- n me, but we will burn the Dutc^, and get their Money; That by Ury's
Pe^^wasions that he could forgive Sins, many were brought in to be concerned;
Ury was near me when I was sworn, and the Hughsons, and I took him to be one of
the Head; Ury wante^ to christen me, but I would not, and he would not speak to
me, nor before me, for a long Time; for he could not abide me, because I
refused to become a Roman; till after he knew that I was concerned in the Plot,
and even then he did not much care for me: Ury was by, when Hughson swore eight
Negroes into the Plot in a Ring; and it was then talked among them, of burning
the Fort; and Quack (who was present) was at that Time pitched upon to do it,
in the Presence of Ury, who he believed might, and did hear it. Jerry Corker
told me, that the English Church was intended to be burnt on Christmas Day
last; but Ury put it off, and said, that when the Weather was better, then
there would be a fuller Congregation.


Prisoner. You say you have seen me very often, you saw me at Coffin's, you saw
me several Times at Hughson's, pray what Clothes did you see me in?


Kane. I have seen you in black, I have seen you in a yellowish great Coat, and
sometimes in a straight bodied Coat, of much the same Color.


Prisoner. What Time of the Day have you seen me at Hughson's, and what did I
say to you?


Kane. I have seen you there chiefly at Nights, and you told me, you could
forgive me my Sins, and there would be no fear of Damnation, and you wanted to
christen me.


Prisoner. You say you saw me christen a Child in New-Street; how was the Child
dressed, and what Ceremony did I use, and who was present there then?


Kane. The Child was not naked, it was dressed as usual; and you put it on your
Left Arm, and sprinkled it with Water three Times, and put Salt in it is Mouth,
and crossed it, as I said before; there were about nine Persons present.


Prisoner. Did I use any Thing besides Salt and Water?


Kane. Not that I saw.


Prisoner. Who were present at the Christening?


Kane. Eight or nine Persons, I think; there was Jerry Corker, Daniel Fagen,
Coffin, You, the Mother of the Child, myself, and two or three more.


Prisoner. You say you saw me at Hughson's several Times, what Room was I
usually in?


Kane. Sometimes in one Room, and sometimes in another.


Prisoner. At what Times was I there?


Kane. At Nights.


Prisoner. What Habit have you you seen me wear?


Kane. A black Coat, a yellowish Surtout, and sometimes a light colored
close-bodied Cape Coat.


Prisoner. What did I offer in order to induce you to become a Roman Catholic?


Kane. Forgiveness of all my Sins past, and what I should do in this Case; and
I said to you, What a fine Thing it is to be of such a Religion, when a Priest
can forgive Sins, and send one to Heaven.


Mr. Chambers. Call Sarah Hughson.


Prisoner. I except against her being sworn, for she has been convicted, and
received Sentence of Death for being concerned in this Conspiracy, and
therefore cannot be a Witness.


Attorney General* But Mr. Ury, she has received His Majstey's most Gracious
Pardon, which she has pleaded in Court this Morning, and it has been allowed
of, and therefore the Law says, she is a good Evidence. II Hawk. Title Pardon.
Chap. 37. 48.


Court. Her Pardon has been pleaded, and allowed, and by Law, she may be
admitted.

SARAH HUGHSON, sworn.


Mr. Chambers. Sarah, do you give the Court and Jury an Account of what you
know of Ury's being concerned* in this Conspiracy.


S. Hughson. I know him, and have often seen him at my Father's, late in last
Fall Chiefly: I have seen him there at Nights, in Company with Negroes, when
they have been talking of burning the Town, and killing the white People. I
have seen him make a Ring with Chalk on the Floor, which he made the Negroes
stand round, and put their left Foot in, and he swore them with a Cross in his
Hand, To burn and destroy the Town, and to cut their Masters and Mistresses
Throats. He swore Bastian, Vaarck 's Caesar, Auboyneau 's Prince, and Walter's
Quack; he swore them to keep secret, not to discover him or any body else, if
they were to die for it. I have heard Ury, and the Negroes, talk of burning the
Fort; and he said, if that did not do, they were to begin at the East End of
the Town, with a strong Easterly Wind, and that would go through the whole
Town. He asked me to swear to the Plot, and said, That I should have all my
Sins forgiven, if I kept all secret; and he swore me on an (...), and my
Parents and Peggy were by; and he swore Peggy too; and I heard him tell her,
That all the Sins which she had committed should be forgiven her; and he told
her, That Priests could forgive Sins as well as God, (...) THEY WOULD FOLLOW
THEIR DIRECTIONS. That he used to christen Negroes there; he christened Caesar,
Quack, and other Negroes, crossed them on the Face, ^ad Water and other Things;
and he told them, He would absolve them from all their Sins.


Prisoner. How did I swear you?


C. Hughson. On a Book: I believe it was an English Book.


Prisoner. Who was present when I swore you?


S. Hughson. My Parents, Peggy, Kane, and others.


Prisoner. You say I baptized several People, Pray what Ceremony did I use at
baptizing? Since the Notes upon the Extracts out of Ury 's Journal were made,
it has been discovered, That John Ryan, whose Son Timothy, Ury has registered
to have been baptized by him, was an Irish Servant brought hither the Summer
before the Plot broke out, by Col. Cope when he came to embarque for the
Expedition to the West Indies; which Ryan, it is said, is a pro^est Roman
Catholic, still residing in this City. See Extract Ury's Journal, and Notes
thereon. Fol. 143.



S. Hughson. When you baptized the Negroes, you made a Cross upon their Faces,
and sprinkled Water, and you used something else, but I cannot tell what; and
you talked in a Language which I did not understand.


Prisoner, Whom did I baptize?


S. Hughson. Caesar Prince, Bastian, Quack, Cuffee, and several other Negroes.
The Behavior of this miserable Wretch was upon this Occasion, beyond
Expectation, composed and decent; she seemed to be touched with Remorse and
Compunction; what came from her, was delivered with all the visible Marks and
Semblance of Sincerity and Truth, insomuch, that the Court. Jury, and many of
the Audience, looked upon her at this Instant, to be under real Conviction of
Mind for her past Offenses, which was somewhat surprising to those who were
Witnesses to the rest of her Conduct, since her Condemnation and several
Reprieves: Her Evidence (as the Reader may observe) was regular and uniform,
and agreed with the Account of the Plot, as to to the Persons and Things she
spoke to, and was chiefly confirmed by many concurring Evidences, and therefore
for once, it seems but reasonable and just to allow, that she spoke the Truth.

She was brought this Morning to plead her Pardon out of the condemned Hole*
where she had been confined from the Time of her Condemnation; and when her
Pardon was pleaded, she was taken from Court into a Room in Custody of the
Undersheriff, where she was to be near at Hand for C^^^ upon this Trial, and
there she remained till wanted and was sent for: And the Witnesses delivered
their Testimony in the Order of Time they are here placed, out of the Hearing
of each other, till each respective Person had given their Evidence; which is
m^ntioned. That the Reader may more particularly observe the Correspondence and
remarkable Agreement between her Evidence, Kane 's, and Mary Burton 's, which
must be seen by every one, that will be at the Pains to make the Comparison:
And Sarah was under Ground before, and all the Time Kane had been committed; so
that there could have been no Confabulation between them; nor could Mary Burton
have Inter^ourse with either, who was the first white Evidence that impeached
Kane, and Kane by his Confession confirmed her Evidence, and now all three
confirm each others.




M^. Murray, Council for the King. If your Honors please, I have a Piece of
Evidence, which I would not offer 'til I have opened the Nature of it; it has
been hinted at by Mr. Attorney, in the Opening; which is a Letter from General
Oglethorpe to the Lieutenant Governor, informing him, That a Party of Indians
had returned to Georgia, on the Eighth of May last, from War against the
Spaniards, who in an Engagement with a Party of Spanish Horse, near Augustine,
had taken on^ of them Prisoner, and had brought him to the General; That the
Spaniard, in his Examination before the Magistrates in Georgia, had given some
Intelligence of a villainous Design of a very extraordinary Nature, that the
Spaniards had employed Emissaries to burn all the Magazines and considerable
Towns in the English North America, thereby to prevent the Subsistence of the
English Fleet in the West Indies; and that for this Purpose, many Priests were
employed, who pretended to be Physicians, Dancing Masters,....... and other
Kinds of Occupations; and under that Pretense to endeavor (...) g^^^ Admitance
and Confidence in private Families.

I only offer this by way of Inducement and Illustration of what is strictly
Evidence, and what I think by Law I may; it is to show in general, that there
was a Plot; [and cited some Authorities out of the State Trials]


Court. Mr. Murray, You must prove that Signing to be General Oglethorpe's Hand.


It was proved accordingly: And so much of the Letter read as relates to the
present Purpose; which follows:

Frederica, in Georgia, 16th May 1741. SIR,
A PARTY of our Indians returned the 8th Instant from War against the
Spaniards: They had an Engagement with a Party of Spanish Horse, just by
Augustine, and brought one of them Prisoner to me; He gives me an Account of
three Spanish Sloops, and a Snow, Privateers, who are sailed from Augustine to
the Northward, for the Provision*Vessels, bound from the Northward to the
West Indies, hoping thereby to supply themselves with Flour, of which they are
in Want. Besides this Account which he gave to me, he mentioned many
Particulars in his Examination before our Magistrates.

Some Intelligence I had of a villainous Design of a very extraordinary Nature,
and, if true, very important, viz* That the Spaniard^ had employed Emissaries
to burn all the Magazines and considerable Towns in the English North America,
thereby to prevent the Subsisting of the great Expedition and Fleet in the
West Indies: And that for this Purpose, many Priests were employed, who
pretended to be Physicians, Dancing-Masters, and other such Kinds of
Occupations; and under that Pretense to get Admittance and Confidence in
Families. As I could not give Credit to these Advices, since the Thing was too
horrid for any Prince to order, I asked him concerning them; but he would not
own he knew any thing of them.

I am, SIR, Your very humble Servant, James Oglethorpe.
Superscribed, To the Honorable GEORGE CLARKE, Esquire; Lieutenant Governor of
New York.

What would make one give yet more Heed to this Piece of Intelligence, is, a
Paragraph in the American Newspapers, the Winter before this Conspiracy broke
out, extracted from those of London, viz. In the Boston Gazette, 1st December
South Carolina Gazette, 25th December, and the Pennsylvania Gazette 1st of
January, the last of which has it as taken from the London Papers of the 7th of
October 1740.

In order for the Reader to make the most he can of it, it is thought proper
also to insert the Introduction to it; the Whole is said to be an Extract of a
Letter from the Hague, as follows;

THE Marquis d^ F^nelon, Ambassador from France, continues to exhort the States
General to make a common Cause with his Court for maintaining the Treaty of
Utrecht, in regard to the Possessions of his Catholic Majesty in America; and
for this Purpose that their High Mightinesses would join a Squadron with those
of his Most Christian Majesty, in order to prevent the C^mmerce in the
West Indies from bring interrupted by any Power whatsoever: The Deputies of
their High Mightinesses manifested their Surprise at the Proposition of this
Ambassador, and told him, that it was not by the English that their Merchants,
who traffic to the West Indies, had in the least suffered; but that it was the
continual Vexations and injurious Treatment they had met with from the
Spaniards, that they had only Cause to complain of; and their High Mightinesses
had caused Representations to be made upon this Subject at the Court of Spain,
and had reiterated their Instances, but all in vain; wherefore their High
Mightinesses had found it very necessary to grant the Protection to their
Subjects, and to maintain the Liberty of Commerce, which Treaties concluded in
the most solemn Manner, had privileged them to do.

The States General look with a watchful Eye upon the Designs of the Court of
France, which are, as it is positively assured, to turn the Tables upon the
English in America, by exciting Revolts and Disturbances in their Possessions,
and by doing every Thing in it is Power to traverse the Designs, and even In the
Boston Paper it is ever to distress, etc.
to distress the English.

The Letter Writer best knew what Assurances there were concerning this Matter;
surely these Pieces of Intelligence could not arise from Nothing; whe^ever
there is much Smoke, it is a necessary Conclusion that there must be some Fire.

About the Time, or soon after, we had the several Fires in this City, as
related in the Introduction, one Luke Barrington, an Irishman, a professed Papist
(who came to live in the County of Ulster some short Time before, and set up
for a Schoolmaster, and kept School at Little Britain) being in Company with
James Mc Claghry, Peter Mullender and several others; Mullender drank KING
GEORGE's Health to Barrington, who taking the Basin of Liquor into his Hand,
drank King Philip's, or Philip of Spain's Health* Mc Claghry thereupon told
Barrington, it was wrong in him to drink the King of Spain's Health in that
Company, especially as it wa^ War with Spain, and if any would inform against
him, he might be hanged on that Tree, pointing to a Tree near by; to which
Barrington replied, he scorned to dissemble for any Body; that King Philip was
his King; and if he would come over with his Army, he would take up Arms for
him, and knock all the English on the Head: Barrington staid a Day and two
Nights afterward in that Neighborhood, and then left it: Of this Mc Claghry
afterward made Oath before one of his Majesty's Council for this Province,
living near that Neighborhood, who caused diligent Enquiry to be made after
Barrington, in order to apprehend him; but he was not met with at that Time;
though it was said, he was taken up some time afterward, and committed to
Kingston Jail, and from thence made escape.

It seems this Schoolmaster came first into those Parts the Fall before; he
was a young Man about Five and Twenty; he pretended to be a Minister's Son of
the Church of England in Ireland; knew many of the Irish Gentry, and could give
an Account of their Families; he said he left his Father in a Pet; had
traveled into Italy, and confessed to some, that he turned Roman Catholic
there: And as the Neighborhood talked much of his being an extraordinary
Scholar, and of his understanding several Languages, the Counselor several
Times sent him an Invitation to his House; but he never went, nor did that
Gentleman ever see him. -- But it was said, that some time after his Arrival
there, he chiefly kept Company with the Irish Servants, of which they have many
in that Part of the Country, and the greatest Number of them Roman Catholics,
and they had frequent Meetings together.

So that this is a fourth Instance of suspicious Schoolmasters infesting these
Parts, correspondent to General Oglethorpe's Letter of Advice: This Man, Ury
the Priest, Holt a Dancing Master, and John Corry an Irishman, a Dancing Master
and professed Papist.

Court. Mr. Murray, have you any more Witnesses?


Mr. Murray. Sir, We shall rest here at present.


Court. Mr. Ury, have you any Witnesses; for now is your time to produce them?


Prisoner. May it please the King's Judges, and the Gentlemen of the Jury.

IT is very incongruous to Reason to think that I can have any Hand or be any
way concerned in this Plot if these Things be duly weighed: That after the
Discovery of the Conspiracy and the Execution of many for it that I should act
such a Lunatic part if I were Guilty as to continue in this City join with Mr.
Campbell and not only so but publicly advertise myself for teaching of Grammar
There was no name to his Advertisement, as has been remarked.
yea further that I should still continue even after the Caution Mr. Webb gave
me a Week and a few Days before I was taken into Custody he told me Mr.
Chambers told him that the Eyes of this City were fixed on me, and that I was
suspected to be a Roman Priest and thought to be in the Plot I answered my
Innocence would protect me I valued not what the World said, again another
Instance that must free me from this Plot is when Mr. Campbell went to take
Possession of Huson's House his Daughter refusing to go out and she swearing
like a Life Guardman I took up the Cause Mr. Campbell not exerting himself as I
thought was proper at that time and told her if she would not go out quietly I
would take another Method with her for I would have no such wicked Person (as
she was said to be) live where I was to dwell Now Reason must pronounce me
innocent for had I been engaged in their Scheme my Guilt my Fears would have
forced me to have acted in a very different manner rather to have soothed her
and gave her Liberty to stay till provided for instead of not showing her the
least Countenance and further what corroberates my Non knowledge of this Plot
is that the Negro who confessed as it is said that he set fire to the Fort did
not mention me in all his Confession doubtless he would not have neglected and
passed over such a Person as I am said to be namely a Priest and if he was
bound by any Oath or Oaths as he confessed it showed he thought it or them of no
Value and therefore would have confessed and laid open the whole Scheme and all
the Persons he knew concerned in it but more especially the Priest as it is
said I am and what is still more strong for my Innocence is that neither Huson
his Wife nor the Creature that was hanged with them and all that have been put
to Death since did not once name me certainly Gentlemen if I am a Priest as you
take me to be I could not be so foolish as to engage myself in so absurd a
Contrivance as to bind myself with a Cord for Negroes or what is worse
profligate Whites the Scum of this Earth superior in Villainy to the Knights of
the Post to make an Halter for me Gentlemen as there is a great unknown and
tremendous Being whom we call God I never knew or saw Huson his Wife or the
Creature that was hanged with them ^o my Knowledge living dying or dead or the
Negro that is said to have fired the Fort excepting in his last Moments but put
the Case I had known Huson's and had been at his House Is it to be inferred
from thence that I must be acquainted with his Villainy or kn^w his Secrets and
as he kept a Public House which is open and free for all is it reasonable to
think that all or any Man being seen at Huson's must make him or them culpable
or chargeable with his Villainy surely no for if so sad would be the Case of
many Gentlemen who in traveling the Countries in England who have used bad
Houses or Inns and lit into the Company of Highwaymen who by their Garb and
Conversation they took for some honest Country Gentleman or Tradesman and yet
these have not been in the least suspected But I fear all this Trouble of mine
springs from and is grounded upon the Apprehensions of my being a Roman Priest
and therefore must be a Plotter some believing there can be no Mischief in a
Country but a Priest (if there) must be in it Say they that in the Chain of
general Woes the first and the last Link must be tied to the Priest's Girdle.
But Gentlemen I must assure you from Reading and Conversation I believe no
Priest would hold a Confederacy with Negroes they are too wise too cunning to
trust such sort of Gentry It is not Men of Fortune good Sense and Learning they
care to meddle with or entrust in such Affairs as Plots excepting they be Men
of their own Kidney of their own way of thinking in Religion supposing a Priest
could be so foolish or become so non compos mentes as to Plot in short a Priest
a joint Contriver of firing a Fort a Celebrater of Masses a Dispenser of
Absolutions as it is said I am so long passed by such a particular Person
forgotten* No Gentlemen you must think and believe he would have been the next
Person after the Discovery of the Plot that would have been brought on the
Carpet And further what is of great Note is that Huson was sworn to be the
whole Projector and Carrier on of the Plot and if these Witnesses knew me so
well as they pretend to how came it about what Reason can be assigned why they
did not bring me out before what not know any Thing of me before I came to
Prison, doubtless they would have been eager to have betrayed me when the
Scheme was discovered, For being a Priest and consequently artful and cunning
they would have been afraid of my escaping No if I had been engaged they would
have soon informed thinking to have saved their own Lives knowing how this
Government stands affected to such Gentlemen, And as to the second Indictment
wherein.........


Court. Mr. Ury, if you have any Witnesses to examine, it is more proper you
should do that now, and make your Defense afterward.


Prisoner. If that be the Pleasure of the Judges, I have several Witnesses; I
desire Mr. Croker may be called.

Mr. CROKER called and sworn.


Prisoner. As I have lodged at your House for some time, you can best give an
Account of my manner of Life and Conversation; and pray ^^st inform the King's
Judges, and the Jury, if you ever saw any Negroes come after me.


Croker. No, I never saw any Negroes come after you.


Prisoner. Pray give an Account of what you know ^f me.


Croker. Mr. Ury came to my House the Summer before last, and staid a Week; and
then returned to Burlington, and came back last November, and said, he was
going further; but I prevailed upon him ^o stay, to teach my Son Latin, for
which I was to give him his Lodging and Diet. He taught Norwood's Children, and
^ol. Beekman's Daughter to write and cipher. Some Time ago he went to Staten
Island, and preached there, and said he was paid for it: He lodged at my House
from November till a little before Campbell took Hughson's House; and while he
was with me, he kept pretty good Hours; sometimes he came home by Eight, or
Nine, or Ten o'Clock, and sometimes staid out till Eleven or Twelve at Night.
He once went to Brunswick this Spring, before the Fort was burnt, as I heard,
or else I do not know that he lay out of my House; That once talking of
Negroes, I heard him say, he did not think them proper Objects of Salvation. He
used to go up Stairs sometimes, light a Candle in the Day time, and lock
himself up in a Room alone.


Attorney General. Pray Mr. Croker was you in Town all the Time he lodged at
your House?


Croker. No, I have been out for a Day or so.


Attorney General. Pray Mr. Croker what Hours did the Prisoner usually come
home at?


Croker. Sometimes sooner and sometimes later: I have known him stay out
sometimes till Eleven or Twelve o'Clock, once or twice later; I asked him why
he staid so late, and where he had been? he commonly told me he had been at Mr.
Webb's; and sometimes at some other private Houses.


Attorney General. When did Ury come to lodge at your House, and when did he
leave it?


Croker. He came to my House in November last, and left it a little before
Campbell went to live at Hughson's House.


Attorney General. Have you ever heard him preach?


Croker. Yes, once, and he then said, he was to preach again the next Sunday;
and in his Prayer before Sermon, he prayed for his Majesty King GEORGE, and all
the Royal Family. Which is beyond what any other Witness says, and contrary to
Ury' s own pretended Principles of a Non Juror.



JOSEPH WEBB called for the Prisoner and sworn.

Prisoner. Mr. Webb, I desire you will give an Account of what you know of me.


Webb* I have known Mr. Ury since November last, I was then at work at John
Croker's at the Fighting Cocks, and hearing him reading Latin and English, and
thinking he read well, enquired of Croker who he was? he told me he was a
Schoolmaster lately come from Philadelphia; and from this I became acquainted
with him, and I asked him if he would teach a Child of mine; and he said he
would, if Croker would give him Liberty of coming to his House; which Croker
agreed to; and I s^nt my Child to him, and he taught him Latin* and after this
I recommended him to Col. Beekman, to teach his Daughter to write and cipher;
and he and I growing more intimate, and I observing a poor and mean Appearance
in his Habit, I thought his Pocket might be answerable to it; and I gave him an
Invitation to my House, and told him he should be welcome at my Table Noon and
Night, at any time, when he saw proper; and he frequently came to my House
accordingly all the Winter after: That he used often to stay at my House late
in discoursing, sometimes on one Subject, sometimes on another; and has staid
there, now and then, till Eleven or Twelve o'Clock at Night, and I have often
gone home with him to his Lodging at those Hours. Mr. Ury told me he was a Non
Juring Minister; having asked him, who ordained him, he answered me, the Senior
Non Juror in England: I have heard him preach, and have heard him say, such a
Day is my Sacrament Day, and he must be at Sacrament.


Attorney General. Did he say he must take the Sacracrament, or be at
Sacrament, or administer the Sacrament?


Webb. I cannot be sure, but I remember he said, it was his Sacrament Day.


Attorney General. Was it Sundays or working Days he said were his Sacrament
Days?


Webb. I cannot be sure, but I think I have heard him name both.


Attorney General. Do you know any thing of his buying of Wafers, or going to
(...) Confectioner's?


Webb. He asked me for a Confectioner's Shop, and I showed him Mr. De Brosse's*
where he went along with me; and after he asked for several ^orts of Sweet
Meats, he asked for Wafers; which being shown to him, he asked Mr. De Brosse if
he made Wafers for the Lutheran Minister, and he was told he did, but I do not
remember that he bought any of them: I have heard him pray and preach several
times, but don't remember, That ever I heard him pray for King GEORGE, but in
general Terms for the King. I am by Trade a Carpenter, and Ury applied to me to
make him up something in Hughson's House, which I have heard since called an
Altar; That Ury gave me Directions for making it, and said, it was a Place to
lay Books on to read, or to put a Candle or a Bottle and Glass on, or other
such like common Uses; it was two Pieces of Board, which formed a Triangle, and
was raised against the Wall, at the Bottom of which was a Shelf; on each Side
there was a Place to hold a Candle.


Attorney General. Do you think if a Man wanted a Shelf or other Place to lay a
Book on to read, or set a Bottle or Glass on, he would make it in that Form?


Webb. I cannot say; People may have odd Humors, but I should not.


Attorney General. When you made it, what did you take it for?


Webb. I cannot say; I followed his Directions.


Attorney General. Do you know any thing of Ury's being imprisoned in England?


Webb. Ury did tell me that he was imprisoned in England; for he said he had
wrote a Book there, and that the Critics laid hold of it, picked a Hole in it
and construed it Treason; but if it was, he said, it was contrary to his
Intentions.


Attorney General. Mr. Webb, in your Conversations together, what have you
heard him say about Negroes?


Webb. We were one Day talking about Negroes, and I said, I thought they had
Souls to be saved or lost as well as other People; Ury said, he thought they
were not proper Objects of Salvation; I replied, what would you do with them
then, what would you damn them all? No, says he, leave them to th^^ Great Being
that has made them, he knows best (...) ^o do with them; says he, They are of a
Slavish Nature* it is the Nature of them to be Slaves, give them L^^^^ing, do
them all the Good you can, and put them be^^^^ the Condition of Slaves, and in
return, they will cut your Throats.


Court. Mr. Ury, would you ask this Witness any more Questions?


Prisoner. No, Sir, I have nothing more to ask.


Court. Have you any more Witnesses?


Prisoner. Yes, Sir, I have some more; I (...) that John Campbell and Mrs.
Campbell may be called.


JOHN CAMPBELL, and ANN CAMPBELL his Wife, sworn,

Prisoner. Mr. Campbell, did you ever see me at Hughson's House before I went
there with you, and what passed there?


John Campbell. I never saw him there till I went to take Possession of the
House at May Day last, and then as we were going there together, he said, he
did not know the Way thither; and when we came down, he took Gerardus Comfort's
House for it; as for any thing else, I know nothing more of him, for I took him
for a grave, sober, honest Man.


Prisoner. Mrs. Campbell, will you please to give an Account of what you know
of me, and what passed between Sarah Hughson and me, when we went to take
Possession of the House.


A. Campbell. I went with my Husband and Mr. Ury, on May Day last, to
Hughson's, to take Possession of the House; and when we came there, Sarah
Hughson the Daughter was in Possession; and we told her she must go out of the
House; for that my Husband had taken it: Whereupon Sarah Hughson swore and
cursed at me; and Mr. Ury said to her, how dare you talk so impertinently and
saucily to an old Woman, you impudent Hussy! go out of the House, or I Will turn
you out: Sarah then swore miserably, and said, you have a House now, but shall
not have one long. I have often heard him pray and sing Psalms; and he prayed
by a sick Woman; I never saw any Harm by him; my Husband and he were to keep
School together.


Court. Will you ask them any more Questions?


Prisoner. No, Sir, I have Nothing more.


Attorney General. If your Honors please, as the Prisoner has been now
endeavoring to prove he is not a Romish Priest, and has already insisted on it
as a Part of his Defense; I shall beg Leave to examine a Witness or two to that
Point.


Court. Call them then, Mr. Attorney.


JOSEPH HILDRETH, Schoolmaster, and RICHARD NORWOOD, called and sworn.

Attorney General. Mr. Hildreth, will you give an Account of what you know of
the Prisoner, how you became acquainted with him, and what has passed between
him and you in Conversation from time to time.


Hildreth. What I have to say, Sir, I have committed to Writing. [and produced
a Paper from his Pocket.]


Chapter Justice. You must not read the Paper, but you may look into it to refresh
your Memory.


Hildreth. The Way I came to hear of, or know this Mr. Ury, was, that last
Winter some time in February, I happened to be in Company with a Friend at Mr.
Croker's, and Mr. Webb, Joiner, called me aside, and asked me What School I
had; and if I would incline to take a Partner, one very well versed in the
English, Latin and Greek Tongues? I answered him, what School I had I could
very well manage myself; I had no Inclination for a Partner at all: He said he
was a good sober sort of a Man, and understood his Business very well, and if
we could agree, he did not doubt but it would do very well: I answered him, I
inclined to be Master of my own School alone, though it was not so large as if
I had a Partner* He seeing I had no Inclination for him, did not tell me who he
was.

Some time after, about seven or eight Weeks, I had a little Business on board
Capt. Griffiths, where I met with him and Web in Company, which was the first
time I ever spoke to him; then, after our Salutation of each other, he began to
ask me some Questions concerning my School and Method of teaching; after which
we stepped in at Baker's, and took a serious Glass together; at which time he
took a small Book out of his Pocket ( English and Latin) and construed (I
think) the 117th Psalm; then laying the Book on the Table, I took it up, and
was going to look on the Title Page; but he directly seized it out of my Hands,
and told me I must not look into it, and put it in his Pocket.

Another time at my School, I had some Discourse with him concerning Mr.
Whitefield's Letter in Answer to Mr. Wesly's Sermon on Free Grace; which Letter
he did not approve of at all, and told me, he believed it was through the great
Encouragement the Negroes had received from Mr. Whitefield, we had all this
Disturbance; and that he believed Mr. Whitefield was more of a Roman than any
Thing else; and he believed he came abroad with no good Design. Then I asked
him what was the Signification of a Non-Juror, as I understood ^e pretended to
be? and he answered, those that would not take the Oaths of Allegiance, as he
did not: I asked him Why? Says he, Can you swear one to be a Bastard? No: No
more can they say King J -- was one; and the Difference between we Non-Jurors
and others, is this; we in the Prayer for the King and Royal Family, mention no
Names, as they do; I asked him if they prayed for the Pretender? he said, for
him, let him be who he will, that was the King; he mentioned no Names.

At another time, says he, you talk so much against Popery, I believe though
you speak so much against it, you will find you have (or I think will have) a
Pope in your Belly; for, says he, the Absolution of the Church of Rome is not
half so bad as that of the Church of England at the Visitation of the Sick:
But, says I, I don't approve of their confessing to Priests, etc. says I, there
is a deal of Wickedness and Deceit in it: Says he, No, no; for when any Person
makes Confessions, the Priest does not know who they be; for he does not so
much as see them, but only hears and absolves them: Then, says I, I was
mistaken. Oh! says he, they speak against the Church of Rome, but don't know
them; their Priests, says he, are the most learned of Men; the Articles of the
Church of England were made in distracted Times. And I observed several times
he said, we Priests. Says he, your Roman Priests will make you believe, and
prove by the plain Rules of Grammar, that black is white, and white black, and
that the Wafer and Wine is the real Body and Blood of Christ.

We were often in Company; but the best Part of our Discourse was upon
Salvation by Faith alone, which he would not allow, nor Predestination; and he
told me, he really believed the Moon to be an inhabited Planet, and all the
Stars were inhabited; or else, says he, I would not repeat that Part of the
Nicene Creed, Begotten of his Father before all Worlds; and, says he, many
Texts of Scripture confirm it to be so.

I was several times since in his Company, but do not remember any Thing in
particular relating to Priests, etc. But the last time I had any Thing of
Discourse was about two Days before I heard him preach, and then in his Room; I
seeing the Altar placed in the Corner, I asked him what Use that was for? first
he said only to lay Books on, or for a Candle to sit and read by; but I told
him I could not think it; for I supposed it for the Sacrament by its Form and
odd Color; I begged him to let me know what it was; so after some time he
seriously told me, it was for the Sacrament; and he told me, I think, every
Saint's Day it was exposed, only covered with a Piece of white Linen; and that
he administered on some proper Days; and he told me, they received the Wafer
instead of Bread, and white instead of red Wine: I asked, why the Wafer?
Because, says he, the Wafer is more pure; and no Bread he thought pure enough
to represent the Body of our Lord; then going to his small Box, says he, I Will
get a Piece and you shall taste it if you will; and he brought me a Piece, and
I took and eat it.

I think he told me, that some time before he had baptized a Child in the
House, but they used more Ceremonies than we; and he talked as if they anointed
and washed one another's Feet: He told me further, that at the Time of the
Celebration, or at what Time the Sacrament was exposed, they had lighted
Candles burning to represent our Savior as the Light of the World. And when I
came in to hear him preach, I accordingly saw it as he told me; for he told me
before, that if I came on Sunday Evening to hear him, I could see it; for the
Sacrament was on the Altar covered with a white Linen Cloth, and there were
three Candles burning; but not a Minute after I came in, he put out the
Candles, and put his Sacrament in his Box, and locked them up.

Some time after I became thus acquainted with him, I was informed he kept a
private Meeting, and made Use of the Church Form of Prayer every Sunday
Evening, at the House of Mr. John Campbell, in his own hired Room.

My Curiosity led me the next Sunday Evening to go and hear him preach; but
when I came there, he told me he did not make a Practice of Preaching to any
others, but those of his own Society; and those of his Society did not make any
Practice of running to any of our Churches or Meetings; for he did not approve
of any such Thing; and as he was a Non Jured Minister, so he had a Society and
Members of his own.

Afterward he told me, he had some Company from Philadelphia, (I think) and
desired to be excused; but next Sunday Evening, if I would call, he would be
glad to see me.

The next Sunday Evening I accordingly went, and heard him discourse upon the
Second Chapter of the Second Epistle of St. Peter, the 1 st, 2 d and 3d Verses;
and before he dismissed us, he told us he would preach the next Wednesday
following (being the Day his Majesty began his happy Reign) upon the 16th
Chapter of St. Matthew, the 18 th and 19 th Verses, adjoining to them the Words
of Our Lord to his Disciples, Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them, and whos^ver Sins ye retain, they are retained: Which Discourse I
did not not hear.


Council. Mr. Ury, would you ask this Witness any Questions?


Prisoner, No, Sir, I have nothing to ask him.


Attorney General. Mr. Norwood, will you give the Court and Jury an Account of
what you know of the Prisoner at the Bar?


Norwood. I became acquainted with him last Fall, and I agreed with him in
December to teach my Children to write and read; That several Times in
Conversation with him, he talked in such a Manner that I suspected him to be a
Popish Priest He used very often to miss coming to teach my Children at the
School time, and made frivolous Excuses; and at last I was very angry with him
and discharged him: That in the Evenings he used very often to pretend that he
must go to pray by a sick Person by the English Church, that belonged to his
Society, or that he must go and pray with his Society by the English Church:
Hughson' s was near by it.
Whereupon I once asked him to let me go along with him; but he refused me, and
said it was not proper for any one to go there, who were not of the Society;
which occasioned a Jealousy in me, and I had often a Mind to have dogged him,
to have seen where he went, and do not know how it happened, but I never did.
That one Day I met Campbell the Schoolmaster in the Street, who said to me,
What do you think? Webb has taken away his Son from me, and has put him to a
Schoolmaster that lodges at Croker's; and Campbell said, D -- n him, he is a
Popish Priest: And at last having a bad Opinion of him, I discharged him, le^t
he should inveigle my Children; and I told him, I would have nothing more to
say to him.


Court. Mr. Ury, would you ask this Witness any Thing*


Prisoner. No, Sir.


Mr. Murray. May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury.

That the Prisoner is a Romish Emissary, sent according to the Intimation in
General Oglethorpe's Letter, I think must be concluded from what has been given
in Evidence against him; and from the known Principles of the Romish Religion,
it may be judged, what Inducement the Prisoner had to undertake so wicked and
diabolical a Project. The Letter of General Oglethorpe has been offered by Way
of Inducement, and in aid of other Evidence in general, to show that there was
a Plot; and herein I apprehend we are justified by the Precedents and
Authorities in Law before cited.


Mr. Smith addressing himself to the Court, proceeded as follows.

Before the Prisoner enters upon his Defense, we conceive it will be proper to
read to him some Passages out of sundry Books, that declare the Customs and
Usages of the Church of Rome, to which his Practices among us, as declared by
the Witnesses, bear some Conformity: And unless he can make it appear, that his
Practices are warranted by the Usage of any other Church, we conceive they will
convince every Body, that he is a Priest of the Roman Church, and of no other.

And first, as to the Use of Salt.

Peter de Moulin, in his Book entitled, Anatomy de (...) Mess, 2 Part, p. 94.
gives us the Form of the Priests exorcising Salt, in order to prepare it for
their superstitious Uses in the following Words; which, because the Prisoner
professes himself a Scholar, I shall first read in the Original, and then
render it into English.

Exorciso te, Creatura Salis, per Deum vivum, per Deum verum, per Deum^sanctum,
per Deum qui te per Elisaeum proph^t^m, in aquam mitti jussit, ut sanaretur
sterilitas aquae; ut efficiari^ Sal exorcisatus, in sa^utem credentium, ut sis
omnibus te sumentibus, sanitas Anima^ and Corporis, and eff^giat atque discedat
ab ^o loco quo aspersus fueris, omnis Phanta^ia and Nequitia, vel Ver^uti^
diabolicae fraudis omnisque Spiritus in Mundus adjuratus, per eum qui venturus
est judicare Vivos and Mo^^uos and Seculum per Ignem. Amen. In English thus^

Creature of Salt, I exorcise thee by the living God, by the true God, by the
holy God, by the God who commanded thee to be put into the Water by Elisha the
Prophet, that the Barrenness of the Water might be healed; that then may
become Salt exorcised, for the Salvation of them that believe; that thou may
be to all who take thee Health of Soul and Body; and that from the Place where
thou art sprinkled, may fly and depart every Apparition and Wickedness, or
Cra^tiness of diabolical Fraud, and every unclean Spirit adjured by him who
will come to judge the Quick and Dead, and the World by Fire. Amen. As to
Popish Use of Salt in Baptism, we have a most authentic Testimony in their
Catechism, edited by the Decree of the Council of Trent, in Chapter 9. De
Baptis^m^ Sacramento.

The 66 Question is

Cur ejus qui Baptizatur, Ori Sal admoveatur* Responsio.

Accedunt ad Exorcismum aliae Ceremoniae, quar^^^ singulae ut quae mysticae
sint propriam, atque illustre^ significationem habent, nam cum Sal in illius Os
qui ad Baptismum adducendu^ est, inseritur hoc significari perspicuum est, cum
^idei Doctrina and Gratiae dono consequaturum esse, ut a peccatorum Pu^redine
liberetur, sapo^emque bonorum Operum p^rcipiat, and divinae Sapienti^^ pabulo
delectetur. In English thus;

Q. 66. Why is Salt put to the Mouth of the Person that is baptized?

Answer. There are other Ceremonies added to Exorcism, of which some being
mystical, have a proper and remarkable Signification; for when Salt is put into
the Mouth of him who is to be brought to Baptism, it is clear that this is
signified, that he shall obtain by the Doctrine of Faith and Gift of Grace, a
Freedom from the Corruption of his Sins, partake of the Savor of good Works,
and be delighted with the Food of Divine Wisdom.

As to the Point of Absolution.

We have the Jesuits Doctrine concerning it at large; in a Book, entitled, Les
Provinciales, ou Lettres ecrites par Louis Montalte, a un Provincial de ses
Aims et au R. R. P. P. Jesuits sur la Morale a la Politic de ces Peers. Tom.
II. Lettre X. I shall only cite one or two Passages from this Letter page 50.
which quotes Le P. Bauni, q. 15. in these Words.

On peut absoudre Celui qui avoue, que l'esperance el' etre absous l' a port a
pecher, avec plus de facilite qu' il n'eut fait, sans cette espe^ance.

Et le P. Caussin defendant cette Proposition dit. p 211. de sa Resp. a la
Theol. mor. que si elle n' etoit veritable, l' usage de la Confession seroit
interdit a la plu'part du monde et qu' il n' y auroit plus de auter remede aux
pecheurs qu' une Branche d' arbre et une Cord.

In English thus.

A Man may be absolved, says Father Bauni, who confesses that the Hope of
Absolution encouraged him to commit Sin with the greater Ease, which he had not
done without such Hope. And Father Caussin defending this Proposition, says,
That if this was not true, the Use of Confession would be forbidden to the
greatest Part of the World; and Sinners would have no other Remedy left, but
the Limb of a Tree and ^n Halter. This is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
contrary to that of St. Paul, who says, Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may
abound? God forbid.

May it please your Honors, This is all that we shall mention at present, that
if the Prisoner pleases, he may take Notice of them in his Defense, and show,
if he can, that he had another Warrant than the Church of Rome, for the like
Practices proved by the Witnesses.


Court. Mr. Ury, now is the Time for you to make your Defense.


Prisoner. May it please the King's Judges, and the Gentlemen of the Jury.


[Here the Prisoner read over again that Part of his Speech, which is set forth
before, and then proceeded as follows.]

And as to the second Indictment wherein I stand charged with being an
Ecclesiastic Person made by Authority from the Sea of Rome that I have
celebrated Masses given Absolutions and that I have acknowledged myself to be a
Priest of the Church of Rome all which cannot is not proved. As to my
professing myself to be an Ecclesiastic of the Church of Rome is very
improbable if it be considered that no Gentleman who is a Priest would be so
childish as to tell any Person out of Communion that he is a Priest there must
be as I have been informed very good Proof that a Person is a Roman Catholic
before a Priest will have any thing to say to him and that Proof consists in
the Persons producing a regular Certificate from their last Confessor and as to
my celebrating of Masses it is very unlikely if it be considered that if the
Evidences saw me celebrating of Masses they must have seen more, seeing there
can be no Mass without Two at the Altar, and by the Priest's Breviary and
Directory for celebrating of High Mass three Priest's two Officials and at some
Masses four Officials Twelve a Clock As to Absolution it is well known by the
Learned that the Sacrament of Penance must proceed which if the Evidences are
asked what it means I believe they can give no Account of It is not Persons
professing themselves Roman Catholics by going to Mass or being brought up in
that way that have any thing to say to a Priest And as to those who were not
born within the Pale of that Church if not learned that know any thing of her
Doctrines or Worship much less to converse with Priests as Priests nay before
they can partake of any Privileges of that Church they must be rebaptized and
inducted Now how come these Persons to know so much, to be acquainted with
Priests and their Secrets who know not what Mass is nor what the Difference of
a Vesper from a Compline or a Compline from a Nocturn nor the Hours of Mass no
more than we were Swallows* Shelter in the Winter, but by Conjecture; As to my
Books and Writings I cannot be deemed a Roman Catholic* either a Spiritual
Person or Laick I believe it cannot with Reason be concluded that a Person
having a Mass Book in Possession must therefore be a Papist If so a Man having
the Alcoran must be a Mohammedan and a Presbyterian with a Common Prayer must
from thence be a Churchman but I believe that will not be allowed by any -- The
written Book was transcribed from the Secret History of Europe and after some
Remarks I told Col. Beekman that it was a very insipid thing and that if a
Priest wrote it he was a very foolish one But now suppose these Lines are my
own Thoughts does that make me Penable when they were never exposed in Print
and therefore cannot be Libellous. I remember in the case of Algernoon Sidney
who was beheaded in King JAMES II. Reign for Writings found in his Closet which
were of his own composing and this was thought so wicked and unreasonable an
Action That King WILLIAM and his Parliament took of the Attainder of High
Treason and registered it Murder And Gentlemen I believe you cannot be brought
to think that such a venerable pious and learned Gentleman as Mr. Comyns could
make such a Mistake as to take a Roman Priest for a Non-Juring Minister nor yet
the Gentleman when he recommended me to -- as a Person worthy their Notice and
Benevolence which accordingly took Effect for I had my Passage paid and
provided for 'till I could get into Business -- Gentlemen The Mistake the Major
Part of the World lies under is their apprehending that a Non Juring Priest
must be a Popish Priest Whereas there is no truer Protestants for they are far
from having any regard to a Pretender or for setting on the Throne a Popish
Prince to be the head of a Protestant Church The Doctrines they assert and
stand by is Non Resistance and passive Obedience which is now as vigourously
maintained as ever it was in any Reign And I believe that there is no Nonjuror
either Clergy or Laity but would show themselves such true Subjects to the
present King GEORGE as to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy I have now
no more to say but hope and pray that what has been offered will be considered
with Minds unprejudiced Minds prepossessed with no Opinions with Minds in a
diligent Search after Truth You being Gentlemen I hope fearing God reverencing
Conscience hating Partiality Lovers of Truth and Innocence and having a tender
Rega^^^^^^ Life. This and the other Part of the Speech, or Defense, delivered
by the Prisoner, being taken from his Paper, which he read in Court, from whose
Hands it was obtained the next Morning; and it being wrote in the Prisoner's
own Hand, without Stops or Pointing, he apologized therefore to the Person he
delivered it to; and as there were none in the Original, the Compiler would not
risque altering the Sense, by printing it with any: Though it may be remarked,
that those who were somewhat acquainted with the Man, were of Opinion, he was
not very capable of making them.


Mr. SMITH summed up the Evidence for the King, and addressing himself to the
Court and Jury, proceeded as follows.

THOUGH this Work of Darkness, in the Contrivance of a horrible Plot, to burn and
destroy this City* has manifested itself in many blazing Effects, to the Terror
and Amazement of us all; yet the secret Springs of this Mischief lay long
concealed: This destructive Scene has opened by ^low Degrees: But now,
Gentlemen, we have at length great Reason to conclude, that it took its rise
from a Foreign Influence; and that it originally depended upon Causes, that we
ourselves little thought of* and which, perhaps, very few of the inferior and
subordinate Agents were intimately acquainted with.

The monstrous Wickedness of this Plot would probably among Strangers impeach
its Credit; but if it be considered as the Contrivance of the public Enemy,
and the inhuman Dictate of a bloody Religion, the Wonder ceases.

What more cruel and unnatural can be conceived, than what Rome has contrived;
yea what more savage and barbarous, than what Popery has attempted, and
sometimes executed, for the Extirpation of that, which the Papists call Heresy?
We need not go so far from home as the Valleys of Piedmont, nor rake into the
Ashes of the Ancient Waldanses and Albigenses, for tragical Instances of Popish
Cruelty. -- We need not remind you of the Masacre at Paris, nor the later
Desolations in France, nor mention the horrible Slaughters of the Duke d' Alva
in the Low Countries; -- We need not recount the many Millions of Lives, that
in remote Countries, and different Ages, have been sacrificed to the ROMAN
IDOL; nor measure out to you, that Ocean of foreign Blood with which the
SCARLET WHORE has made herself perpetually drunk.

No, Gentlemen, the Histories of our Native Country will give us a formidable
Idea of Popery; and inform us of the detestable Principles of that Religion:
Witness the Blood of our own Martyrs (who perished in Prisons and at the Stake)
without beginning higher than my Lord Cobham, and recounting their Number down
to the End of Queen Mary's Reign. --

-- Witness that execrable Design to blow up King, Lords and Commons, in the
Gun Powder Treason, contrived by the Papists* That intestine Fire that broke
out in the late unnatural Civil War, the Coals whereof were blown up by them.
-- The bloody Massacre of many Thousands of Protestants by the Irish Papists,
about the same Time: The restless Spirit of that Party, which has broke out in
Plots in almost every Reign since the Reformation. -- The arbitrary and illegal
Measures that preceeded the Glorious Revolution; and the unnatural Rebellion
within our Memory: -- These are all Evidences of the destructive Tendency of
that bloody Religion, which in order to promote i^^ Interests, never boggles at
the vilest Means, can sanctify the most execrable Villainies; and to encourage
its Votaries, will cannonize for Saints, a Guy Faux and others, some of the
greatest Monsters of Iniquity that ever trod upon the Face of the Earth!

Gentlemen, If the Evidence you have heard is sufficient to produce a general
Conviction, that the late Fires in this City, and the murderous Design against
its Inhabitants, are the Effects of a Spanish and Popish Plot* then the Mystery
of this Iniquity, which has so much puzzled us, is unvailed, and our Admiration
ceases: All the Mischiefs we have suffered or been threatened with, are but a
Sprout from that Evil Root, a small Stream from that overflowing Fountain of
Destruction, that has often del^g'd the Earth with Slaughter and Blood, and
spread Ruin and Desolation far and wide.

We need not wonder to see a Popish Priest at this Bar, as a Prime Incendiary;
nor think it strange that an Englishman of that Religion and Character should
be concerned in so a Detestable a Design. What can be expected from those that
pro^ess a Religion, that is at War with God and Man; not only with the Truth^
of the Holy Scriptures, but also with Common Sense and Reason; and is
destructive of all the kind and tender Sensations of Human Nature? -- When a
Man, contrary to the Evidence of his Senses, can believe the absurd Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; can give up his Reason to a blind Obedience and an implicit
Faith; can be persuaded to believe, that the most unnatural Crimes, such as
Treason and Murder, when done in Obedience to the Pope, or for the Service of
the Holy Church, by rooting out what they call Heresy, will merit Heaven: I
say, when a Man has imbibed such Principles as these, he can easily divest
himself of every thing that is Human but his Shape, he is capable of any
Villainy, even as bad as that which is charged on the Prisoner at the Bar.

[Thence Mr. Smith proceeded to observe on the several Parts of the Indictment,
that were necessary to be proved, in order to convict the Prisoner;
particularly, That Quack did burn his Majesty's House in the Fort; That the
Prisoner did counsel, abet, procure and encourage the said Negro to commit that
Felony. He observed, that the three Witnesses, Mary Burton, William Kane and
Sarah Hughson, had fully proved the Fact. He reminded the Jury of the Caution
that the Court had taken in Favor of the Prisoner, so that none of the three
Witnesses had heard the Testimony, which was given by those which had been
examined before them; the Particulars of which Evidence is beforementioned,
and the Observations thereon, are here omitted, for Bravity Sake.]

And then concluded,

Thus, Gentlemen, Nothing remains to be considered but the Credit of the
Witnesses. Indeed two of them have been concerned in the Plot; but we have
proved them (under their present Circumstances) to be legal Witnesses. -- They
all give a consistent Account of the Fact; and if you believe their Testimony,
we think, you cannot avoid finding the Prisoner Guilty. You have heard the
Prisoner's Defense; which, we conceive, does not affect the main Parts of the
Accusation: He tells you that he must have been a Lunatic to have staid in
Town after Notice, if he had been guilty: True; and in some Sense he must be
supposed to have been a Lunatic from the Time he first concerned himself in
this detestable Plot. Gentlemen, all Wickedness is in some sort Madness; and
the Degrees of it rise in Proportion to the Enormity of the Crime; and when Men
have filled up the Measure of their Iniquity, and are ripe for Ruin, they are
commonly cut off from all* the Means of escaping it.

As to his rough Language to Sarah Hughson at Campbell' s, on which he lays
some Stress; this may be accounted for, as proceeding from other Causes than
his Innocence; either from a personal Resentment of a supposed Injury to
himself, who wanted the Room she took up in that House; or perhaps with a
Design to make a Show that he never had been acquainted with her; for Priests,
he tells us, are very artful and cunning. -- But be this how it will, we
conceive it cannot amount to a Disproof of the main Charge against the Prisoner.

As to what he alleges concerning Quack, Hughson and his Wife, and the
Creature that died with them, no^ having accused him; we think very little can
be inferred from thence in his Favor: As to Quack, he accused many in general
Terms more than he particularly named; and indeed the Confession that Quack
made was in the Hurries of Death, after he was fastened to the Stake. Hughson,
his Wife, and the Creature that died with them, confessed Nothing at all;
therefore Nothing can be inferred from their not accusing the Prisoner. It
seems strange, that Mr. Ury could not give us the Name of that Creature that
died with Hughson and his Wife, seeing as Mary Burton says, he was so well
acquainted with her as to have had the Liberty of undressing himself in her
Bed-Room.

As to the Prisoner's Appeal to God for his Innocence* this we conceive
witnesses Nothing in his Favor, but rather against him; for we often find,
that the Wickedest of Men will attempt to cloak their Villainies with the same
Practice, and good Men are ever sparing in their Appeals to H^^ven, even in
Cases where their Innocence is concerned.

He says, that it don't follow from his being at Hughson' s, that he was guilty
of the Plot: True* (...) admitting that he had used that House* his Pretense ^o
John Campbell, of not knowing it, must have been a Piece of Craft; and it
renders the Evidence of his being concerned (...) Wickedness carried on there,
the m^^^ probable.

He says, a Priest is more artful and cunning, (...) Negroes, if so foolish or
non compos mentis as to (...), Gentlemen, this proves nothing in the prisoner's
Favor* for supposing a Priest to be concerned in this Plot, (...) was too
extensive for him to execute it alone; and therefore he must trust Part of it
to such Tools as he could (...).

Thus, Gentlemen, I have replied to the princip^^ Part of the Prisoner's
Defense; from which we conceive there appears nothing material for his
Justification. As to his being a Roman Priest* this was only offered as an
Inducement to the Credit of the Testimony of the Witnesses who were brought to
prove his being an Accessory to the Burning of his Majesty's House in the Fort;
and was allowed by the Court to be given in Evidence on this Trial, upon the
Authorities which were produced only for this Intent. -- That he is a Priest,
is what he has often confessed and never denied* He has also confessed, that he
is a nonjuring Priest, and consequently bears no good Will to the present
Government. -- But we have no Evidence of his having confessed himself a Roman
Priest. -- That he was reputed such, by some of his Acquaintance, is clear from
what William Kane has told you* That he approved of their Practices, seems
evident from his Conversation with Mr. Hildreth.

You have, doubtless, observed, that before the Prisoner made his Defense we
read to him, in Latin, sundry Passages, and one of them out of an authentic
Book of the Roman Church, being their Catechism, published by a Decree of the
Council of Tr^^t: These Passages we translated into English, in his Hearing;
which show the Usages of that Church to be agreeable to the Practice of the
Prisoner (...) this City. We have shown from the Writings of (...) Jesuits the
Popish Doctrines concerning Absolution; and to what an Extent they carry that
Impos^ure and Cheat upon Mankind: This also has been read to the Prisoner, in
French, and also translated into English. We urged that the Prisoner ought (if
he could) to show that he was a Priest of some other Communion that maintained
th^se Usages, and preached such Doctrines; i^ not, his performing his Priest's
Office in Latin, his baptizing with Sa^^, his Use of the Crucifix; his exposing
the Sacrament by lighted Candles; his preaching upon those Texts upon which the
Papists pretend to ^ound the Pope's Supremacy, and, his declared Power to
forgive Sins as well as God Almighty, will undoubtedly fix the Brand of a Roman
Priest upon him. -- To all this the Prisoner has made nothing tha^ can be
properly called a Defense. He says, indeed, that there is no Proof of his
having confessed himself a Roman Priest, nor that he has celebrated Mass: He
tells us also that Nonjurors are not Papists; that their Principle (...)
passive Obedience and Non-Resistance; and seems willing (...) screen himself
under that Denomination.

But, Gentlemen, though we have not proved, that the (...) is a Roman Priest,
by his own Confession, or his (...) of Mass; yet he has not d^^^^d that the
(...) against him, are notorious Ba^^es of Popery* and such as we conceive will
leave it pas^ any reasonable Doubt, that if he is a Priest at all, he is a
Priest of the Romish Church.

However, Gentlemen, as I observed before, the principle Point in (...) Trial,
is to prove that the Prisoner was an Accessory to the Burning of the King's
House in the Fort; if you find also that he is a Roman Priest, then though he
is Guilty, as the Indictment charges him, and has acted a most wicked Part in
the public and privat^ Mischiefs that have (...) us, yet he has acted
consistent enough with the Principles of that corrupt and apostate Church,
whereof he is a Member; and all that the Witnesses have declared against him,
is the more easy to be believed.

Gentlemen,

I shall add no more; but leave you to the Direction of the Court, and your own
Consciences; not doubting but that you will weigh the Evidence which has been
produced, and give such a Verdict in the present Case as will be consistent
with your Oath and Duty.

Then the Chief Justice charged the Jury, and a Constable being sworn to attend
them, they withdrew; and having staid out about a Quarter of an Hour, returned,
and found the Prisoner GUILTY of the Indictment.

Supreme Court. THURSDAY, 30th JULY.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice, The Second and Third Justices.

The KING against Negroes.
Adam, MURRAY's. Tom, LIVINGSTON's. Tickle, CARPENTER's. Sandy, NIBBLET's


THE Prisoners having been indicted for the Conspiracy, were set to the Bar,
and arraigned, and all of them pleaded, GUILTY to the Indictment.

THE KING, against Billy, ELLISTON's Negro.

PROCLAMATION having been made, and none appearing to prosecute, the Prisoner
was discharged.

The KING against Eighteen NEGROES. viz.
Jack, Slydal's. Sandy, Nibblet's. Tickle, Carpenters. Low, Dav. Provost's.
Jeffery, J. Brown's. Sam, Peter Lowe's. Jack, Adam,
Murray's. Toby, Wendover's. Jack, Breasted's. Caesar, Horsfield's. Harry,
Furman's. London, Kelly's. York, Thomas's. Windsor, Myers Cohen's. Tom,
Livingston's. Gosport, Bound's. Tom, Hyer's.
THE Prisoners being set to the Bar, pleaded His Majesty's Pardon; which was
read, and allowed of.

Court adjourned 'til tomorrow Morning, 11 o'Clock.

This Day a Warrant was issued for apprehending the Negroes, John alias Jack,
and Cambridge, belonging to Mr. CODWISE, Caesar, to ISRAEL HORSFIELD, and Guise
alias Galick, to TIMOTHY HORSFIELD, all of King's County, being charged with*
being concerned in the Conspiracy; and they were all but Jack taken
accordingly, and committed to the Goal of this City.

Supreme Court. FRIDAY, 31st JULY:
PRESENT The Chief Justice. The Second and Third Justices.

COURT opened, and adjourned 'til tomorrow Morning Eleven o'Clock.

Supreme Court. SATURDAY, 1st AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Second and Third Justices.

COURT opened and adjourned to Monday the third Instant, Ten o'Clock in the
Morning.

Supreme Court. MONDAY, 3d AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice. The Second Justice.

COURT adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Eleven o'Clock.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 4th AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice. The Second and Third Justices.

The KING, against John Ury, alias Jury.

ON Motion of Mr. Attorney General, the Prisoner was called up to Judgment; and
being set to the Bar and asked, Whether he had aught to say in Arrest thereof,
why Sentence of Death should not be pronounced against him? he had nothing to
offer; but requested the Favor of the Court, that they would allow him as much
Time as they could, before his Execution, for the Settling his private Affairs.

Then the Chief Justice (after taking Notice of the Heinousness of the Offense
of which he was convicted; the dangerous and pernicious Tendency of the
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which emboldened her Disciples to embarque in
the most hazardous, wicked and inhumane Enterprises; which he illustrated from
several Passages cited from the Works of the late Archbishop TILLOTSON) he
exhorted the Criminal to make a candid and ingenuous Confession of his Guilt,
and an ample Discovery of his Accomplices in this dark Confederacy, and to
improve the Time the Court would indulge him with to the best Advantage, in
order for his Preparation for another World, whither he was soon going to give
an Account of his Actions.

He was Sentenced to be hanged on next Saturday Sev'night, the fifteenth
Instant.

AN ORDINANCE published for enlarging the Term of Sitting of this Court to the
first Tuesday in September next.

Court adjourned to Tuesday the 11th Instant, Eleven o'Clock in the Morning.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 11th AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice.

The KING, against Juan, alias Wan, a Spanish Negro.

ORDERED, That Juan, alias Wan, be executed according to his former Sentence,
on Saturday next, between the Hours of Nine and One of the same Day.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning 11 o'Clock.

Supreme Court: WEDNESDAY, 12th AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice.

COURT opened and adjourned to Tuesday the 18th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the
Morning.

SATURDAY, 15th AUGUST.
THIS being the Day appointed for the Execution of John Ury, His Honor the
Lieutenant Governor, was pleased, upon the humble Petition of the said Ury, to
respite the same till Wednesday following.

Juan, alias Wan de Sylva; the Spanish Negro, condemned for the Conspiracy, was
this Day executed according to Sentence: He was neatly dressed in a white
Shirt, Jacket, Drawers and Stockings, behaved decently, prayed in Spanish,
kissed a Crucifix, insisting on his Innocence to the last.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 18th AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice. The Second Justice.

THE Court opened and adjourned to Thursday the 20th Instant, 11 o'Clock in the
Morning.

Supreme Court: THURSDAY, 20th AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice.

COURT opened and adjourned to Tuesday the 25th Instant.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 25th AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice.

Court opened.

The KING. against John Ury.

THE Prisoner John Ury, being set to the Bar, and asked, what he had to say,
why Execution should not be awarded against him according to his former
Sentence? and having nothing to allege,

Ordered, That the said John Ury be executed according to the said Sentence, on
Saturday next, between the Hours of Nine and Two of the same Day.

Court adjourned to Monday the 31st Instant.

SATURDAY, 29th AUGUST.
THIS Day John Ury was executed according to Sentence. Being asked by the
Sheriff, Whether he had any Speech or Paper to deliver? he answered, he had
given one to his Friend, or Webb [the Person who attended him at the Gallows:]
He repeated somewhat of the Substance of it before he was turned off: A Copy of
this Paper was made in the Jail [from one delivered by Ury himself in his own
Hand writing] from which the following was taken.

The last Speech of JOHN URY.
Fellow Christians,
I AM now going to suffer a Death attended with Ignominy and Pain; but it is
the Cup that my Heavenly Father has put into my Hand, and I drink it with
Pleasure; it is the Cross of my dear Redeemer, I bear it with Alacrity; knowing
that all that live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution; and we must
be made in some Degree Partakers of his Sufferings, before we can share in the
Glories of his Resurrection: For he went not up to Glory before he ascended
Mount Calvary; did not wear the Crown of Glory before the Crown of Thorns. And
I am to appear before an awful and tremendous GOD, a Being of infinite Purity
and unerring Justice; a God who by no Means will clear the Guilty, that cannot
be reconciled either to Sin or Sinners: Now this is the Being at whose Bar I am
to stand; in the Presence of this God, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth, I
lift up my Hands, and solemnly protest, I am innocent of what is laid to my
Charge: I appeal to the great God for my Non-knowledge of Hewson, his Wife, or
the Creature that was hanged with them; I never saw them living, dying or dead;
nor never had I any Knowledge or Confederacy with White or Black, as to any
Plot: And, upon the Memorials of the Body and Blood of my dearest Lord, in the
Creatures of Bread and Wine, in which I have commemorated the Love of my dying
Lord, I protest that the Witnesses are perjured; I never knew the perjured
Witnesses but at my Trial. But for a Removal of all Scruples that may arise
after my Death, I shall give my Thoughts on some Points.

First, I firmly believe and attest, That it is not in the Power of Man to
forgive Sin; that it is the Prerogative only of the Great God to dispense
Pardon for Sin; and that those who dare pretend to such a Power, do in some
Degree commit that great and unpardonable Sin, the Sin against the Holy Spirit;
because they pretend to that Power which their own Consciences proclaim to be a
Lie.

Again, I solemnly attest and believe, That a Person having committed Crimes
that have or might have proved hurtful or destructive to the Peace of Society,
and does not discover the whole Scheme, and all the Persons concerned with
them, cannot obtain Pardon from God: And it is not the taking any Oath or Oaths
that ought to hinder him from confessing his Guilt, and all that he knows about
it; for such Obligations are not only sinful, but unpardonable, if not broken:
Now a Person firmly believing this, and knowing that an eternal State of
Happiness or Misery depends upon the Performance or Nonperformance of the
above mentioned Things, can not, will not triffle with such important Affairs.

I have no more to say by Way of clearing my Innocence, knowing that to a true
christian unprejudiced Mind, I must appear guiltless; but however, I am not
very sollicitous about it. I rejoice, and it is now my Comfort (and that will
support me and protect me from the Crowd of evil Spirits that I must meet with
in my Flight to the Region of Bliss assigned me) that my Conscience speaks
Peace to me.

Indeed, it may be shocking to some serious Christians, that the holy God
should suffer Innocence to be slain by the Hands of cruel and bloody Persons (I
mean the Witnesses who swore against me at my Trial) indeed, there may be
Reasons assigned for it, but as they may be liable to Objections, I decline
them; and shally only say, that this is one of the dark Providence of the
great God, in his wise, just and good Government of this lower World.

In fine, I depart this Waste, this howling Wilderness, with a Mind serene,
free from all Malice, with a forgiving Spirit, so far as the Gospel of my dear
and only Redeemer obliges and enjoins me to, hoping and praying, that JESUS,
who alone is the Giver of Repentance, will convince, conquer and enlighten my
Murderers Souls, that they may publicly confess their horrid Wickedness before
God and the World, so that their Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord
JESUS.

And now a Word of Advice to you, Spectators: Behold me launching into
Eternity; seriously, solemnly view me, and ask yourselves severally, how stands
the Case with me? die I must: Am I prepared to meet my Lord, when the Midnight
Cry is echoed forth? shall I then have the Wedding Garment on? Oh Sinners!
triffle no longer; consider Life hangs on a Thread, her^ Today and gone
Tomorrow; forsake your Sins ever ye be forsaken forever: Hearken, now is God
awfully calling you to repent, warning you by me his Minister and Prisoner, to
embrace JESUS, to take, to lay hold on him for your alone Savior, in order to
escape the Wrath to come; no longer delay, seeing the Summons may come before
ye are aware, and you standing before the Bar of a God who is a consuming Fire
out of the Lord Jesus Christ, should be hurled, be doomed to that Place, where
their Worm dies not, and their Fire is (...) to be quenched. See Langhorn' s
dying Speech, State Trials, ad Vol.



NOTE, This Copy differs from that supposed to have been printed at
Philadelphia soon after Ury's Execution, which perhaps might have been altered
and corrected by some of his Associates; as also that of his Defense made at
his Trial, which was printed with it; for that in the foregoing Trial was
taken from a Copy literally transcribed from one delivered in his own Hand
Writing, without Points; it was therefore printed with Ury's Mis-spellings, and
unpointed, that the Reader may have a Specimen of his Schollarship, and from
thence conjecture, whether the Defense and dying Speech were of his own genuine
Product.

The following Account concerning this Person, comes from a Gentleman who had
several Conversations with him between the Time of his Sentence and Execution,
who says Ury informed him,

THAT his Father was Secretary to the South Sea Company, but died when the said
Ury was young.

That after the Death of his Father he was taken Care of by a Gentleman who
bore the Character of a Non-Juror, but who, he had since Reason to believe, was
a Jesuit.

That he was educated at two Universities. -- But what Universities they were
he did not care to tell me.

That afterward he became a Non-juring Clergyman; and that the Head of their
Society was one Dr. Clarke.

That while in this Character, he was taken up and tried for writing a Book
against the Government; of which he was found guilty: Upon this Account, a
Chappal he had of his own, and which brought him in 50 l. ^ter^. per Annum, was
seized into the Hands of the Government, and he himself escaped with his Life,
only through the Character and Interest of his Friends. Being thus reduced to
difficult and disgraceful Circumstances, he could not bear to stay in a Place
where he had once lived in Honor and Credit; and this occasioned his Removal
into America.

Says the Gentleman,

I had a great Curiosity to know how far this Account of himself was true; and
he having often told me, that he was intimately acquainted with a Gentleman of
distinguished Worth and Character in London, with whom I had some
Correspondence by Letters; I wrote to that Gentleman, desiring, if he knew any
Thing of this John Ury, that he would give me a particular Account of him and
his Circumstances:

In Answer to my Request, he informed me,

THAT John Ury's Father was a Secretary in the South Sea, but dismissed before
the great Advance of it in 1720; so that he had no Share in those Gains. That
when he died he left his Family in the utmost Distress and Poverty. -- This
John Ury had been (...) of a Shop-Boy, to carry Messages, but educated to no
Business or Profession.

His highest Ambition was to be a common Servant in a Family: He professed
great Religion, went often to Worship with the Dissenters, but always
communicated with the Church of England. He never heard of his writing against
the Government, nor believed him capable of it, being without Education: At
last, being disappointed in most of his Designs, he fell into Dictraction. --
From which Time this Gentleman heard Nothing of him, till the melancholy News
from America, which was about the Space of three years.

Supreme Court: MONDAY, 31st AUGUST.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice. The Second and Third Justices.

THE Grand Jury being called, and appearing, were discharged.

The KING, against John Corry (...)-Master.

JOHN CORRY impeached of the Conspiracy, being placed a^ the Bar, and no Person
appearing to prosecute, was discharged by Proclamation.

The KING, against Andrew Ryan, Edward Kelly, John Coffin, Edward Murphy, Peter
Conolly. David Johnson.


THE Prisoners, also impeached of the Conspiracy, being placed at the Bar and
Proclamations made, and no one appearing to prosecute, they were discharged.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow morning, 9 o'Clock.

Evidence affecting John Corry,
Notes of ( Mary Burton's), ( William Kane's) Exam. 13 th June, p. 138. William
Kane's Examination, No. V. pa. 140. 3, 6.

Evidence affecting Andrew Ryan.

Mary Burton's Deposition, No VII.. pa. 132.

Evidence affecting Edward Kelly, Soldier.

William Kane's Examination. No. II. 10, 11 pa. 127.

See Will (Ward's) Negro's Confession at his Execution, upon which only Kane
himself was taken up, page 125. col. 1. 3, 4.

Evidence affecting John Coffin.
William Kane's Exam. No. II. p. 126. 127. 1, 3, 5, 6, 9. Sarah Hughson's Exam.
8 th July, pa. 130. 2. 10 th July, pa. 134. col. 2. 16.

But his Person exactly answered her Description in her first Examination.

Mary Burton's Deposition. No: VIII. 5. page 132. William Kane's Examination,
V. page 132. Evidence affecting Edward Murphey.
William Kane's Examination, No. III. page 131. Mary Burton's Deposition, VI.
page 131. VIII. page 132. 3.

Evidence affecting Peter Conolly,

William Kane's Examination, No. II. 10. page 127

Evidence affecting David Johnson.

William Kane's Examination, No. IV. Page 131.

Supreme Court. TUESDAY, 1st SEPTEMBER.
PRESENT, The Third Justice.

AN ORDINANCE for enlarging the present Term to the third Tuesday of this
Instant September, published in Court.

Court adjourned to Friday the 4th September Instant, 11 o'Clock in the Morning.

Supreme Court. FRIDAY, 4th SEPTEMBER.
PRESENT, The Third Justice.

COURT opened and adjourned to Tuesday the 8th Instant, 11 o'Clock in the
Morning.

This Day his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, by and with the Advice of his
Majesty's Council, issued a Proclamation, Commanding and Directing Thursday the
24th Day of September Instant, to be set apart and observed as a Day of public
and general THANKSGIVING to Almighty GOD, for his late Mercies vouchsafed unto
us, in delivering his Majesty's Subjects of this Province from the Destruction
with which they were so generally threatened by this horrible and execrable
Conspiracy.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 8th SEPTEMBER.
PRESENT, The Third Justice.

COURT opened and adjourned to Friday the 11th Instant, 11 o'Clock in the
Morning.

Supreme Court: FRIDAY, 11th SEPTEMBER.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice.

COURT opened and adjourned to Tuesday the 18th Instant, Ten o'Clock in the
Morning.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 18th SEPTEMBER.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice.

THE Court opened and adjourned to the third Tuesday in October next; being the
first Day of the ordinary October Term.

THURSDAY, 24th SEPTEMBER.
THIS being the Day appointed by his Honor the Lieutenant Governor's
Proclamation of the 14th Instant, to be observed throughout this Province, as a
Day of public Thanksgiving, for the Deliverance of his Majesty's Subjects here
from the Destruction wherewith they were so generally threatened by the late
execrable Conspiracy; the same was decently and reverently observed accordingly.

Thomas Hughson, (Father of John Hughson executed) and four of his Sons, viz.
Richard, William, Nathaniel and Walter, having been indicted by the first Grand
Jury, as Parties concerned in the Conspiracy, they still remained under
Confinement in Westchester County Jail, and from thence petitioned the Judges
of the Supreme Court this Day, as follows;

May it please you^ Honors;
OUR being so long confined in Prison, and at this Season of the Year, has
almost reduced our Families to become a public Charge,; and we are likely to
perish should we be continued here the approaching Winter.

We are innocent of the Crime laid to our Charge, and hope it would appear,
were [we to] be tried: And we humbly pray, that if the Law will admit of it, we
may be delivered to Bail, which we can procure, until you shall think proper to
try us.

But if the Law will not admit us to be bailed, rather than to suffer here, and
our Wives and Children should perish at home, or be burdensome to their
Neighbors, we are willing to accept of a Pardon, to prevent our being further
molested on Account of the Indictment found against us, and to depart this
Province, and never to make any Settlement any more therein; and we humbly pray
your Honors to procure the same for us, and in such Manner, that we may be
released as soon as possible; and we remain,

Your most-Obedient, though distressed, Humble Servants. Thomas Hughson, Richard
Hughson. William Hughson. Nathaniel Hughson. Walter Hughson.



Whereupon, as Matters were circumstanced at this Time, the Judges thought
proper so far to comply with the Prayer of the Petition, as to recommend them
to His Honor the Lieutenant Governor for a Pardon, upon Condition of their
leaving the Province. And some Days afterward they were let out upon Bail,
having entered into Recognizance with Sureties for their Appearance at the
Supreme Court on the first Day of the next Term.

Supreme Court: TUESDAY, 20th OCTOBER.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice. The Second Justice,

COURT opened with the usual Forms.

The KING, against Richard Hughson, Thomas Hughson, William Hughson, Nathaniel
Hughson, and Walter Hughson.


THE Hughsons appeared in Court, and were ordered to attend again Tomorrow
Morning.

Court adjourned till Tomorrow Morning 10 o'Clock.

Supreme Court, WEDNESDAY, 21st OCTOBER.
PRESENT, The Chief Justice. The Third Justice.

The KING, against Richard Hughson, Thomas Hughson, William Hughson, Nathaniel
Hughson, Walter Hughson.


THE Hughsons appeared in Discharge of their Recognizances, and pleaded His
Majesty's most gracious free Pardon; which was read and allowed of; and they
were discharged.

The Pardon was upon Condition of their leaving the Province by a Day therein
limited.

JOURNAL of the PROCEEDINGS against the Conspirators at NEW YORK: 1742.
JANUARY.
UPON the Return of the Vessels that had transported the Negro Conspirators the
last Summer, to various foreign Parts, many Particulars of Intelligence
concerning the Conspiracy, which had dropped from those Criminals in their
Discourse with the Captains, Passengers and others, were brought hither; from
which there was Reason to apprehend, that this City and People were not yet out
of Danger from this Hellish Confederacy, which had been so wickedly and
maliciously formed against both; and considering the Hints the Negroes gave
concerning the execrable Oath the Conspirators had engaged themselves in; it
seemed probable that the like Attempts would be renewed, notwithstanding the
many Examples that had been made by Executions, and the Number of Slaves sent
out of the Province; for the Conspirators impiously looked upon the Oath to be
so sacred, that they thought (as no Doubt they were made to believe) that the
eternal Welfare of their Souls depended upon their strict Observance and
Execution of it; for fear (as the Cant was, both of Whites and Blacks) that if
they should reveal it, or desist from the Execution of the Engagements they
were laid under by it, they should wrong their own Souls.

Many Cabals of Negroes also had been discovered in diverse Parts of the
Country, since the Execution and Transportation of the Conspirators, which
justly caused Suspicion, that the same villainous Scheme was yet in Agitation;
particularly in Queen's County, on Nassau, alias Long Island; the Negroes had
there formed themselves into a Company about Christmas last, by Way of Play or
Diversion (as they would have had it thought) had mustered and trained with the
borrowed Arms and Accoutrements of their Masters, (or we would rather suppose,
surreptitiously obtained) Information whereof having been given to His Honor
the Lieutenant Governor, he immediately ordered his Majesty's Attorney General
to write to the Justices of that County about it, and to expostulate with them
upon the Occasion, and direct them to inflict due Punishment on the Offenders.

And the Negroes were accordingly chastised for this daring Piece of Insolence.

There having also been Reports about the same Time, of several pretended
Prophecies of Negroes, That Charlestown in South Carolina, and the City of
New York, were to be burnt down on the Twenty fifth of March next; these
Circumstances considered, and added to what had been wrote by General
Oglethorpe, as before mentioned, That the declared Enemies had secretly
conspired to burn down and destroy all his Majesty's Magazines in
North America; and considering what a Scene of monstrous Iniquity had been
discovered the last Summer, tending to this detestable Purpose; there seemed to
be too much Reason to suspect, that these Sort of Divinations were founded upon
a Conspiracy still subsisting, as well as in Part executed, both here and in
South Carolina.

The Lieutenant Governor therefore thought it necessary to put the People upon
their Guard, by writing circular Letters to the Magistrates of every City,
Borough and County within this Government.

The following Letter was sent directed to the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of
this City.

26th JANUARY, 1742. Gentlemen,
AFTER the providential Discovery of the late most execrable Conspiracy, and
the hellish and barbarous Designs of a perverse and blood-thirsty People, for
the Ruin and Destruction of the whole Province, and the Inhabitants thereof;
and that even at a Time when all Things were ripe for Execution, and the
intended Desolation was so nigh at Hand; one would think our signal
Preservation could never be forgot; and that no one could be so blind to
himself, and regardless of his future Safety, as to suffer the Negroes to have
private or public Meetings and Caballings together; thereby giving them an
Opportunity of forming new Designs, or another Conspiracy; knowing them to be a
People whom no Example can reclaim, no Punishment deter, or Lenitives appease;
yet from the many undoubted Informations I have received from diverse Parts of
the Country, the Insolence of the Negroes is as great, if not greater, than
ever; and they are not only suffered to have private, but even public
Meetings, in great Numbers, without the least Molestation or Interruption from
the Magistrates, and in Defiance of those Laws they ought to be the Protectors
of, and see put in due Execution; thereby suffering them and themselves to be
trampled on and insulted, to the endangering the Peace of the Province: If this
Practice continues, what may we not fear? For I doubt there are too many yet
remaining among us who were of the late Conspiracy; and though we have felled
the Tree, I fear it is not entirely rooted up. I must therefore require you, as
you value the Peace and Safety of this City and Province, and your own
Preservation; and you are hereby strictly charged and required, to see the Laws
against Negroes duly and punctually executed; suffering no Meetings of them
within your City and County and several Districts: And, in order that the same
may be more effectually done, I do hereby direct you to charge all the
Constables and other Officers, to be diligent in their Duty, and that they
apprehend and bring before you, or some of you, all and every one so offending;
as also all such Person and Persons as shall be found to harbor Negroes,
confederate or consort with them, that they may be proceeded against according
to Law. And in order that every one may have Notice hereof* I do direct, that
you cause this Letter to be read from time to time at your General Quarter
Sessions; and that you give in Charge to the Grand Juries, that they make
Enquiries concerning the Offenders* I doubt not but you will have Regard
hereto, as it so highly concerns you all; and that you will take such prudent
Measures as may prevent any future Disturbance.

I am Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, GEO. CLARKE.


TUESDAY, 2d FEBRUARY.
AT the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, held this Day for the City and
County of New York.

The Grand Jury being called and sworn, the above Letter was read; and the
Recorder after observing upon, and endeavoring to enforce, the same by his
Charge, likewise recommended to them to enquire in general concerning Tavern
keepers and Innholders entertaining of Negroes at their Houses, as a Crime of
most pernicious and dangerous Tendency; and having received Information
concerning M -- and Whitfield, two Tavern keepers, that they were much
suspected of being guilty of that vile Practice (notwithstanding the latter was
convicted upon an Indictment found against him for the like Crime, and fined
thereupon the last Summer) the Recorder gave them particularly in Charge.

Hereupon the Grand Jury, as they were about to be discharged, reported, That
they had enquired into the respective Neighbourhoods of those two Persons, and
that they could get no sufficient Information concerning this Matter whereon to
found an Accusation against them.

But how well grounded the Lieutenant Governor's Apprehensions were, concerning
the Danger which still threatened us from the Conspirators remaining amongst
(...) may be conceived from what follows.

MONDAY, 15th FEBRUARY.
THIS Morning about six o'Clock, it was providentially discovered, that some
Fire had been put in the Gutter of a Shed adjoining to the House where Walter
Hyer lived, next the Fence of the Old Dutch Churchyard: The Wind blowing very
hard at N. and the Gutter lying N. and S. some of the Coals were blown into the
Street; which were accidentally discerned by one Hendricks* a Carpenter, who
was opening the Window-Shutters of a new House he was about finishing, fronting
the End of the Street, in order to go to work; whereupon he immediately went to
Hyer's House, and called him out of Bed; and they found some live Coals in the
Gutter next the Shed toward the Churchyard, and likewise a Brand's-End, or
the Bark of a Brand's-End, on the other Side of the House next Ratsey's: The
Mayor being acquainted herewith, (...) summoned the Magistrates to meet his
Morning at the City-Hall, to consult what Steps to take, in order to discover
the Incendiaries* And the Magistrates being accordingly met, it was proposed by
one of them, as no particular Person was suspected, that they should all go and
view the House and enquire what Negroes were in the Neighborhood, and their
Characters whereby the most Suspicious might (...) laid hold of and examined;
'twas thought most likely; that by this Method the Truth might chance to ^olt
cut* They went accordingly and it luckily happened, that the first Person's
(...) enquired after, was the Widow Bradt* She kept a Bake-house near by, and
her Yard-ran along the Rear of Hyer's and Ratsey's Houses, up to the Church
Yard Fence, where were an Heap of Oyster Shells lying so near Hyer's Gutter,
that a middle-siz'd Man might easily step up and put Fire in the Gutter, at the
North End of it, and from the same Yard as easily throw a Brand's End on the
other Side of the House next Ratsey's: Upon the Enquiry, it was said that the
Widow Bradt had only one Negro, a Sort of a simple half-witted Boy* but however
he was ordered to be brought forth; and he appeared upon View to be a lusly
well-set Fellow, of Man's Growth, and was afterward judged (by those that knew
him best, and had brought him into the Country) to be One or Two and Twenty
Years old; his natural Countenance was none of the pleasantest; but his
Appearance upon this Occasion betokened Symptoms of Guilt: It was thought that
Baker's Servants, from the Nature of their Business, must be up early, and have
always a Command of Fire, which administered some Color of Suspicion, which the
Looks of the Fellow very much heightened; and therefore he was without Ceremony
committed, in order for Examination in the Afternoon, and likewise some other
Negroes of the Neighborhood, who were afterward discharged.

The Magistrates being met at three o'Clock in the Afternoon, and Tom asked,
how he came to put the Fire to Hyer's House* and who advised and assisted him
in it? he directly owned, that he put the Fire in the Gutter himself: And being
then very particularly examined, his Confession was taken down in Writing, in
the Presence of the Justices, and by them signed.

The Confession follows.
1. TOM confesses and ^aith, That the Sunday before l^st, he being in the Yard
of Capt. Jasper Farmar, a playing for Pennies with Jack a Negro belonging to
said Farmar, a Negro belonging to Samuel Dunscombe, a Negro belonging to John
Tudor called Peter, and a Negro belonging to Charles Crook (Rob); Jack told
him (Tom) that his Mistress was cross to him, he should take Fire and throw it
upon the Shed or Offdackye, Dutch for a Shed.
and set them on Fire; that if he the said Tom did not do it, ^e (Jack) would
poison him: That Jack told him this in the Hearing of Peter.

2. That Jack told him, if he fired the Shed, that would fire the House of
Capt. Ratsey, and his Mistress's House too, and her in it: That Jack told him
(Tom) that in firing the Shed, that would fire the whole Town, and then the
Negroes in Town, with the Negroes that were to come from Long Island, would
murder the White People; and that he said this in the Presence and Hearing of
all the Negroes above mentioned.

3. That all the Negroes above mentioned said, that when the Negroes came from
Long Island, they could do it all at once (that is) murder the white People;
and that they would assist or help in murdering of the Whites, and then they
would be rich like the Negro Language, signifies white People.
Backarara.

4. That Jack told him (Tom) to throw fire upon the Offdackye or Shed early on
the Monday Morning come Week; and that he rose very early, about five o'Clock,
lit a Candle, made a Fire in the Bake-House, heated Water to melt the Sugar,
and then took a lighted Coal of Fire, and threw it upon the Roof of the Shed.

5. That immediately after his throwing the Coal of Fire upon the Roof, the
Coal in falling broke into several smaller Coals; that the Wind blew the Sparks
into the Little Street.

6. That soon after he heard a Knocking at Walter Hyer's Door; that he was then
still in his Mistress's Yard, and hearing the Knocking, he was afraid to be
discovered, and run into his Mistress's Bake-house, and sat himself down at the
Fire side; that being afraid he might he followed, he bolted the Side Door
which leads into the Yard.

Taken before THE MAYOR, RECORDER, and several ALDERMEN.
TUESDAY, 16th FEBRUARY:
AT a further Meeting of the Justices in the Afternoon, the Negro Tom (Mrs.
Bradt's) further confessed and said,

NUMB. II.
1. THAT being at Capt. Farmar's House, on Sunday Afternoon last, with his
Negro Jack, and going away. Jack followed him to the Gate, and then told this
Tom, that he should not forget To morrow Morning (meaning to fire the Offdackye
or Shed;) says Jack, the Wind blows hard now, and if it does so Tomorrow
Morning, then you must fire the Shed; but if the Wind does no^ ^^^w hard, then
he (Tom) should not do it.

2. That on Monday Morning last, about five of the Clock, Tom being up, he
heard a Knocking at his Mistress's Gate, went and opened it, and found a Negro
Man there, whose Name he does not well know, unless it be Jack, who told him,
that Farmar's Jack had sent him to tell him (Tom) to fire the Offdackye
immediately. That this Negro brought with hi^ a Piece of Wallnut-Wood Bark,
which was on fire at one End and not on the other; and that this Negro put that
Fire between the House of Capt. Ratsey and Walter Hyer's House; and that this
Negro ran away when the Knocking was at Hyer's House, over the Church Yard
Fence.

Taken before The MAYOR, RECORDER, and several ALDERMEN.
THURSDAY, 18th FEBRUARY.
Further Examination of Tom, (BRADT's) Before the Justices.
NUMB. III.
TOM being confronted with Jack (Farmar's) charged him with what he had said
against him in the two former Confessions, and says,

1. That Michael, Dunscombe's Negro was afterward proved to have been nine
Miles out of Town, from Saturday 'till Monday Afternoon; (...) that Tom was at
least mistaken as to the Sunday, which is no (...) Thing with Negroes to (...)
i^ Point of Time.
(Dunscombe's Negro) was at Farmar's Gate last Sunday, and heard Jack,
(Farmar's) tell him, Tom, to remember what he had told him the Sunday before,
that is to say, to put Fire to the Offdackye, and c. and that Dunscombe's Negro
said thereupon, Oh! fie, why do you put such a little boy upon putting Fire?
Oh! says Jack, he is big enough.

2. That his Mistress called him up last Monday Morning early, about five of
the Clock, to make Fire, and melt Sugar to make Cooky^^; and that he put fire
to the Offdackye next the Churchyard first; that he had Fire in the Tongs in
one Hand, and Bark of Nut Wood on fire in the other, and the Fire in the Tongs
he threw in the Gutter next the Churchyard, and threw the lighted Bark
afterward on the Side of Hyer's House next Ratsey's; and this he says was
between five and six o'Clock in the Morning: The Coal he had in the Tongs he
got out of the Bake-house, the Nut wood Bark he had out of the Parlour.

3. That he put this Fire all alone, and no Body ^as with him or helped him.

4. That there was a Negro came for Fire that Morning, and took it, having
knocked at the Gate for that Purpose, and then went out at the Gate again, and
does not know who he was.

Taken as the former.
THURSDAY, 25th FEBRUARY.
THE Justices being met a fourth Time, in order to endeavor to pry further
into this Mystery of Iniquity, by examining Tom once more; for as to what had
been drawn from him hitherto one could not give entire Credit, as the Reader
may conclude, excepting as to his being the Instrument of putting the Fire; and
it being intimated by one of the Magistrates, that Tom's Mistress had a strong
Imagination (one might venture to say a strange One) that she and her Son, if
the Magistrates would permit their Attendance, could prevail upon their Negro
to speak the whole Truth. As there were many of us, there was Difference in
Opinions upon this Matter. However, at length it was ruled, that they should be
admitted, and were sent for accordingly. Upon their Appearance, Tom was
admonished to tell the whole Truth, how it was concerning this Matter; and he
declared himself at first to the same Purpose as to the Negroes he before
accused, and as to the same Matter and Substance with his Examinations before
set forth; but in the Close, as there was great Doubt made of his Veracity,
being strenuously urged by some of the Magistrates, and his Master and
Mistress, to be sure that he spoke nothing but the Truth; and being asked,
whether he was sure that what he had said as to these Negroes was the Truth? he
thereupon recanted, and declared what he had before related concerning the
Negroes he had accused, were all Lies; and took the Whole upon himself. And
being asked, why he did it, and how he came to do so? he answered, He could not
help doing it.

This Fellow having thus prevaricated, no Use could be proposed to be made of
him as an Evidence to convict others, however he might have chanced to change
his Note afterward; and 'twas therefore determined to bring him upon his
Trial. But it may be proper to observe, that in the Interval between Tom's
first and last Examination, the Negroes accused by him, were several Times
closely examined, both separately and Face to Face; but they all along
positively denied every Thing alleged against them by Tom concerning the
setting Fire, and c. but owned their being together at Farmar's playing at
Pennies; though it could scarce be imagined, that Tom (who was realy no Fool,
nor any of the wisest) had framed this Scheme, and made this Attempt merely on
his own Bottom, which should so correspond with the villainous Confederacy of
the last Year. His Recantation was not taken down in Writing, but what is above
set forth, contains the Substance of it.

SATURDAY, 27th FEBRUARY.
THE Justices, pursuant to the Directions of an Act of General Assembly, issued
their Summons to James Alexander, Esquire; Mr. David Clarkson, Mr. Robert
Livingston, sen* Merchants, Paul Richard, Esquire; and Peter Van Brugh Livingston,
Merchant, as some of the principal Freeholders within this City, thereby
summoning and requiring them to appear at the City-Hall on Tuesday the second
Day of March next ensuing, at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon of the same
Day, to hear and determine, in Conjunction with the Justices, Whether Tom, a
Negro Man Slave, be guilty of Conspiring or Attempting to kill His Majesty's
liege People, or of Burning the Houses of Baffie Vandewater, or of Andrew
Bradford and Cornelia his Wife, within this City, whereof he stood accused.

TRIAL of Tom, BRADT's Negro.
TUESDAY, 2d MARCH.
City of New York, ss.
AT a Meeting this Day of the Justices and five principal Freeholders of this
City, pursuant to the Summons and Directions of an Act of General Assembly of
this Colony, made in the fourth Year of his present Majesty's Reign, entitled,
An Act for the more effectual preventing and punishing the Conspiracy and
Insurrection of Negro and other Slaves; for the better Regulating them, and for
Repealing the other Acts therein mentioned relating thereto.

PRESENT, Justices of the Quorum.
JOHN CRUGER, Esquire; Mayor, The Recorder,
Esqrs, Aldermen, and Justices of the Place.
William Romme, Simon Johnson, John Moore, Christopher Banker, John Pintard,
John Marshall,


Mr. Peter Van Brugh Livingston having been summoned upon this Occasion,
appeared, and excused himself from serving, as not being a Freeholder, and Mr.
James Sear^^ was summoned in his Room, and appeared.

Merchants, principal Freeholders of this City.
James Alexander, Esquire; Mr. David Clarkson, Mr. Robert Livingston, son. Paul
Richard, Esquire; Mr. James Sear^^,
TOM By this Act the Owners of Slaves have it in their Choice to try them by a
Jury, which is attended with some small Change; but this, upon the Question
proposed, Mrs. Bradt declined.
a Negro Man Slave brought to the Bar. And

WILLIAM SMITH, Esquire; having been appointed by the Justices, Council and
Prosecutor for the King, he delivered into Court Articles of Accusation against
the Prisoner.

Before the Articles were read, the Freeholders were sworn, well and truly to
try and judge as directed by the Act of Assembly; and the Recorder warned the
Prisoner in Favor of Life, that he need not plead Guilty to any of the
Articles, but nevertheless, that his several Confessions being read to the
Court, would amount to full Proof, so far as they affected himself.

Then the Articles were read, and were as follows,

Tom, a Negro Man Slave belonging to Divertie Bradt of the said City, Widow,
stands charged and accused,

First, For that he the said Tom, on Sunday the seventh Day of February last
past, at the Dock Ward of this City, did conspire with Jack, a Negro Man Slave
belonging to Jasper Farmer, Michael, a Negro Man Slave belonging to Samuel
Dunscombe, Peter, a Negro Man Slave belonging to John Tudor, and Rob, a Negro
Man Slave belonging to Charles Crook, of this City, and diverse other Negro
Slaves unknown, to kill and murder the said Divertie Bradt* Baffie Vandewater,
and other his Majesty's liege People within the City of New York.

Secondly, For that he the said Tom, on Monday the fifteenth Day of February
last past, did wilfully put Fire to and burn the Shed or Outhouse of Baffie
Vandewater, and the House of Andrew Bradford and Cornelia his Wife, in the Dock
Ward of the same City.

Thirdly, For that he the said Tom, did on the fifteenth Day of February last
past, at the City and Ward aforesaid, attempt to kill and murder Divertie Bradt
and Baffie Vandewater, of this City, by setting Fire to their Houses, and
burning them in the same.

Fourthly, That he the said Tom, on the fifteenth Day February last past, at
the City and Ward aforesaid, did attempt to burn the Out-house of the said
Divertie Bradt and the Dwelling-Houses of Baffie Vandewater, and Andrew
Bradford and Cornelia his Wife, situate in the same Ward, and to burn the whole
Town and City of New York.

To the First Article the Prisoner pleaded, Not Guilty.

To the Second, Guilty.

To the Third, Not Guilty.

As the Prisoner had pleaded Guilty to the Second Article, the Court were of
Opinion to proceed to Judgment upon that; but Mr. Smith moved, that before they
proceeded, some Witnesses might be sworn, and the Criminal's several
Examinations and Confessions taken by the Justices, as before set forth, might
be read for their further Information concerning his Guilt, and for the greater
Satisfaction of the Court and Audience.

And here it may not be improper to observe, that the Prisoner distinguished
and pleaded to the three several Articles directly, without Hesitation; which
seems to be a further Argument that he had more Sense than some People were
willing to allow him.

Proclamations for Silence and Witnesses.

WITNESSES for the KING sworn, HENDRICKS and HYER.

HENDRICKS said, he discovered the Fire to fall out of the Gutter as he was
looking from a Window into the Street; and that thereupon he went and knocked
at Hyer's Door, and called him out of Bed, and they searched and found Coals on
each Side of the House; some in the Gutter next the Shed, toward the
Churchyard, and some on the Side next Ratsey's House.

HYER said, that the Gutter next the Churchyard was burnt black in the Spot,
or Part of the Gutter, where he found the Coals lying.

The Criminal's Confessions read as before set forth.

And the Justices further informed the Court, that the Criminal at his last
Examination, though he at the Beginning of it persisted in the same Story as to
his Accusation of Jack (Farmar's) prompting and proposing to him to put the
Fire, and c. and as to the other Negroes present at the two Meetings at
Farmar's House, advising and threatening him if he did not, and c. yet in the
Close he declared for Truth, that all he had said relating to them, were Lies,
and that he put the Fire of his own Head; and being asked, why he did it, and
how he came to do so? he answered, he could not help doing it. And being asked
by the Court, whether he did not make such Confessions as had been then just
read? he answered, Yes. He was then bid to tell the same Story over again as he
had told to the Justices at the three first Examinations, and likewise at the
first Part of the fourth and last; and he repeated the same over again, as it
were in the same Words: And when he had done, being asked, whether what he had
then said as to the other Negroes was true? he answered, No, 'twas all Lies;
and took all again upon himself, and owned his Recantation to be the Truth.

The Audience being ordered to withdraw, the Prisoner taken from the Bar, and
the Court*Room cleared; the Recorder advised with the Justices and Freeholders;
and having taken their Opinions, which were unanimous upon that Occasion, the
Doors were ordered to be opened, and the Prisoner brought back; and being
accordingly brought back, the Recorder proceeded to Admonition and Sentence, as
follows:

YOU Tom, the Criminal at the Bar, hearken to what is now to be said to you.

You stand convicted of wilfully putting Fire to and burning the Shed or
Out-house of Baffie Vandewater Laid in her Name in the Articles of Accusation,
being Owner of the House; Walter Hyer Tenant
within this City. The Evidence of your Guilt has stood principally upon your
own Confession before your Trial; which you now confirm by your Plea: And
indeed this is the strongest Proof, the highest Conviction that can be: For
this single Fact you deserve Death: And though the Court proceeds to give
Judgment against you upon this Article; yet your Offense is of a complicated
Nature, i. e. consists of many Particulars, all tending to one and the same
monstrous and execrable Purpose; the Murdering the Inhabitants of this City.

The hellish Scheme you have engaged in, as you have confessed before the
Magistrates over and over again (I think no less than four several Times) was,
to set Walter Hyer's House on fire, and (as you concluded and proposed) that
would consequently set the next House ( Ratsey's) on fire, and that would set
your Mistress's on fire, and burn your Mistress in it; and then that would burn
the whole Town: Then the Long Island Negroes were to come over to the
Assistance of the Negroes here* and they, in Conjunction, were to murder all
the White People of this City: And, in order that your malicious hellish
Purposes might effectually take Place, the Fire was to be put, as it actually
was, when the Wind blew hard, that in all Probability, any Attempts made to
extinguish the Flames, might be in vain.

And such a trusty Agent have you been in the Devil's Service, that in
prosecution of this infernal Conspiracy, you did actually take the first Step
proposed, in order to accomplish this diabolical Purpose, by putting Fire to
Hyer's House on both Sides of it.

All this that I have said, you have confessed over and over again; and in this
we must take your Word: It was a merciful Act of Providence that your Designs
were timely prevented, that you were committed upon Suspicion only, and that
thereupon the Truth has thus bolted out from you.

It was rumoured without Doors, that you were an half-witted Fellow (Boy I
think they called you, though you are said to be Two or Three and Twenty Years
old) and indeed one would think hardly any Body but arrant Fools, or Mad-Folks,
would engage in such chimerical, wicked, villainous and dangerous Projects,
which must most probably end in the Confusion, and Destruction, of the Wretches
concerned; as you found by woeful Experience in the many Examples of those
miserable Creatures of your Color that expired in Flames, and at the Gallows,
the last Summer, for the like detestable Offenses: And yet so hardened and
stupefied are ye in Villainy, that no Examples though ever so severe, no
Terrors of Punishment can affright ye; but ye will even defy the Gallows and
commit your Bodies to the Flames, rather than not risque the Chance of
gratifying, your savage, cruel, and insatiable Thirst for Blood.

But nevertheless, to convince one that you are not that half-witted Fellow, as
some would represent you, you showed some Cunning (as it should seem you
thought) after your Commitment, in providing for your own Safety and
Preservation, by laying this Scheme upon and accusing others, as having
prompted you to this Mischief, hoping thereby, as it must be supposed, to be
admitted an Evidence against them, and so save your own Life: This was a
Thought too deep for a Fool, or half-witted Fellow: And indeed from my
Observation of you, during the Course of your several Examinations, I could
discover no Reason for an Insinuation, that you had less Sense than those of
the common Rank of Negroes, but that your Qualifications for Mischief are
inferior to none of them; That you have Sense enough to distinguish between
Good and Evil; that your own Conscience could direct you what was fit and
proper to be done, and what not; you yourself, by your own Confessions have
given most convincing Proofs; for when (as you all along said, till the last
Time when you recanted and declared that what you had told concerning the other
Negroes was all Lies, I say, as you told the Story) Jack (Farmar's) in order to
try whether you were fit for the Undertaking, said to you, Tom your Mistress is
cross to you, you must set fire to the Offdackye, then that will burn Hyer' s
House, that will burn Ratsey' s House, then that will burn your Mistress's
House, and burn your Mistress in it: Your Answer to Jack upon this Proposal
was, No, my Mistress no cross to me, my Mistress good enough, what should I set
Fire for? you may do it yourself; or Words to that Effect: That thereupon Jack
insisted, that you should set fire, and the Reason why you at last agreed to do
it, was because, you said, Jack threatened he would poison you if you did not.
This is what we call natural Reason, and shows such a Measure of it, or there
is such a Chain of Consequences drawn by it, that supposing it to be your own
Scheme (as you now take all upon your self) you can be no Fool, or half-witted
Fellow; and if it was the Scheme of others proposed to yourself, your very
Repetition of it, your telling that Story as you have done so often over and
over again, almost in the same Words, shows that you don't want Understanding;
but that you have made a very bad Use of it, and acted against that Light,
which God Almighty has given you to employ to better Purposes: So that here, I
say, in these Instances of the very Proposal and Answer, you give convincing
Proof, that you were conscious, i.e. that you yourself was sensible and knew,
that what you was going to attempt was wrong, was wicked, and what you ought
not to do: Whether Jack (Farmar's) was the Person that proposed the Thing to
you, we cannot tell; but that somebody did, and that you did not do it
altogether of your own Head, I am fully persuaded* But if no one but the Devil
and you contrived it; then so much must be drawn from it, as is sufficient to
show, that you acted against the Light of your own Conscience, your own Reason,
by your own Way of arguing, and out of your own Mouth you are judged. How you
came at last to withdraw your Accusation against those Negroes, you for four
Examinations running, charged with advising you, and being concerned with you,
in this villainous Project, I know not; nor can I account for it, without the
Devil had a Mind to leave you in the L^rch at last.

You Negroes are treated here with great Humanity and Tenderness; ye have no
hard Taskmasters, ye are not lade^ with too heavy Burdens; but your Work is
moderate and easy: You say, your Mistress no cross to you, she very good, or
she good enough; and yet with small Persuasion, you were prevailed upon to
destroy her in Flames: Such worthless, detestable Wretches are many, it may be
said most, of your Complexion, that no Kindnesses can oblige ye; there is such
an Untowardness, as it should seem, in the very Nature and Temper of ye, that
ye grow cruel by too much Indulgence: So much are ye degenerated and debased
below the Dignity of Humane Species, that even the brute Animals may upbra^d
ye; for the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib; even the very
Dogs also will, by their Actions express their Gratitude to the Hand that seeds
them, their Thankfulness for Kindnesses; they will fawn and fondle upon their
Masters; nay, if any one should attempt to assault them, they will defend them
from Injury, to the utmost of their Power. Such is the Fidelity of these dumb
Beasts; but ye, the Beasts of the People, though ye are clothed and fed, and
provided with all Necessaries of Life, without Care; in Requital of your
Benefactors, in Return for Blessings ye give Curses, and would scatter
Firebrands, Death and Destruction around them, destroy their Estates and
butcher their Persons. Thus monstrous is your Ingratitude! Bu^ Thanks be to
Almighty God, that through his wondrous and merciful Providence, your hellish
Devices are discovered, and you are now to reap the just Reward of your
Labors. Note, As there was like to be a large Audience at this Trial, thus far
was calculated principally with a View to awaken the People to a Sense of their
Danger with respect to the Negroes, and other Conspirators, and to put them
upon their Guard; whereas some lightheaded People (and others, as it is to be
feared with deeper Design, in order to put a Stop to further Discovery) had
taken no small Pains to bring a Discredit upon the Story of the Plot, though
they had seen Houses burnt to the Ground, and others on fire about our E^rs,
and no one ^^uld find out, if they were not done (...) Purpose, how they came
to be so Whether this extravagant Behavior of the former were owing to an
Apprehension of having their own Negroes brought in Question, and suffering by
the Loss of them, it might seem hard to say: But so excessive was the Folly and
Wantonness of some, and the execrable Malice and Villainy of others!


And since Justice has at last overtaken you, I shall in Compassion to your
poor Soul, which is in the utmost, the greatest Danger of being forever
miserable, give you a Word of Advice. in order to prevail upon you to make use
of those few Moments you have to remain in this World, to the best Advantage;
for be not deceived, there is another World after this, and there is a God
above who has a clear View of all your Actions, and knows the very Secrets of
your Hearts, and will require at your Hands according to that Degree of Reason
which he has given you* And though your Body be consumed in the Flames here on
^arth (a Punishment of short Continuance) yet your Soul will never dye; that
must survive the Body, either to be forever happy, or forever miserable,
according to your Actions here.

What a horrible shocking Expectation must yours be then! You that would murder
and destroy without Mercy, nay without Provocation; what reasonable Hopes can
you entertain of Mercy from the Hands of the God of Justice, who will reward
every Man according to his Works? They that have done Good shall be forever
happy; they that have done Evil shall be cast into a Sea of Fire and Brimstone,
to be forever tormented with the Devil and his accursed Spirits, from whence
there will be no returning, no coming out again, but there will be bitter
weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, Time without End.

Now to avoid this dreadful everlasting Punishment, the only Method for you to
take, is to make the best Use of the Time allowed you between this and your
Execution, by bringing yourself to a due Sense of your Guilt, your heinous
crying Sins; truly to repent you of, and be heartily sorry for your Wickedness,
and earnestly to pray to God Almighty for Forgiveness: And this is not all; but
that your Repentance may be sincere, you must make that little Amends which is
in your Power, toward us you have designed, and conspired to murder and
destroy, by discovering all those Persons whom you know to be any Ways engaged,
or concerned in this hellish Plot, that you may thereby prevent all further
Mischief. Upon these Conditions only can you have any reasonable or
well-grounded Hope or Expectation of the Salvation of your Soul, and of
avoiding that dreadful eternal Punishment, against which I have forewarned you.

And now it were but just, that the same Mischief which you intended for others
should fall upon your own Pate; but the Court has had some Regard to your
Confession, as you acknowledged your Guilt upon your. first Examination, they
have adjudged you to be hanged, otherwise you would have been burnt.

And therefore the Sentence which I am to pronounce against you is,

That and c.

The Court then ordered the Execution to be on Friday next between the Hours of
Ten and One.

But his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, by Advice of his Majesty's Council,
thought proper to reprieve him to the Friday seven night.

Tom after his Condemnation returned to his old Story as to Jack (Farmar's)
advising him to set fire, and c. and brought in Philip (Duyckink's) as joining
with Jack therein, and in the Threatenings to poison or kill him, if he did not;
but Jack and Philip were several times examined after Tom's Condemnation, and
confronted with him, and the charged them to their Faces, but they could not be
brought to a Confession. Their Examinations follow.

WEDNESDAY, 4th MARCH.
PHILIP (Duyckink's Negro) being examined, says,

1. THAT he was at Jack (Farmar's) on Sunday about a Month ago; in the
Afternoon, in Church Time, he was going by Farmar's House to Church, and Jack
called him in, and he found in the Yard Kingston, Peter (Tudor's) York
(Debrosse's in the Square) Tom (Bradt's Negro) called amongst them Monkey, to
the Number of six with Jack and himself: They all played at Pennies; and the
Examinant lost two Pence, and then went away just before Church out, in order
to fetch his Mistress's Stove from Church, (...) left all the others in the
Yard.

2. That he never was at Jack (Farmar's) any other Time, and says he did not
hear any Talk from any of those Negroes about setting fire to the Houses, or
the Long Island Negroes coming over to assist the New York Negroes in killing
the White People.

3. That there was looking on upon the Negroes playing at Pennies, a white Boy
Abraham. He was examined, and said the several Negroes mentioned by Tom were at
Farmar' s; but he heard no such Talk amongst them relating to the Conspiracy.
Tudor's Apprentice, when the came into the Yard, and he le^t him there when he
came away.

4. The Examinant at last remembers that Oronoko (Mr. Marston's Negro) was also
at Jack (Farmar's) at the same Time.

JACK (Farmar's) though he denied it at first, now owns, that Philip
(Duykink's) and Oronoko (Marston's) were at his Mistress's in the Yard one
Sunday, but did not see them play at Pennies but each of them once on different
Sundays; and that Oronoko came to his House frequently on a Weekday.

Both Philip and Oronoko own, they were playing at Pennies at Jack (Farmar's)
on Sunday three Weeks ago.

Tom (Bradt's) confronted with Jack (Farmar's) and charged him with telling
him, that Philip said, he ( Tom) should put the Fire; that Philip was by, and
heard Jack tell him so, and said if he did not he would lick him; and Jack
(Farmar's) said, he would poison him if he did not. Tom was likewise at the
same Time confronted with Philip, and declared to the same Purpose to his Face.

SATURDAY, 13th MARCH.
THE Negro Tom was executed.

At the Gallows he declared, That now he was sure he must die, he would tell
the Truth, and said, that Jack (Farmar's) Philip (Duyckink's) Cuffee (William
Gilbert's) and Corah (David Van Horne's) were the Persons that put him upon
setting the Fire.

Immediately after Tom's Execution, Cuffee, Corah and Philip, were apprehended
and strictly examined by the Mayor and Recorder, but nothing could be got out
of them.

MONDAY, 15th MARCH.
A Tanner's Barkhouse, belonging to one Stevens was set on fire, in the Swamp
at the East End of this City, the Wind blowing exceeding hard at N. W. The
Alarm of Fire was between Twelve and One of Clock, which put the People into
great Consternation; but the Tan-Pits being detached some Distance from any
Dwelling-Houses, it did no other Damage than the Burning a few wooden Work-and
Bark-houses belonging to the Tanners there.

Upon Enquiry it was found, that two of Stevens's Negroes, Sam and Tom, and
also his White Servant Boy (John) had been at work there in the Morning; and it
being cold, they had made some Fire under the Wind near the Workhouse, and had
enclosed the Fire on both Sides with two Doors or Boards, to prevent the Eddy
Wind from blowing the Fire about.

A^ Twelve o'Clock these Servants all left off Work, in order to go home to
Dinner. Negro Sam sends Tom to fetch Tea-Water at a little Distance from the
Place where they had been at work, and afterward ^ends the White Boy after
him, and Sam undertakes to put out the Fire and fasten the Doors of the
Bark-house and Stable; which done, and Tom and the White Boy returned with
Tea-Water, they all go Home together to Dinner, and toward One o'Clock this
Fire was discovered.

The Bark-house was a new close boarded Building, adjoining to a Stable and
Mill-house, on the Side of the Yard opposite to the Workhouse, under the Side
of which the Fire was made by the Servants in the Yard; and the Bark-house was
at the End of those Buildings first mentioned, farthest out of the Course of
the Wind; so that it was most improbable that any Coals could have been blown
thither; and it seemed to be agreed on all Hands, that the Fire must have been
put there on Purpose.

TUESDAY, 16th MARCH.
Examinations taken this Day, and several other succeeding Days, before the
Mayor, Recorder and several of the Aldermen, concerning the Fire at the
Tan-Yards in the Swamp.
PAUL ROMME says, That being at the Tan-Yards in Beekman's Swamp, on Monday
near One o'Clock, he heard the Cracking as of Cedar, or Boards on Fire; that
looking around him he soon heard the Cry of Fire, Fire, and immediately
thereupon perceived a great Flame and Blaze break through the upper Part of the
Roof of the Bark-house of Mr. John Stevens; that the Blaze, Fire and Smoke
spread in a surprising Manner, and took to the Stable, Mill-house, and c. in a
very short Time, that when he came to the Fire, he found there Hendrick
Vandewater, a young Man belonging to Dobson, and c. That he does not believe,
that the Fire, which broke out of the Roof, did proceed from the Fire that was
made in the Yard at the Side of the Workhouse; believes it was set on fire on
Purpose, but does not know by whom.

HENDRICK VANDE WATER said, That standing at his Father-in-Law's House with
Daniel Van Dursen, he perceived a Smoke go out from one of the Houses at the
Tan Yards at Beekman's Swamp; upon which he desired Van Dursen to look at the
Place, and said he believed it was on fire; that continuing to look, he found
the Smoke increase; upon which he ran toward it, and Van Dursen after him;
That when he came to the Bark-house of John Stevens, he saw a great Blaze and
Fire strike through the upper Part of the Roof; that this was near One o'Clock
Yesterday Afternoon: That this Fire could not, as he apprehends and believes,
proceed from the Fire that was in the Yard at the Side of the Work house; but
believes it was set on fire by Hand.

JOHN BASS, Stevens's White Boy, said, That Sam told him to go and help Tom to
fill the Jugg, (this John denied this Morning, and Sam just now says, that he
and Sam shut all the Doors together) That when he and Tom did return with the
Water, they did not find Sam near the Place where the Fire had been, nor did
they stand there with him; that he did not see Sam till he passed the
Workhouse, and then Sam stood within five Yards of Mr. Bonnett's Lime-house.

Tom said, When he went for Tea-Water, he left Sam and the White Boy at the
Fire by the Workhouse, and that it was not then put out, nor did he see it put
out, but that Sam said he had put it out with Water: That he did not see Sam
stand at the Water-hole, nor did he see him till he came to the Lime-house of
Mr. Bonnett, when he saw him stand at the little Gate waiting for Tom and the
White Boy; that the White Boy came to Tom after he had filled his Jugg with
Tea-Water: That he did not stand at the Side of the Workhouse with Sam and the
white Boy, after his Return with the Tea-Water.

WILLIAM ROGERS said, That on the fifth Instant, being Friday, in the Afternoon
about Five of the Clock, being at the Tan-Yards in Beekman's Swamp,at work for
Mr. Bonnett, Sam, a Negro belonging to John Stevens, delivered to this Rogers,
a Piece of Gold called a Double Doubleloon, which was very black, and desired
him to get it changed for him into other smaller Money; that Rogers delivered
this Gold to Mr. Stevens, who took his Negro up Stairs and whipped him: That
afterward, being Saturday, said Sam came again to the Tan-Yards, where finding
said Rogers, Sam said, Well, William, you have occasioned my Master's whipping
of me, who said, he would whip me again; but I will be even with you for it:
That said Rogers afterward acquainted Mr. Stevens with these threatening
Speeches of his Negro, who answered him, Don't fear him, he will not hurt you, he
is an harmless Fellow.

Mr. BONNETT said, That Mr. Stevens told him he would or had whipped his Negro;
but understood that he said he had whipped him; that the Negro told him, that
his Master had whipped him: Th^^ was touching the Doubleloon spoken of by
William Rogers.

Sam said, That he shut the back Door; that no Body was then with him; that he
then came out at the Stable Door, and shut it, no Body being then with him;
that at these Times Tom and the White Boy were gone for Tea-Water: That when
Tom and the White Boy returned, Sam stood where the Fire had been, under the
Side of the Workhouse; that Tom and the White Boy came to him where the Fire
had been, and stood a little While; that they could see that the Fire was put
out; that the White Boy then said, Come, Sam, let us go home: That Tom and the
White Boy were gone for Tea Water about ten Minutes: That after putting out the
Fire he put the Shovel into the Stable; that after putting out the Fire, and
before putting the Shovel into the Stable, he put the Shovel into the Water of
one of the Coops: That Tom did not ask him, whether he had put out the Fire;
nor did he tell him that he had, nor the White Boy either.

This Fire at the Tan-Pits just brought the Year round, to St. Patrick's Day,
the Evening ^^^^^of the last Year (as the Reader may have observed from the
Course of the Evidence) was calculated by the Conspirators for burning the
Fort; a Place, no Doubt, most likely to give them the greatest Annoyance;
which, though accordingly attempted, was not however effected till the next
Day. Why that particular Time was fixed upon, from what afterward appeared in
Evidence concerning the Conspiracy, was no difficult Matter to conjecture; for,
as that was an Evening of National rejoicing, according to the Custom of some,
it were most likely that many would then be incapacitated for giving that
Assistance, which the Nature of their Duty might require, in time of
extraordinary Emergency; and therefore, it seems to have been a principal Aim
of the Conspirators, to attempt the Destruction of the Fort at all Events, and
at that particular Time; especially as some of the Soldiers themselves were
proved afterward to be of that villainous Confederacy; who also well knew of
what Consequence it might be to their diabolical Scheme, to have that Place
demolished; and, no Doubt, these Miscr^^ (...) were engaged, and accordingly
endeavored, to cheer up their innocent Comrades, as well as their wicked
Confederates, to such a Pitch, under Color of this national Festival, as might
render the former useless, and the latter desperate* For, as the Secrets of
this infernal Confederacy were afterward unfolded, it is scarce to be doubted,
that had the Fire at the Fort taken Effect on St. Patrick's Night, there would
then have been a General Insurrection of the Negroes, and the Whites their
Abettors; and much more Mischief done, probably many Persons, nay Families,
butchered, had not the Providence of GOD most remarkably interposed in our
Favor, by preventing the Fire's ^king Effect that Night, as the Conspirators
purposed it should. See Negro Quack's Confession, page 45. col. 2. 3. page 46.
McDonald' s Evidence.
But the Fire breaking out there the next Day about Noon, the Buildings in the
Fort were all down to the Ground long before Night, which was the most suitable
Season for these Assassins to act their intended Tragedy; but, as was observed
in the Introduction Page 6. col. 1.
a Company of the Militia being under Arms in the Evening, and continuing so
all Night, the Conspirators Hearts failed them; and thus a Stop was happily put
to their Career; and their wicked Machinations afterward, as providentially
detected. But soon after the Examples had been made of many of the
Conspirators, by Executions and Transportations, it seemed as if the People had
almost generally composed themselves into a tranquil Security; some by
discrediting, others (as one would imagine) forgetting, that there had been a
real Conspiracy; though from reiterated Accounts still daily arriving by
Masters of Vessels, to this Time, of what the transported Negroes had in their
Passages declared concerning it, There seemed too much Reason to apprehend,
there were yet remaining among us, many of the Associates in that execrable
Confederacy, who might yet be hardy enough to persist in the same wicked
Purposes, and make new Attempts; and as an Earnest of it, two fresh Alarms we
have already passed over; and had but the last taken Effect, when a str^^^ Wind
favored the Design, perhaps, St. Patrick's Day might have been an Anniversary
in our Calender, to have been commemorated by the Colony with FASTING, WEEPING
and MOURNING.

But notwithstanding these signal providential Disappointments, neither did the
Malice of the Conspirators subside, nor their Courage abate; for,

TUESDAY, 23d MARCH.
IN the Dusk of the Evening a Bundle of Linen set on fire, was thrown into the
Gutter adjoining to Benson's Brew house, at the East End of the Town, and was
by the Wind blown out thence upon the adjoining Shed; which was discovered by a
Neighbor accidentally coming into the Yard: When it came down, as the Man
declared, it was like a round lighted Coal, but burnt to Tinder; and upon
Examination of i^, he judged that there had been Tow stuffed in the Middle of
it.

WEDNESDAY, 24th MARCH.
THE Magistrates met at the City-Hall, and sent for several of Mr. Benson's
Servants, and others, and examined them; but no particular Person being
suspected, of the Fact, nothing could be made of it.

TUESDAY, ^^th APRIL.
BEING the first Day of Term, the Judges of the Supreme Court recommended it to
the Grand Jury to enquire concerning the Fire at Steven^'s Tan (...); but
nothing further being discovered, they did not think there was sufficient Cause
to present the Negro Sam upon the Evidence before mentioned, but indicted him
for a Felony and Robbery committed some Time before, of which he was now
impeached.

No Discovery was made about the (...) at Benson's.

But the Information: of the transported Negroes before hinted at, and these
fresh Instances of Fires consuming the^^, seemed at length to gain Attention;
and were by many thought sufficient to awaken every one from a ^^pine Security,
and put them upon their Guard against these latent Enemies.

TUESDAY, 3d AUGUST.
THE daring Insolence of Negroes observed by many even at this Time, and the
Countenance and Encouragement given by Dr^m Shops, was still every Day
complained of; and yet the Difficulty was to de^ect them, so as to convict the
Aggressors: However, the Magistrates thought it their Duty (...) use all the
Means in their Power, toward bringing them to condign Punishment. -- And
therefore,

At a General Quarter Sessions of the Peace held this Day for the City and
County of New York, before the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen.

THE Grand Jury being sworn, His Honor the Lieutenant Governor's circular
Letter of the 26th January l^st, directed to the Magistrates of the City before
set forth* Page 179.
being again read; the Recorder proceeded to his Charge as follows.

Gentlemen of the Grand Jury,

IN order for you to pursue the good Intention of his Honor's Letter, it is
necessary that you make diligent Enquiry into the ^Economy and Behavior of all
the mean Ale^ Houses and Tippling Houses within this City; and to mark out all
such to th^^ Court, who make it a Practice (and a most wicked and (...)) of
entertaining Negroes, and the Sword^ and Dr^g* of the White People in
Conjunction* (...), to support such Expen^^, are tempted and abetted (...)
steal, that they may debauch each other upon* (...) and Spoils of their Masters
and Neighbors: This gives Opportunities for the most loose, debased and
abandoned Wretches amongst us to cabal and confederate together, and ripen
themselves in these Schools of Mischief, for the Execution of the most daring
and detestable Enterprises; I fear there are yet Nine Persons were indicted and
fired for keeping such disorderly Houses. See Page 250, 251.
many of these Houses amongst us, and they are the Bane and Pest of the City:
'Twas such that gave the Opportunity of ^^^ooding this most horrid and
execrable Conspiracy; the Effects of which internal Combination, his Honor is
thus anxious to prevent.

And notwithstanding the great Pains and Industry (as it should seem) has been
taken, to bring the Notion of a Plot into Contempt, and Ridicule, by some
People among us of P^^^matick Tempers, who have endeavored to make light of
it, dozed themselves into a lethargick Security, and have set at naught the
Evidence of their own Senses; for they have seen and heard, and (...) thinks
the (...) have felt too; Nevertheless, I ^^ll not forbear expressing my Fears
and Apprehensions also, that the Enemy is still at work within our Bowels* for
surely it would be of little Avail, if the same execrable and horrible Scheme
of Villainy is still carrying on among us, and should at length break out again
in Flames about our (...), and proceed to the murdering and butchering our
Families; I say, 'twill be of no Avail, for such (...), thoughtless, and
incredulous Folk as these, to stand against at their dreadful Conviction, and
cry out, Lord! who would have thought it? 'Twill be too late then to call upon
(...), when the affrontive contumacious Behavior of some among us, who spurn
at the Mercy of Providence, (...) great and signal Deliverance out of the Jaws
of our Enemies; when (...) own irreverent, impious Demeanor may have filled up
the Measure of our Iniquities, fitted us for Divine Vengeance, and drawn down
such a heavy and sore Judgment upon us, as delivers us over for a Prey unto
their Teeth.

Let us therefore, Gentlemen, think seriously, and take better Heed to these
Things; acknowledge the Divine Goodness in our Deliverance and Preservation
hitherto, by a suitable Deportment, and make a proper Use of the Warning that
has been given us, by providing for our own Safety and Security.

And (...) what I have already pointed out for your (...) it will be necessary
for, you also, and highly becoming in you, to enquire concerning all Lodgers
th^^ are Strangers within this City; obscure People that have no visible Way of
Subsistence: For that Popish (...) have been dispatched from abroad to steal in
among us, under several Disguises, such as Dancing-Masters, Schoolmasters,
Physicians, and such like; whereby* as it is calculated, they may easily gain
Admittance into Families, work under Ground like Moles in the Dark, and
accomplish the Works of the Devil, and other our declared Enemies; if any such
obscure Persons as I have hinted a^, you can discover in the Course of your
Enquiries (and that there have been such, we have had very credible
Information) it is your Duty to pre^^^nt them to the C^art, that they ^^y be
apprehended, and examined by the Magistracy, and dealt with according to Law.

Gentlemen,

I doubt not but you will remember, that you are sworn, diligentl^ to enquire,
and true Present^^^, ^ake of all such Matters and Things as shall be given you
in Charge.

I give his Honor's Letter to you (...) Charge; and these Things I have before
mentioned, I give you expressly, and particularly, in Charge also; and persuade
my self of your Conscientious Discharge of your Duty.

In general, you are charged to present all Crimes and Offenses which shall
come to your Knowledge, from (...) Treasons, down to Trespasses.

THURSDAY, 2d SEPTEMBER.
At a Common Council.

City of New York, s^.

MARY BURTON, the Evidence who detected the Conspirators, having applied to the
Board for the Reward offered by the Proclam^^ (...) See Introduction, Page 10.
issued pursuant (...) Order of the Common Council ^word (...) 11th of April,
17^^, Ibidem. Page 9.
promising the Sum of One Hundred Pounds to any White Person that should
discover any Person or Persons concerned in setting Fire to any Dwelling
Houses, Storehouses, or other Buildings, within this City: IT WAS ORDERED,
That the Mayor should issue his Warrant to the Treasurer to pay to Mr. Moore,
for Mary Burton's Use and Benefit, the Sum of Eighty One Pounds, which with the
Sum of Nineteen Pounds before paid by the Corporation for the Freedom and other
Necessaries to and for the Use of the said Mary, made in the Whole the Sum of
One Hundred Pounds, in full of the Reward offered.

The Mayor accordingly issued his Warrant, and the Money was paid to Mary
Burton.

THE CONCLUSION:
BY the Course of the Evidence, it appears. That a Design was conceived to
destroy this City by Fire, and massacre the Inhabitants: That Fire was to be
put to several Quarters of the Town, at one and the same Time: That the English
Church was to be set on Fire, at a Time when 'twas most likely there would be
the fullest Congregation, and the Avenues from the Church were to be guarded by
these Ruffians* in order to butcher those that should attempt to escape the
Flames: This Part of the Scheme, it seems, Ury the Priest, had particularly at
Heart. -- The Winds were consulted which would be most proper to attempt the
Fires with: They were to begin at the East End of the Town with a strong
Easterly Wind, which (as it was projected) according to the Course (...)
Situation, would probably destroy the whole Town; but the King's Fort was first
to be burnt, because most likely to annoy these Furies, when their hellish
Devices were putting in Execution The Negro Confederates were each of them to
se^ Fire to his Master's House, and proceed to the Assassinating their
respective Masters and Families; and these Fires were calculated for the Night
-- St. Patrick's Night was the Time appointed. Accordingly we find, as a Proof
that they were in earnest, the Attempt upon the Fort was made on St. Patrick's
Night, though through the Providence of GOD, the Fire did not take Effect (...)
the next Day at Noon, when the Villain who first put it, had renewed his
Effort, by blowing up the some Brand that he had placed for the Purpose the
Night before. See the Note upon Quack' s Confession at the Stake, page 46.
letter p.


If* it be considered, that many of the Irish Catholics, unknown to the
Captain^, Runagates, or perhaps purposely sent over, had been enlisted in some
of the Independent Companies posted here, some whereof were detected of being
confederated with the Conspirators; they could not have pitched upon a ^^tter
Season for perpetrating their bloody Purposes; for on this Night, according to
Custom, their Commemoration of their Saint, might be most likely to excite in
those of the infernal League, Boldness and Resolution, for the Execution of
this horrible Enterprise, and others innocently partaking of their Jollity,
might in such an Event, be thereby incapacitated for Service; so that according
to this Device, all (it might seem probable to them) would lie at their Mercy.
But the Fire at the Fort happening in the Day, contrary to the Purpose of the
Conspirators, and the Town having been much alarmed at the Misfortune, though not
apprehending the Treachery; yet, (...) military Watch being kept all the Night
following, the Villains were thereat somewhat intimidated, and stopped their
Progress for a While: Nevertheless, from the nightly Cabals of the
Conspirators, at Hughson's, and the Encouragement given by Ury the Priest, the
Night after the Fort burnt, who told them, Now God had prospered them in the
Beginning, in burning the Fort, they need not fear; we must be resolute and
proceed in the Work, and no doubt God will prosper us in all; execrable Wretch!
From hence they took Courage again, and it was resolved amongst them, that they
should proceed. Accordingly after one Week had passed, they did, we see, set
Fire to several Houses within the Compass of a Fortnight, sometimes many in a
Day, undiscovered; and made several other Attempts in which they were
frustrated, 'till at length some Spanish Prize Negroes having been seized and
committed upon Suspicion, a Stop was put to their Career. But more than a
Fortnight passed after the last of these Fires, before the least Intimation was
given touching the Occasion of them, that they were the Effects of a diabolical
Conspiracy; 'til Mary Burton, Servant to John Hughson, was brought before the
Grand Jury, as a Witness to a different Matter, concerning which she had
testified before the Magistrates; she at first refusing to be sworn to give her
Evidence in that Case to the Grand Jury, at length rather than go to J^^l
submitted, but withal bolted out, that she would give no Evidence concerning
the Fires: This Hint afforded sufficient Handle to the Gentlemen of the Grand
Jury, to exert their Diligence in sifting out her Meaning, and to prevail with
her to disclose the Secret; which, after much Entreaty and Persuasion, they
effected, though at the same Time, the Girl dis^urthen'd herself with apparent
Dread and great Unwillingness, from the Apprehension of the Danger she should
be in of being murdered by the Conspirators for the Discovery, as she
afterward declared.

By the Evidence of this Girl, it appears, that her Master Hughson was a
Principal, Engine, Agent and Instigator of these Deeds of Darkness amongst the
Slaves here, ever since she came into his Service; and by the Evidence of
others, Whites and Blacks, it also appears, that he having kept a public House
for some Years, had long since made it a Practice to entertain Numbers of
Negroes, often 20, 30, 40 or 50 at a Time, and by Degrees deluded them to
engage in the Conspiracy, upon his Promises, that they should all be Freemen,
and that other fine Things should be done for them; that upon their consenting,
Hughson always bound them to their Engagements by horrible Oaths, not only to
perform what they undertook to do, viz. to burn and massacre, but also to keep
all secret, though they were to die for it; that these Oaths were reiterated at
all future Meetings in order to confirm them; and for their Encouragement,
Hughson often swore himself over again, and had sworn his Wife and Daughter
into the Confederacy also That Hughson provided Arms and Gunpowder, further to
convince these deluded Wretches, how much he was in earnest; but the Butchery
to be executed by the Negroes after they had set Fire to their Masters Houses,
was calculated to be done with Knives; for those Weapons, it seems they judged,
would make no Noise: This the whole Current of Negro Evidence agrees in, and
it is corroborated by Whites. -- That a Knife designed for this Purpose was
actually found in the Chest of one of the Negro Conspirators, and most others
of them were provided with Knives.

That Hughson employed some of the Head Negroes as Agents under him, to decoy
other Negroes, and their Instructions were not to open the Conspiracy to any
but those that were of their own Country (as they are brought from different
Parts of Africa, and might be supposed best to know the Temper and Disposition
of each other) and when they brought a Convert to Hughson, or one likely to
become such, Hughson always gave them Drams 'til they were intoxicated, and
then the Conspiracy was proposed to them; and they generally consented without
much Difficulty, upon his specious Promises, and sometimes upon the bare
Proposal; but if they were unwilling to engage, they were terrified by Threats
of being murdered, 'til they complied^ then all such were constantly sworn,
invited to Hughson's Feasts, and these commissioned to seduce others. Many
before they knew any Thing of the Secret, were invited to Hughson's by himself
or others: For, by Way of Introduction, as well as Confirmation. Hughson, it
seems, kept open House for the Negroes, and entertained them at all Times;
those that had no Money at free-Cost; He assured them, they should be always
welcome to him: Those Compliments he artfully placed at he judged most proper;
for us to such as were his special Agents and dexterous Fellows, they were to
pay in Money if they had it, or Money's Worth, by pilfering and stealing as
they could, to raise Supplies for carrying on the Common Cause; and they were
to bring all to him; more especially upon the Grand Catastrophe, when the Town
should be all in Flames, and the Negroes had butchered their respective
Families, the most valuable Things easiest to be removed (particularly Plate)
were to be brought to Hughson's, and it seems they had already carried on so
successful a Trade, and Hughson's House was become a Mart of so great Note
amongst the Negroes, that with them it had obtained the Name of Os^^e^o, after
the Province Trading-House. They were likewise injoined to steal their
Masters's Arms, Powder, etc. and lodge all in Hughson's Custody: He had many
Barrels of Gunpowder at a Time. It appears, that this hellish Project was set
on foot here, by Agent Hughson, four or five Years before it was ripened for
Execution; and it must needs have been a Work of Time to seduce so many Slaves
as have been detected.

The White Conspirators were sworn by Ury the Priest, (...) chief, and the
Negroes sometimes by Hughson, and sometimes by Ury in a Ring surrounded by
them, and he, while the Oath administering, holding a Crucifix over their Heads.
They were persuaded that the French and Spaniards were soon to come and join
them, and if they did not come in a set Time, they were to begin and do all
themselves. -- Further to encourage the Town Negroes, they were told the
Confederates had many Whites and Blacks to come out of the Country to their
Assistance, particularly from Long Island, and Hughson w^^ to give the Word
when they were to begin. The Negroes were flattered they were to be formed into
Companies, several Officers of them were named for the Purpose, Captains, etc.
and the Town was divided into Districts. Thus all was to be their own, and if
any of them were squeamish, Ury the Priest could forgive Sins, and did forgive
them all they had committed, or should commit, provided they performed what
they had engaged in, and kept all secret to their last Breath.

But however true these Matters have been ^ound to be, so chimerical, wicked,
abominable and inhumane was the Device, that those at a Distance might have
been apt to think it all a Dream, or a Fiction, were it not for the last Proof
of a Reality, which cannot be withstood, the several Fires which did happen in
the Manner we saw; which Consideration was a great Motive to this Publication.
The Witnesses, Whites and Blacks, that gave any Evidence, or made any
Confession at all, agree in the most considerable Articles concerning it; the
Design of burning the Town, and murdering the Inhabitants: and that Popish
Priests were concerned in it; which verifies, what is sarcastically cited in
Ury's Defense as proverbial, That there can be no Mischief in a Country, but a
Roman Priest (if there) must be in it; but we may venture to go one ^^ep
further* and say, if such Priests had not been here (and some of Capacities
much superior to Ury's) there would have been no such Plot; for upon this and
no other Footing can it be accounted for. Let us suppose then (and we sha^^
find just Grounds for the Supposal) that such Priests, or Monks, etc. call them
what you please, had conceived a Design for such a horrible, detestable
Purpose, as the Devastation of this City, and the Massacre of its Inhabitants,
to be perpetrated by the Hands of our own Slaves, in Conjunction with the most
abandoned Whites, the Dregs and Disgrace of their Complexion; and that at a
critical Time, when their successful Wickedness would have frustrated the
Supply of Provisions and Necessaries to his Majesty's Fleet, then upon an
Expedition against his Enemies in the West Indies, upon which perhaps their
Subsistence was in some Measure to rely; and that for the Purpose, Emissaries
of these kind of Gentry were dispatched into his Majesty's Colonies, in several
different Disguises, as those of Dancing-Masters, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
etc. who under these colorable Appearances, might be most likely to gain
Admittance and Confidence in private Families, and thereby have Opportunities
of debauching their Slaves, and acquainting themselves of such White People as
might be most likely to be seduced to their detestable Purposes: Who then so
seemingly proper Instruments to be pitched upon amongst us, by such Infernal
Agents, as John Hughson and such like? For as the Way to Hell must be trod by
gradual Steps, and no one commences consummate Villain in an Instant; so
Hughson had already taken some hopeful Degrees in the School of Wickedness; he
had for many Years entertained Negroes at his House in all Hours of Darkness;
and to support that Expense, and promote his own Lucre, encouraged them to
pilfer and steal what they could from their Masters, and he readily received
their Spoils: This might be thought a promising Earnest of his Qualifications;
sure such a one must be judged, by these Craftsmen, a hopeful Tool to make
Experiments upon; for he that could consort with Slaves in one kind of
Villainy, would probably make the less Difficulty of going some Steps further.
But then his Religion! Why truly, from what has already been observed, it might
be thought to little Purpose to talk about that: But his Wife (good Woman!) was
already a professed Papist, as common Fame has it; so the Business might be
near half done; for her Persuasion joined to a Roman Priest's Assistance,
Artifice and dairty fine Promises, free and ^ull Remission, Pardons,
Indulgencies, and Absolution for Sins past, present, and to come, and a
Passport for Heaven on Condition of performing Engagements [to do the Devil's
Business] bound (...) the Sanction of reiterated Oaths, to keep all secret to
the last Breath; he might perhaps (as others before him have been) be buoyed up
in full Expectation of becoming rich and great here, and of a Fool's Paradise
hereafter, and thus be seduced to enter into their abominable Measures.

There are some Passages of History in a French Author or two, which may serve
to add Light to our own Case, and are therefore thought proper to insert here.

Mr. Juri^u, in the VI Chap. of his History of Popery, (a) treating of the
Intrigues of the Popes and Papists against ELIZABETH, Queen of England, and
WILLIAM and MAURICE of Nassau, Princes of Orange, and the League in France, the
Product of Popery; have the following remarkable Pieces, translated from the
French thus,

Pope Gregory XIII. who succeeded Pius the V. Quarto Edition of his Works
printed at Amsterdam, Anno 1683. page 352 to 354.
entered also into all the Schemes and Designs of his Predecessor; which were
to oppress the Queen of England, by causing her Subjects to revolt; and he had
pitched upon one Stukeley, an English Rebel and Fugitive, whom he had created a
Count and a Marquess, and he was to go to Ireland, and cause all the Papists of
that Island to revolt: But this Stukeley perished in Africa, in that Battle
against the Moors Anno 1572.
(where died also Sebastian, King of Portugal.) His Death only put the Design
in Suspense a little: Soon after the Pope sent to Ireland, one James Fitz
Morice, with Saunders, an Irish Priest, (Author of the History of Schism) in
the Quality of Legate, charged with a Banner consecrated by the Pope, and
Plenty of Indulgencies, to solicit the Irish to revolt. Accordingly Saunders
set on foot an Army of Rebels, who were dispersed at the first Shock by the
Queen's Troops, and this Legate perished wretchedly with Hunger and Misery in
the Woods, whither he was chased with the rest of the Rebels, at the Head of
whom he had put himself. 'Twas about the same Time, that the Pope established
English Seminaries, one at Douay, another at Rheims, a third at Rome, and some
time after a fourth at Valladolid in Spain, for an inexhaustible Store of
Assassins, Conspirators, and Traitors; for it is in these Seminaries that they
breed up English Papists in these detestable Maxims, that every heretical
Prince is not a legal Sovereign, and that People Anno 1578.
ought, when Occasion offers, to do their utmost Endeavor for re-establishing
the Catholic Religion, where it has been abolished, without sparing the Life
of any one whatsoever. 'Twas out of these Seminaries that they afterward
draughted those Parricides, which they scattered throughout all England: For
Instance, one Somervil Anno 1583.
with Hall the Priest, and other Accomplices: This Some^^^ was found strangled
in Prison; which was likely to have been done (...) his Companions, that he
should not discover any Thin^ further of the Conspiracy.

Amongst these enormous ^^tish Conspiracies against the Life of this Queen,
that which they designed to execute by William Parry, is remarkable; wherefore
we will report it a little more at large: Anno 1584-5. Rapin 2 Vol. Folio, page
120.
We have all the Pieces of his Process in the first Volume of the Memoirs of
the League: In France.
In short, this William Parry being affected toward Popery (which they call in
the Roman Style, Zeal for the Catholic Religion) conceived a Design to
assassinate the Queen of England, and he opened the Matter at Venice to a
Jesuit named Father Beneditto Palmio, and to the Pope's Nuncio, named
Campeggio: They both much approved of his Design; and by their Advice he wrote
about it to the Pope. This Parricide returning to Paris, was confirmed in his
Intention by Thomas Morgan, and many other English Papists. Hannibal Codret, a
Jesuit, strenuously confirmed him also, confessed him, and gave him the
Sacrament, to fix him in this great Undertaking. The Pope's Nuncio who was at
Paris, named Ragazoni, was let into the Secret, and took upon him to send
William Parry's Letter to the Pope, whereby he requested to be authorized in
this Action, and that full and entire Remission of his Sins might be granted
him. The Pope answered according to his Purpose, as favorably as William Parry
could have wished.

The Cardinal C^mo, who had Commission to answer him, wrote him in plain Terms*
That his Holiness could not but commend and approve the good Resolution he had
taken for the Good of his Service, and that of the Public; that his Holiness
begged him to persevere; and to the End that he might be the better assisted by
the good Spirit, which had brought him to it, his Holiness granted him full
Indulgence and Remission of all his Sins; and moreover promised him great
Rewards.

The same Author in his VIII Chapter, treating of the Papist's Conspiracies in
England, amongst others, of those in the Reigns of King CHARLES the 1st and 2d,
and that in Ireland in the Year 16^2, makes general Reflections upon the Means
made use of by the Author of The Apology for the Catholics, to invalidate the
Proofs of the Truth of them, and accordingly proceeds, page 400.

Neither [says he] do I find these Gentlemen have said any Thing upon the
Affair of Elizabeth Oxley, Nicholas Stubb, and the Priest Maurice Gifford;
which however is a Matter of no small Importance. We find by the Deposition of
O^ts, That the great Fire of London happened by a horrible Conspiracy of the
Priests and English Papists. The Depositions of Bedlow prove also, that in the
Year 1676, when he was at Paris, the Confederates in the Conspiracy, amongst
others, a Benedictine wou^d have engaged him to set Fire to Westminster, (...)
and other Places, and that Father Gifford had joined himself in this Design; in
the Execution whereof they had actually hired Cellars in diverse Parts of the
City, which they filled with Wood, Charcoal, and all other Sorts of
Combustibles. The Story of Elizabeth Oxley strongly confirms that Deposition.
See Rapi^, Folio Vol. 2. page 705.
This Elizabeth Oxley was in Service at the House of one Mr. Bird, a noted
Attorney in Fetter Lan^: This Girl having dwelt there about six Weeks, on the
10th April, 1679, when all the Family were asleep, put Fire in her Master's
Cabinet, where there were a great many Papers; and when she thought that the
Fire was got beyond extinguishing, she cried out Fire, and waked her Master and
Mistress. They happily found Means to extinguish the Fire; when that was done,
it was discovered that this Creature had made up a Bundle of her own Clothes,
which appeared to have been packed at Leisure, in very great Order; this, added
to many other Circumstances, caused a Suspicion, that this Servant had put the
Fire on Purpose: She was sent to Prison, and upon Examination owned all. She
said that about Michaelmas, in the Year 1678, she became acquainted with one
Nicholas Stubb, an English Papist, who had taken a great deal of Pains to
pervert her, and make her change her Religion; when he thought he had persuaded
her, to fix her, and make her sensible that she had chosen the good Part as
well for this World as the other, he several Times said to her. That she would
see all the Protestants in England destroyed before the End of the Month of
June, the next Year; See Page 101. col. 1. Judy Pelham's Affidavit concerning
Plummer.
and that all those who would turn Catholics, should live much more happily
than otherwise they could, if they remained Protestants; That after all, it was
a meritorious Action to kill an Heretic; and that all the CATHOLICS would
have a Mark upon their Hats to distinguish them, to the End they might not be
massacred with the others. After many such like Discourses, this Nicholas Stubb
having learnt that she lodged at this Attorney's House, had often advised her
to put Fire to her Master's House, to burn that Quarter, promising her for this
Action Five Pounds, that is to say, 50 or 60 Livres, and gave her Half a Crown
earnest: He assured her also, that they would at the same Time se^ fire in
several other Quarters o^ the Town. This Girl being gained by these Promises,
promised herself, and did all that they desired.

Upon this Confession of Elizabeth Oxley, the Justice caused Nicholas Stubb to
be taken into Custody; at first he denied all with a brazen Front, but when he
was confronted with the Girl, he could not resist the Force of Truth; he
acknowledged all that Elizabeth Oxley had advanced concerning their Dealings
and Conspiracies. He added, that he had done it at the Persuasion of Father
Gifford his Confessor, who assured him there was no Crime in setting Fire to
the Houses of Heretics. He said further, that there were two Irishmen
concerned with him, the one named Flower, a Barber, and the other Roger
Clayton; that they all three usually met in the Dusk of the Evening at St.
James's in the Fields, to consult Means for putting their Design in Execution;
and that Father Gifford had promised to the Accused One Hundred Pounds for this
Deed. Afterward this Nicholas Stubb related a Thousand Extravagances wherewith
Gifford buoyed up their Hopes, and supported the Promises he made them of a
sudden Change in England. He told them, they would levy a great Army in
England, there were Catholics enough there for that, and they would draw over
a Succor of Sixty Thousand Men from foreign Countries: He added, lastly, that
this Priest made them take horrible Oaths to keep the Secret, and threatened to
have them murdered, if they discovered what they knew.

I own I cannot conceive what they can say to invalidate Facts so important,
and so well proved: Here are Persons taken in the Fact, and Persons that
confess, what would you have more? There is Nothing of which the Hardiness and
Impudence of these false Devotees is not capable: Wherefore there is no Doubt
but they will devise some new Cheat, and suborne fresh Witnesses to support
some new Romance about these frequent Combustions. It Is a Matter beyond
Example, that a Town should be set on Fire as it were every Year; for since the
great Fire of London, scarce a Year has passed but there has been an hundred
Fires, of two Hundred and Six Hundred Houses: One cannot be persuaded that this
was natural. Before we leave this Story of Elizabeth Oxley and Nicolas Stubb, I
wish it may be observed, that this Nicolas Stubb, taken up upon the Fact, and
committed as an Incendiary, confessed exactly what Bedlow had deposed
concerning Father Gifford, to wit, that it was ^e that was the Instigator of
these Fires, that they had made Preparation for. Nicolas Stubb, the Prisoner
accused, convicted, confessing; could he have taken his Confession from the
Mouth of Bedlow, whom probably (...) had never seen!

The Author of the Apology for the Catholics, makes great Show of Advantage,
because the Lord Viscount Stafford, and the other Conspirators who were
executed, persisted to maintain their Innocence to the last, and denied there
had been any Conspiracy; wherefore it may be proper to call to mind what Mr.
Me^eray says upon the Gunpowder Plot in 1606. It is customary in these
Conspiracies to bind the Consciences of those that know these Affairs, with
horrible Oaths. You may read in [the Book entitled] Les derniers Effort de l'
Innocence affligee. Printed at the Hague, Anno 1682. Deux^^^s Entretien 1.2^^.
beginning page 119.
the Form of an Oath which they oblige the Conspirators to take.

[The following Translation from the Book itself, is thus introduced by Way of
Dialogue.]

It having been objected, as an Argument of great Weight, that Persons executed
for these popish Conspiracies* persisted to maintain their Innocence with their
last Breath; the Protestant Lawyer answers.

I am surprised, Sir, that you make such a Difficulty about this obstinate
Silence, we see every Day, Criminals who, to salve their Honor, and to have
the Pleasure of saying they die innocent, resist the most violent Tortures; and
you don't conceive, that People who have hardened their Courage a long While
before, for an Enterprise the most hazardous in the World, should have
Resolution to keep 'til Death a Secret whereon depends not only their Honors,
but the Preservation of all the Roman Catholics in England! If they confess
themselves guilty, they must name their Accomplices; and in doing so, they
would destroy an infinite Number of People, and render their Religion
abominable in the World, by showing it is capable of inspiring such frightful
Sentiments, and to cause such frantic Designs to be hatched. These
considerations are of such Force, that they alone are capable of supporting the
Weakest of Men, to prevent their revealing a Secret of such Importance. When
the Powder Plot was discovered in 1605, not one of the Confederates would
confess; and they had known Nothing from their Mouths, without the Industry of
the Judges, who placed Garnet and H^ll in two Dungeons from whence they could
communicate, and in the Thickness of the Wall there was a Place wherein they
put two Witnesses, who could hear every Thing the Prisoners said; by which
Means they were forced to own all. Lastly, would you know the principal Reason
why these Secrets are so well guarded? It Is an horrible Oath wherewith they
bind all those who enter into the like Conspiracies. Read Mezera^ in the Place
where we have just left him open.

The last Day of January, eight of these principal Conspirators were executed
at London, for High Treason. Not one of them accused either the Priests or the
Monks; for they were engaged to Secrecy by horrible Oaths.

To give you full Satisfaction in this Matter, I will show you the Form of the
Oath, which they administered to all those who were entered into this Conspiracy.

The Oath for the Conspiracy in England.

I the Underwritten, being in the Presence of Almighty God, and of the blessed
Virgin Mary, of the blessed Michael the Archangel, of the most happy St. John
the Baptist, of the holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and of all the other
Saints in Heaven, and of You my Spiritual Father, The pious Priest or
Confessor, administering this execrable Oath!
Declare, from the Bottom of my Heart, That I believe the Pope, Vicar General
of Jesus Christ, to be the only and sole Head of the Church upon Earth; and
that by Virtue of the Keys, and the Power given to his Holiness by our Lord
Jesus Christ, to bind and to loose, he has Authority to depose all heretical
Kings and Princes, to oblige them* to relinquish their Thrones, or to kill
them; Wherefore I will defend this Doctrine with all my Heart, and the Rights
of his Holiness against all sorts of Usurpers, especialy against him that they
pretend to be King of England; because he has broken his Oath made to the
Agents of his Holiness, in not fulfilling the Promise made to them for
establishing in England, the Holy Roman Catholic Religion. I renounce and
disavow all sort of Promise and Submission to the said present King of England,
and all Obedience to his Officers and inferior Magistrates. And I do believe on
the contrary. That the Protestant Doctrine is heretical and damnable, and that
all those who do not forsake it, are damned* I will also with all my Might
assist the Agents of his Holiness here in England, to extirpate and ^oot out
the said Protestant Doctrine, and to destroy the said pretended King of
England, and all, those his Subjects which will not ^dh^re to the Holy S^e of
Rome, and the Religion which they there profess. Moreover I promise and
declare, That I will keep secret, and will not (...) directly nor indirectly,
by Word or Writing, nor any other Circumstance whatsoever, that which You my
Spiritual Father, or others engaged in the Advancement of this holy and pious
Design, will propose to me, or give me in Charge; and that I will be diligent
and not ^ease to advance it; and there shall be no Hope of Recompense, nor
Threats of Punishment that shall make (...) discover any Thing concerning it,
and that if I am discovered, I will never confess one Circumstance about it: I
swear all these Things by the holy Trinity, and by the (...) Body of God, which
I propose presently to receive; and I call to Witness all the Angels and all
the Saints in Heaven, that this is my true Intention. In Witness whereof I do
receive the holy and blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist.

The Author of the History of Popery goes on. Page 402.


^rance informs us in his Deposition, that the Priests confessed such miserable
Wretches often, and gave them Absolution; but never gave it them till after
they had made them reiterate their Oaths, adding always, That there would be no
Mercy nor Paradise for them if they ever discovered the Conspiracy. Is it then
any Thing surprising, that People (who on the one Hand can hope Nothing from
their making Confession, since they are condemned to Death, and who fear on the
other Hand with the Ruin of their Religion their eternal Damnation) have had
the Hardiness to suppress and deny the Truth to the last Moment! We find every
Day, that Criminals who for the Pleasure of saying they die innocent, deny
their Guilt at the Gallows; and here they would give us Proof from the Silence
and Denial of these People, to which they had persuaded them, that they would
be damned eternaly if they let the least Word escape them. All the World knows
that Garnet and Oldcorn^, who were convicted of the Gunpowder Plot in 1606.
persisted in the Denial of it; and if it had not been that they deceived them
by the Means above recited, the Jesuits would to this Day have had the Pleasure
of proving their Innocence by the same Argument, by which they prove that of
the Viscount Stafford, and the other (...) executed. It must be observed also,
that according to the Laws of England, they cannot put Criminals to the Rack;
so that the Conspirators did not suffer the least Torture. It is then a great
Marv^l indeed, that the Jesuits, Priests, and People who had hardened
themselves in the Resolution of denying all, whatsover they made them suffer,
should have had the Power to do that which they had resolved, when we see every
Day Criminals condemned, and who have no Hopes at all of Life, resist the most
cruel Tortures, and persist 'til Death, to maintain their Innocence. It Is the
Conscience which is to Criminals a Torture of the greatest Efficacy to force
them to a Confession: So far from the Conscience bringing these English
Conspirators to a Confession; on the contrary 'twas that that kept them from
it; (...) they had been persuaded, that they should commit an unpardonable
Crime in confessing, and that they would do a good Deed by denying the Truth to
their Deaths. It is material to know upon this certain considerable Facts: For
Example, that the Confessors and Directors of the Consciences of these wretched
Prisoners and Accused, took Care to harden them, either in Person themselves or
by some others; that they supplied with set Forms of Speeches and Protestations
of Innocence for the Gallows, those that were not capable of composing any for
themselves. There was one found in the Pocket of Lawrence Hill, who was
executed for having assassinated Godfrey. The Executioner, after Hill was
hanged, amongst many other Papers, ^pulled out one from his Pocket wherein was
written the dying Speech, whereof he had recited almost the whole Substance:
You will find it a studied Piece, expressed in handsome and strong Terms,
whereof Hill was not at all capable; for he was illiterate, and besides of low
Genius.

It is proper to show it you entire, that you may judge whether it be the Style
and Sentiments of a vulgar Person, or the studied Production of a Priest and a
Jesuit.

I come now to the fatal Place, where I must end my Life; and I hope I shall
finish it with a Courage becoming mine Innocence. I am going presently to
appear before the great Judge who knows all Things, and judges justly of every
Thing. I hope it will be happy for me a Sinner to suffer ^o unjust a Death. I
call God, Men and Angels to Witness, that I am utterly ignorant of the Manner,
the Authors, and Time, of the Murder of Justice Godfrey. It Is nevertheless for
this pretended Crime, that by the Malice of some wicked People I am brought to
this shameful Death, which I hope will be a ready Passage for me t^ eternal
Life. In this Hope I dye with Joy, because of mine Innocence, and the Benefit
flowing from the precious Wounds of my Blessed Savior, by whose Merits I hope
to obtain Salvation. I dye a Roman Catholic, and I desire all those who are
of the same Religion to pray to God for my Soul: And I beseech God, in his
Justice, that he will please to detect the Authors of this horrible Murder, in
order that my Innocence may appear (...) though I heartily forgive mine
Accusers, I summon them notwithstanding to appear before the great Tribunal of
Divine Justice, as well as those that have put their Hands to this bloody Plot,
to answer for the Wrong they have done to an innocent Man: I summon
particularly the Lord Chief Justice who presided in this Judgment, and the
Brothers of Edmond-bury Godfrey, with the Jury, the Witnesses, and all those
who have been concerned in this Affair. O Lord, bless and preserve the King;
have Pity on this poor Nation, and lay not innocent Blood to their Charge. I
bid you all farewell in Christ Jesus, into whose Hands, I resign my Spirit.

That Author goes on,

There is a great deal of Art in this little Speech; but I question, whether
Hill was in earnest in what he professed. To be more certain that it was not
his own Performance, the Paper was shown to his Wife, who protested it was not
his Writing; and in Truth he had not the Use of either Pen, Ink or Paper, all
the Time he was in Jail. So it is that these Gentlemen harden the Courage of
their People, to lie with their last Breath.

The Conformity and Correspondence our own Case bears to the Circumstances and
Practices in those aforecited, is so obvious, that 'twould be almost needless
to remark upon them: But we have a further Particular considerable; That to
accommodate themselves to our Circumstances, these Gentry have gone yet one
Step further; They ransacked ancient Rome, Rome in its State of Heathenism, for
a fresh Instance of Barbarity, and have exceeded them in Villainy, inasmuch as
the Meanness of the Submission to confederate with Negro Slaves is the more
contemptible. See Tarquin' s Conspiracy, Universal History, p. 480.


But for this Masterpiece they must have very well known, they could entertain
no Hopes of setting on foot any such Conspiracy amongst us, from the utter
Abhorrence the Generality of People here have to their Principles and Practice.
Our Slaves being numerous, from the Hopes of their Corruption only must they
have flattered themselves with a Prospect of their Babel: And indeed, through
their great Artifice, Cunning and Industry, their Expectations had like to have
been too successfully answered, had not the Providence of God interposed,
confounded their Devices, and brought them to Shame by a Detection, whereby
many of their confederates have been delivered into the Hands of Justice, and
suffered their condign Punishments.

The confessions of Criminals of both Complexions, which were very many, we
see, minutely in the Circumstances of (...) Con^piracy as well as the principal
Things aimed at, the burning the Town, and assassinating the Inhabitants, as
observed before: It appears by the Evidence, that more Romish Priests than One
had a Hand in it. Let us remember General Oglethorpe's Letter of Intelligence
from Georgia, Page 161. col. 1.
that also of the News-Writers, that there were Designs brooding in Europe, to
excite Revolts and Disturbances in his Majesty's Possessions in America. Ibid,
col. 2.
from whence it may be inferred, some Politicians had flattered themselves, his
Majesty would have enough to do to divert his Attention from other Affairs of
Importance to his Majesty's Dominions. Could these be Dreams, or is it more
rational to conclude, ^^^m what has happened amongst us, that they were founded
on Realities? What have these Miscreants to say then? Why they will wipe their
Mouths, and have Recourse to their old trite Artifice, which they have always
practiced on such like Occasions, and clamor lustily with brazen Fronts, that
there was no Plot at all, and the Witnesses were all perjured* for that
Hughson, his Wife, Kerry, and Ury denied (...) and maintained their Innocence
to their last Breath. (...) have Criminals we see of their Communion (...)
before. But the Witnesses, say they, what were (...) truly generaly such as
they condescend to confederate with in these Deeds of Darkness: For who but
Villains, and the most profligate, debased and abandoned of Villains, devoid of
all Sense of Shame, Virtue and Humanity, would confederate with Murderers? and
who should discover them but their Confederates?

Here were their Associates, Whites and Blacks, detected, confessing their
Crimes, some before Conviction, some afterward, others in the Torments of
their Conscience, in Prospect of Flames; some in the Anguish and Bitterness of
their Spirits, exclaiming against that accursed Oath, which ^ound them in this
detestable Confederacy, and destined them to that Misery; and yet, as it were,
maintaining their Innocence to the last, or at least being silent as to their
Guilt. This was credibl^ reported to have slipped from Ben (Capt. (...)) as he
was leading to the Stake.
others again under actual Sufferings confessing their heinous Crimes,
attesting the Truth of what evidenced against themselves, and accusing others,
to that time unimpeached, who likewise afterward confirmed their Testimony by
their Confessions.

Though so egregiously infatuated were many of these poor deluded Wretches,
that they were even persuaded they should wrong their own Souls if they made
Discovery; See Margaret Salingburgh, alias Kerry' s Voluntary Confession, the
only one of the kind, sent from Jail, page 20, col. 1.
this it seems was the Opinion of Whites and Blacks; so artfully and painfully
had they been tutored! So fixed and steady were these black Disciples in these
bloody Purposes, that one of them who was yet at large, and attending at the
Execution of a Confederate at the Stake, was so far from being dismayed at that
affrightful Object, that he proposed the present Time to proceed to their
Execution, upon observing how many white People were present. York
(Marschalk's) Negro, afterward hung in Chains by Hughson, proposed this at the
Execution of Quack and Cuffee, 30 May. See Prince' s Confession page 109. col.
2, 2.


But we may remember, that the principal Witness in this shocking Case, and
happy Instrument of this Detection, was Mary Burton, Hughson's indented
Servant; who (^owever it was) no one so much as insinuated to have been sworn
of the Confederacy. As she was the prime Cause of the Discovery, as before
related, their envenomed Arrows have been chiefly pointed at her; and no Doubt,
say they, she must be the Wickedest of Mortals, to bring so many Innocents to
this shameful, miserable and untimely End. And what have they to impute to her,
sufficient to invalidate her Testimony? Why one Particular, say they, enough to
outweigh all: She deposed in her first Examination before the Grand Jury, that
she never saw any white Person (...) they [the Conspirators] talked of burning
(...) Town Allow the Expression to import the Conspiracy in general.
but her Master, her Mistress and Peggy. Page 13. 9.
It Is (...) she did so, and indeed (...) was very ill done; but should (...)
Step preponderate to invalidate her whole Evidence? Much might be said to
aggravate this Offense, much also in Extenuation of it. We cannot expect
Evidence concerning these Deeds of Darkness, from Witnesses of unblemished
Characters, free of all Exception. Say she was sworn of the Conspiracy; though
it did not appear that she was so; and if it was true, 'twere something
strange, one would think, that not a Criminal under Execution, or otherwise,
who confessed their own Guilt and impeached others, should have declared it;
but on the Contrary, confirmed her Testimony against themselves in the Torments
of Flames, attesting, that she had spoke the Truth, and could name many more.
i. e. that her Account of the Conspiracy and Conspirators, given at their Trial
was true; Quack' s Confession at the Stake, p. 46. (...) 46. 8.
which is the utmost Attestation that can be to the Credibility of any Person
as to the Matter treated of. And if they had known she was engaged in the
Conspiracy, from the Resentment they must have borne to her as a principal
Evidence in their Conviction, it might have been expected, it would naturaly
have bolted out from them; nor did Sarah Hughson the Daughter, so much as
insinuate it, whose Spleen was very inveterate toward her, as the Cause of
their Detection: But perhaps Hughson's Daughter was more artfully instructed,
for if it came out, that Burton was sworn in a Party, that might add Strength
to her Testimony, and fix the Guilt more strongly upon the Parties she accused,
by an implied Confession of the most material Part of her Evidence; and if she
were not sworn of the Confederacy, it might seem strange to some, that the
Conspirators trusted her so much with their Secrets.

There are Allowances to be made, with regard to the special Circumstances this
Girl was under in this Case, and some Passions and Qualities which seemed
natural to her: She came over young into this Country, an indented Servant, a
Year or two before: Her first Master, after some Service, assigned over her
Indenture to John Hughson for the Remainder of her Term, the Midsummer before
this Iniquity broke out, when she was between fifteen and sixteen Years of Age:
The Girl thus becoming under the Power of Hughson, a Stranger in the Country,
and not a Friend to advise with; her Situation was surely somewhat deplorable;
for being in the Hands, and under the Influence of so hopeful a Family, and
held to Secresy by her Apprehensions of the Danger she was beset with, from
these Assassins, she might think her Condition helpless, and that she could
only wish for Deliverance: She was of a warm hasty Spirit, had a remarkable
Glibness of Tongue, and uttered more Words than People of her supposed
Education usually do; such a Temper, one might think, could ill brook the
Ceremony of attending and serving upon Slaves, and such a Band of black and
white Ruffians; which, it seems, was the Service enjoined her; neither could
they think themselves safe with her, unless they could seduce her to their
wicked Purposes, which they might have Hopes they should compass at last; and
though at first they might think she was not to be trusted at all Adventures; yet
it so happened, that by Degrees, it seems, the Conspirators (as depending upon
a Master's Influence over one in her Circumstances, added to the Terrors of
their Threatenings to murder her if she made Discovery) flattered themselves
they had her sure, and at length became so familiarized and unreserved toward
her, that they ^eeded not saying, or doing any thing before her; and thus she
might be let into their Secrets, upon a Persuasion, that she durst not tell.

The Girl doubtless must ^e under terrible Apprehensions when her Life was thus
endangered, both from Blacks and Whites, if she made Discovery; this must have
been (...) of great Restraint to her, and, in her Hurry and Con^^^ion; of
Thought, might occasion her to utter that through Inadvertency, which upon calm
Reflection, she became conscious was wrong, though at (...) time, it might be
^n involuntary Suppression only of Part of the Truth, arising from an
Over-hastiness in answering, and want of due Recollection; which therefore
perhaps, after making all candid and ingenuous Allowances, will not be
ri^o^ously construed a wilful and deliberate Falsehood.

Her natural Volubility and Quickness of Tongue (...) she not generally spoke
the Truth, must unavoidably (...) betrayed her into many gross Mistakes and
Inconsistency but (...) such Thing but that before mentioned, (...) observed in
the Course of her Evidence, and her Examinations and Depositions were many,
besides her Testimony given at the several Trials; her Evidence a^ to these,
has this Advantage, it is confirmed by the whole Current of the Testimony of the
other Witnesses, white and (...) as well circumstantialy as principally, as
already remarked; and that such a Number of Witnesses examined, and kept apart
from each other, should tally so exactly in Circumstances, as well as principal
Points of Facts, and their Testimony not be true, is inconceivable!

As to such other White Persons as Burton did afterward accuse, against whom
there appeared just or probable Grounds of Impeachment, viz. Sarah Hughson the
Daughter, William Kane, and John Corry the Dancing Master; concerning the two
former, her Testimony affecting them was confirmed by many Negro Witnesses
separately examined, and far enough apart from each other, who not only agreed
in the Particulars affecting them, but the most minute Circumstances also
relating to the Conspiracy: And though it may be objected, they were not legal
Witnesses (and therefore had not been admitted to give Evidence on the Trial of
any white Person) yet surely their Testimony thus considered together, not only
adds Strength to that of Burton, but does also amount to the utmost moral
Certainty of the Truth of the Facts testified of. -- But to put the Matter
beyond Dispute concerning them, this Sarah and Kane confessed their own Guilt,
and confirmed (amongst other Things) particularly what Burton said affecting
themselves.

Kane himself was first impeached by a Negro, as well as other Soldiers Will' ^
Confession at the Stake, page 125. col. 1.
however they became so fortunate as to escape Justice: and this was
nevertheless true for it is coming from a Negro; for Kane confessing his Guilt,
made also some Atonement by further material Discovery, which squared with the
rest of the Evidence; and both Sarah Hughson (the Daughter) and Kane confirm
Burton's Testimony in general, and in particular also that against Ury the
Priest; and as to Corry the Dancing Master, that he was (...) of the
Conspirators, Kane examined apart from Burton, testified likewise; so that it
may be conceded she only kept back or suppressed, upon her first Examination,
Part of that through Dread and Distraction of Thought and Want of proper
Consideration, which at the same Time upon due Reflection and Remembrance she
might have known to be the Truth, viz. that there were other white Persons
concerned in the Conspiracy, besides her Master, her Mistress, and Peggy,
though perhaps they might not all at that Instant have occurred to her Memory;
which as to Hughson's Daughter, Burton afterward declared, she did not think
of her at the Time.

Thus far then we may venture to infer Burton's Testimony affecting the Persons
by her impeached (whose Guilt was manifested by circumstantial and other direct
Evidence of Witnesses, in Conjunction with, and Corroboration of hers, and by
their own Confessions) was deserving of entire Credit.

We may have observed by the Course of the Proceedings, how these poor Negro
Wretches have been deluded by Degrees, and cajoled to interest themselves, and
become Parties in this detestable Enterprise, through the Artifices of Agent
Hughson; who (though himself a mean illiterate Fellow) from his vicious
Propensity, and natural Accuteness, had an Aptitude for Mischief; which these
Craftsmen made Improvement of, and at length rendered suitable to their
abominable Purposes. -- Though we cannot suppose that Hughson really had the
Folly or Vanity to aspire to a Kingdom of the Conspirators erecting; yet the
Notion might be calculated and propagated, to captivate the Negroes, (for with
none but Fools and Negroes could it take:) And further to please them, it seems
they were persuaded, there should be a motley Government as well as motley
Subjects; for Caesar (Vaarck's,) was to be Governor over free Negroes, who were
to marry the Gentlewomen, and Caesar had got his white Governess already
provided. -- If these Phantasms and Delusions could have Force sufficient to
ensnare these simple Creatures (as we find the had) it mattered not how
extravagant soever they Folly of the Means was which seduced them to these
bloody Purposes, provided they served the Turn and Designs of our Enemies;
thereby disappointed the Supply of Provisions (...) his Majesty's Armament in
the West Indies; laid Waste this City, destroyed the Inhabitants, and prepared
the Way for an Invasion of his Majesty's Enemies, whether secret or (...), and
their making an easy Prey of the whole Province; neither did it signify how
illiterate Hughson was, he approved himself sufficiently to his Masters, by his
dexterous Prosecution of their Scheme; he did seduce the Negroes in the Manner
we have seen; he tempted them to frequent Visits at his House, by his
hospitable Entertainments, at such an Expense as it is incredible he could have
supported for such a Series of Time, as this Mischief must have been brooding,
merely upon the Spoils of a few Negroes's Pilferings, and without other private
Assistance. It must be allowed he was trusty in his Agency, very industrious,
and used no small Craft to encompass a Disciple: In the first Instance, if they
were not pre engaged by a Deputy, Hughson attempted to make them swear, by
Forms of Oaths accommodated to their own Customs, by Thunder and Lightning, and
such like horrible Imprecations, as have appeared in the Course of the
Evidence, without telling them what they were to swear to: If they scrupled
swearing without further Explanation concerning what; then he intimated, they
were to swear to Secresy, that in regard he kept a Public House, and
entertained Negroes contrary to Law, the Intent of the Oath was, that they
should not discover him therein; If they agreed to swear at all, 'twas easy to
add, (as we find he did) neither should they tell of what they saw going
forward at his House: Then upon the main Matter proposed, if they scrupled to
engage in the Conspiracy, from any Qualm arising either from the Inhumanity or
Wickedness of the Design; they were flattered they were all to be Freemen, and
'twas a meritorious Undertaking: If they thought it would be a Sin; there was a
Priest that could forgive Sins: If all this would not do, their Lives were
threatened if they would not engage, or at least if they discovered any Thing
about it: But so apt Pupils were most of them, that the bare Proposal of the
Scheme was sufficient to engage them immediately, at all Adventures.

Hughson artfully engaged in this infamous Project, a Neighbor's Negro, Jack,
(Comfort's) a Fellow of most remarkable Craft and Subtlety for one of his
Complexion, which qualified him afterward for a more material Witness
concerning these Deeds of Darkness for Jack had more Wit than to be hanged for
them. Jack was a dignified Man amongst them, a Captain of one of these Bands of
Fools, had so well approved his Parts and Capacity to Hughson and the rest,
that he had a Deputation for swearing, as it should seem; for he administered
Oaths, to such Converts as he made, either abroad or at home; and in both Cases
had great Opportunities of caballing with Negroes; for his Master was
frequently absent from home for several Weeks together, insomuch that Captain
Jack looked upon the House as his own, and himself as his own Ma^^^^* To (...)
Well every Morning and Evening resorted Negroes from ^ll Quarters of the Town
for Tea-Water; which therefore afforded him convenient Seasons for gaining
Parties, which he made Use of to the Utmost; and hereat Jack was so (...), that
he became the very Counter-part of his Master Hughson; for when their Scheme
was grown near ripe for Execution, Jack, as well as Hughson, had a List of
these black Confederates, their Devotees; and about a Month before the Fort was
burnt, Jack had as large Companies of Negroes at his Levees, as Hughson usualy
had at his, and buoyed them up with the same Hopes, that at the Expiration of
that Time, the French and Spaniards would be here to join them, and take the
Place; nevertheless, if they did not come, they were to agree, and did agree,
amongst them, to proceed and do all themselves.

We may perceive, that what has been unfolded concerning this Mystery of
Iniquity, came out by slow Degrees; the first Hint concerning the Conspiracy,
was given by Mary Burton to the Grand Jury, on her Examination the 22d of
April; and for some time after the Trial of Hughson, etc. for aught that had
appeared, he m^st have been deemed the Projector of it; though it had been
whispered that Roman Priests had been, and that some were then, in Town; no one
however cared to discover them, so as they might be laid hold of, and dealt
with, as a salutary Law of this Province directs. By Act of Assembly, II. WM.
and MARY, entitled, An Act against Jesuits and Popish Priests, reciting, That
diverse Jesuits and Popish Missionaries had [ then of late] come and for some
time had their Residence in the remote Parts of this Province, and other his
Majesty's adjacent Colonies, who by their wicked and subtle Insinuations,
industriously labored to debauch, seduce and withdraw the Indians from their
due Obedience to his most sacred Majesty, and to excite and stir them up to
Sedition, Rebellion, and open Hostility, against his Majesty's Government: For
Prevention whereof, It was Enacted, That all and every Jesuit and Seminary,
Priest, Missionary, or other spiritual or ecclesiastical Person, made or
ordained by any Power, Authority or Jurisdiction derived, challenged, or
pretended from the Pope or See of Rome, then residing within this Province, or
any Part thereof, should depart from and out of the same, at or before the
first Day of November then next.

And that all and every Jesuit, Seminary, Priest, Missionary, or other
spiritual or ecclesiastical Person, made or ordained by any Authority, Power,
or Jurisdiction, derived, challenged or pretended, from the Pope or See of
Rome, or that shall profess himself, or otherwise appear to be such, by
pr^ct^sing or teaching of others, to say any popish Prayers, by celebrating of
Masses, granting of Absolutions, or using any other of the Romish Ceremonies,
or Rites of Worship, by what Name, Title or Degree soever such Person shall be
called or known, who shall continue, abide or come into this Province, or any
Part thereof, after the first Day of November aforesaid; shall be deemed and
accounted an Incendiary, and Disturber of the public Peace and Safety, and a
Disturber to the true Christian Religion, and shall be adjudged to suffer
perpetual Imprisonment. And if any Person, being so sentenced and actually
imprisoned, shall break Prison, and make his Escape, and be afterward retaken;
he shall suffer such Pains of Death, Penalties and Forfeitures, as in Cases of
Felony.

And further, That every Person that shall wittingly and willingly receive,
harbor, conceal, aid, succor, and relieve, any Jesuit, Priest, Missionary, or
any other ecclesiastical Person of the Romish Clergy, knowing him to be such,
and be thereof lawfully convicted before any of his Majesty's Courts of Record
within this Province, (which Courts are thereby empowered and authothorized to
hear, try and determine the same) he shall forfeit the Sum of Two Hundred
Pounds, current Money of this Province; one Half to his Majesty, for and
toward the Support of the Government, and the other Half to the Informer, who
shall sue for the same in any Court of Record, etc. And such Person shall be
further punished, by being set in the Pillory on three several Days, and also
be bound to his good Behavior, at the Discretion of the Court.

And it is further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for every
Justice of the Peace, to cause any Person or Persons suspected of being a
Jesuit, Seminary, Priest, or of the Romish Clergy, to be apprehended, and
convened before himself and some other of his Majesty's Justices; and if such
Person do not give satisfactory Account of himself, he shall be committed to
Prison, in order to a Trial. Also it shall and may be lawful to and for any
Person or Persons, to apprehend, without a Warrant, any Jesuit, Seminary,
Priest, or other of the Romish Clergy, as aforesaid, and to convent him before
the Governor or any two of the Council, to be examined and imprisoned, in order
to a Trial, unless he give satisfactory Account of himself.




Ury the Priest was looked upon with a very jealous Eye, soon after this
Iniquity began to unfold; but no certain Evidence was given concerning him,
that he was such a One, and at last 'twas Suspicion only that caused him to be
taken into Custody: Some Footsteps of others were likewise traced, but they
were too artful and cunning, got out of Reach, left Ury the Dog to hold, and
sl^pt their Necks out of that Collar, which was afterward deservedly placed
about his; though he pretended to maintain and protested his Innocence with his
last Breath; -- they, it seems, were not so fond of this kind of Martyrdom.

(...) upon the Evidence of Burton and Kane, who corroborated the Testimony of
each other, and Sarah Hughson the Daughter's Evidence establishes the Credit of
both, as to what they say concerning him; so that the Gentlemen of the Grand
Jury which found the B^^l against him, weighing Matters heartily and
ingenuously, saw sufficient Cause to that Time, to credit Burton's Testimony;
and to do those Gentlemen Justice, 'twas owing in great Measure, to their good
Sense, Discretion, and indefatigable Labors, that this Affair was brought to
so happy an Issue; and their painful Service, during a Course of about three
Months daily Enquiry, ought to be remembered by this City and Country, with the
utmost Gratitude.

But it so happened, That for some Time before this Grand Jury was discharged,
there arose great Clamor against Mary Burton; for so many Negroes being daily
taken into Custody (though not solely through her Evidence, but rather
principally upon Discovery made by the Confessions of their black Associates
already in Custody, and their Testimony corroborated with hers) some People
began to be afraid of losing their Slaves; for, as Matters were then like to
turn out, there was no guessing where or when there would be an End of
Impeachments; every one had Reason to fear their own Negro would be sent for
next; and indeed, all Things duly considered, it was most probable, there were
but few of them that were not in the Secret; and the Girl had declared, that
there were many Negroes concerned, whose Persons she could or might probably
remember, but many whose Names she knew not; so that it should seem, at length
some Masters of these Slaves, as well as the Conspirators, endeavored to bring
the Witnesses, and the Notion of a Plot, into Discredit, if perchance it might
put a Stop, not only to further Prosecution, but further Enquiry and Discovery
also: And these Attempts, luckily for some, had such an Effect, that several
Whites, as well as Negroes, escaped Justice, who, had the same Evidence
appeared against them a few Weeks before, would scarce have been thought
Objects of Mercy; nor, from what we may have observed, would Mary Burton's
Evidence have stood single against them.

However, when the first Grand Jury drew near their Discharge, they were
importunate with Burton, to discover all the Persons she knew to be engaged in
this villainous Design; for about this Time she had suggested to some, that
there were White People of more than ordinary Rank above the Vulgar, that were
concerned, whom if she told of, they would not believe her: This having been
intimated to the Grand Jury, they were very pressing with her to discover all
she knew, whoever they were; but the Girl stood mute; nor could the Grand Jury
prevail with her to name any, not with Threatenings of Imprisonment; (...)
length, being tired with her Obstinacy, they delivered her over to two of the
Judges, requesting them to endeavor to sift the Matter out; but neither, upon
Trial, could the Judges by any Means prevail with her to be explicit to them
upon the Occasion; she complained (as it (...) she had before done to the Grand
Jury) that she had been very ill used; that not only her Life had been
threatened by Conspirators of both Complexions, if she made Discovery, but she
had also been frequently insulted, and abused by People of the Town, for
bringing their Negroes in question, and that People did not believe what she
said, and what signified speaking? or to this Purpose she expressed herself;
she intimated withal, that there were some People in Ruffles (a Phrase as was
understood to mean Persons of better Fashion than ordinary) that were
concerned, but seemed very unwilling to name any Names; 'til for the last
Experiment, she was told, she must expect to be imprisoned in the Dungeon, if
she continued obstinate; she then began to open, and named several Persons
which she said she had seen at Hughson's amongst the Conspirators, talking of
the Conspiracy, who were engaged in it; amongst whom she mentioned several of
known Credit, Fortunes, and Reputations, and of Religious Principles superior
to a Suspicion of being concerned in such detestable Practices; at which the
Judges were very much astonished; others again were imperfectly described by
her, whose reputed Religious Profession might square with such wicked Designs,
concerning whom the Girl had long before given broad Hints, but said she did
not know their Names, or what Part of the City they lived in; but it came out
at last, that one of them was a Doctor (a professed Papist, as common Fame had
it) whom she had seen several Times afterward in the Streets, and who upon
Sight of her, always turned another Way, to avoid meeting her: However it was,
this Person had the Discretion to remove himself out of this Province soon
after; and it is said, into foreign Dominions; and it were much to be wished,
that such others, as were justly liable to Impeachment, would act with the same
Prudence, and follow his Example, for the Sake of their own Safety, as well as
the Peace and Security of our selves. But upon the Whole, there was Reason to
conclude, that this Girl had at length been tampered withal; might it not be
suggested to her, that the Reward offered by Proclamation for the Discovery,
she was already sure of; for she was entitled to it; and might she not be
tempted to make further Advantage of the Affair? Upon this Supposition, the
Conspirators could not have devised a more effectual Means (if they could but
prevail with her) to put a Stop to further Enquiry, to procure the Names of
Persons to be called in question at last, concerning this Scene of Villainy,
whose Fortunes and Characters set them above Suspicion: They very well knew
(for Papists or Priests, as Ury intimated, are " too wise and too cunning") if
they could but prevail in this, they would thereby not only put a Stop to
further Discovery, but likewise have some Pretense, according to their usual
Custom, to clamor loudly, there was no Plot at all; 'twas a mere Dream! And to
serve this Turn, they had luckily with them some Owners of Slaves, who hapened
to humor this Artifice, though upon a different View.

'Twas fit this Matter should be stated in its proper Light; that on the one
Hand the Evidence of this Witness (but for whom next under the Interposition of
Divine Providence, this City would in all Probability have been laid waste in
Ashes, and many Families massacred) might have its due Weight, so far as
deserving of Credit; and on the other Hand, that where she may be justly
suspected to have exceeded the Bounds of Truth, there a Stop may be made, to
consider, and conjecture, how it might have come to pass, that she told some
Things incredible at the Winding up of this Affair; and weigh impartially also,
the whole Current of the other Evidence, remarking how it appears to confirm
and establish her Testimony, so far as it has been judged proper and ^^^ting to
publish it.

The other White People executed, as well as Ury, like true modern Romanists,
pretended to maintain (and did protest) their Innocence to their last Breath;
though Hughson himself, soon after his Conviction, seemed to betray strong
Symptoms of his Inclination to confess his Guilt* and make Discovery; but if he
was in earnest to have done so, in Hopes of saving his own Life, his Mind was
soon changed (as 'twas conjectured) by the Persuasion of his Wife; yet Kerry
left such Proofs behind her of many of the Particulars of this Conspiracy, and
of her own Guilt, as add great Force to the aforegoing Accounts of it; and her
rec^^^ing afterward, is another irrefragable Instance, how these Wretches do
prevaricate, even in their last Moments!

That a Plot there was, and as to the Parties and bloody Purpose of it, we
presume there can scarce be a Doubt amongst us at this Time; the Ruins of his
Majesty's House in the Fort, are the daily Evidence and Memento of it, still
before our Eyes: If the other Frights and Terrors this City was alarmed with,
to their great Consternation, are, as to some amongst us, so soon slipped into
Oblivion, yet surely others will think we ought once a Year at least, to pay
our Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving to the Divine BEING, that through his
merciful Providence and infinite Goodness, caused this inhumane horrible
Enterprise to be detected, and so many of the wicked Instruments of it to be
brought to Justice, whereby a Check has been put to the execrable Malice, and
bloody Purposes of our Foreign and Domestic Enemies, though we have not been
able entirely to unravel the Mystery of this Iniquity; for 'twas a dark Design,
and the Veil is in some Measure still upon it!

ERRATA.
Page, Col. Line 7. 1. 12. for Villians, read Villains. 9. 1. 25. after the
Word, Causes, add being. 9. 2. 2. at Top, f. laudible, read laudable. 9. 2. 12.
from the Bottom, f. Villians, r. Villains. 12. 1. 3. from the Bottom, f.
prevent, r. present. 14. 1. 1. f. Villians, r. Villains. 24. 1. 6. from the
Bottom, after the Word, hard, add what. 36. 2. 16. f. having, r. had. 36. 2. in
Note ( g) line 17, f. hereby, r. thereby. 37. 1. 6. from the Bottom, f. their,
r. this. 38. 2. 4. last Paragraph, dele not, before the Word, discover. 39. 2.
6. from the Bottom, f. come, r. came. 42. 2. 11. from the Bottom, r.
incredible. 52. 2. 13. from the Bottom, after the Word, inform, add the King's
Justices. 65. 1. 18. read the first Word, Mary. 76. 2. 7. from the Bottom, f.
where, r. were. 81. 2. 16. from the Bottom, f. Witness, r. Witnesses. 90 1. 12.
from the Bottom, f. Cooke's, r. Crooke's. 93. 1. 5. from the Bottom, r. Orders.
120. 1. 4. from the Bottom, before the Word, with insert, went. 123. 2. 5. Note
Letter (f) at Bottom, r. Dispatch. 124. 2. 7. f. Similitude, r. Simile. 125. 1.
3. line 4. r. Cotton. 128. 1. in the Note Letter (t) at Bottom, first Line,
dele likewise. 5 line, r. soon. 130. 1. 16. from the Bottom, instead of the
first Word, move, r. excite. 135. 2. The Paragraph at Top, concerning the
Hughsons, should have been placed the 13th June. 153. 2. 12. r. Court. 158. 2.
14. r. Hughson's 161. 1. What follows General Oglethorpe's Letter, in Ury's
Trial, to the Question put by the Court, to Mr. Murray, p. 162, col. (...).
should have been placed by Way of Notes, but was inserted by Mistake in the
Body of the Trial. 166. 1. 12. from the Bottom, r. Sacrament. 168. 2. 28. f.
proceed, r. precede. 168. 1. 15. f. aims. r. amiss. Line 21. f. el' etre, r.
d'etre. Line 26, f. de auter, r. d' autre. 169. 1. 2. Note (y) f. being, r.
was. 169. 2. 23. f. Waldanses, r. Waldenses,

APPENDIX:
DEPOSITION.
ANNE KANNADY, Wife of James Kannady of the City of New York, Peruke-Maker,
being duly sworn, deposes,

1. That on the Tuesday or Wednesday Evening (to the best of her Remembrance)
after the Deponent's Husband James Kannady, and several other City Officers had
been several Times in search at John Hughson's, after the Goods stolen from Mr.
Hogg's Shop; Mary Burton, then Servant to Hughson, came to the Deponent's House
to buy a Pound of Candles for her Master; and it being a very cold Evening, the
Deponent asked her to come in and warm herself, which she did; and thereupon
the Deponent took upon her to ask her several Questions: First of all she asked
her her own Name, which she told her as above; for the Deponent did not know
it, though she had been several Times at her House upon the like Errands, and
she knew that she lived at Hughson's: Then the Deponent asked her, whether that
was a black Child or a white Child which that Irish Beauty had, which lodged at
their House? and she made answer, that it was as white as any of her Children,
or any other Child. The Deponent then told her, that she heard that there was a
Negro who kept Company with her and was the Father of that Child; the said Mary
answered, there was a Negro came thither to her, but he was not the Father of
that Child, she believed: Then the Deponent took upon her to give the said Mary
good Advice; she told her, she would give her her Blessing as a Mother would a
Child, as she was a Stranger in the Country; the Deponent advised her to have
no Dealings with Negroes, and to have no Hand in Thievery, for that would be a
Means of bringing her to the Gallows.

2. That the Deponent then asked her, if she knew any Thing of the Thievery of
Hogg's Goods? and she several Times denied that she knew any Thing about the
Matter. The Deponent then asked her, if she had a Mind to be freed from
Hughson? if she had, and would discover the Goods, the Deponent would free her,
and she should come and live with her; then the said Mary answered, that her
Husband (meaning the Deponent's, who had been at Hughson's upon Search, as
aforesaid) was not cute enough: Then the Deponent said, tell me where the Goods
are, and I will take you away from him to Night; she answered, that she would
not tell her any Thing to Night, she would tell her Tomorrow; but that the
Deponent's Husband had trod upon them. Then the Deponent let the said Mary
return home.

3. That after this Conversation was over, the Deponent the same Evening went
to Mr. Mills, the Undersheriff, and told him what had passed as above;
whereupon the said Mills, Mr. Hogg and his Wife, and several Constables, with
the Deponent's Husband and herself, went down to Hughson's House; and the
Deponent desired Mills to go into the House first, and bring Mary Burton out to
her; but Mills staying a long Time, the Deponent went into the House to him,
and found him and his Wife and Mary Burton in the Parlour; and there she denied
all that she had said to the Deponent as above: Then the Deponent charged her
home with it, 'til at last the said Mary said, she could not tell them any
Thing there, she was afraid of her Life, that they would kill her: Whereupon
they took her out of the House; and when they had got a little Way from thence,
she put her Hand in her Pocket, and pulled out a Piece of Silver Money, which
she said was Part of Hogg's Money which the Negro had given her; whereupon they
all went with her to Alderman Banker's; and the Deponent informing him what she
had promised the said Mary, that is to say, to get her freed from her Master;
the Alderman directed that she should that Night lodge with the Undersheriff
at the City-Hall for Safety; and the Deponent wen^ with the said Mary, and left
her at Mr. Mills's accordingly.

4. That some time after the said Mary Burton was parted from Hughson (to the
best of Deponent's Remembrance, it was after the House in the Fort was burnt)
she came to the Deponent's House, and Deponent was talking about the Robbery at
Hogg's, and about Butter, Indigo, and Beeswax, which had been then lately
stolen from other Persons; and Mary said, that Hughson, his (...) and ^amily
had had them all, it was plain enough, and that (...) knew enough to hang and
burn them all: The Deponent then advised her to tell all that she knew, saying,
it (...) such People should go on in their Wickedness unpunished.

5. That some time after this, the said Mary said to the Deponent, that she was
better than ever her Mother was to her, that she had relieved her from the
Hands of her Enemies, by being the Means of taking her away from Hughson's; and
that if ev^^ it was in her Power, she would reward her handsomely for it.

6. That the said Mary Burton further said to this Deponent, that if they had
not taken her, the said Mary, from Hughson's the Night that they did, she
verily believed they (meaning the Hughsons) would either have murdered her, or
sent her away in a ^^oat by the next S^^^ing.

her Anne z Kann^dy. Mark
13 April 1742. Sworn before the Recorder. The same Day and Time James Kannady
and Mary Goddard (Daughter of said James and Anne) Wife of Christopher Goddard
of New York, Mariner, having severally heard the before mentioned Deposition
of Anne Kannady taken and read over in their Presence, (...) severally make
Oath, that that Part of the said Deposition which relates to what Discourse
passed between the said Anne Kannady and Mary Burton, did so pass between them
when they (the Deponents) were respectively present; and that what therein is
deposed, is the Sub^^^nce and Effect of what was so said between them.

Sworn before the Recorder.



DEPOSITION.
REBECCA HOGG, Wife of Robert Hogg of the City of New York, Merchant, depos^th,

1. That one Wilson, a Boy belonging to the Flamborough Man-of-War, used to
frequent her House, upon Pretense of Acquaintance with two White Boys, Servants
to two Gentlemen that lodged there.

2. That the Thursday before the Robbery was committed, the said Wilson came to
her House with a Man belonging to the aforesaid Ship, in order to buy some
ch^cqued Linen; and the Deponent showed them into the Shop, where he (Wilson)
bought something of her, and gave her a Spanish Nine-penny Silver Piece in pay;
and the Deponent unadvisedly opening her Desk to weigh it, she pulled out a
Drawer in View of the said Wilson, wherein were a considerable Number of
Spanish Pieces of Eight; whereupon she immediately recollected herself, and
^^ut to the Drawer and Desk again in Haste, thinking she had done imprudently
in exposing her Money to an idle (...) who used to be so often backwards and
forwards at her House, and thereupon made an Excuse to send the Piece of Money
aforesaid out of the House to be weighed. And on the Saturday Night following
her Shop was robbed.

3. That the Sunday Morning after, this Boy (Wilson) came to the Deponent's
House, as usual, and she was telling him how that she had been robbed, and that
as she knew he belonged to the Man-of-War, she thought he might be able to give
her some In^elligence of it; as there were several Sailors who frequented vile
Houses that were near her; the Deponent described some Snuff-Boxes and coined
Silver Pieces, one an Eight-Square Piece; whereupon he the said Wilson
answered, that he had been that Morning at the House of one Hughson, by the
North River, and there he saw one John Gwin (whom the Deponent understood to
have been a Soldier of that Name, a Person of vile Cha^^^ter, who lived in the
Deponent's back Street; but it turned out to ^e Caesar, Vaarck's Negro) whom he
saw pull out of his Pocket, a worsted Cap full of coined Silver; and that
Cuffee (Philipse's Negro) came into Hughson's upon Pretense of having his
Master's Shoes mended, and seeing John Gwin have this Money, he asked him to
give him some; and he counted him out Half-a-Crown in Pennies and asked him if
he would have any more, and pulled out an Handful of Silver in the Presence of
the Boy (Wilson) amongst which he said he saw the Eight-square Piece so
described by the Deponent as aforesaid; but the Deponent did not then suspect
Wilson to have had any Hand in it.

4. That upon this Information the Deponent told her Husband; and he and Mr.
Mills went the same Sunday Morning to Hughson's, to enquire for one John Gwin,
a Soldier; and Hughson told them, that he was not there, nor did he use the
House* But Caesar, the Negro who went by that Name (as he himself after he was
apprehended, and after his Conviction, confessed to this Deponent) was at the
same Time standing in the Chimney Corner, in the same Room where Mr. Hogg and
Mr. Mills came: Whereupon Mr. Hogg returned to his House, and told the
Deponent, that there was no such Soldier as John Gwin, that used that House*
that the Boy (Wilson) who was present, thereupon (...), it was not a White Man,
but Caesar, a Negro belonging to one Vaarck, a Baker, who went by that N^^^^.

5. Upon this Caesar was apprehended the same Sunday about three o'Clock, and
being brought to Wilson, to know if that was the right Person, he said it was.

6. That upon her examining the said Negro Caesar, in Jail several Times, as
well before his Trial as after his Conviction of this Robbery, he confessed to
her as follows.

7. That the Boy Wilson, used to be frequently in Company with him (Caesar)
Cuffee (Philipse's) and Prince (Auboyneau's) Negroes, at Mr. Philipse's House,
and at Hughson's; and that he (Wilson) came to Hughson's, where were present
Hughson and his Family, Caesar (himself) Cuffee and Prince, and there he told
them where they might have a good Booty, and described the Deponent's House and
Shop to them, and told them what Money he had seen in the Drawer, as aforesaid,
and said, he believed there must be more by seeing that in one Drawer: That
Caesar and he did not know where Mr. Hogg lived, but he knew the House if it
was where the Widow Scott lived formerly; and that so said Hughson, that he did
not know Mr. Hogg, nor where he lived* But Caesar further said, that upon this
Information they contrived it at Hughson's how to commit this Robbery; and that
he (Caesar) going to see Peggy Kerry, who lodged at Hughson's, on the Saturday
Evening following, he dropped asleep there, and about Ten o'Clock John Hughson
came to him, and waked him, telling him, that he had forgot what he had
promised the Boy (Wilson) Cuffee and Prince, to go to the House in
Broad-Street, to get that Booty.

8. That thereupon he ( Caesar) went to Mr. Philipse's House ( Cuffee's
Master's) and finding no Body there, he sa^ himself down in the Cellar-Kitchen
by the Fire; and by-and-by hearing his Confederates coming, he feigned himself
asleep, and they came in with a large Bundle, and hid it in a Bran Box in the
Stable or Outhouse, in the Yard, as he discovered by their Talk, they thinking
him asleep; for they did not attempt to wake him, but went out again in search
of further Prey.

9. That when they were gone, he went and took the Bundle they had so hid, and
carried it to John Romme's at the New Battery, who opened the Door for him
himself, and let him in, and he (Caesar) threw the Bundle in a Chair, which was
tied up in a large Table-Cloth, which Romme opened, and took out a Piece of
Cotton and Linen Cheque, and a Pair of Silver Knee-Buckles belonging to Mr.
Hogg* and some other Linen Things which he could not particularly remember;
and after this, he (Caesar) carried the Remainder of the Bundle to Hughson's,
and left them in the Room where Peggy was, and went to Bed; and in the Morning
when he awaked, he took the Snuff-Boxes, a Child's Whistle, and Ring, and a
Pair of Earrings, and a Locket with four Diamonds, and gave them to Peggy,
with some Money; and the Linen and ch^cqu'd Shirt he left with Peggy, to
distribute as she thought proper, but he bid her give an Apron to the Girl
(meaning Mary Burton;) and when he (Caesar) went down Stairs, he distributed
Money to Hughson, his Wife, and their Children, and likewise the Servant Girl.

10. That Caesar confessed to the Deponent, that when he came to Hughson's with
the Things, the Family was all a-bed; but that they had left open a Window, as
was usual, and he climed upon the Shed, and got into the House, and went to Bed
to Peggy, as Hughson and his Family kn^w he used to do every Night.

Rebecca Hogg.
14 April, 1742. Sworn before the Recorder.
15th JULY, 1742.
THE Recorder having been informed by Mary Burton, that she had several Times
talked to the Wife of Daniel Masters, Carman, concerning the Conspiracy, and
what she had heard the Negroes and the Hughsons often talk about it, whilst she
lived at Hughson's, and this before the Fire at the Fort; he spoke to Daniel
Masters, and desired him to send his Wife to him, in order, as he told him, to
enquire of her about it; Within three or four Days afterward Susannah Masters
came to the Recorder, (viz. this Morning) and he examined her upon the Matter,
and took down what she said in the Form of a Deposition, consisting of Twelve
Sections or Paragraphs, which she signed and swore to, after hearing the same
distinctly read over: the Recorder being obliged to go out, and pressed in
Point of Time, he did not examine her so fully as otherwise he would have done;
but upon reading over the Deposition in the Afternoon, several other Questions
occurred to him, which he thought might be proper to interrogate her upon;
therefore he then sent for her again, and she came very readily, and ^^uely
answered the Questions proposed to her; Notes were taken at large of the fresh
Information she gave; which she was told were to be drawn out in proper order,
and added to her Deposition, and the Whole to be fair copied, ready to be read
over to her the next Morning, in order to be sworn and signed; and she promised
to come the next Morning for that Purpose; but it may be presumed she had been
otherwise advised; for though her Husband had been several times afterward,
ordered to send her again; yet she thought fit to decline coming; the Recorder
did not care to be over sollicitous about it, for some Reasons; but has
ventured to give the Public her Examination at large, as it was drawn out from
his Notes, which he does av^rr, he thinks is faithfully done; and to do the
Woman justice, she seemed to behave upon the Occasion with the greatest
Sincerity and Candor. For Distinction, the particular Paragraghs contained in
her first Deposition, which were read over to her, and by her sworn to and
signed, are printed in Italick.

Note, Upon the fair c^p^ing, some of the Paragraphs were transposed, and the
Words enclosed in the Crotchets. thus, [] at the End of the 10 * were added
upon her second Examination.

The DEPOSITION and EXAMINATION of SUSANNAH MASTERS, Wife of Daniel Masters, of
the City of New York.
She said,

1. That Mary Burton, ^ate Servant to John Hughson (executed for the
Conspiracy) soon after her Removal from her said Master, (upon the Discovery of
Mr. Hogg' s Goods the last Year, which were stolen and lodged at the said
Hughson' s House) came to live with one Wilson, in the same Street with this
Deponent, with whose Family this Deponent was well acquainted, they used to
fetch Water at this Deponent's House, and to dry their Clothes in her Yard; and
after Mary Burton came to live with Wilson, she used often to come to the
Deponent's House upon the same Errands, which gave the said Mary frequent
Opportunities of talking to this Deponent; and she said she was glad she was
got from Hughson' s, to the Place where she now was; for she was afraid there
would be Mischief in the Town; for that she knew there used to be Cabals of
Negroes at Hughson' s whilst she lived there, almost every Night at Supper, and
they used to make her wait upon them; and at such Meetings Hughson and the
Negroes used to talk of killing the People and burning the Town; that the
Governor' s House should be the first, and then they would begin at the Fly,
and so go through the whole City; and that Hughson's Wife said, that rather
than it should go undone, she would lend an Hand herself; and when all this was
done, it was agreed among them, that Hughson was to be King, his Wife Queen,
Caesar (Vaarck' s Negro) Governor, and Peggy his Mistress Governess.

2. That Mary said, that the Hughsons and the Negroes several times threatened
her, that if ever she discovered any Thing out of the House, that she heard
there, they would certainly make away with her.

3. That the said Mary had discoursed in this manner (...) the Deponent three
several Times, before she spoke of it to her Husband; but it had made the
Deponent very uneasy, though she could not know how to give Credit to it.

4. That at the Times of this Discourse, Mary Burton seemed very uneasy, and
used to sit down and cry and bemoan herself, and said, she was but a young
Girl, a Stranger in the Country, and no Friends, and she was in Danger of her
Life; the Deponent th^n asked her, why she did not go to a Magistrate, and make
a Discovery of all this? Mary answered, that if she should tell them what she
knew, they would not believe her, as she was a poor Girl and a Stranger.

5. That upon the Girl's crying and bemoaning herself so to her, the Examinant
(considering the Circumstances she was under from the Manner of her relating
her Story*) was very much affected, and could not but take great Compassion of
her, as she had no Friends or Relations in this Country to advise with upon her
Case, or to protect her; and yet the Examinant says, she would at some times be
cheerful and merry, and laughing at the Folly of the Conspirators, when she was
telling the Examinant of some particular odd Passages which happened at such
Nightly Meetings; and that she bore up against the Difficulties she was under,
much better than the Examinant could have done in the like Circumstances, and
that she thought she had very good Spirits.

6. That the said Mary used further to talk, that when Hughson and the Negroes
had any Thing extraordinary to do at Nights, the Hughsons would send her up to
Bed; and that the Night Hogg' s Goods came thither, they had sent her up to
Bed, and she heard when the Goods came, and she got up and looked out of the
Window, and saw the Goods delivered in, but it being dark she could not
discover who they were that brought them, for there were many of them, but she
heard and knew the Voices of the Negroes Caesar (Vaarck's) Prince (Auboyneau's)
and Cuffee (Philipse's)

7. That Mary told the Deponent, that the Night Hogg' s Goods were stolen,
Caesar was asleep upon the Table; (...) he had been drinking very hard, and
John Hughson came to him about Eleven o'Clock and waked him, and said to him,
You forget your Promise, don't you? Caesar answered, No, Sir, I don't, and
thereupon get up and went out; and then Hughson sent Mary to Bed; and Mary
said, that upon, this she suspected something extraordinary was to be done, she
could not sleep; and she heard the Noise when they brought the Goods, which she
took to be about Twelve or One o'Clock.

8. That Mary Burton told the Deponent, that she saw the Goods the next
Morning; and that Caesar offered her as much speckled Linen before Peggy, as
would make her an Apron, but she said she would not have it, and threw it down
upon the Floor, and told them she did not want it; that want it she did, but
that she would not have it in that manner; that she told them she believed they
did not come honestly by it; at which she said they were affronted; but she did
not value it, she would not receive any Thing of them, if she could but get
Victuals, Drink and Clothes as long as she staid with them, that was all she
cared for: That Caesar offered her a Piece of Silver, which she supposed was to
engage her to look after Peggy in her lying in; but she said, No, she would not
take care of her and her black Child, but perhaps she might have submitted to
have looked after White People's.

9. That at last the Deponent told her Husband of what had passed between her
and Mary; but at first he thought it was all idle Talk in the Girl, and could
not give any Credit to it, and rebuked the Deponent for giving an Ear to her.

10. That the said Mary further said, That there were many White People, and
some in Ruffles, that used to come to Hughson' s, and go into a private Room
with Hughson; and if she, when she was bid, brought any Wine or any Thing to
the Door of the Room where they were, Hughson used to stand ready at the Door
and receive it, and send her away again: That these White People in Ruffles
used to come seldom; but they used to send Letters and Money in them to Hughson
often; [for that she has received several Letters brought thither, and has felt
Money in them, large round Pieces, which she took to be milled Spanish Pieces
of Eight.]

11. That the said Mary said, That Hughson had a large Parcel of Arms, which he
hid under Ground; but she did not know what became of them.

12. That the said Mary told the Examinant, that Kannady the Constable's Wife
(at the time that he had been searching at Hughson's in Quest of Hogg's Goods
that had been stolen) upon Mary's going to her Shop upon an Errand, advised
her, if she knew any Thing of Hogg's Goods, to discover it, or else, she told
her, she might be brought into Trouble; and that Mary told her, Ah! said she,
the Constables in this Place were not half cute enough, that they went over
them several Times, and had poked a Stick (or Cane she thought she said) into a
Place where some of them were (the Examinant apprehended her, that there was
some Place in the Stairs that was broken that they were so poking at) and Mary
said, that she could scarce for bear laughing to see how dumb they were, and
yet she dared not tell them.

[ Hereupon Ann Kannady's proceeding Deposition being read over to the
Examinant, she declared,]

13. That Mary Burton had told her what had passed between the said Ann Kannady
and her the said Mary, which to the best of the Examinant's Remembrance, was
much to the same Purpose as is related in the said Ann Kannady's Deposition,
and that soon after she came to live with Wilson as aforesaid, and before the
Fire at the Fort.

14. That all the Conversation before related, passed between the Deponent and
the said Mary concerning the Conspiracy before the Fire at the Fort, and before
the Proclamation issued, promising a Reward to such as should make Discovery of
any Person or Persons concerned in setting Fire to the Houses.

15. That Mrs. Waldron who is since married to -- Miller, coming one Day to the
Examinant's House, before the Fire at the Fort, Mary Burton being there, she
related before her most of the Particulars herein before set forth, much to the
same Purpose as before related* and the said Mrs. Waldron was very much
surprised a^^t.

16. That the Day the Fort was fired, Mary Burton came to the Deponent's House,
and said to her, Now you see this is the Beginning of it, Mrs. Masters; they
said the Governor's House should be the first; you did not seem to take much
Notice of what I said to you* and Mary seemed to be in a very great Fright, and
much perplexed, and said, 'twas a thousand Pities it should not be discovered;
but says she, if I was to speak what I know of it, they would not believe me,
and the (...), when she looked upon the Houses, she thought what a Pity 'twas,
that they must all come down.

17. That after the Fire at the Fort the said Mary used to come frequently to
the Examinant's House, until the Time that her Master, Wilson, removed to live
in the Fly, which was at May Day, 1741; and she would often be talking about
these Matters, and of her Fears and Apprehensions, that she should be murdered
by the Negroes; and she told the Examinant one Day, after she had been first
examined by the Grand Jury concerning Hogg's Goods, that she met one of
Vaarck's Negroes Bastian.
who was one of the Conspirators (whose Master lived near the Examinant) and he
asked her, whether she had discovered any Thing about the Fires? and Mary said
she answered him, No; and the Negro replied, We shall soon take Care that you
shall not tell any more; or Words to some such Purpose; and Mary said, she came
immediately into the Examinant's House, before ^he went to her Master's; and
she seemed to be frightened almost out of her Wits, when she told the Examinant
this Story, and said, she looked behind her all the Way, expecting she should
be followed and knocked on the Head.

18. That after Wilson was removed into the Fly, the said Mary told the
Examinant, that one Sunday Morning her Master and Mistress being gone to
Church, a Negro who she believed did belong to old Hughson (Father of John
Hughson executed) came into her Master Wilson's, Cellar-Kitchen, and asked if
there was a Barber there? that Mary answered him No; that the said Negro made a
Pretense that he wanted to send the Boy out (the only Person in the House
besides herself) in order to fetch him a Barber to shave him; but Mary said she
was afraid he had some ill Design, and would not let the Boy go; and at last,
when Church was near out, the Negro went away, and People beginning to come
into the Streets, the Negro took to his Heels and run away; and she said she
thought to have got somebody to have laid hold of him, but he made too much
Haste out of reach: That afterward she told her Fears and Apprehensions to a
Magistrate, and Care was taken to remove her from her Master Wilson's; and she
was then lodged again at the Under-Sheriff's at the City-Hall, where she was to
remain, and the Corporation purchased her Indentures of Wilson for that Purpose.

19. That this Examinant was out upon the Common at the Execution of Quack and
Cuffee, where she met the said. Mary Burton, and the Examinant said to her, she
wondered how she had Courage enough to be there; she answered, that she knew
they had deserved it, and that if half the Negroes in Town were executed, she
believed they had deserved it; that she knew a great many of them by Sight, but
did not know their Names, nor who they belonged to.

20. That when the Governor had ordered a Military Nightly-Watch to be kept in
this City, that Evening that Philipse's Storehouse was burnt, Mary (having
been talking to the Examinant about the Conspiracy, and the several Fires which
had happened that Day) said, That was right, and the only Way to prevent
further Mischief.

21. That when several Fires had thus happened, the Examinant was then
convinced of the Truth of what the said Mary had often before related to her;
and the Examinant's Husband resolved to inform, and did inform a Magistrate of
what Mary had told the Examinant, or of the Substance of (...) Examinant's
Husband informed her.

22. And lastly, the Examinant says, that from the Beginning of these
Conversations with the said Mary Burton, about these P^ottings and Caballings
between the Hughsons and the Negroes, the Examinant had heard the said Mary
mention the Names of several White Persons of Condition beyond the Vulgar, who
she said resorted sometimes to Hughson's, and used to go into a Room with him
in private, whom she suspected; and others who used to be with the Negroes and
the Hughsons in public, whom she said she knew, from what she had seen and
heard at such Meetings, were concerned in the Conspiracy [whose Names the
Examinant did not care to mention, without a Promise not to insert them in her
Examination] but among several others she had heard her name Corry, the
Dancing Master, as one particularly, who used to be with the Hughsons and the
Negroes, when they were talking about burning the Town and killing the People.

The following Letter and Dialogue, were sent from Mr. FAVIERES, of the City of
New York, Merchant, directed to the Recorder.
SIR,
HAVING been often interrogated concerning some Discourse I had with the Negro
Bastian, concerning the Conspiracy; you were pleased to propose to me, that I
should recollect myself as well as I could, and set down the Substance of it,
by Way of Dialogue; which I have done, according to the best of my Remembrance,
as follows.

Being at New-^^ndon with my Sloop the Beginning of last September, Elias Rice
Commander, having sixteen Negro Men and one Negro Woman on board, who ^ere
transported for having a H^nd in the late Plot, and have since been delivered
at Hispaniola; I about that Time received a Letter from my Wife at New York,
dated the 31st Day of August, 1741. in which Letter she informed me, that one
John Ury had been executed the Saturday before, as (...) concerned in the
Conspiracy; and that it was the (...) of many People, that he was innocent of
what had ^^en alleged against him at Court: This Piece of (...) occasioned me
to go on Board, to try what I could lea^^ from the Negroes; and I was relating
this Account of Ury to Captain Rice, in French, and Bastian, one of the
transported Negroes, who attended on Captain Rice, being near the Door of the
Cabin within hearing; at my saying, a great many People thought him innocent,
he seemed to smile, and spoke as if somewhat surprised; He innocent! (says he)
He was one of the Worst of them all. Upon which I said to him, Bastian* you
know all that was to have been done, and you must (...) me all that you know of
the Matter; and he answered that if I would come on board in the Afternoon, he
would ^ela^e to me all he knew concerning the Plot; but was unwilling any of
the Negroes should hear him. I according to his Request returned on Board in
the Afternoon, and taking him privately into the Cabin, I put the following
Questions to him; which without Scruple he answered as I have here penned down,
or to the same Effect

Note, That most of the Conversation was in French, Bastian having been bred
from a Boy in Mr. Fauconnier' s Family, where they chiefly talked that Language.

Question. Bastian, seeing you are now to be transported, and that it has
pleased the Governor to pardon you for a Crime, wherein many of your Associates
have suffered Death; you need not fear any dangerous Consequences by giving me
an impartial Account of all you know concerning the Negro Plot; tell me all you
know of that Affair from the Beginning to the End, without amusing me with any
Falsehoods; and this you may depend upon, it will in a great Measure, obtain a
Pardon likewise from God, for your many and detestable Sins.


Answer. Sir, you may depend upon it, that I shall declare to you nothing but
what I am very certain of.


Q. Who was the first Person that introduced you at Hughson's?


A. Caesar, belonging to my Master.


Q. The first Time you were at Hughson's, what did you do there?


A, Hughson himself filled me a Bumper of Liquor, and after having drank it, I
found my self quite intoxicated; but I remember he brought me a Book, and bid
me lay my Hand on it, and bid me swear, and told me, if I refused it he would
kill me upon the Spot; finding myself in so great a Stress, to save my Life I
took the Oath.


Q. What Book was it that Hughson made you swear upon, was it a Bible?


A. I don't know what Book it was, but by its make, I thought it looked like
those Books you call Bibles.


Q. What was it Hughson obliged you to stand to, and after what Manner did you
swear?


A. By Lightning and Thunder, and by Hell-Fl^^es, that I would set fire to
whatever I came across, and destroy as many Whites as I could.


Q. What did you propose to do, if in case you had got the upper Hand of the
Whites; did Hughson make you any Promise?


A. He promised to make us all free.


Q. Did there generally use to resort many Negroes at Hughson's?


A. Yes; for I have been there many a Time when I have told Fifteen, often
Twenty, and sometimes Thirty Negroes.


Q. Did you use to eat and drink there, whenever you went to see Hughson?


A. We always had a good Supper, and never wanted for Liquor.


Q. The Night after the Fort burnt, did you return to Hughson's?


A. No; but the Night after that we were a jolly: Company, and had a fine
Supper prepared for us, and seemed all of us to be well pleased with our late
good Success.


Q. Do you know any Whites that were concerned with you? Did you ever see any
at Hughson's, at your Meetings?


A. I have seen Will Kane there very often, and two or three Soldiers whom I
knew not, and another little Man who was also a Stranger to me.


Q. Was that little Man young or old? of what make was he? and how did he
employ his Time among you?


A. He was far from being a tall Man, but short, very lean, and a pale Visage;
nor was he old; his Place was at the upper End of the Table; he often
encouraged us to remain firm, like Men, in our Designs: He read and wrote a
great deal.


Q. Do you know what he wrote?


A. I have seen him take the Names of the Negroes down, from time to time, by
Way of List.


Q. But how could Hughson, who was but a poor Man, support so great an Expense
at his House? there were Suppers every Night for you all, Candles, and many
other Things, the Charge of which must have been very great: This goes beyond
my Comprehension; for you know the Person who wrote so much, must have had
Lights to see; I say, I do not know how he did to support all that Charge!


A. The Negroes brought what they could steal to him; the White Man, (...)
speak of was short-sighted, and never wrote or read without Spectacles.


Q. They say he was a Romish Priest; do you know any Thing about that?


A. I don't know that he was a Priest; but he used to exhort us like a
Minister, to continue (...) in our Intentions, and used to throw his Hands
about like a Preacher; and (...) said to us at the Meeting at Hughson's the
second Night after the Fort was burnt, N^w God has prospered us in the
Beginning, in burning the Fort, and we need not fear; we must be resolute, and
proceed in the Work, and no Doubt God will prosper us in all; That the Town was
too much alarmed at present; but they must go on when the fine Weather came;
That they (the Negroes) need not fear, he would forgive them their Sins if they
kept true to their Engagements, and by and by the Spaniards would come, and
then they should be free.


Q. Have you been baptized by that little Man, they called a Priest?


A. No; but I have been told by some Negroes of our Company, that the little
Man had baptized them.


Q. Is it true, you were to burn the English Church?


A. Yes, we agreed to burn it last Winter; but the Man whom you call a Priest
opposed it, and advised us to stay till Spring, when there would be a larger
Congregation.


Q. Your Intentions then were to destroy all the Whites while they were in the
Church; how were you to go about it? had you Arms? and could you think
otherwise but that many would have made their Escape through the Doors and
Windows? Explain me these Things as well as you can.


A. We had Combustibles prepared by Doctor Harry, made up into Balls, which we
were to set fire to, and throw them upon the Roof of the Church, which sticking
fast would set fire to the Shingles; after which, guarding the Doors, we were
to let none pass, but destroy them all in the Church with our Firearms; for we
had a great Number of them at Hughson's.


Q. Where did you use to keep your Arms at Hughson's? for when the Searchers
were sent there, they were not to be found.


A. I believe not; for the Plot beginning to come to Light, Hughson, to secure
himself, had them all thrown into the River; before that they were hid in a
Hole in the Cellar.


Bastian further declared, that he had not seen the Person they called a
Priest, since he came into Jail.

James Favieres.

19th MARCH, 1742.
JAMES FAVIERES, of New York, Merchant, made Oath before the Recorder, that the
aforegoing Relation contained the Substance of the Discourse that passed
between him and Bastian, a Negro, at the Time and Place above mentioned,
according to the best of his Remembrance.

DEPOSITION.
ELIAS RICE, says,

1. That in his Passage with the Seventeen Negroes, Sarah (Burk's)
acknowledged, that she was concerned in the Plot; never was at Hughson's, but
often at Comfort's amongst the Negroes a forwarding of the Plot; and that she
had wilfully set fire to her Mistress's House several Times.

2. That Dick (of Teneyck) was cooking the Victuals for the Ship in the
Passage, and the Negroes suspected he had a Design of poisoning them, and saw
him busy with yellow Stuff in Shells in a Bag; which upon Examination the
Negroes looked upon to be Poison, which he had from Doctor Harry (the Negro.)
Some of the Negroes knew it to be Poison, the same Sort they saw in Guiney.

3. Jacob (H. Rutgers's) and Gill (Lush's) denied being at Hughson's, but all
the rest owned it.

4. Bastian owned he had been a Head*Man there, was there very often, and saw a
little Man there they called a Priest; but never saw him after he came to Jail.

5. Tickle said, he had killed Fowls there: London (Kelly's) had carried a
Quarter of Mutton there.

6. Windsor (Myers Cohen's) had carried a Turkey there; and all (except as
aforesaid) owned they had marry a good Feast, and good Liquor there.

7. That Bastian was always during the Passage, very free in owning his being
engaged in the Plot: and kept to the same Story; and said, that he had often
seen Kane at Hughson's; that he was concerned in the Plot, and many more
Soldiers that used to come there with him, whose Names he knew not.

8. That Bastian declared, that all the Negroes that were executed, he had
often seen at Hughson's Entertainments, and that they were concerned in the
Plot.

Elias Rice.
Sworn before the Recorder.
DEPOSITION.
JOHN THURMAN of the City of New York, Baker* being duly sworn on the Holy
Evangelists of Almighty God, deposes, That after John Campbell came to live at
the House where John Hughson formerly lived, by the North River, he applied to
the Deponent, to put his Children to School to him, informing him, that John
Ury, who was a very good Scholar, a Latinist, was to be Partner with him in
keeping School; and that he the Deponent would be sure to have his Children
well instructed, but the Deponent having no good Opinion either of Campbell or
the other, gave no Heed to his Proposal. That soon after Ury came to live in
that Neighborhood, as the Deponent was informed, he took upon him to preach,
and went about inviting the People to come and hear him; and that some of the
Deponent's Family, as they afterward told him, did go to hear him: That before
Ury came to live in that Neighborhood, he knew his Person by Sight, having
seen him several Times. That the Day John Hughson, his Wife and Peggy, were
executed, the Deponent went upon the Common to see the Execution; and as he was
returning from the Gallows, he saw the said Ury near Spring*Garden, returning
with the Crowd to Town, and walked along side of him, till he the Deponent came
to the Market by Bogart's the Baker, when the Deponent turned down toward his
own House: That the Deponent did at that Time, and still does, think, that Ury
was returning from the Execution of the Hughsons.

John Thurman.
Sworn before the Recorder.
The INFORMATION of John Williams of the City of New York, Baker, touching the
Confession made to him by Will (Ward's Negro) executed for the Conspiracy.
1. THAT he (Williams) lived next Door to Mr. Ward the Clock-Maker, in
Duke-Street, and knew his Negro Man Will, who was executed as a Confederate in
the Conspiracy; That he always had great Suspicion of him, of being concerned
in some Mischief, having seen him at play in his Master's back Storehouse,
with many* Negroes at a Time, of a Sundays Afternoon, playing at Dice or Pa^pa;
and he had heard also that this Fellow had been concerned in the Conspiracy at
Antigua, about four of five Years ago, which made him keep a very watch^^^
(...) him.

2. That the Day Mr. Philipse's Storehouse was fired, and there was an Alarm
that the Negroes were rising, he thereupon went home to get his Arms in
Readiness, and to secure his House and Family; and as he had conceived a great
Jealousy of Ward's Will, he called at his (...) and asked him, where this Negro
was, in order that he might have him in sight, and secure him; Ward answered he
was back in the Kitchen; and he calling him sever^^ Times, Will at last
answered out of the Garret: He was ordered down, and Williams commanded him to
keep upon his Master's Stoup, within his Sight, and told him if he offered to
s^ir from the Door, he would shoot him; Williams having at the same Time a Gun
in his Hand; and there he accordingly remained 'til the H^rry was over.

3. That some time afterward, when the Affairs of the Plot broke out, and
several Persons had been executed for the same, and the Proclamation was
issued, promising Pardon to such Negroes as should come in by the Time therein
limited; the Day before the Expiration of that Term, he charged Will home with
being concerned, and advised, if it was so, that he would go and confess to
save his Life; but he stiffly denied knowing any Thing of the Matter, and said,
Think not, Master, that I am such a Fool; for the Negroes here live as well as
the White People at Antigua; I was concerned in a Plot there, and had been
hanged, only I turned King's Evidence, and by that Means got c^ear; I could not
stay there on Account of the other Negroes, being apprehensive of their
intending to kill me. And the next Day he was impeached and taken into Custody;
(...) after which, Williams went to talk to Will in Jail, in order to try what
he could g^t out of him; and asked, what he thought of it now? he answered, he
thought he was in the Wrong, that he had not taken his Advice; but he thought
they were all hanged or sent off, that knew he was concerned.

4. Then Williams asked him, what would become of him in case the Plot had gone
on, whether he had a greater Antipathy against him than any other? he said, No;
but he would have fared as the rest; he should have killed all that came in his
Way; for he had taken the Oath of the Priest; and there were a matter of Twenty
or Thirty of them in all, that were sworn together by the Priest, a little Man,
with a long Gown on; but he did not know him or ever had seen him before as he
knew of: Williams asked him, to what they were sworn; he answered, to burn and
destroy what they could: Williams asked him, what would have become of his
Master? he answered, as he was sworn, he must have gone on to destroy what he
could.

7th APRIL, 1742.
EXAMINATION of Ann Lyng, Jemima Ross her Mother, and Jemmy -- Taken by the
Recorder and Deputy Town Clerk.
ANN LYNG, Wife of Harman Lyng of the City of New York, Mariner, declared.
That some short Time after John Ury the Priest was executed, she was one Sunday
Morning boiling of Chocolate, and Jemmy (a little Boy of about six or seven
Years of Age, who was boarded with her and her said-Mother) said to her, Aunt
Nancy, my Mammy Campbell used to boil Chocolate every Morning, but used to give
me Suppan, and sometimes Chocolate with it: Whereupon Ann Lyng asked him, who
used to eat the Chocolate? he answered, his Daddy Campbell So the Child used to
call him; he boarded, and went to School to him, before he came to Ann Lyng.
and Mr. Ury used to eat the Chocolate; Then she asked him if he knew Ury? he
answered, Yes, very well; for he used to be by, when his Daddy Campbell and
Hughson used to play upon a Board with little Pieces of Wood upon it; she then
asked him if he knew Hughson? he said, very well; he was a tall Man, with a
thin Face, used to wear a red Coat, and a white Cap; that he often came to his
Daddy Campbell's, but always at, Night; that he knew Ury well, he used to teach
him his Book sometimes, and was a very little Man, and lodged sometimes at his
Daddy Campbell's.

Mrs. ROSS declared, That upon her said Daughter's telling her what Jemmy had
said, as above, she asked him Questions much to the above Purpose; and the
Child declared over again to the same Effect.

Then the Boy was asked some Questions by the Recorder and Town Clerk, tending
to the same Purpose, concerning his knowledge of Hughson and Ury* and he
described them as above, and said, they used often to be together at his Daddy
Campbell' s, and his Daddy Campbell and Hughson used to play at Chequers, or
Draughts, [as they understood, according to the Child's Description; for he was
put in Mind of it, it seems, by Ann Lyng's Child having some Beans given i^,
which it was playing w^^^, and throwing about the Floor,] and that Ury used to
(...) by, and looking at them, and used to say, Now Campbell you will win, and,
now Hughson you will win.

The Child also described the Persons of Hughson and Ury very exactly, and
said, Ury used to wear Spectacles, and made Punch for Hughson and Campbell,
whilst they were playing.

A LIST of White Persons taken into Custody on Account of the Conspiracy: 1741.
Names of Persons. Occupations. When committed Arraigned Convicted. Confessed.
Executed. Discharged. Margaret Kerry, alias Salingburgh. 4 March. 2 and 4 June,
for receiving stolen Goods. John Hughson, Shoemaker and Alehouse keeper. 18
April: 4 June, 12 June. Sarah Hughson, Wife to John Hughson, 18 April. Sarah
Hughson, the Daughter. 6 May. 8 July, Pardoned. 5 John Romme, Shoemaker, and
Alehouse-keeper. 18 May. Discharged on Security for his departing the Province.
Elizabeth Romme, his Wife. 8 May. Peter Connolly, Soldier. 23 June. 31 August.
John Ury, A Priest. 24 June. 15 and 22 July 29 July 29 August Edward Kelly,
Soldier. 25 June. 31 August, 10 William Kane, Soldier. 4 July. 5 July,
December. Enlisted for (West Indies. John Coffin, Pedlar. 6 July. Edward
Murphey, Soldier. 8 July. Andrew Ryan, Soldier. 9 July. 31 August: David
Johnson, Hat-maker. 9 July. 15 John Corry, Dancing Master 13 July. Thomas
Hughson, Yeoman, 12 and 13 June. Pardoned, on Condition of departing the
Province. Nathaniel, Thomas Hughson' s Sons. Yeomen, Walter, William, 20
Richard, Corker, mentioned is Kane' s Evidence in Ury' s Trial, and in his
Examinations, never found. Fagan, Plumm^^*

A LIST of NEGROES committed on Account of the Conspiracy.
Negroes. Masters or Owners. Committed. Arraigned, Convicted, Confessed, Burnt.
Hanged. Transported to Discharged. Antonio, Spaniard. Peter De Lancey, 6 April,
13 June, 17 June, Spanish W. Indies. Augustine, Spaniard. Macmullen, 1 April,
13 June, 17 June, Antonio. Spaniard. Sarah Maynard. 1 April, 13 June, 17 June,
Madeira. Albany, Mrs. Carpenter. 12 May, 8 June, 10 June, 12 June, 5 Abraham, a
free Negro 1 June, Adam, Joseph Murray, Esquire; 26 June, 27 June, Madeira. Brash,
Peter Jay. 9 May, 25 June, 25 June, Madeira. Bastian, alias Tom Peal, Jacobus
Vaarck, 12 May, 8 June, 10 June, 11 June, Hispaniola. Ben, Capt. ^^^shall, 9
June, 12 June, 13 June, 16 June, 10 Bill, alias Will, Coenradt Ten Eyck. 12
June, 3 July, 30 June, Madeira. Bridgewater. Abraham Van Horn, 22 June, 3
July, 27 June, Hispaniola. Billy, Mrs. Ellison, ^5 June, 1 July, Braveboy, Mrs.
Kierstede, 27 June, 10 July, 30 June. Madeira. Burlington, Joseph Haines. 3
July, 15 July, 15 Caesar, Vaarck, 1 March, 24 April, 1 May, of a Robbery, but
appears to have been a principal Negro Conspirator. 11 May, Cuffee, Adolph
Philipse, Esquire; 6 April, 28 May, 29 May, 30 May, Cuba, a Wench. Mrs. Constance
Lynch, 4 April, 5 July, Curacoa Dick, Cornelius Tiebout, 9 May. 8 June, 10
June, 12 June. Cato, Alderman Moore, 9 May, 15 July, 22 June, 20 Caesar,
Alderman Pintard, 9 May, 3 July, 22 June. Madeira. Cuffee, Lewis Gomez, 24 May,
6 June, 8 June, 9 June, Caesar, Benjamin Peck, 2^ May, 6 June, 8 June, 9 June,
Cato, Joseph Cowley, 25 May, 12 June, 13 June, 16 June. Cook, Gerardus Comfort,
26 May, (...) June, 8 June, 9 June. 25 Cambridge, Christopher Codwise, 30 May,
10 July, 30 June, Cape Francois. Caesar, Israel Horsefield, 30 May, 26 June, 27
June, St. Thomas, returned Cato, John Shurmur, 9 June, 16 June, 19 June, 27
June, 3 July, Caesar, Cornelius Kortrecht. 9 June, 3 July, 2 July, Hispaniola.
Cato, or Toby, John Provoost. 9 June, 12 June, 13 June, 16 June, 30 Cuffee,
Mrs. Fortune, 22 June, 15 July, 2 July, Cato, Robert Benson, 23 June, 26 July,
Surinam. Cajoe, alias Africa. Mo^dec^^ Gomez, 2^ June, 1 st July, 28 June.
Madeira. Caesar, Alderman Moore, 29 June, 20 July. Caesar, Dr. Henderson. 29
June, 10 July, 35 Cajoe, Richard Baker, 30 June, 15 July, Negroes. Masters or
Owners. Committed. Arraigned, Convicted, Confessed, Burnt Hanged. Transported
to Discharged. Dundee. Robert Todd, 7 May, 3 July, 24 June, Cape Francois.
Dick, Robins, 8 July, 23 July. Dublin, Capt. Walton, 13 July, 23 July.
Deptford, John Cruger, Esquire; 23 June, 26 June, 27 June, Portugal. 40 Dick,
Coenradt Ten Eyck, 20 June, 15 July, 30 June, Hispaniola. Dick, Wolf, 23 June.
23 July, Hispaniola. Diego, Peter Van D^rsen, 27 June. 23 July. Diego,
Marschalck. 23 July. Emanuel, a Spaniard, Thomas Wendover. 6 April, 25 June, 27
June, Hispaniola. 45 Francis, Jasper Bosch, 6 April, 8 June, 10 June, 12 June,
Fortune, John Wilkins, 22 May, 7 July, 22 May, Madiera. Fortune, John
Vanderspiegel, 25 May, 12 June, 13 June, 16 June, Fortune, John Latham, 13
June, 7 July, 15 June, Curacoa. Fortune, David Clarkson, 25 June, 1 July, (...)
July, Madeira. 50 Frank, Frederick Philipse, Esquire; 27 June, 20 July, Fortune,
Capt. Walton, 28 June, 1 July, 15 July, 18 July, Frank. Henry Ryker. 30 June,
10 July, 15 July. 18 July, Guy, Timothy (...) 30 May, 26 June. 27 June, St.
Thomas, returned. (...) (...) Rutgers, 2 July. 10 July, 15 July, 18 July, 55
(...) Robert Bound. 29 June, 1 July, 15 July, Cape Francois. (...) Mrs. Kipp.
30 May, 16 June, 19 June, 27 June, 3 July, Harry, John Thurman, 9 June, 19
June, 22 June, Madeira. dead. (...) John Cruger, jun. 29 June, 15 July, (...)
Samuel Myers Cohen, 29 June, 2 July. 60 Harry, (Doctor) John Mizeral, L.
Island, 6 July, 10 July, 15 July, 18 July. Jack, Joshua Slydall, 6 May, 12
July, 12 June, Cape Francois. Jack, Henry Brestead, 9 May, 25 July, 27 June,
Hispaniola. Jonneau, Jacobus Vaarck, 13 May, 7 July, 2 July, Hispaniola.
Jamaica, Thomas Ellison. 22 May, 6 June, 8 June, Madeira. 65 Jack, Gerardus
Comfort. 26 May, 6 June, 8 June, 8 June, Cape Francois. Jeffery, Capt. John
Brown, 15 June, 1 July, 27 June, Jacob, Hermanus Rutgers, 23 June, 26 June, 24
June, Curacoa. Jack, Joseph Murray, Esquire; 25 June, 1 July, 26 June, Madeira.
John, Widow Van Rantz, 27 June, 20 July, 70 Jack, Jacob Abrahamse, 28 June, 1
July, 2 July, Jack, John Roerback, 28 June, 20 July. Jack, Judah Hayes, 2 July,
6 July. John, Rip Van Dam, Esquire; 6 July, 20 July. Jupiter. Capt. Walton. 13
July. Madeira. Negroes. Masters or Owners. Committed. Arraigned, Convicted,
Confessed, Burnt. Hanged. Transported to Discharged. 75 Kid, Cornelius Van
Horn, 29 June, 2 July, London, Augustine Hicks, 30 May, 4 June, London, Peter
Marschalk, 9 June, 16 June, 19 June, 20 June. Madeira. London, Edward Kelly, 12
June, 19 June, 2 July, Hispaniola. Low, David Provoost, 22 June, 25 June, 27
June, Statia. 80 (...), Benjamin Wyncoop, 22 June, 26 June, 25 June,
Hispaniola. London, Roger French. 22 June, 3 July, 24 June, Madeira. Lewis,
Ado^iah Schuyler. 27 June, 1 July, 1 July, Madeira. Mars, Robert Benson, 12
June, 3 July, 3 July, Mink, John Groesbeck, 12 June. 16 June, 18 June,
Newfoundland. 85 Othello, James De Lancey, Esquire: 27 June, 10 July, 10 July, 30
June, 18 July, Prince, John Auboyneau, 2 March, 24 April, 1 May, of a Robbery,
but appears to have been a principal Negro Conspirator. 11 May, Pablo, or
Powl^s, a Spaniard. Frederick Becker, 6 April, 13 June, 17 June, Newfoundland.
Patrick, William English, 9 May, 25 June, 27 June, Madeira. Prince, Anthony
Duane, 1 June, 25 June, 26 June, 3 July, 90 Pompey, Abraham Lefferts. 1 June, 3
July, 9 June, Madeira. Primus, James Debrosses, 12 June, 3 July, 19 June, St.
Thomas, returned (and dead. Pedro, Peter Depe^ster, 13 June. 29 June. Prince,
Gabriel Crook, 13 June, 15 July, 13 June, 20 July, Pompey, Peter De Lancey, 20
June. 15 July, 22 June, Cape Francois. 95 Pompey, Jane Gilbert, 23 June, 26
June, 27 June, Madeira. Pompey, Samuel Bayard, 23 June, 26 June, 30 June.
Madeira. Phaeton, Nicholas Bayard. 30 June, 15 July, Prince, Cornelius
Kortrecht, 1 July, 23 July, Hispaniola. Quack, John Walters, 6 April,
recommitted 9 May, 10 July, 10 July, 18 July. 100 Quack, John Roosevelt, 12
May, 28 May, 29 May, at the Stake. 30 May, Quamino, Ebenezer ^emberton, 12
June, 19 June, 22 June. Madeira. Quack, Jacob Goe^et, 4 July, 23 July, Quash,
Hermanus Rutgers, 9 June, 12 June, 13 June, 16 June, Quash, La Roux, 2 July,
recommitted 13 July, 23 July, Madeira. 6 July, 105 Robin, John Chambers, 13
April, 6 June, 8 June, 9 June. Robin, Mrs. B^ck^ey. 1 July, 20 July, Sarah,
Depeyster's. 4 April, Sarah, Thomas Niblet, 10 May, 11 July, Sandy, Thomas
Niblet, 14 May, Hispaniola. 110 Sarah, Mrs. Burk, 25 May. 7 July, 1 June,
Hispaniola. Sam, George R^ppelie. 30 May, 4 June, Scipio, Mrs Van Borsom, 9
June, 25 June, 25 June. Sterling, Capt. Lawrence, 12 June, 3 July. 23 June,
Hispaniola. Sam, Peter Low, 22 June, 26 June, 3 July, Negroes. Masters or
Owners. Committed. Arraigned, Convicted, Confessed, Burnt. Hanged. Transported
to Discharged. 115 Scipio. Robert Bound. 22 June, 26 June. 2 July, Cape
Francois. Sam, Frederick Courtlandt, 22 June, 26 June, 1 July, Madeira. (...)
Abraham Abrahamse, 25 June, 26 June, 27 June, (...) Nathaniel Marst^^, 27 June.
7 July. 29 June, Curacoa. (...) Mrs. B^^kly, 1 July, 20 July, (...) (...),
alias Will, Mrs. Carpenter. 30 May, 12 June, Hispaniola Tom, Winant Van Za^^^,
30 May, a July Tom, Benjamin Moore, 1 June, 16 June, 18 June, Newfoundland.
Tom, Capt. Row^, 12 June, 3 July, (...) July, Tom, Van Zant. 29 June, 2 July.
125 Toney, John Latham, 13 June, 25 June, 26 June, 3 July, Toney, Mrs. Brazier,
22 June, 26 June, 2 July, Surinam, Tom, Simeon Soumaien, 23 June, 26 June, 26
June, Toby, Widow Brestead, 25 June, 1 July, 30 June, Cape Francois. Tom, Hyer,
26 June, 1 July, 15 July, Hispaniola. 130 Tom, Robert Livingston, 26 June, 27
June, Madiera. Titus, Capt. Phaenix. 27 June, 7 July, 30 June, Surinam. To^y,
or T^n^^ Councellor Courtlandt, 29 June, 23 July, Tom, Peter Valette, 30 June,
23 July, Toby. Hercules Wendover, 30 June, 10 July, 15 July. 135 Toby, Abraham
Marschalk, 30 June, Tom, Bradt, 15 February 2 March, 1742. 13 March, 1742
Venture, Cornelius Tiebout, 28 June, 1 July, 15 July, 18 July, 1741 Wan, or
Juan, Capt. Sarly, 6 April, 13 June, 17 June, 15 August, Will, a Spaniard,
Abraham Filkins, 6 April, 20 July, 140 Wan, Dr. Ni^oll, 24 April, 30 June,
Will, alias Gill, Capt. Lush, 24 May, 25 June, 27 June, Hispaniola. Wor^aster,
Isaac Varyan, 30 May, 19 June, 22 June, Cape Francois. Will, Anthony Ward, 20
June, 25 June, 4 July, at the Stake, 4 July. Will, Jacobus Vaarck, 20 June, 25
June, 145 Windsor, Samuel Myers Cohen, 25 June, 1 July, 30 June, Warwic^,
Obadiah Hunt, 25 June. 1 July, 1 July, Madeira. Will, John Tiebout, 4 July, 23
July, Wan, Indian, Low. 12 June, 19 June, 19 June, Curacoa. York, Benjamin
Peck, 30 May, 25 June, 27 June, Madeira. 150 York, Peter Marschalck. 9 June, 16
June, 19 June, 20 June, 3 July, in Chains with John Hughson. York, Thomas
Thomase, 20 June, 6 July, 27 June, Madeira. York, Charles Crook, 22 June, 26
June, 27 June, York, Widow Van Rantz, 1 July, 23 July, Curacoa. York, Gerardus
D^yckink, 2 July, 13 July.

Negroes indicted who were not to be found.
155 Hanover, H. Cruger's. London, Abraham Van Horne's. Ben, Stephen Bayard's
Pedro, R. Stillwell's. Ben, Augustus Jay's. 160 Jack, Governeur's. Joe, Holt's.

LIST of white Witnesses, and References to their several Depositions,
Examinations, and Confessions.
Mary Burton. Depositions. No I. page 13. -- No II. p. 27. -- No III. p. 28. --
No IV. p. 95. -- No V. p. 126. -- No VI. p. 131. -- No VII. p. 132. -- No VIII.
p. 132. Notes of her Examination, page 138. No. IX. p. 139. Arthur Price.
Depositions. No. I. p. 17. -- No. II. p. 19. -- No. III. p. 26. -- No IV. p.
30. Abigail Earl. Lydia George.
Depositions. p. 24. Sarah Hughson. 1st Examination, p. 29. 2d Examination, p.
130. Examination, No II. p. 149. Stephen Evan. Deposition, page 91. Judy
Pelham. Deposition, page 101. William Kane. 1st Examination, p. 125. --
Deposition and Examination. No. II. p. 126. -- No. III. p. 131. -- No. IV. p.
131. -- Notes of his Examination, p. 138. Deposition No. V. p. 139. -- No. VI.
p. 149. Elias Debrosse's Deposition, p. 151. concerning Ury the Priest. Joseph
Webb's Deposition, p. 152. concerning Ury the Priest.
LIST of Negro Witnesses, and References to their Confessions.
Sawney, alias Sandy. Examination, No. I. pa. 32. -- No. II. p. 35. -- No. III.
p. 49. Fortune. (Wilkins's) Examination, No. I. p. 33. -- No. II. p. 34. -- No.
III. p. 50. Sarah. (Burk's) Examination, No I. p. 35. -- No. II. p. 50. -- No.
III. p. 59. Jack, (Comfort's) Examination, No. I. p. 63. -- No. II. p. 67. 5
Bastian, his Confession in Court, p. 69. Examination No. I. p. 69. -- No. II.
p. 137. Will, alias Tic^^^^itcher, Examination, No. I. p. 71. No. II. p. 75.
Pompey, (Leffert's) Examination, p. 66. Jack, (Sleydall's) Examination, p. 72.
Caesar, (Alderman Pintard's) Examination, p. 89. 10 Cato, (Col. Moore's)
Examination, pa. 90. Brash, Examination, p. 97. Tom (Livingston's) Examination,
p. 112. Dick (Ten Eyk's) Examination, p. 116. Jack, Examination, No. I. p. 100.
15 Adam, Examination, No. I. p. 102.
(Murray's) Tom (B. Moore's) Examination, p. 83. Braveboy, Examination, p. 114.
Pompey, (Peter De Lancey) Examination, p. 83. Prince, (Gabriel Crooke's)
Examination, page 75.
FINIS.

