Dr. Chauncy's SERMON Preached before the Convention of Ministers, May 31. 1744.

Ministers cautioned against the Occasions of Contempt.

A SERMON Preached before the Ministers of the Province OF THE
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, in NEW ENGLAND, AT THEIR Annual Convention, In BOSTON; May
31. 1744.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. Pastor of the first Church there.

N. B. The Things passed over for Want of Time, when the Sermon was preached,
are inserted in their proper Places.

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for SAMUEL ELIOT in Cornhill. 1744.

At the Anniversary Convention of Ministers of the Province of the
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, in NEW ENGLAND, met at BOSTON, May 31. 1744.

Voted, That Thanks be returned to the Reverend Dr. CHAUNCY for his Sermon
preached before the Convention this Day; and that he be desired to consent to
the Publication of it.

Attest. T. PRINCE, Scriba.

A Convention SERMON.
TITUS II. 15. -- Let no Man despise thee.


THE Epistle, out of which I have taken the Text, was sent by Paul to Titus. It
would take up too much of the Time allowed me, to enter upon the Character of
this eminent Servant of GOD; especially in his Capacity as an Officer in the
Church of CHRIST, under which Consideration, and not as a private Christian, he
is here wrote to.

I shall only say, he was one of Paul's Converts, a Fellow Laborer with him in
the Kingdom and Patience of JESUS CHRIST, and his Companion in Travels. It was
with Paul that he went to Crete; and by him he was left there to serve the Ends
of the Gospel. Some say, he was now constituted Bishop of Crete; but it is
remarkable, he is not spoken of as the Bishop of this Place, by any of the
Fathers within the three first Centuries: Nor does the Scripture at all favor
such a Notion. It rather represents him as tarrying here on some temporary
Occasion, than as a fixed Officer.

The Story is thus,

Paul and Titus, upon their coming to Crete, found Things in a very unsettled
State. For though considerable Numbers had embraced Christianity, they had too
much neglected Order. They had few or no ordained Elders among them; and,
perhaps, were not as yet formed into distinct Churches: Or, if this was the
Case, they had not got into a regular State, without which it is impossible
Societies should subsist long without falling into Confusion. Now, for this
Cause it was, that Titus was left in Crete, that he might set in Order the
Things that were wanting, and ordain Elders in every City: Which, when he had
done, the more special End of his Continuance in this Place was answered, and
he might travel elsewhere, as in all Probability he did.

But however this be, his being at Crete, in the Service of CHRIST, and under
peculiar Circumstances of Difficulty, was the Occasion of Paul's writing this
Epistle to him; in which, many are the Advices he gives him for the Direction
of his Conduct, as one entrusted with the Management of the Affairs of CHRIST's
Kingdom.

He is very particular in minding him of the necessary Qualifications for the
sacred Office, that he might put none into it, who were not fit for so
important a Trust. And he the rather chose to enlarge upon this Head, as many
unruly and Vain-talkers and Deceivers were scattered up and down, subverting
whole Houses, and teaching Things they ought not for filthy Lucre's Sake. It
may seem strange, that, in the Days of the Apostles, there should be such
Numbers of false Teachers: But so it was in Fact; yea, and they were grown to
such an Height in Impudence, even in those primitive Times, that they could
exalt themselves above the very Apostles. And in Order to this, they were so
far Masters in the Art of Deceit, as to transform themselves into Angels of
Light: Nor did they stick at any Thing, so they could but lessen the Apostolic
Reputation, and wind themselves into the Affections of the Populace. The
Apostle seems very sollicitous, that the Church might be rid of these false and
dangerous Teachers; and, as the best Expedient to this End, directs, that none
might have committed to them the Dispensation of the Gospel, but well qualified
Persons; one essential Requisite in whose Character he has declared must be
that, able, by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the Gainsayers.

Upon which it is natural to remark, if none are allowed to be entrusted with
the Ministry but those who have Ability to convince Gainsayers, it must
certainly be the Duty of such, when they are in the Ministry, to make Use of
this Ability against those, who teach Things which they ought not. How else
will they answer one of the express Ends of their being put into the sacred
Office? And to what Purpose is it, that this Ability must be found in them, if
it is not their Duty to make Use of it, as the Occasion of the Church shall
render it needful?

But among all the Directions given to Titus, for his Conduct as a Minister,
there is no one of more Weight than that in the Text, Let no Man despise thee.
And it is of common Obligation on all, whom it has pleased God to put into the
Ministry. They should all behave so as not to be despised, so as to give no
just Occasion to be so. That Is the Meaning of the Words. Otherwise, Ministers
would have a hard Task indeed. Their Duty would be an utter Impossibility. For
it is not in their Power, though they should be as wise as Serpents, and
harmless as Doves, to pass through the World, and not be despised, They may,
through the Supply of the SPIRIT of JESUS CHRIST, behave so circumspectly and
inoffensively, as that none may have Reason to treat them with Contempt; but
they cannot command the Wills of other Men, they have not the Government of
their Passions, or Prejudices, or Lusts. The GREAT SAVIOR himself, though a
Prophet of unspotted Innocence, was yet despised of Men. And shall the Disciple
be above his LORD? Shall the World vilify the MASTER, and the Servant be better
treated? The Spirit of too many is such, that we may expect, be we as cautious
as we will, to be derided. And this indeed seems to be implied in the Text it
self. The Exhortation, Let no Man despise thee, plainly supposes a too great
Proneness in People to treat Ministers with Contempt; and their Duty lies, not
in People's not despising them, but in not deserving their Contempt, in doing
nothing that may lay a just Foundation for it.

In further speaking to the Text, I shall,

I. Say something of that Disposition there is in People to despise the
Ministers of CHRIST.

II. Show wherein they should take Care to avoid the Occasions of Contempt.

III. Represent the Obligations which lie upon them to such a Care.

The whole will then be followed with some suitable Application.

I. I am, in the first Place, to speak of that Disposition there is in People
to despise the Ministers of CHRIST. Not that I would insinuate, as if they were
generally faulty in this Respect. Many there are, GOD be thanked, who
acknowledge the special Relation they bear to JESUS CHRIST, and treat them as
Stewards of the Mysteries of GOD; esteeming them highly in Love, both for their
Office, and Work's Sake. And some, it may be, think more highly of them than is
meet. Those, to be sure, do so, who have their Persons in Admiration; blindly
receiving all they say, as though it were infallible Truth. This is doing them
too much Honor; yea, it is placing them in the Room of CHRIST, and calling them
Master in Opposition to the one Master in Heaven. Brethren, we renounce all
claim to such undue Reverence. We don't pretend to have Dominion over your
Faith, but only to be Helpers of your Joy. And instead of an implicit Faith in
our Dictates, we commend to you the Example of the noble Bereans, who searched
the Scriptures daily, to see whether the Things taught them were the Truths of
GOD, yea, or nay: Nor dare we advise you to hold fast what we deliver to you,
in the Course of our Preaching, only as you perceive it to be good, upon full
Proof from the Word of CHRIST. To the Law, and to the Testimony: If what we say
does not agree herewith, there is no Light nor Truth in it.

You may, perhaps, have conceived so high an Opinion of the uncommon Sanctity
of some particular Ministers, in Distinction from others, and the divine
Teachings they are under, as to suppose them to have got beyond all Danger of
Mistakes; you may be ready to think it impossible you should err, while you
follow the Instructions of Men filled with such extraordinary Measures of the
HOLY GHOST: But you ought to remember, it is not always those who make the
greatest Pretenses to the SPIRIT, who are most favored with his real
Influences; nor are any since the Days of Inspiration, so led by the SPIRIT as
to be infallible. Alas! the best qualified Ministers are but Men; Men of like
Passions with your selves: And of this they too often give Proof by the Errors
they run into, in Principle as well as Practice. They may not therefore be
depended on, as though you could not be misguided by them. Be their Gifts, or
Graces, or Zeal, what they will; or let their Pretenses to the immediate
Conduct of the Divine SPIRIT be as peremptory as they will, you must not
believe this, or the other Thing, to be the Truth, as it is in JESUS, upon
their Authority: No, but you must bring what they say, with an unprejudiced
Mind, to the HOLY BIBLE; closing in with it, or rejecting it, as you find it,
upon Trial, to agree or disagree with that one only Test of all religious
Truth: Nor will you otherwise be able to excuse your selves another Day. It
will not then suffice to plead, that you were told this, or that, by those you
esteemed Men extraordinarily assisted by the SPIRIT; for you had the Scriptures
to repair to, and might have examined what they said by that sacred and
unerring Rule: Which, if you neglected to do, believing Man rather than GOD,
how will you hold up your Heads? 'Twon't lessen, but aggravate your Fault, to
pretend you submitted your Consciences to mere humane Dictates; for it will
then appear, that your embracing any Thing for a Truth of GOD, upon any
Authority short of his, was setting up that Authority in his Throne, and paying
that Honor to the Creature, which is due only to the Creator.

But if there are some, who rise too high in their Respects to Ministers, are
there not others, on the contrary Extreme, who fall as much too low? And is not
this the Spirit evidently prevailing at this Day? Are there not many who vilify
the Office it self, treating it with Sneer and Ridicule? And what Wonder, if
the Persons of Ministers don't escape the Scorn and Contempt of such? They have
indeed a pitiful Though It of all of this Profession; and spare none, though of the
most shining Accomplishments. If they know nothing more of a Man than that he
is a Minister, it is enough with them to finish his Character: This alone will
give them a low mean Opinion of him; though without either Candor or Justice.

Not but that there have been, among the Clergy, both weak and vicious Men. It
would be a strange Thing indeed if their had not. But why must the whole Order
suffer Reproach on this Account? Is this fair? Is it thought to be so in other
Professions? If there are any who make themselves vile, let them bear all the
Indignity they deserve: But where is the Equity of blaming the Innocent with
the Guilty? Are there not Men of Worth in the sacred Function, as well as in
other Employments? Men of Capacity and Integrity, yea, and of extensive
Usefulness, through their abundant Labors in the Cause of GOD? And shall they
all, notwithstanding, be condemned, and by the Lump too, as a Parcel of simple,
or else crafty and designing Men?

This, I know, has sometimes been suggested, if not plainly spoken out, to the
Prejudice of their Reputation; and with all the Embellishments of Wit and
Railery. But if Men, professedly of no Principles, are Enemies to those, whose
Business it is to plead the Cause of Virtue and true Religion, what is it more
than might be expected? Nor would they act up to their Character, if, rather
than not asperse them, they did not make a handle of any Thing; and instead of
solid Argument exert themselves in profane Banter.

I may not impertinently add here, It Is not only among atheistical vicious Men
that Ministers are treated with Contempt. They have appeared strangely prone to
despise one another, and to take all Occasions to do so; and this has been too
much their Way, in all Places, and Ages of the World. If some Ministers han't
had Light to think, or speak, just as some others would have them, how commonly
have they been the Objects of their Contempt? What Names of Ignominy and
Reproach have been cast upon them? And how has the Spirit of Contempt been
propagated from Ministers to People, to the great Hindrance of the Gospel?
Perhaps, some of the Ministers of CHRIST, and it may be as faithful Ministers
as any in the Gospel Church, have suffered more from their own Brethren, and
such among the People as have been set on Fire by them, than they ever have,
even from foul-mouthed Infidels. Says the excellent Mr. Baxter, speaking of the
Sectaries of his Day, They have quite out-stripped the profane Scorners of the
Ministry. -- By many Years Experience in conversing with these Men, I can speak
it knowingly, that the chiefest of their Zeal is let out against the faithful
Ministers of CHRIST. He is the ablest of their Preachers, that can rail at them
in the vilest Language. It is their most common Discourse, in all Companies,
both godly and profane, to vilify the Ministry, and make them odious to all;
partly, by Slanders, and partly by Scorns. Is this the Way to win Souls?
Whereas formerly they thought, that if a Man were won to a Love of the
Ministry, and Ordinances, he was in a hopeful Way of being won to God; now
these Men are diligent to bring all Men to scorn them, as if this were all that
was necessary to the saving of their Souls, and he only shall be happy, that
can deride at Ministers and Discipline. He adds, If any Man doubt of the Truth
of what I say, he is a Stranger in England.

I will not go about to draw a Parallel between the late Times in this Land,
and those referred to by this pious and learned Writer; but thus much I may be
allowed to say, that the Body of the Ministers were never treated with more
Insult and Contempt than by Multitudes, and of those too, who once esteemed
them the Glory of New England: Nor were they ever more hardly censured than by
some of their own Order, from whom they might have expected better Things. It
will not be denied, that they have had all Manner of Evil spoken against them,
and this, in the Face of crowded Auditories. And are there not Numbers, in many
Places, who have learned, from their admired Teachers, to give them no better
Names than Pharisees, blind Leaders of the Blind, Opposers of CHRIST, and what
not? And han't this Contempt been thrown upon as valuable Ministers as any the
LORD JESUS CHRIST has in the Country, of as known Soundness in the Faith, and
as exemplary a Walk in Conformity to the Precepts of the Gospel?

Let us not be discouraged, my Brethren; what though we are despised, not only by
Men of no Religion, but those who pretend to a great Deal? This was the Lot of
inspired Apostles; yea, of JESUS CHRIST himself: And it has often been the Lot
of his most faithful Ministers ever since. Merely our being despised, is not
our Fault, though it may be our Unhappiness. The Fault is, to deserve Contempt;
and we cannot, it must be owned, be too much upon our Guard, that there may be
no just Reason to charge it upon us: Which leads me to the next Thing, namely,

II. To show wherein Ministers should take Care to give no Occasion of
Contempt. And their Care should be expressed in the following Particulars.

1. If they would not be despised, they should see to it that they ben't
ignorant. It was required under the Jewish Economy, that the Priest's Lips
should preserve Knowledge, because the People were to ask the Law at his Mouth
And the same Thing is equally necessary, under the Dispensation by JESUS
CHRIST. Gospel Ministers should be as Scribes instructed unto the Kingdom of
Heaven; they should be like the good Householder, who can bring out of his
Treasure Things new and old. It Is mentioned by the inspired Paul, as an
essential Qualification of a Guide to Souls, that he be apt to teach, and able,
by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the Gainsayers. And can the
Minister be thus fitted for his Office, without considerable Degrees of
Knowledge? He ought, certainly, to be a Man above the common Level for natural
Capacities: Nor is this enough; but his Powers ought to be well cultivated by a
good Education. He ought to have Skill in the learned Arts and Languages, so as
to be ready to make use of them in the Service of the Sanctuary, as Occasion
may call for it: Nor otherwise will he rise above just Contempt.

It may reasonably be expected of Ministers, that they should have made
considerable Seize, particularly in the Knowledge of Divinity. How else
should they be Teachers of others in this noble Art? Shall Men be ignorant in
their own Profession? How incongruous is this? What can more strongly tend to
render them despicable? What will actually bring upon them greater Contempt?

Not but that illiterate Men are sometimes mightily cried up; raw ignorant
Novices highly applauded and admired: But it is only among such as have need to
abound yet more and more in Knowledge and Judgment: As for others, who, by
Reason of Use, have their Senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil, they
readily perceive the Insufficiency of Teachers, understanding neither what they
say, nor whereof they affirm. Nor would it be strange, if, in their Behavior,
they should express the low Opinion they entertain of them. And the Contempt
due to such blind Guides will, with Justice, be reflected on others of the same
Order, if they appear forward to invite them into their Pulpits; especially, if
they do it to the Neglect of those who are of known established Merit, and
hereby baulk their own Judgment to fall in with the popular Humor.

It may be worth Consideration, We live in an Age, wherein there is some
Learning as well as a great deal of Ignorance: And there are, among our
Hearers, a considerable Number, eminent for their good Sense and acquired
Accomplishments: And it must needs be distasteful to such, to behold those set
up for public Teachers, who need themselves to be taught which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of GOD. They cannot help conceiving a mean Thought of
such Medlers with what they are neither qualified for, nor called to; and their
being caressed, not only by the Populace, (which is no Wonder) but by those
clothed with the sacred Character, is a Damage to Ministers in general. It
makes their Credit run low; and in vain will they complain, if they are treated
as a Set of Men knowing very little, though they pretend to know a great Deal.

It will, doubtless, be here said, the Apostles themselves, the first Preachers
of the Gospel, were a Set of ordinary Men, destitute of the Advantage of
Learning. And it is readily owned, the most of them were so. But then it is
observable, they were not allowed to go forth from Jerusalem, to teach the
Nations, 'till they had been endued with Power from on High. i. e. 'till the
HOLY GHOST had, in a miraculous Manner, fitted them for their Work. So that
it is a Mistake to think the Apostles commenced Preachers, while unfurnished for
the sacred Employment. It Is true, they did not pass through a Course of Study
preparatory to their Mission as Ministers; but it is as true, that the Want of
this was abundantly made up, by the Effusion of the HOLY GHOST upon them in
miraculous Gifts; enabling them not only to speak with Tongues, but without
previous Meditation, and so as to be infallible Guides to Men, in the Way to
Salvation.

Some, perhaps, while they are mere Novices, may take upon them the Office of
the Ministry, expecting the Bestowment of the SPIRIT, in extraordinary Gifts;
as in the Days of the Apostles. But they herein err, not considering the
Difference between the State of Things now, and when the Gospel was first made
public. It was necessary the Christian Revelation should be approved of GOD,
by Signs, and Wonders, and Miracles, done in the midst of the People; and that
it should also be infallibly delivered to the World, as the standing Rule of
Men's Faith and Practice, which, it could not have been, if holy Men had not
spoken, and wrote it, as moved and inspired by the HOLY GHOST: Whereas, there
is no Need of the like extraordinary Influence of the Divine SPIRIT, now that
Christianity has received its Confirmation and been established, in the World,
as a Religion coming from GOD. Accordingly, the Way of becoming qualified to be
Ministers of this Religion is, not by any miraculous Interposition of Heaven,
but by Attendance to Reading, Meditation and Prayer. In this Way, we may hope,
through the Blessing of GOD, to be furnished with all suitable ministerial Gifts:
But if, instead of Labor and Pains, in the Use of ordinary Means, we expect
the Descent of the HOLY GHOST in Tongues of Fire, or depend on extraordinary
Revelations, or immediate Impressions, we shall only render our selves meet
Objects of Contempt. Who have all along been the ablest Defenders of
Christianity? Who have set its Doctrines in the clearest and most consistent
Light? Who have explained and urged its Precepts, in the most instructive and
convincing Manner? Who have been the grand Supporters of its Worship and Order?
Can this Honor be claimed by your Pretenders to immediate Revelations, and
extraordinary Influences from above? Must it not rather be given to those, who,
by hard Study, and a considerable Stay at the School of the Prophets, have,
through a Divine Blessing on their Endeavors, got their Minds furnished with
desirable Measures of Knowledge and good Understanding? There is no Room for
Debate on the Matter. No Man, since the Days of the Apostles, was ever sutably
qualified for the Ministry, but in the Way of Labor and Pains, in an
Attendance on the ordinary Means of Instruction: And those who have left this
Way of GOD's Appointing, in Expectation of extraordinary Supplies from the
SPIRIT, have too commonly, sooner or later, run wild, to the exposing, not only
themselves, but the whole Ministry, yea, Religion it self, to Contempt.

But possibly, it will be further urged, does not GOD sometimes take Occasion,
from the Labors of Men of small Parts, and little Learning, to serve the Ends
of his own Kingdom? And if GOD approves of Persons of such a Character, why
should not we? The Answer whereto is easy. A Distinction ought always to be
made between GOD's Approbation of a Thing, and his taking Occasion from it to
do Good: Nor can the former be at all collected from the latter. It Is readily
allowed, the alwise merciful GOD may overruled the Ministrations of weak
ignorant Men for spiritual Advantage to Souls; but it cannot be argued from
hence, that he looks upon such Persons as fit to be entrusted with the sacred
Ministry. In Order to know his Mind in this Matter, the great Question ought to
be, what are the Qualifications the BIBLE, that public, standing, authentic
Revelation of the Divine Will, makes necessary to be found in those who would
be Gospel Ministers? And if it appears, that it requires Knowledge, and
considerable Degrees of it, those only are fit to be put into ^^e Ministry, who
are thus qualified. There is, no Doubt, a Latitude in this Case. A Man may be
qualified for the Ministry, though he should not be furnished with Knowledge in
the highest Degrees: But then, he must have Knowledge in such a Proportion as
to answer the Scripture Demands, or he is certainly an unsuitable Person to be
employed as a Minister.

And this is a Matter of greater Importance than many may be ready to imagine.
For it is remarkable, when GOD would represent a People as in the most
deplorable Circumstances, it is in such Language as that, Isa. lvi. 10, 11. His
Watchmen are blind: They are all ignorant; they are dumb Dogs, they cannot
bark. -- They are Shepherds that cannot understand. On the contrary, when he is
returning to a backsliding People, in a Way of Mercy, and would bestow the
richest Blessings on them, that is mentioned as one of the greatest, Jer. iii.
15. I will give them Pastors according to mine own Heart, which shall feed them
with Knowledge and Understanding. And again, Chap, xxiii. 4. I will set up
Shepherds over them, which shall feed them.

2. Ministers, if they would not be despised, must not set a bad Example. The
Design of their Office is to disengage Men from their Vices, and persuade them
to a sober, righteous and godly Life, in Conformity to the Precepts of the
Gospel. And shall they, whose professed Business it is, to turn Men from the
Power of Sin and Satan, be the Servants of Unrighteousness? How unseemly is
this? Thou that say, a Man should not commit this, or the other evil Deed,
do thou do the same thy self? Thou that magnifiest the Law in thy preaching,
do thou in thy Practice dishonor GOD by breaking it? How shocking is such a
Conduct? And what but Contempt can be the Effect? It Is observable, when the
Jewish Priests, in the Days of Malachi, departed from the Way of the LORD, and
corrupted his Covenant, The LORD of Hosts said unto them, Therefore have I made
you CONTEMPTIBLE, and BASE before all the People. And the like may be expected
by all Ministers, who behave after the same ill Manner. 'Twould be just in GOD
to give them up to Contempt: Nor if they were base in the Eyes of the People,
would it be beyond their Desert. A vicious Man, and yet a Preacher of
Righteousness, how gross the Inconsistency! A Man of GOD, and yet vain, or
proud, or covetous, or intemperate, or idle and unfaithful, how palpable the
Absurdity! There is not, on the Earth, a more meet Object of Reproach. He has
forfeited all Right to the good Opinion of Men; and should he claim their
Reverence, in Virtue of his Office, he would only render himself still more
contemptible.

Nor may it be thought, that such an one would be likely to do much good. Who
would believe, or regard, what he said? He would rather harden Men in Sin, than
recover them from it. He would rather make them suspicious of the Truth of
Religion, than concerned to become the Subjects of it. There are, in one Word,
no such effectual Hinderers of the Gospel, and Obstacles in the Way of its
Success, as wicked Ministers: And the greater the Contempt they meet with, the
better.

Only let it be remembered, those only ought to be esteemed wicked Ministers,
who visibly appear to be so. If there is an agreeable Harmony between the
Manner of their Life and Profession, they ought not to be loaded with bad
Names, and treated with the Contempt due to abandoned Sinners. This, it may be
feared, has been too common a Practice in these Times; but it is being a common
Practice will not make it a Christian one. We ought not to look into the Hearts of
Ministers instead of their Lives, and judge them to be Pharisaical and
unconverted, from a pretended Knowledge of their inward Principles and Springs
of Action. This is to assume to our selves the Prerogative of GOD, who only has
an Inspection into humane Hearts, and allows us to judge of one another only
from what is outward and visible. By their Fruits shall ye know them. This is
the Rule out SAVIOR has given us; and it is a Rule particularly refering to the
Case of Ministers, and the only one by which we may form a Judgment of their
Character. It Is true, they may not be the Men inwardly, they appear to be
outwardly; but this is none of our Business. The Determination of Men's State,
does not belong to us, but to JESUS CHRIST, who, when he comes in the Glory of
his Father, will bring to Light the hidden Things of Darkness, and manifest the
Counsels of all Hearts.

I may add to what has been said, Ministers, if they would command Respect,
must be Men of exemplary Holiness. They must not think it enough, if they keep
at a Distance from every Thing mean and base; if they abstain from all gross
and notorious Crimes: But they should express a Care to show out of a good
Conversation their Works with Meekness of Wisdom. It should not content them,
that they are blameless as the Stewards of GOD, not self-willed, not soon
angry, not given to Wine, not given to filthy Lucre; but they should be Lovers
of Hospitality, Lovers of good Men, sober, just, holy, temperate: In all Things
showing themselves Patterns of good Works, and Examples of the Believers, in
Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. This was the
Direction PAUL gave TIMOTHY, as that which would not only set him above
Contempt, but procure for him all suitable Respect: Nor could he have advised to
a more effectual Expedient to beautify his Character, and secure a good
Reputation. There is a strange Power in exemplary Virtue to command Reverence.
It will, beyond the finest Accomplishments of Learning, or the greatest
Eloquence in Preaching, render the Minister amiable in the Eyes of People; they
cannot but love and honor him; yea, even profane Sinners, if not given up to a
reprobate Mind, will treat him with a decent Esteem, while they behold his good
Conversation in CHRIST. And this also will give a singular Energy to his
Preaching. A bad Life will turn the Edge of the keenest Discourses, delivered
from the Pulpit; but when the Minister exhibits, in his Behavior, a Pattern of
what he preaches, his Doctrine will be likely to strike the Mind with a divine
Force, and answer the saving Ends to which it is designed.

3. Ministers, if they would not be despised, must not expose themselves by an
undue Performance of the public Offices of their Station. It Is justly expected
they should manage these with a becoming Dexterity; for they profess to have
Ability to do so. And if they are Blunderers wherein they pretend to be
Masters, how should it be but that they should sink in the Esteem of Mankind?
It Is thus in all other Professions: Nor will the Sacredness of the ministerial
Character prevent its being so here. Ministers may want the Art of managing in
the common Businesses of Life, and not be thought the worse of; because they
pretend to no Skill in Affairs of such a Nature: But they do pretend to have
Skill in managing the public Offices of Religion. Praying, and Preaching, and
over-seeing the Affairs of GOD's House, are the proper Duties of their Calling;
and if they are really wanting in a Faculty decently to perform these Duties,
their Character must run low in the Opinion of all suitable Judges. But to be
distinct here.

(1.) Ministers should take Care to manage their public Prayers so as not to
expose themselves to Contempt. It is not indeed to be expected, they should all
be able, in the like easy, natural, flowing Language, to lead in the Addresses
of a Congregation to the Divine Majesty. Some, it has pleased GOD to furnish
with the Gift of Prayer, to an eminent Degree. They never shine brighter, than
when they are called, and it may be on a sudden, to represent some special Case
before the Throne of Mercy. Their Mouths are filled with Arguments, and they
can utter themselves to the Ravishment of the devout praying Assembly. But
though all are not alike gifted; yet all, methinks, should be able to go out of
the common Road, as Occasion may call for it, without rambling, or stammering,
or running into Tautologies. If any are wanting in such an Ability, it may be
feared, whether they have taken that Pains, in the Use of Means, which is
proper, in Order to their attaining the Gift of Prayer. Or, if it should be the
Case of some, that they are born down with Over-modesty of Temper, or possess
not the Faculty of conceiving quick enough for a ready Utterance, they might do
better to pray by some well-compos'd Form, than to run the Hazard of falling
into Contempt by disgustful Hesitations.

Nor is it enough that Ministers pray well as to Matter: They should take Heed
to the Manner also, that it be with Seriousness, in Opposition to all Levity
and Airiness of Temper; with an apparent Awe and Solemnity of Spirit, and with
such an awakened Fervor and Devotion, as shall make it evident, they realise
the Worth, especially of those spiritual and eternal Blessings, which they ask
at the Hands of the great and good GOD.

I shall add here, they should be particularly careful not to mingle their own
Passions and Prejudices with their Prayers: Nor should they oblige a whole
Assembly to be of their Mind, in Matters of doubtful Disputation, or else come
to an undesired Pause in their Devotion. Ministers, when praying in public,
are to be considered as the Mouth of the Congregation; and as such, there is a
manifest Impropriety in their going into the Use of such Petitions, or
Thanksgivings, as a great Part of the Congregation cannot, in Faith, join with
them in offering up to GOD. I the rather mention this, because it may have been
too much a Practice, among some Ministers, more especially in the late Times,
to express themselves in Language, they could not but know, if they allowed
themselves to think, a considerable Number of those they were praying with
could not give their hearty Amen to. What others may think I know not; but to
me, it appears a Matter of no small Importance, that there be an Agreement
between those who pray, respecting the Things they pray for. And our SAVIOR
himself seems to have taught as much, in that Declaration of his, Matthew. xviii.
19. I say unto you, that if any two of you shall agree on Earth, as touching
any Thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is
in Heaven. And it is as suitable an Assembly of worshipping Christians should be
agreed, respecting what they ask of GOD in Prayer, as that two private Persons
should: Nor otherwise may they encourage a hope, that it shall be done for them
according to what they desire. And if this was more thoroughly considered, it
might put Ministers upon greater Care, so to adapt their Prayers, as that all
might harmonise in sending them up to the Throne of Mercy.

(2.) Ministers should take care that their Preaching be such as may give no
Occasion of Contempt. And here suffer me, with an honest Freedom and
Simplicity, to mention some of the many Things which call for the Care of
Ministers, if they would not be despised.

And to be sure, they should not in their Preaching invade the Province of
others. Their Work does not lie at large, but is restrained within proper
Bounds. They are Pastors to particular Flocks: These are their special Charge;
they have taken the Oversight of them, and should employ themselves in feeding
them with Knowledge and Understanding. Not that they are so confined, that they
may not preach but to their own People. This they may do; but it should always
be within the Rules of Order. They should not go into other Parishes to keep up
an unreasonable Disaffection in People to their own Ministers: Neither should
they presume to preach there, trusting in themselves that they are righteous,
but harboring in their Breasts uncharitable Suspicions of their Brethren, as
carnal and unconverted.

It may look like Zeal for CHRIST, and a vehement Desire to do good to Souls,
for Ministers to go about from Parish to Parish, spending themselves and being
spent, through their abundant Labors: And they may be caressed on this Account
by many Persons, as having more of the Spirit of CHRIST and his Apostles than
their Brethren. But whatever Charity may be disposed to hope, GOD only knows
the true Spring of such a Conduct. It may, possibly, be Pride and Self-Conceit,
or a vain Itch to be admired and applauded: And among all who ascribe it to
such a Cause, (as there are many that will) they will be contemned. But be the
Motive what it will, ever so Christian, or Noble, the Practice, I believe, is
bad; as tending, in the natural Course of Things, to introduce Confusion and
Disorder: Nor has it ever yet failed of sinking the Credit of the Ministry, in
a less or greater Degree.

But after all, if any are fond of going about from Place to Place, thinking
they shall hereby have Opportunity of doing GOD good Service; why will not they go
where they will invade no Man's Right, nor occasion Schisms and Separations.
Are there not those, even in this Province, and among the English too, (to our
Shame be it spoken) who are destitute of the Gospel, in the Ministry of it? And
are there not vast Numbers, in the neighboring Governments of VIRGINIA and
NORTH CAROLINA (not to say any Thing of the Natives) who live almost in
heathenish Darkness? And would it not discover as much Love to Souls, and as
disinterested Zeal to serve the Redeemer's Kingdom, for Ministers to travel up
and down, preaching the Gospel to these People, as to go about from Place to
Place, where the Gospel is preached every Sabbath Day, and by Persons called to
the Work, qualified for it, and fixed in it? There is Room for itinerating: And
the more abundant any are in it, the greater will be their Glory: Nor will any
one be disposed to withhold from them the Praise that is their just Due.

Ministers also should take Care, that their Preaching may savor of Pains and
Industry. Not that they may not preach, if they have not had Time to labor a
Discourse. Necessary Avocations, or the Suddenness of a Call to speak, may
justify their going into the Pulpit, when their Preparations have been more
hasty than they would have chosen: And, at such Times, a tolerable Measure of
Candor in Hearers would make the Allowances that may reasonably be expected.
But, ordinarily, their Sermons should appear to be the Fruit of Labor and
Study. The wise Man says, The Preacher sought to find out acceptable Words. He
is speaking of himself, who, though he excelled all Men in Understanding, yet
did not turn People off with any Thing that came next to Hand; but took Pains
to express himself in agreeable Language. And he is herein to be imitated by
all Preachers. Not that fine Turns of Wit, high rhetorical Flights, calculated
chiefly to entertain the Fancy, need be any Part of their Care; but yet, they
should endeavor to cloth their Discourses in a becoming Dress. Their Language
should be far from low and vulgar, yet easy and natural: Their Words fitly
spoken, and such as may be likely to please Men to their Edification. And they
should the rather be concerned about this, as wisely chosen Words, according to
what follows in the next Verse, are as Goads and Nails fastened by the Masters
of Assemblies. i. e. "There is the like Power in them to excite and stir up the
Minds of slothful Men to the Practice of Virtue, that there is in a Goad to
prick the Ox forward: Nor do they only sting and move the Mind for the present;
but are apt to stick as fast in the Memory as Nails do, when they are driven
into a Board."

Nor ought Ministers to think it enough, if they are careful about the Language
of their Sermons; but the Matter and Method also should be the Effect of
Meditation and Study. Their Business is, rightly to divide the Word of truth.
It Is the Word of GOD, and not the Traditions or Commandments of Men; it is the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, and not Lectures of mere Reason, they
should bring their People. The Matter of their Preaching should be the pure
Gospel of CHRIST. And they should rightly divide it. i.e. They should dispose
it in due Order; giving its Truths their proper Place and distributing them to
the proper Persons. And this they should do like Men of Skill; and in order to
it, should apply themselves to their Work with Care and Diligence. So Paul
advised Timothy; calling upon him to study, if he would approve himself to GOD
a Workman that needed not to be ashamed. And he elsewhere recommends to him
Reading and Meditation, that his profiting might appear to all Men. And if such
an extraordinary Person as Timothy was obliged to the Use of Pains and Study,
much more is this a Duty in the ordinary Officers of the Church.

Not that a Minister, if he has tolerable Qualifications for his Work, need be
at much Pains to make Sermons that will please some sort of Hearers. But even
these Hearers ought to be edified as well as pleased. And though through want
of Judgment, they may not be able to distinguish between an extempore Discourse,
and one that has cost the Preacher a great Deal of hard Study; yet the latter,
if as it ought to be, will be much better adapted to promote their spiritual
Profit; and there is more Reason to expect a divine Blessing will accompany it
to this End. Besides, a proper Respect ought to be paid to all Hearers; to the
strong as well as the weak, to the knowing as well as the ignorant* And this
there may be, where suitable Care has been taken to prepare what is to be
delivered in public; for it may be accommodated to the Capacity of those who
are illiterate, and yet so contrived as to fall in with the Relish of the more
intelligent: Whereas, if it is crude and indigested, though it may not be
disliked by the weak and injudicious, it will be despised by those of better
Understanding.

It will, perhaps, be said, those Ministers who take little or no Thought
beforehand what they shall say, are the Men who depend on the SPIRIT of GOD;
and the Help they obtain from him more than makes up for the Want of
Preparation by Study. None, I would hope, will esteem Preparation by Study an
Argument of the Want of a just Dependence on the SPIRIT; for so far is this
from the Truth of the Case, that they who are most careful to make suitable
Preparation, take the Method in which they may most reasonably expect the
divine Influences; and they are the most likely Persons to be favored with
them: Whereas, it may be feared, those, who venture into the Pulpit without
Forethought, presume upon the SPIRIT rather than trust in him; and it is too
often apparent, that they receive no great Help from him. For who more
confused, many Times, in their Discourses? Who more rash and unguarded in their
Expressions? Who more vain and arrogant in their Boastings? Who more wild in
their Imaginations? And, in a Word, who deliver the Truths of the Gospel with a
greater Mixture of Mistake and Error? And shall it be pretended, that such
Preaching is the Effect of extraordinary Communications from the Spirit? It Is a
gross Reflection on the blessed SPIRIT of GOD to suppose such a Thing.

It may take with some People to be told by Ministers, they knew not the Text
they should preach from, till they came into the Pulpit; and they may be ready
to think the Men inspired; especially, if they are able to deliver themselves
with Freedom and Zeal. But People ought to know, there may be great Warmth and
Volubility in Speech, without any extraordinary Help from the SPIRIT. And the
plain Truth is, the SPIRIT of GOD does not assist Ministers now, as in the
first Days of the Gospel. He did it then by immediate Revelation; he does it
now in a Way more humane, by his Blessing on their Studies. And while
Ministers, in this Way, depend on his Help, they may humbly hope to obtain it:
Whereas they will deceive themselves, and impose on People, if they go about to
excuse their Neglects in the Use of ordinary Means, pretending to extraordinary
Communications from above.

Ministers likewise should preach as those who are in earnest. The Business
they are engaged in is the most solemn that can be. They have to do with Souls,
one of which is of more worth than the whole World: And it is their Salvation or
Damnation they are to treat with them upon. And shall they be cold and lifeless
in an Affair of such infinite Importance? Matters of everlasting Life and Death
should not be spoken of, in ordinary Discourse, but with a becoming
Solicitude: Much more, when Ministers bespeak Men in the Name of GOD, upon the
Concerns of Heaven and Hell, should they do it with all Solemnity of Spirit.
And if, when they are talking upon these astonishing Truths, they speak as if
they were asleep, or had not upon their Minds a serious Sense of their awful
Weight and Reality, how can it be that they should affect the Hearts of their
Hearers? They will rather be disposed to slight both them and what they say?
Though, that they might not do this injuriously, they should be very careful they
don't run into Mistakes, taking that for Dullness in some, and an awakened
Fervor in others, which may be no certain Indication of either. The Tempers of
Ministers are very different, and so are their Organs of Speech; insomuch, that
if they had all the same Concern about spiritual and divine Things, they would
not be alike in the Manner of its Discovery. And it ought to be particularly
notic'd, mere Loudness of Voice is no Sign at all of a suitable Frame of Mind.
There may be the still small Voice, and the Heart, at the same Time, seriously
and thoroughly warmed with a Sense of eternal Things; as on the other Hand, there
may be a noisy boisterous Fervency, that is only histrionical and affected: And
it very ill becomes the Minister, and tends rather to harden Sinners than do
them any spiritual Good. There is very little therefore to be collected merely
from the Voice of the Preacher. The Manner is more to be regarded: And if he
really feels what he says, be his Voice great or small, it will ordinarily be
perceived by discerning Hearers. And he should always endeavor to speak, not
as though it were a Task, and he cared not what he said; but as having upon his
Mind an awakened Sense of the Worth of Souls, and the Weight of everlasting
Concerns.

Further, Ministers, in their Preaching, should apply to the Understandings of
their Hearers, and not lay out all their Endeavors to work on their Passions.
Not that it is improper to speak to the Affections; for they have their Use in
Religion, and it may serve a great many good Purposes to excite and warm them.
But then, it ought to be remembered, the Understanding is the leading Power in
Man, and ought, as such, in the first Place, to be applied to. To be sure, the
Understanding ought not to be neglected. Light and Heat should always go
together, and keep Pace with each other: Nor unless there is a due Proportion
of the former, will it turn to any good Account, if there be ever so much of
the latter: Nay, Heat in the Affections, without Light in the Mind, will serve
rather to make Men wild, than religious; as has been too often verified by sad
Experience. Whenever the Passions therefore are addressed to, a good Foundation
ought to be first laid in the Understanding: Or otherwise, the Discourse should
be managed so as to inform the Mind, at the same Time it kindles the
Affections. And now the Preaching is suited to work, in a regular Manner, upon
the Powers of humane Nature; and if the Effect is not the spiritual Edification
of Hearers, they can reasonably reflect the Blame no where but on themselves.

A rambling incoherent Discourse delivered in terrible Language, and with great
Vehemence of Voice and Action, will have, I am sensible, a more powerful
Tendency to disturb the Passions, especially of some People. But where is the
Advantage of throwing the Passions into a Tumult? Of what Service can it be to
raise them to such a Height, as that the due Exercise of the reasonable Nature
shall be obstructed? It Is true, Men may, in this State, appear to be religious,
and this to an extraordinary Degree; but their Nature all the while is
inverted, those Powers got to be uppermost which were made to be kept under
Restraint: And while they continue in this Condition, under the Government of
their Passions, instead of their Understandings, they are in extreme Hazard;
for there is no Wildness, whether in Theory or Practice, but they are liable to
be driven into it. The short of the Matter is, as Men are reasonable Creatures,
they are to be preached to as such. The Address should be made, not so much to
their Passions as to their Understandings; at least, all proper Care should be
taken to enlighten the Mind, and convince the Judgment, as well as to move the
Affections. And if instead of speaking to the Minds of Men, Ministers will lay
out all their Pains to work upon their Passions, as though herein lay the whole
Value of Religion, they will certainly expose themselves to all, who have any
tolerable Acquaintance with the Frame of humane Nature.

Moreover, Ministers in their Preaching should insist upon the great and
important Truths of Religion, and not bestow their greatest Pains upon less
necessary Points; the Circumstantials and Externals of Divine Worship: Much
less should they spend their Breath about needless Questions, which minister to
Strife, rather than godly Edifying. These are not the Things which should take
up their Thoughts and Labors, unless they intend to bring themselves into
Contempt. If they would acquit themselves with Honor, they must dwell upon
those Truths, which have a near and close Connection with the Salvation of
Men's Souls; such as the undone State of Man by his Apostasy from God, and the
Method of his Recovery, as revealed in the Gospel. And as it is by JESUS CHRIST,
and him alone, that a new and living Way has been opened for the Entrance of
Sinners into the holy Place, HE should be the great Subject of all our Sermons.
Their main Scope should be, to unfold the Mystery which was hid from Ages and
Generations, but made manifest in these last Days, by the Incarnation of our
JESUS, and the several Offices he has sustained and executed, in our Nature,
and in Order to effect our Salvation.

I may observe here, the Scripture ever takes notice of three Things with
Reference to the Affair of Man's Redemption. The first is the Grace of GOD
purposing it. It Is particular in its Care to fix our Thoughts on the Good Will
and free Mercy of GOD, as the true, original, eternal Source of this Blessing.
Next to the Grace of GOD, it gives all due Honor to the Merits of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST. It Is with a View to him, for his Sake, and on his Account, that
the Sinner is spoken of as justified and saved. These great Gospel Favors are
granted to him, not for any Works of Righteousness which he has done, but in
Consideration of the mediatorial Performances and Sufferings of the LORD JESUS
CHRIST. This Righteousness of the Redeemer is considered as the Ground and
Reason, that on the Account of which he is interested in the Mercy of GOD to
eternal Life. But besides the Grace of GOD, and the Merits of CHRIST, there is
what the Scripture calls a Meetness for the Inheritance, a Preparedness in the
Frame of the Sinner's Heart for the heavenly Glory, wrought in him by the Power
of the HOLY GHOST. And without this, it is as impossible he should be happy as
that Light should have Communion with Darkness, or CHRIST with Belial. He must
be changed from a Servant of Sin, to a Servant of Righteousness; he must be
made to put off the old Man, and to put on the new Man, or he cannot inherit
the Kingdom of GOD.

And now, these are the Things which should comprehend the Sum of our
Preaching; and the rather, because, in their proper Place, they are all
necessary, and equally necessary, in order to Salvation. Had it not been for
the infinite Compassions of the All-merciful GOD, he never would have purposed,
or accomplished our Redemption. Had it not been for the LORD JESUS CHRIST, what
he did and suffered in our Nature and Stead, we should have had no Title to
Salvation, no Righteousness that would have been a sufficient Ground for the
Bestowment of this Mercy. And if we are not transformed by the renewing of the
HOLY GHOST; if we are not made holy in the internal Frame of our Minds, in
Conformity to the Image and Will of GOD, neither the Grace of GOD, nor Merits
of the REDEEMER will be of any Avail to our Salvation: For while under the
Dominion of Sin, and in Slavery to evil Passions and corrupt Inclinations, we
harbor Misery in our Breasts; and could we be supposed, in this Condition, to
have a Right to Heaven, and to go there, we should really carry the very Seeds
of Hell along with us: Nor could we be happy, as reasonable Creatures, even in
that Place of Blessedness.

Some, perhaps, may think it enough, if, in their Preaching, they magnify the
Grace of GOD, and do honor to the Righteousness of CHRIST; but it is necessary
also that they explain to Men, and urge upon them, that Holiness of Heart and
Life, without which they cannot see the Lord; together with the Office and
Influence of the HOLY SPIRIT in the Work of Sanctification. These Things are
all insisted on in the Bible, and severally represented as having a necessary
Connection with Salvation: And they should, in like Manner, be insisted on by
Ministers in their Preaching. There is no Inconsistency between the Truths, but
a perfect and glorious Harmony. Men may, it is true, confound them in their
Thoughts; they may place their own Holiness in the Room of CHRIST, or the the
Grace of GOD; making it serve a Purpose it was never intended to, nor is
sufficient for: And so, under the Notion of exalting the Grace of GOD, or the
Righteousness of the REDEEMER, they may entertain a Thought of inherent
personal Holiness, as a Thing almost insignificant. But in either of these
Cases, they abuse the Doctrine of the Gospel, conceiving amiss of these Truths.
For they all have their Use in the Affair of Salvation; yea, in their proper
Place, they are all necessary: Nor can there, be Salvation without them all.
And People should be told so by Ministers. It Is indeed the Business of their
Office to set these Truths in a clear and distinct Light; and to this End
should their Preaching be mainly calculated.

Only, as there is Danger lest proud Man should ascribe too little, in the
Affair of Salvation, to the Grace of GOD, and depend upon his own Works instead
of the Righteousness by Faith, Ministers should be particular in guarding
against this Fault: Though they should take Care, in the doing of it, that they
don't run into the contrary Extreme; speaking after such a Manner of personal
evangelical Holiness, as to make it of very little Service: Whenas it is a
Matter of such Importance, that without it we are barred Entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, both by the Appointment of God, and the Frame of our own
Natures. And they should the rather be constant in affirming, that they which
have believed in GOD might he careful to maintain good Works, because it is too
common a Thing for professed Christians to be negligent of a good Life; yea, it
would be well, if they were not sometimes in a Temper of Mind to take Occasion,
even from the Grace of GOD, to continue in Sin.

Moreover again, Ministers should be uniform in their Preaching; making it
appear that they are Men of fixed and steady Principles. Not that they may not
change their Minds, if they have unhappily fallen into Error, and just Grounds
of Conviction are laid before them. It would be to their Honor, in this Case,
to own their Mistake; and no wise Man would think the worse of them for it, but
the better. But a Change of Sentiment, arising from a through deliberate
Examination, is a Thing quite different from a fluctuating and inconstant State
of Mind: And if, from such a volatile Disposition, Ministers are pepetually
wavering in their Thoughts, to Day of this Mind, and to Morrow of another, it
will very much tend to weaken their Credit: Nor may they expect any Thing short
of Contempt, if they temporise in their Sermons, speaking one Thing to one
People, and another Thing to another, on Purpose to suit their Humors, and
recommend themselves to the several Parties there may be among them. Such a Man
pleasing Conduct is beneath the Man, much more the Christian, most of all the
Minister. How much more becoming is it to deliver our Minds, at all Times, and
before all People, as we may be called, with an open Frankness, an honest
Freedom and Simplicity? It may, for the present, it is true, be of some
Disservice to our Interest; but, in the End, it will bring us into Esteem, and
secure for us a lasting good Reputation: Whereas, if we shift and change, to
gain the Applause of this, and the other Party, we shall not only act a mean
and base Part, but take the ready Way to expose ourselves to Contempt: And it
seldom happens, but such Servility meets with its just Desert, sooner or later.

In fine, Ministers should not be wanting in a Care about the external Manner
of their Preaching. This indeed is a Matter of the least Importance; though,
perhaps, most recommending to the Generality of People: For which Reason, it
would not be misspent Labor, if Ministers took some Pains that they might be
Masters of a good Pronunciation, and becoming Gesture: To be sure, they should
avoid disagreeable Tones and Whines; as also unnatural Distortions of
Countenance, and Motions of the Body: Neither should they turn Mimicks,
endeavoring to speak and act, not like themselves, but those they admire: They
may herein Aim at being more agreeable, but they really make themselves
ridiculous. Above all, they should take Heed of speaking and acting as if they
were beside themselves; for, in this Case, People will be apt to take them to
be so, and treat them with the Contempt due to such.

These now, and such like are the Instances, in Preaching, which should employ
the Care of Ministers, if they would not be despised. I go on, and say,

(3.) They should be equally careful they don't expose themselves by an undue
Conduct, in Point of Church Order. Government is as necessary in Church as
State; though the Ends to which it is designed, and the Manner of Administration
may be different. And so far as it lies with Ministers to preserve Order in the
Churches, they should be religiously careful to do it; at all Times
discountenancing such a Behavior, in the House of GOD, a tends to Confusion.
The Apostle Paul has set a noble Example in this Kind. When there were, among
the Corinthians, those who left their own Business, and took upon them the Work
that was proper to Ministers, he exhorted and commanded them to abide every
Man, in the same Calling wherein he was called; assuring them, that all were
not Apostles, or Prophets, or Teachers. And when they spoke many at once, in
the Place of Worship, so as to endanger its being said they were mad, he
corrected this Abuse; minding them that GOD was not the Author of Confusion,
but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints; and directing, that all
Things should be done decently and in Order. The present Ministers of CHRIST,
it is true, may not pretend to determine in Matters of this Nature with the
Authority of Apostles: Or if they should, they would only expose themselves to
Contempt. But yet, they may advise and rebuke, and back their Counsels and
Reproofs, with such Arguments from Scripture and Reason, as are suited to inform
the Understanding, and convince the Judgment: Nor should they suffer the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, in this, or any other Use of them, to lie by
neglected, where Persons break in upon the Rules of Decency, or otherways walk
in a disorderly Manner. They should use them indeed with Prudence and Caution,
and a becoming Tenderness and Compassion: but with a due Concern also for the
Honor of CHRIST, and the Well-Being of the Church: And when these make it
necessary, they should, so far as it belongs to them, exercise the proper
Discipline, and not be moved from their Duty herein, neither through dastardly
Fear, on the one Hand; nor a criminal Respect of Persons, on the other. If
Discipline is an Ordinance of JESUS CHRIST, it ought to be made Use of, in
Obedience to him, upon all suitable Occasions: Nor may Ministers expect any
other than to be base in the Esteem of People, if they sneak and cringe, and
prostitute this Institution of the Son of GOD to the Prejudices, Passions, or
Humors of Men. It Is Discipline, my Fathers and Brethren, not the mere Name, but
the vigorous and impartial Execution of the Thing, that must preserve and
establish our Churches. Our Fathers found the Advantage of it in their Day; and
it would be of like Service in ours, wisely and faithfully administered, both
for the Credit of the Ministry, and the Edification of these Churches in Peace
and Holiness.

4. In the last Place, Fourthly, Ministers should take Care they don't hurt
their Character, by an undue Performance of the more private Duties of their
Calling. Their Duty is not confined to their public Administrations: They have
a great Deal to do in private among their People. They must visit the sick,
comfort the Mourners, instruct the ignorant, warn the wicked, reduce the
wandering, strengthen the feeble-minded, bind up the brokenhearted; and, in
short, suit their Counsels, and Warnings, and Consolations, to the respective
Cases of those they have to do with. And they should be always in Readiness to
attend these Duties of their Station; not spending so much of their Time about
secular Employments, or in Studies foreign to their Office, as to take them off
from the faithful Discharge of them: Neither should they be partial in their
Respects; but endeavor, by all Means, to do Good to all, preferring no one
before another.

In a Word, Ministers will unavoidably have frequent Occasions to converse with
their People: and they should ever be careful to do it, after such a Manner as
not to be thought morose, haughty, or unsociable; yet should they keep at a
Distance from every Thing light, and vain, or mean. They should be
condescending, but not servile; they should be pleasant and affable, yet solid
and grave; and though they should not be backward to religious Discourse, yet
they should take Care that it be brought in so as not to look forced and
affected: And the whole of their Conversation should be such, as may have a
Tendency to preserve in the Minds of People, both a Love to them, and a
Veneration of them.

And having thus, in a plain, though imperfect Manner, considered a few of the
many Instances, wherein the Care of Ministers is necessary, if they would not
expose themselves to Contempt; I now go on,

III. In the last Place, to represent the Obligations which lie upon them to
express this Care. And these are solemn and weighty. The Honor of CHRIST calls
for it; the Success of their own Ministry depends very much upon it; Nor can
they otherwise give a good Account of themselves another Day: To which I might
add the Regard they owe to the Credit of the Clergy in Common. These are the
Particulars the Time will permit me but briefly to touch upon.

1. The Honor of CHRIST is concerned in the Care of Ministers not to be
despised. They are his Servants, as they act in his Name, and by Authority
derived from him. And shall they esteem it a small Thing, whether they are
base, or honorable in the Esteem of Mankind? If they are despised, and the
Contempt comes through their own Faulty Imprudences, will not the Disgrace,
however unjustly, be reflected on him who sent them? What greater Abuses have
been offered to the Name of CHRIST, than those which have been occasioned by
the Follies and Vices of Ministers? And shall the Thought of being thus
injurious to our LORD and SAVIOR sit easy on our Minds? Shall we be unmindful
of our Character, and take no Pains to act up to the Dignity of our Office,
when our MASTER will suffer so much through our Neglect? Whose Honor should we
be tender of, if not his who has separated us from our Brethren, and called us
by his Grace to the Ministry of the Gospel? The Honor of the REDEEMER should
lay near our Heart: And yet, what more distant from it, while our Conduct is
such as tends to make us contemptible; for the Contempt will finally, though
injuriously, be turned upon CHRIST himself.

2. The Success of our Ministry depends very much upon our not being held in
Contempt. If People have a despicable Thought of us, of what Advantage will our
Preaching be to them? They will conceive the same Opinion of our Sermons, as
they do of our Persons; And should we preach the pure Truths of GOD, and do it
with the Eloquence of Angels, it would have little or no good Effect upon them.
The Scribes and Pharisees of old seem, in this, to have been well acquainted
with humane Nature. For when they would obstruct the Ministry of our SAVIOR,
it was by base Attempts to lessen his Reputation. Is not this, say they, the
Carpenter's Son? And they wickedly misrepresented him to the People as one of a
bad Character, a Profaner of the Sabbath, a Friend to Publicans and Sinners;
and, in short, a Person of no Religion himself, and that would keep them from
having any too, if they minded what he said; rightly judging, that, if they
could but destroy his Credit, they should, at the same Time, render his
preaching insignificant: And so it unhappily proved, in respect of Multitudes,
in that Day. And the Effect will be the same now, and in all future Time to the
End of the World. There is indeed no such Thing as preaching so as to answer
any good End, where Ministers have lost their Reputation, and instead of
Respect are though it of with Contempt by People. We may observe (as One expresses
it), when Men are prepossest in Favor of any one, every Thing almost which he
speaks, appears weighty and significant. Opinion gives Luster to, and begets a
high Esteem even of his Weaknesses. When Opinion has raised a Man up to a
great Height, there must be something sublime and extraordinary in all his
Performances. On the contrary, when a Man's Credit is sunk and under Water,
what little Regard is paid to what he says? He is under such an unhappy
Disadvantage, that if he could speak like an Oracle, it would hardly stick and
make an Impression.

And what a powerful Argument is this to engage our Care that we don't expose
our selves to Contempt? Are we content to live useless? Are we willing to go on
in a Round of attending the Duties of our Calling, and do no good? Thus it is
likely it will be, if we do not look to our selves, and take suitable Care to
maintain a good Character. It is this that must prepare Men's Minds for a
favorable Reception of what we preach.

3. If we do not use did proper Measures to keep from Contempt, we shall not be
able to give a good Account of our selves another Day. Not but that it may be
our Lot to be despised, notwithstanding the most faithful Endeavors to deserve
the Esteem of People: In which Case, the greater the Contempt we have passed
through, if we have behaved well under it, the brighter will be our Crown in
the Day of CHRIST. But if we have brought Contempt on our selves, by our
Follies and Vices, the Fault is our own. And if by thus rendering our selves
despicable, we have not only hindered the Efficacy of our Ministry, but
unhappily been the Occasion of the Ruin of those Souls, we might have saved;
how dreadful will be the Account we must give up unto GOD! Should the People of
our Charge accost us at the Bar of CHRIST; We were stumbled at your
Imprudences; we were unhinged, in our religious Sentiments, by your
Unsteddiness; we became indifferent to the Practice of Piety, through your Want
of Zeal in recommending it to us; we gradually lost all serious Sense of Divine
Things, hardened our selves in Sin, and settled in Profaness and Infidelity,
from the loose, vain, evil Example you set before us: I say, should our People
thus bespeak us, before the Tribunal of Judgment, how would it cut us to the
Heart, and pierce our very Souls? Should they go on, and say; Had you behaved
so as to gain our Esteeem and Reverence; had you preached, and conversed, and
lived, so as to render Religion amiable in our Eyes; had you been faithful in
your Warnings, skilful in your Counsels, and watched for our Souls as those who
were earnestly desirous of their everlasting Salvation, it had not been with
us, as it is at this Day. To you it is, in a great Measure owing; to your
Negligence and Unsaithfulness; to your Want of Love to our Souls, and Care of
their everlasting Well-Being, that we are now placed at the left Hand of
CHRIST, and must be doomed to a Departure from him, into the Place of weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. Would not such a Charge as this make every
Joint of us to tremble? Should not we be struck with Horror to be thus
challenged by the Souls committed to our Oversight, in the great and terrible
Day of the LORD? There is no Guilt like that of the Blood of Souls. It cries
for Vengeance: And O who can conceive the Weight of Vengeance we must suffer,
when Multitudes of lost Souls shall rise up, and call for it to be poured out
upon us!

But besides the Souls of our own proper Charge, we shall, if we make our
selves mean, be accountable for all the Damage that may herefrom arise to
Religion in general; which will be greater than we can well imagine. Contempt
will easily and naturally be derived from our Persons to the Cause we are
managing; insomuch, that if we are base in the Opinion of the World, Religion
will be so too. When Eli's Sons, by their shameful Misconduct in the Priest's
Office, had made themselves vile, the next Thing we hear of is, that Men
abhorred the Offerings of the LORD. And the Effect will be the same now. If
Ministers behave so as to forfeit their Credit, it will make Way for the
Profanation of divine Ordinances, or a Neglect to attend on them; and from
Carelessness about the Things of Religion, Men will proceed to violate its
sacred Laws, and from one Degree of Wickedness they will go on to another,
'till they have made themselves abandoned Sinners. And do we think the Blame of
this no Ways belongs to us? It will all, if we have justly exposed our selves
to Contempt, be charged on us, to the aggravating our Condemnation, in the Day
of reckoning. And better would it have been for us, if we had never been born.
In vain shall we plead that we have prophesied in CHRIST's Name, that we have
broken the Bread of Life, and poured forth the Wine of Salvation; -- It will
rather expose us to the more angry Resentments of our Judge: Nor will any of
the Sons of Adam drink deeper of the Cup of the LORD's fiery Indignation. I may
add, in the last Place,

4. We are bound to the Use of all proper Care not to fall into Contempt,
because of the Damage which may hereby accrue to the Ministry in Common. Were
the Hurt confined to our selves, the Obligation would be the less; but it will
probably spread from our Persons to the Profession, and all in general will
suffer through our Mismanagement. This, it must be owned, is very unfair. The
Body of the Clergy ought not to be though it the worse of, because some may make
themselves vile. But such is the Temper of the World, that they will not
restrain their Contempt to the particular Ministers who may deserve it, but
will extend it to all of the same Order. And very severe have been the
Reflections on the whole Clergy, as occasioned by the ill Conduct of a few. It
is too common, indeed, upon the Miscarriage of one, to hear it said, they are
all alike; and sometimes the Office it self must be aspersed, and even the
Wisdom of GOD called in question for establishing it. And shall not a Regard to
the ministerial Order make us careful of our Credit? We should certainly take
heed, we do not expose our selves to Contempt, because if we do, it will not
rest on our own Persons, but will more or less affect the whole Body of
Ministers.

The APPLICATION remains. And

1. We learn from what has been said, that the Work of Ministers is very
difficult. The Pains they must take to keep from being despised shows it to be
so. How hard a Thing is it to attend the various Duties of our Office, so as to
deserve the Esteem of People, and Preserve in their Minds a becoming Respect
for us? Unless we are Men of good natural Abilities, and acquired
Accomplishments; at the same Time, maintaining a Care of good Works, it is
impossible: And even in this Case, what Caution and Prudence, what active Zeal
and Diligence, what Resolution and Courage, are necessary? O who is sufficient
for these Things! If an Apostle of JESUS CHRIST cried out under the Weight of
Care that lay upon him, how much more Reason have we to do it, who are not
endowed with his Graces or Gifts? We cannot be too sensible of the Need we stand
in of divine Help: Nor can we too frequently repair to the Throne of Grace,
that we may obtain Mercy, and find the Grace that may be sufficient for us.

2. What Reason have Ministers to be humbled, that they have taken no more Care
to preserve themselves from Contempt? Who of us can say, that our Conduct has
been unexceptionable? That we have behaved in our Office so as to give no
Occasion of Reproach? Dare we, any of us, the best of us, lay our Hands upon
our Hearts, and justify our selves before GOD? We have all, at one Time or
another, acted below our Character, in a less or greater Degree: And the more
sensible we are of it, and humbled for it, the more worthy we shall be of
Respect and Honor. And have we not, some of us, so exposed our selves as that
human Frailty, cannot be our Excuse? Are we none of us, by criminally
neglecting our Studies, less knowing in Things pertaining to the Kingdom of
CHRIST, than we might and ought to have been? Have we none of us too often
ventured into the Pulpit, when we have had nothing to say there, but what,
through Want of previous Meditation and Care, has been crude and indigested,
and sitted rather to bring us into Discredit with judicious Hearers, than to
profit their Souls? Have we, none of us, been too careless of our Lives,
behaving after such a Manner as to prejudice People against Religion, rather
than recommend it to their Love and Practice?

I say not these Things to suggest Evil of the Body of the Ministers of this
Generation; for I really believe, and would take this Opportunity to declare
it, that they are as pious, and faithful, and laborious a Set of Men, as any
Part of the Christian World is favored with. I am indeed sensible they are too
commonly despised at this Day, and to as great a Degree as was ever known in
the Country; but I trust in GOD, the Contempt is injurious. Not that I think it
is so, in Respect of them all: And it is, perhaps, principally owing to some of
our own Order, that the Credit of the Ministry runs so low. Are there none
among us, whose Conduct, in the late Day of Trial, has led People into a mean
Thought of Ministers in general? Did we all discover that Knowledge of the
World, and of the Frame of human Nature, and act with that prudent Forecast,
which might have been expected of Men of our Character? Did we all stand up for
the Order of the Gospel, and in Defense of its Truths and Ways, with the
Courage and Faithfulness which became the Servants of JESUS CHRIST? Have we,
none of us, too much connived at those Errors in Doctrine, and Irregularities
in Practice, which have had a dreadful Tendency to sink the Credit of the
Ministry, yea, and of Religion too, in the Land? Have we, none of us, invited
into our Pulpits Men of mean Parts, and no Learning, at whose Performances we
our selves have been ashamed? Have we, none of us, taken Part with those, who
have treated the best Ministers in the Country with Neglect, to say nothing
worse? Have we, none of us, had the Persons of some particular Ministers in
Admiration, to the reflecting an unjust Odium on others? Have we not flattered
them beyond all Bounds of Modesty, and by our Flatteries strengthened their
Influence to hurt the Reputation, and together with it the Usefulness of the
Minstry, GOD has set up in these Churches? And what is worse than all this,
have we, none of us, acted in the proper Charges of our Brethren, so as to
leaven the Minds of their People with evil Surmisings against them, though Men
of as good Reputation for their ministerian Gifts and Faithfulness, as our
selves? Have we not spoken of them in a Manner so censorious and uncharitable,
as to bring them into Disesteem, in their own Parishes? Have we not sided with
People in the Disgrace they have heaped upon them? Have we not encouraged them
in their Alienations, Disaffections and Separations? Or, if we have had too
much Policy, or too little Courage, to be open in these Things, have we not by
secret Whispers, and Closet-Insinuations, done the Business as effectually? I
charge nothing upon any in particular; but GOD knows, and we all know, that
there has been great Guilt as to these Things: And so far as we are any of us,
Sharers in it, we have Reason for deep Humiliation before GOD. A despised
Ministry will be a useless one. Wherein therefore we have had a Hand in
bringing our Brethren into undeserved Contempt, we have done great Disservice
to the Interest of the REDEEMER; nor could we, in any Thing, have more pleased
the Enemy of all Righteousness: For his Kingdom is never more likely to be in a
flourishing State, than when the Ministry of a Land is injuriously held in
Contempt. The good LORD humble and pardon us all, wherein we have been faulty!
And may we be more upon our Guard in Time to come!

3. Ministers should do what they can to keep one another from being despised;
not by countenancing one another in Wickedness; nor yet by standing up for each
other, in that which is a Dishonor to Men of our Character. This would be to
bring, both our selves, and the whole Ministry, into Disgrace. But we should be
tenderly concerned for the Reputation of our Fellow Laborers in the LORD, and
ready, in all suitable Ways, to advance it. We should be disposed to prefer our
Brethren in Love, to hope well, and believe well, and speak well of them, so
far as there is Reason to do so. And if it is the Unhappiness of any to be
treated with Disrespect, not because they are in themselves worthless; or have
acted a mean and base Part, but because they have to do with such as are
unreasonably prejudiced against them, we should both pity them, and use our
best Endeavors, as we may have Opportunity, to wipe off the Dirt that is
thrown upon them. To be sure, we should not encourage Busy-Bodies in coming to
us with their idle tatling Stories; neither should we strengthen contentious
Men in their Alienations and Disaffections; much less still may we allow our
selves in secret Whispers to the Disadvantage of our Brother, while we dare not
tax him to the Face, with the Evil we insinuate behind his Back. -- Ministers
may do a great Deal to support the Reputation of one another; and if they would
heartily endeavor to do it, so far, I mean, as they might with Reason and
Justice, we should soon see the Clergy in better Repute than they enjoy at this
Day.

4. How careful should Ministers be to introduce none into the sacred Office
who are like to be despised? We are the Persons to whom it belongs, according
to the Appointment of JESUS CHRIST, to separate Men to the Work of the
Ministry: And we ought to be cautious on whom we lay Hands for this Purpose. We
should not suddenly do it in an Affair of such Importance; nor indeed at all,
till first satisfied, that the Qualifications of the Persons are such, as that
there is no Prospect of their falling into Contempt. And in Order to this,
there should be some Trial of them before they are entrusted with the Care of
Souls. It might be best, if we countenanced none in preaching 'till they had
first been examined. I know it has been a long Custom for young Men to go into
the Pulpit, when they themselves think fit to do so. Perhaps, the Churches in
this Land are the only ones, who take so little Care in a Matter of such
Consequence to the Interest of the Kingdom of CHRIST. It Is high Time it was
rectified: And if, as a Means to so good an End, Ministers would be peremptory
in refusing their Pulpits to all Candidates, 'till they had passed their Trials
before proper Judges, it might be of singular Service.

To be sure, all reasonable Care should be taken, that none be set apart for
the Service of CHRIST, in the Gospel Ministry, but faithful Men; such as are
both apt, and able to teach; such as are of good Behavior, and have a good
Report without. Raw, ignorant, unfurnished Men, ought never to have committed
to them the Administration of divine Ordinances. Says the Apostle, 1 Timothy iii.
6. Not a NOVICE, lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation
of the Devil. And if, in Opposition to his Advice, we are active in the
Ordination of such Persons, or taking them into our Pulpits, how can we excuse
ourselves before GOD? Should they sink into Contempt, as in all Probability
they soon will, the Reproach would reach us; nor can it be but we should be
accountable for the Scandal hereby brought upon the Ministry.

5. We see, from what has been said, the Reason we have to be thankful for the
Means of Education among us. Not but that some, in these Days, have expressed a
mean Opinion of Learning, and of the Colleges, where are the best Means for the
Acquirement of it. It is a Pity any in holy Orders have been so unadvised as to
lead People into this Thought. They are herein very unlike to our pious
Forefathers, who had such a Sense of the Necessity of Learning as a
Qualification for the Ministry, that they soon founded a College in the midst
of a thousand Straits and Difficulties; from whence, through the Smiles of
Heaven, our Churches have, all along, been supplied with able Ministers; Men
who have been a Credit to the sacred Function, and, I may say, an Honor to the
Country. And shall this, and the other School of the Prophets more lately
erected, be now slighted and neglected? We ought rather to rank them amongst
the richest Blessings, which call for our Thankfulness to Almighty GOD: Nor can
we lay ourselves out too much to strengthen the Reputation and Usefulness;
esteeming them the best Security against an ignorant, and therefore a
contemptible Ministry.

And it were to be wished, the young Men, in these Schools, would wisely
improve the Price put into their Hands to get Wisdom and Understanding. And let
me advise the Candidates of the Ministry, those in particular who may be here
present, not to rush too hastily into the sacred Employment, lest they expose
not only themselves, but Religion also to Contempt. Give yourselves to Reading,
Meditation and Prayer; and continue in these Things, 'till you have attained,
under the Divine Influence, a suitable Furniture, both of Gifts and Graces, for
the Service of the Sanctuary. And don't trust your own Judgments in a Matter of
so great Importance. And, if you should be urged to enter upon Preaching, by
those who know not whether you are qualified for the Business, be not overcome
to yield to their Entreaties; but wait 'till you are declared fit, by such as
are proper Judges in the Case. And don't be discouraged from Labor and Pains
to get furnished with considerable Measures of Learning, both Divine and
Humane, because, as the Times are, it may be of little Service to recommend you
to the Esteem of many People. The State of Things, it is to be hoped, will not
always continue as at present: or however, you will find the Advantage of
previous hard Study, through your whole Life; besides that you will be hereby
qualified to be greater Blessings, in your Day, wherever the Providence of GOD
shall fix your Place of Labor.

6. People should learn, from what has been said, not to despise Ministers, nor
do any Thing that may tend to bring them into Discredit. I mean not, Brethren,
to blame any of you for entertaining a mean Though It of Ministers, or expressing
the low Opinion you have of them, when, by their Behavior, they have forfeited
a Right to your Regards. It Is fit and proper your Sentiments of, and Conduct
toward us, should be adjusted to our visible Character? And if we make our
selves contemptible, we ought to be base in your Esteem. But then, you should
take Care you don't despise us, when we give you no sufficient Occasion to
treat us with Contempt. You should not watch for our Halting, nor aggravate
every Infirmity we may be betrayed into; but be ready to make all reasonable
Allowances in our Favor, considering we are Men of like Passions with
yourselves, and liable not only to the same, but to more and greater
Difficulties and Temptations. Don't despise us for common Frailties, but rather
cover them with the Mantle of Charity. Don't take up, and harbor in your
Breasts, unjust Prejudices, either against our Persons, or the Office we
sustain: In such a Case, should we behave ever so circumspectly, you would turn
every Thing to our Disadvantage: Nor would it be in our Power, should we both
preach and live like Angels, to make you think well of us. Take Heed
especially, that you do not despise us for those Things, which ought rather to
recommend us to your Veneration. If we reprove you for your Vices, don't be
disaffected to us; for this we must do, or we cannot be faithful to him who
sent us. If we see you exposed to Danger, or turning out of the good old Way,
don't take it amiss if we are free in telling you of it; for we are moved
hereto from the Love we bear to you. If we stand up in Defense of the Faith and
Order of the Gospel, don't say we are carnal, and treat us as though we were
your Enemies, and the Enemies of JESUS CHRIST; for it is in Obedience to him,
and out of Compassion to your Souls, that we thus run the Hazard of your
Displeasure. In a Word, divest your Minds, as much as may be, of every wrong
Biass, and heartily form your Sentiments of us, not from this or the other
particular Action, not from our being of this or the other Party; but from what
appears in our general Conduct: And if this is such as will allow you to think
honorably of us, be in a Temper to do so; and do not carry it toward us with
Neglect, much less Contempt, unless there is evident Reason given for it: And
then, if we find Fault, we shall be unjust to you, and partial to ourselves.

And you should not only take Care, that you do not despise us, but that you do
not do any Thing that may tend to bring us into Discredit. If any of you should
not relish our Manner of preaching, as not being so well suited to your
particular Turn of Mind, do not prejudice others against it, who may be both
gratified and profited by it. If any of you should be so defective in your
Charity as to suspect, whether we are the Men inwardly we appear to be
outwardly, do not leaven the Minds of others with the like evil Surmisings;
don't speak of us as Wolves in Sheep's Clothing; do not so much as whisper a
Thing so injurious to our Character. If any of you should be fond of the
Preaching of Men of small Capacities and no Learning, do not so insist upon our
taking them into our Pulpits, or separating them to the Work of the Ministry,
as to force us to disoblige you, or expose ourselves to those who have more
Knowledge and Judgment.

And here let me recommend to you one Thing, which, if duly considered, would
be of great Service to the Credit of the Ministry; and that is, that you be
well satisfied, not only of the good Disposition of your Children, but their
Promptness to learn, before you devote them to the Service of GOD, in the
Gospel of his SON. Don't think it will tend, either to their Repute, or the
Benefit of the World, to give them an Education, with a View to the Ministry,
if their natural Abilities are of the lower Size. They may better serve their
Maker, and Generation, in some other Employment. They may have a Genius for one
or other of the various Businesses of Life, though not a Turn of Mind fitted to
make them shine as Ministers: And it is Pity, their Usefulness in the World
should be obstructed, by a Mistake in their Education which cannot easily be
afterward mended. And if your Circumstances in Life should set you above your
Neighbors, either in Point of Riches, or Honor, do not think it will be a
Disgrace to you, to devote your Sons to the Work of serving at GOD's Altar, if
they appear to be peculiarly disposed to it, and formed for it. It Is true, they
will not, in this Station of Life, be in the Way of worldly Preferments; but
yet, what more noble Employment than that of Co-workers with CHRIST, in forming
Men to a Meetness for the eternal Service and Enjoyment of GOD in Heaven? And
if your Sons should be Instruments in turning many Sinners to Righteousness,
would not this reflect an Honor, even upon you, both in this World, and that
which is to come?

Let me further say, as Ministers, when low in the World, and hard put to it
for a Livelihood, are too often despised, take Care you don't withhold from
them more than is meet. And where it is the Lot of any to be fixed among People,
who, through Prejudices against the Gospel, do little toward their Subsistence,
suffer me to bespeak for them your charitable Assistance; for those especially,
who, at the Desire of this Convention, and as encouraged by Promises of Help
from them, have gone forth into such difficult Service. One Design of our being
now together is, to contribute to the Support of these Missionaries; and, I
doubt not, you will join with us in this Act of Piety. We have had Experience
of your Goodness in former Collections, and trust the present one will be
enlarged through your Liberality. May we all, both Ministers and People, freely
give as we have freely received; and to our Bounties let us add our Prayers,
that these Servants of the LORD may be carried through all their Difficulties,
and succeeded in their Endeavors to do Good to Souls, to the Joy of their
Hearts here, and the brightning their Crown of Glory hereafter.

In fine, and above all, see to it, as you have any Value for our Credit, that
our Ministry be not lost upon you. If you reap no spiritual Profit by our
Labors for the Good of your Souls, but continue in your Sins, and grow worse
instead of better, nothing will have a more dreadful Tendency to bring us into
Disgrace. The Language of your Impenitence will be, that we are a useless Set
of Men: Nor will the Enemies of Religion fail of improving it to our Reproach.
Whereas, if, under our Ministry, you are effectually taught to deal justly, and
love Mercy, and walk humbly with GOD, this would put to Silence those who might
be disposed to speak Evil against us, and procure for us a Name better than
precious Ointment. If, by Means of our Preaching, you are convinced of Sin, and
turned from the Power of it; if your Tempers are rectified, and Manners
reformed; if you are really brought to love GOD and your Neighbor, and, in one
Word, to possess and exercise that Faith and Humility, and all those Christian
Graces, wherein the Image of GOD and the Power of Religion do truly consist, we
shall not need any other Recommendation; you will then be a living standing
Proof of our Usefulness: And we should herefrom be under Advantage to do still
greater Service, to our own Comfort in this World, and our shining, in the
next, as the Brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars forever and ever.

And now, may we all, both Ministers and People, receive what we have heard, so
far as it is the Truth in Jesus, in the Spirit of Love and Meekness. It Is
probable, we shall never all of us be together again in this House. The Faces
of some, who were present the last Year, we shall see no more, 'till we meet in
the Day of the appearing of the SON of MAN. May we look to ourselves, and so
behave in our Stations, as that we may then be found at the right Hand of
CHRIST, and have Admission into that Kingdom, prepared before the Foundations
of the World, where we shall no more be in a Temper to despise, nor shall ever
give Occasion for Contempt; where we shall no more treat one another with
Bitterness, Anger and Clamor, but live together in perfect Love and Peace;
where, instead of differing and contending with each other, we shall all be of
one Mind and one Heart; joining with the innumerable Company of Angels and
glorified Saints, in saying with a loud Voice, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory,
and Power, be unto HIM THAT SITS ON THE THRONE, and unto the LAMB for ever
and ever. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

