CHRIST's LIGHT SPRINGING, ARISING up, SHINEING forth, AND DISPLAYING it self
through the Whole WORLD. Being a Treatise wrote By SAMUEL FISHER

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by WILLIAM BRADPORD, at the Sign of the Bible in
Second Street. 1744

A PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH Human Learning is not esteemed an essential Qualification to a Minister
of the Gospel by the Society of which the Author of the ensuing small Treatise
became a Member and Minister, yet inasmuch as it is esteemed so by some of
other Christian Societies, the said Treatise may be better accepted of such,
when they are acquainted that he was a Scholar, which to show, please to
observe, that He was one trained up to Literature, and had studied diligently
in the University, and though he was but young then, yet of pious Conversation,
disliked many Ceremonies and Customs in the Schools. When he had finished his
Course there, he was ordained a Priest of the Church of England, and a certain
great Man took him to be his Chaplain; and afterward he got a Living at Lydd,
worth about two Hundred Pounds a Year. But after having been thus employed some
time, he came to see that Infant Baptism was an human Institution, and to
preach for Wages unlawful. -- And becoming in time more and more uneasy to go
on in Acting what was burthensom to his Conscience, he resolved to desist from
his Ministry, and so he went to the Bishop and delivered up the Commission that
he had received from him to preach; and casting himself upon God's Providence,
he took a Farm and turned Grasier, by which Means he maintained his Wife and
Children much better to his Content than before. W. Sewel's History fol. 100.
See his Speech before Parla. 130. goes to Dunkirk 202. and to Rome 249. his
Death 432.


To which may be added, a short Extract of WILLIAM PENN'S Testimony concerning
him, i. e. I have myself found Information and Comfort in perusing several
Tracts that have been written by him; and though I greatly valued his Abilities,
employed so accurately in a good Cause, yet above all, I cannot but admire and
love his great Self-denial and Humility, who from being a Teacher, became
willing to be taught; and that most eveness and sweetness of Temper, his most
intimate Friends have often observed in him: So that he was not only a good
Scribe but a good Liver; a Christian, according to the Apostle James, composed
of Faith and Works; therefore is his Name of good Savor with the the
Righteous, because he counted nothing dear in comparison of the Excellency of
the Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, which came not by Flesh and Blood, but by the
Revelation of the Father of Lights.

Sect. 1.
OUR Testimony, and that Truth to which we bear Testimony, who by those to whom
Woe is, forasmuch as they tremble not at the Word of God, are scornfully styled
Quakers, is no different Thing, nor another, but plainly one and altogether-the
same, which all the Holy Men and Prophets of God have held forth, as also
CHRIST himself and all his Apostles and Ministers, as many as have spoken as
they were moved of God from the beginning of the World to this very Day.

2. For even as they (whose Testimony who even few or none either believed or
received) so we, who are of her Children, of all and only whom Wisdom is
justified, give Testimony to Wisdom itself, not the Wisdom of this World, nor
of the Princes of this World, who come to naught, but to that hidden Wisdom,
which none of the Princes of this World knew (for had they known, they would
not crucify the Lord of Glory) The Wisdom of God is a Mystery, even the Light
of the Lord God and JESUS CHRIST, who are Light, and in whom is no Darkness at
all; yea to that glorious Light that is now arising to enlighten that Holy City
New-Jerusalem, where now there is to be no more Night, into which nothing shall
in any wise enter that defiles.

3. Concerning which Light CHRIST himself said to Paul, being now truly
Converted to it, which he persecuted before, through the blindness of his Mind,
I now send thee to the Nations, to open their Eyes and turn them from Darkness
to Light, from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness
of Sins, and Inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith that is in
me. Acts, 26.17, 18.

4. Neither was this the Business and Ministry which Paul only received of God,
that he might fulfill it; but John also testifies, that this was the Message
which he, together with the rest of CHRIST'S Ministers, had received from
CHRIST himself, to declare, which was also from the Beginning, not any new
Thing, (however it might seem new, as being clouded till the Darkness was past,
and the true Light shined again out of the Darkness that sometime clouded it)
but the old Thing, which was from the Beginning, namely, That God is Light, and
in him is no Darkness at all, and that if we say we have Fellowship with him,
and walk in Darkness, we lie and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light,
as he is in the Light, we have mutual Fellowship with him, and the Blood of
JESUS CHRIST his Son, cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. Moreover,
that who says he is in the Light and hates his Brother, is in Darkness even
until now.

5. Concerning which Light of God, of which the Scripture every were speaks,
and from which enlightening the Penmen thereof, the Scripture itself was given
forth, which also was, which also shined in the Heart of Man long before the
Scriptures were; we, together with the Scripture and the Writers thereof, do
testify this self same Thing, namely, That a certain Measure, certain Beams
were of old, and now are given of God, in the Conscience of every of them, to
the Sons of Men, who although God made them after his own Image, upright and
blameless, have yet sought out to themselves both various and vain Inventions,
and corrupted their Ways and erred: And as to any help they can have from
themselves, are in a Manner wholly perisned from the true God, and from the
Knowledge of him, whom truly to know is Life eternal, and from all Communion
with him, to shine in their dark Hearts as a Light in a Dark Place, and to
bring them back through the Condemnation of their evil Deeds, Words, and
Thoughts, and of that whole Chaos of Confusion and Corruption that came in by
the Fall, which Condemnation this Light will bring on all that take good heed
to it and through the Mortification of that old Man and Body, as well of Death
as Sin, with all its earthly Members; and in a Word, of all whatever in Man is
contrary to the Image and Will of God, and turn them back unto God, unto that
primitive State of Purity, Righteousness and Innocence, from which they
departed to worship Images in their own Imagination, to know and to worship the
true God, who is a Spirit, truly in Spirit and in Truth, with which Worship
only the Lord is worshipped according to his Will; and lastly, to enjoy such
spiritual Peace and Communion with him, as none are by any Means possible (as
is aforesaid) capable of, while they are alienated from him by the Darkness of
Iniquity, and while they remain in their Transgression incorrigible and
unconverted.

6. Romans 3, 6, 9, 19. For both Jew and Gentiles (as it is written) are
concluded all under Sin, there is not one Righteous, no not one; there is none
that understands, there is none that seeks after God, they are all gone out
of the Way, they are altogether become unprofitable, there is none that does
Good, no not one; their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with their Tongues they
have uttered Deceit, the Poison of Asps is under their Lips, their Mouth is
full of Cursing and Bitterness, their Feet is swift to shed Blood, Wasting and
Misery is in their Way, and the Way of Peace they have not known, there is no
Fear of God before their Eyes. So that every Mouth is stopped and the whole
World become guilty before God, for all have sinned and fallen short of the
Glory of God.

7. This is the State of all Mankind separated by the Fall from the Light into
the Darkness, among whom even all of whatsoever Sex, Nation, Language,
Condition or Age (at least that is capable to discern between Good and Evil) I
say, all may say within themselves, We are lost, we are gone down headlong into
the utmost Darkness, into extreme Damnation from God: Neither is there any
other way to Life exhibited, but by JESUS CHRIST the Light of the World, by
some Measure of Light at least shining from himself, enlightening (as it is said)
every Man that comes into the World, shining in Darkness, in the dark
Consciences of Men, though the Darkness comprehended it not. Holding by the
Hand also, and as it were leading by the Hand those that being ensnared in
Chains of Darkness, and thrust down into the Pit, do not wink with their Eyes,
to the further blinding of them, but according to the Council of Christ
himself, believe in the Light whilst they have it, that they may become
Children of the Light: For I am the Light of the World, (says CHRIST) he that
follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life;
also, I am come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in me may not
remain in Darkness, John 12.46, etc. I came not to damn the World, but to save
the World.

8. In this Manner therefore is CHRIST the Salvation of the World, as he is the
Light of the World, destroying the Works of the Devil, who has wrought in the
Darkness to the setting up of a Principality and a Kingdom to himself in the
Hearts of Men, and redeeming Men from the Power of the Prince of the Darkness
of this World unto God, who is Light, and to see Light, even the Light of Life
in his Light, Psalm 18.28, 29, etc.

9. In like manner does the Prophet Isaiah affirm CHRIST to be given of God for
a Covenant to the People for a Light to the Nations, to open the blind Eyes,
and to bring out of Prison them that sit in Darkness, even the Blind, which
have Eyes and see not, Isa. 42.6, etc. And after him Paul testifyeth, that
Christ was set as a Light to the Nations, that he might be the Lords Salvation
to the Ends of the Earth. Simion also speaking by the holy Spirit of the Child
JESUS, call him that Salvation of his which the Lord had prepared before the
Face of all People, to be a Light to lighten the Nations and the Glory of his
People Israel, Luke 2.30.

10. In as much therefore as CHRIST is the Light of the World, he is the
Savior of the World, and so far only are men saved by him as they believe in
him, who is the Light, and in that Light where with he does enlighten every
Man, in his own Conscience, and set themselves to walk after it, which leads no
Man into Iniquity; and so far forth are all Men liable to Condemnation before
God, as they walk not in this, which is in them, howbeit, not consenting to
any, but testifying against all Iniquity, even the least, and also reproving
and condemning it, even in them, who are not in it, but walking contrary to it
in the Darkness.

11. For although God in his great Love gave his Son for a Light, not that he
might damn the World, but that the World through him might be saved; and he
that believes in him is not condemned, yet he that believes not is condemned
already; and this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, into
the inmost Consciences of Men, their manifesting Good and Evil, but Men loved
the Darkness rather than the Light, because their Deeds are evil; for he that
does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should
be reproved; but whosoever does Truth, he comes to the Light, that his deeds may
be made Manifest, that they are wrought in God, John 3.16 to 21.

12. And although all that obtain Justification, are justified freely, by the
Grace of the Lord, through the Redemption that is made in JESUS CHRIST alone,
(yea cursed be he, and cursed will he be, that seeks for Justification any
otherway; for he who is the Light of the World, is also that corner Stone which
(however it be set at naught by a thousand thousand, of the Builders) is yet
made the Head of the Corner; neither is there Salvation in any other, nor is
there any other Name save that of CHRIST the Light, under Heaven given among
Men, whereby they must be saved, Acts 4.11, 12. Nevertheless no further is any
Man accepted of God, or justified by CHRIST, or the Grace of God in CHRIST,
then as he is directed by CHRIST the Light, and is by the Grace of God, by that
inward Witness of God, by the Light of God and CHRIST in his Conscience, which
is given of God for this very End, that it may teach and lead, taught and led
unto Repentance from the unfruitful Works of Darkness.

13. For this Light shows the riches of the Goodness and Long-suffering, and
forbearance of him who is Long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
Perish, but that all should come to him by Repentance, and is that very Grace
of God bringing Salvation, that has appeared to all Men, teaching all that
will learn what it teaches, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, they
should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, which kind of
Life will otherwise be two late to begin to live in the World to come; which
Grace being received in Vain, how much more being despised, by the hardness of
the Heart, refusing to repent, wrath is treasured up against the Day of wrath,
and the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render unto every
one according to his Works, to them who by patient Continuance in well doing,
seek for Glory and immortality, eternal Life; but unto them that are
Contentious, and obey not the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, Indignation and
Wrath: For Romans 2. Tribulation and Anguish is to come upon every Soul of Man
that works Evil; but Glory, Honor and Peace to every one that works Good,
both to the Jew and also to the Greek: For there is no respect of Persons with
God; but in every Nation he that fears him and works Righteousness, is
accepted with him; but the wicked, and him that loves Violence, his Soul
hates.

14. And howsoever the World which is called Christian, together with the
manifold Sects, Professors and merely nominal Christians and Ministers thereof,
may dream that they have CHRIST their Redeemer, very often calling him LORD,
JESUS, continuing in the mean Time in all Disobedience to his Light; yet the
Foundation of the Lord siandeth sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows who
are his; and let every one that names the Name of CHRIST depart from Iniquity.

15. For the Day of the Lord draws nigh, wherein both every Man and his Deeds
shall be made manifest; for the Day, which is the Light, shall declare them;
for they shall be revealed by Fire, and the Fire shall try every Man's Works of
what sort they are; and in that Day all those Dreamers shall be awakened, and
shall know, that as concerning the Truth, they have erred far from the Mark;
and that not every one that says unto CHRIST, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does what Christ says, and what the will is of
his Father which is in Heaven, and though they have prophesied in his Name, and
done great Things, nevertheless for as much as they departed not from Iniquity,
they shall be doomed from CHRIST with Depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity, I
know you not.

16. Then shall the whole Multitude of Transgressors of the Law, i. e. of the
Light of God in the Conscience, by which all, even those that have not the Law
written in an outward Letter, are a Law to themselves, having the Work of the
Law written in their Hearts, That the Lamb of God came not to tolerate, but to
take away the Sin of the World, and that Jesus was sent, not to give liberty to
Sin, but to set his People at Liberty from their Sins, and that in the greatest
Liberty, wherewith CHRIST freeth his People, there is the least License, and
that the Father having raised up his Son, has sent him to bless Men, they
turning away every one of them from his Iniquity, and that those blessed ones,
to whom the Lord imputes not Sin, whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sin
is covered, are such in whose Spirit there is no Guile, and that there is in no
Wise any Remission of Sins unto those, who still accustom themselves to daily
Commission of them, Romans 2.14, 15. Joh. 1.20. Psalm 32.1, 2. Act. 3.26. Romans
11, 26,

17. Moreover the great and terrible Day of the Lord now comes, wherein the
Light, which is risen in the Consciencies of Men, shall daily more and more
clearly shine forth, in which also the Book of Conscience must be opened, that
out of it all Men may be judged according to all Things that are written
therein, where, by the Light, which is God's faithful Witness, all Sin is
written down in the Sight of God, as with a Pen of Iron; in which Day, by the
Light, God will come nigh to us to Judgment; and then the Righteousness, Grace
and Mercy of God shall be revealed toward all, who, standing still in his
Light, wait for him to come as a Redeemer to them from their Impieties, that
they may be saved from the Wrath, that is to come upon all the Children of
Disobedience, by which Light the Wrath of God shall be manifested from Heaven
in their own Consciences, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men,
who retain the Truth in Unrighteousness; in which Day God will rain down upon
the Wicked, Snares, Fire, Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest, all which Things
shall be the Portion of their Cup.

18. Moreover in the Hand of God there is now a Cup and the Wine thereof is
red, and it is full of Mixture, and he pours out of the same, and Judgment is
begun at the House of God, and God has begun to bring evil upon the People,
upon whom his Name is written, and his Nature and Image is imprinted; and they,
whose Portion it is not, in such a measure as they have drunk of the Cup of
Abomination and Fornication, have drunk also of the Cup of Indignation and
Wrath, before they could take the Cup of Salvation, and praise the Name of the
Lord, in no wise therefore shall the Wicked go unpunished, but the Worshippers
of the Beast, and those that receive his Image must drink also of this Wine,
which is poured out of the Mixture into the Cup of his Indignation and shall be
tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the Presence of the holy Angels, and of
the Lamb; yea, the very Dregs hereof, the Top whereof the Children of the Light
and of the Day have tasted, the Children of the Night and of the Darkness, that
is all the wicked ones of the Earth shall drink and wring them out.

19. Wherefore whilst in the long suffering of God, Opportunity is not wanting
unto you, whilst the Day of your Visitation is near unto you from God, let my
Council be accepted of you all, and turn your selves to the Light of CHRIST in
your own Consciences, and take Council thereat forever, which seriously and
sincerely minding, you shall be taught by CHRIST himself, whose Testimony to
you, from Heaven, that is, to your both external, internal and eternal Peace
and Salvation, and shall be brought to CHRIST himself, and to see him, and his
Father from both whom it comes, to the saving Knowledge of whom there can be no
coming any other Way whatsoever; for as the Sun of this outward World is not
seen, but by that Light which flows from it self unto us, so neither is the Son
of Righteousness, but by that Measure of Light (how little soever it be) that
shines from him in the Heart.

20. For although the Scripture which speaks of the Light, and directs to the
Light makes mention of the Father and of the Son, so that there ye may read of
them, and speak of them also, according to what ye there read; yet this the
Scripture it self witnesses that none can know either the Father or the Son,
but he to whom the Father and the Son do mutually reveal each the other, whose
Revelation also is made within, Mat. 11.27. Gal. 1.16. for that which may be
known of God, sufficient to Salvation, is manifest to Men, (says Paul) for God
does manifest it in them, and the Gospel is preached in every Creature which is
under Heaven, Romans 1.16. Col. 1.23. by the Light of God in the Conscience, so
that they are left inexcusable before God, (who else would be excusable and
blameless) forasmuch as though they know God, yet they glorified him not as
God, neither like to retain God in their Knowledge, but knowing the Judgment of
God, that they which do such Things, as they do, are worthy of Death, yet not
only do the same, but have Pleasure in those that do them.

21. In the mean while we do not affirm CHRIST himself to be in all Men, who
yet is known to be in all that are not Reprobates, as that hope of Glory;
nevertheless all (for there is no Difference, but what is made by different
degrees of Light, which do not vary the Nature of the Thing) have some Measure
or other of his Light at least one Talent committed to them, that they may
trade therewith to profit withal, which using well, and doubling they have
entrance into the Joy of their Lord, but hiding of which and not gaining
therewith, they shall be thrust out at last from the Light they have, into the
utter Darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of Teeth: This Light
therefore shines in all even the Heathen, in some Measure, although not in all
in the same Measure.

22. To the Measure of which Light of CHRIST, which in you is, you will do well
to take heed while you have it, as unto a Light shining in a dark Place, to
give you the Knowledge of your Salvation, and guide your Feet in the Way of
Peace, and that you may find true rest to your burdened and wearied Souls, and
lest Darkness come upon you, for he that walks in Darkness, knows not
whither he goes, nor at what he stumbles.

23. This Light is the Law of God, (for the Law is Light says the wise Man)
Pro. 6.23. written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in
Tables of Stone, (as of old for a Figure hereof, by the Finger of God) but in
fleshly Tables of the Heart; in which may be read and understood not only (as
in the Scriptures and the Law without) the Right, that is, what you should do
and should be, but the Fact also, that is, what you do, and what you are; For
to know thy self, whom if thou know not, thou know not CHRIST, whom if
thou know not, its no profit to thee to know other Things, this comes no
other Way then by an inward beholding of thy self in that more inward
looking-Glass, namely the Light of CHRIST, by which God shines in the
Conscience, which Light leads those that follow it to hear that true and living
Word of God, of which the Scripture declares, Heb. 4. That it is powerful and
mighty, and Sharper than any two edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing of
the Soul and Spirit, and of the Marrow and Reins, discerning the Thoughts and
Cogitations of the Heart before which, all Things are naked and bare; that it
is as a Fire, and as an Hammer breaking the Rocks in Pieces, and causing all
Things to tremble at the hearing thereof; which was in the beginning, before
the Scripture was, which testifies of it, concerning which, the Scripture both
Old and New does truly testify, it is not far off, but nigh in the Heart and
Mouth, that thou may do it, even that very Word of Faith the Apostles
preached.

24. This Light is that good old Way, older than the eldest among the Sects of
this Age, whether of Jews or Christians, who (all in the mean Time, namely both
Catholics, and Lutherans, and Calvinists, and Baptists, etc. every one
professing to be the Antientest) have divided the Grand Tree of the old Roman
Church, into so many Branches, lesser Boughs and little Twigs, that the whole
Body thereof, will ere long be sick even unto Death, and she who has been so
long the Mother of so many Children, is almost now devoured of her own
Children. This Light (I say) is that Ancient Way, unto which God by the prophet
Jeremiah called back the Israelites, when degenerated from God into their own
Traditions, saying, Stand in the Ways and see, and ask for the ancient Paths,
where is that good Way, walk therein, and you shall find rest unto your Souls;
but they said, we will not walk therein; hearken to the Voice of the Trumpet,
but they said, We will not hearken Jer. 6.16.

25. This Light is a Teacher that cannot deceive, for it is the Testimony of
God, which is greater than the Testimony of Man; nor yet can it flatter, for it
reproves every one justly, not justifying the wicked, and condemning the
Innocent, but telling every one the Truth concerning himself directly as the
Case is, and no otherwise, accusing or excusing than God himself, from whom it
is; for if by that which is shining from God in thee, thy own Heart condemns
thee, there is no God without that holds the Guiltless; but when by that thy
Heart condemns thee not, then may thou have Boldness before God, 1 John
3.20, 21.

26. Finally this Light is that perfect Law of Liberty, of which whosoever is a
hearer and not a doer, he is like a Man that beholds his natural Face in a
Glass, which so soon as ever he has beheld, and is gone away, he straitway
forgets what manner of Man he was; but whosoever looks into it, and continues
therein, and is not a forgetful, and an idle Hearer, but a doer of the Work,
this Man shall be blessed in his Deed, Jam. 1.25.

27. Henceforth therefore, who e're thou art, who would know thy self, do
not seek thy self out of thy self, but behold thy self, within in that inward
Light, which inwardly gives the discerning, not only of the good and perfect
Mind and will of God concerning thee, but also of thy own Mind and of thy whole
self, and that so perfectly, that concerning these, and even all Things
pertaining to the Salvation of the Soul and the Kingdom of God, with the
Righteousness thereof, and what hereditary Right thou have therein, which is
nigh, which is within, (says CHRIST to the Pharisees, Luke 17.20, 21. who
never entered into it) there is no need that thou should go forth of thy
self, in order to a further Evidence and Understanding of them: Yea thou
know more than enough already, if of the good Will of God thou know more
than thou live up to, for what Good is only known, and not done, tends only
unto thy Condemnation: In all Openness and Plainness, and not in knowing what
is to be done, but in doing what is already known stands the Salvation of the
Sons of Men.

28. Moreover what hinders (unless they be delighted in the blinding of their
own Eyes, the stopping of their Ears, and the hardening of their Hearts, and in
rejecting the Council of God to their own Perdition) but that the Wicked may
come to the Life of God, from which they stand estranged? for the Way to that
Life, howere it is narrower and straiter by Reason of the Cross of CHRIST, which
is daily to be taken up by those that follow him, than that wide and broad Way
that leads to Destruction, for which cause it is that so many enter in by this,
and so few by the other, yet is, together with that which tends unto Death, so
plainly made manifest by the Light that (unless it be to such as are willingly
Ignorant) it cannot easily be hidden.

29. For the Fruits of the Spirit or Works of the Light, which are
Righteousness, Love, Goodness, Faith, Gentleness, Sobriety, Temperance,
Chastity, which whosoever brings forth to God, lives with God, and sees God, are
manifest to every one that does not wink against the Light in his own
Conscience; and the Works of Darkness or of the Flesh, such as are Adultry,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envy, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, which whoever does shall never enter
into the Kingdom of God, are Manifest (says the Scripture) Gal. 5.19. ad 23.
and that not so much by the Scripture, as by the Light to which the Scripture
Testifies, and by which they were manifest in the Consciences of Men, before
the Scripture was, and are made manifest at this Day where the Scripture is
not, by which also they would have been made manifest if the Scripture had
never been; For all things that are reproved (says the Spirit, in the
Scripture) are made manifest by the Light, for whatsoever does make Manifest is
Light Ephesians. 5, 13.

30. To this therefore all apply your Minds, to this come, in this walk and
continually abide, even in the Spirit of God, which reproves the World, and
comfort the Saints called, redeemed and chosen out of the World: Here stand
continually, that ye may both know your selves, and comprehend false Spirits
with the Works and Children of Darkness, who are comprehended and discerned by
the Spirit, by the Light, although these comprehend neither it, nor it is
Children; and that Grace, Mercy and Peace, may be multiplied to you from God
the Father, and from JESUS CHRIST, whose Council in the Conscience, whosoever
hearkens to shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from even the fear of Evil:
For this is a brazen Wall to a Man to be inwardly Conscious to himself of no
Evil; not to wax pale at the Sense of any Crime.

31. But whosoever turns aside from the Light, leaving the Paths of Righteousness
to walk in the Ways of Darkness, as he is inwardly condemned of himself, so
both Error and Terror do meet him at every Turn, so that howbeit he carries
outwardly a show of Laughter and Mirth, yet he goes often grievously griped,
and within waxes pale at the Sense of that which the Wife of his own bosom is
Ignorant of.

32. All these Things abovesaid, which at first were written in Latin more
privately, for the sake and use of a singular eminent Friend in Germany, are
now with no other Alteration than the Case requires, not without God himself
also moving thereunto, given forth more publicly, in Service to you, (O
Academians) and all others, to whom we are ready, according to Peter's Counsel,
to render a Reason of the Faith, which is in us, with Meekness and Fear having
a good Conscience; and to this End that both ye, whose Ears being turned away
from the Truth, are turned into Fables, and ye, who itching and attending to no
other Business than telling and hearing some new Thing, suppose we bring
certain strange and new Doctrines to your Ears, may know that we bring no new
Things, but all the old Things, even the self same, which by Gods Ministers
were uttered from the very beginning; which also we know either to your
Salvation, or greater Condemnation, your selves shall once acknowledge even
forever.

33. Of which yet we are not slack to warn, and by Admonition to awaken you,
forasmuch as though to say the same Things that were said before, its not
grievous to us, yet for you it is safe, who, by overmuch Incognitancy, and
Inadvertency (I may truly say) are Ignorant of what ye know.

34. Which truly if in the same Light, and with the same sincere Spirit, with
which they were written, they may be thoroughly perused by any, it shall repent
neither me to have writ, nor you to have read what is here written.

35. But if otherwise, and if this friendly Word of your Salvation shall stir
up in you the Spirit of Enmity and Malignity, and receive from you rather an
ignominious Repulse, than an healthful Hearkening thereunto, it shall Please me
enough that in this Work I have pleased God, and am clear of the Blood of your
Souls, and ye at last shall remember at least (yet not without Repentance though
too late) that ye were warned from God.

By an English Man, who is a Friend, and a Lover of your Souls,

SAMUEL FISHER.

FINIS.

