A SHORT and FAITHFUL NARRATIVE, Of the late Remarakable Revival of Religion In
the Congregation of New-Londonderry, and other Parts of Pennsylvania. As the
same was sent in a Letter to the Rev. Mr. PRINCE of Boston.

By SAMUEL BLAIR, Minister of the Gospel at New-Londonderry, in Pennsylvania.

Psalm. xxvl.7. That I may publish with the Voice of Thanksgiving, and tell of
all thy wondrous Works.

Psalm. cxlv.4. One Generation shall praise thy Works to another, and shall
declare thy Mighty Acts.

PHILADELPHIA. Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in
Second-street.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT may be proper to acquaint the Reader with the Reasons of the Composure and
Publication of the following Letter: For which Purpose I must apprize him that
there is a Book published at Boston, by the ingenious Mr. Prince, junr. under
the Title of the Christian History, containing Accounts of the Revival and
Propagation of Religion (of late) in Great Britain and America: Which exhibites
to us a large Number of very satisfactory and joyful Accounts, chiefly from the
Provinces of New England, and the Kingdom of Scotland. This History is first
published in weekly Papers, as Materials come to hand, and then, all the Papers
of the Year are bound up in one Volume at the Years End. The first Years Volume
was completed in March last; and the young Gentleman expects to carry on the
History for at least one Year more. His Reverend Father, one of the Revd.
Ministers of Boston, was pleased to direct a Letter to me, desiring me to send
him as cautious and exact an Account as might be of the happy Revival of
Religion in my Congregation, whereof he had got some Information, to be made
Public along with other Relations of that Kind in the abovesaid Christian
History. This Motion was acceptable enough to me, as I am convinced that it is
our Duty, in the most open Manner to declare and bear Testimony unto the Work
of God's Grace among us at this Day, for the Honor of his Name, and Good of
his Church, both in the present and future Generations: According to this Time
it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, what has God Wrought! Numb. xxiii.23.
The Christian History is not like to be so common in Peoples Hands in these
Parts as I could heartily with it; and that is the Reason of my publishing this
Copy of my Letter to Mr. Prince, singly by itself here: That so People in this
Country may more generally have the Use of this Account of the Work of God's
Grace and Power in the Land than otherwise they would have. And in the mean
Time I hope this will not make them any Thing the less, but abundantly the more
desirous to have the Use of the Christian History, whereby they may see the
Astonishing Spread and Progress of the same Divine Work in other Parts of the
World.

May the Lord bless this Relation of the Work of his Grace to the Reviving of
those who have been the Subjects of it; to the removing of the sinful and very
dangerous Prejudices of many others; and, in a Word, to the solemn Conviction
and saving Conversion of many Souls.

S. B.

Reverend Sir,
I Do most gladly comply with your Desire in sending you some Account of the
glorious Appearances of God in a Way of special Grace for us in this
Congregation, and other Parts of this Country; and am of the same Judgment with
you and many other pious and judicious People, that the collecting and
publishing of such Accounts may greatly tend to the Glory of our Redeemer, and
the Increase of his Triumphs. I much rejoice in the Publication of such a
Collection in the Christian History so far as it is already carried on: I think
it may serve to many excellent Purposes, and be a happy Mean of advancing the
dear Interest of our glorious REDEEMER's Kingdom, both in the present Age and
the Ages to come. And I cannot but look upon myself as called of God in Duty,
being thus invited to it by you, Rev. Sr. to put to a Hand, among many others
of my Rev* Father and Brethren on both sides the Atlantic, to the carrying on
of the Design of said History, containing Accounts of the Revival and
Propagation of Religion in this remarkable Day of Grace.

I cannot indeed give near so full and particular a Relation of the Revival of
Religion here as I might have done, had I had such a Thing in View at the Time
when God was most eminently carrying on his Work among us: I entirely neglected
then to note down any Particulars in Writing, for which I have been often sorry
since; so that this Account must be very imperfect to what it might otherwise
have been.

That it may the more clearly appear that the Lord has indeed carried on a Work
of true real Religion among us of late Years, I conceive it will be useful to
give a brief general View of the State of Religion in these Parts before this
remarkable Season. I doubt not then, but there were still some sincerely
religious People up and down; and there were, I believe, a considerable Number
in the several Congregations pretty exact, according to their Education, in the
Observance of the external Forms of Religion, not only as to Attendance upon
public Ordinances on the Sabbaths, but also, as the Practice of Family
Worship, and perhaps secret Prayer too; but, with these Things the most Part
seemed to all Appearance to rest contented; and to satisfy their Consciences
just with a dead Formality in Religion. If they performed these Duties pretty
punctually in their Seasons, and, as they thought with a good Meaning, out of
Conscience, and not just to obtain a Name for Religion among Men, then they
were ready to conclude that they were truly and sincerely religious. A very
lamentable Ignorance of the main essentials of true practical Religion, and the
Doctrines nextly relating thereunto very generally prevailed. The Nature and
Necessity of the New Birth was but little known or thought of, the Necessity of
a Conviction of Sin and Misery, by the Holy Spirits opening and applying the
Law to the Conscience, in order to a saving Closure with Christ was hardly
known at all to the most. It was thought that if there was any need of a
Heart-distressing Sight of the Souls Danger, and Fear of divine Wrath. It was
only needful for the grosser Sort of Sinners, and for any others to be deeply
exercised this Way (as there might sometimes be some rare Instances observable)
this was generally looked upon to be a great Evil and Temptation that had
befallen those Persons. The common Names for such Soul-Concern were,
Melancholy, Trouble of Mind, or Despair. These Terms were in common, so far as
I have been acquainted, indifferently used as Synonimous; and Trouble of Mind,
was looked upon as a great Evil, which all Persons that made any sober
Profession and Practice of Religion ought carefully to avoid. There was
scarcely any Suspicion at all in general, of any Danger of depending upon
Self-Righteousness, and not upon the Righteousness of CHRIST alone for
Salvation: Papists and Quakers would be readily acknowledged guilty of this
Crime, but hardly any professed Presbyterian. The Necessity of being first in
CHRIST by a vital Union, and in a justified State before our Religious Services
can be well pleasing and acceptable to God, was very little understood or though it
of; but the common Notion seemed to be, that if People were aiming to be in the
Way of Duty as well as they could, as they imagined there was no Reason to be
much afraid.

According to these Principles, and this Ignorance of some of the most
Soul-concerning Truths of the Gospel, People were very generally through the Land
careless at Heart, and stupidly indifferent about the great Concerns of
Eternity. There was very little Appearance of any hearty Engagedness in
Religion: And indeed the Wife, for the most Part, were in a great Degree asleep
with the Foolish. 'Twas sad to see with what a careless Behavior the public
Ordinances were attended, and how People were given to unsuitable worldly
Discourse on the Lord's Holy Day. In public Companies, especially at Weddings,
a vain and frothy Lightness was apparent in the Deportment of many Professors;
and in some Places very extravagant Follies, as Horse Running, Fidling and
Dancing, pretty much obtained on those Occasions.

Thus Religion lay as it were a dying, and ready to expire its last Breath of
Life in this Part of the visible Church: And it was in the Spring Anno Domini
1740, when the God of Salvation was pleased to visit us with the blessed
Effusions of his Holy Spirit in an eminent Manner. The first very open and
Public Appearance of this gracious Visitations in these Parts, was in the
Congregation which God has committed to my Charge. The Congregation has not
been erected above Fourteen or Fifteen Years from this Time: The Place is a new
Settlement, generally settled with People from Ireland. (as all our
Congregations in Pennsylvania, except two or three, chiefly are made up of
People from that Kingdom) I am the first Minister they have ever had settled in
the Place. Having been regularly liberated from my former Charge in
East-Jersey, above an hundred Miles North-Eastward from Hence (the Rev.
Presbytery of New-Brunswick (of which I had the Comfort of being a Member)
judging it to be my Duty, for sundry Reasons, to remove from thence) at the
earnest Invitation of the People here I came to them in the beginning of
November 1739, accepted of a Call from them that Winter, and was formally
installed and settled amongst them as their Minister in April following. There
were some hopefully pious People here at my first coming, which was a great
Encouragement and Comfort to me. I had some View and Sense of the deplorable
Condition of the Land in general; and accordingly the Scope of my Preaching
through that first Winter after I came here, was mainly calculated for Persons in
a natural unregenerate Estate. I endeavored, as the Lord enabled me, to open
up and prove from his Word, the Truths which I judged most necessary for such
as were in that State to know and believe in order to their Conviction and
Conversion. I endeavored to deal searchingly and solemnly with them; and through
the concurring Blessing of God, I had knowledge of four or five brought under
deep Convictions that Winter. In the beginning of March I took a Journey into
East-Jersey, and was abroad for two or three Sabbaths. A neighboring Minister,
who seemed to be earnest for the Awakening and Conversion of secure Sinners,
and whom I had obtained to preach a Sabbath to my Peoin my Absence, preached to
them, I think, on the first Sabbath after I left Home. His Subject was the
dangerous and awful Case of such as continue unregenerate and unfruitful under
the Means of Grace. The Text was Luke 13.7. Then said be to the Dresser of his
Vineyard, behold, these three Years I come seeking Fruit on this Fig Tree, and
find none, cut it down, why cumbereth it the Ground? Under that Sermon there
was a visible Appearance of much Soul-Concern among the Hearers, so that some
burst out with an audible Noise into bitter crying (a Thing not known in those
Parts before.) After I had come Home there came a young Man to my House under
deep Trouble about the State of his Soul, whom I had looked upon as a pretty
light merry sort of a Youth: He told me that he was not any Thing concerned
about himself in the Time of hearing the above mentioned Sermon, nor
afterward, till the next Day that he went to his Labor, which was grubbing,
in order to clear some New-Ground; the first Grub he set about was a pretty
large one with a high Top, and when he had cut the Roots, as it fell down those
Words came instantly to his Remembrance, and as a Spear to his Heart, cut it
down why cumbereth it the Ground? So thought he, must I be cut down by the
Justice of God, for the Burning of Hell, unless I get into another State than I
am now in. He thus came into very great and abiding Distress, which, to all
Appearance has had a happy Issue: His Conversation being to this Day as becomes
the Gospel of Christ.

The News of this very public Appearance of deep Soul-concern among my People
met me an Hundred Miles from Home: I was very joyful to hear of it, in Hopes
that God was about to carry on an extensive Work of converting Grace amongst
them And the first Sermon I preached after my Return to them, was from Mat. 6
33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. After opening up
and explaining the Parts of the Text, when in the Improvement, I came to press
the Injunction in the Text upon the Unconverted and Ungodly, and offered this
as one Reason among others, why they should now henceforth first of all seek
the Kingdom and Righteousness of God, viz. That they had neglected too too long
to do so already. This Consideration seemed to come and cut like a Sword upon
several in the Congregation, so that while I was speaking upon it they could no
longer contain, but burst out in the most bitter Mourning. I desired them, as
much as possible, to restrain themselves from making a Noise that would hinder
themselves or others from hearing what was spoken: And often afterward I had
Occasion to repeat the same Council. I still advised People to endeavor to
moderate and bound their Passions, but not so as to resist or stifle their
Convictions. The Number of the Awakened increased very fast, frequently under
Sermons there were some newly convicted, and brought into deep Distress of Soul
about their perishing Estate. Our Sabbath Assemblies soon became vastly large;
many People from almost all Parts around inclining very much to come where
there was such Appearance of the divine Power and Presence. I think there was
scarcely a Sermon or Lecture preached here through that whole Summer, but there
were manifest Evidences of Impressions on the Hearers; and many Times the
Impressions were very great and general: Several would be overcome and
fainting; others deeply sobbing, hardly able to contain, others crying in a
most dolorous Manner, many others more silently Weeping, and a solemn Concern
appearing in the Countenance of many others. And sometimes the Soul Exercises
of some (though comparatively but very few) would so far affect their Bodies, as
to Occasion some strange unusual Bodily Motions. I had Opportunities of
speaking particularly with a great many of those who afforded such outward
Tokens of inward Soul-Concern in the Time of public Worship and hearing of the
Word; indeed many came to me of themselves in their Distress for private
Instruction and Council; and I found, so far as I can remember, that with by
far the greater Part, their apparent Concern in Public was not just a
transient Qualm of Conscience, or merely a floating Commotion of the
Affections; but a rational fixed Conviction of their dangerous perishing
Estate. They could generally offer as a convictive Evidence of their being in
an unconverted miserable Estate, that they were utter Strangers to those
Dispositions, Exercises and Experiences of Soul in Religion, which they heard
laid down from God's Word as the inseparable Characters of the truly regenerate
People of God; even such as before had something of the Form of Religion; and I
think the greater Number were of this Sort, and several had been pretty exact
and punctual in the Performance of outward Duties. They saw that they had been
contenting themselves with the Form, without the Life and Power of Godliness;
and that they had been taking Peace to their Consciences from, and depending
upon their own Righteousness, and not the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST. In a
Word, they saw that true practical Religion was quite another Thing than they
had conceived it to be, or had any true Experience of. There were likewise many
up and down the Land brought under deep distressing Convictions that Summer,
who had lived very loose Lives, regardless of the very Externals of Religion.
In this Congregation I believe there were very few that were not stirred up to
some solemn Thoughtfulness and Concern more than usual about their Souls. The
general Carriage and Behavior of People was soon very visibly altered. Those
awakened were much given to reading in the Holy Scriptures and other good
Books. Excellent Books that had lain by much neglected, were then much perused,
and lent from one to another; and it was a peculiar Satisfaction to People to
find how exactly the Doctrines they heard daily preached, harmonize with the
Doctrines maintained and taught by great and Godly Men in other Parts and
former Times. The Subjects of Discourse almost always when any of them were
together, were the Matters of Religion and great Concerns of their Souls. All
unsuitable, Worldly, vain Discourse on the Lord's Day seemed to be laid aside
among them. Indeed, for any Thing that appeared, there seemed to be an almost
universal Reformation in this Respect in our Public Assemblies on the Lord's
Day. There was an earnest Desire in People after Opportunities for public
Worship and hearing the Word. I appointed in the Spring to preach every Friday
through the Summer when I was at Home, and those Meetings were well attended, and
at several of them the Power of the Lord was remarkably with us. The main scope
of my Preaching through that Summer was, laying open the deplorable State of Man
by Nature since the Fall, our ruined exposed Case by the Breach of the first
Covenant, and the awful Condition of such as were not in CHRIST, giving the
Marks and Characters, of such as were in that Condition: And moreover, laying
open the Way of Recovery in the New Covenant through a Mediator, with the Nature
and Necessity of Faith in CHRIST the Mediator etc. I labored much on the last
mentioned Heads; that People might have right Apprehensions of the
Gospel-Method of Life and Salvation. I treated much on the Way of a Sinner's
closing with CHRIST by Faith, and obtaining a right Peace to an awakened
wounded Conscience; showing, that Persons were not to take Peace to themselves
on Account of their Repentings, Sorrows, Prayers, and Reformations, nor to make
these Things the Grounds of their adventuring themselves upon CHRIST and his
Righteousness, and of their Expectations of Life by him: And, that neither were
they to obtain or seek Peace in Extraordinary Ways, by Visions, Dreams, or
immediate Inspirations; but by an understanding View and believing Persuasion
of the Way of Life, as revealed in the Gospel, through the Suretyship, Obedience
and Sufferings of JESUS CHRIST, with a View of the Suitableness and Sufficiency
of that mediatory Righteousness of CHRIST for the Justification and Life of
Law-condemned Sinners; and thereupon freely accepting him for their Savior,
heartily consenting to, and being well pleased with that Way of Salvation; and
venturing their all upon his Mediation, from the Warrant and Encouragement
afforded of God thereunto in his Word, by his free Offer, authorative Command,
and sure Promise to those that so believe. I endeavored to show the Fruits and
Evidences of a true Faith, etc.

In some Time many of the convinced and distressed afforded very hopeful
satisfying Evidence that the Lord had brought them to a true closure with Jesus
Christ, and that their Distresses and Fears had been in a great Measure removed
in a right Gospel-Way by believing in the Son of God, several of them had very
remarkable and sweet Deliverances this Way. It was very agreeable to hear their
Accounts, how that when they were in the depest Perplexity and Darkness,
Distress and Difficulty, seeking God as poor condemned Hell-deserving Sinners
the Scene of the recovering Grace, through a Redeemer, has been opened to their
Understandings, with a surprising Beauty and Glory, so that they were enabled
to believe in Christ with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. It appeared that
most generally the Holy Spirit improved for this Purpose and made use of some
one Particular Passage or another of the Holy Scripture that came to their
Remembrance in their Distress, some Gospel-Offer or Promise, or some
Declaration of God directly refering to the Recovery and Salvation of undone
Sinners by the New Covenant: But with some it was otherwise, they had not any
one particular Place of Scripture more than another in their View at the Time.
Those who meet with such remarkable Relief, as their Account of it was Rational
and Scriptural, so they appeared to have had at the Time the Attendants and
Fruits of a true Faith, particularly Humility, Love, and an affectionate Regard
to the Will and Honor of God. Much of their Exercise was in self-abasing and
self-loathing, and admiring the astonishing Condescension and Grace of God
toward such vile and despicable Creatures that had been so full of Enmity and
Disaffection to him. They they freely and sweetly with all their Hearts chose
the Way of his Commandments; their enflamed desire was to live to him for ever,
according to his Will and to the Glory of his Name. -- There were others that
had not had such remarkable Relief and Comfort, who yet I could not but think
were savingly renewed and brought truly to accept of, and rest upon Jesus
Christ, though not with such a Degree of Liveliness and Liberty, Strength and
Joy; and some of these continued for a considerable Time after, for the most
Part under a very distressing Suspicion and Jealousy of their Case. I was all
along very cautious of expressing to People my Judgment of the Goodness of
their States, excepting where I had pretty clear Evidences from them, of their
being savingly changed, and yet they continued in deep Distress, casting off
all their Evidences: Sometimes in such Cases I have thought it needful to use
greater Freedom that Way than ordinary, but otherwise I judged that it could be
of little Use, and might readily be hurtful.

Beside these above spoke of, whose Experience of a Work of Grace was in a good
Degree clear and satisfying, there were some others (though but very few in this
Congregation that I know of) who, having very little Knowledge or Capacity, had
a very obscure and improper Way of representing their Case. In relating how
they had been exercised, they would chiefly speak of such Things as were only
the Effects of their Souls Exercise upon their Bodies from time to time, and
some Things that were just Imaginary, which obliged me to be at much Pains in
my Enquiries before I could get any just Ideas of their Case. I would ask them,
what were the Thoughts, the Views, and Apprehensions of their Minds, and
Exercise of their Affections at such Times when they felt, perhaps, a quivering
over come them, as they had been saying, or a Faintness, thought they saw their
Hearts full of some nautious Filthiness, or when they felt a heavy Weight and
Load at their Hearts, or felt the Weight again taken off, and a pleasant
Warmness rising from their Hearts, as they would probably express themselves,
which might be the Occasions or Causes of these Things they spoke of? And then,
when with some Difficulty I could get them to understand me, some of them would
give a pretty rational Account of solemn Spiritual Exercises. And upon a
thorough careful Examination this Way, I could not but conceive good Hopes of
some such Persons.

But there were moreover several others, who seemed to think concerning
themselves that they were under some good Work, of whom yet I could have no
reasonable Ground to think that they were under any hopeful Work of the Spirit
of God. As near as I could judge of their Case from all my Acquaintance and
Conversation with them, it was much to this Purpose: They believed there was a
good Work going on, that People were convinced, and brought into a converted
State, and they desired to be converted too; they saw others weeping and
fainting, and heard People mourning and lamenting, and they thought if they
could be like those it would be very hopeful with them: Hence they endeavored
just to get themselves affected by Sermons, and if they could come to weeping,
or get their Passions so raised as to incline them to vent themselves by Cries.
Now they hoped they were got under Convictions, and were in a very hopeful Way;
and afterward they would speak of their being in Trouble, and aim at
complaining of themselves, but seemed as if they knew not well how to do it,
nor what to say against themselves, and then they would be looking and
expecting to get some Texts of Scripture applied to them for their Comfort, and
when any Scripture Text, which they thought was suitable for that Purpose, came
to their Minds, they were in Hopes it was brought to them by the Spirit of God,
that they might take Comfort from it. And thus much in such a Way as this some
appeared to be pleasing themselves just with an imaginary Conversion of their
own making. I endeavored to correct and guard against all such Mistakes so far
as I discovered them in the Course of my Ministry; and to open up the Nature of
a true Conviction by the Spirit of God, and of a saving Conversion.

Thus have I given a very brief Account of the State and Progress of Religion
here, through that first Summer after the remarkable Revival of it among us.
Toward the End of that Summer there seemed to be a Stop put to the farther
Progress of the Work, as to the Conviction and awakening of Sinners; and ever
since there have been very few Instances of Persons convinced. It remains then,
that I speak something of the abiding Effects and After-fruits of those
Awakenings, and other Religious Exercises which People were under during the
above mentioned Period. Such as were only under some slight Impressions and
superficial Awakenings, seem in General to have lost them all again, without
any abiding hopeful Alteration upon them: They seem to have fallen back again
into their former Carelessness and Stupidity: And some that were under pretty
great Awakenings, and considerable deep Convictions of their miserable Estate,
seem also to have got Peace again to their Consciences without geting it by a
true Faith in the Lord Jesus, affording no satisfying Evidence of their being
savingly renewed: But, through the infinite rich Grace of God, (and blessed be
his Glorious Name!) there is a considerable Number who afford all the Evidence
that can reasonably be expected and required for our Satisfaction in the Case
of their having been the Subjects of a thorough saving Change; except in some
singular Instances of Behavior (alas for them) which proceed from, and show
the sad Remains of Original Corruption even in the regenerate Childen of God
while in this Imperfect State. Their Walk is habitually Tender and
Conscientious; their Carriage toward their Neighbor Just and Kind; and they
appear to have an agreeable peculiar Love one for another, and for all in whom
appears the Image of God. Their Discourses of Religion, their Engageedness and
Dispositions of Soul in the Practice of the immediate Duties and Ordinances of
Religion, all appear quite otherwise than formerly. Indeed the Liveliness of
their Affections in the Ways of Religion is much abated in General, and they
are in some Measure humbly sensible of this and grieved for it and are
carefully endeavoring still to live unto God, much grieved with their
Imperfections, and the Plagues they find in their own Hearts; and frequently
they meet with some delightful Enlivenings of Soul, and particularly our
sacramental Solemnities for communicating in the Lords Supper, have generally
been very Blessed Seasons of enlivening and enlargement to the People of God.
there is a very evident and great Increase of Christian Knowledge with many of
them. We enjoy in this Congregation the Happiness of a great Degree of Harmony
and Concord: Scarcely any have appeared to open Opposition and Bitterness
against the Work of God among us, and else where up and down the Land, though
there are pretty many such in several other Places through the Country. Some
indeed in this Congregation, but very few, have separated from us, and joined
with the Ministers who have unhappily opposed this Blessed Work.

It would have been a great Advantage to this Account had I been careful in
Time to have Written down the Experiences of particular Persons; but this I
neglected in the proper Season: However I have more lately noted down an
Account of some of the Soul-Exercises and Experiences of one Person, which I
think may be proper to make Public on this Occasion. The Person is a single
Young Woman, but I judge it proper to conceal her Name, because she is yet
living. I was very careful to be exact in the Affair, both in my conversing
with her, and writing the Account she gave of herself immediately after; and
though I don't pretend to give her very Words for the most Part, yet I Am well
satisfied I don't misrepresent what she related, the Account then is thus. She
was first brought to some solemn Thoughtfulness and Concern about her Soul's
Case, by seeing others so much concerned about their Souls.

When she saw People in deep Distress about their Souls States, she thought
with her self how unconcerned she was about her own. And though she thought that
she had not been very guilty of great Sins yet she feared that she was too
little concerned about her eternal well Being; and then the Sermons she heard
made her still uneasy about her Case, so that she would go home on the
Sabbath-Evenings pretty much troubled and cast down, which Concern used to
abide with her for a few Days after, but still toward the End of the Week, she
would become pretty easy, and then by hearing the Word on the Sabbaths, her
Uneasiness was always renewed for a few Days again. And thus it fared with her,
till one Day as she was hearing a Sermon preached from Heb. 3.15. To Day if ye
will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. The Minister in the Sermon spoke
to this Effect. How many of you have been hearing the Gospel for a long Time,
and yet your Hearts remain always hard without being made better by it: The
Gospel is the Voice of God, but you have heard it only as the Voice of Man and
not the Voice of God, and so have not been benefitted by it. These Words came
with Power to her Heart: She saw that this was her very Case indeed, and she
had an awful Sense of the Sin of her Misimprovement of the Gospel, of her
Stupidity, Hardness and Unprofitableness under hearing of the Word of God: She
saw that she was hereby exposed to the Sin-punishing Justice of God, and so was
filled with very great Fear and Terror; but she said there was no other Sin at
that Time applied to her Conscience, neither did she see her self as altogether
without CHRIST. This deep Concern on the forementioned Account stuck pretty
close by her afterward. There was a Society of private Christians to meet in
the Neighborhood some Day after in the same Week for Reading, Prayer and
religious Conference, she had not been at a Society of that kind before, but
she longed very much for the Time of their Meeting that she might go there; and
while she was there, she got an awful View of her Sin and Corruption, and saw
that she was without CHRIST and without Grace, and her Exercise and Distress of
Soul was such, that it made her for a while both deaf and blind; but she said
she had the ordinary Use of her Understanding, and begged that CHRIST might not
leave her to perish; for she saw that she was undone without him. After this
she lived in Bitterness of Soul; and at another Time she had such a View of her
Sinfulness, of the Holiness and Justice of God, and the Danger she was in of
eternal Misery, as filled her with extreme Anguish; so that had it not been
that she was supported by an Apprehension of God's All Sufficiency, she told me
she was persuaded she would have fallen immediately into Despair. She continued
for some Weeks in great Distress of Spirit, seeking and pleading for Mercy
without any Comfort, until one Sabbath Evening, in a House where she was lodged
during the Time of a sacramental Solemnity, while the Family were singing the
84th Psalm, her Soul conceived strong Hopes of Reconciliation with God through
JESUS CHRIST, and she had such Apprehensions of the Happiness of the Heavenly
State that her Heart was filled with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, she
sung with such Elevation of Soul as if she had sung out of her self, as she
expressed it; she thought at the Time it was as if the Lord had put by the Veil
and showed her the open Glory of Heaven. She had very enlarged Views of the
Sufficiency of CHRIST to save. She was clearly persuaded to the fullest
Satisfaction that there was Merit enough in him to answer for the Sins of the
most guilty Sinner, and she saw that God could well be reconciled to all elect
Sinners in his Son, which was a most ravishing delightful Scene of
Contemplation to her. But while she was in this Frame, after some Time she
thought with herself that notwithstanding all this, yet she could not with the
full Assurance of Faith lay Claim to the Lord JESUS as her own Savior in
Particular. She could not say with such full Satisfaction and certainty as she
desired, that he would be a Savior in particular to her, and hence for want of
thoroughly understanding wherein the very Essence of a saving Faith consists.
She had some jealous Fear that she was not yet brought truly to believe in
Christ; however she was much free from her former Terrors after this sweet
Interview; but after some Time she grew more disconsolate, and more sensibly
afraid of her State on the forementioned Account. She heard that Sinners in
closing with Christ by Faith received him for their Savior, which she thought
included in it a certain Persuasion that he was theirs in particular, and she
could not clearly say that this had ever been her Case, and so she came awfully
to suspect herself as yet an Unbeliever, and though she came in Time to that
sweet Plerophory and full Assurance of Faith, yet she has since seen her
Mistake, in that Matter, about the Nature of a true and saving Faith. She
continued very much under these grievous Dejections for about two Years, and
yet enjoyed considerable Sweetness and Comfort at Times, she often came to hear
Sermons with a Desire to get clearly convinced of her being yet in a Christless
State, and with a formed Resolution to take and apply to her self what might be
said in the Sermon to the Unconverted, but most commonly, she returned very
agreeably disappointed, she would generally hear some Mark of Grace, some
Evidence of a real Christian laid down, which she could lay claim to, and could
not deny, and thus she was supported and comforted from Time to Time during
that two Years space. It was still with much Fear and Perplexity that she
adventured to communicate in the Lord's Supper; but she could not omit it, and
she always found some Refreshing and Sweetness by that Ordinance. After she had
been so long under an almost alternate Succession of Troubles and Supports, the
Sun of Righteousness at last broke out upon her to the clear Satisfaction and
unspeakable Ravishment of her Soul at a Communion Table, there her Mind was let
into the glorious Mysteries of Redemption, with great Enlargement while she
meditated on the Sufferings of the Lord Jesus, she thought with her self, he
was not just a Man who suffered so for Sinners; but infinitely more than a Man,
even the most High God, the eternal Son equal with the Father, and she saw that
his being God, put an infinite Luster and Value upon his Sufferings as Man. Her
Heart was filled with a most unutterable Admiration of his Person, his Merit
and his Love, she was enabled to believe in him with a strong self-evidencing
Faith, she believed that he suffered for her Sins, that she was the very
Person, who by her Sins had occasioned his Sufferings, and bro't Agony and Pain
upon him. The Consideration of this filled her with the deepest Abhorrence of
her Sins, and most bitter Grief for them, she said she could have desired with
all her Heart to have melted and dissolved her Body quite away in that very
Place, in Lamentation and Mourning over her Sins. After this Enjoyment her Soul
was generally delighting in God, and she had much of the Light of his
Countenance with her, and O! her great Concern still was how she might live to
the Lord, how she might do any Thing for him, and give Honor to him. The Lord
condescended to be much with her by his enlivening and comforting Presence, and
especially sacramental Seasons were blessed and precious Seasons to her. At one
of those Occasions she was in a sweet Frame meditating upon the Blood and Water
that Issued from the Wound made by the Spear in her Savior's Side, she thought
that as Water is of a purifying cleansing Nature, so there was sanctifying
virtue as well as justifying Merit in the Lord Jesus, and that she could no
more be without the Water, (his sanctifying Grace to cleanse her very polluted
Soul) than she could be without his Blood to do away her Guilt, and her Heart
was much taken up with the Beauty and Excellency of Sanctification. At another
Time, a Communion Solemnity likewise, she was very full of Delight and Wonder
with the Tho'ts of electing Love, how that God had provided and determined so
great Things for her before ever she had a Being. And a very memorable
Enjoyment she had at another Time on Monday after a Communion Sabbath, when
those Words came to her Mind. The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him
that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take the Water of Life freely.
The Glory and Delight let in upon her Soul by these Words was so great that it
quite overcome her bodily Frame, she said it seemed to her that she was almost
all Spirit, and that the Body was quite laid by, and she was sometimes in Hopes
that the Union would actually break, and the Soul get quite away. She saw much
at that Time into the Meaning of her Lord, in those Words, Because I live, ye
shall live also.

About a Time of Sickness she had had, concerning which I inquired at her, she
told me that she expected pretty much to die then; and was very joyful at the
near Prospect of her Change; and was sensibly grieved to find herself recover
again; chiefly, because that while she lived here, she was so frail and sinful,
and could do so litltle for the Lord's Honor. I was with her in the Time of
that Sickness, and indeed I scarcely ever saw one appearing to be so fully and
sweetly satisfied under the afflicting Hand of God; she manifestly appeared to
lie under it with a peaceful Serenity and divine Sweetness in her whole Soul.
In a Word, her whole Deportment in the World bespeaks much Humility and
Heavenliness of Spirit.

One of our Christian Friends, a Man about 50 Years of Age, was removed from us
by Death in the Beginning of May last, of whom I can give some broken imperfect
Account, which perhaps may be of some Use. His Name was Hanse Kirk Patrick, he
was a Man of a pretty good Understanding, and had been, I believe a sober
Professor for many Years, though he had not been very long in America. After the
Work of Religion began so powerful among us I found, in conversing with him,
that he believed it to be a good Work, but seemed very unwilling to give up his
good Opinion of his own Case. He told me of some Concern and Trouble he had
been in about his Soul in his younger Years; but yet the Case looked Suspicious
that he had got Ease in a legal Way upon an outward form of Religion. At
another Time being at his House and taking up a little Book that lay by me on
the Table, which I found to be Mr. Mather's Dead Faith anatomized and
self-justiciary convicted; he said to me that was indeed a strange Book as ever
he saw, and that according to that Author it was a great Thing indeed to have a
right Faith that was true and saving. Another Thing than it was generally
supposed to be, or to this Purpose. He seemed to me at that Time to be under
more fears about his own Case than I had observed in him before. Not long after
this as he was hearing a Sermon one Day, the Word was applied with irresistible
Evidence and Power to his Heart, so that he saw himself as yet in a perishing
undone Case; whereupon the Distress and Exercise of his Soul was so great that
he fell off the Seat on which he was sitting, and wept and cried very bitterly.
A little after this he went to Philadelphia, at the Time of the meeting of the
Synod, in hopes that perhaps he might meet with some Benefit to his Soul, by
hearing the Ministers preach there, or by conversing with some of them. He told
me afterward that while he was there, as he walked the Streets he was
unspeakably distressed with the View of his miserable Condition, so that he
could hardly keep his Distress from being publicly discerned upon him, and
that he seemed sometimes to be even in a Manner afraid that the Streets would
open and swallow up such a wretched Creature. He told me of his Trouble, and
his very sweet Relief out of it in a most moving manner, under a very fresh
Sense and Impression of both; but the Particulars of his Relief I have quite
forgot. He was afterward chosen and set apart for a ruling Elder in the
Congregation. He died of an Imposthume and gradually wasted away for a long
Time before his Death, and was for about two Months entirely confined to his
Bed. He told me that for sometime before he was laid Bed-fast he had been full
of very distressing Fears and Jealousies about his Souls State, and was
altogether unsatisfied about his Interest in Christ; but that soon after he was
confined to his Bed the Lord afforded him his comforting Presence, cleared up
his Interest, and removed his Fears. After this he continued still clear and
peaceful in his Soul, and sweetly and wholly resigned to the Lord's Will until
Death. While he had strength to speak much, he was still free and forward to
discourse of God and divine Things. One Time as two other of our Elders were
with him he exhorted them to continue steadfast and faithful to God's Truths and
Cause; for he said if he had a thousand Souls he could freely venture them all
upon the Doctrines which had been taught them in this Congregation. One time
when I took leave of him he burst out into Tears, saying, I had been the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts to him that the Lord had sent to call him out of
the broad Way of Destruction. For some Days before his decease he could speak
very little, but to all Appearance with a great deal of serenity and sweetness
of Soul he fell asleep in Jesus.

There have been very comfortable Instances of little Children, among us two
Sisters, the one being about seven, the other about nine Years of Age, were
hopefully converted that Summer when Religion was so much revived here. I
discoursed with them very lately, and both from their own Account and the
Account of their Parents, there appears to have been a lasting thorough Change
wrought in them, they speak of their Soul-Experiences with a very becoming
Gravity, and apparent Impression of the Things they speak of. The youngest was
awakened by hearing the Word preached, she told me she heard in Sermons, That
except People were convinced and converted they would surely go to Hell; and
she knew she was not converted. This set her to praying with great Earnestness,
with Tears and Cries, yet her Fears and Distress continued for several Days,
till one Time as she was a praying her Heart, she said, was drawn out in great
Love to God; and, as she thought of Heaven, and being with God, she was filled
with Sweetness and Delight. I could not find by her that she had at that time
any explicit particular Thoughts about Christ as a Redeemer, but she said she
knew then that Christ had dyed for Sinners. She told me she often found such
Delight and Love to God since as she did then, and at such Times she was very
willing to die that she might be with God: But she said she was sometimes
afraid yet of going to Hell. I asked her if she was troubled at any time when
she was not afraid of going to Hell, she said, Yes, I I asked what she was
troubled for then, she said because she had done ill to God, meaning that she
had done Evil, and Sin against God. Sometime after she first found Comfort, one
Night when her Father and all the rest of the Family, but her Mother and
herself, were gone to a private Society, she said to her Mother, that the
People were singing and praying where her Father was gone, and she desired her
Mother to do the same with her, and after they were gone to Bed she desired her
Mother to sing some Psalms which she had by heart, for she said she did not
want to go to Sleep. Her Sister was first brought into Trouble about her Soul
that same Summer by Sickness, it continued with her some time after her
Recovery, till one Day coming home from Meeting, as she heard some People
speaking about Christ and Heaven, her Heart was enflamed with Love to Christ.
She says that when she has Christ's Presence with her, she does not know what
to do to get away and be with God. Their Parents told me that for a long Time
they seemed to be almost wholly taken up in Religion, that no Weather through the
Extremity of Winter, would hinder them from going out daily to by-Places for
secret Prayer, and if any thing came in the Way that they could not get going
out for Prayer, at such times as they inclined and thought most proper, they
would weep and cry. Their Parents say they are very obedient Children, and
strict observers of the Sabbath. There are likewise other young ones in the
Place of whom I know nothing to the Contrary but what they continue hopeful and
religious to this Day.

This blessed Shower of divine Influence spread very much through this Province
that Summer, and was likewise considerable in some other Places bordering upon
it. The Accounts of some Ministers being something distinguished by their
searching awakning Doctrine and solemn Pathetick Manner of Address, and the
News of the Effects of their Preaching upon their Hearers seemed in some
Measure to awaken People through the Country to consider their careless and
formal Way of going on in Religion, and very much excited their Desires to hear
those Ministers. There were several vacant Congregations without any settled
Pastors, which earnestly begged for their Visits, and several Ministers who did
not appear heartily to put to their Shoulders to help in carrying on the same
Work, yet, then yielded to the pressing Importunities of their People in
inviting these Brethren to preach in their Pulpits, so that they were very much
called abroad and employed in incessant Labors, and the Lord wrought with them
mightily, very great Assemblies would ordinarily meet to hear them upon any Day
of the Week, and oftentimes a surprising Power accompanying their Preaching was
visible among the Multitudes of their Hearers. It was a very comfortable
enlivening Time to God's People, and great Numbers of secure careless
Professors, and many loose irreligious Persons through the Land were deeply
convinced of their miserable perishing Estate, and there is abundant Reason to
believe, and be satisfied that many of them were in the Issue, savingly
Converted to God. I my self have had Occasion to converse with a great Many up
and down who have given a most agreeable Account of very precious and clear
Experiences of the Grace of God, severals even in Baltimore, a County in the
Province of Maryland, who were brought up almost in a State of Heathenism,
without almost any Knowledge of the true Doctrines of Christianity, afford very
satisfying Evidence of being brought to a saving Acquaintance with God in
Christ Jesus.

Thus Sir, I have endeavored to give a brief Account of the Revival of
Religion among us in these Parts, in which I have endeavored all along to be
conscientiously exact in relating Things according to the naked Truth, knowing
that I must not speak wickedly even for God, nor talk deceitfully for HIM, and
upon the whole I must say it is beyond all dispute with me, and I think it is
beyond all reasonable Contradiction that God has carried on a great and
glorious Work of his special Grace among us.

I am, Revd. Sir, your very respectful Son and Servant, Samuel Blair.
New-Londonderry in Pennsylvania, August 6th 1744.
ATTESTATION.
WE the under Subscribers, ruling Elders in the Congregation of
New-Londonderry, do give our Testimony and Attestation to the above Account of
the Revival of Religion in this Congregation and other Parts of this Country,
so far as the said Account relates to things that were open to public
Observation, and such things as we have had Opportunity of being acquainted
with, Particularly, we testify that there has been a great and very general
awakning among People, whereby they have been stirred up to an earnest uncommon
Concern and Diligence about their eternal Salvation, according to the above
Account of it: And that many give very comfortable Evidence by their Knowledge,
Declaration of Experience, and conscientious Practice, of their being savingly
changed and turned unto God.

James Cochran, John Ramsay, John Love, John Smith, John Simson, William Boyd.

N. B. One of our Elders not having had the Opportunity of seeing this Letter
before it was sent away his Name is not here subscribed.




