Dr. Chauncy's SERMON AT THE INSTALMENT OF Mr. THOMAS FRINK.

Ministers exhorted and encouraged to take heed to themselves, and to their
Doctrine. A SERMON Preached the 7th of November, At the Instalment OF THE Rev.
Mr. Thomas Frink TO THE Pastoral Care Of the third Church in PLYMOUTH.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. Pastor of the first Church in BOSTON.

Titus ii. 7. 8. In all Things showing thy self a Pattern of good Works: in
Doctrine showing Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech that cannot be
condemned; that he that is of the contrary Part may be ashamed, having no evil
Thing to say of you. BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for S.ELIOT in
Cornhill. 1744.

An Installation Sermon.
I. TIM. iv. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine; and continue
in them: For in doing this, thou shall save both thy self, and them that hear
thee.
THEY are the Words of PAUL to TIMOTHY, his own Son in the Faith: And they are
directed to him, not in his private Capacity as a Christian, but an Officer in
the Church of GOD; one whom JESUS CHRIST the LORD had counted faithful, putting
him into the Ministry. And they were, no doubt, intended for the Instruction
and Admonition of all others, in all after Ages, to whose Trust, the glorious
Gospel of the blessed GOD, should be committed.

And two Things are observable in them.

I. A summary Representation of the Duty of Ministers. Take heed unto thy self,
and unto thy Doctrine; continue in them.

II. A special Motive enforcing the Duty. For in doing this, thou shall save
both thy self, and them that hear thee.

Accordingly, these are the general Heads we shall distinctly speak to, and
then finish with an Application proper to the Business of the Day.

I. The first Thing to employ our Thoughts from the Text is, the Description it
gives of the Duty of Ministers; summarily comprehending the three following
Particulars. (1.) Their taking heed to themselves. (2.) To their Doctrine. (3.)
Their continuing in these Things.

1. The first Article in the Duty of Ministers is, their taking heed to
themselves, i. e. their Minds, that they be furnished, both with Grace and
Gifts; and their Behavior, that it be befitting those, who are clothed with
the sacred Office. Here it may be distinctly said,

1. If Ministers would take heed to themselves, they must look to their Minds,
that they be furnished both with Grace and Gifts.

They must express a suitable Care, that their Minds be furnished with Grace.
Or, in other Words, they must see to it that they be inwardly Men of Religion;
Partakers of the Divine Nature; Subjects of Faith in JESUS CHRIST, that Faith
which shall purify their Hearts, purge their Consciences from dead Works, and
dispose them to an Acquiescence in the Gospel Method of Salvation: Nor can they
otherwise be in Favor with GOD here, or have Admission into his Kingdom
hereafter. For the Way to heaven is one. It Is the same both for Ministers and
People. It Is not merely our being Preachers to others, that will avail to our
Salvation. We must be Men in CHRIST, justified in his Righteousness, and
sanctified by his SPIRIT; or nothing will prevent our being doomed, at the
great and last Day, to a Departure from CHRIST among the Workers of Iniquity.
Our first and chief Care therefore should be, to experience in our own Hearts
the Truths we preach to others; to be ourselves the regenerate Men, the new
Creatures, the sound Believers, we urge others to be: Nor would any Thing more
happily tend to render our Ministry serviceable to the great and good Ends of
our being entrusted with it.

Though I would not be understood by this to suggest, as if Ministers must be
endowed with saving Grace, or no good Effect would follow upon their
Administrations in CHRIST'S Name. I know, the Instrumentality of unconverted
Ministers, in the Business of Regeneration, has, in these Days, been compared
to that of a naturally dead Man in begetting Children. But this Way of
representing the Matter is evidently founded on gross Ignorance of the
unavoidable State of the visible Kingdom of GOD. There is no such Thing as
certainly securing the Church of CHRIST from the Ministrations of Men, not
knowing the Grace of GOD in Truth. Neither People who call Men to the Work of
the Ministry, nor Ministers who separate them to it, can look into their
Hearts: Nor can they, either of them, make a Judgment of their State by any
Thing but what is outward and visible. And notwithstanding the most specious
outward Appearance, whether in Word or Deed, their Hearts may be leavened with
Hypocrisy: Nor can it be known of any Minister, on the Earth, that he is the
Man inwardly, he professes to be outwardly. I speak not this to insinuate a
Suspicion of Ministers, as though they were Hypocrites. GOD forbid I should be an
Encourager of such Uncharitableness, or, in this Way, lead any into an ill
Opinion of them, to the Hurt of their Reputation and Usefulness! But what I aim
at is to show, that there is no knowing the inward real State of Ministers any
more than People; and that, after the closest Adherence to Scripture-rule in
judging of them, we may be deceived, taking them for converted when they are
not. And can it be supposed, that sanctifying Grace should be necessary to a
regular or valid Administration of Gospel Ordinances, when it is the sole
Prerogative of the great GOD, to know the Persons that are endowed with it, and
the appropriate Work of the SON of GOD, at the final Judgment, to declare who
they are? Is it possible that should be essential to the Character or Success
of Ministers, in regard of which there is no Church on Earth but may be imposed
on? And if Gospel Ordinances will be effectual to Salvation, only as
administered by converted Ministers, whose Administration of them must be
attended on? And the Resolution of this Question is the more necessary,
because, for all any Thing that we know, or indeed can know, unless by
immediate Revelation from GOD, the Ministers we most admire, and have the
highest Opinion of, as eminently sanctified Men, may be no other than whited
Sepulchers, beautiful without; but within, full of dead Men's Bones, and all
Rottenness and Uncleanness.

This confining the Success of Gospel Ordinances to the inward unknown Sanctity
of the Administrators is therefore unreasonable and antichristian; yea, pursued
in its just Consequences, it will totally destroy the Use, both of Ordinances
and Ministers to dispense them. And however some may be very fond of a Notion
carrying in it so much seeming Piety, and zealous in propagating it to the
Disturbance of the Churches, and fomenting Divisions in them, they herein
depart, both from the Scriptures, and the Principles of the famous Westminster
Assembly of Divines, as well as the Faith of the Forefathers of this Country,
one express Article in whose Confession, consented to by their Elders and
Messengers, convened at Boston, May 12. 1660, is in these Words, The grace
which is exhibited in or by the Sacraments, rightly used, is not conferred by
any Power in them: Neither does the efficacy of a Sacrament depend upon the
Piety, or Intention of him that does administer it: but upon the Work of the
SPIRIT, and the Word of Institution, which contains, together with a Precept
authorizing the Use thereof, a Promise of Benefit to worthy Receivers. But to
go on,

Ministers should not only take Care that their Minds be furnished with Grace,
but with Gifts also. It may reasonably be supposed, that their natural Gifts,
their mental Capacities, are above the common level: Otherwise, they certainly
judged ill in desiring the Office of Overseers in the Church of GOD; and it was
ill-judged in People to call them to the Work of the Ministry, and still more
so in the Pastors of the Churches who separated them to it. But it is not
enough that they are endowed with good natural Powers. These must be well
cultivated and enriched by Meditation and Study. In this Way, under the
Influence of the blessed SPIRIT, they should take Pains, that they may acquire
all necessary Gifts for the Use of Edification; Gifts for praying, and
preaching, and administering the Sacraments and Censures of the Kingdom of
CHRIST: Nor should they content themselves merely with an Ability to do these
Duties of their Office; but endeavor after a Capacity and Readiness to perform
them in an agreeable Manner, so as to engage the Attention, and command the
Esteem and Veneration of their Hearers. Especially should Ministers take Care,
that their preaching be such as may discover them to be Men of Knowledge and
Understanding, and not Babes in Divine Things. It should appear from their
Discourses, that they are able to instruct the Ignorant, to resolve the
Doubting, to convince the Gainsayers, to awaken the Secure, to comfort the
Brokenhearted; and, in a Word, that they have the Skill to adapt themselves to
the Cases of all Sorts of Persons, and to the various Occurrences, in divine
Providence, which may be capable of being improved to the spiritual Advantage
of their People.

Some, perhaps, may expect to be furnished with these Qualifications for the
Work of the Ministry, in an extraordinary Way, without the diligent Use of
common Means. But they herein miserably delude themselves. Even TIMOTHY was
advised by the inspired PAUL, in my Context, not to neglect the Gift that was
in him; but to make his profiting appear unto all, by giving Attendance to
Reading and Meditation. And it is in this Way, together with the Use of Prayer,
humbly depending on the Blessing of Heaven, and in this Way only, that we may
warrantably hope to acquire those ministerial Accomplishments, which will be an
Honor to our Profession, and render us eminently useful in the Places Divine
Providence has fixed us. But,

2. Ministers, in taking heed to themselves, should look to their Behavior
that it be befitting those who are entrusted with the Care of Souls. In Order
whereto,

To be sure, they must not be Men of bad Lives. A vicious Minister is one of
the most misbecoming Creatures in all the World. A Teacher of others in all
Godliness and Righteousness, and yet profane, unclean, intemperate, unjust,
uncharitable; what a Reproach is he to himself, and Scandal to the Profession?
The Lives of such Ministers are a practical Contempt of Religion, whatever they
may say in its Favor while they are preaching. The Ways of Piety, through
their Means, are evil-spoken of, and the Son of GOD himself reproached and
blasphemed. When others see the Preachers of Salvation living in those
Practices that are unseemly in the Sight of GOD and Man, they are ready to
esteem CHRIST a Minister of Sin, and to reflect upon his Religion as allowing,
or, at least, not sufficiently discountenancing Vice and Wickedness: Nor does
any Thing more dreadfully prejudice Men against a religious Profession, and
harden them in their Sins.

But besides not being vicious, Ministers should be of a good Conversation in
CHRIST. It is not enough that they keep themselves innocent from great
Transgressions, that they are blameless, and without Rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation; but they must express a becoming Care to show
themselves Patterns of good Works; Examples to all they live among, in Word, in
Conversation, in Faith, in Purity, in Charity. Such should be their Manner of
Life as to be able to appeal to the People of their respective Charges, in the
Language of the Apostles, Ye are Witnesses, and GOD also, how holily, and
justly, and unblameably, we behaved ourselves among them that believe. This
would exhibit a lovely Idea of Religion, and recommend it to the Choice and
Esteem of the World, more than the best studied Sermons, while they saw we paid
little Regard to them ourselves.

But there are some special Instances of Behavior, peculiarly befitting
Ministers, and wherein they must be exemplary, if they would take due heed to
themselves. Thus,

They should behave with Humility; setting before their View, the Example of
the meek and lowly JESUS, their Master and Lord; who condescended to wash even
his Disciples Feet. They should not, because they have the Advantage of some
others in Point of Educations, Gifts, and Station in the Church of GOD, grow
big in their own Imagination, and treat those below them with Neglect and
Contempt. Nothing appears more unseemly in those whose Business it is to preach
up Humility, than the Discovery of a proud and haughty Spirit, a Temper to lord
it over GOD's Heritage, and to carry it with Loftiness, as though they might
not be spoken to. But of all Pride in Ministers, none is so odious as that
which is spiritual. They never appear more disagreeable, than while they are
boasting of their own superior Sanctity, trusting in themselves that they are
righteous, and despising others; especially is this Vanity detestable, when it
shows itself in Contempt of their Brethren in the Ministry; when they are urged
on by it to invade their Province, looking upon themselves as extraordinary
Men, special instruments in the Conversion of Sinners* while those, into whose
Labors they enter, are esteemed and treated by them (though perhaps much more
valuable than themselves in the Opinion of all sober Judges) as poor carnal
worthless Creatures, not fit to preach the Gospel. How much better would it
suit the Character of those who are the Ministers of the humble JESUS, if, with
the great Apostle of the Gentiles, they appeared to have an Opinion of
themselves as less than the least of all Saints, and not meet to be called
Ministers? If they preferred others in Love, esteemed them better than
themselves, and treated them with a decent Respect? And they would shine still
brighter, if, at all Times, they appeared with an Air of Meekness and
Condescension, showing Humility to all, in their Speech, in their Carriage, in
all the Exercises of their Office. This modest humble Deportment is graceful in
any, but peculiarly recommending in Men of our Profession. Scarce any Thing
will raise us higher in the good Opinion of People; whereas, if we are lofty
and proud, its much if we are reverenced by any but our selves.

Ministers should behave also with Charity; discovering a Readiness to all the
Offices of Christian Love and Kindness, both to Men's Souls and Bodies, their
Character and Usefulness in the World: Nor should they confine these Exercises
of their Good Will to their Friends and Acquaintance, those who may think well
of them and admire them. This would be to do no more than Publicans and
Sinners. For they love those that love them, salute their Brethren, and treat
their Friends with singular Marks of Civility and Courtesy. And shall
Christian Ministers carry the Expressions of their Charity no higher than this
comes to? They ought to show their Benignity to Enemies, yea, the greatest
Enemies they have in the World; those who most injure and abuse them. It should
be visible to all they Converse with, that they can put up Affronts, bear
Insults, forgive ill Treatment, yea, that they can do good to them that hate
them, that they can bless them that curse them, and pray for them that
despitefully use and persecute them.

And if they should exercise Charity in such high Instances, much more should
they behave with Kindness to those, who are no otherwise Enemies to them, than
as they cannot think and speak just as they would have them. They should not
judge such; they should not set at naught such; for one is our Master in
Heaven, and we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST. They should
not treat such with Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and
Evil-speaking. This is not the Charity, any more than the Wisdom, that is from
above. The Charity of this Kind is peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of Mercy, and good Fruits, and without Partiality. It looks ill,
especially in Ministers, to call bad Names, to sit in Judgment upon their
Fellow Christians, and Fellow Laborers in the Work of the Lord, to determine
their State, and damn their Souls. It would be much more becoming, should they
be Opposers of the Truth, and taken in the Snare of the Devil, to instruct them
in Meekness. This might, through the Blessing of GOD, bring them to Repentance,
to the acknowledging of the Truth: But to rail at them will have no Tendency to
enlighten their Minds, or alter their Judgments; though it may move their
Resentments, and fill them with Indignation.

In like Manner, Ministers should behave with Steadiness; making it apparent,
that they are of fixed Principles, and a uniform Conduct. They should not be
like Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine: Neither should they be like those fluctuating, volatile, uncertain
Men, who are easily turned aside from the Truth, by the cunning Craftiness of
those who lie in wait to deceive. To be sure, they should not vary and change,
be of this Party or that, appear in this Shape or the other, as may best suit
the sinful Design of pleasing Man: But they should be Men of Steadiness,
consistent with themselves, altering neither their Sentiments, nor Profession,
nor Conduct, that they may fall in-with the Example of the Populace, the Humor
of some particular Persons, or the Revolution of Affairs, whether in Church or
State. Ministers, above all Men, should be steadfast and immovable. I do not
mean, that they should be unreasonably so. There is a Tenaciousness, both of
Opinion and Practice, arising from Pride, Ignorance, Prejudice, Heat and
Strength of Imagination: And the Men are to be pitied, rather than commended,
who are thus stiff: They are rather blindly obstinate, than rationally
steadfast. The Stedfastness which would be a Glory to Ministers, is such an
habitual Fixedness of Sentiment and Uniformity of Practice, as is the Result of
Consideration; and impartial, deliberate, through Inquiry into the Mind of GOD,
made known in the Bible. And having, in this Way, settled their Principles, and
satisfied themselves how they ought to act, they should not waver in their
Minds, and be unstable in their Ways. That was the Advice PAUL gave TIMOTHY, in
his 2d Epist. to him, Chap. 1. v. 13. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which
thou have heard of me, in Faith and Love which is in CHRIST JESUS. And the more
special Reason of this Advice is added in the 15 v. This thou know, that all
they which are in Asia be turned away from me. And the same Advice is
seasonable at this Day, and too much so, for the like Reason. To be sure, there
is Danger, lest Ministers should be turned away from the Apostles: And they
should take heed to themselves, that they fall not from their Stedfastness,
being led away with the Error of the Wicked.

Moreover, Ministers should behave with Courage and Resolution; not being
ashamed, or afraid, to appear for GOD, and in Defense of his Truths and Ways.
It would be mean in those who are commissioned Servants of JESUS CHRIST, to
behold the Rise of Error, in Opposition to the Faith revealed by him; to behold
the Growth of Sin and Wickedness, in Contradiction to the Law of GOD made known
in his Gospel; to behold the general Spread of Contention and Schism, in
Violation of the Order he has appointed: I say, it would be dastardly in
Ministers to see these Things, and stand by, and keep Silence. They are set for
the Defense of the Gospel; it is one special Part of the Work they are called
to, by sound Doctrine, to exhort and convince Gain sayers. And now is the Time
when they should stand up for the good old Way, and bear a faithful Testimony
against every Thing that may cast a Blemish on true primitive Christianity. And
if they now hold their Peace, they are too much under the Influence of that
Fear of Man, which brings a Snare; they are guilty of Cowardice which they
cannot give a good Account of, either to GOD, or their own Consciences.

In fine, Ministers should behave with Activity and Diligence. Idleness in a
Minister is one of the worst Things that can be said of him, and should be most
distant from his Character. Be an Example, says the Apostle to TIMOTHY, in
Spirit, i. e. as some gloss upon it, "in a sprightly Zeal and Activity for the
Glory of GOD, and the Good of Souls." We have a great deal of Work to do, as we
are called to watch for the Souls of others, as well as our own; a great deal
to do, not only in our Closets and Studies, but in our private Applications,
especially to the Sick, those that are gone astray, and those who may be under
spiritual Doubts and Troubles; and in our public Performances. And these Duties
can never be done as they ought to be, without a good Measure of Diligence and
Industry. To be sure, we cannot attend the more private Duties of our Office
with Fidelity, and do our Duty in the Pulpit, in a becoming Manner, unless we
are active, and fill up our Time with Pains and Labor. It Is true, we may
loiter away the Week in Indolence, or in rambling about to intermeddle in other
Men's Matters, and entertain our People on the Sabbath with some hasty, or
unmeditated Discourse: But such preaching has very little Worth. It may indeed
pass well enough with the Weak and Ignorant; but it is perfectly tasteless to
the Wise and Judicious, who, on this Account, will justly conceive a low
Opinion of us. How much more would it redound to our Honor, if we so performed
the Duties of our Station, as that it should be apparent to all, that our Heart
was in our Business, that it swallowed up our whole Time, and employed all our
Tho'ts and Powers? But I must pass on to the

2. Second Branch of the Duty of Ministers, viz. their taking heed to their
Doctrine. And they must take heed to it, that it be Christian, in Opposition to
that which is the Result of mere Reason; that it be sound, in Opposition to
that which is corrupt; that it be important, in Opposition to that which is
trifling; and, in fine, that it be real, in Opposition to that which is
imaginary. We shall be distinct and particular here. And,

1. Ministers should take heed to their Doctrine, that it be Christian, and not
merely rational.

I would not, by this, be understood to find Fault with a rational Way of
preaching. This was Paul's Manner, that eminent Pattern of good preaching.
Hence that Remark in his Story, Acts 17. 2. And Paul, as HIS MANNER WAS, went
in unto them, and three Sabbath Days REASONED with them out of the Scriptures.
And the like observable Remark we have, in the next Chapter v. 4. And he
REASONED in the Synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews, and the
Greeks. And it is a Way of preaching that ought not to be spoken against. It Is
the Way in which Men, who are reasonable Creatures, ought to be addressed to: Nor
are they treated as Men, if all proper Care is not taken to inform their
Judgments, and fill their Minds with the Knowledge of GOD's Will in all,
spiritual Wisdom and Understanding.

Neither would I be understood to suggest, as if Reason had nothing to do in
Matters of Revelation. So far is this from the Truth, that without Reason we
could never know the Meaning of a Revelation from GOD, or prove it to be one.
And it is the peculiar Glory of the great and main Points of revealed Religion,
that they are perfectly consistent with Reason, though they could not have been
investigated by it: Nor does a Preacher do more Honor to Revelation, than while
he discourses upon the several Articles of it in a Way of Reasoning and
Argument; representing them worthy of GOD, and fit to be embraced by Men,
though they should, some of them, be beyond human Comprehension. And indeed
Faith and Reason are no such Enemies as some may be ready to imagine. There is
no Doctrine of Faith, but it perfectly accords with the Principles of true
Reason: Nor otherwise might it be received as an Article of Faith. We should
never therefore oppose Faith and Reason; but rather consider them as Helps and
Supports to each other; for so they really are: Nor can there be Faith without
Reason. To be sure, it would grossly reflect upon Faith, if in Order to our
being Believers, we must renounce our Reason; for this would be to put off our
Character as Men.

But though Reason may, and ought to be employed by Ministers in preaching, yet
the Doctrine they preach should not be the Result of mere human Reason. It
would be highly incongruous, and justly offensive, in a Minister of the Gospel,
to discourse to his Hearers, as though he had no Knowledge of, or Regard to,
the Revelation GOD has made of himself by his SON JESUS CHRIST. He should ever
appear to be a Minister of CHRIST by the Doctrine he preaches. This should be
truly Christian, as being fetched from the Gospel. His preaching should not be
in Words of Man's Wisdom, but the Truth as it is in JESUS. He may properly
enough, upon some Occasions, speak of those Things, which might have been
known, by the due Exercise of Reason, without Revelation; but he should not
confine himself, in treating even upon these Things, to mere Reason; but should
make Use of the Light that is reflected on them from the Scripture, and take
Care to consider them in the Reference they bear to CHRIST. Nor should he be
ashamed to insist much in his Preaching, upon the Mysteries which were hid from
Ages and Generations, but have been made manifest in these last Days, by the
appearing of the SON of GOD in our Nature. The Method of Salvation by the
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, the everlasting Counsels of GOD unfolded to a perishing
World by him, should be the main Scope of his Sermons. With PHILIP, he should
preach the Things concerning the Kingdom of GOD, and the Name of JESUS CHHIST:
Yea, with the Apostle PAUL, he should determine not to know any Thing among his
People, save JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. And the more of CHRIST, not his
mere Name, but the Spirit and Genius of his Religion, he discovers in his
Preaching, the more worthy will he be of the Character of an able Minister of
the New Testament.

2. Ministers should take heed to their Doctrine, that it be sound, in
Opposition to that which is false and erroneous. It should be the pure,
uncorrupted Word of GOD. This, the Apostle had principally in the Eye; and it
seems, indeed, to have been a Matter much lying on his Heart. Hence in
mentioning the Qualifications proper for Ministers, that is one, Tit. 1. 9.
Holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may be able, by
SOUND DOCTRINE, both to exhort, and convince the Gainsayers. And in his
Instructions to TITUS, as a Gospel-Minister, he is particular in exhorting him
to speak the Things which become SOUND DOCTRINE; -- showing Uncorruptness,
sound Speech that cannot be condemned, Chap. 2. v. 1. 7. 8. Ministers then
should not be as those who corrupt the Word of GOD; they should not, as was
complained of the Prophets in ancient Days, prophesy Lies in GOD's Name; they
should not, as was the Practice of some in the Apostle's Days, beguile their
People with enticing Words, turning them away from the Simplicity of the
Gospel: But that should be their Character, Teachers of their People in Verity;
Nourishers of them in Faith and good Doctrine. They should deliver nothing but
the Truth, and should do it, as much as may be, without the Mixture of any
Thing erroneous: And they should be particularly cautious upon this Head, at a
Time, when People will not endure sound Doctrine, but, after their own Lusts,
heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears.

Would the Time permit, I might here properly take Occasion to enumerate some
of those Errors, which, if Ministers should countenance in their Preaching,
they would not take heed to their Doctrine, that it be sound.

The first of these Errors is, that which makes Assurance essential to a Man's
being a true Believer in CHRIST. The Bible knows of no such Doctrine as this.
It teaches, it is true, that Assurance is attainable; that it is the Duty of
Christians to give Diligence to make their Calling and Election sure; and that
it is a bad Sign when Men are easy and contented, while uncertain whether they
are interested in the saving Mercy of GOD, through the LORD JESUS CHRIST. But
it no where says, that a Man cannot be a real Christian, if under Doubts and
Difficulties respecting his spiritual State: So far from it, that it expressly
declares a Man may truly fear and obey GOD, and yet walk in Darkness; Yea, in
Darkness to so great a Degree as to see no Light; Isai. 50. 10. It is therefore
a corrupting the Truth to tell People, that Faith and Assurance are inseparably
connected, and that there cannot be the former without the latter. And those,
who deliver such Doctrine as this, justly offend the Generation of GOD's
Children, who, in all Ages, have experienced the Reverse.

That also is an Error which makes the Knowledge of the Time and Manner of
Conversion necessary to the Thing it self. This is a Doctrine the Scripture is
an entire Stranger to: Nor will it accord with the Experience of a great many
as good Christians as any we know of in the World. Conversion, it is true, is
sometimes effected in a Manner so observable, that the Time. and Circumstances,
may be particularly pointed out: But it is not always thus, nor, it may be, most
frequently. There is a vast Variety in the Dealing of GOD, with different
Persons, in bringing them into a State of Grace, both as to Time and Manner, as
well as Degree, yea, and every other Circumstance relative thereto. So that if
some can tell when and how they were converted, it is no Argument others must
be able to do the like, though equally in a good State. A real, through Conversion
from Sin to GOD in CHRIST, is necessary; and to affirm it to be so is sound
Doctrine: but to say that we cannot be converted, unless we know the precise
Time when this Change was wrought, is corrupt and false.

In like Manner, it is grossly erroneous to pretend, as if unregenerate Men ought
not to pray; and there needs no other Proof of it than only this, that GOD has
plainly commanded them to pray. Those Persons are certainly unregenerate, who
want a new Heart to be given to them, and a new spirit to be put within them;
and yet, that is the Language of GOD to Persons of this Character, and in Order
to their Obtainment of a new Heart, and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 37. I will for
this be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them. And what if
unconverted Men cannot pray in the same gracious Manner with those, who have
been transformed by the renewing of the HOLY GHOST? Did not GOD know this
before the Appointment of Prayer: And han't he, notwithstanding, revealed it as
his Mind that they should pray? Yea, that they should attend this Duty, as an
Institution of his, in the Use of which they may humbly hope for converting
Grace? For any therefore to insinuate, as if unconverted Men would not do well
to lay open their distressed Case before the Father of Mercies, by Prayer and
Supplication, with Confession, is not only, in Reality of Consequence, to
arraign the Wisdom of GOD's Appointments, but to restrain Men from that,
without which they can have no good Hope, upon the Foundation of CHRIST and the
Apostles, ever to expect the special saving Grace of GOD.

In fine, for I must not stay to multiply Particulars It Is an Error, and a very
dangerous one too, so to mistake the Use and Design of the Righteousness of
CHRIST, as to suppose it takes away all Necessity of any Righteousness of our
own. Some, not having a clear and distinct Notion of the Gospel Use and Design
of CHRIST'S Righteousness, and of our own, have spoken of these Things so as to
reflect Dishonor on CHRIST, while they might intend to exalt him. The Use of
our own Righteousness. in the Gospel-plan is not to entitle us to Salvation,
there is no Necessity of it for this; nor is it sufficient to answer such a
Purpose. When we have done our best, we are unprofitable Servanrs, as having
fallen short of our Duty: And therefore it cannot be by any Works of
Righteousness which we have done, that we are justified and saved; but for the
Sake of CHRIST, in Consideration of what he did and suffered, when he stood in
the Place of Sinners. This therefore is the Use of the Righteousness of CHRIST:
It Is our Title to Heaven, that on the Account of which we are interested in the
Mercy of GOD to eternal Life. But though it is on the Account of CHRIST'S
Righteousness that we are justified and saved, and it would be highly injurious
to his Merits to suppose otherwise; yet this by no Means takes away the
Necessity of personal inherent Righteousness. This also has its Use, and is
equally necessary in its Place. It is necessary on other Accounts, though not
as our Title to Heaven. It Is required in the Gospel, and so becomes necessary
by Divine Appointment; yea, and of such Importance was this Appointment, that
GOD ordained before the Foundation of the World, that Christians should walk in
those good Works, unto which they are disposed and prepared, when they become,
a second Time, his Workmanship, being created anew in CHRIST JESUS. And it is by
inherent personal Righteousness, and by this only, that Men become the capable
Subjects of Salvation in Heaven. Without this, they would not be meet for the
Enjoyment of it; nor could they be any more happy, as reasonable Creatures,
moral Agents, than Light could have Communion with Darkness, or CHRIST with
Belial. But I must not enlarge -- To go on,

3. Ministers should take heed to their Doctrine, that it be important, not
trifling and Useless. It Is observable, there were, at the Time when PAUL wrote
this Epistle to TIMOTHY, certain Teachers in the Church of Ephesus, who gave
heed to Fables, doting about Questions, and striving about Words to no Purpose.
And it was, no Doubt, in Opposition to the profane and vain-babbling of these
Teachers, that he enjoins it no TIMOTHY to take heed to his Doctrine, and
elsewhere, in express Terms, not to give heed to Fables, which minister
Questions, rather than godly Edifying; hereby exhibiting a just Idea of that
Preaching which is not calculared to answer the great Ends of the Ministry, in
building Men up in Faith and Holiness; teaching us to esteem in rather trifling
than preaching; as being of little more Significancy than a Fable, an idle Tale
that is told. The Business of preaching is the greatest and most important that
can be. It has to do with Men's spiritual Concerns, to instruct them in what
they are to believe and practice, in Order to their serving GOD acceptably
here, and being eternally happy in the Enjoyment of him hereafter. And shall
Ministers trifle in so solemn and Affair? Shall the Peculiarities of a Party,
the Externals of Religion, the Modalities of Worship, swallow up all their Time
and Thoughts? Shall they bring every nice disputable Matter into the Pulpit,
and deal perpetually in wrangling Controversies, which tend not to Holiness? It
is true, they are exhorted to contend for the Faith; and they should be bold in
Defense of the great and substantial Truths of Religion, those that are of
considerable Importance to the Souls of Men: But for foolish Questions, and
needless Disputes they should not trouble themselves, or their People with
them. The Subjects of their Preaching should be the main and necessary Articles
of Faith, and Rules of Life. These they should dwell upon; these should be the
great Scope of their Discourses; These they should have principally in View,
even when discoursing upon comparatively less important Points. And they should
be abundant in Labors to explain, and establish these great and essential
Principles of Religion; especially when there is Danger, lest Shipwreck should
be made of Faith and a good Conscience.

4. Ministers should take heed to their Doctrine, that it be real, not
imaginary. What they preach should have some solid Foundation; it should be
Truth bottomed on the Word of GOD, and not a mere Notion, a Fancy that has
Existence no where but in their own overheated Brains.

Some, perhaps, may think this a needless Caution: But if they do, it is
because they are ignorant of the World, yea, and of their Bibles too. There
have always been visionary, enthusiastical Men; pretending to an extraordinary
Mission from GOD, and preaching for Doctrines of his, the Suggestions of their
own vain Imaginations. So it was in Old Testament Times. Hence that Passage
directed to the Jewish Nation, Jer. 23. 16. Thus says the LORD of Hosts,
hearken not unto the Words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you: they make
you vain; they speak a Vision of their own Heart, and not out of the Mouth of
the LORD. To the same Purpose it follows in the 25. 26. 27. 32. Verses. I have
heard what the Prophets said, that prophecy Lies in my Name, saying, I have
dreamed, I have dreamed. How long shall this be in the Hearts of the Prophets
that prophecy Lies? Yea, they are Prophets of the Deceit of their own Hearts;
which think to cause my People to forget my Name by their Dreams, which they
tell every Man to his Neighbor. -- Behold, I am against them that prophecy
false Dreams, says the LORD, and do tell them, and cause my People to err by
their Lies: Yet I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore they shall not
profit this People at all, says the LORD. And so it has been in all Ages of
the Christian Church; yea, there have not been wanting Instances, even in our
own Day, of those, who under the vain Notion of being extraordinarily sent of
God, have gone about venting their own wild Imaginations for divine Truths, to
the great Reproach of CHRIST, and Scandal of Religion. Ministers then should
take heed to their Doctrine, that it be the real Truth of GOD, and not dare
utter any Thing, as coming from him, but what they can prove does so. It Is not
enough that they have an Impulse on their Spirits, that they are under supposed
Impressions from above. These must all be examined by the Rule of GOD's Word.
To the Law and to the Testimony. If we preach not agreeable hereto, there will
be neither Light nor Truth in what we say, be the Pressure on our Minds ever so
lively, or the Thing suggested to us of ever so much Weight in our own
Imaginations. I go on to say,

3. Ministers should not only take heed to themselves, and unto their Doctrine,
but continue in them. They should hold out to the End, as to both.

In Respect of themselves, it is not enough that they appear to be Men of Piety
for a while, but they must always do so; showing themselves, through all the
Periods of Life, Patterns of good Works, following after Righteousness,
Godliness, Faith, Patience, Meekness; keeping themselves without Spot, and
unrebukable until the Appearing of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

And then as to their Doctrine, they must not only begin, but go on to preach
that which shall tend to the Use of Edifying. It will not suffice, if, for a
Time, they deliver the Doctrine which is according to Godliness; but the same
sound, pure, good Doctrine should run through the whole Course of their
Preaching. Their Sermons, from first to last, should breathe the true Spirit of
the Gospel, and be a Testimony for them, that they have not fallen from their
Stedfastness, but continue strong in the Faith, that Faith which, by CHRIST and
his Apostles, was once delivered to the Saints.

But it is more than Time that I pass to the next Head of Discourse, which is,

II. To consider the special Motive with which the Apostle inforces the Duty in
the Text; Namely, For in doing this, thou shall save both thyself, and them
that hear thee. Here it may be said,

1. Ministers by doing their Duty will save themselves. The Salvation here
spoken of means Salvation in another World, Salvation from Wrath, Salvation
with eternal Glory. And what a Motive is this to take heed to themselves, and
to their Doctrine, to look well to their Temper and Conduct, both as Christians
and Ministers? They cannot, unless they are thus careful, obtain Salvation.
Merely their Character, as Officers in the Kingdom of CHRIST, will not secure
them from Danger, in the great Day of GOD's Wrath. Judas, though called to be
an Apostle, Yet, went to his own Place. And our Savior assures us that many,
in the Day of his Appearing to judge the World in Righteousness, who prophesied
in his Name, will be doomed to a Departure from him among the Workers of
Iniquity. And of all Men, wicked and unfaithful Ministers will receive the
greatest Damnation. It will not be enough that they are turned into Hell with
the Nations that forget GOD; but by how much their Guilt has been aggravated
beyond their's, by so much their Torment and Sorrow will be increased, in this
Place of weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. An awful Consideration
surely! It should make us, to whom it has pleased GOD to commit the
Dispensation of the Gospel, look to ourselves, and to our Ministry, lest, when
we have preached to others, we our selves should be Cast-aways. If PAUL, that
Man of GOD, who was not behind the chiefest of the Apostles; no, not in Grace,
any more than Gifts, makes this Supposition in Respect of himself, much more
may we, who are so far below him in all Christian, as well as ministerial
Accomplishments. We should be jealous over ourselves with a godly Jealousy, and
lay ourselves out, with all Diligence and Fidelity, to do the Work we are
called to, as private Men, and as entrusted with the Charge of Souls. And shall
not we be quickened hereto from the Consideration, that, in doing thus, we shall
save ourselves? The Salvation of Heaven will be infinitely more than a
Recompense for all our Labor and Pains, for all our Services and Trials, in
fulfilling our Ministry. Nor is it all, that we shall be saved: But our
Salvation shall be distinguishingly great and glorious, in Proportion to the
Degree of our prudent Zeal, and active Fidelity in our LORD's Work. This
supposes Degrees, of Glory in the coming World. And our Savior himself
supposes the same Thing, when he speaks of a Prophet's Reward, and
distinguishes it from a righteous Man's Reward: And the Apostle PAUL supposes
the same Thing, or rather directly affirms it, when he says, There is one Glory
of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars: So
also is the Resurrection of the Dead. And if there are Degrees of Blessedness
in GOD's heavenly Kingdom, those certainly bid the fairest to be advanced to
the highest of them, who spend themselves, and are spent in watching for Souls,
the Souls of other Men, as well as their own: And they shall assuredly shine,
in the other World, as the Brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for
ever and ever. But,

2. Ministers, by taking heed to themselves, and to their Doctrine, will not
only save themselves, but them that hear them. Not that this will always
certainly be the Effect. Such a Sense of the Words is contrary to the Truth of
Fact, and irreconcilable with the Complaints, which the wisest and most
faithful Ministers, the World ever saw, have often made on Account of their
Want of Success. Who has believed our Report? To whom has the Arm of the LORD
been revealed? So spoke Isaiah, that inspired Messenger of GOD to his People
Israel And a greater than Isaiah, the SON of GOD himself, is represented in the
New Testament, as bemoaning the Unsuccessfulness of his Ministry, in these same
Words of bitter Complaint, as you may see, Joh. 12. 37, 38. And so far,
sometimes, are even faithful Ministers from saving the People they are sent to,
that their Preaching is unhappily the Means of their being still more hardened
in Sin. So it was with the very Apostles of CHRIST. Hence that Remark of PAUL,
2. Cor. 2. 16. To the one, we are a Savor of Death unto Death. Yea, the
Prophet Isaiah was immediately commissioned by GOD to go, and preach to the
Jewish People, when the woeful Effect is declared in the Commission it self. Go,
(says GOD to him, Chap. 6. v. 9. 10.) tell this People, hear ye indeed, but
understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the Heart of this
People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they see with
their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and
convert and be healed. It Is indeed an awful Thing when People receive no saving
Advantage from the Ministry of the Word; and it is still more awful, when it
proves an Occasion of making their hard Hearts harder, and their blind Eyes
blinder; and godly faithful Ministers may be exceedingly grieved, and bowed
down hereat: Though, even in this Case, they may assure themselves they are unto
GOD a sweet Savor in CHRIST in them that are saved, and in them that perish.
Their Judgment is with the LORD, and their Work with their GOD: And though Israel
is not gathered, they shall be glorious in the Eyes of the LORD, and GOD shall
be their Strength. But to return,

When Ministers are urged to Heedfulness in the Discharge of their, Duty, from
the Consideration, that they shall save them that hear them, it must not be
understood, I say, in too rigorous a Sense, as if People might not fail of the
Grace of GOD, and of entering into Heaven, though they are faithful. But the
Meaning rather is, that, when Ministers prudently and heedfully attend the
proper Duties of their Office, they make Use of a suitable and well adapted
Means to promote the Salvation of Souls; yea, a Means which GOD has instituted
to this End, and in the Use of which they may humbly hope for such concurring
Influences of divine Grace, as shall be made effectual to the Accomplishment of
it. It is by the Ordinance of preaching, that it pleases GOD to save them that
believe. This is the wise Appointment of Heaven to bring about this Purpose of
Divine Mercy. And who so likely to be succeeded in this Design of saving Souls,
as those who look to their own Hearts and Lives, and express a suitable Care,
at all Times, to preach the pure uncorrupted Word of GOD? These, of all
Ministers, have most Reason to expect the Blessing of GOD on their Labors: And
if the Salvation of Sinners does not follow upon the Word preached by them,
they are not to Blame, but those that hear them.

And what a noble Incentive to heedful Diligence is this? Where is our Love to
the People of our Charge, where our Compassion for their precious Souls, if
this Motive lies not with Weight upon our Minds? The Prospect of eternally
saving them who hear us, should warm our Hearts, animate our Powers, and
inspire our Endeavors with Life and Vigor. If we might but be happily
instrumental in promoting the everlasting Felicity of a Number of the lost Sons
of Adam, how highly would GOD honor us? What Occasion should we have for holy
Rejoicing? How should we exult in the Presence of the LORD JESUS CHRIST at his
Coming? And how unspeakably blessed should we be in the Kingdom of our Father,
having such Seals of our Ministry to be unfading and eternal Crowns of Glory to
us?

The Application remains. And,

1. How very solemn is the Work of Ministers! We have not only our own Souls to
answer for, but the Souls of our People. Our Charge, as Ministers, is like
that, 1 Kin. 20. 39. Keep this Man; if by any Means he be missing, then shall
thy Life be for his Life. We are set Watchmen unto the House of Israel: And if
we receive the Word at GOD's Mouth, and faithfully declare it; warning the
Wicked of their Way, and persuading them to turn from it, by the Terrors of the
Law, and the Encouragements of the Gospel, we have delivered our Souls: If they
die in their Iniquity, their Blood will not be required at our Hands. But if we
are negligent to give Warning from GOD; if we flatter Men in their Sins,
daubing them with untempered Mortar; if we preach to them our own Fancies,
instead of the Truth of GOD; or, if the Truth we speak be so mingled with
Error, so over-clouded with blind Zeal, so accompanied with unguarded Conduct,
as to be an Occasion, in the natural Course of Things, of exciting Prejudices
in Men's Minds against Religion, and hardening them in Sin; if they now die in
their Iniquity, we may have Reason to fear, lest GOD should require their Blood
at our Hands. And oh! how doleful is the Cry of Blood! the Blood of lost and
undone Souls! How insupportable must be our Horror, to behold the People of our
Charge, in the Place of future Torment, and to hear their bitter Execrations;
charging their Ruin upon us, our bad Doctrine, which corrupted their Minds; our
bad Example, which encouraged them in Sin; our Remissness in our Ministry,
which suffered them to go on in their evil Ways, till their Feet took hold on
Death! Can we think of this, and not realise what an awful Work we are engaged
in? It Is indeed the most solemn, Man can be entrusted with.

2. How unable are Ministers, in their own Strength, to discharge the Duties of
their Office! This Reflection I take from PAUL, who, when he had been
discoursing on the Work of the Ministry, exclaims in that Language, Who is
sufficient for these Things! And if the great Apostle of the Gentiles, who,
besides his strong natural Genius, and acquired Learning, had the HOLY GHOST
plentifully poured out upon him, not only in miraculous Gifts, but high Degrees
of sanctifying Grace; I say, if the Apostle PAUL, under all these Advantages,
was filled with a humbling Sense of his own Insufficiency for this arduous
Undertaking, with how much more Reason may the present ordinary Ministers of
the Gospel cry out of their own Weakness? It Is not an easy Thing, my Brethren,
to acquit ourselves with Fidelity and Honor in the Ministry of the Gospel. Our
Business is to save the Souls of them that hear us. And O what Skill is
requisite so to dispense the Gospel, as that it may operate in a kind and
suitable Manner, to accomplish this blessed End! What Knowledge, what Wisdom,
what Heedfulness, are necessary, so to convey its Truths, as that they may,
with Ease and Freedom, enter into Men's Minds; So to represent its Laws, as
that they may feel their Reasonableness and Beauty, and be in Love with them;
So to urge its Motives, the precious Promises and awful Threatenings revealed in
it, as that they may have a joint Influence upon their Hopes and Fears,
preserving a due Balance between these grand Springs of all humane Action? To
dispense the Gospel so as that it may not, through any Fault of ours, be an
Occasion of Hurt but Good, is truly a very difficult Matter: And it is owing to
Pride, Ignorance, Inconsideration, or something Worse, if any imagine otherwise.

When I have been most serious in my Thoughts on the Business of Preaching,
viewing it as an Appointment of GOD to save Souls, I have been amazed, rather
than pleased, to see Ministers venture into the Pulpit, to speak upon the great
Affairs of Salvation and Damnation, with out any previous Forethought. They
might, perhaps, depend upon extraordinary Communications from above: But they
herein deluded themselves, and imposed upon others. None have Reason, from the
Bible, to expect any Assistance from the SPIRIT, much less that which is
extraordinary, while they neglect their Duty in the Use of common Means: And it
is too often visible, that they receive none by the Things which they deliver.

Nor have I been less amazed at the Forwardness of many, who, in these Days,
without any acquired Accomplishments, have thought themselves qualified, and in
an extempore-Way too, to address to large Auditories, upon the important
Concerns of everlasting Salvation. It Is strange any should entertain such
slight Thoughts of that, which the Scripture teaches us to look upon as an
Institution of JESUS CHRIST. And yet, this has been the Way of too many, in all
Ages of the Church. There were those, even in the Times of the Apostles, who
desired to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they said, nor
whereof they affirmed, 1 Timothy 1. 7. And the same Complaint may be justly made
of these Times: For which Reason People need be admonished, not to heap to
themselves such Teachers, having itching Ears. I am sure, if Men had but just
Tho'ts of the Reference which Preaching has to the Salvation of Souls, and the
great Heedfulness which is necessary in Preachers, both in Respect of
themselves, and their Doctrine, they would not be over-forward in this Matter;
especially, if they had never taken Pains by Reading, and Meditation, and
Study, to acquire the needed Accomplishments for this momentous Work. The best
qualified Men have been awfully sensible of their Insufficiency for it: Nor can
we who are Ministers have too strong a Sense upon our Minds of the Need we
stand in of Help from CHRIST; that it is he, and he only, who enables those
whom he puts into the Ministry. This would make us prayerful; and give us the
most hopeful Prospect of a Supply from the SPIRIT of JESUS CHRIST, according to
our Need.

3. What has been said affords Matter of serious Self-Reflection to Ministers.
Who of us dare say we are free from Blame? We have all our Faults and Follies,
and abundant Reason herefrom for deep Humiliation before GOD. Let us this Day
review our Temper and Conduct, both as Christians and Ministers.

Let us look into our spiritual State. Others cannot determine this, nor have
they any Right or Business to meddle with it. But to us it is a Matter of the
greatest Importance to know our own selves. And in Order to this we should
prove our own selves, how that CHRIST JESUS is in us; except we be disallowed
of GOD. Let us put the Question each one to his own Soul, Have I ever felt the
Power of those divine Truths which I preach to others? Has CHRIST JESUS, his
Image and Likeness, been formed in me? Am I that holy, humble, meek, patient,
contented, righteous, charitable Believer on the SON of GOD, I call upon others
to be? If, upon an impartial Examination, we have the divine SPIRIT witnessing
with our own Spirits, that we are thus Christians indeed, we may have
Confidence toward GOD. And O what a blessed Spring of Consolation would this
be to us, under the hard Censures, and severe Reproaches that are cast upon us
in this Day of Trial! Now might we take to ourselves the Words of the holy
Apostle PAUL, and say, It is a very small Thing that I should be judged of you,
or of Man's Judgment: He that judges me is the LORD: Yea, we might exult in
that triumphing Language of his, Who shall lay any Thing to the Charge of GOD's
Elect? It is GOD that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is CHRIST that
died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right Hand of GOD, who
also makes Intercession for us: Nor shall any Thing be ever able to separate
us from the Love of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, or to prevent our Participation of the
blessed Fruits of it, in his heavenly and everlasting Kingdom.

But besides our private Character as Christians, we should look back and
consider, what Care we have taken to fulfill our Ministry. It might be of
Service to reflect after some such Manner as this, Was my Aim right in coming
into the Ministry? Had I an honest upright Intention? Was it my main View to
honor CHRIST in doing Good to Souls by promoting their Salvation? And what has
been my Conduct all along in the Course of my Ministry? Have I made it my
sincere Endeavor to find out the true Way to Heaven, and to assist and direct
my People in their Walk on in it? Have I laid out my main Strength in studying
and preaching CHRIST JESUS and him crucified? Have the great Truths of the
Gospel, those wherein the Life and Power of Godliness consist, been the
principal Subjects of my Ministry? Have I in all Things approved myself to the
Consciences of my People, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by
Kindness, by the HOLY GHOST, by Love unfeigned, by the Armor of Righteousness,
on the Right Hand, and on the Left? Have I been constant in bowing the Knee to
the GOD and FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, in humble fervent Prayer for
Direction and Help, a Blessing on my Studies and Labors, and that my People,
with myself, might obtain the Salvation of Heaven? We have now behaved well in
our Office; we have now done our best to serve the Interest of Souls: And if it
should please GOD to crown our Endeavors with Success, O what a happy Meeting
should we, and the Souls begotten to GOD under our Ministry, have, in the Day
of the Appearing of the SON of MAN! Then should we, in Raptures of Joy, be able
to say to the great SAVIOR as well as Judge of Men, Here, LORD, are we and the
Children thou have graciously given us: And both we and they should go away
into Life eternal.

4. How reasonable is it People should take heed to themselves that they may
save their own Souls! And how inexcuseable will they be, if they neglect so
great Salvation! Brethren, it is that you might be saved, everlastingly saved,
that we your Ministers have had committed to us the Despensation of the Gospel.
And our Hearts Desire, and Prayer to GOD for you is, that you may be saved: And
GOD, I trust, is our Witness, that we would willingly spend and be spent in
taking heed to our selves, and to our Doctrine, if we might but be the Means of
your receiving Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them that are
sanctified by Faith that is in CHRIST. But this lies not so much with us, as
with your selves. Our Desires of your salvation, and most faithful Labors to
promote it, will not be effectual, unless you are wrought upon to be thoughtful of
your own Souls, and to look well to your selves, that you fail not of the Grace
of God. O be persuaded to pay a suitable Regard to the Messages of GOD handed to
you by our Ministry! Don't attend on our preaching for Fashion's Sake, and
because it is the Custom of the Country.. -- Don't come to hear the Word
dispensed with Prejudice, either against us, or the Truth of GOD delivered by
us. -- Don't let your Aim be to find Fault, and take Occasion to censure and
reproach us: But be serious in your Attendance on our Ministrations. -- Look
upon them as Means instituted by GOD to bring about your Salvation: And wait
upon them as such, with an awakened Sense, which certainly becomes you, when
treated with upon the Concerns of Life and Death. -- Let the Salvation of your
Souls be your principal View in coming up to the House of GOD. And whenever you
come here, let it be with sincere Desires, and ardent Prayer, that you may
receive spiritual and saving Advantage; that you may gain a true Knowledge of
GOD and JESUS CHRIST; a real Conformity to the Divine Image; a Heart to do your
Duty, and Strength to perform it; and in a Word, that you may have the Life of
Grace begun in you, and carried on, as much as may be, to Perfection.

And solemnly realise it, that you may finally perish under the best Ministry
in the World; yea, and that you certainly will perish, if you do not make a
wise and good Use of it. And if this should be your unhappy Case, you would be
without all Excuse. Said our Savior to the Jews, John 15. 32. And it is
equally applicable to all Gospel-Impenitents, If I had not come, and spoken to
them, they had not had Sin; but now they have no Cloak for their Sin. If you
hear not CHRIST speaking to you, in the Ministry of the Word, you will have
nothing to plead in your own Justification. How then shall you escape? There is
no Possibility of it: Nor will the Ruin of any Sinners be more dreadful than
yours. No Sinners will be found to have abused greater Light and Grace; to
have more highly provoked the holy GOD; to have more bitterly grieved the good
SPIRIT of GOD; to have sinned against richer Advantages, or more distinguishing
Favors: And therefore none will drink deeper of the Cup of the LORD'S
Indignation. -- It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of
Judgment than for you. -- But, Beloved, we are persuaded better Things of you,
and Things that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak.

It will be but agreeable to the Occasions of the Day, and the Expectations of
the Auditory, if I now turn the Discourse into an Address; First, To the Person
who is to be fixed in the Ministry of the Gospel in this Place; and then, to
the People who are to be his more special Charge.

It Is at your Desire, Sir, that I stand here to stir up your pure Mind by Way
of Remembrance, that you may be mindful of the Commandment of the Apostle of
our Lord and Savior which speaks on that wise, Take Heed to thy self, and to
thy Doctrine; continue in them. Your Care about yourself, that you might behave
as is befitting a Minister of JESUS CHRIST, no one will gain say: And in the
Course of your Labors, for a Number of Years, in another Part of GOD's
Vineyard, you have not only approved your self a Man well furnished with Gifts
for the Ministry, but a Preacher of good Doctrine, sound Speech that cannot be
condemned. We do therefore with the more Freedom recommend you to this People,
and act in the Solemnity of setting you over them in the LORD; hoping, and
praying, and expecting, that you will be to them a heedful, painful, able
Minister of the New Testament.

Let me advise you, Sir, To look well to the Frame of your own Heart. Get, and
keep, as much as may be, a strong and vigorous Sense of spiritual and eternal
Concerns. This will animate you in your Work, enliven your Performances, give
an Energy to your Ministrations, and be apt to engage the Attention of your
People, and strike their Minds with irresistible Conviction.

Let your Behavior also be exemplary. This, more than any Thing, will
strengthen your Influence to do Good. It will reflect a Glory on your
Character, and give a strange Edge to your Discourses to your People, whether
in public or private: Whereas, if they don't find you to be a Man of Meekness,
and Humility, Seriousness and Sanctity, it will mightily take from that
Veneration, which is necessary to prepare their Minds to receive what you say
with Advantage.

Take heed likewise to your Doctrine; especially at this Day: For the Time is
come, when many will not endure sound Doctrine, but turn away their Ears from
the Truth; and this, in Matters of no small Importance. The Evidences of
Conversion; the Necessity of good Works; the Nature of the SPIRIT'S Influence;
the Use of the Holy Scriptures, and of the Gospel Ministry, have been
egregiously misunderstood, and such false Notions touching them spread abroad,
as are destructive to Religion, and the Souls of Men. Be then upon the Watch.
Continue in the Things which thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. Hold fast the faithful Word; and be
always ready, not only to preach the Truth, but to stand up in its Defense;
showing that you are able, both to exhort, and convince the Gainsayers.

And let me further recommend it to you to have a special Guard upon your
Pulpit, and not suffer any, so far as your Influence will reach, to enter into
it, whom you have Reason to think are wanting in Gifts for Edification, or
consent not to wholesome Words, even the Words of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and to
the Doctrine which is according to Godliness: Neither would you consult the
Interest of Religion among this People, on the Order of our Church State, if
you should countenance that Itinerant Preaching, which has been the Occasion of
so much Contention in the Land. You are in Principle against this Kind of
Preaching: It may therefore reasonably be expected, you will act up to your
Principles, and not give Way to any, who may go about from Parish to Parish, as
though they had some extraordinary Mission from above. And I the rather take
Occasion to mention this, because you will, probably, have a Trial of your
Stedfastness in this Respect, as he who first gave Rise to the Itinerancy, that
has, of late, been so much in Practice, is again come among us: And if the
Practice ought to be discouraged in any, much more in him who is the Patron as
well as Origin of it.

Suffer me, Sir, to beseech you, and my Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry,
here present, will not take it amiss, if I beseech them also, to mark this Man
who has caused Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned, and to avoid him. Turn your View, my Brethren, into all Corners of the
Land: Behold the Confusion in Towns; the Contention in Churches; the
Alienations and Separations of People from one another, and from their
Ministers: Behold the Heat of Men's Spirits; the Wildness of their
Imaginations; the Errors of their Judgment; the Disorders of their Practice:
Behold the unchristian Spirit of Censoriousness that has broke loose, urging
Men on to the most uncharitable Conduct toward Neighbors and Friends; toward
Brethren by Nature and Church Fellowship; and especially toward Ministers,
though sound in the Faith, and visibly of a good Conversation in CHRIST: Take a
View, I say, of these Things, whereby many of our Churches are so crumbling to
Pieces, that there is a Call almost every Week, for the Help of Ecclesiastical
Councils, in one Place, or another; and then consider, whether it is not high
Time to put on Courage, and make a Stand for the Support of Religion and good
Order. And is it possible you should do this, if you strengthen the Influence
of him, who is the true Source of most of this Mischief? If you invite him into
your Pulpits, and teach your People to have his Person in Admiration?

Perhaps, it will be said, these mischievous Things are only accidental
Effects, and not to be charged upon him. So far from it, that they are the
unavoidable Consequence of that Spirit in which he appeared; and might easily
have been foreseen by any one tolerably acquainted with humane Nature. What
might be expected, in the ordinary Course of Things, but that People should be
censorious and uncharitable, speak slightily of Ministers, and judge them to be
carnal and unconverted, when the Man they admired, and followed, seldom
preached, but he leavened their Minds with evil Surmisings of this Kind, and
spoke of the Generality of them, in his Writings, conveyed into all Parts of
the Land, as talking of an unknown, unfelt CHRIST? What might be expected but
Alienations and Separations from Ministers, as useless to the Purpose of saving
Souls, when People were taught, that the Deadness in their Congregations was
owing to their having dead Men to preach to them, and these dead Men were
compared to the Devil in Point of Serviceableness to promote their Conversion?
What might be expected, but that People should entertain an ill Opinion of our
Colleges, and the Governors and Instructors of them, and have their Minds
filled with Jealousies lest their Sons should be trained up in Error, when they
were publicly told, That their Light was become Darkness; yea, Darkness that
might be felt? What might be expected but that People should run into all
Manner of Wildness, Disorder and Error, when they were instructed to give heed
to Impulses and Impressions, and govern themselves by mere Pressures on their
Minds, taking them for Communications from the Deity? It Is impossible but such
bad Pinciples should appear in corresponding bad Effects. And shall the Man who
had the first and greatest Hand in disseminating these Principles all over the
Country, be again caressed, and distinguished from all other Ministers, as
though, in Compare with him, they were not worthy to preach the Gospel? Are we
willing to see an Increase of our unhappy Disorders? And yet, this will,
undoubtedly, be the Case, if Ministers don't now appear openly, and boldly, to
prevent that Misconduct, which has already proved so detrimental to these
Churches.

I fear there is a great deal of Guilt lying upon Ministers, in doing no more,
in the beginning of these Times, to check the Progress of those Evils, which we
are now groaning under: And to speak freely, I attribute it principally to
their want of Courage to exhibit a due Testimony, in Season, against Errors and
Disorders, and going on steadily to show their Disapprobation of them, that
they are risen to so great a Height. And if they discover the same fluctuating
irresolute Temper now, suffering those, who have been the chief Sowers of
Discord, to take their own Way, and do as they think fit, they may see Reason
to repent of their Cowardice when it is too late.

I know it is the Thought of some, that this Gentleman is now come with another
spirit. But if he still assumes the Character of an Itinerant, and retains his
Humor of traveling about from Town to Town, all over this, and the
neighboring Provinces, where the Gospel is already preached by fixed Pastors,
well qualified for their Work, it is not fit he should be encouraged. The Bible
knows of no such Visitor of the Churches. And the obvious Language of the Man
who takes upon him this Character is, That the Pastors of the Churches are not
furnished for their Business, or are negligent and unfaithful in it; or that
he, for his Part, is one of superior Seize, more sanctified and better
gifted; or has some extraordinary Commission setting him above all other
Ministers. And the Tendency of the Thing it self is bad. It strikes directly at
the Order of our Ecclesiastical Constitution, and threatens the entire
Demolition of it. And can our Churches subsist without Order? It Is the Strength
as well as Glory of all Societies whether Christian, or Civil: Nor is it
possible they should long continue in being without it. And it naturally tends
to Strife, and Envy, and Schism, and an undue Preference of one Minister to
another, to the great Hindrance of the Gospel. We have already seen such
Effects as these. And shall not this put us upon our Guard? If it does not, we
shall throw our selves into further Difficulties with our Eyes open.

I know it will be said, Good has been done by the Itinerations of this
Gentleman. And who is ignorant that GOD may bring Good out of Evil. The
Question is, Whether this Itinerating Practice, in the Manner it has been taken
up, does not tend, in the natural Course of Things, to all Kind of Disorders?
And if some Good has come of it, has it not thrown the Country into a
Convulsion? Has not the Effect of it been, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath,
Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Bitterness, Clamor, Evil-speaking? And are not
these manifestly Works of the Flesh? If ye have bitter Envying and Strife in
your Hearts, the Apostle peremptorily declares, this is not the Wisdom that
comes from above. And where Envy and Strife is, he farther declares, there is
Confusion and every evil Work. And this same Apostle has set us Ministers an
Example, how we should conduct in such an unhappy State of Things. When there
was Envy, and Strife, and Division in the Church of Corinth, does he stand by
as a silent Spectator? No, but sets himself to do all that lay in his Power to
hinder the Progress of these evil Things. And shall not we do likewise? And if
we exert our selves to the utmost, can we do amiss, when we have an inspired
Apostle for our Example?

I am aware I have exposed my self in what I have now offered to the ill
Opinion of many; and it is probable they will reflect very severely on me: Not
that I am conscious that I have given just Ground of the least Offense to any.
I would willingly please all Men, in all Things: But wherein I cannot please
Men, and be the Servant of CHRIST, I am at no Loss to know my Duty; and I thank
GOD, I am in a Temper of Mind, in the present Case, to do it. Men may call me
an Opposer of that which is good, or bestow on me any other odious Name: But no
such Things move me, while I have the Testimony of my Conscience, that I aim at
the Honor of CHRIST, and the Establishment of these Churches in Peace, and
Truth, and Holiness. We ought, my Brethren, to speak our Minds, and behave like
Men, in this Time of Danger; neither falling in with the Humor of the
Multitude, or fearing their Resentments. Alas! what is the good Word of Man, in
Compare with the Approbation of GOD, and our own Consciences? And whom should
we fear, Man, the utmost Extent of whose Power reaches no further than the
Body? Or GOD, who can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell? We shall, no Doubt,
meet with frequent Trials of our Faith and Patience, and all our other Graces,
in a Day of such uncommon Trouble. The People in this Land have a more than
ordinary Itch to run after Strangers. So it was in former Days; And we have
seen it to be so in our own Day. And this Weakness, we may expect, will be an
Occasion of great Difficulty; and it may prove as great a Temptation: But if we
don't, in all suitable Ways, endeavor to guard against it, the Difficulty will
probably be much greater. HE that is come among us may bring us into still
greater Bondage; to whom therefore we should not give Place, no, not for an
Hour, that the Truth of the Gospel may continue among us. And do you think, if
we put on Courage, and behave with Resolution, it will turn out to our
Disadvantage? It may, possibly, for a while; but in the End we shall be no
Losers. We serve a good Master. And if we are faithful, he will amply reward
us, in Proportion to all the Trials we are called to pass through, for his
Sake; and for the Sake of the Souls for whom he died: We shall hereafter be
crowned with the far exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory.

I go on now to address a few Words to the People usually meeting in this
House. Beloved in the LORD, we join with you in bowing the Knee to the glorious
Head of the Church, who has given you Oneness of Heart in the Choice of a Man
to be set over the Congregation. Accept him as a Gift from the ascended,
enthroned JESUS: And do whatever lies in your Power to assist and encourage him
in his Ministrations among you. Free him, as much as may be, from the Cares of
the World, that he may give himself wholly to these Things. Do ye not know,
that they which minister about holy Things, live of the Things of the Temple?
And they which wait at the Altar, are Partakers with the Altar? Even so has
the LORD ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel?
And if he, who is your Minister, sows unto you spiritual Things, you will not
esteem it a great Thing, if he should reap of your carnal Things. Who goes a
Warfare any Time at his own Charge? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of
the Fruit thereof? Or, who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk of the
Flock? Say I these Things as a Man? Or says not the Law the same also? And you
will, doubtless, find your Account in well supporting your Pastor. He will, by
this Means, be able to make better Provision for your Souls. And what says the
LORD of Hosts? Prove me now herewith, if I will not pour you out a Blessing. --
And as you have selected him from others to be your Pastor, let him have the
Preference in your Affections. Don't suffer any wandering Stranger to alienate
your Hearts from him: This, in the End, will be unprofitable for you: But
cherish an inward real Regard to him. Honor him in the LORD, and esteem him
very highly for his Work's Sake. -- Don't be shy to make him acquainted with
your spiritual Trials and Difficulties. Don't go to others to the Neglect, or
rather Contempt of him; as though he had not Skill in such Matters, or would
not lay himself out, in all proper Ways, to suit and serve you. This has been a
Fault too common in these Times: And it has too much tended to that glorying in
Men, which an inspired Apostle has cautioned against. -- Don't be offended, if
he deals plainly and faithfully with you; telling you of your Sins, and
reproving you for them. He would be greatly wanting in his Duty, if he should
suffer Sin upon you. He is directed of GOD to reprove and rebuke, as well as
exhort, with all Long suffering. -- Don't think it strange if you should
discern in him Frailties and Imperfections. This is no more than may be
expected, considering he is a Man of like Passions with yourselves. You should
therefore cover his Infirmities with the Mantle of Charity, and ever be in a
Disposition, not to aggravate his Failings, but to make all kind Allowances,
exercising Love and Candor toward him. -- And let me beseech you, Brethren,
for the LORD JESUS CHRIST's Sake, and for the Love of the SPIRIT, to strive in
your Prayers to GOD for him. Make Mention of him without ceasing in your
Families and Closets, that he may be a rich Blessing to your selves, and to
your Children. -- Above all, let your profiting, under his Ministry, appear to
all around you. Think it not enough, that the Gospel by him is preached to you.
This alone will not be sufficient. It must have its proper Influence, both on your
Hearts and Lives; on your Hearts, conforming them to the Image of the blessed
GOD, and his Son JESUS CHRIST; and on your Lives, making them such, in all
Sobriety, Righteousness, and Godliness, as the Gospel requires: In order
thereto, let your Minds be open to Instruction. -- Be ready to embrace the
Truth in the Love of it. -- Receive the Word with Meekness and Faith, and be
ever willing to yield Obedience to it: So will you honor your Profession, and
be the Glory of your Pastor; his Joy here, and Crown in the Day of the
Manifestation of the SON of GOD.

I cannot break off without lamenting the unhappy Dissension there has been in
this Town, whereby the Redeemer has been dishonored, Religion wounded, and
Satan gratified. Who have been the blameable Causes, is not for me to say; nor
what might have prevented it. -- We heartily wish a Blessing out of the House
of the LORD to the other Church and Pastor. Grace, Mercy, and Peace, be
multiplied to them from the GOD and FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST! And
wherein any, on either Part, have said, or done any Thing amiss, the good LORD
pardon them for his Mercies Sake in JESUS CHRIST!

And may the GOD of Love and Peace unite Ministers and Churches in this Day of
Contention! And may we all finally have Admission granted to us into that
coming Kingdom of GOD, where no Offense shall be given, or taken; where there
shall be no Variance or Strife, but Love and Charity in Perfection forever!
Till which blessed Time, let us encourage our selves to hope for the
Fulfillment of that Prayer of our SAVIOR for the Professors of his Religion,
John 17. 21. That they all may be ONE, AS THOU FATHER ART IN ME, AND I IN THEE;
that they also may be ONE IN US: That the World may believe that thou have sent
me.

AMEN.

