Mr. Eliot's SERMON ON An inordinate Love of the World.

An inordinate Love of the World inconsistent with the Love of GOD.

A SERMON Preached at the Thursday Lecture in BOSTON, August 2. 1744.

By Andrew Eliot, M. A. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

MATTHEW. VI. 24. No Man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one,
and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other; ye
cannot serve GOD and Mammon.

JAM. IV. 4. -- Know ye not that the Friendship of the World is Enmity with
GOD? Whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of GOD.

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1744.

An inordinate Love of the World inconsistent with the Love of GOD.
I. JOHN ii. 15. -- If any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in
him.


THESE Words immediately follow a Dehortation against the Love of the World;
Love not the World, neither the Things that are in the World. This Prohibition
is addressed to the various Ranks of Disciples, young Men, Chidlren and
Fathers; and it is a Caution which all need to have enforced: The World
naturally steals away our Hearts from GOD, we are imperceptibly engaged in the
Pursuit of it, and are drawn into the Snare before we are sensible of the
Danger.

Our Text is a Reason for the Dissuasion, taken from the Inconsistency of the
Love of the World with the Love of GOD. If any Man love the World, the Love of
the Father is not in him. The Words intend much the same with those of our
Savior Matthew. vi. 24.
, No Man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other; ye cannot serve
GOD and Mammon.

In speaking to the Words, I shall endeavor these two Things.

First, To state the true Meaning of them. And Secondly, To open and illustrate
the Truth contained in them, or to show that such a Love of the World, as is
here intended, is utterly inconsistent with the Love of GOD.
First, For the Explanation of the Words. If any Man love the World, the Love
of the Father is not in him. By the World is here doubtless intended those
Enjoyments of the World which tend to seduce us, which are so suited to the
Corruptions of Men, as that they prove a Temptation and Share to them: These
are well sum'd up by the Apostle in the Verse following our Text under these
three Heads, The Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of
Life. By the Lust of the Flesh, as it here stands distinguished, I apprehend,
is intended those Things which tend to provoke our sensual Appetites, and
inflame our Desires after fleshly Delights. By the Lust of the Eyes, is to be
understood those Things which tend to feed our Covetousness, when we earnestly
desire and eagerly pursue those Things which our Eyes have seen. By the Pride
of Life, is intended those Things which tend to raise or cherish our Pride;
such as the Honors and Dignities of the World, or whatever else tends to
gratify our ambitious Views, to exalt us in our own Esteem, or we are disposed
to take a Pride in.

If any Man love the World. By loving the World, cannot, I think, be understood
every Kind of Love to any of the Enjoyments of it; this would be to prohibit
the Exercise of those natural Principles which are implanted in us by the God
of Nature, and which are necessary for us in our present State. Some Regard to
the World and the Things of it is necessary to keep the World in good Order,
and for our comfortable Subsistence here; yea, for the Discharge of many Duties
which God requires of us. GOD commands that Husbands love their Wives, and
Parents would never do their Duty to their Children, if they had not a real
Affection for them; Diligence in our particular Calling is our Duty, but how
apt would Mankind be to indulge themselves in Laziness, were it not that they
have a Love to the World, and some Desire to have a larger Portion of the
Things of it? Nor can I see any Evil in such Desires, so long as our Love to
these sublunary Enjoyments is subordinate to our Love to GOD, and we seek them
with an humble Submission to the divine Will, and possess them with a
Disposition to resign them whenever GOD in his Providence calls for them; A
Love to the World which is accompanied with such a Frame and Temper is, I
think, lawful and perfectly consistent with our Love to GOD -- It Is then an
inordinate Love to the World which the Apostle here condemns, such a Love as
influences us to be immoderate in our Pursuit after it, and unwilling to part
with it. Some of the Signs of such an inordinate Love I shall have Occasion to
speak of presently.

If any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him, i. e. he has
not that supreme Love to GOD, which is the Characteristick of the true
Christian, he remains in his natural Enmity to GOD, and has never experienced
that Change in his Soul by which he may be denominated a Christian. -- This I
take to be the plain Sense of the Words, and without troubling you with any
critical Remarks upon them, I proceed

Secondly, To open and illustrate the Truth contained in them, or to show that
an inordinate Love to the World is inconsistent with the Love of GOD, Here I
shall show

I. When our Love to the World may be called an inordinate Love.

For Answer

1. When the World so takes up our Thoughts as to exclude the Thought of GOD
and Religion, then our Love to the World may be said to be inordinate. To
contemplate on GOD and Divine Things is most worthy our reasonable Natures,
most delightful and most profitable to the renewed Soul: It is a Consideration
which demands our closest Attention, how we may obtain the Favor of GOD, and
how we may glorify and honor him; and it argues too great a Regard to the
World, when we are so attached to it, as that we cannot presently call off our
Thoughts from it to those Things which are of infinitely greater Importance to
us. While we are in the World, we are necessarily engaged in worldly Business,
and it must take up much of our Thoughts; but surely it ought not to have all,
there ought to be some Time allotted for the Care of our Souls, which is by Way
of Eminence the one Thing needful; and though the World, or the Care of those
committed to us may employ the greater Part of our Time; yet, if our Hearts are
not too much set upon it, our Thoughts will frequently run upon spiritual and
divine Subjects: Yea, when we are engaged in worldly Business, these will be
easy and natural to us. Our Love to the World must be an inordinate Love, if we
allow our Minds to dwell wholly upon it, and never think of Divine Things, or
if religious Thoughts are burdensome, and we find more Delight in contemplating
upon the World and the Things of it: When we put by religious Considerations as
Felix did Paul to a more convenient Season, have our Minds engaged upon our
temporal Affairs all the Day long, contriving how we may buy and sell and get
gain, and imagine it enough if we contemplate of spiritual Things at the Times
of our stated Devotions: Nor will it be so easy a Thing, as many think it is,
to bring ourselves sutably to attend to these Subjects, and to fix our Thoughts
upon them; when our Minds have been for a long Time otherwise engaged;
especially, when they have been employed upon Subjects so much more agreeable
to our Corruptions: In such a Case, you will find it extremely difficult to get
your Heart disengaged from the World; it will steal upon you in your
Retirements, when you go aside professedly to meditate on Things of a spiritual
Nature; it will intrude itself into your Devotions, and take off your Thoughts
when you would engage them elsewhere. Our Care about the World is then
immoderate, and our Love to it inordinate, when we put aside religious Thoughts
when they come into our Minds, and will give them no Place, but on those Times
which we have expressly set apart for them; surely then it is, if such Thoughts
never come into our Minds; if the Cares of the World take up all our Time; if
these lie down with us, and are first with us when we awake; Such a Frame of
Mind is a certain Indication that our Souls are set upon them, and that we have
a greater Regard to them than to any Thing else -- As a Man thinks in his
Heart, so is he. Prove. 23.7.
If then, any one thinks of the World with most Frequency and Delight, he is
a worldly Man.

2. Our Love to the World is then inordinate, when we are discontented because
we have not more of it. Though their ought to be a prudent Care about the
Things of the World, and it is in our Nature to have some Love to it, and we
may lawfully pursue after it; yet our Care and our Pursuits are to be
restrained within the Bounds of Reason and Religion, and we should submit to
the Allotments of Divine Providence without murmuring or repining. It argues a
very unbecoming Temper, and too great a Love to the Things of this present
World; when we are fretful because we have not more, and envious toward those
that have. Some, when they look upon others, who abound in temporal Blessings
and seem to have all Things comfortable and pleasant about them, are ready to
say within themselves; why, I have taken as much Pains and have had as fair
Opportunities as my Neighbors, but I an't thus prosper'd: This Man has Honor
and Respect shown him, I am slighted and despised; another has amassed great
Possessions I am still low in the World. Well, and what then I pray? so GOD is
pleased in his Providence to order, and its all right and just as it should be.
You love the World too well, if you an't willing GOD should govern it as
pleases him, but are uneasy and dissatisfied because he does not give you as
much as he does others, or as you desire. GOD has a sovereign Right to dispose
of all Things here, and it is our indispensable Duty to submit to his Will
whatsoever it is concerning us. If then you are in a contrary Frame, and cannot
be easy with what GOD bestows upon you because you have not more, it argues a
too great Regard for the Things of the World, and that your Desires after it
are not kept within due Bounds, since the mere Want of it puts you into an
undutiful Frame toward the blessed GOD. We are ready to think there is no
Danger of our loving the World too well, when we have not a great Share of it:
But a covetous Temper may be as evident and prevail as much in those, who are
denied an Abundance of the good Things of this Life, as in those who abound;
though they have them not, yet they crave them, and an't contented without
them: What can this proceed from but an inordinate Love to them? They discover
their Regard to them by their Cravings after them, as the others do by their
Attachment to them when they have them: Was our Love to the World under due
Regulations, though we should take a prudent Care about it, yet if our
Endeavors were not crowned with Success, it would not disturb us; much less
should we discover a discontented murmuring Frame of Spirit.

3. Our Love to the World is then inordinate, when we take indirect Methods to
gain it. Under this Head I rank not only those who steal and are guilty of the
more notorious Acts of Fraud and Injustice, but those also, who involve
themselves in Debts which they have no reasonable Prospect of honestly
discharging, or improve what is due to another without his Knowledge or
Consent; such as are disposed to take every Advantage they can of their
Neighbors, and embrace every Opportunity to gripe and oppress them; such as
engage in more Business than they can accomplish and attend the Duties of
Religion, or engage in unlawful Business: These all take indirect Methods to
gain the World. I know many such pass for honest Men, and maintain a good
Character; but their Character is better than they deserve. There are fair open
Ways enough of gaining a Subsistence and Livelihood in the World, Men need not
make Use of such mean Methods and so contrary to the Genius of the Gospel; such
a Behavior can proceed from nothing but an unlawful Desire of Gain, they are
eagerly set upon growing rich, and have a Prospect of gaining more in this Way,
than in any other. They may indeed persuade themselves that there is nothing
amiss in their Conduct, because they are not guilty of open palpable Acts of
Injustice: but it is their Love to the World that deceives them; did they
impartially examine, many such Acts as now they think just and honest would
appear as really evil as open Robbery or Theft. That my Meaning may be quite
plain, I shall instance in two or three Cases too common among us wherein I
think Men take indirect Methods to gain the World, agreeable to the Hints I
just now gave -- Such then pursue the World in an unlawful Way, who involve
themselves so deeply in Debt, that they can have no Prospect of discharging
their Obligations with the least Measure of Punctuality, and so are
necessitated to break their Word, if they have made any Promises; or at best to
cheat and defraud their Creditors: Who keep that Money to trade upon, or to lay
out to their Advantage, which they know to be justly due to another, without
his Knowledge or Consent, yea, when they know he wants it himself; Who never
will pay their just Debts, till they are obliged to it; but for the Sake of a
small Advantage, which they hope to reap to themselves, keep the honest
Creditor out of his just Due as long as they can. Call this what you please, it
is no better than Knavery and Cheating: The Money is not their own, nor have
they any Right to use it; and it appears to me very little worse to take their
Neighbor's Interest out of his Chest, than to keep him out of what is due to
him, when there is any Possibility off discharging the Debt; I say, when there
is any Possibility of discharging the Debt, because an unforeseen Series of
Accidents may put it beyond their Power to do as they ought and really desire
to do: I speak of those, who will not pay their Debts when they are able, or
involve themselves more deeply in Debt, then they have any Reason to hope, by a
common Blessing upon their Endeavors, they shall be able to pay according to
their Contract with and the consequent Expectation of their Creditors. --
Another instance, wherein Men take indirect Methods to gain the World, is this;
a Man sees his Neighbor in absolute Necessity for a Sum of Money or something
else, which he can easily help him to, and which he knows or thinks he cannot
procure elsewhere; upon this he demands very large Interest, or an extravagant
Price, much more than he would pretend to ask, if his Neighbor was not in such
extreme Necessity that he could not do without it: If this is not Extortion, I
confess I am ignorant what is. It is equally unjust, when one Man imposes upon
the Ignorance of another, puts off that Commodity for cheap, which he knows in
his own Conscience is dear, or that for good, which he knows to be bad; when he
knows that the Buyer is ignorant and depends upon him for Direction: This is a
complicated Crime, there is Breach of Trust as well as Fraud and Oppression. And
yet, in these Ways how many are pursuing after Estates? In short, with many the
Role of Trading seems to be only this; every one to get what he can, and, if he
don't actually steal, in what Way he can: The Worth of the Thing, the Value of
their Labor or what would be a reasonable Profit scarce come into
Consideration. Others there are, who take such a Multiplicity of Business into
their Hands, that they cannot accomplish it without a Neglect of the more
important Concerns; they are for driving the World before them and scruple no
Methods, that will not absolutely destroy their Character, to gain the Things of
it; They are always in a Hurry and can spare no Time to attend the Duties of
Religion: Now what can such a mean base sinful Temper as this proceed from but
an inordinate Love of the World? Would Men be thus eager after it, would they
for the Sake of it so abuse and oppress their Neighbors, if they had a just
Contempt of it? Would they neglect what is plainly their Duty for the Sake of
it, if they did not love it too well? I allow there may be some Cases, when we
may defer or omit what would otherwise be our Duty for the Sake of taking Care
of our temporal Estate: As it may be a Man's Duty to omit praying in his Family
at the stated Season, when he has a large Interest at Stake, or great Sums in
imminent Hazard. But such Allowances in extraordinary Cases will by no Means
excuse an habitual Neglect of these or such like Duties: It will not be any
sufficient Excuse for such a Conduct to say, that your proper Business obliges
you to omit your Duty; for the Case is plain; If it is so, your Business is
unlawful, and you ought to lay it aside and look out for another Calling; But I
believe such Pretenses of want of Time for the Duties of Religion are usually
false and groundless, Men may attend them if they will, and find Time enough
for their worldly Business. Observe here, I speak only of those with Respect to
Family Duties, who are at home with their Families; and not those who are
necessarily called at a Distance from them, as are our Seafaring Brethren and
others. I speak of those who make a Practice of going out from their Families
so early in the Morning and returning so late at Night under Pretense or really
for the Sake of following their Calling, as that they have no Time to offer up
their Morning and Evening Sacrifices of Prayer and Praise. -- Such Men are
certainly actuated by an inordinate Love to the World.

4. Our Love to the World is inordinate when our Anxiety about it leads us to
distrust the good Providence of GOD. This is the Temper of many: As others are
discontented because they have not an Abundance of the good Things of this
Life; so these, although they have them, are perpetually restless and uneasy,
through a slavish Fear of losing them. The ambitious Man cannot sleep, nor take
any Comfort in his exalted Station, lest some Change of Affairs should happen,
and he should be deprived of his Honors. The rich Man is harrass'd with
continual Fears lest he should lose his Substance; when he is awake he imagines
it will be stole when he is asleep; and the same disquieting Fears disturb his
Rest, he dreams of Thieves and Robbers and a thousand Dangers when none is near
him. They forget that the Most High governs the World, and orders all Things in
it with consummate Wisdom, and watches over it with infinite Vigilance; and
that he is able to preserve to them the Blessings which he has bestowed upon
them; these Considerations would Influence them to put their Trust in him, and
to depend upon the Care of his Providence; which would still their Fears and
quiet their Minds about Futurity. -- Anxiety about the Things of the World,
always argues a Distrust of GOD and his Providence; and so it evidences too
great a Love to the World; for if we loved it in Measure, we should be resigned
to the divine Will about it, and leave our selves and ours at the Disposal of
our heavenly Father. I tell you again, I speak not against a prudent Care of
these Things; so far as this consists with a humble Resignation to the Divine
Will, and a Dependence on the good Providence of GOD, it is our incumbent Duty.
I speak of such an anxious Concern about worldly Enjoyments as unfits us for
Duty, for Conversation, and deprives us of all Comfort in Life. Such is the
Care of Parents for their Children, when they cannot bear them out of their
Sight, and if at any Time they are absent from them, are filled with
distressing Fears lest some Accident should befall them, although the same careful
Providence watches over them then as at other Times. Such is the Anxiety of the
Merchant, or those that have smaller Sums at Sea, or elsewhere, lest they
should lose their Substance by Storms, Enemies or other Ways; when they ought
to leave their Care with GOD and commit themselves and their's to his good
Providence. Such a Temper of Mind is a certain Indication that our Hearts are
too much set on the World.

5. Our Love to the World is inordinate, if we are loath to part with it, when
there is proper Occasion for it, or are angry when GOD in his Providence takes
it from us. It is an evident Truth; that, as GOD has given us all we enjoy, so,
he has a Right to command us how we shall dispose of it, or, if he please, to
take it from us: It argues therefore, that we have a greater Love to the World
than we ought to have, if we are unwilling to improve what he gives us
according to his Will and Command, or murmur and fret, when he sees fit to
deprive us of it: If we can see Objects of Charity and not relieve them; or if
it troubles us when we meet with them; if we put them off with good Words,
instead of generous Actions; or if we give grudgingly and and with Reluctance:
If its a Burden to us to support the Gospel, or to bestow of our Substance for
other pious Uses; one who has only a religious Regard to these Things would
give as freely as he receives, he considers his Estate as a Talent given him to
improve, for the Improvement of which he must be accountable to GOD; under the
Influence of this Consideration, his chief Care is, how he shall dispose of
these Things so, as will best answer the Ends for which they were given him; he
rejoices therefore, when he has an Opportunity of serving GOD or relieving his
Brethren, and is willing to part with all for the Sake of CHRIST: I mean not,
that, in ordinary Cases, any one is obliged to give all he has in Charity; the
State of the World or of the Church of CHRIST is not such as to require it; but
a good Proportion of our Income ought to be reserved for this Purpose; and a
greater as there shall be a Call in Providence for more. How vastly too great
then is their Love to the World, who cannot bear to spend a Penny either to
promote the Kingdom of CHRIST or to relieve the Necessitous, and had rather
their Money should rust in their Chest, than take it out to keep a Brother from
starving?

It proves the same inordinate Love to the World, if we find a Disposition to
repine at the Providence of GOD, when he takes away any wordly Enjoyment; if we
cannot cheerfully, at least without murmuring, give up our Character, Estate and
every Thing else, when GOD calls for them, or acquiesce in the Providence which
deprives us of them; if we are apt to think hardly of GOD and behave
undutifully toward him when he is pleased to remove Relatives near and dear to
us. We ought never to set our Affections upon any Creature to such a Degree, as
that the Loss of it should overbear our Reason, unfit us for Duty, or disturb
and disquiet us in it; but should maintain such an Indifference toward them,
as that whether with or without them, we could still bless GOD, and think him a
good GOD and a merciful Father.

6. When Men pursue the World with greater Eagerness than they do the Favor of
GOD and the Treasures and Joys of Heaven, then is their Love to the World an
inordinate Love. When they are warm, eager and diligent to secure any worldly
Advantage, and are cool, lazy and indolent about obtaining an Interest in
Christ and securing the Treasures of Heaven: When they make the World, the main
Object of their Pursuit, and Religion a Thing by the by: When they neglect the
Care of their Souls rather than the Care of the World: When they are very
sollicitous to secure the Honors, Riches and Pleasures of this World, and are
under no Concern to be found unto Praise, Honor and Glory in the other World:
Such a Temper evidently discovers a too great Love to the World; because the
most valuable Objects ought always to be pursued with the greatest Diligence;
as then the Things of the World are no Way to be compared with the Advantages
which accrue from the Love and Favor of God; so our Love to them must be
inordinate if we prefer them so as more earnestly to follow after them.

7. Our Love to the World is too great, if the Enjoyments of it afford us
greater Delight than the Service of GOD and Communion with him. We always
delight most in those Things which we love best; the Service and Company of
others is pleasant and agreeable in Proportion to the Love we bear to them;
according to this Rule we may determine which has the highest Place in our
Affections GOD or the World: If we delight in the Service of GOD and prize the
Enjoyment of him above every Thing here, then he has the supreme Place; but if
we take more Delight in the Things of the World, it is because we love it best;
and we certainly love the World too well, if we love it better than GOD who is
the supreme Good. Their Love to the World is therefore inordinate who serve God
with an unwilling Mind; who think it hard to be taken off from their worldly
Business to attend the Duties of Religion, and account the Sabbath and other
Times which they spend in religious Exercises, to be lost Time, and long to get
into the World again; who cannot keep their Hearts engaged, when they draw near
to GOD with their Bodies; but suffer their Tho'ts to wander with the Eyes of
the Fool unto the Ends of the Earth -- Such Men have no Taste for the Pleasures
of Religion, nor do they prize the Manifestations of Divine Love: The utmost
Desire of their Souls and the plain Language of their Practice is who will show
us any worldly Good. If they lose any Part of their earthly Substance, they can
grieve and mourn, nor can they take Satisfaction and Comfort from the
Consideration of the infinite Fullness of Christ, and the heavenly Treasures
which are promised in the Word of GOD: But they can bear the Absence of GOD and
the Light of his Countenance without any Concern of Mind or Emotion of Spirit,
and have no Uneasiness at the Want of Communion with him. If the World smiles
upon them, they discover no Solicitude about spiritual Pleasures, or the
Evidences of the Divine Favor. Such a Temper is a clear Evidence that we love
the World too well: Every Thing ought to please us according to its real Value
and the Degree of solid Pleasure it is capable of affording: If then the
Pleasures of Religion, which result from Communion with and the Enjoyment of
GOD are superior to any which the World can afford us, as I take it for granted
they are, it argues that we have too great a Value for the Enjoyments of the
World, if we prefer them to the other. There cannot be a clearer Evidence of an
inordinate Love to the World, than when we pursue after the Pleasures of it
with greater Eagerness than we do spiritual Enjoyments, when we prize them more
in Possession, and mourn more for the Absence of them.

8. When Mon pride themselves in the Things of this World, it proves that they
have an inordinate Love to them. This is extremely natural to Man; to value
themselves upon such Things as distinguish them from others, and to despise
those who in these Respects are inferior to them; hence they expect great
Deference and Respect, are offended if they are not consulted in every Thing,
are touchy and waspish, will not bear Contradiction or endure Control: Thus, its
strange to see, how some empty Wretches expect a Deference to their Judgment
because they are rich; as if Riches procured them Brains and they were Men of
Sense because they had large Possessions: So likewise as to Honor and other
Things, they oftentimes put Men above themselves, so that they are in a Rage at
the least Slight, yea, if they are not preferred before others. Now what can
such a proud haughty Spirit proceed from, but an Over-valuation of those
Qualifications they are endowed with, or those Enjoyments they possess? They
think more highly of them than they ought to think: This must be the Case when
we pride ourselves in any worldly Enjoyment, because they are none of them so
valuable, as that we can have any Reason to be proud of them; and this high
Opinion of them must proceed from an undue Affection to them: Those Objects
which we love, we are always apt to think better of and to imagine them more
valuable than they really are: Our Love to them causes us to look upon them
with Prejudice, it blinds our Eyes, so that we don't see the Imperfections of
the Object we love, and fancy a Thousand Excellencies which are only imaginary.
This is the Foundation of Pride, this is therefore an Evidence of an inordinate
Love to the World.

9. and lastly, Our Love to the World is then inordinate, when we desire only
to keep within the Bounds of Duty, and allowedly proceed to the very Limits of
what is lawful. A Christian ought never to be contented without Growth in
Grace, it should be his continual Care to get at the greatest Distance from Sin
and to press toward Perfection. But how contrary to this is the Conduct of a
great Part of the Christian World, of those who make a Profession of Religion?
They would be Christians and that is all; they desire just to escape Hell and
get to Heaven and no more; they retain their Relish for sensual Pleasures, as
did the Israelites for the Leeks and Onions of Egypt; they have not such a Love
to Holiness as that they desire to be more holy; they will readily gratify their
Lusts and pursue the World, as far as they imagine they may venture to do it
without forfeiting their Title to Heaven: As for such as behave with more
Strictness, and endeavor to be Examples of Holiness, they stigmatize them as
Precisians, Pharisees and what not, while they themselves behave with such
Levity, and approach at least so near the Borders of Vice, as is a Scandal to
Religion and a Disgrace to their holy Profession. Now what can such a Behavior
as this proceed from but an inordinate Love to the World? These Men have not
lost their Affection to it, though they may have restrained themselves from the
more gross Acts of Sin; they flatter themselves that they have renounced the
World, whereas they have only reformed their Lives after a Sort, but their
Hearts are the same, and they retain the same Affection to the World. Why else
have they such an Inclination toward it and the Things of it? Why do they give
themselves such a License, to go to the utmost Bounds of what is lawful, and
allow themselves in the Gratification of their sensual Appetites, so far as is
not plainly sinful; When they ought to endeavor to get at the greatest
Distance from the Ways of Sin, and as near to Perfection as they possibly can?
This is a certain Evidence that they have an inordinate Love to this World and
the Things of it. Thus I have shown, by such Hints as came to my Mind, what it
is to have an inordinate Love to the World.

I come now to say Secondly.

II. That an inordinate Love of the World is inconsistent with the Love of GOD.
But here I would premise, that no particular Act of inordinate Love to the
World is enough to determine that we have not Love to GOD: Alas! We are all too
worldly carnal and sensual: The World steals upon the best and too often
interrupts their Communion with GOD and draws away their Hearts from him. But I
speak of the habitual Frame and Temper of the Mind; when an inordinate Love of
the World is the prevailing reigning Disposition of the Soul, the Love of GOD
is not there. -- For first,

1. Where there is true Love to GOD he has the supreme Place in the Affections:
That Discovery of him which attracts our Love to him at all, will influence us
to love him above every Thing else. -- There is naturally in our Souls a
Principle of Enmity to the blessed GOD, which results from this Consideration,
that he is holy, just and true, and that we are odious to his Holiness,
obnoxious to his Justice and exposed to the Execution of his Threatenings: This
Enmity therefore can never be removed, 'till the Cause is taken away; which
must be by a Change both of our State and our Nature: Which Change is effected
when GOD is pleased effectually to call us by his Grace: Our State is then
changed by GOD's free justifying Act on Account of the Righteousness of CHRIST
imputed to us on our receiving him by Faith; our Nature is changed by the
Operation of the blessed Spirit working all his Graces within us. When this
Change is effected, GOD is no longer an Object of Hatred; the Cause of our
Enmity is removed, we are not the Objects of his Anger or Displeasure; he is
reconciled to us and engaged for us; and his Goodness in showing Mercy to such
guilty Rebels, as we all are in our natural State, now recommends him to our
Love, as much as his other Attributes rendered him hateful to us before: Yea,
those severer Attributes of the Deity are now amiable and lovely: his Holiness
especially, when we are sanctified ourselves, excites our Esteem and Love; and
all his Excellencies, which now shine upon the Soul with peculiar Luster,
especially as they are manifested in the Face of Jesus Christ, have this
attractive Influence. And the same Consideration which induces us to love him
at all will constrain us to love him above every Thing else: We love every
Object according to the Goodness or Excellency there appears to us be in it;
as then after we are changed and renewed by the Holy Spirit, GOD evidently
appears to the Soul the best and most excellent Being; so he will love him
best: He will then see the Emptiness and Vanity of the Creature, when compared
with GOD, and therefore will despise it. That which induces any to love the
World, is the Good which they think there is in it, it is Suitableness to their
Desires, Appetites and Inclinations and the Prospect of Happiness they have
from it: But the renewed Soul has his Inclinations so changed that he no longer
Desires the sinful Pleasures of the World, nor any Portion of it any further
than is needful for his Subsistence, or than he can improve to the Glory of his
Maker. He is convinced that the World cannot yield him Happiness; that there is
that and infinitely more in GOD, than he can expect from the World; and he
looks for Happiness from him and not from sublunary Enjoyments. -- As then GOD,
by the Discoveries which he makes of himself to the true Christian, appears to
him not of himself to the true Christian, appears to him not only the greatest
but the best of Beings; as all he hopes for is from him; and he sees evidently,
that no Creature is of any Service, or can yield any Pleasure, or be of any
Value, but by his Appointment; so he loves him with a supreme Affection; yea,
he despises every Thing in Comparison with him. It Is true, he still loves the
World, but with a subordinate Love, according to its real Use, and in its
proper Place. Where there is not such a supreme Love to God, there is no Love
to him; this is the natural necessary Effect of that Change, which the Spirit
of GOD makes in the Soul of a Sinner, when he renews and sanctifies it. --

But to go on Secondly,

2. This inordinate Love of the World is inconsistent with the Love of GOD
because it naturally leads to Acts directly contrary to the Will of GOD: Or
otherwise, because the Service of GOD and the World are inconsistent. The
blessed GOD requires us to devote ourselves to him, and to use the World so as
shall most glorify him: But an inordinate Love to the World leads us to devote
ourselves to that, and to improve it in the Gratification or our Lusts. GOD
commands us to mortify our Members and curb our Lusts: The World presents us
with Objects which tend to inflame our Desires and provoke our Lusts. GOD
commands us to set our Affections on Things above and not on Things below: The
World would engage our Affections upon earthly Enjoyments and represents the
other as no Way suitable for us, and therefore not to be valued. GOD commands
us to seek first the Kingdom of GOD and his Righteousness; the World would
entice us to neglect these Things till the last. GOD tells us that he is the
alone Fountain of Happiness: The World would have us to seek it in the
Enjoyments of Sense. GOD commands us to give him our whole Heart, to love him
with all our Heart; but this is absolutely inconsistent with an inordinate Love
of the World. GOD, says, (to allude to the Words of another, Mr. Henry.
Exposition upon Mat 6.24.
My Son give me thy Heart: The World says, no, give it me. GOD says, Be
content with such Things as you have: The World says, grasp at all that ever
thou can. GOD says, defraud not, never tell a Lie, be honest and just in all
thy Dealings: The World says, cheat thy own Father, if thou can get by it.
GOD says, be charitable: The World says, hold thy own, this giving undoes us
all. GOD says, Be careful for nothing: The World says, be careful for every
Thing. GOD says, Keep holy the Sabbath Day: The World says, make Use of that
Day, as well as any other for the World. Thus inconsistent are the Commands of
GOD and the World, so that we cannot serve both. Agreeably our Savior tells us
in forecited Matthew. 6.24. No Man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate
the one and love the other. Or else he will hold to the one and despise the
other. Ye cannot serve GOD and Mammon.

I come now to the APPLICATION of what has been said; and,

1. I shall apply what has been said for the Conviction and Awakening of those
who have that inordinate Love of the World, which has been described. Many such
there are, it is to be feared, who yet think themselves good Christians. They
mistake their Greediness after the World for Prudence, and their Covetousness
for Frugality: And upon this Principle, they blame others of a more generous
charitable Disposition, charge them with Extravagance, would have them think
whether they can afford what they give in this Way, whether they sha'n't hurt
themselves and Families. Indeed, my Brethren, there is but little Need in our
Day for such Cautions as these: Few, very few are in Danger of hurting
themselves or their Families by what they give in pious and charitable Uses;
the most give but a Trifle in this Way. But, (suffer me to speak my Fears) if I
mistake not, the most of you are in much greater Danger of loving the World too
well. Look into your own Hearts then (for GOD calls you to apply these Truths
to yourselves rather than to others.) What are your Thoughts employed about? Is
it not, how shall I buy and sell and get Gain? How shall I advance my Estate?
How shall I lay out my Money to the best Advantage? I say not, that all such
Tho'ts are sinful; but don't they take up so much of your Time, that you shut
out the Care of your Soul and neglect to secure the one Thing needful? I verily
believe that many think more how they shall get or save a Penny, than how they
shall save their Souls from Hell. Is not their Love to the World then
inordinate? Is it not too great to have any Room for GOD in the Heart?

Again, What means this Bleating in our Ears? What is all this Murmuring and
Fretting that you have not more of the World? That you must toil and labor and
yet be poor, while others get Estates without half the Pains you take? Is not
your Murmuring against the Lord? Is it not he that allots out every one's
Circumstances? Did you love him half so well as you do the World, you would be
easy, contented and thankful; for the poorest of you have much more than you
deserve. The Apostle could say, I have learned in whatsoever State I am
therewith to be content. Phil. 4, 11.
How contrary are many, who would be thought Christians too, who in whatever
State they are, are always discontented?

Again, What shall we say of those who don't scruple to take any Measures just
or unjust so they can but gain the World? I speak not only to Thieves and open
Robbers, but to many who would think it hard if their Goodness was to be
suspected: Such as oppress the Poor and lie in wait to take Advantage of the
Necessities of their Brethren: Such as have no Rule in Dealing, but to get as
much as they can, and take extravagant Interest, when their Neighbors, through
Necessity, are obliged to borrow of them: Such as will commend their Goods when
they know them to be bad; and will take the Bread out of their Brethren's
Mouths, to lay up Money in their Chests: who are growing rich upon the Spoils
of others, and defraud others to raise themselves. -- Is this your Way to get
Estates? poor Souls! You Will perish with your Money unless you repent.

Again, What Occasion for that Anxiety and Distress which many discover lest
they should not have enough to carry them through the World? Is there not a GOD
in Heaven whose Care has been extended toward you, ever since you have been in
the World? How unbecoming a Christian is it, when he should be committing his
Case to GOD, to unfit himself for Duty, through a restless Anxiety about
Futurity.

Again, You have Reason to suspect your State; who are as stingy when you have
got Money, as you was avaricious in getting it. -- How hard is it to get any
Thing out of some Men, when the Honor of GOD plainly calls for it! How many
Excuses do they make; its hard Times, I Have a large Family. I allow there is
something in these Things, but will this excuse you from doing any Thing for
the Service of GOD? Or if some Men give, yet with what apparent Reluctance is
it? It seems as if they had almost as willingly give a Piece of their Flesh, it
so evidently hurts them; and I Am sure, it hurts me, when I see such Men give.
-- GOD loves a cheerful Giver, but he hates such mean, sordid, stingy Souls.

Again, How melancholy is your Case, who can take Delight in the World, and
the Things of it, but none in the Service of GOD: Who take great Pleasure in
getting the good Things of Life, but none in conversing with GOD: Who are easy
if you can but procure large Possessions to yourselves, though you have no
Communion with GOD, no Manifestations of the Divine Love. -- Or who can labor
and toil to get earthly Riches, but can find no Time to scare to secure the
infinitely preferable Treasures of Heaven. This World's Goods you may possibly
get, but, if you carry this Temper with you to the Grave, the other you shall
never have, these Things will be such a heavy Weight upon you as will sink you
deep in the bottomless Pit. -- Need I say any Thing to set forth the Danger of
those who are puffed up with Pride, on Account of what they enjoy here? Your
Folly is inexcusable and your Danger is great, that since you so abominably
misimprove the Bounty of Heaven toward you, he will at Length take an
effectual Way to humble you, even by leaving you to contemplate on your Vanity
with Shame and Grief to all Eternity. As for such as are for being religious
and worldly too, who are for getting a little Grace, just enough to squeeze in
at the strait Gate; who desire no more than just to get over the Line between a
converted and unconverted State; I fear you will be so cautious of going too far,
that you will not go far enough. -- In plain Words, such a Temper discovers you
are a Stranger to Conversion and know nothing of the Power of Godliness. Oh be
awakened and convinced then, all these Kinds of Persons, I have been describing
love the World too well, too well to have any Love to GOD, too well to be
Christians. -- But Secondly,

2. What has been said may serve to reprove the Children of GOD. Alas do not
the best of us find that we love the World too well: Though those Tempers I
have mentioned, are not the habitual Frame of our Minds; yet are they not too
often prevailing, within us? Have we not had Reason to judge and condemn
ourselves more than once while we have heard an inordinate Love to the World
described? But how is this, my Brethren! have we not chosen GOD as the Object
of our Hope and Trust? Does he not deserve that Affection we have placed upon
him? Yea, have we not found more Pleasure in the little Communion we have had
with him, and the little Time we have been serving him than in all that the
World has afforded? Have we not found the World empty and vain; and that it is
GOD only can satisfy our Desires? Why then do we return again to the World, or
expect that from it which we know by Experience it cannot yield us? Shall we
who have partook of the Fountain of living Waters, go back again to those
broken Cisterns that can hold no Water? Shall we halt between two Opinions, who
have determined upon so good Grounds for the Lord, and have chosen his Service?
Oh rouse up, contemplate on the Excellencies of the Divine Nature, and you will
see so much to attract your Love, that you will despise every Thing which the
World presents.

There are two Reasons especially, which should influence the Children of GOD
not to discover too great an Affection to the Things of the World. The one is
the bad Influence it is like to have upon others; they are ready to think they
are within due Bounds, because they see such a good Man as eager and anxious
about the World as they -- the bad Example of good Men has a great Influence
upon others: they should therefore endeavor to discover their Contempt of the
World and to show the little Value they put upon it that others may follow
them, may examine the real Value of it, and be brought to slight and despise
it. The other Reason is that it will cloud their Evidences for Heaven if they
suffer their Hearts to go out after the World. The Way to have our Title to the
heavenly Inheritance cleared up, is to get weaned from the World and more
conformed to the heavenly World. The more worldly we are, so much the more
Darkness are we like to have about our State, the more we are like the Men of
this World, the more difficult it will be to determine that we are not of it
ourselves. And this may discover to many of us the Reason, why we have not had
more of the Light of GOD's Countenance: We have been too worldly, too eager in
our Pursuits after it, too anxious about the Things of it, when we ought to
have considered ourselves as Pilgrims and Strangers here, and lived as such. --

3. But I would just say one Word for the Encouragement of some poor
disconsolate Souls, who are ready to conclude every Thought about the World
unlawful, and to give all over for lost, because they are not so weaned from it
as they think they should be. As to the first of these: You cannot expect to be
free entirely from the Cares of the World; while you are here, you must and you
ought to think about it, and to take Care for your comfortable Subsistence
here. As to the other, I am inclined to think it is true, that you are not so
weaned from the World as you ought to be: But is not this your Grief, your
Burden? Don't you long to get more weaned? Don't you mourn before GOD that you
are so much attached to the World? And pray that you may have Grace to
withstand the Temptations of it? Don't you watch against it, and strive against
it, and don't you long to be free from the Snares of it? This is not the Temper
of those, who have an habitual inordinate Love to the World, but are the
genuine Marks of a Child of GOD.

In fine, Let us all be exhorted to moderate our Affections to the Things of
this World, and to place them on GOD and CHRIST and Things that are heavenly
and Divine. Your own Experience will teach you, that all Things here are empty,
vain, and unsatisfactory; whatever we promise ourselves from the Enjoyment of
them, we find ourselves disappointed, and still a great Way off from that Ease
and Contentment which we expected from them. It is not in their Nature to
satisfy the boundless Desires of our rational Souls. -- Besides, all sublunary
Enjoyments are fading and perishing; they make to themselves Wings and flee
away; they will soon leave us, or if not, we must soon leave them; and if we
choose our Portion here, we must go without it hereafter, if the World
engrosses our Affections while we are in this State, we must be miserable
forever. -- Shall we suffer these Things then to engage our Attention, our
Affections, our Desires, and Pursuits, which are so mean in themselves and so
fatal in their Consequences? Especially, when they come in Competition with the
Treasures of Heaven, which are infinitely valuable in themselves, and eternal
in their Duration? These, my Brethren, are worthy your closest Attention; you
cannot be too earnest in your Desires, or too eager in your Pursuit after them.
Oh then, Seek first the Kingdom of GOD and his Righteousness. Labor to make
sure of an Interest in CHRIST, he is the Pearl of, great Price; and if you can
but make him yours, though it be at the Expense of all you have in this World,
you will gain infinitely by the Bargain, you will find that Happiness in Communion
with and in the Enjoyment of him, which you vainly expect from the Things of
this World, and infinitely more: in him there are unsearchable Riches, it has
pleased the Father that in him should all Fullness dwell, he can satisfy your
most enlarged Desires, and make you as happy, as without him you must be
miserable. -- If you are interested in his Merits, you shall have Grace and
Glory, nor will GOD withhold any good Thing from you. If GOD sees it to be for
your Good, he will bestow the Enjoyments of this Life upon you, for so far
Godliness has the Promise of this Life as well as of that which is to come. And
what reasonable Man would desire the Promise of it any further? But however GOD
may see fit to deal with you here, you shall be admitted to the richest
Happiness in the Glory of the heavenly World. I conclude with Col. iii. 2, 5.
Set your Affections on Things above, and not on Things on the Earth. Mortify
your Members which are upon the Earth -- inordinate Affection, evil
Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry.

FINIS.

