Mr. Balch's SERMON AT THE ORDINATION OF Mr. Benjamin Parker.

The Duty of Ministers to aim at promoting, and being Partakers of the Gospel.

A SERMON Preached at the ORDINATION OF Mr. Benjamin Parker To the Pastoral
Care of a Church in Haverhill, November 28. 1744 Made public at the Desire of
the venerable Council (consisting of Eleven Churches) convened on that
Occasion, and a considerable Number of other Ministers and Gentlemen.

By WILLIAM BALCH, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Bradford.

He stood in too much Awe of his great Master, to fear or know any Man, [in the
Discharge of his Duty] or to be swayed by any worldly Considerations. He
believed firmly, that he must render an Account of his Conduct at the Day of
Judgment, and wisely resolved so to act, as that he might do it with rejoicing.
Life of Dr. GALE. BOSTON: Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for J. EDWARDS in
Cornhill. 1744.

An Ordination Sermon.
I Cor. IX. 23. And this I do for the Gospel's Sake, that I might be Partaker
thereof with you.


MEEKNESS and Patience, and a mutual Condescension and Forbearance toward one
another, are Duties incumbent on all the Disciples of Christ. The Example of
their great Lord, as well as his Doctrine, was peculiarly calculated to enforce
and recommend them, as being of eminent Note in the Christian Scheme. And if we
take a View of the State of Things in the World, and consider the incredible
Mischiefs that have arisen to Mankind from their Pride and Peevishness, and
their insulting and domineering over one another; we shall soon be convinced,
that these Duties are not only of the last Importance to the present Ease and
Quiet of Men in the various Relations and Affairs of this Life, but Reason will
tell us, they cannot be less necessary to prepare them for the Society and
Happiness of the future World; where there shall be nothing to hurt and
destroy, or to grieve and vex the blessed Inhabitants forever.

But though these Duties are incumbent on all Christians, and should make a
distinguishing Part of their Character from the Rest of Mankind; yet the
Ministers of Christ should look upon themselves as in particular called to
excel in them. Their Relation to Christ beyond that of Christians in common,
and the Nature and Business of their Office, viz. to teach the Religion of
Christ to others should be considered by them, as a perpetual Admonition to 'em
to approach the nearest possible to the Likeness of Christ, and be a Pattern
themselves to the Rest of their Fellow Christians. The great Apostle St. Paul
whose Example next to that of our Blessed Savior, is the most eminent of any
one recorded in the New Testament, took particular Care of his Duty in these
Respects: And we are very frequently notified of it, to the End, without Doubt,
that others in the sacred Office might be excited from thence to go and do
likewise; and become Followers of this prime Minister of the Christian Church,
as he followed Christ the Author and Finisher of our Faith. Hence in the Text,
after a large Account, through the whole foregoing Part of the Chapter, of his
Meekness and Forbearance and Condescension toward all Sorts of Persons under
the various Prejudices of their Education, and the different Turns of Mind with
which they attended on his Ministry, the Apostle assigns the Reason of such his
Conduct: Saying, And this I do for the Gospel's Sake, that I might be Partaker
thereof with you; giving us to understand, he did not condescend to the
Weaknesses and Prejudices of People, to aggrandise himself in their Esteem, or
that by little mean popular Arts he might exalt himself above his Brethren,
employed in the same evangelical Ministry: Much less did he do it, that by
working on their Passions, he might obtain such a Mastery over their
Understandings, as to be able to manage them to his own particular Humor, and
serve his worldly Ends by them: This was too much the Manner of false Teachers;
but he did it for the Gospel's Sake, i. e. as he expresses it in some of the
foregoing Verses, that he might gain and save them, viz. gain them to Christ
and not to himself, and save them from the Dominion of their Lusts, and not
from the due Exercise of their Reason: And that what he aimed at with Respect
to himself, was to be a Sharer of the same Benefits, and a Partaker of the
Gospel with them.

There are two Things here implied which I shall make the Heads of the ensuing
Discourse I. That the Ministers of Christ ought to aim at being Partakers of
the Gospel, in common with all the Faithful. And, II. That in Order hereto,
they ought to set up the Gospel in their View, as that for the promoting of
which their Office was designed; and in the Reputation, Defense, Success, and
Propagation of which, all their ministerial Endeavors should center.


I. That the Ministers of Christ ought to aim at being Partakers of the Gospel
in common with all the Faithful. That I might be Partaker thereof with you.

Ministers have the same Concern and Interest in the Christian Religion with
the rest of Mankind. They have Souls to save or lose as well as their People;
their Lives are equally precarious and uncertain; their Strength is not the
Strength of Stones, nor their Flesh of Brass; they have the precious Treasure
of the Gospel but in Earthen Vessels, that are soon and easily dashed to Pieces
-- And they are no more exempted from appearing in the last Judgment: They must
give Account of themselves to God as well as the rest of Mankind, and receive
the Things done in the Body whether they have been good or evil. They ought not
then to be so intent upon the saving of others as to neglect their own
Salvation. It should seem indeed as if this was in no wise likely ever to
happen. But they that know the Multiplicity of Cares and perpetual Hurry of
Business in which the Ministry for the most Part involves a Man, will not think
such a Caution needless. There are, it is true, some Advantages of a religious
Nature attending on an Employment in the Work of the Ministry: but then the
Temptations likewise peculiar to that Office, or more especially besetting
those who are employed in it, are in a great Measure a Balance to them. And if
any should grow remiss upon this Account, under Pretense that they are
continually taken up in religious and spiritual Affairs, it would certainly be
a great and most dangerous Mistake.

It is constantly found, that Ministers are Men of like Passions with others;
and though good People are apt to conceive a more raised Opinion of their
Sanctity than of their own, or of other Men's, yet it will not from hence
follow, that Ministers should think thus of themselves: Nor can there be any
Foundation for it merely from their being employed in the sacred Function. This
indeed should be a Motive to them to excel in all Christian Goodness and
Virtue; that they may be Examples to Believers in Word, in Conversation, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Charity, in Purity: But then in Order hereto, personal
Religion must be no small Part of their Care; and while they are employed in
keeping the Vineyard for others, they must not neglect their own. The Apostle
Paul in many Places informs us of his own daily Exercise herein; he kept under
his Body, and brought it into Subjection, lest that by any Means, when he had
preached to others, he himself should be a Castaway. He took Care to have his
Conversation in the World in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not according to
fleshly Wisdom, but the Grace of God. He was willing in all Things to live
honestly, and used his utmost Endeavors to keep a Conscience void of Offense,
both toward God and toward Man. And in the Text, to insist upon no other
Place at present, This I do for the Gospel's Sake, THAT I MIGHT BE PARTAKER
THEREOF WITH YOU. This shows what he had in View with Respect to himself,
namely to be a Sharer with all the Faithful in the Benefits of the Gospel, to
experience its Divine Energy in changing and transforming him into the Image of
Christ in this present World; and then in the World to come, to be a Partaker
of eternal Life, which is the great and final Reward the Gospel proposes. Here
then,

First, Ministers should aim at being Partakers of the saving Efficacy of
Gospel Truths. They should not content themselves with merely teaching the
Truths of the Gospel to others, (though this they should do very diligently, it
being a main Branch of their Office,) but in Order to their own Salvation they
should likewise see to it, that they experience in themselves the effectual
Operation of those Truths purifying and governing their Hearts and Lives.

It is not teaching the Truths of the Gospel, but obeying and living them, that
will denominate us good Men. Whenever therefore we are preaching upon any
important Subject to our People, we should, as often as may be, bring the
Matter home, to ourselves by such serious, solemn Reflections as these, How am
I affected, and what is my own Concern herein? What is the State of my own Soul
in Reference to these Things! And what have I to do more than I have yet done
in Order to a due Improvement of these Truths, that I may not be condemned in
the last Day out of my own Mouth? Oh my Brethren! It will be a dreadful Thing
to have the Judge say to any of us, Thou wicked Servant, out of thine own Mouth
will I condemn thee. And yet this will certainly be the Case, be we ever so
diligent in teaching the Gospel to others, if we are not careful to live it our
selves. We must be renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, the Knowledge of the
Truth must make us free; we must be sanctified by our Faith in Christ, and be
inspired and animated to a Victory over the World, or it is impossible we
should be saved. The Want of these Things can no more dispensed with in
Ministers than others: Yea, but higher Seize are required, for to him
that knows to do Good and does it not, to him it is Sin. And that Servant
which knew his Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, nor did according to it,
shall be beaten with many Stripes. This then we should continually aim at, to
find in ourselves the powerful Effect of those Truths which we preach to our
People; that having the Spirit of Christ, and being full of Goodness and
Righteousness, we may appear to be his, and to have a real, saving Interest in
him.

And to encourage, excite and animate us hereto, we should also,

Secondly, Aim at being Partakers of the Gospel, as that Phrase may signify our
being Partakers of the Glory and Happiness which the Gospel reveals.

It can be no more unlawful in Ministers than in private Christians to have a
Respect to the Recompense of Reward; and to animate themselves to their Duty
from the Consideration of the Glory and Happiness of the future World. As this
is the greatest that can be, what Eye had not seen, nor Ear heard, nor had
entered into the Heart of Man, before the Gospel discovered it; so, no Doubt,
this Discovery was made, that we might, from thence forward, set this Glory and
Happiness up in our View, and earnestly aspire at being Partakers of it. If
this had been unlawful, an infinitely wise and merciful God would never have
made the Discovery; because it would have been casting such a Stumbling Block
in the Way of his reasonable and intelligent Creatures, as must (unless they
had acted in plain Contradiction to the Nature which he himself had given them)
inevitably prove their Ruin.

It is certainly then not only lawful, but a Duty both in Ministers and People,
to aim at being Partakers of the Gospel in this latter Sense, when they
likewise aim at being Partakers of it in the former, i. e. to aim at Glory and
Happiness in the Way of Holiness and Virtue. And it is only unlawful and
absurd, when Men don't seek, and aim, and labor after it in the Way the Gospel
prescribes, but in Ways of their own Superstition; not by a lively, effectual
Faith in the Son of God, changing their Hearts, and reforming their Lives; not
by Obedience to the Gospel, and the Practice of that Goodness and Righteousness
which it requires; but either by some or other Scheme of mere speculative
Notions, or by the Practice of such Things as are no where required at their
Hands; when Jesus Christ is not made the chief Corner Stone of the Building,
and the Foundation of their Hope is not laid in the Merit of his Blood and
Righteousness; but they either imagine their own Doings sufficient to recommend
them to God, without the Benefit of the Gospel Covenant, and the Intercession
of the Savior; or else, that be their Doings what they will, they are neither
the nearer, nor yet the farther off from a just and rational Hope of eternal
Life.

Both these are dangerous Errors, and Ministers and People should equally guard
against them: Either that we have no Need of the Blood of Christ to cleanse us
from our Sins, and of his Intercession to recommend our Persons and
Performances to the Divine Acceptance; or else, that be our Persons and
Performances what they will, whether we be Wicked or Godly, whether we live
like Christians or live like Heathen, the Blood of Christ may be equally ours
and we hope to be saved by it, ONLY IF WE TAKE CARE CONFIDENTLY TO EXPECT IT,
AND BE SURE NOT TO BE INFLUENCED BY IT TO LIVE ANY BETTER THAN WE SHOULD
OTHERWISE HAVE DONE. We should beware, my Brethren, how by any Means we go into
such Sentiments: Or, so far as it shall be in our Power to prevent it, suffer
any of our People to do so. The former Opinion is entirely subversive of
Christianity; and the latter, even of moral Virtue and Honesty. Infidels err
the former Way, and Enthusiasts generally the latter. Let us look for eternal
Life, but look for it as a Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord; and as a
Gift which he will only bestow upon them that have their Fruit unto Holiness;
and let the Belief and Expectation hereof have a powerful, abiding Influence
upon us. The more it influences us to Holiness and Virtue, so much the better;
even if under the Influence of this Divine Hope we should purify ourseves, as
he that calls us to Glory and Virtue, is pure; if, forasmuch as we know that
our Labor is not in vain in the Lord, we should from thence seek always to
abound in the Exercises of our Christian Duty, and if, under the Reproaches and
Terrors of an evil World, we should be steadfast and immovable, and undaunted,
and unfainting while we look not at the Things that are seen and are temporal,
but at the Things which are not seen and are eternal. In a Word, This is such a
Spring and Principle both of active and passive Obedience to the Will of God,
as no good Man, and much less Christian Minister can spare; and we should never
therefore suffer it to be wrested out of our Hands. What shall we do, when the
Times are such (as they have more than once been, and may be again, if God
should see Cause righteously to permit it) that if in this Life only we had
Hope, we should of all Men be most miserable; I say, what shall we do, if we
have not then a Hope entering into that within the Vail, which as an Anchor of
the Soul both free and steadfast, may keep it safe amidst the Storm; and be a
Means of that blessed Tranquillity, as to put us out of Danger of making
Shipwreck of Faith or of a good Conscience? For my own Part, I shall endeavor
to be always firmly possessed of this Principle: Aiming at Glory and Virtue,
and forgetting the Things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those that
are before, I will press forward toward the Mark for the Prize of the high
Calling of God in Christ Jesus: Nor will I ever be ashamed to profess my self
as acting in Hope of Eternal Life which God that cannot lie, has promised.

I proceed to the other general Head proposed, viz.

II. To show that in Order hereto, the Ministers of Christ ought to set up the
Gospel in their View, as that for the promoting of which their Office was
designed; and in the Reputation, Defense, Success, and Propagation of which,
all their ministerial Endeavors should center.

The Ministers of Christ have not only themselves to save but also them that
hear them: And they cannot secure their own Salvation, unless they likewise
sincerely endeavor the saving of their Charge; which is the End of their
Office, and that for which it was set up in the Church. They are to be Helping
of the Faith and Holiness and Comfort of the People of God. They are to teach
the Disciples of Christ to observe all those Things which he commanded; and are
perpetually to admonish them that profess to believe in God, to be careful to
maintain good Works; and so adorn their Christian Profession.

The very Business of Ministers as such, is to promote the Gospel, i. e. a
right Understanding and firm Belief of the Doctrines of Christ, and a
Conversation in all those who profess the same, agreeable thereto. And next to
their own Salvation this should ever lay upon their Minds, viz. promoting the
Virtue and Happiness of those with whose Instruction they are entrusted:
Showing them the good and right Way, and persuading them to walk in it: Laying
before them the Precepts and Motives of the Gospel, and from Time to Time
impressing their Minds with a Sense of the Reality, Nearness, and infinite
Importance of unseen, eternal Things. The making of their People good and
happy, next to securing the Favor of God, and eternal Happiness for
themselves, should be their great Care and governing Design. Not their own
secular Advantage, not their Grandeur, not their Ease, not their own Reputation
or Life, should lay so near their Hearts, as promoting the Knowledge of Christ
in their People, leading them to a true Faith in him, and guiding them in Paths
of Virtue and true Holiness to eternal Glory. For this End, and with this in
their View, the should be a always ready to deny themselves, and take up their
Cross; not pleasing themselves, nor seeking their own Profit, but the Profit of
many that they may be saved: With Prudence and Meekness instructing and
persuading those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
Repentance to the Acknowledgment of the Truth. The Design of the Gospel is to
make Men good and happy: and this is what Ministers are to be carrying on; as
Workers together under God, beseeching Men not to receive his Grace in vain.
And if they meet with Opposition herein, they are not presently to call for
Fire from Heaven; but by Gentleness and Goodness, Forbearance and
Longsuffering, should seek to overcome their Lusts and Prejudices.

Indeed there may be Instances, and at certain Seasons they may abound,
wherein, if Ministers should be more resolute, they would not want the
Countenance of Scripture. The great Apostle St. Paul, who in our Text and
Context mentions his Condescension, without Doubt, as being examplary, and
worthy of Imitation, does elsewhere speak of his very resolute Behavior, and
even glory in his not giving Place by Subjection to Adversaries; no, not for an
Hour. Gal. 2.5.
And says, If I yet pleased Men I should not be the Servant of Christ, Chapter 1.10.
i. e. if he made it his main Design to render himself agreeable to the Lusts
and Prejudices of those he conversed with, and for the Sake of pleasing Men in
Sentiments opposite to his own, should violate the Light and Conviction of his
own Mind and Conscience, he should not behave himself at all suitable to the
Character of a Christian Minister. Where Good may be rationally hoped for from
Moderation, a condescending Forbearance, and meek and patient Instruction, it
is, no Doubt, to be practiced: But some Tempers are not to be wrought on or
gained in that Way. The Apostle Jude therefore exhorts, of some have
Compassion, making a Difference; and others save with Fear, pulling them out of
the Fire. Jude 22, and 23d Verses.
It remains then that in all the Particulars of their Conduct, the Ministers of
Christ need that Wisdom which is profitable to direct; and should daily ask it
of God, who has promised to give it liberally. And what I have said is, that in
general, this End is perpetually to be had in View, and is what they should
make the ruling Measure of their Conduct; promoting the Gospel of Christ.

But then there are diverse Things pertaining to the Gospel, which ought to be
a little more distinctly considered, upon Account of the Influence they should
have upon us, as,

I. The Reputation of the Gospel. This should be unspeakably dearer to us than
our own. Our own Reputation is but a little Thing and of little Worth, further
than as it may render us more extensively serviceable in our Day and
Generation. In this View of it, a good Name is very desirable. and can hardly
be set at too high a Rate; but in other Respects, Reproach and Obloquy may
perhaps be safer for us. To be sure, neither the Praise nor Dispraise of Men,
Can be of any Consequence to us long; for we shall not stand or fall by their
Judgment upon the last Trial. But the Reputation of the Gospel is of the
vastest Consequence, as the Happiness of Millions, even their eternal
Happiness, has a Dependence upon the Reception and Entertainment which they
shall give to it. The Gospel is not at all likely to profit those who have no
Opinion of its Worth and Excellency: If Men take up mean, low, and contemptuous
Thoughts of the Christian Religion, they will treat it accordingly. Ministers
therefore should be infinitely tender of doing any Thing that may turn to its
Reproach; and on the other Hand, they should neglect nothing but do every Thing
in their Power, to give it Credit and Influence among Men. But here suffer me
to say, we are not to imagine as if we could do this, promote the Honor and
Reputation of the Gospel, by making Additions to it of our own: As if it could
receive Perfection from our Imperfection. A vain Design, a most foolish
Attempt! The Gospel will ever be most beautiful in its own native Simplicity.
When it was first thus taught in the first and purest Times of the Church, it
had wonderful Reputation and Success. And if we would preserve to it, in any
Measure, the same honorable Esteem and efficacious Influence, we must be
careful to teach the Truth as it is in Jesus: We must strip the Religion of
Christ of those ugly and false Disguises that have been put upon it by weak or
ill-minded Men: We must distinguish from it, and put away, what is of mere
human Invention: For with this corrupt Mixture, the Reputation of the Gospel
must needs sink, and the Defense of it be insufficient: The Addition being in
no wise equal to what is genuine; nor of the same Nature with it, but for the
most Part, irrational and absurd. The Apostle Paul was exceeding zealous
against annexing to Christianity the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies; because he
knew they would mar its Beauty, and weaken its Influence with a great Part of
Mankind. And the Additions that have been made to it since that Time,
especially in Popish Countries, have been far from being less detrimental than
those would have been.

2. The Defense of the Gospel should be another Part of the Minister's Care. To
this Purpose the Apostle Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, prescribes,
that a Bishop or Christian Minister should not only be of modest and good
Behavior, but one apt to teach, a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, and
able by sound Doctrine to convince Gainsayers; for there are many unruly and
vain Talkers, says he, whose Mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole Houses.
And is not a good Measure of human Literature requisite hereto? Many of the
Adversaries of Christianity are Men of some Learning; and what a miserable,
pitiful Figure will an illiterate Minister make, should he chance to fall into
such Hands! we are not born Workmen at any Thing: But must be instructed and
educated to the Business in which we would serve our Generation. And shall the
sacred Calling only cost a Man no Pains to prepare for it? Is every Man apt to
teach? Are all able to convince Gainsayers? And yet I don't see but that
Ministers should be furnished and qualified in these Respects in some good
Measure, or else, that their very undertaking the Work must be esteemed
unlawful. Indeed it is not to be expected that all Ministers should be alike
able and skilful herein; but the least that can be reasonably required is, that
they should be Men of good natural Powers, and have had some suitable Advantage
for Improvement. Upon this Account, the happy Foundation laid by our
Forefathers for the training up of Youth for the Service of the Sanctuary, can
never (I think) be enough admired by us their Posterity: Nor shall we show our
selves worthy of such Ancestors, should we ever suffer the least Contempt to be
cast upon our Colleges without due Resentment. Every sincere Friend to the
Religious Interests of this Country, I believe will heartily join with me in
saying, May these flourishing Societies still flourish in good Sense and useful
Learning, as well as Piety and universal Virtue; and may our Churches be
supplied from them with pastors that shall feed them with Knowledge and
Understanding, and be the Defense as well as Ornament of the Gospel, as long as
the Sun and Moon shall endure.

I pass on,

3. Another Thing that the Hearts of Ministers are to be much set upon, is the
Success of the Gospel upon those who profess it. Alas, it is the Want of this
that creates the greatest Difficulty in the Defense of Christianity. Had the
Chritian Religion but its due Influence upon the Hearts and Lives of its
Professors, all Mankind would soon acknowledge its Divine Original and
Excellency. There is nothing else wanting to render the Christian Church the
Perfection of Beauty; and to attract the Eyes, and engage the Esteem of the
admiring Nations. Let but Zion become a Mountain of Holiness, and it would soon
be the Joy of the whole Earth.

This then should be the Minister's main Care, to instruct his People in the
Nature, and to convince them of the Necessity of true Holiness; that except a
Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God; that they which profess to
believe in God must be careful to maintain good Works; and that all, in the
various Relations of Life, who call themselves Christians are under an
indispensable Obligation to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts and to live
soberly, righteously and godlily in the World.

These Things Christian Ministers must speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
Authority: And they must repeat the awful Cautions so often found in Scripture,
Be not deceived; God is not mocked: For whatsoever a Man sows that shall he
also reap. -- He that sows to his Flesh shall of the Flesh reap Corruption:
But he that sows to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting.
Gal. 6.7, 8.
And, let no Man deceive you, (the Holy Ghost foreseeing what Opposition this
Doctrine which is according to Godliness, would meet with in the several Ages
of the Church) he that does Righteousness is righteous. He that commits Sin
is of the Devil. -- In this the Children of God are manifest and the Children
of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his Brother. I John 3.7, 10.
And they must command their People's Attention, and oblige them not to
overlook such plain Passages as those, Romans 2.6, 7, 8. Who will render to every
Man according to his Deeds: To them that by patient Continuance in well-doing,
seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, eternal Life. But to them that are
contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness; Indignation
and Wrath. -- And, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.9. -- The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven -- in Flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel: -- Who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from
the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power: When he shall come
to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe.

Once more,

4. The Ministers of Christ should be concerned for the Propagation of the
Gospel, or a farther Spread of Christian Knowledge than it has hitherto
obtian'd. It should be their Heart's Desire, and their daily Prayer to God,
that all Men may be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth: Nor should
they be wanting in any proper methods, to contribute their utmost Endeavors
that the People which sit in Darkness, and dwell in the Region and Shadow of
Death, may be favored with this great Light. The Apostle Paul was in a
particular Manner concerned for this; therefore strove to preach the Gospel,
where Christ had not been so much as named. Indeed the oridinary Ministers of
Christ, who are Officers in particular Churches, are not obliged, or at Liberty
in this Respect, as the Apostles were, who had it in their Commission to go
into all the World, and to preach the Gospel to every Creature: Whereas these
have their particular Stations and Provinces assigned them. These were in
Primitive Times ordained in every City; and their Charge was to feed the Flock
of God over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers. Their Business was
not so much to plant Churches, as to take Care of those committed to their
particular Oversight. The Apostles, and other extraordinary Persons raised up
by God for that Purpose, were to Disciple the Nations, and gather them into
distinct Christian Bodies: And then those who were put in Trust, in the several
Churches by them, were to maintain Christianity where they had planted it. Not
that New Churches might not under their Direction be formed and gathered out of
old ones, as their Numbers should increase and their Circumstances call for it;
this was necessary even to the Maintenance of Christianity where it had been
planted by the Apostles; but what I would be understood arguing against, is the
Practice of those, who, though ordinary Ministers (if any at all) yet as if
they were Apostles, go from Place to Place, and from Country to Country, either
having no proper Charges of their own, or neglecting them, if they have any,
and rambling about in those of other Men's, exciting Parties and Factions:
Which is so far from being a Means to propagate the Gospel where it is not,
that it has the most direct Tendency to subvert and overthrow it where it is.
We are station'd, my Brethren, in different Parts of our Lord's Harvest; and we
should study to be quiet, and to do our own Easiness. We should not so much as
have a Mind to crowd our selves into the Labors of other Men; much less should
we endeavor to crowd out any of our Fellow Laborers from those Parts of the
Harvest which by our common Master, the Lord of the Harvest, are assigned to
them. And as we should not aim at this our selves, so neither should we tamely
submit to it from others, but boldly oppose and steadfastly resist such Criminal
Disorders in any of our Fellow Servants, -- But I may not enlarge.

I have thus finished what I proposed; and have shown what Ministers should aim
at both with Respect to themselves and their People, namely, in one Word, to be
good Men, and make them such; to understand, believe, embrace, and practice the
Religion of Christ, and teach it truly and successfully to others. I shall only
crave your Patience further, while I make some Application of what has been
said, in the usual Addresses; First, To my Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry, and more particularly to the Person now to be ordained; And then, to
my Christian Hearers in general, but especially those of the Congregation in
this Place.

First, Permit me to address, and make some Application of what has been said
to my Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry.

How critical is the Situation of our Place, and of what vast Consequence is
the right Deportment and due Behavior of our selves in such important
Stations! We are put in Trust with the Gospel of Christ, the richest and most
invaluable Treasure, and we have this to improve not for our selves only, but
for many others. With this in our Hands, with these Goods of our heavenly
Master, we are to trade and occupy. And our Business is, not only to improve
our selves in the Knowledge and Love of God, and Conformity to his Image and
Will, but likewise to gain others to Christ, even as many as we can, and to
promote in them the same heavenly Virtues. We are not to deal in Party Matters
(our Lord will not have his Goods thus bestowed) in promoting Factions and
Schisms, and in dividing and alienating the Minds of Men, and of Christians
from one another. We are not to deal in proud Wrath, and to spend our Lord's
Money in fomenting a better Zeal arising from Men's doting about Questions and
Strifes of Words; but our Business is, with the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, to promote Faith and Love and
that godly Edifying which is in Christ Jesus. We are not at Liberty to spend
that Time and Strength in contending with our Fellow Servants, which is given
us for other and better Purposes. We have a great Work upon our Hands; and
shall we let it cease while we come down beneath the Dignity of our Office, to
quarrel about Trifles? Let us hear the great Apostle giving his solemn Advice
to a Christian Minister, Follow (says he) Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace
with all them that call on the Lord out of a pure Heart. But foolish and
unlearned Questions avoid, knowing that they do gender Strifes. And the Servant
of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men -- in Meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves. -- Though we should be firmly
resolved in the Strength of God's Grace, to profess and stand by the Truth so
far as we shall know it, without Regard to the Fear or Favor of Man; yet we
should hate Bigotry, and with an equal Zeal avoid whatever has a Tendency to
stir up Strife, and to set Christians at Variance one with another. The End of
the Commandment, says the inspired St. Paul, is Charity -- from which some
having swerved, have turned aside unto vain Jangling. Though we are set for the
Defense of the Gospel, and should contend earnestly for the Faith that was once
delivered to the Saints; yet it will not unbecome us to let our Moderation be
known to all Men; and in Order to the former, we must carefully distinguish
what is Gospel and what not, what is the Faith that was once delivered to the
Saints, and what has been added to it since by Man. And here let me say, the
Credit and Honor of Christianity demand this at our Hands, and the Defense of
it makes it absolutely necessary. And I should think the Success of it too,
might be reasonably hoped to bear some good Proportion to the Purity and
Simplicity in which it is taught. To be sure, the Gospel never had such Success
as in the primitive Times before the Face of it was overspread with that great
and general Corruption, which even the Reformation from Popery (though the
greatest of Blessings, yet I fear) has not entirely carried off. It is the
Gospel, my Fathers and Brethren, our Office was designed to promote, the Gospel
of Christ, and not any human Schemes or Systems. It Is this we are to teach our
People; and for this we should show our selves becomingly zealous: But if we
teach them for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, as we shall not be able to
answer it our selves to God, so neither shall we profit our People at all; for
the true Fear of God is not to be taught in that Way, Isa. 29.13. and Mat.
15.9. We cannot then be too careful in this Respect, as the Honor and Defense,
and Success and Propagation of the Gospel have all so great a Dependence on it,
which are the Things we are perpetually to have in our View.

I would now turn my self to the Person, at whose Desire and for whose special
Service this Discourse was prepared.

Dear Sir, I doubt not but you have heard with a particular Self-Application. I
have said nothing (I think) discouraging; for why should it be thought an hard
Saying, that we must be plain, honest Men, and aim at what we profess to aim
at, and serve the Master we profess to have chosen. You will presently be
acknowledged a Minister of Christ, and receive the Charge of Souls. Your
Business then will be, to preach Christ and watch for Souls; no Work more
honorable or more important. But in Order to your doing this successfully, the
Life which you live in the Flesh, you must live by the Faith of the Son of God,
depending on, and deriving from him, the Head of all vital Influences, the
Assistance you shall need from Time to Time. Oh be not satisfied with merely
preaching Christ, while you shall allow yourself to live a Stranger to him; or
with watching for the Souls of others, while you neglect the keeping and the
cultivating your own Soul. Preach the Gospel, but live it withal; and know that
in so doing you shall be a Partaker thereof; you shall more and more experience
the saving happy Influence of Divine Truths; the Doctrine which you preach to
others shall continually be of the greatest Advantage to your self, making you
an holy and therefore an happy Man: And at last you shall partake of the great
Reward which the Gospel has set up in the View of its Ministers and Professors
to animate them to their Duty with a lively Zeal, even Eternal Life. This is
enough Sir, we cannot need any greater Encouragement: We serve the best of
Masters; his Yoke is easy, and his Burden light, but the Reward of serving him,
an exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. And if we are called at any Time to
special and more difficult Trials and Services, his Strength will be made
perfect in our Weakness. He will not put us upon Impossibilities; he knows we
are Flesh, and has had Experience of our Infirmities. If the Sufferings of
Christ shall abound in us, so shall likewise those Consolations which are by
Christ Jesus. And as thy Days so shall thy Strength be. Is not this enough? Is
not he faithful who has promised, and will he not do it? With an entire
Dependence then upon these faithful Promises, do thou, my Brother, do
faithfully whatsoever thou do; and never let the Fear of Man, or any worldly
Consideration, prevail to draw you into Compliances against your Conscience.
It Is impossible that any outward Thing should be a millionth Part of that
Service and Comfort to us, that the Testimony of our Conscience to the
Simplicity and Integrity of our Behavior, will be. The Joy of an innocent Mind
alone cannot be equaled by all earthly Comforts put together; and the more we
suffer for Well-doing, or so long as we do well, the greater and more sensible
will this be, as well as the future Reward. Let Men then do their worst, the
good Man's Happiness is in his own Power, for to be good is to be happy. Let
these Things, dear Sir, sink deep in your Heart; and have always such a Sense
of the Happiness of being good, that you may be unwearied and unfainting in
your Endeavors to make every Body else so. In this Design, God be with you and
make you a prosperous Man.

I am now in the next Place,

Secondly, To apply what has been said to my Christian Hearers in general. And
are you then Christian Hearers? This one Word speaks and the Duty I can teach
you. You profess yourselves Christians; may God enable you to be such indeed!
But if you would be so more than in Name or Profession only, your Knowledge of
the Truth must make you free; free from the Power and Dominion of every corrupt
Affection and Appetite; you must be sanctified by your Faith which is in Christ
Jesus; the Spirit of Christ and of his Gospel must reign and prevail in you.
You must be Partakers of the Gospel; of the saving, divine Efficacy of Gospel
Truths, which shall renew you in the very Spirit of your Minds; purify your
Souls, all fill you with the Love of God, and the Love of Goodness. You cannot
be Christians without this; if a Man has not the Spirit of Christ be is none of
his.

You have heard the Duty of Ministers: Now you may easily learn your own from
thence; for it is in common with the Faithful; that they are to aim at being
Partakers of the Gospel; though indeed they should aim at peculiar Measures
thereof. But if common Christians should aim as high as their Ministers, could
any Body blame them? If they attain to a Prophet's Goodness, shall they not
receive a Prophet's Reward? Be not straitn'd then, my Hearers; be not straightened
in your own Minds, for you are not straightened in Christ. The Foutain of Grace is
open to you; Oh drink, drink abundantly, and be not contented with any low
Measures of Goodness.

It is a melancholy Thought, the low Ebb of Christianity in the World: how
little is it understood, how little complied with? The Name indeed is common,
but the Thing how rare! Oh, my Leaness, my Leaness, how just and how general
might the Complaint be, among all Orders indeed, among all Professions, and
through all the various Distinctions, that divide Mankind! Let me entreat you,
my Christian Friends, not to satisfy your selves with barely being sensible of
the Evil, and bewailing it: But up and be doing, and make Proof of what
Christians may attain to. The noblest Heights are attainable; arise then, be
strong, take hold of God's Strength, and Eternal Life is before you.

I now turn my self particularly to the dear People of this Parish. Through the
good Hand of God toward you, a Man of Understanding, and as we hope, of
sincere Piety, is given you this Day. Oh, magnify the Redeemer for such a Gift.
Yet, though we cannot but greatly rejoice with you in the Prospect you have of
so happy a Settlement, we must however warn you to cease from Man whose Breath
is in his Nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of? Lord what is Man, Man
that is like unto Vanity, and whose Days are as a Shadow that passes away! And
admonish you, to put your Trust in the living God, in whose Hand is the Soul of
every living Thing, and the Breath of all Mankind; every Creature being that,
and no more as to our Comfort and Happiness in it, than he is pleased to make
it. Let it be your Care, to do nothing that shall discourage so fervent a Zeal,
or cramp such Gifts as your Minister is setting out with. We are Witnesses of
the Forwardness of his Mind toward you, and of his laudable Ambition to
excel. A Thousand Ways you may encourage or discourage him, provoke his
Endeavors yet further to serve you, or damp his Spirit, and sink his Mind. I
know the Heart of a Minister, the Fears, Temptations and Discouragements, that
such are peculiarly incident to; and I know what it is in some good Measure, to
have a kind, obliging People; a People that steadfastly adhere to their Minister
under all his Troubles, and don't gad about after every Stranger; who know how
to bear with their Minister's Infirmities, and are disposed to make the best of
it, if there be any good Thing in him. I cannot but wish, you may be such a
People, or a better to him who is this Day to be set over you in the Lord. If
you encourage him you will certainly reap the Advantage of it your selves. No
Man can do under sinking Oppressions, as if a People were kind to him. And if
some find Fault (as it is impossible it should be otherwise, where there are so
many differing Minds) why may not others commend? I don't mean that it is
desirable, there should be differing Sentiments among the same People. So far
as it may be, they should all speak the same Thing, and be perfectly joined
together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. But as this is not to be
expected unless we understand it (perhaps as we ought to do) only of an
Agreement in Fundamentals; so in other and lesser Matters, there should be a
mutual Christian Forbearance one of another. And if every one is not pleased in
every little Thing, or Mode, or Circumstance of the Minister's Behavior, or
Preaching, or the like, who can help it? What disgusts some, may be edifying to
others: and if some find Fault (I say) others may commend. Not again, that I
would have you to flatter your Minister; nothing is more unprofitable, nothing
more dangerous. But that there may be an Equality, and his Spirit not sink
under the Captiousness of those, who will never be easy long with any Minister,
or under any Preaching. My Christian Friends, I hope you don't look for
Perfection in your Minister. Let it be his Care to be as perfect as he can, and
yours to maintain that Charity whose Property it is to cover a Multitude of
Faults. Be more concerned about your own Duty than his; be more concerned to
know your selves how to live, than to teach him how to preach. And on the other
Hand, never satisfy your selves with merely admiring and applauding his
Preaching. Oh, empty, vain Thing, unprofitable to Minister and People! Commend
your Minister's Preaching by improving under it in Knowledge and Virtue, by
leading sober, righteous, and godly Lives; this will afford the greatest
Satisfaction both to him and you. Let your Profiting then, as well as his,
appear to all Men; and therefore give Attendance to Reading, to Meditation and
Prayer in your Families and Closets, as well as to the public Hearing of the
Word; and be much in these Things. Oh, let the Word of Christ dwell in you
richly, and aim at being Partakers of the Gospel. Set the Glory and Happiness
of the future World continually in your View; live in a realizing sincere
Belief and Expectation of the Judgment to come; and know, that in Order to your
being found in Christ in that Day without Spot and blameless, you must here in
this World love his Name and be his Servants; you must study and obey his holy
Will; you must sincerely endeavor to find out the Truth for your selves, and
live in all good Conscience before God; exercising a daily Repentance for your
daily, manifold Infirmities, and a lively continual Faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, who loved us and gave himself
for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor: -- To
whom therefore, with the Father and Holy Spirit, be given Praises everlasting,
Amen.

After SERMON, the Church was gathered by the Rev. Mr. Sergeant of Methuen, And
the following CHARGE Given by the Rev. Mr. Barnard of Andover.
WHEREAS you Benjamin Parker, upon whom we impose our Hands, are, at this Time,
to be separated to the Work of the evangelical Ministry and Office of a Pastor
to the Church of CHRIST in this Place;

We do in the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST Ordain you thereunto;

And We charge you before GOD and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the
Quick and the Dead, at his Appearing and Kingdom, that you faithfully Discharge
the Work of a Gospel-Minister; That you take the Oversight of this Flock, not
by Constraint, but Willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a Ready Mind; That
you feed all the Flock over which the HOLY GHOST now makes you an Overseer,
that you feed Christ's Sheep and his Lambs.

Receive Thou the Keys of the Kingdom; the Key of Doctrine, and the Key of
Discipline. Preach the Word; Be instant in Season and out of Season. Reprove,
Rebuke, Exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine:

In Doctrine showing Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech, which
cannot be condemned.

Study to show yourself approved of GOD, a Workman that needs not be ashamed,
rightly dividing the Word of Truth?

And in Order hereunto, give yourself to Reading, Meditation and Prayer;
Especially study the Sacred SCRIPTURES, make them the Standard of your
Doctrines. Let these be the Fountain, from whence you derive the Discourses,
which you offer to the People of your Charge? Follow not blind and
enthusiastical Impulses. Be not guided by the Conceits of your own Fancy, nor
feed your Auditory with the Productions of a vain Imagination, neither be
biassed in your Preaching by a Party-Spirit.

Rule well the Flock committed to your Charge by the Laws of CHRIST'S Kingdom;
Administer that Discipline and Dispense those Censures, which the Great Head of
the Church has appointed for the Removal of Offenses and Reclaiming of
Offenders, for the preservation of the Purity, Peace and Honor of the Church,
and a Testimony against the Violation of his Laws. See you do Nothing by
Partiality, prefering One before Another: Nor Lord it over GOD'S Heritage.
Administer the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
to them and to them only, who have a Right thereunto, by Divine Institution;
Set not the Doors of the Church too wide open, nor keep them shut too close.

Pray for and with the People of your Charge, and Bless them from Time to Time,
in the Name of the LORD.

Let it be your Concern, in all Regards, to acquit yourself as becomes a
faithful Shepherd, a vigilent Watchman, a compassionate and loyal Ambassador of
CHRIST, a wise and prudent Steward, whom his Lord has made Overseer of his
Household, to give unto every one his Portion of Meat in due Season:

And be thou an Example to the Flock, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith and Purity: Be grave and prudent in your Converse with your
People; Let your Moderation be known unto all Men; In Meekness instruct those
that oppose themselves; Keep under your Body; Be temperate and chaste, lest,
after you have preached unto Others, you yourself be a Castaway; And endure
Hardness, as a good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST.

And We do herewith (in the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST) give you Power and
Authority to assist in the Ordination of Ministers, as often as you shall be
regularly called thereunto. But see, that they be Men of good Lives, sound in
the Faith; well qualified for the Gospel Ministry, faithful Men, able to Teach
others. Lay Hands suddenly on no Man, lest you be a Partaker of his Sin.

And let your Dependence be upon CHRIST for Assistance, Acceptance, and Success
in the great Work, unto which you are called and separated.

To conclude; If you keep this Charge, we do assure you from our LORD JESUS
CHRIST (in whose Name we now Act) when He, the chief Shepherd shall appear, you
shall appear with Him, and from Him receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not
away. Amen.

THE Right Hand of Fellowship By Mr. Parsons of Bradford.
My Brethren of this Assembly,
WHatever was originally intended by the RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP, this
Ceremony, as practiced in these Churches, is an Acknowledgment of the Validity
of their Ordination to whom it is given, of their Equality as Ministers of the
Gospel, and mutual Obligations to assist each other in managing the Concerns
and promoting the Interests of Christ their common Lord.

It administers therefore Instruction and Consolation to him that receives it.
On the one hand, it admonishes him to magnify his Office and maintain his
Equality amongst his Brethren in the Ministry against the injurious Claims of
any affecting a Superiority which Christ never gave Matt. 20.20, -- 28.
. And on the other, it teaches him to guard against that Ambition,
Covetousness, or whatever else it may be, whereby he may be prompted to
exercise a forbidden Dominion over his Equals in the Ministry.

And as it succeeds to a Charge the most Important that Man can be entrusted
with, and of which an Account must be rendered in that Day, when Jesus shall
appear in the Glory of the Father with all the holy Angels to judge the quick
and the dead, it may be considered as designed to encourage the Heart and
strengthen the Hands of him that receives it, who if he be duly sensible of
the Nature of his Office cannot but need it. And this it does, as it is a
Promise of brotherly Love and Assistance.

Wherefore, dear Sir, by giving you this Right Hand of Fellowship in the Name
of your Brethren in the Ministry, and by the Appointment of the venerable
Council convened upon the solemn Occasions of this Day, I acknowledge you to be
regularly separated to that Office which I sustain in the Christian Church. And
I admonish you that you and I are equal, and that neither of us is upon any
Occasion whatsoever, to aspire at that Dominion and Authority which Christ has
forbidden us both; no, not yet to suffer it each other. -- May God evermore
grant as much of that humble heavenly Temper of Mind, whereby we may be
restrained within the Limits of our Duty, and on the other Hand, that Wisdom
and Fortitude by which the Pretensions of every bold Invader of the Rights of
his Brethren and Fellow Servants may be successfully opposed.

And as I am sure the weighty Charge this Day devolved upon you and repeated to
me, tends to inspire us with great Fear and Solicitude of Spirit, let us, my
Brother encourage ourselves with the supports Christ has provided for us which
are many and mighty. We are engaged in a Calling that is divine, and are
Workers together with God: The holy Spirit, the Sanctifier and the Comforter,
operates in us and with us in the same great Undertaking: The holy Angels are
oftentimes sent forth upon the like weighty Errand of ministering to those who
shall be the Heirs of Salvation: Good Men too are with us in our Work by their
fervent Prayers, seasonable Counsels, and the persuasive Argument of a good
Example: Finally, To those Ministers who shall be faithful to the Death, Christ
has given the encouraging Promise of a Crown of Life.

To all which, dear Sir, I add, your Brethren, engaged in the same holy
Calling, willingly promise, what in their Turn they expect from you all
necessary Assistance by their Prayers, Counsels, Admonitions and Reproofs, and
the Exercise of their ministerial Powers.

And now, may God of the Riches of his Grace grant you to acquit your Self in
your several Functions with Industry, Fidelity and Success, that hereafter you
may receive that transporting Sentence from the Judge of all the Earth, Well
done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in a few things, I will
make the Ruler own many things, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

FINIS.

