AN ACCOUNT OF THE Rise, Progress and Consequences Of the two late SCHEMES
Commonly called the Land-Bank or Manufactory Scheme AND THE Silver Scheme, In
the Province of the Massachusetts Bay. Wherein the CONDUCT of the late and
present G -- r during their Ad -- ns is occasionally considered and compared.
In a LETTER from a Gentleman in Boston, to his Friend in LONDON.

Printed in the Year 1744.

Boston, April 9. 1744. SIR,
YESTERDAY by Captain Adams from London I received Advice, which I can entirely
rely upon, confirming the Hints given me in your Letter, that a Combination has
been for some Time forming here to prevent the Act of the General Court of this
Province lately passed for finishing the late Land Bank or Manufactory Scheme
from receiving his Majesty's Royal Approbation; upon the obtaining of which,
and the due Execution of the Act the putting an immediate End to the Confusion
and unhappy Consequences of that mischievous Scheme (an Effect which all
Well-wishers to the Peace of the Country desire) entirely depends.

I have also received undoubted Intelligence, that the late G -- r B -- r is
deeply concerned in this Combination with a Person here, who attempted to
engage some Gentlemen of very great Distinction and Worth on your Side of the
Water to use their Intetest for procuring his Majesty's Disapprobation of the
abovementioned Act of this Government; and that authenticated Proofs of some
pretended unwarrantable Proceedings of this Government relating to the Persons
concerned in the late Land Bank Scheme were to be transmitted by Mr. B -- r,
who was personally to represent, the same in all their Circumstances, together
with the Management of several Persons therein, so as that they might come to
the Knowledge of the Government at Home, -- that Mr. B -- r's Correspondents at
Home were to prepare Matters against his Arrival there; and that Letters have
been forwarded to London from Mr. B -- r and his Friend containing many
scandalous Reflections and Calumnies upon this Government.

This Advice, Sir, tallies with the Reports, which have been openly talked of
here and currently believed, concerning Mr. B -- r's general Views in going to
London, and so fully discovers his Scheme in taking out of the Secretary's
Office, under the Province Seal, Copies of all the Proceedings of this
Government upon the Affairs of the late Land Bank Company, during the Time of
his own and the present Ad -- n, that it leaves no Room to doubt of the Use,
which he designs to make of those Papers, and how capable he is of representing
both his own and his Suc -- r's Proceedings in a false Light. -- Wherefore as
you are so good, Sir, as to offer the Continuance of your Service to the
Country for disappointing the past and future Machinations of the honorable
Gentleman and his Associate for perpetuating (as far as in them lies) the
malignant Effects of the Land Bank Scheme in the Province; and for defeating
all their secret Attempts on your Side of the Water to misrepresent and traduce
the Acts of this Government, and to engage Persons of the greatest Honor and
Worth to use their Interest to the Prejudice of it, I now transmit you a
particular Account of the Rise, Progress, and Consequences of the late Land
Bank or Manufactory Scheme from the first Projection of it to this Time; and
also of another memorable one called the Silver Scheme, so far as it is
connected with the Land Bank Scheme, that you may furnish yourself from thence
with the Knowledge of all such Facts, as are necessary to be known by you, in
order to state all the Transactions and Proceedings of this Government upon
these Schemes both under the late and present Ad -- n in their true Light,

But before I proceed to give you a Detail of them, I must take the Liberty
upon this Occasion to say, Sir, that I think the Conjunction of the Parties
engaged in this Combination is a very extraordinary one: A Gentleman, who had
not long ago the Honor to be his Majesty's G -- r of this Province, is in
League with One, who is commonly reputed, ever since the Act of Parliament for
suppressing the Land Bank Scheme took Effect, to have made a Trade and Business
of buying up the late Land Bank Company's Bills in Order to make Demands upon
the late Directors and Partners of it, for the Sake of private Gain, and to lay
such of 'em under Contributions to him, as could be brought to pay him any Sum,
in order to screen themselves from Actions commenced, or threatened to be
commenced by him against them, and scandalously prostituting the Act of
Parliament designed for the Relief, and Benefit of such Possessors only of the
Bills, as had unwarily taken them in the common Course of their Traffic and
Dealings, and for the Suppression of the Scheme, to the base Purposes of his
own Avarice and Revenge, and making a mere Stale of the Act for his vile
Practices: I say, his late Ex -- cy takes into his Cabal such an Associate to
assist him in his Attempt to defeat the Measures of this Government for
extricating the Country from the Mischiefs of this Scheme; which together with
the Silver Scheme were the produce of his own Ad -- n, the latter of them
having grown up under his special Grace and Favor, and the former by his
Permission. -- I now proceed to the Account of the two Schemes.

Mr. Colman of this Town, late Treasurer of the Land Bank Company, was the
original Projector of the Land Bank Scheme; and it appears by two of his
Letters on that Subject to the late G -- r B -- r, one dated April 11th 1737,
and the other January 14th 1740, (Copies of both which Mr. Colman has been
induced to expose upon the Occasions herein mentioned) that he had communicated
his Scheme to his late Ex -- cy three Years before the Land Bank Company was
formed, in order to take his Sentiments upon it; and had several Times
discoursed with him upon that Subject both before and after that Time; -- and
that he began to procure Subscriptions to his Scheme in 1737, of which he
apprized the G -- r in his first mentioned Letter, by telling him, "That he was
called upon every Day by Men of good Estates in Trade to bring the Thing (the
Scheme) forward, and that he could have a Hundred Subscribers in a Week's Time,
and had then met some Gentlemen upon it; but had waited till his [Ex -- cy's]
Return from Piscataqua, that he might see him before he proceeded so far, but
he then purposed to go on with the Scheme, and hoped for Success in it.

Before I quit this Letter of Mr. Colman's, I must inform you, that it appears
by it, that the late G -- r had objected against his Scheme, that the Bills
were not to be redeemable by Silver -- To obviate which, and another Objection,
and to show the Expediency of the Scheme, Mr. Colman argues with his Ex -- cy
through his whole Letter; and to induce him to Countenance the Scheme, assures
him, amongst other Things, that he had his Ex -- cy's private Interest in View
in it; telling him, that the Lands, his Ex -- cy was endeavoring to sell
Westward (in order to pay off a Debt due, from him to the Estate of the late
Mr. Lloyd of London) as he was informed, would not then fetch ten Thousand
Pounds, which would in a little Time fetch more than twenty Thousand Pounds;
and then proceeds in the following Words, Would it not then be much more for
your Interest to take ten Thousand Pounds out of this Bank, which would not
cost you above three per Cent, (the Terms upon which the other Subscribers to
the Scheme were to have their Shares of the Bills) and to keep your Lands? And
if the G -- r does not think proper to appear himself in such an Affair, he
does not want Friends, who will manage it for him, with as much Secresy as he
can desire -- And he afterward adds, that he could not expect his Ex -- cy
would appear openly for it (the Scheme) which he wished he could, because he
knew it would be very pleasing to the People. -- I have mentioned this Part of
the Contents of that Letter so particularly, that you may the better judge
between Mr. B -- r, and the late Treasurer and Directors of the Land Bank
Company concerning the Treasurer's Proposal in it to Mr. B -- r to take
l,10,000 of the Land Bank Bills at the before mentioned Interest.

Upon the Foundation of this Proposal, when it was apparent that the Land Bank
Scheme would be destroyed, and Mr. B -- r became suspected of having favored
it in it is first Rise; he then, and not before (as Mr. Colman and the late
Directors say) declared in his own Vindication, that the Land Bank Company had
offered to give him l. 10,000 in Bills of Credit of the old Tenor; nay, that he
might have had l.20,000 old Tenor from them to favor their Scheme, and that he
refused it: This Assertion Mr. Colman and the late Directors insist is
groundless, and look on it as an Aspersion upon them: They say, that this
Proposal or rather Question of Mr. Colman's to the late G -- r, upon which he
grounds his Assertion, was made to him above three Years before the Company was
formed, and before the Persons, who were afterward chosen Directors of it, had
entertained Thoughts of their being interested in the Scheme; that it was made
by Mr. Colman without the Privity of any other Person whatsoever; that neither
that or any other Proposal or Offer of any Kind, was ever renewed or made
afterward to his late Ex -- cy, or any other Person either directly or
indirectly by Mr. Colman, or the Directors, or Partners of the said late
Company, or any of them, or by any other Person on Account of the said Mr.
Colman and Company, or any of them to induce his late Ex -- cy to favor or
connive at their Scheme, except that some of them had heard that Mr. C -- r J
-- L -- n of this Province, a Person publicly known not to be of found Mind
and Memory, had taken Occasion, without the Consent or Privity of any of them,
to make some Offer or Proposal to his late Ex -- cy of Advantages, that might
be reaped by him from the said late Company; but what the particular Proposal
or Offer might be, none of them were ever informed; and if any such was made,
whatever it was, his Ex -- cy had no just Reason to give the least Credit to
it; and that the said C -- J -- L -- n, though he was a Subscriber to the Scheme,
never was a Partner or any Ways interested in it; and this Mr. Colman and all
the late Directors, except one Gentleman, who has been for these last two Years
in London, and for that Reason could not join in the Deposition, have lately in
their Justification declared upon Oath. -- And these Gentlemen farther insist
that had the Proposal mentioned in Mr. Colman's Letter been really made to his
late Ex -- cy by the whole Company, it is evidently no more than that he should
take l.10,000 in Land Bank Bills in a private Manner, but upon paying the same
Interest for it, that other Partners of the Scheme were to pay for their Shares
of the Bills; that his Ex -- cy well knew that he could not pay off a Sterling
Debt in London by the Help of those Bills, nor indeed could they have been of
Service to him in any other Respect, as it was impracticable for any one Person
to have found Vent for a fifth Part of l.10,000 in those Bills, especially in a
private Manner, as his Ex -- cy must have done, had he accepted them. -- Mr. B
-- r on the other Hand is so fond of this boasted refusal of l.10,000 old
Tenor, as he calls it, and Mr. Colman's Letter, upon which he founds his
Assertion, that he has several Times declared (as I have been informed) that he
would not take ten Thousand Pounds for the Letter. -- Upon the whole, I shall
leave you to judge for your self upon Mr. B -- r's Construction of the Terms of
this Proposal, and whether it can be deemed the Proposal of the Company to him;
and proceed to inform you, that soon after the sending of this Letter to his Ex
-- cy Mr Colman began to take in Subscriptions to his Scheme, in order to form
a Company or Partnership upon it, as he had apprized the G -- r he would, and
proceeded in it without any Check or Interruption for above two Years, and
'till he had procured 395 Subscribers. -- And in 1739 the Silver Scheme which
was at first reputed to be the Project of Col. Hutchinson of this Place, and
called by his Name, began to be formed. -- This Scheme plainly appears to have
taken it is Rise from the Land Bank Scheme, and indeed to have been formed upon
near the same Plan, but in several Respects considerably corrected and amended,
and by the 25th of March 1740 had got 106 Subscribers.

The Land Bank Scheme, as it was finally settled, was a Scheme for the Emission
of l.150,000 in Notes of Hand on Land Security to be received in Trade, and for
all Debts by the Partners as equal to lawful Money, and at the Expiration of
twenty Years to be redeemed by several Commodities therein enumerated, but not
at any fixed Price: and in the mean Time l.10,000 of that Sum was to be
employed in Trade as the Company's Stock to be exchanged for their Notes, as
the Possessors of them should want and demand any of the Commodities in their
Treasury.

And the Tenor of the Notes, which were to be signed by the Directors, and
endors'd Joseph Marion, was as follows, viz.

We jointly and severally Promise for our Selves and Partners to take this Bill
as lawful Money at six Shillings and eight Pence per Ounce in all Payments,
Trade and Business, and for Stock in our Treasury at any Time; and after twenty
Years to pay the same at that Estimate on Demand to Mr. Joseph Marion or Order
in the Produce or Manufactures enumerated in our Scheme, for Value received.

The Silver Scheme was for the Emission of l.120,000 in Notes redeemable by
Silver Money at 20 s per Ounce in fifteen Years, and by Gold Coin pro rata.

And by the 19th Article of this Scheme the Partners of it agreed and promised
that they would receive in Trade, and for Debts due (Specialties and express
Contracts excepted) the Bills emitted on the Scheme at the following Rates, in
the several Terms, and Periods therein after mentioned, viz. for the first year
after their Emission at the Rate of twenty eight Shillings and four Pence for
an Ounce of Silver, for the second Year after their Emission, at the Rate of
twenty seven Shillings and nine Pence; for the third Year at the Rate of twenty
seven Shillings and two Pence, and so on in the like Proportion lessening the
Price of Silver to the Possessors of the Bills seven Pence per Ounce in each
Year, 'till by the 15th Year it was reduced to twenty Shillings per Ounce --
and that the Directors of the Company should be and were thereby accordingly
obliged to exchange and give in the common current Bills to every Possessor of
the Notes on Demand so much as would purchase one Ounce of Silver for twenty
eight Shillings and four Pence in those Notes for the first Year after their
coming out, and so much as would purchase one Ounce of Silver for twenty seven
Shillings and nine Pence for the second Year, and in the same Manner during the
whole fifteen Years. -- And by the Tenor of the Notes of this Scheme, which
were signed by the Directors and indors'd Isaac Winslow, the Directors, jointly
and severally Promise to pay to Isaac Winslow Merchant or Order in Boston --
Ounces of Silver Sterling Alloy, or -- Standard Gold, both coined and Troy
Weight by the 31 st of December 1755. Value received, etc. -- And upon the Back
of the Notes it was advertised thus; All the Subscribers to this Scheme promise
and oblige themselves to take this Bill at the Rates undermentioned in all
Trade and Business 1741 an Ounce of Silver at the Rate of 28 s 4 d 1742 -- 27 s
9 d 1743 -- 27 s 2 d And so on in like Proportion 'till the Year 1755 at the
Rate of twenty Shillings, according to the before recited nineteenth Article;
but without any mention of exchanging the Notes for the common current Bills,
or being signed by any Person.

Upon comparing the two Schemes and Companies together these Observations seem
to be very obvious, 1 st. That the Sum in Notes of Hand proposed to be emitted
by the Land Bank Company, being l. 150,000 to pass as lawful Money (that is)
equal to l.600,000 in Bills of Credit of the old Tenor, was in it self,
exclusive of the badness of the Scheme in other Respects, such an immoderate
Sum, as must not only have vastly depreciated the Company's Bills, but all the
other Bills current within the Province, and consequently have been extremely
mischievous to the Community; whereas the Sum proposed to be emitted by the
Partners of the Silver Scheme was but one fifth Part of the intended Land Bank
Sum.

2 dly. That the Land Bank Bills were not redeemable 'till the End of twenty
Years, and then at no certain Value; the enumerated Commodities, in one or
other of which they were made redeemable, being uncertain as to the Prices to
be set upon them by the Company, and as to the Species of them, in which each
Possessor might exchange his Bills; and in the mean Time the Bills were not
secured in the least from depreciating below their nominal Value; whereas the
Bills of the Silver Scheme were redeemable with Silver or Gold at a certain
Value at the End of fifteen Years, and were proposed by the 19th Article of it
to be secured against depreciating below their nominal Value in the mean Time
by being made exchangeable for such Quantities of the common current Bills, as
would purchase the Silver promised by the Bill in each of the fifteen Years at
the Rates mentioned in the Scheme.

3 dly. The Directors and Partners of the Land Bank Company, a very few of them
only excepted, were Persons of but mean Circumstances, whereas the Partners of
the Silver Scheme were many of them Persons of good Estates; and the Directors
in particular were some of them principal Merchants in Boston, and of the best
Credit and most considerable Estates in the Province, and the Company was
undoubtedly capable of executing their Scheme, so that it was no Imposition
upon the World in that Respect.

Upon these Accounts therefore and others, which might be mentioned, the Silver
Scheme Company was much preferable to the Land Bank Company; but in Respect of
their unlawful Combination they were both upon a Par; and the Land Bank Scheme,
by which that Company's Bills were agreed to be received by them in all
Payments, so that those Bills would discharge all Kinds of Debts owing to any
of the Land Bank Partners, whereas Debts due by Specialties and express
Contracts in writing were excepted out of the Debts dischargeable by the Bills
of the Silver Scheme, that is, all Debts, if the Partners of that Company
pleased, were excepted, was even preferable in that Respect to the Silver
Scheme; -- and the Silver Scheme seems also to be very exceptionable on Account
of the exorbitant Gain arising to the Company from the Possessors of the Bills;
For at the Time of the Emission of those Bills the Price of Silver in Boston
was 28 s. 4 d. per Ounce in Bills of Credit of the old Tenor, so that the
Discount, which the Company allowed to the Possessors upon their Bills or
Notes, that were not payable 'till fifteen Years and five Months after Date,
was no more than after the Rate of about 30 per Cent. whereas the just Discount
upon 'em, reckoning the Interest of Money at 6 per Cent, which is the lawful
and common Interest a: Boston, was near 60 per Cent, so that after deducting 3
per Cent. for the Charges of the Company there was left 27 per Cent. clear
Gains coming to it from the Possessors of the Bills, which was a most
unjustifiable Imposition upon them, and not to be countenanced in any
Community: Nay besides these excessive Gains the Company by their Scheme would
have got a considerable Profit upon such of their Bills, as they should take in
Payments or Exchange for the common current Bills each Year by the following
Circumstance, viz. they were to allow either in Exchange for their Bills, or in
any Payments throughout the Year 1741 (for Instance) no more than about two and
half per Cent, whereas according to the plain Reason of their Scheme they ought
at the End of every three Months in that and every succeeding Year, 'till the
End of their Scheme, to have advanced upwards of an half per Cent. to the
Possessors upon their Notes; that is to say, they should have allowed at the
End of three Months in the Year 1741 upwards of three per Cent, at the End of
six Months in that Year upwards of three and half per Cent, and at the End of
nine Months upwards of four per Cent, etc. -- And even the Performance of this
Part of the Scheme seems not to have been well secured to the Possessors of the
Bills; for it is not expressed in the Body of the Bills, as by the Help of a
short Reference to the 19th Article of this Scheme it might, and ought to have
been, in order to have given the Possessors a lawful Demand against the
Directors, signers of the Bills; but it was only mentioned in an Advertisement
or Memorandum on the Back of the Bill not signed by any Person, (and upon which
no Demand could be grounded in Law) that all the Subscribers to the Scheme
promised and obliged themselves to take the Bills at the Rates undermention'd
in all Trade and Business; and without any mention of their taking it in
Payment of Debts, or of the Directors being obliged to exchange it for common
current Bills pursuant to the 19th Article of the Scheme; so that the best
Security, which the Possessors had for the Execution of this Part of the
Scheme, was the Characters of the Directors, which indeed were deservedly such,
as that they might have been depended upon in this Case; though that does not
mend their Scheme. -- And to do those Gentlemen Justice, they never pretended
(at least the most sensible of them) to justify this Scheme farther than by
insisting that it was much better (and in Truth it was vastly so) than the Land
Bank Scheme, and that the Possessors of their Bills were much better secured
from suffering Loss by any Depreciation of 'em than the Possessors of the
Province Bills were; which last was also certainly true: And they further
insist in their Defense, that their Scheme was from the Beginning concerted and
carried on with the Privity and express Approbation of the late G -- r whom,
they say, they acquainted from Time to Time with every Step; they took in it;
and indeed it was in the Time of it generally understood so to be. -- This last
Circumstance indeed seems very surprising, viz. that the King's G -- r, who was
expressly directed by his Majesty's Royal Instructions to him to take especial
Care, that no more than the Sum of l.30,000 in Paper Bills (that is the Value
of l.30,000 Sterling in those Bills) emitted even by the Legislature, and that
too for the Support of his Majesty's Government, should be current at one and
the same Time; and was expressly forbid to give his Consent to any Act, that
should be passed by the Assembly for emitting any Sums in Bills of Credit upon
any Account whatsoever, except for the Support of his Majesty's Government,
should approve of an unlawful Combination of private Persons for emitting any
Sum in Bills of Credit to pass in Lieu of Money, especially to large an one as
that proposed by the Silver Scheme Company, and upon such as unjustifiable
Scheme as theirs was, and that too at a Time when he knew that the Parliament
of Great Britain had the restraining and regulating of the Paper Currency in
his Majesty's Amererican Colonies under their Consideration. -- But the
Veracity of the Gentlemen, who assert the Fact is unquestionable.

The Merchants were now so alarmed at the Progress, which the Land Bank Scheme
had made, and stirred so much in Opposition to it, that on the 18th of March
1739 a Vote of Council was passed for raising a Committee of both Houses to
inquire into the two Schemes, and make Report thereon, and of what they judged
proper for that Court to do; which was concurred by the House of
Representatives, and consented to by the G -- r, according to his Ex -- cy's
general Custom of signing his Consent to Votes of the two Houses of the like
Sort; and on the 28th of the same March the Committee reported upon the two
Schemes as follows, viz. That the Notes proposed to be issued by Mr. Colman's
Scheme were upon so slender a Foundation, that the Circulation of them among
the People of this Province might have a great Tendency to depreciate the Bills
of Credit already circulating, and consequently endamage his Majesty's good
Subjects as to their Property; and that with Regard to Col. Hutchinson's
Scheme, They were of Opinion that although some such Projection might be
serviceable, unless a better Medium of Commerce might be found out for the
People of this Province, under their then distressing Circumstances, yet they
apprehended it most convenient that all farther Proceedings thereon should be
stayed 'till this Court might again meet and consider of that Affair.

Upon this Report the following Vote originated and was passed in the House of
Representatives, and was concurred by the Council, and consented to by the G --
r, viz. That John Colman, Esquire and his Partners, and Edward Hutchinson Esquire and
his Partners be and were thereby strictly forbidden issuing any Notes of Hand
or Bills in pursuance of, or any further Proceedings relating to their
beforementioned Schemes or Projections, 'till the sitting of the General Court
in May next, and the farther Consideration of the Affair was referred to that
Time accordingly. And on the fourth of April following his Ex -- cy with the
Advice of his Majesty's Council issued a Proclamation to inform all Persons of
the beforementioned Proceedings and Orders of the General Court, and forbid the
Persons concerned in the Land Bank and Silver Schemes to issue any Notes of
Hand or Bills as a Medium of Trade and Commerce, or to proceed further in their
beforementioned Schemes 'till the Session of the General Assembly in May then
next ensuing.

It appears evident from these Proceedings, that the G -- r had at that Time a
fair Opportunity of suppressing the Land Bank Scheme effectually; that the
House of Representatives had given him a manifest Proof, by their late Vote, of
their good Disposition toward doing it, and that nothing was wanting but a
Message or Speech from his Ex -- cy recommending to the Assembly to project
some Law for that Purpose; in which Case it was apparent, that there would have
been little or no Difficulty in getting the Law passed: that on the other Hand,
the Hazard of neglecting this Opportunity was as plain; it being then well
known that the Land Bank Scheme was a most popular one; that the Hearts of the
Debtors and Countrymen in general were much engaged in it, which must
unavoidably influence the ensuing Election of Representatives; and that the
majority of the next House of Representatives could not fail of being such, as
would be more inclined to favor the Scheme than the House then subsisting was:
It seemed therefore very extraordinary, if his Ex -- cy was at that Time
determined to have suppressed the Scheme, that he should let slip so favorable
an Opportunity of doing it, and trust the Fate of it, when it had already
gained 395 Subscribers, and was bro't so near to Maturity, and seemed to be
upon the Point of being carried into Execution, to a bare Order of the General
Court for suspending it only for two Months; within which Time it could not but
be expected, though no formal Proceedings should be made openly in the Scheme,
that it is Party would still grow and spread more through the Country, and be
strengthened by Patrons in the next House of Representatives. -- As to his Ex
-- cy's Proclamation for informing the People of the Order of the General
Court, there seemed to be Danger of its being looked upon by 'em as a Thing of
Course only, and not to be avoided by the G -- r after the General Court had
passed that Order; and that it could have no great Influence for preventing the
Progress of the Scheme, since the Language in which his Ex -- cy there speaks
of it, is the same with that, in which he speaks of the Silver Scheme, which it
was generally understood he had approved of and encouraged.

On the 28th of May following the first Session of the next Assembly began, and
the Injunction laid on the Partners of the two Schemes by the beforementioned
Order of the late General Court and Proclamation was expired, and they were at
Liberty to proceed to the Execution of 'em: On the 29th the G -- r opened the
Session with a Speech to both Houses, the Business of which is generally looked
on to be to point out to the Assembly such Matters as the G -- r would
recommend to them to take under immediate Consideration; and accordingly his Ex
-- cy did in that Speech point out several particular Things to 'em. And among
others it might well have been expected that he should have pressed upon them
an immediate Consideration of the two Schemes, as what would not admit of
Delay; but it is very remarkable that he entirely passed them over in Silence
in his Speech, and did not so much as recommend the Consideration of them by
any Message afterward during the whole Session. -- On the 4th of June the two
Schemes were read in the new House of Representatives, and ordered to lie on
the Table; and on the 6th the House (alone) entered into the Consideration of
the Land Bank Scheme; and the Persons concerned in it were admitted to be fully
heard in the House upon their Arguments in Support of it. -- On the same Day
great Numbers of the most considerable Merchants and Traders in the Province
signed and presented a Memorial to the G -- r and Council and Representatives,
setting forth the pernicious Tendency of the Land Bank Scheme, and praying that
to prevent such base and grievous Oppression, and the Confusions consequent
thereon, his Ex -- cy, the Council and Representatives, would discountenance
and suppress so great a Mischief. Which was read in the House of
Representatives the same Day also; but no Order was made thereon, except that
the Scheme should be farther considered on the 18th of that Month: Which
Proceedings discovered plain Symptoms of the good Disposition of the House
toward the Scheme.

On the 12th of June the Council, who were ever well disposed to prevent the
Execution of the Scheme, being excited by the Memorial of the Merchants to make
use of their best Endeavors for that Purpose at this critical Conjuncture, and
alarmed at the separate Proceedings of the House of Representatives in the
Affair, which in the last Assembly had been referred to the Consideration of a
joint Committee of both Houses, though it it might be of Service, as the former
Assembly (in March before) had put off the Consideration of the two Schemes to
this present Session, to have another joint Committee appointed, that so both
Houses might act in concert, and thereupon passed a Vote that five of their
Members with such as should be appointed by the House of Representatives,
should be a Committee to consider and report what would be proper for the Court
farther to do thereon: which Vote was concurred in the House of
Representatives, and eight of their Members were joined with the five Members
of the Board in the Affair. -- It is observable here that though his Ex -- cy,
according to his frequent Practice in like Cases, had signed his Consent to the
Vote of the last Assembly for appointing a joint Committee of both Houses to
consider and make Report upon the two Schemes, yet he omitted doing it to this
last Vote: Indeed the G -- r's signing his Consent to any such Votes was
improper and unprecedented, what was not practiced by his Predecessors, and
will not I dare say be imitated by his Successors; but yet as this was his
usual Practice, it seems remarkable that he should depart from it in this
Instance. -- Some have been of Opinion that possibly his Ex -- cy might not
think it proper for him publicly to declare himself in Opposition to the Land
Bank Scheme at this Time, before the Assembly had passed the Bill for his
Support that Year; which is always done in the May Session: But if he had been
influenced by that Consideration, though I think he had no just Grounds to fear
that such a Declaration from him to the Assembly would have moved them to offer
at so unjustifiable a Proceeding, as to obstruct the granting of his Salary,
yet it is certain, that had he been desirous of suppressing the Scheme, he
might with the utmost Safety to his Interest, and without any Danger of giving
Umbrage, have in a private Way tried his Influence for that Purpose with his
Friends and Dependants in the House, among whom were some of the leading Men of
the Land Bank Party, which it is certain he did not in the least do: and it is
surprising that he should not in all this Time once attempt to dissuade Mr.
Colman from proceeding in his Scheme, or advise him against it or declare to
him that he would finally oppose it, as will appear hereafter that he did not.
-- This new joint Committee, which had failed of having his Ex -- cy's Consent
signed to the Vote for raising it, which the Vote of the former Assembly for
raising their joint Committee upon the like Occasion had obtained, never once
met to consider of the Schemes referred to them, the Members of the House
having refused to meet the Members of the Board, and to act any Thing with
them, though called upon by the Board's Members for that Purpose

On the 18th of June whilst the Matter was referred to the Committee of both
Houses, and before that Committee had met upon it, the House of Representatives
(alone) took the Land Bank Scheme into Consideration a third Time. -- And upon
the Day following the Question being put there, Whether the Persons concerned
in the said Scheme should be strictly forbidden to issue any Bills or Notes of
Hand in pursuance of the Scheme, It was resolved in the Negative by 59 Voices
against 37; the Names of the Voters on both Sides being taken and inserted in
two Lists in the Journal of the House, so that every Abettor of the Land Bank
Scheme in the House of Representatives was publicly known, as the Names of the
Subscribers to it were before, by the List given in to the former Assembly. --
By this irregular Proceeding and strong Declaration of the House of
Representatives in Favor of the Land Bank Scheme it sufficiently appeared what
imminent Danger there was that it would be very soon carried into Execution,
especially as the Number of the Subscribers to it, which in March proceeding
appeared by the List given in to both Houses to be 395, was by this Time
exceedingly increased. -- On the 21st of June the Bill for the G -- r's Support
passed both Houses to be enacted; and upon the 23d his Ex -- cy signed that and
some other Acts; upon which Occasion he sent for the House of Representatives
to attend him in the Council Chamber, and made a Speech to them, wherein he
recommended to 'em several Matters to be done before the rising of the Court;
among which, if he had been the least inclined to have prevented the Execution
of the Land Bank Scheme, he could not possibly have neglected at that Crisis to
have pressed the Prevention of it upon the Assembly, nor have withstood the
strong Application of the Merchants so lately made to him and the other two
Branches of the Legislature against the Scheme; and as his Salary was now
secured to him, he could be under no Restraint, for fear of the Grant of that is
being obstructed by any Attempt to suppress the Scheme.

The Merchants being now in the utmost Alarm at the Proceedings of the House
of Representatives made a second Application directed to the G -- r and C -- l
as their last Resort, praying as well in Behalf of the Principals the Merchants
of Great Britain as themselves, that his Ex -- cy and the C -- l would
interpose to prevent the Execution of the Scheme, which they represented not
only as destructive of their own Interest, and that of the British Merchants,
but also of the Welfare of the Province in general. -- This Memorial was
subscribed by 129 of the principal Merchants, Traders and Gentlemen in the
Province, and presented by them in a great Body to his Ex -- cy in the Council
Chamber, and farther pressed upon him by private Applications to him at the
Province-House: Upon which Occasions in his Discourse he fully condemned the
Scheme, and took Opportunities to promise the Merchants that he would send for
the Representatives into the Council Chamber before he suffered the Assembly to
rise, and in a Speech to them expose the Malignancy and pernicious Consequences
of the Scheme in a strong Light, and make Use of all his Weight and Influence
with them for preventing its being carried into Execution. -- This indeed was a
probable Method for preventing it: and if by these pressing Applications of the
Merchants, and the Obligations of his own repeated Promises to them thereupon
his Ex -- cy could have been prevailed upon to have made this one Attempt for
suppressing the Scheme; late as it was, and notwithstanding all former
Neglects, it would in all Probability have effectually prevented it: But
notwithstanding his Promises to the contrary, and that the Assembly continued
sitting more than a Fortnight after the second Memorial had been presented, he
prorogued the Assembly to the 20th of August following, without making the
least Mention of the Affair to the House of Representatives either in a Speech
or even by Message: But instead thereof on the 17th of July, five Days after
the rising of the Court, and about three Weeks after the last Application of
the Merchants, with the Advice of his Majesty's Council issued a second
Proclamation giving Notice and Warning to all his Majesty's Subjects of the
Danger, they were in [from the Land Bank Scheme] and cautioning them against
receiving or passing it is Notes, as tending to defraud Men of their Substance,
and disturb the Peace and good Order of the People, and give great
Interruption, and bring much Confusion into their Trade and Business.

It must be very surprising if after the Experience of the little Effect, that
the former Proclamation against both the Schemes, though grounded upon, and
strengthened by a preceding Order of the whole General Court, and framed in
stronger Terms than this, had to stop the Progress of them, his Ex -- cy could
possibly expect that this Proclamation cautioning the People etc. but not going
even so far as to prohibit the Partners of the Land Bank Company from
proceeding in their unlawful Combination, and uttering their Notes, would have
any Influence upon the People against the declared Sentiments of a great
Majority of the House of Representatives, and the general Bent of the Country,
which was now grown fond of the Scheme: And accordingly the Merchants were much
dissatisfied with the Behavior of the G -- r in the Time of it, if we may
judge of their Sentiments by those of two of the principal Ones among them, who
were the leading Men in the Application from hence for procuring an Act of
Parliament to suppress the Scheme, and expressed their Resentment of his Ex --
cy's Usage of them in their Letters, dated the 20th of July and the 9th of
August following to their Correspondent in London to this Effect, (...) the G
-- r had deceived the Merchants by breaking his Promise to them that the
Assembly should not rise till he had made a Speech to them in Favor of their
Memorials, and exposed the Scheme, which he (...) condemned, but not done any
Thing, except issuing out a Proclamation, which he knew would signify nothing
but to amuse the Vulgar; that had he exposed the Scheme publicly in the
Assembly as he ought to have done and promised he would, they verily believed
it would have had the desired Effect.

There was indeed among other extraordinary Circumstances of his Ex -- cy's
Behavior respecting the Land Bank Scheme, during the late Session of the
Assembly, one that seems particularly Remarkable: Major Wise a Trader in
Ipswich and the Representative of that Town was publicly known both from the
List of the Subscribers to the Land Bank Scheme, and that of the Voters in
Favor of it in the House of Representatives, as well as other Transactions, to
be a very considerable Subscriber to and Promoter of that Scheme; and it
appears that on the 9th of July about a Week after the second Memorial of the
Merchants had been presented to his Ex -- cy and the C -- l against the Sheme,
and his Ex -- cy's strong Promises to 'em that he would discountenance it and
endeavor to suppress it, his Ex -- cy in C -- l appointed the Captains of the
ten Companies proposed to be raised in this Province for his Majesty's Service
in the late Expedition against the Spanish Settlements in the West Indies, and
that Major Wise was the second Captain in his Ex -- cy's List. -- This
Appointment was very far from denoting his Ex -- cy's Displeasure against the
Promoters of the Land Bank Scheme, and seemed a Mark rather of his
countenancing than discouraging of them: It appeared very strange indeed that
his Ex -- cy should not have it in his Power, had it been in his Inclinations,
to influence a Person so dependent upon him as Mr. Wise was in his Vote
concerning the Scheme; or that Mr. Wise, whilst he was suing for his Ex -- cy's
Favor, should be so imprudent as to abet the Scheme so publicly, had he in
the least conceived it would have been displeasing to his Ex -- cy, or that
after he had appeared openly in supporting the Scheme his Ex -- cy should so
immediately distinguish him by a peculiar Mark of his Favor, if he had been
then really disgusted at those, who promoted and supported the Scheme. -- Had
his Ex -- cy indeed been at a Loss to have found proper Persons, and of
sufficient Interest to have raised the ten Companies proposed, something might
have been alleged in Excuse for his preferring a Land-Banker at that Time to
be one of his Captains: But that was far from being the Case; he had before
most unaccountably and contrary to the Practice of all his Majesty's other G --
rs in North America on that Occasion refused the Service of two Persons for
raising each of them a Company, both of 'em of superior Pretensions to those
of Mr. Wise, as well as of all his Ex -- cy's other Captains, except one, with
Regard to their Skill in military Affairs, and their Interest in the Country
for raising Soldiers; one of them having then actually engaged seventy Men for
the Service, and the other being undoubtedly capable of raising two Hundred, if
they had been required; both whom he rejected with great Marks of Indignity and
Insolence, as I am credibly informed, to the present G -- r (who engaged them
in the Service and recommended them to his late Ex -- cy) merely because he had
engaged them, and presumed to recommend them.

On the 30th of July, thirteen Days after the issuing of the second
Proclamation, the Subscribers to the Land Bank. Scheme being now increased to
upwards of 800 formed themselves into a Company, and chose their Treasurer,
Directors and other Officers; and on the ^9th of September following executed
their mutual Agreements and Covenants; and begun to issue out l.49,525 of their
Notes, which were then struck off. -- In the mean Time, the Persons concerned
in the Silver Scheme had formed themselves into a Company and chosen their
Officers, and by the first of August begun to issue out l.120,000 of their
Notes.

On the 20th of August following the Assembly met again and continued sitting
'till the 12th of September, on which last Day of the Session, and not before,
his Ex -- cy being sufficiently apprized of the Dissatisfaction of the
Merchants, and their intended Complaint to his Majesty and Application for an
Act of Parliament to suppress the Land Bank Scheme, though it proper to take Notice
of the two Schemes to both Houses, which he did this first Time in a Message to
them; wherein he recommended a strict Inquiry into the Nature of those Schemes
by a Committee of that Court in its Recess, and in the mean Time to prohibit
any farther Proceedings in them without Leave from the Government, which might
prevent great Confusion and Loss in the Estates and Trade of the Province.

Upon this Message a Debate was had in the House, and the Question being put
first, Whether a Committee should be appointed to inquire (in the Recess of the
Court) into the Nature of the two Schemes, and report thereon at the next
Session, and the Undertakers be strictly forbidden proceeding any farther upon
the said Schemes in the mean Time; it passed in the Negative. -- Then the
Question was put, Whether a Committee should be appointed to consider the
Nature of said Schemes, in the Recess of the Court, and report at the next
Sitting; which also passed in the Negative.

And indeed by this Time when it was publicly known that six of the leading
Members in the House of Representatives were Directors of the Land Bank
Company, and several others of the Members Partners in the Scheme, and a great
majority of them Abettors of it, and when the Company was formed, and had
entered into mutual Agreements and Covenants for carrying on the Scheme, and
had actually carried it into Execution by issuing out their Notes, so that it
was too late to prevent the Execution of their Scheme, his Ex -- cy might very
safely venture to send such a Message to the House of Representatives
(especially on the last Day of the Session, when the Assembly is always
impatient to rise, and will seldom attend to Matters of Importance) without
running the least Risque of interrupting the Progress of the Land Bank Scheme.
-- As to his Ex -- cy's recommending an Inquiry into the Silver Scheme etc. in
his Message, which Scheme he had made no mention of in his second Proclamation,
but plainly dropped all Pretense of Opposition to it, and which it was publicly
known he approved of from the Beginning, and had been carried into Execution
six Weeks before, by the issuing of the Company's Notes, which had obtained a
Currency among the People, it could not possibly be looked on as any thing more
than mere Color and Form.

During the Recess of the General Court the G -- r, as appears by his Speech to
the Assembly made on the 22d of November, received Advice that Applications
were making to his Majesty and the Parliament of Great Britain against the Land
Bank Scheme; and about the same Time received from their Excellencies the then
Lords Justices of the Kingdom of Great Britain his Majesty's additional Royal
Instruction respecting the future Emission of Bills of Credit in the Province,
whereby he was directed not to give his Consent to any Act for emitting Bills
of public Credit, without a Clause's being inserted therein for suspending the
Execution of it, 'till his Majesty's Royal Pleasure should be known concerning
the Act: and this Instruction proceeded from an Address of the honorable House
of Commons, which had then lately taken the State of the Paper Currencies in
the Plantations under their Consideration, to his Majesty for that Purpose.

On the 5th Day of November during the Recess of the General Court the
Directors of the Silver Scheme at the Instance of the G -- r and C -- l, as it
seems by a Paragraph of his Ex -- cy's Speech made on the 22d of November to
the Assembly, executed an Instrument under their Hands and Seals, whereby after
reciting the beforementioned 19th Articles of their Scheme, which was one of
the original Articles of it, they covenanted for themselves and their
Survivors, (but with no Person whatsoever as Covenantee, so that it was
questioned whether any Action at Law could have been maintained upon that
Covenant) that they would at all Times comply with the said Article; and that
that Instrument should lie in the Province-Secretary's Office for the Use and
Benefit of the Possessors of the Bills; and on the same Day his Ex -- cy with
the Advice of the Council issued a Proclamation reciting that the Land Bank
Notes were struck off, and passing among the People, and warning all civil
Officers against signing or giving any Countenance or Encouragement to the
passing of them on Pain of being removed from their Offices, and on the Day
following issued another Proclamation of the like Tenor to warn all military
Officers under the like Penalty.

On the 22d of November the Assembly met again, and his Ex -- cy made them a
Speech, wherein he expresses himself thus concerning the two Schemes; You are
sensible, Gentlemen, that there have been for some Time past two Schemes or
Projections going forward for the emitting or circulating a great Quantity of
private Notes of Hand to pass in Lieu of Money; and I am told these Notes are
now getting out among the People: Such Proceedings in any Community without the
Leave and Countenance of the Government have been always judged of dangerous
Consequence to a Common Wealth; for which Reason the last Assembly of the
Province came into a Resolution of making Inquiry into those Things, and which
I wish had been duly pursued by you; but as it was not, the Governor and
Council (in the Recess of the Court) took these Matters into their
Consideration, in order to discountenance (as far as in them lay) any farther
Proceedings about them; and they brought the Undertakers of what is commonly
called the Silver Scheme to make an essential Amendment upon it, whereby every
Possessor of those Notes is entitled from the Undertakers to Silver or Gold on
Demand, at the Rates expressed in the Face of those Bills, or otherwise, that
the said Company have obliged themselves to pay any Difference that may happen
in the Price of Silver or Gold from the Time stated in those Notes, as the
Possessors may please to demand it of them; and this Amendment is made an
unalterable Article of that Scheme: and for the better Security of it an
authentic Instrument is executed by the Directors of the said Company, and
lodged in the Secretary's Office, and this will prevent any Fraud or Discount
on those Notes, all distant Periods of coming at Silver or Gold for them being
out of the Question.

But as for the Scheme for forming what is commonly called the Land Bank, it
appeared to the Governor and Council to be big with so many Mischiefs to this
People, that they thought it their indispensable Duty to bear public Testimony
against it (as they have done) and so save unwary People from the Injuries,
they might otherwise suffer by taking Notes for Money, which have not honest or
solid Foundation, and in the End may prove ruinous to such Possessors as may
have any Bulk of those Paper Notes: I would therefore earnestly recommend to
you the preparing of a Bill to be passed into a Law to stop any farther
Proceedings of those Projectors: You have no doubt had an Account of the
Applications now making to his Majesty and to the Parliament of Great Britain
for suppressing this dangerous Affair.

There are several Things very remarkable in the first recited Paragraph of
this Speech; the G -- r there asserts that he and the Council had during the
Recess of the then General Court endeavored to discountenance both the
Schemes; whereas in Reality his Ex -- cy and the Council had acted nothing upon
either of them in the first Recess of that Court, except issuing a Proclamation
concerning the Land Bank Scheme, which makes not the least mention of the
Silver Scheme, and by omitting to mention it plainly encouraged it; nor in the
second Recess, except issuing the Proclamations of the 5th and 6th of November
against the Land Bank Scheme, in neither of which any mention was made of the
Silver Scheme; and that on the 4th Day of November his Ex -- cy took up a Note
of the Silver Scheme of the Denomination of l. 10, and on the Back of it above
and under the before mentioned Advertisement did the Company the Honor to
express in his own Hand writing his Approbation of their Scheme in the
following Terms, viz.

Boston, Nov. 4. 1740.
Whoever may be Possessor of this Bill or any other put out by this Company is
entitled on Demand or every Day to Silver at the Rates expressed on the Back of
this Bill, not being obliged to wait any Period; but the Bill is really Gold or
Silver according to these Prices mentioned, as by an unalterable Article of the
Scheme.

In honorem bajus Societatis.

Which seems to have been designed by his Ex -- cy as a Present to the Company
of an Inscription and Motto to be printed on the Reverse of all their Bills,
that had the Rates of Silver expressed upon them, and is so far from
discountenancing the Scheme, that it contains an high Recommendation of it, and
Compliment to the Company. -- His Ex -- cy likewise asserts in that first
Paragraph, that he and the Council had brought the Undertakers of the Silver
Scheme to make an essential Amendment upon it; that such Amendment was (then)
made an unalterable Article of the Scheme, for the better Security of which
[Article] an authentic Instrument was executed by the Directors of that
Company and lodged in the Secretary's Office; whereas in Fact the Undertakers
did not make the least Amendment upon their Scheme; What the G -- r alludes to
is plainly the beforementioned 19th Article of that Scheme, which the Directors
had by their Instrument lodged in the Secretary's Office covenanted for
themselves and their Survivors that they would perform, which Instrument
indeed, such as it was, his Ex -- cy persuaded them to execute and lodge in the
Secretary's Office; But the Article, which his Ex -- cy says in his Speech
contains the essential Amendment of the Scheme, is one of the original Articles
of the Scheme, and never was in the least amended since it was first made. --
His Ex -- cy also asserts in the same Paragraph, that by that essential
Amendment (as he calls it) every Possessor of the Notes [of the Silver Scheme]
is entitled from the Undertakers to Silver or Gold upon Demand at the Rates
expressed upon the Face of those Bills [he means, as he before expressed
himself, on the Back of those Bills] or otherwise that the said Company have
obliged themselves to pay to the Possessors any Difference, that may happen in
the Price of Silver or Gold from the Price stated in those Notes, as the
Possessors may please to demand it of 'em -- all distant Periods of coming at
Silver or Gold for them [the Notes] being out of the Question: The Substance of
which his Ex -- cy also expressed in his beforementioned Inscription upon the
Back of one of those Notes in the following Words, viz. Whoever may be
Possessor of this Bill, or any Other put out by this Company is entitled on
Demand, or every Day to Silver at the Rates expressed on the Back of this Bill,
not being obliged to wait and Period; but the Bill is really Silver or Gold
according to these Prices mentioned: Whereas in Fact the Possessors of these
Notes were not entitled to demand Silver or Gold for 'em before the last Day of
December 1755, and in the mean Time were only entitled to have them exchanged
for common current Bills, that is Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut or
New Hampshire Bills (at the election of the Directors) at such Rates as to
prevent the Company's Bills from depreciating below their nominal Value.

It is not to be wondered at that the G -- r after receiving his additional
Instruction concerning the future Emissions of Province Bills, and being
appriz'd that Applications were making to his Majesty and the Parliament of
Great Britain for suppressing the Land Bank Scheme, (as he told the assembly he
was in his before mentioned Speech) should think it dangerous for him to delay
longer the declaring himself most fully in Opposition to that Scheme; that he
should at last come to the Point, and (amongst other Things) recommend to the
Assembly in the last recited Paragraph of his Speech to prepare a Bill to be
passed into a Law for stopping any farther Proceedings in the Scheme, an
Expedient the most obvious to be though it of from the Beginning. -- But it seems
most extraordinary indeed that after his Ex -- cy had so lately received the
Royal Instruction prohibiting his consenting to the Emission of any more Bills
of Credit by the Legislature, though even for the necessary Support of his
Majesty's Government, until the Act for emitting them should have received his
Majesty's Royal Approbation, he should not only strongly recommend an Emission
of l.120,000 in Notes, for a Medium of Trade, which were unlawful in Respect of
their Nature, and bad as to their particular Scheme; but that he should proceed
such unparralel'd Lengths, as to endeavor to impose false Facts upon the
People from the C -- r in order to recommend these Notes, though he had but just
before in the same Paragraph declared that such Proceedings [meaning Emissions]
in a Community without the Leave and Countenance of the Government had always
been judged of dangerous Consequence to a Common Wealth -- and that He and the
Council had in the Recess of the Court taken the two Schemes into their
Consideration, in order to discountenance, as far as in them lay, any farther
Proceedings in them* I say it is surprising indeed that his Ex -- cy from the C
-- r, immediately after having pronounced this Scheme dangerous to the
Commonwealth, and declaring that he and the Council had endeavored to
discountenance it, should in the same Breath dress it up to the People in false
Colors, in order to give the Company's Notes a better Currency among them.

On the 5th of December a Vote of Council was passed that Samuel Adams, William
Stoddard, and Samuel Watts, Esqrs; Justices of the Peace for the County of
Suffolk, and Robert Hale and John Choate, Esqrs; Justices of the Peace for the
County of Essex, five of the Directors of the Land Bank Company, should be
dismissed from their Offices of Justices of the Peace for persisting to
Countenance and encourage the passing of these Notes, and that Copies of that
Order should be transmitted by the Secretary to the Clerks of the Peace for the
said Counties; and on the same Day the Question being put in Council, whether
an Instrument entitled the Land Bank Scheme, which had been offered to the
Secretary by one of the Directors to be recorded in his Office, should be
recorded, it passed in the Negative. -- And on the 9th of the same Month a Vote
was passed in Council that George Leonard, Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the County of Bristol, and a Justice of the inferior Court of
Common Pleas in the same County, another of the Directors of the Land Bank
Scheme, should be removed from his Offices of Justice of the Peace and of the
Pleas for the same Reason and that a Copy of that Order should be transmitted
by the Secretary to the Clerks of the Peace, and of the Inferior Court of
Common Pleas for the said County. -- On the 19th of the same Month another Vote
of the Council was passed for dismissing Joseph Blanchard, Esquire a Partner of the
Land Bank Company from being a Justice of the Peace for the County of Middlesex
for the like Cause; and on the same Day another Vote of Council was passed that
the Secretary should write to the Registers of Deeds and Conveyances in the
several Counties to send him Lists of the Names of such Persons, as had made
Mortgage of their Estates for the Manufactory Bills, in order to be laid before
the Board.

In the same Month and Beginning of January other Votes of the Council were
passed for removing other Justices of the Peace from their Posts for continuing
to be concerned in or encouraging the passing of the Land Bank Bills: But
nothing was done by his Ex -- cy for the actual Removal of any of these
Officers in Consequence of the Votes of Council, except nominating and
commissionating Job Almy, Esquire to be a Justice of the Pleas for the County of
Bristol in the Room of the above mentioned Mr. Leonard, whose Commission for
that Office was thereby superseded: as to the beforementioned Justices of the
Peace and the other Justices, against whom like Votes of the Council were
passed, which Officers are all constituted by the G -- r, in whom solely is the
Power of nominating and commissionating 'em for their respective Posts, though
the Advice and Consent of the Council is requisite to make such Nominations
effectual, his Ex -- cy neither issued out new general Commissions of the
Peace, nor sent them particular supersedeas's, (one or other of which Acts was
necessary for the Removal of them from their Posts,) nor even sent his own
Orders (pursuant to the Vote of the Council) to the Clerks of the Peace to
strike their Names out of the Lists of Rolls of Justices in their respective
Counties, nor did any Act whatsoever, whereby he could possibly imagine that he
had superseded any of their Commissions, not even so much as signing his
Consent to the Council's Votes of Dismission, which according to his Custom of
signing his Consent to Votes for raising a Committee of both Houses to consider
of any Matters in order to make their Report upon 'em to the two Houses, seemed
natural for him to have done; so that for the Dismission of these Persons from
their Offices there was nothing but bare Votes of the Council, who, though their
Advice and Consent is by the Royal Charter necessary to the making of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, have not the least Shadow of Authority, when
they are made, to remove them; But these Gentlemen remained, after these Votes
of the Council, as much invested with the Powers and Authorities of Justices of
the Peace, as they were before, with their Names still continued in the Rolls
of the Justices in their respective Counties.

It is difficult to know what to impute his Ex -- cy's Behavior to in this
Case: it seems incredible that after issuing two Proclamations for prohibiting
all Civil, and Military Officers to countenance the Land Bank Scheme under the
Penalty of being dismissed from their Posts, and his actually removing Mr.
Leonard from being a Justice of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas for the
County of Bristol, and dismissing some Military Officers for that Offense his
Ex -- cy should not really be in earnest to remove the Justices of the Peace
and Coroners, but should promote those Votes of Council (if he did promote 'em)
to save Appearances only; and it seems equally incredible that his Ex -- cy
should be so profoundly ignorant of the Principles of Government, as to imagine
that the Council had Power by their Vote to remove Officers, who are nominated
and commissionated by His Majesty's G -- r, and by the Tenor of their
Commissions hold their Posts during his Pleasure; and that no Act of his was
necessary to that Purpose: I shall therefore leave you to your own Judgment in
this extraordinary Affair.

However that may be, if before the Land Bank Subscribers had formed themselves
into a Company, and entered into mutual Agreements and Covenants, and had
issued out their Notes his Ex -- cy had issued his two last Proclamations,
which it was indisputably in his Power to have done in the Beginning of this
Scheme, as the Council was always ready to concur with him in preventing the
Execution of it; or had thought fit to dismiss any of his Civil or Military
Officers, either of which he might have done even without the Concurrence of
the Council, (according to the best Opinions here) for persisting to be
concerned in the Scheme or countenancing it, there can be no reasonable Doubt,
but that these Proceedings would have had their proper Effect and infallibly
have prevented any further Progress of the Scheme; But as his Ex -- cy had
carefully avoided taking these Steps or any others, that could well be expected
to be effectual, whilst the leading Men of the Scheme were at Liberty to have
quitted it at their Pleasure; and refused to exert himself till the Company was
formed and the Scheme was actually executed, and the Directors and Partners
were hampered with Covenants and Engagements, which they were persuaded they
could not get rid of, without the Consent or Dissolution of the whole Company;
instead of suppressing the Scheme, or checking the Progress of it, these
Measures and his open Favor and Indulgence to the Directors and Partners of
the Silver Scheme, which it was his Duty to have discountenanced too, served
only to exasperate and inflame the Minds of the Populace, and raised a
malignant Spirit which was very near at last breaking out into a Riot or
Insurrection.

During the Time of these Proceedings at Boston, the New England Merchants, and
Traders in London having been stirred up by the Complaints of the Merchants
from hence upon the Disappointment of their Application to his Ex -- cy, and
the Assembly for preventing the Execution of the Land Bank Scheme here
presented a Petition in Behalf of themselves, and the Merchants and Traders
residing in this Province to his Majesty in Council for Redress against the
Scheme; which Petition was on the 27th of October 1740 referred to the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and the Plantations; at which Board upon a Hearing on
the Petition Mr. Pa -- dge his Ex -- cy's Brother in Law and Agent in London,
especially in Matters of secret Service, a Person devoted entitely to his Ex --
cy's Interest, and absolutely under his Influence in Affairs that concerned the
Province, strenuously opposed it, and attempted to vindicate the Scheme,
notwithstanding their Lordships had, before he declared himself, expressed
great Indignation against it; in doing which Mr. Pa -- dge upon being asked by
their Lordships, for whom he appeared in this Case, denied that he was employed
by any Person and professed himself a Voluntier in it; which was undoubtedly
true with Respect to the Directors and Partners of the Land Bank Scheme who had
not sent him any Instructions in it, or in the least signified to him any
Desire that he would intermeddle in the Affair, but were surprised at the first
News of his concerning himself in it.

In the Beginning of January following Advice arrived here, that the Petition
of the Merchants against the Land Bank Scheme to his Majesty had met with such
Success, that there was great Reason to expect that they would be relieved
against it by an Act of Parliament, together with a particular Account of Mr.
Pa -- dge's appearing in Favor of the Scheme -- This Conduct of Mr. Pa --
dge's surprised every Body exceedingly: It seemed strange indeed that without
having the least Concern in the Scheme or Relation to it, and without any
Direction from those, who were interested in it, he should officiously engage
in the Support of it, where it was looked upon as a Scandal and Reproach for
any Man to give the least Countenance to it, or even speak a favorable Word of
it; It appeared I say incredible that he should voluntarily expose himself to
certain Discredit and Contempt by entering singly into the Defense of a Scheme,
in which he was not in the least interested, against all the World on your Side
of the Water, unless he had some secret Instructions and Advice from hence from
some Employer, whom it was not proper for him to name, and some Prospect of
reaping Advantage by it.

It is certain that had Mr. Pa -- dge succeeded in his Attempt to prevent the
passing of the Act of Parliament for suppressing the Land Bank Scheme, he could
not have failed of being rewarded by the Assembly for his Success, with their
Choice of him to be standing Agent for the Province, and that nothing could be
more agreeable to his Ex -- cy than the carrying of that Point; and it was as
certain that at that Time Mr. Pa -- dge's Success would have made the G -- r
the Idol of six Parts in seven of the People, and that the least Advice or Hint
from his Ex -- cy was sufficient to steer his Brother, with whom such a Secret
would be quite safe, into the Measures, he pursued in Favor of the Scheme: and
as this seemed fully to account for not only Mr. Pa -- dge's Conduct, but also
his Ex -- cy's Neglect to destroy the Scheme in its first Rise, when it was
evident that the House of Representatives would have concurred in doing it; and
his absolutely declining, during the first Session of the Assembly 1740, to do
the least Thing, which might discountenance the Scheme; and his withstanding
the most pressing Solicitations of the Merchants upon that Point; and the
Breach of his repeated Promises to them that he would not let the Assembly rise
before he had made a Speech to them, and used his Influence with the House of
Representatives for preventing the Execution of the Scheme; likewise for his Ex
-- cy's avoiding to take any Step in the Assembly, even during the next Session
of it, for preventing the further Proceedings of the Land Bank Company, till
they had fully carried their Scheme into Execution, and it was but a few Hours
before he prorogued the Court; and in short, his avoiding to take any effectual
Steps for preventing the incorporating of the Land Bank Company, and actual
Execution of the Scheme, which it was in his Power to have done from the
Beginning without the Concurrence of the House of Representatives; all which
Behavior both of his Ex -- cy's and Mr. Pa -- dge's is not otherwise to be
accounted for or explained; Upon all these Accounts (I say) the News of Mr. Pa
-- dge's Conduct created a Suspicion that there must have been some
Correspondence between the two Brothers upon the Affair of that Scheme at the
Beginning of the Merchants Opposition to it, and that Mr. Pa -- dge must have
had some Advice or Hint given him by his Ex -- cy to engage him in acting the
Part, he did; which at all Events it does not seem reasonable to think he would
have acted without his Ex -- cy's Approbation of it, at least signified one Way
or other to him. -- The soling Circumstance seemed also to favor such
Suspicion afterward, viz. His Ex -- cy's declaring that he might have had l.
10,000 or even l.20,000 old Tenor, from the Land Bank Company for favoring
their Scheme* and if he was really persuaded of that (as he plainly seems to
have entertained some Notion of it in his own Mind) what might he not propose
to himself to get from them for his extraordinary Services, if his Brother had
succeeded in his Attempt? But as the Hope of that began now to fail, it
demanded his Ex -- cy's most vigorous Efforts to Discountenance the Scheme, and
to wipe off the Suspicion, which he must be sensible Mr. Pa -- dge's Conduct
would naturally raise, of his having been secretly at the Bottom of this
Opposition to the Petition of the Merchants at the Board of Trade.

Accordingly his Ex -- cy took Opportunity in his Conversation to censure and
exclaim against Mr. Pa -- dge's Behavior, and in his Speech to the Assembly of
the 9th of January, instantly before his prorogueing it, expressed himself
concerning the Scheme in the following Manner, viz. And this leads me to lay
before this Court again the Scheme for forming what is commonly called the Land
Bank; and I do in the first Place acknowledge the Zeal and Steadiness of his
Majesty's Council in joining with me for suppressing a Project so full of
mischievous Consequences to his Majesty's Government and People, and I depend
we shall still proceed in all just and reasonable Methods for the Destruction
of this dangerous Attempt: And while we are thus doing our Duty to the King and
this Province, I am sorry, Gentlemen of the House of Representatives, That you
will not give the least Aid in this Affair, but seem rather to Countenance this
iniquitous Contrivance and Combination, a considerable Number of the Members of
your House, as I am informed, having greatly interested themselves in it.
However, Gentlemen of the Council and House of Representatives, I shall think
my self obliged in Duty to his Majesty, and in Faithfulness to this Country to
lay this Matter before his Majesty in it is proper Light; and I doubt not but
the Measures taken with Respect to it here, and at Home by a Number of
Gentlemen of great Substance Integrity and Honor, will soon have the desired
Effect, and thereby prevent the vast Confusion and Ruin, this pernicious
Undertaking might otherwise bring on this whole Government and People.

In Consequence of his Ex -- cy's Declaration in this Speech that he would lay
an Account of the Land Bank Scheme before his Majesty in it is proper Light, on
the 15th of January a Vote of Council was passed for raising a Committee of
that Board to prepare the Draught of a Letter to the Lords Commissioners for
Trade and the Plantations on that Affair; which Draught was accordingly
prepared and laid before the Board and there accepted on the 28th of January.
-- The Purport of this Letter was to inform their Lordships of the Project of
the Land Bank Scheme, and of the several Proclamations and other Proceedings of
the G -- r and Council, and it appears by the Draft of it now in the
Secretary's Office to have been signed by the three Members of Council, who
were the Committee for drawing it. -- This I take to be the Account of the Land
Bank Scheme, mentioned in his Ex -- cy's Speech to be intended by him to be
laid before his Majesty. -- Upon this Proceeding I would observe that his Ex --
cy well knew, his Majesty had been fully informed of the Land Bank Scheme, and
it is pernicious Tendency above three Months before in a very proper and
effectual Manner by the Petition of the Merchants in London; that both the
Lords Commissioners for Trade, and the Lords of the Committee of Council had
considered the Scheme and reported upon it, and that there was the utmost
Probability, that the Parliament had by this Time taken it under their
Consideration, in order to provide for the Suppression of it: -- This
Proceeding seems therefore calculated by his Ex -- cy to atone for Mr. Pa --
dge's Conduct at the Board of Trade in Relation to the Scheme, rather than to
give his Majesty any new Light or Information in the Affair. -- It had the
Appearance of his Ex -- cy's concurring with the Merchants in London, whom his
Brother in Law and Agent had lately opposed in their Petition against the
Scheme, and who most surprizingly continued afterward to oppose them, even
when the Bill for suppressing the Scheme was depending in Parliament,
notwithstanding he had met with such a Repulse before the Lords Commissioners
of Trade, as would sufficiently have discouraged any other Person, who was, as
he professed himself, a Voluntier in the Case, from attempting any Thing
farther in Favor of it. -- You will also observe Sir, that his Ex -- cy says
in his last mentioned Speech, "He doubts not but the Measures taken with
Respect to the Scheme here, and at Home by a Number of Gentlemen of great
Substance, Integrity and Honor would (...) have the desired Effect, and
thereby prevent the vast Confusion and Ruin, that pernicious Undertaking might
otherwise bring on this whole Government and People." -- What Assistance the
beforementioned Letter to the Lords Commissioners of Trade might afford the
Gentlemen at Home in their Endeavors for preventing the Ruin and Confusion
likely to be bro't on the Province by the Land Bank Scheme (in Case it was sent
there) I will not pretend to determine; but it is certain that the Measures taken
by the Gentlemen at Home had a most happy Effect for delivering the Province
from the Ruin and Confusion, which his Ex -- cy's Measures here with Respect to
the Scheme had brought this Government and People upon the Brink of; and it is
difficult to determine which Part of his Ex -- cy's Conduct had the greatest
Share in the Mischief; whether his long Connivance at the leading Men of the
Scheme, and his Neglect to use the Measures proper for preventing the Execution
of it, when it was in his Power to have done it, whereby he suffered it almost
to establish itself among the People, or his untimely Measures for suppressing
it afterward, when it was really out of his Power to do it, whereby he raised
a malignant Spirit in the Country, which threatened the Government with
Disorder and Confusion.

Some Time in this Month of January Mr. Colman the before mentioned Projector
and Treasurer of the Land Bank Scheme sent another Letter to his Ex -- cy to
expostulate with him upon these Proceedings and his Partiality to the Silver
Scheme, in a Paragraph of which Letter he expresses his Surprise at the G --
r's Opposition to the Land Bank Scheme in these Words; Sir, I perceive by my
Brother that your Ex -- cy is offended at my writing a few Lines in
Justification of what we are doing about our Land Bank -- I confess I never
expected to see your Ex -- cy against us, but on the contrary, that you would
have been passive in the Matter; for by all the Discourse, we have had about it
before you went to England, and since your Return, I thought you inclined to
favor it rather than the contrary; We often talked of the Difficulties, which
attended bringing in Silver, and that it would be the Work of many Years to
effect it; and when we talked of the vile Abuses put upon People by the Silver
Bankers you faulted their Conduct as much as I did; what your Ex -- cy sees in
their second Scheme to recommend it, I know not; to me it appears not a Whit
better than the Former; but rather worse; for the Length of Time set for it is
Continuance will give the oppressive Usurer the greatest Opportunity to eat up
his Neighbor. -- The Contents of which Paragraph, as also that his Excellency
never advised him against pursuing his Scheme, or to desist from it, or any
Ways declared himself to him in Opposition to it before that Time, Mr. Colman
has verified by his Declaration upon Oath: And this farther to be confirmed by
the following Circumstance, viz. That Mr. Colman being about that Time very
angry at his Ex -- cy's Treatment of him and his Scheme determined to publish
to the World in one of the Boston Newspapers an Account of the Discourse,
which had from Time to Time passed between himself and his Ex -- cy upon the
Subject of the Land Bank Scheme, setting forth the G -- r's former Declarations
of his Sentiments concerning it; and delivered such an Account to Messieurs
Kneeland and Green to be printed in their next Weekly Paper; but though this
Account was signed by Mr. Colman, yet as the Subject Matter of it concerned the
G -- r, they did not think it prudent for them to print it without his Ex --
cy's express Leave for doing it; whereupon Mr. Green communicated it to his Ex
-- cy to know his Pleasure concerning the printing of it; but the G -- r after
having read it told him, it would not do, and forbid him to print it, and
thereupon Mr. Green delivered back to Mr. Colman his Paper.

In this and the following Months of February and April several other Votes
were passed in Council respecting the Land Bank Scheme; one of which was that
the Secretary should sign a Letter in Behalf of the Board to the several Courts
of Justice within the Province, recommending to them to use their best
Endeavors, that none of their Officers, or Dependants should give any
Encouragement to the Land Bank Bills; and another, that no Person should be
admitted to appear and plead before the Board as an Attorney or Counselor at
Law on any Account whatsoever, who should pass, receive, or give Encouragement
to the Land Bank Bills; and the rest of them for the Dismission of other
Justices of the Peace for persisting to encourage the passing of the Bills.

By this Time the popular Discontent at these Proceedings ran very high; there
were upwards of 800 Partners in the Scheme, and five Parts in six of the
Countrymen, who were not interested in it, were Abettors of it; the Bills had
obtained a Currency throughout the Country, and the Possessors of them were
numerous. -- One Circumstance, in his Ex -- cy's Conduct particularly irritated
and inflamed the Spirits of the Land Bank Party, viz. the Encouragement and
Patronage, which he afforded to the Silver Scheme; the great Imposition and
Unreasonableness of which they could plainly discern, though they were blind with
Partiality to the mischievous Effects of their own: the unequal Proceedings
therefore of the Government in Respect to the two Schemes they looked on as
Injustice to themselves and resented highly, and there is no Question but that
if his Ex -- cy had done his Duty with Respect to the Directors and Partners of
the Silver Scheme, whom the Parliament of Great Britain afterward condemned
equally with the Land Bank Company, and subjected to the same Penalties that it
inflicted upon the Partners of the Land Bank Scheme, the People would have
acquiesced in the Suppression of the Land Bank Scheme, or at least have born it
with secret Reluctance only; whereas their Clamor and Threatenings now grew so
loud that they alarmed the Government; and a Vote of Council was thereupon
passed the 9th of May reciting, that Information had been given of a
Combination of many ill minded Persons in several Towns within the Province to
come in a tumultuous and seditious Manner into the Town of Boston, in order to
force the Currency of the Land Bank Bills; and thereupon ordering that the
Members of the Board then present, who were Justices of the Peace throughout
the Province, should issue out their Warrants for apprehending the Persons or
some of the Principal of them, that were represented as concerned in that
Design.

On the 25th of April 1741 the Assembly was dissolved, and on the 27th of May
following the new House of Representatives met and made Choice of Samuel Walls,
Esquire a Director of the Land Bank Company for their Speaker, who was accordingly
presented to the G -- r for his Approbation pursuant to the Charter, but was
disapproved; whereupon the House proceeded to a second Choice and elected Mr.
William Fairfield an Abettor of the Scheme for their Speaker, who upon being
presented to his Ex -- cy for his Approbation was approved of: Then the Council
and House of Representatives proceeded to the Choice of Counselors, eleven of
which being either interested in or known Abettors of the Land Bank Scheme his
Ex -- cy negativ'd -- the Choice of Mr. Fairfield for Speaker who was most
remarkable for his general Opposition to Government, (...) and openly in his
Discourse bid Defiance to the Act of Parliament then lately passed for the
Suppression of the Land Bank Scheme, and was a Person, whom the House would not
have chosen for a Speaker at any other Time, and the Choice of the Land Bank
Counselors sufficiently discovered the Temper and Spirit of the House of
Representatives, which the G -- r therefore dissolved on the 28th of May: And
Writts were issued for the Choice of new Representatives returnable the 8th Day
of July following.

In the mean Time Advice arrived that Mr. S -- ey was appointed G -- r of the
Province by his Majesty; but as his Commission was not arrived here by the 8th
of July G -- r B -- r then met the new Assembly; when it appeared that the
Dissolution of the late Assembly had wro't no Change in the House of
Representatives, but rather increased it is Number of Land Bank Members. -- The
House then proceeded to elect for their Speaker John Choate, Esquire a Director of
that Company, whom G -- r B -- r therefore negativ'd; after which they
proceeded to a new Choice and elected John Hobson, Esquire a Favourer of the Land
Bank Scheme but not interested in it, whom the G -- r approved of.

On the 31st of July, twelve Days before the Arrival of G -- r S -- ey's
Commission, and when it was every Day expected, the House proceeded to the
Election of such civil Officers for the Year ensuing, as the Charter directs
shall be appointed by the General Court, and among others chose Samuel Watts,
and Robert Hale, Esqrs; to be two of the Collectors of the Excise, to which
Choice the Consent of the G -- r as a Part of the General Court is necessary,
as also his Commission is for constituting them Collectors after they are
chosen; these two Gentlemen were Directors of the Land Bank Company, and as
such the Council had passed a Vote (as I before observed to you) for the
Dismission of 'em from being Justices of the Peace; and G -- r B -- r had for
the same Reason negativ'd the Election of the former for being Speaker of the
House of Representatives in the last Assembly about two Months before; but his
Ex -- cy, though not the least Step, was then taken by the Land Bank Company for
putting an End to the Scheme, in Obedience to the Act of Parliament for
suppressing it, but whilst on the other Hand their Party continued to set the
Act at Defiance, and threaten their Opposers, suddenly altered his Behavior
toward these Directors, and approved of the Choice of them and other noted
Abettors of the Scheme to be Collectors of the Excise, and accordingly
commissionated them for that Purpose. -- This Alteration of his Ex -- cy's late
Conduct toward the Land Bank Company seems very remarkable; But to what it is
to be imputed, whether to the near Approach of his being removed from his G --
t on the Arrival of G -- r S -- ey's Commission, or any other Cause, I shall
not pretend to determine: It is certain that had not his E -- cy been very well
inclined to have done it, and even fond of this farewell Act of Grace to the
Company, he might have delayed acting upon the List of these Land Bank
Collectors of Excise, and have left it for his Suc -- r, whose Commission was
every Day expected, either to have approved or disapproved of them.

On the 13th of August the present G -- r's Commission arrived and was
published the Day following, which put an End to G -- r B -- r's Ad -- n: The
State and Condition of the Province at the Time of Mr. B -- r's quitting the C
-- r may be collected in general from the Sense, which it appears the House of
Representatives had of it by their Address to Mr. S -- ey upon his Accession to
the G -- t: They there tell him that they were much concerned to think that it
should be at a Time when this Province was laboring under so many Difficulties
and Distresses, and to which he could be no Stranger; but then it would be so
much the more for his Honor, if he might be the happy Instrument of leading
'em out of them; and that they must not despair of the Common Wealth. -- As to
the Temper of the People at that Time, the Land Bank Party, which was very
numerous throughout the Province, were irritated and inflamed to such a Degree,
that they seemed ripe for Tumult and Disorder; they had persuaded themselves
that the Act of Parliament could not be carried into Execution, and had even
bid Defiance to the Government by their Threats; and it had not a little
contributed to exasperate them, that though the Parliament of Great Britain had
included the Directors and Partners of the Silver Scheme in the same
Condemnation with those of the Land Bank Scheme, yet the former had shared the
Smiles and Favors of his late Ex -- cy, whilst those of the Land Bank had been
treated of late in a quite different Manner: Nor was the Temper of the House of
Representatives in a much better Frame than that of the Populace, two Thirds of
the Members at least being either Partners of Abettors of the Land Bank Scheme,
from whom a general Opposition to all the Measures of Government necessary at
that Time for his Majesty's Service and the public Welfare of the Province
seemed in their present Disposition to be much feared: As to the G -- r's
dissolving 'em and calling a new Assembly, the Dissolution of the late Assembly
had given him full Proof that it would only serve to inflame the Country more;
and that it was in vain to expect that a new Choice would lessen the Number of
Land Bank Representatives.

Several Points of Consequence to his Majesty's Service were at this Time
necessary to be effected by the present G -- r, among which were these
following, viz.

In September 1741, Capt. Winslow arrived here from the Army under General
Wentworth's Command with Instructions to raise Recruits for the American
Regiment then in his Majesty's Service in the Expedition against the Spanish
Settlements in the West Indies, which it was the G -- r's Duty to promote in
the Province, pursuant to his Majesty's express Orders for that Purpose, by
engaging the Assembly to give suitable Encouragement to Men to enlist in the
Service: In the Beginning of the September preceding G -- r B -- r had
indulged the last Assembly with disbanding at their Request four Companies of
Soldiers then lately raised in the Province for his Majesty's aforesaid Service
in Pursuance of his Royal Commands, and for the transporting of which to the
Place of general Rendezvous in the West Indies that Assembly had obliged
themselves by a late Vote to raise a sufficient Sum of Money; by Means of which
Dismission, which his Ex -- cy went into the Field to effect personally at the
Head of each Company, three of those Companies were entirely broke up and lost
from his Majesty's Service, and the other was very near being lost, but was at
last with great Difficulty saved by the Advice and Vigilance of his present Ex
-- cy then a private Gentleman upon their re-inlisting, which by the Terms of
their Dismission they had a Liberty of doing. -- The Pretense of his late Ex --
y's assuming this extraordinary Power was that Commissions, Clothes and Arms
were not sent for those Companies to Boston; whereas undoubted Assurances had
been given that those Companies would have been received in the Army upon the
same Terms with the Companies, for whose Officers Commissions had been sent to
Boston; and upon the Assurance of which the Officers of those four Companies
had been prevailed on by his present Ex -- cy to keep their Companies together
(till G -- r B -- r dismissed 'em) in order to proceed with them to the West
Indies without receiving their Commissions, Arms, or Clothes from his Majesty
at Boston, and would have accordingly proceeded, had not he thus broke the
Companies up, but insisted, as it was plainly his Duty to have done, that they
should have been transported to the West Indies at the Province's Expense,
pursuant to the former Vote of the Assembly; which unprecedented Compliance of
the late G -- r and Dismission of Soldiers actually enlisted in His Majesty's
Service had an Appearance and Tendency to make the present G -- r's Demands of
an Encouragement for raising Recruits disagreable to the Assembly, and his
Success doubtful.

The late G -- r had also given Encouragement to the Destruction of His
Majesty's Woods by countenancing Persons commonly reputed to be Destroyers of
them in a frivolous and groundless Petition containing Complaints against His
Majesty's then Survey or General of the Woods, and the Court of Vice Admiralty
addressed to himself with Compliments upon his own Ad -- n; which Petition he
privately employed a Person in Boston to correct and amend by aggravating the
Complaints against the Surveyor General and heightening the Compliments upon
himself; and after sending it to the Petitioners to be new signed transmitted
it to be laid before His Majesty, in order to make his Surveyor General and the
Court of Vice Admiralty obnoxious to His royal Displeasure for exerting their
best Endeavors to discharge their respective Duties for the Preservation of
His Woods -- And also by neglecting to cause the Orders of His Majesty in
Council for the Redress of Workmen employed in cutting Trees for the Service of
the royal Navy to be carried into Execution by the Judges of the Provincial
Courts, and expressly declaring his Opinion to be against His Majesty's
Jurisdiction in that Case; the ill Consequences of which to His Majesty's
Service have been since sensibly felt in the Province, which it was his present
Ex -- cy's indispensable Duty to endeavor to remedy, by causing the
abovementioned royal Orders to be carried into Execution (for doing which he
also received afterward His Majesty's express Commands) and a Law of the
Province to be passed for the better Preservation of His Majesty's Woods within
it.

The late G -- r had also throughout his whole Administration indulged the
Assembly in the Practice of dividing old Townships and erecting new ones out of
'em whereby those Towns had a Right to double the Number of their
Representatives; which Practice (though an established one with the Assembly) as
the present G -- r looked upon it to be of pernicious Consequence in several
Respects, he was determined to put a stop to.

The Fortifications throughout the Province were in a ruinous and defenseless
Condition, particularly those at Castle William, the Key of the whole Province
and its main Fortress, which the present Rupture with Spain, and the Prospect
of another very speedily with France made it dangerous to delay the Repairs of
longer, and called for large Grants of Money.

Other Points also essential for the Good of the Country demanded his present
Ex -- cy's immediate Attention: The late G -- r had indulged the People with a
Scheme of Province Bills, which from the Experience of many Years before his
coming to the Ad -- n had been found by their continual depreciating to prove a
mere Fraud to the Merchants of Great Britain trading hither, and other
Creditors in general; and which his present Ex -- cy had therefore determined
to bring under a new Regulation.

His late Ex -- cy had likewise permitted upwards of l. 390,000 of these Bills,
computed in Bills of the old Tenor, to be outstanding beyond their stated
Periods, which both the Province Law had provided and his Majesty's Royal
Instructions required should have been sunk at their proper Periods; and this
great Arrear it was necessary for the present G -- r to (...) to be drawn in by
Executions at a Time, when the public Service happened to require heavier
Taxes to be laid on the People than what they had paid for twenty Years
before; the drawing in of which Sum must be felt by the Towns in Arrear as much
as if it had been assessed upon them by a new Tax.

For effecting some of these Points, the Concurrence of the Assembly with the G
-- r was absolutely necessary, and for compassing the others it was requisite
that the Dissatisfaction and Ferment, in which his late Ex -- cy had left much
the greatest Part of the Country, when he quitted the C -- r, should be
allayed. -- The only practicable Method therefore for the G -- r to enable
himself to do the Duty of his Post in these Particulars was to restore the
general Tranquillity of the Province, and an Harmony between the three Branches
of the Legislature, the latter of which he could not reasonably hope to effect
without reclaiming the leading Men of the Land Bank Party in the House of
Representatives into the Service of his Majesty, and the true Interest of the
Country; whereby all unreasonable Opposition in that House to the Measures of
the G -- t might be removed; and the previous Step to be taken as preparatory
to this End and all other Measures, was to dispose the principal Directors and
Partners of the Land Bank Company voluntarily to pay a due Obedience to the Act
of Parliament for suppressing their Scheme: 'Till this was effected it was in
vain to expect that the public Tranquillity could be settled, or the House of
Representatives bro't to a just Sense of their Duty; or that even the Act of
Parliament itself could be carried into Execution without Danger of some
violent Struggles and Commotions in the Province. -- This therefore claimed the
present G -- r's most immediate Attention; and such Progress was made in this
Affair by the 23d of September that at a general Meeting on that Day of the
Directors and Partners of the Land Bank Scheme held at Milton a Committee was
chosen who were empowered to attend and assist the Directors in consuming the
Bills as paid in by the Partners, or otherwise drawn into the Treasury, and
that they in Behalf of the Partners should audit and settle the Accounts of
Trade with the Directors or Factors of the Partners, in order to their
receiving or paying what might be gained or lost on the Trade, to be concluded
and shut up as soon as possible, and that they should see the Plates on which
the Bills were struck be forthwith destroyed.; -- And on the 28th of September
the Directors by an Entry under their Hands in the Company's Books made the
following Declaration, viz. We the Subscribers having been concerned in the
Manufactory Scheme lately erected in Boston on Land Security, which by the
Partners is voted to be dissolved, do hereby publicly declare that from this
Time forward we do desist from, give up, and relinquish, and wholly forbear to
act farther therein, or directly or indirectly to carry on the same.

The above mentioned Vote of the Land Bank Company for putting an End to their
Scheme was difficultly obtained, and carried only by a bare Majority, many of
the Partners being warmly of Opinion to stand out in Defiance of the Act of
Parliament; but the Consequence of that Vote, and of the Declaration of the
Directors for renouncing the Scheme was that the Directors in general paid an
Obedience to the Act of Parliament, as much as in them lay, and several of the
Partners redeemed their Quota's of the Bills, and bro't them in to the
Directors to be consumed, and continued daily so to do; and the Directors
instead of carrying on the Scheme attended to receive the Bills brought in by
the Partners, and thereupon to cancel and discharge their Bonds and Mortgages,
and acted wholly in Destruction of it; whereby the Quantity of outstanding
Bills was daily lessened, the late malignant Temper visibly abated in the
Country, and the Spirit of Opposition subsided in the House of Representatives,
and was succeeded by a general Disposition there to promote his Majesty's
Service and the true Interest of the Province: The first Effect of which
appeared in a very cheerful Grant of l.18,000 old Tenor in Answer to his
present Ex -- cy's Speech to them for that Purpose, to encourage Men to enlist
for recruiting the American Regiment and transporting them to the West Indies,
not exceeding the Number of 500 Men; in Consequence of which upwards of 170 Men
were inlisted, about 110 of which were actually transported to Jamaica, and the
Remainder of 'em upon the Arrival of News from General Wentworth that his
Majesty had ordered him to disband the American Regiment, and put an End to the
Expedition, were dismissed from his Majesty's Service by the recruiting
Officer. -- But the Effect of this Dissolution of the Land Bank Scheme, and the
Change of Temper wro't in the House of Representatives were most visibly
distinguished in the following Instance; the present G -- r had in October
refused his Consent to a Bill passed by both Houses for the Supply of the
Treasury, and in his Speech to 'em pointed out the several exceptionable Parts
of the Bill with the Amendments, which he recommended to them to make,
particularly to secure to every Creditor his just Due for the future against
the depreciating of the Bills by enabling the King's Judges to do Justice in
that Particular; which had a due Influence upon the House of Representatives in
their November Session, who in their next Supply Bill complied with the most
material Amendments proposed by his Ex -- cy, particularly that for securing to
Creditors the full Value of their future Debts against the depreciating of the
Bills of Credit, by putting it in their Power to demand of their Debtors in a
Court of Judicature a full Recompense for any Depreciations, which might happen
between the Time of contracting the Debt and the Payment of it; for which the
General Court made Provision by an Act passed in that Session, entitled an Act
for ascertaining the Value of Money and of the Bills of Credit, etc. -- The
passing of this Act was a most remarkable Instance of the Alteration in the
Disposition of the Land Bank Representatives, (who made up above two Thirds of
the House,) and of the Influence, which the G -- r's Recommendation had upon
'em: nothing could be more opposite to the Land Bank Scheme, or to the Supply
Bill, which had passed both Houses but two Months before, and which his Ex --
cy had negativ'd; and it must be a very extraordinary Change indeed, that could
be wro't so suddenly in them, as to bring them from espousing the worst Scheme
of Notes, and almost as bad a Supply Bill, to go at once greater Lengths
toward regulating the Paper Currency, than the best composed Assembly in the
Province had done for thirty Years before, and at the same Time to reconcile
them to a Proceeding, which was not only quite new in the Province, but
unpopular. -- This Regulation had also a strong Tendency to correct that Spirit
of Dishonesty, which had before too much prevailed in the Province by Debtors
neglecting to pay plain, indisputable Debts without being compelled to it by
Judgments at Law and Executions, for the Sake of the Advantages that were
before gained by them upon the Depreciating of the Bills; to lessen the
scandalous Number of Law Suits in the Country; and cure the People of an
Insensibility of the Discredit of being openly sued for honest Debts, which had
lately grown upon 'em; It was indeed going as far toward curing the Evils of
the Paper Currency with Respect to private Debts, as it was reasonable to think
the Assembly could be possibly brought to do at that Time -- And for retrieving
the public Faith by preventing future Assemblies from postponing the drawing in
of the Bills of Credit beyond their stated Periods, which the last Assembly had
been guilty of, they inserted a Clause in the Supply Act of the same Session,
whereby it was put out of their Power to do it; which Clause has been since
repeated in every subsequent Act for the Supply of the Treasury.

On the 16th of January the two Houses proceeded to a Choice of eight Signers
of the Bills to be issued by Virtue of the late Supply Act, among which they
chose three of the Directors of the Land Bank Company, who were Members of the
House of Representatives and the most leading Men of the Land Bank Party in it;
and the List was laid before his Ex -- cy in the usual Form for his
Approbation, and he accordingly approved of it: This Approbation, it seems, is
one of the honorable Gentleman's Articles of Impeachment against his present
Ex -- cy, which, if it was well grounded in itself, must come with but an ill
Grace from him, who had during his own Ad -- n but five Months before approved
of and commissionated two of these Signers to be Collectors of the Excise for
two Counties; and seemed thereby to have passed an Act of Oblivion with Respect
to their Land Bank Offense: and this was done by him before they had renounced
their Scheme, or taken any Step to exempt them from the Penalty of the Act of
Parliament, which was then passed and publicly known here; or done any Act
that could in the least merit or claim such Favor from his late Ex -- cy, and
when he was not under the least Necessity of doing it, but might have left the
Approbation or Disapprobation of the Assembly's Choice to his Suc -- r: Whereas
his present Ex -- cy' Approbation of the Assembly's Choice was in a Matter,
upon which he was obliged to act, and in which a G -- r's Negative would have
been unprecedented: His Approbation of the three late Land Bank Directors for
Signers was at a Time too, when they had renounced their Scheme, and had made
some Atonement for the former Part, they had acted in it, by the great Share
and Influence, they had in the dissolving of the Land Bank Company, and putting
an End to the Scheme; and when his Ex -- cy had experienced the good Effects of
their Interest in the House of Representatives for his Majesty's Service in
promoting a liberal Grant for the Encouragement of Soldiers to enlist for
recruiting the American Regiment, and also in the very great Share, they had in
the late Regulation of the Paper Currency by bringing the Land Bank Members,
over whom they had a powerful Influence, into the G -- r's Measures for that
Purpose: These Instances of their Behavior his Ex -- cy had also ^^^son to
look upon as an Earnest of their future Assistance in his carrying the other
Points, which he had in View for his Majesty's Service and the Interest of the
Country, by their Weight and Influence with the Land Bank Party, which then
formed and was likely for some Time longer to form the majority of the House of
Representatives. -- As to the Office of signing the Bills, the Credit of which
could not possibly be affected one Way or other by the Quality or Circumstances
of the Signers, who are only Servants to the Public in that Business; and as
to the Profits arising by it, which upon a Computation may amount to about half
a Farthing Sterling per Man every Time he signs his Name, I say in either of
these Respects his Ex -- cy's consenting to the Assembly's Choice (especially
in a Matter wherein the G -- r's Consent was always esteemed a Thing of Course)
was such a Trifle, as could scarcely admit of any Hesitation upon it: On the
other Hand, his Refusal of his Consent to the Assembly's Choice in this Case
would have extremely disgusted not only the three Gentlemen negativ'd, but
their whole Party both in the House of Representatives and throughout the
Country, and have endangered at that Time the reviving of a malignant Spirit,
which had been dormient but a very little while; and which, had it been again
excited, would have destroyed the Harmony between the three Branches of the
Legislature then but newly created: And it must have been a most extraordinary
Piece of Policy indeed for his Ex -- cy to have run the Risque of embarrassing
his Majesty's Service, and perplexing his own Ad -- n for the future by his
Refusal of so Errant a Trifle, as permitting those Gentlemen to be three of the
Signers of the public Bills, pursuant to the Choice of the Assembly.

The Effects of the late Act of Parliament for suppressing the two before
mentioned Schemes begun now to be thoroughly discerned by the Directors and
Partners of each Scheme; they perceived that the Act had declared all the
Contracts, Agreements and Securities, which had passed between the respective
Directors and Partners of each Company to be illegal, and consequently void,
and had subjected every single Person concerned in each Scheme to the Demands
of all the Possessors of the Bills of that Scheme in which he was interested,
so that those who had in Obedience to the Act redeemed their Quota's of the
Bills from the Possessors, and brought 'em in to be consumed, and paid their
due Proportion of the Charges, which had attended the Execution of the Scheme
in which they were concerned, still remained exposed to the Demands of the
Possessors of the outstanding Bills of such Scheme, and had at the same Time
lost all Remedy against their refractory Partners, who obstinately refused to
redeem their respective Quota's of the Bills, taking Advantage of the Act's
having declared their Bonds and Securities given to the Directors to be illegal
and void: Thus every Partner, who had in Obedience to the Act of Parliament
submitted to bear his Share of the Burden and Loss arising by either of the
Schemes, was still subject by Means of the Negligence or Dishonesty of his
Partners not only to have Demands made upon him for more than what his whole
Estate could perhaps satisfy, but to incur a Praemunire for not complying with
such Demands: Some of the Possessors also of the Land Bank Bills now publicly
threatened to sue without any Distinction as well those Partners and Directors
of that Company, who had paid in their Proportion of the Bills, as those, who
had not. -- This you will imagine, Sir, produced a general Consternation among
the worthier Part of those who were concerned in both Schemes. -- The Directors
of the late Land Bank Company feared also this farther Damage: There were some
outstanding Debts due to the Company from Persons, with whom they had traded,
and it was apprehended at least that the late Act of Parliament had destroyed
the Company's Demands for the Recovery of those Debts, and that in such Case
their Debtors would thereby shelter themselves from the Payment of them:
Wherefore in March 1741/2, several of the Persons concerned in each Scheme had
Resort by their Petitions to the General Court for Redress under their
Difficulties, which Petitions the Council and House of Representatives referred
the Consideration of to a Committee of both Houses, who made the following
Report thereon, viz.

In Obedience etc. We have read the several Petitions, and heard the Parties
concerned upon the same, and upon the whole are humbly of Opinion, that it is
expedient and necessary for the Peace and Quiet of his Majesty's Subjects, to
do equal Justice to all Parties, and also consonant to the Agreement of the
said late Companies for concluding their Schemes by redeeming and Consuming
their Bills, that this Court appoint a Committee of good and sufficient Men,
with full Power to adjust and audit the Accounts of the Directors and Partners
of the several Companies, and of all their Contracts, Trade and Business with
any others concerned with them; to demand, sue for, and recover of all such
Directors Partners or others all such Bills, Notes, Sums of Money, Goods and
Effects, as belong to the respective Companies; to require and have immediate
Payment from the Directors and Partners of all such Sums and Effects, as upon
the said Account shall be found due from them respectively, though among
themselves agreed to be paid in several Times in the Course of their respective
Schemes; To receive in all the Bills of the respective Companies in the Hands
of any People, and in an equitable Manner pay them off out of the Effects of
the said respective Companies as they come in, or in a just Proportion to the
Effects received, 'till the whole are paid off, returning the Overplus, if any
be, to the respective Partners in a just Proportion to their respective
Interest therein; To consume all the said Companies Bills to Ashes in the
Presence of good and lawful Witnesses; To give up the Bonds and Covenants, and
to execute Discharges of the Mortgage, or Mortgages of each respective Partner
upon his paying in to them the full Sum by him received of the Company,
together with his just and rateable Part of all Charges and Damages (the major
Part of said Committee to be a Quorum) and of all their Doings to render a
plain and fair Account to the General Court from one Session or Adjournment to
another, 'till the whole is finished.

This Report was accepted by both Houses, and on the 31st of March an Order was
there passed for raising a Committee for the Purposes in the Report mentioned;
and the Order was laid before his present Ex -- cy for his Consent, and earnest
Solicitations were used to obtain it; but though the G -- r approved of the
Ends proposed by the Order of the two Houses, yet as it was founded upon a
supposed Subsistence of the mutual Agreements and Contracts made at first
between the respective Directors and Partners of each of the said Companies,
which were declared and deemed by the Act of Parliament to be illegal and void
ab initio, he could not be brought to consent to it: but to prevent the Ruin,
which seemed to threaten many private Families, and preserve the public Peace
and Quiet, and to draw in the outstanding Bills of both Schemes, he promoted
the following Order, which was afterward passed by the General Court at the
same Session the 23d of April 1742, viz.

In the House of Representatives, April 23. 1742.
Whereas it is expedient and necessary for the Peace and Quiet of his Majesty's
Subjects in this Province, that all the Notes of the late Companies commonly
called the Companies of the Silver and Manufactory Schemes should be drawn in
and consumed as soon as may be:

Voted, That Mr. Thomas Cushing, etc. with such as the honorable Board shall
join be a Committee (the major Part of whom to be a Quorum) to inspect and
examine the Books, Instruments and Writings of the said late Companies, and to
take an Account of what Quantity of Notes, and to what Value, has been issued
out by each of them, and in what Proportions the same have been distributed
among the Directors and Partners of the said Companies, and what Quantities of
the said Notes have been drawn in and consumed, and to make Return to the
General Court at their Session in May next of their Doings therein, together
with a List of the several Directors and Partners of each of the said late
Companies, who have not brought in their several Quota's of the aforesaid Notes
by them received to be consumed, together with the Value of the several
Quantities of said Notes by them neglected to be brought in, that effectual
Care may be taken to cause the said outstanding Notes to be brought in and
consumed as speedily as may be.

-- Which Order was consistent with the Act of Parliament; and though the
Committee raised by it had no coercive Power over the delinquent Partners of
each Company, except for inspecting their Books and Accounts, yet it very much
alarmed them, and together with the Act of Parliament had so considerable an
Effect that by the 30th of June following, (as appears by the Report of the
Committee then made to the General Court) of the l. 120,000 in Notes of the
Silver Scheme, which had been issued to the several Directors and Partners of
that Company, l. 69,361. 12 s. 6 d. had been drawn in since the Dissolution of
the Scheme (which was voted by the Company in September 1741) l. 51,070 of
which had been consumed to Ashes by the Directors, and the remaining l. 18291
12 s. 6 d. was in their Hands; and that of l. 47282 2 s. 10 d. of the Land Bank
Notes, which had been issued out to the several Directors and Partners of that
Company, upwards of l. 32500 had been drawn in since the Dissolution of that
Scheme; l. 22411 16 s. 8 d. of which Sum had been consumed to Ashes by the
Directors, and the Remainder was in their Hands; and that the Notes of each
Company were still daily coming in: And at the same Time Lists of all the
delinquent Partners in each Company, with the Sums due from 'em, were returned
by the Committee to the General Court. -- Upon this Report of the Committee the
General Court passed a Vote of Censure upon those Partners of each of the
Schemes, who had neglected to pay in their Quota's of Bills, with their
Proportions of the Charges and Loss arising upon the Schemes, and Voted, That
in as much as this was a Matter of great Importance and the present Session [as
was then apprehended] was near concluding, the further Consideration of the
Report should be referred to the next Fall Session, that so further Measures
might be pursued, if need should be, with those Partners who should not then
have paid in their just Proportion of the Bills, and of the Charges and Loss
arising upon the Scheme, in which they were respectively concerned.

In May preceding the new House of Representatives, which had near the same
Number of Land Bank Members in it, as the last House, met and (pursuant to the
Directions of the Royal Charter proceeded) jointly with the Council of the last
Year to an Election of Counselors for the Year ensuing; and among others chose
George Leonard and Samuel Watts Esqrs; Members of the House of Representatives
and late Directors of the Land Bank Scheme, (as I have before observed to you)
to be two of the Members of his Majesty's Council; and the List of the new
Counselors was laid before his Ex -- cy in the usual Form for his Approbation;
and he accordingly approved of it. -- This Approbation, Sir, of two of the late
Land Bank Directors to be two of his Majesty's Council is another of the
honorable Gentleman's Articles against his present Ex -- cy, upon which
Occasion he compares the negativing of thirteen Land Bank Counselors by the
late G -- r in the last Year with the present G -- r's Behavior in that
Respect this Year: Upon which, Sir, I would observe to you that I apprehend,
that the wide Difference between the Circumstances of the Province at the Time
of G -- r B -- r's negativing the thirteen Land Bank Counselors in 1741, and
the Time of the present G -- r's permitting two of the late Directors of that
Company to be of his Majesty's Council in May 1742, will sufficiently Account
for the Difference of G -- r S -- y's Conduct from that of his Pre -- r.

In May 1741 the Spirit of the Land Bank Party was at the height of its
Malignity; The Partners and Abettors of the Scheme then bid Defiance to Acts of
Parliament, and were pushing at an Ascendency over the Government by getting
two Branches of the Legislature into their own Hands; they had already a great
Majority in the House of Representatives, and were aiming to get the same at
the Board of Council, which, if they had obtained it, must have rendered their
Influence and Power in the Province uncontrollable, and have affected every
Part of it, not excepting even the Courts of Judicature: There was therefore an
absolute Necessity for G -- r E -- r's excluding the thirteen Land Bankers from
his Majesty's Council; but the Situation of the Province under G -- r S -- y's
Administration in 1742 was very different; The Land Bank Company had then
dissolved themselves, and the Directors publicly renounced the Scheme; the
Majority of the late Partners had paid an Obedience to the Act of Parliament,
and were now in Opposition to those who refused or neglected to comply with it;
and the Land Bank Members in the House of Representatives had concurred in Acts
of Government for compelling the delinquent Partners to do their Duty. -- In
all these Proceedings the two before mentioned Gentlemen had a considerable
Share by their Weight and Influence with the Land Bank Party in the last House
of Representatives, and had been two of the principal Actors in the Destruction
of the Scheme in every other Respect out of the House; and their Estates now
lay at Stake 'till all the outstanding Land Bank Bills could be brought in, and
the Scheme entirely finished: What possible Danger therefore could there be in
admitting those two Gentlemen at this Time into his Majesty's Council? -- As to
their having been concerned in carrying the Scheme into Execution, the late G
-- r himself, after he had begun to oppose the Scheme, did neither by the Tenor
of his two Proclamations against the civil and military Officers concerned in
it threaten to displace, nor did actually displace any one Officer merely for
having acted in, or encouraged the Scheme* but for persisting so to do; neither
did the Council pass any of their beforementioned Votes for the removal of any
Justice or Coroner for having been concerned in the Scheme, or in passing of
the Bills, but for refusing to desist from it for the future: Now these
Gentlemen had not only desisted from supporting the Scheme, but had been very
Instrumental in destroying it. -- Had they incurred any Disability for being of
his Majesty's Council by the Act of Parliament? The Act indeed had subjected
them, as they were concerned in the Land Bank Scheme, to a Praemunire unless
they should before the 29th of September 1741, within ten Days after Demand
made pay and discharge such Sums, as were made payable by any of the Land Bank
Notes, and desist from, give up, relinquish, and wholly forbear to act further
in any Sort directly or indirectly in any such Matter or Thing; But they had
hitherto paid a most exact Obedience to the Act, and thereby avoided ever
coming within the Penalty of it: Does the honorable Gentleman think that they
had rendered themselves infamous for having been concerned in an unlawful
Combination for propagating a Scheme of Paper Money, which the Act of
Parliament has censured as a Nuisance* and thereby disqualified themselves for
sitting at the Council Board? Why, the Silver Scheme was equally unlawful and
equally censured by the Act, and yet the honorable Gentleman well knows that
the late G -- r did not esteem the Projector himself of that Scheme, and one of
his Partners disqualify'd by it from sitting in his Majesty's Courts of
Judicature after the passing of the Act of Parliament, one as a Judge of the
Common Pleas for the County of Suffolk, and the other as a Judge of the
Superior Court of Judicature throughout the whole Province. -- If two Country
Gentlemen's having been once unwarily engaged in a bad Scheme of Paper Money,
which perhaps they did not well understand, the Bills of which Creditors were
at Liberty to take or refuse in Payment as they thought proper (which was the
Case of these two Gentlemen) is a Disqualification for serving his Majesty,
what can the honorable Gentleman think of a late Governor of this Province,
who passed a Law, which but five Months before himself had declared to the
Assembly would be neither for his Majesty's Service nor the Interest of this
Province, in order to force Creditors to take in Satisfaction of their Debts
(Specialties excepted) any of the Bills of public Credit, which should be
emitted by this Government for the ten next ensuing Years, and afterward
consented from Year to Year to the emitting of such Bills, as he well knew were
at the Time of their respective Emissions of less real Value, some of them by
12 and others by 33 per Cent, than the Bills in which the then outstanding
Debts in the Province had been contracted, were of at the Time of contracting
them; whereby the Merchants of Great Britain trading hi^^er suffered exceeding
great Discount upon their Debts, and all other Creditors in Trade within the
Province considerable Losses, a Spirit of Dishonesty was encouraged among
Debtors, and more mischievous Effects produced in the Country than ever had
been within the same Compass of Time by the Paper Currency before? Who not only
consented to the Emission of such Bills, but permitted larger Quantities of
them, which he had it in his Power to cause to be drawn in, to be outstanding
beyond their limited Periods contrary to the Direction of the Province Law, and
the positive Commands of his Majesty's Royal Instructions to him for that
Purpose, than any Governor of the Province ever did before him, though not under
any Instruction from his Majesty in that Respect? -- These Emissions, it is
true, were not made by an unlawful Combination of private Men, but had the
Sanction of his Majesty's Government here; but was not his Majesty's
Governor's giving the Sanction of the Government to those Bills such an Abuse
of the Royal Authority, as might make him as little excusable as a Land Bank
Director? -- In short, Sir, if having been unwarily engaged in an unjustifiable
Scheme of Paper Money is an inexpiable Crime in New England; how many of the
best Merchants, and Magistrates, and other Gentlemen in the Province must be
excluded by the Silver Scheme from his Majesty's Service; nay how few are there
of those who had the Honor to be of his Majesty's Council in this Province
during his late Ex -- cy's Ad -- n, that have not gone far toward
disqualifying themselves by the Share, they have had in one or other of the
Supply Acts, which received his late Ex -- cy's Fiat, from serving his Majesty
there again?

As to the general Character of those two Gentlemen; they were in all Respects,
bating the single Circumstance of their having been Directors of the Land Bank
Scheme, perfectly fair, and unblemished: they were both of 'em likewise Men of
good Substance, and well affected to his Majesty's Service, which they were
capable of promoting by their Interest and Influence in the House of
Representatives, of both which they had given his present Ex -- cy undoubted
Proofs in the last Assembly, and full Assurances of their future Usefulness in
the present Assembly: -- With Respect even to their late Concernment in the
Land Bank Scheme, neither of 'em though entitled to have taken out of the Bank l.
500 of it is Bills a-piece as their Share, ever took out one; and one of 'em not
only declined at first being concerned in it, but even voted against it in the
Assembly so late as in June 1740, nor could be prevailed with to be interested
in it 'till it had received it is last Amendment, and he was credibly informed
and persuaded that his late Ex -- cy had thereupon approved of it; -- and if
not only being very instrumental in bringing the Lank Bank Scheme to a
Conclusion, and a Majority of the Partners of it to pay Obedience to the Act of
Parliament, but also in the compassing of an Act of Assembly for reforming the
Bills of this Government it self, an Act which has made better Provision for
curing the Mischiefs of the Paper Currency within the Province, and doing
Justice to Creditors, and restoring a Spirit of Honesty and Industry among the
Debtors, and is in every Respect calculated to be more beneficial to the
Country in general, and to the British Merchants concerned in the New England
Trade in particular, than any Act which was ever yet obtained from an Assembly
in this Province since the Paper Currency first began to depreciate; I say, if
having been very instrumental in effecting these good Purposes could in any
Degree atone for the Share, they had in the Scheme, they have this Merit to
plead in their Favor; and it is very certain that both his Majesty's Service
and the Interest of the Country at this Time required that the Gentlemen of
Influence among the Land Bank Party, which was still very numerous in the
Assembly, should be kept in as close an Attachment to the Government as might
be; and that nothing is more disgusting, or has a stronger Tendency to break
the Harmony of the several Branches of the Government, and clog its Operations
at any Time, than negativing Counselors chosen out of the House of
Representatives, and sending them back into the House to raise an Opposition
and a general ill Spirit in it; and that the negativing of these Gentlemen at
that particular Juncture would have very probably produced such an Effect; so
that besides all the other Considerations, which I have mentioned, the
Necessity of the Times made it a Point of Prudence in the G -- r not to
negative the Assembly's Choice in this Instance.

By September following the Quantity of outstanding Land Bank Bills was reduced
to about l.11,000, and upwards of six Hundred of the Partners had been brought
to pay an Obedience to the Act of Parliament; and the Partners being now thus
divided among themselves, and the Delinquent ones, who were still refractory
and stood out in Contempt, grown a small Party in comparison of those who had
paid in their Quota's of Bills and respective Proportions of the Charges and
Loss arising upon the Scheme, and whose Interest it was now to unite against
the Delinquents, so that no public Disturbance or Tumult was to be much
apprehended from 'em; and the Force of the before mentioned Order of the
General Court being near spent, his Ex -- cy promoted at the Council Board an
Order, which was there passed upon the Petition of several of the Directors and
Partners of the Land Bank Scheme, directing the Attorney General to prosecute
all such of the delinquent Partners in the said Scheme, as should incur the
Pains and Penalties of a Praemunire inflicted by the Act of Parliament; And
afterward caused Demands to be made on four of the most noted refractory
Delinquents to exchange several Sums of the Land Bank Bills pursuant to the Act
of Parliament, and upon their Refusal or Neglect to do it within ten Days
directed the Attorney General to settle Writs of Praemunire grounded upon the
Act against them, and to file them in Court, and thereupon Process was issued
out against such Delinquents: This Proceeding bro't in three of 'em to pay in
their Quota's of Bills and all Charges and Loss upon the Scheme, (the fourth
having absconded so that the Writ could not be served upon him) and had
afterward an Effect to reduce the outstanding Bills to about l.8,000 -- But at
length heavy Complaints were made of several Abuses being committed under the
Umbrage of the Act of Parliament, which not only vexed and oppressed the
Parties, upon whom they were practiced, but had a Tendency to defeat one of the
main Ends of the Act itself, which was to draw in the Bills; among which Abuses
these in particular were complained of viz. that Demands had been made upon
several of the Partners of the Scheme, as well those who had redeemed and paid
in their Quota's of Bills, as those who had not, to exchange Land Bank Bills
for lawful Money with the Interest due upon them, pursuant to the Act of
Parliament, with a View only of extorting Money out of them in order to get rid
of Demands for Sums, which were perhaps either such as they could not redeem
without great Hurt to themselves and their Families; or they had before
redeemed from other Possessors as their Quota of the Bills, and brought in to
the late Directors to be consumed; and it was suggested that such Demands had
been made even by Persons, who were not possessed of the Land Bank Bills which
they demanded a Redemption of. Also that several Sums of Land Bank Bills had
been bought up merely for the Sake of ruining particular Persons out of private
Revenge or Malice by obliging, them to redeem 'em; and that in particular a
large Sum in those Bills had been borrowed by two of the honorable Gentleman's
Associates upon their Bond, with no other View than to force two of the leading
Members of the House of Representatives into Measures of Opposition to the
Government, and that Attempts had been made with those Bills for that Purpose,
as it was understand by those Members and others; and that in other Instances,
where though the Act of Parliament was not prostituted to such base Purposes,
yet it was evident that some of the worthier Persons among the Directors or
Partners, who had paid Obedience to the Act, would be ruined or greatly
distressed by repeated Demands of heavy Sums upon them, through the Neglect or
Obstinacy of those who stood out in Contempt of the Act and perhaps absconded,
without having the least Remedy against their delinquent Partners, or any
Relief but by privately selling (in order to save themselves from Ruin) the
Bills, they were thus forced to redeem; whereby some of the Bills were likely
to be kept in an endless Circulation, and a perpetual circuity of Demands to be
kept up, and the Act of Parliament to be perverted in some Respects and
defeated in others, and much Confusion and Mischief produced: -- For remedying
which, and preventing as much as might be any further Abuse of the Act of
Parliament and for the more speedy drawing in of all the outstanding Land Bank
Bills, and finishing the Scheme in the most equitable Manner, and according to
the true Intent of the Act, the Assembly passed a Bill to vest Commissioners
with certain Powers and Authorities for those Purposes; and the same was laid
before the G -- r for his Consent to the enacting of it: But as the Powers
proposed by the Bill to be lodged in the Commissioners seemed to his Ex -- cy
of a very extraordinary Nature, and to have some Tendency to abridge the
Demands of the Possessors of the Notes given them by the Act of Parliament, and
to prejudice the Demands of other honest Creditors against them; and to lay the
Directors and Partners themselves under unnecessary Hardships whilst the
proposed Act of Assembly was carrying into Execution, he refused giving his
Consent to it. -- But in November following another Bill was passed by both
Houses for the before mentioned Purposes, to which the G -- r gave his Consent;
the Purport whereof was To vest the Commissioners named in the Act (who were
first to take an Oath for the faithful Execution of their Trust) with the
following Powers, viz. To call before them and examine upon Oath any Persons
whatsoever touching the Affairs and Trade of the late Company, and to order all
the Effects, Books, Papers, and Writings relating to their Scheme and Trade to
be delivered up to them, that they might discover all the Debts and Credits of
the Company, and the Quantity of the Bills emitted, how many of 'em were
redeemed and consumed, or lying ready to be consumed, and by whom they were
redeemed; how many of 'em were then outstanding; what Loss and Charge had then
incurred upon 'em; and what was the Proportion of every Director and Partner of
the Company for the Redemption of the outstanding Bills -- To assess with the
Approbation and Allowance of the General Court upon every Director and Partner
such Sums, as should appear to them just for the Redemption of their respective
Proportions of the Bills of the late Company, and their equitable Part and
Share of all Loss and Charge arising by the Scheme, and to demand and receive
the same; also to raise the said Sums (if Need should be) by Mortgaging in
their own Names that Part of any delinquent Director's or Partner's Estate,
which he had mortgaged to the late Company for the Performance of his
Agreements and Covenants with them; or in their own Names to sue for and
recover such Sums in any of his Majesty's Courts of Justice within the County
of Suffolk; -- also to demand and receive of and from any Persons all Moneys,
Goods, and Effects due from them to the late Company; and (if Need should be)
in their own Names to sue for and recover the same in any of the aforesaid
Courts; and to apply all such Sums of Money, Goods and Effects, as they should
receive and recover from the delinquent Directors and Partners and their
Debtors, together with such Sums of Money as they should raise by mortgaging
the Estates of the delinquent Directors and Partners, toward the Redemption of
the Company's outstanding Bills; for which Purpose they were from Time to Time
to give public Notice in the Boston Gazette of what Sums of Money they should
receive, that the Possessors of the Bills might bring 'em in to be redeemed --
also equitably to apportion whatsoever Loss should finally appear to arise by
the said Scheme or Trade to the said late Company in general, or to any of the
Directors or Partners in particular; whether through the Insolvency of any of the
late Directors and Partners, or by Means of the Charge attending the late
Scheme, or otherwise howsoever, among the late Directors and Partners of the
Company in general, as the Justice of the Case should require, so as that each
of them might bear, as near as might be, his equitable Proportion of the Loss
and Burden arising by their late Scheme or Trade; and in their own Names to
demand, sue for, and recover in any of the aforesaid Courts of Judicature all
such Sums of Money, as they should assess with the Approbation or Allowance of
the General Court upon any of the Directors and Partners for their
proportionable Shares of such Burden and Loss from Time to Time till the
Scheme should be finished; and thereupon all the Company's Bills, which should
be received by the Commissioners, were to be burned, and the Plates from whence
they were struck to be defaced and broken; and the Securities given by any of
the Directors or Partners of the late Scheme were to be cancelled by the
Commissioners or any two of them in their own Names. -- And for preventing any
fraudulent Alienations or Conveyances of the Estates of such of the late
Directors and Partners, who had not redeemed their just Proportion of the Land
Bank Bills, in order to defraud the late Company's Creditors, and avoid the
Effect of the Act, it was thereby enacted that from and after the Publication
of the Act the Estate of every and each such Director and Partner should be
thereby bound and subjected to the Payment of the beforementioned Sums of
Money in such Manner, as the same or any Part of it would be bound and
subjected by the actual Service of Process of Attachment upon it at the Suit of
any Creditor according to the ordinary Course of the Law and the Usage within
this Province.

And by a special Provision in the Act it was declared that the Act should not
be adjudged or construed to be intended to hinder the Possessors of the Bills
from making the same Demands upon the late Directors or Partners of the Scheme
for the Redemption of them, as they might have made upon them before the
Publication of the Act, and that their Estates should be as liable to be
attached at the Suit of the Possessors of the Bills, or any other just
Creditor, as they were before the making of the Act.

And it is also provided by the Act that the Commissioners shall make a Report
of their Proceedings to the General Court at their next May Session for their
Approbation and Allowance, or Disallowance thereof either in Whole or in Part;
and that any of the late Directors and Partners, who should think himself
aggrieved by such Proceedings, might file his Appeal in the Secretary's Office
to the General Court at their aforesaid Session; and in Case the Appellant
should desire an Issue at Law to be directed to be tried for the Determination
of any of the Matters of Fact mentioned in the said Act, that then the General
Court should upon the Appellant's depositing ten Pounds lawful Money in the
Secretary's Office, as Caution Money for the Payment of Costs, if the Verdict
upon the Trial of such Issue at Law should be found against him, direct such
Issue to be tried at the next Superior Court of Judicature for the County of
Suffolk, after the making of such Order; which Trial is to be a final
Determination of such Matter etc.

This Act of the General Court, Sir, appears plainly to have been intended to
obtain the principal Ends and Purposes of the Act of Parliament without
interfering with it in the least Point; to prevent the Mischiefs which begun to
flow from the Abuse of it; to assist in carrying it fully into Execution in the
most speedy Method; and effectually to finish the Land Bank Scheme in a Manner
the most beneficial for the honest Possessors of the Bills, the most equitable
for the Directors and Partners of the Scheme, and the most salutary for the
Community; And it is manifest that the Execution of it must inevitably draw in
all the outstanding Land Bank Bills in a short Time, many of which it is
evident must keep on circulating in a very mischievous Manner without it; must
speedily furnish the Commissioners with Province Bills for redeeming the
outstanding Land Bank Bills from the Possessors, which will much facilitate the
Redemption of 'em, leaving at the same Time to the Possessors the same Remedy,
which they had against the Directors and Partners before the ma^^^g of the Act;
and must compel every Director and Partner of the Scheme to bear his equal Part
of the Loss and Burden of it; whereas without this Act, it is impossible but
that many of the most dishonest Partners must escape among so large a Number,
without the Payment of a Shilling, and some of the least Guilty of them, who
had in all Points conformed to the Act of Parliament, must be either ruined or
greatly distressed, either of which Events are equally contrary to Justice and
the Intent of the Act of Parliament, which was evidently designed to punish the
Refractory, and save the obedient Partners by expressly exempting the last from
the Penalties of the Act: -- This indeed will soon put an End to the infamous
Practice of the Hucksters of the Bills for levying Contributions upon the late
Directors and Partners, and disappoint the vile Schemes of one or two Persons;
so that their Ends in endeavoring to defeat this Act of the General Court are
obvious: But what honest Purpose can any private Man have for doing it, and
with what Pretense or Propriety can the honorable Gentleman in particular
engage in it? Does he take this upon himself as an Amicus Patriae, out of his
great Affection for his Country? I can assure him every Gentleman in both
Houses of the Assembly disapproves of the Part he acts, and thinks it a
mischievous Attempt: Does he act upon this Occasion only as Agent to the
Person, who has honored him with the Carriage of his Papers and the
soliciting of his Case for him? That seems too low a Condescension; it is
being a mere servus servorum indeed: It would be judging uncandidly to imagine
that he is displeased to see the Land Bank Scheme instead of shedding a baleful
Influence over the Country, which it promised to do in his Time, now
approaching under his Suc -- r's Ad -- n to its final End without having
effected the Mischief, which was feared from it; that the Clouds, which rose
from it is noxious Vapors and gathered over the Country with a very threatening
Aspect, are now likely to be blown over, and dispelled without producing one
Thunder-Storm in the Province, or doing much Damage to private Families in it;
Or that the Land Bank Members of the Legislature, from whom nothing was
expected in his own Ad -- n, but an Opposition to his Majesty's Service and the
general Interest of the Province, and a Disturbance of the public Peace of the
Country have been reclaimed by his Suc -- r to the Service of the Crown and the
true Interest of the Country, made subservient to every good Purpose in
Government, and Promoters of a more general Tranquillity and Satisfaction, which
now reigns in the Province, than has been known for these many Years: I cannot
persuade my self that such Motives stimulate the honorable Gentleman to oppose
this Act and the Destruction of the Scheme; and must leave it to others to find
out the real Motives of this Proceedings.

It would be giving you, Sir, a needless and unreasonable Trouble, to tire you
with a List of all the trifling Exceptions taken by the Combination to this Act
of the General Court; But as a Specimen of the whole, be pleased to take the
following Exception: The Act in it is Preamble sets forth that the Directors and
Partners of the Land Bank Scheme had in general publicly renounced it; as to
which Fact those of the honorable Gentleman's Combination have though it fit to
give the Government the Lie; and Mr. M -- n in particular has asserted that he
can show numerous Instances of the Directors having carried the Scheme on to
the very Time of the making of this Act; and in his Papers which he sent by the
honorable Gentleman to England, he has endeavored to furnish him with Proofs
of it. -- The Fact is this; On the 23d of September 1741, the Directors and
Partners at a general Meeting of the whole Company at Milton by a public Vote
regularly entered among their Proceedings by their Clerk dissolved their
Company, and put an End to the Scheme in as strong Terms as was possible, and
on the 28th Day of the same Month the Directors at another Meeting by a public
Writing under their Hands regularly entered in the Company's Books, and
reciting the aforesaid Vote of the Company for dissolving the Scheme declared
that from that Time forward they did desist from, give up, relinquish and
wholly forbear to act farther therein directly or indirectly to carry on the
same: and accordingly the Directors and some of the Partners forthwith brought
in their Bills to be consumed; and from the Time of that Declaration the
Directors constantly attended at their Office to receive the Bills, and do what
was necessary for finishing the Scheme, and, among other Things, to discharge
and cancel the Mortgages and other Securities, which the Partners had given
them as Directors, and discharged the same, as such, subscribing their Names to
those Discharges with the Addition of Directors.

This Proceeding, Sir, you are sensible (though by the Mortgages and other
Securities having been in Effect declared by the Act of Parliament to be void
ab initio, as the Company it self was declared and deemed by it to be an
unlawful Combination, it was (if strictly considered) superfluous and done ex
abundante) was quite necessary to bring the Partners to pay their respective
Quota's of the Bills and Charges upon the Scheme, who never would have done it,
unless the late Directors had vacated and discharged their Mortgages and other
Securities in the usual Form: and it must be apparent to every Person of common
Sense that the Directors did this for the Destruction of the Scheme, and not
for the Support of it: and that such a superfluous Act, which was done from a
Motive of Obedience to the Act of Parliament, could not possibly be any Offense
against it: yet Sir, this acting in Destruction of the Scheme, which was a
renouncing of it in Fact in the most public Manner, is insisted upon to be an
Instance of their carrying on the Scheme, and upon these Grounds the
Combination have charged the General Court with publishing a Falsehood in the
Act, and this I suppose is one of the Matters which the honorable Gentleman's
Friend says he is personally to represent to the Government at Home: -- From
this Animadversion of the Combination upon the Act of the General Court, I do
assure you, Sir, you may judge safely of the Shrewdness and Modesty of the rest
of their Exceptions to it.

Before I conclude, Sir, it will be necessary for me to give you some Account
of Mr. M -- n's Papers which he has sent by the honorable Gentleman, and
contain one essential Part of his Commission. -- These are various and consist
of Copies of Proceedings duly authenticated under the Seal of the Province; out
of which Articles of Complaint are to be formed some against the whole General
Court, others against the Council and House of Representatives jointly, and
others against each of the two Houses singly; the Substance of the Principal of
them is briefly as follows: -- M -- n had recovered Judgment in the Superior
Court of Judicature held for the County of Suffolk in February Term 1742, for
l. 344 7 s. lawful Money and Costs against one Stevens, a Partner of the late
Land Bank Scheme, in an Action grounded upon the beforementioned Act of
Parliament and brought against him for his refusing to Exchange a Quantity of
Land Bank Bills, pursuant to the Act; and Execution was awarded thereupon: In
June following Stevens brought his Petition to the General Court, the Substance
of which, and of the Depositions of his Witnesses for supporting his Petition
was to the following Effect, viz. That M -- n had sued him at the Inferior
Court of Common Pleas for the County of Suffolk in January Term preceding for
refusing to redeem of him l. 300 Land Bank Bills, and obtained Judgment against
him, he not having at that Court made his full Defense against the Demand,
(which is known to be most commonly, or at least very frequently the Case with
one or both Parties in the Inferior Courts, where the Judgments are not final,
as they often choose to reserve their Strength 'till the Trial in the Superior
Court) that Stevens appealed from that Judgment to the Superior Court of
Judicature in February following; that soon after M -- n made a verbal
Agreement with him, that if he would pay him the Costs of the Inferior Court,
and of three former Suits on the same Demand, in all which M -- n had failed
for want of sufficient Proof of his Demand, he would let his Action [meaning
the Judgment and Execution obtained in the Inferior Court] drop; that Stevens
consented to the Payment of those Costs, (notwithstanding he conceived it to be
unreasonable) and offered to pay 'em to him by his Attorney from Time to Time;
but that M -- n had put off the receiving of them 'till the Time was elapsed
for Stevens's entering his Appeal at the Superior Court, by Means whereof he
was disabled from prosecuting it according to the Directions of the Province
Law; that M -- n taking Advantage of this refused to stand to his Agreement,
filed his Complaint against Stevens in the Superior Court for his Failure to
enter his Appeal, and thereupon obtained a final Judgment against him there for
the abovementioned Sum and Costs, whereby Stevens lost the Benefit of a Trial
at the Superior Court; and thereupon he prayed that he might be enabled by the
Order of the General Court to try the Merits of his Case at the next Superior
Court, and that the Execution obtained against him might be stayed in the mean
Time; and he endeavored to enforce his Petition by setting forth that he had
paid in his Quota of the Land Bank Bills and of the Charges upon the Scheme to
the Directors, and several Compassionate Circumstances of his Sufferings by the
Scheme. -- To this Petition M -- n put in his Answer; and upon Consideration
had of both of them, with the Depositions in the Case supporting the
Allegations in the Petition an Order was passed by the two Houses, That the
Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature next to be holden at Boston, which
was to be in August then next ensuing, should be empowered and directed to hear
and try the Merits of the Cause mentioned in the Petition, and to make up
Judgment and award Execution thereupon, Judgment therein mentioned
notwithstanding, and that the former Execution should be set aside; provided M
-- n was notified and served with a Copy of the Order fourteen Days at least
before the Sitting of the said Superior Court; Which Order was laid before the
G -- r for his Consent, who accordingly consented to it. -- By Virtue of this
Order Stevens entered his Case for Trial at the next Superior Court in August,
but failed, when the Action was called on for Trial, of appearing properly by
Means of some Defect in his Attorney's Power; and thereupon Judgment was
obtained against him by Default and entered up accordingly; Afterward on the
8th of September following Stevens again petitioned the General Court praying
for Relief in the Case, and a second Order for the Trial of his Appeal; and the
two Houses thereupon passed an Order which the G -- r consented to, that M -- n
should be served with a Copy of the Petition, that he might show Cause why the
Prayer of it should not be granted on the 16th Instant, and Execution was
thereby stayed in the mean Time; and M -- n's Answer was accordingly put in,
and upon reading of that and the Petition an Order was passed on the 16th of
the same September by the Council, and concurred on the same Day by the House
of Representatives for referring the Consideration of the Petition to the first
Thursday of the next Sitting of the General Court, and staying Execution in the
mean Time, which being laid before the G -- r for his Consent, his Ex -- cy
esteeming it unreasonable to give the original Plaintiff further Delay in his
Execution for a Cause, which now arose merely from the Laches of the
Petitioner, refused his Consent to that Order; whereby M -- n was at Liberty to
proceed in his Execution for his Debt and Costs, and accordingly proceeded in
it.

That you may the better apprehend, Sir, the Reason of the Proceedings of the
General Court upon Stevens's first Petition, it is necessary that you should be
appriz'd that an Appeal is given by the Province Law from the Judgment of the
Inferior Courts of Common Pleas established in each County to the next
Superior Court of Judicature to be holden for the County, where such Judgment
is given; which Appeal the Law requires to be entered with the Clerk of the
Superior Court on the first Day of the Sitting of such Court; and upon the
Appellant's Failure to prosecute his Appeal, then the Appellee may file his
Complaint at the Superior Court, and thereupon the Judgment of the Inferior
Court is to be affirmed by the Superior Court, and thereby becomes final; and
if the Appellant happens to fail in the Circumstance of entering his Appeal on
the first Day of the Court, which frequently happens through some Slip or other
of the Appellant or his Attorney; in every such Case it has been constantly
held by the Judges that the Appellant is without Remedy in the ordinary Course
of the Law, and that they have not Power to admit the Appellant to enter his
Appeal after the first Day of the Sitting of the Court, or to refuse entering up
Judgment upon the Appellee's filing his Complaint, and awarding Execution
thereon; but that the Appellant in all such Cases must apply to the General
Court for Relief, and to enable the Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature
by a special Order for that Purpose to try the Merits of the Case at their next
Court for the County, where the Judgment was given, and to enter up Judgment
and issue Execution thereon, and in the mean Time to stay Execution upon the
former Judgment. -- And upon such Petitions, which are frequently presented to
the General Court, it has been the constant Practice and Usage of that Court
ever since the granting of the Royal Charter to relieve the Petitioner by
passing an Order to enable and direct the Judges of the Superior Court of
Judicature to try the Merits of the Cause at their next Term or Sitting in the
County, where the Judgment of the Inferior Court was given, and to enter up
Judgment thereupon, and award Execution accordingly, the former Judgment of the
Superior Court notwithstanding, and in the mean Time to stay Execution upon
such Judgment; and the Judges have ever proceeded in such Cases pursuant to the
Orders of the General Court, without any one Instance to the contrary, and
sometimes tell the Parties they must resort to the General Court for Relief, in
such Cases; and the granting of it has for many Years been looked upon to be
almost as much a Matter of Course in the General Court, as the granting of a
Matter of common Right is in the provincial Courts of Judicature; and that too
in Cases, which have happened through the mere Laches of the Petitioner either by
Means of some accidental Slip in himself, or his Attorney in failing to enter
the Appeal in Time, and where the original Plaintiff in the Action has had a
Demand for his Debt or Damages against no other Person than the Petitioner; --
Whereas in this Case there was a probable Appearance at least of Deceit in the
Appellee M -- n, which had occasioned the Petitioner to fail of entering his
Appeal: and M -- n had 800 other Persons on any one or more of whom he might
make the same Demand, and had thereby indisputable Security in Case Stevens
should prove in the least Insolvent; so that Stevens's Case, in which the
General Court granted him Relief, was much stronger than Cases of the like
Nature generally are, upon which it has been their constant Practice and Usage
from the earliest Times of the present Royal Charter to grant the like Relief:
And even in this Case the present G -- r, refused to go the same Length toward
relieving Stevens, which the two Houses conceived it equitable and right to go.

And to show you now, Sir, what Length the honorable Gentleman himself, who is
it seems to represent this Matter personally against his present Ex -- cy, went
in setting aside Judgments of the Superior Court of Judicature during his own
Ad -- n, I shall mention to you only one Instance by way of Specimen, which is
an Order that was passed by him in September 1730, whereby a Judgment of the
Superior Court of Judicature founded upon a Report made by Referees, in
pursuance of a Rule of Court entered into by the mutual Consent of the Parties
for the final Determination of that particular Case, and all other Matters in
Difference between them, was declared null and void; and the Judges were
directed to enter up another Judgment, which was particularly set forth in the
Order, in Lieu of it: an Order, which if the Judges had submitted to it, would
have gone further toward destroying the Law it self in this Province, than was
ever done before by any of his late Ex -- cy's Pred -- rs; but the Judges
refused to pay any Regard to it.

Mr. M -- n had been, some little Time before putting in his last Answer to
Stevens's Petition to the General Court, distinguished as a Person very proper
to be taken into the honorable Gentleman's Service; and he seems about this
Time by his repeated Memorials and Petitions, some addressed to the whole
General Court, and others to the G -- r and Council, which were most of them
stuffed with libellous Reflections on the Assembly and Government, to have been
advanced from his Trade of huckstering Land Bank Bills for the Sake only of
private Lucre mixed with some Quarrels against particular Partners or Directors
to the Employment of affronting and insulting the Government.

It would be tiresome to trouble you with the Particulars of his Memorials and
Petitions here; you have herewith the Copies of them, which are suspected to be
the Productions of the whole Junto; -- The Pretenses for exhibiting these
Memorials and Petitions were that he might have an Allowance made him by the
General Court for the Charges, he had been put to by his Answers to Stevens's
Petitions, Copies of Papers, and Fees upon those Occasions, and his Loss of
Time in Attendance; and also for his Services done the Public by suing of Land
Bankers for the Redemption of their Bills etc, and that the General Court would
order the Sheriffs to break through the Privilege and Protection given to their
Members by a standing Law of the Province to favor his Suits against them:
Which last Matter, when he had failed in his Petition for it to the whole
Court, by having the Petition dismissed in the House of Representatives, he
repeated in another Petition addressed only to the G -- r and Council, praying
them in Effect to suspend the Law of the Province touching the Privilege of the
Members of the House, which the House had but a little before denied to join
in; and which second Petition was dismissed by the Council Nemine
Contradicente, and never reached the Chair. -- After three of these Petitions
and Memorials, which appear to have been presented with no other View than of
being denied, and for the Sake of taking Opportunities of affronting the whole
General Court under the Pretense of seeking Redress, he presented his fourth
Memorial to the G -- r and Council, which drew the Resentment of the Government
upon him expressed in the following Vote of Council -- Viz.

In Council November 8th 1743.
Whereas N -- l M -- n of Boston on Thursday last delivered to the Secretary's
Clerk a libellous Paper directed to the Board, called a Memorial of the said N
-- l M -- n, and by him signed, which contains many gross and scandalous
Reflections upon the public Proceedings of this Board as well as the House of
Representatives, tending to traduce the Acts of this Government, and to excite
a seditious Spirit among his Majesty's good Subjects, without Color of seeking
any proper Relief from this Board for his pretended Grievances, or with any
other Intent but to affront and insult this Government:

Therefore voted unanimously and ordered that the Sheriff of the County of
Suffolk forthwith take the said N -- l M -- n into Custody, and Keep him there
till further Order -- And that the said Memorial be sent down to the House of
Representatives with a Copy of the aforesaid Order.

The above mentioned Order was signed by the G -- r; and M -- n was thereupon
taken into Custody by the Sheriff on the 7th of November, and was afterward
examined by a Committee of both Houses touching his Offense, and fully heard in
his own Vindication; and that Committee was also specially empowered and
directed to inquire into his Abettors and Encouragers. -- As to this last
Particular, Sir, I have been credibly informed that the Committee brought him
almost to a Confession, but after a momentary Deliberation with himself upon
that Matter he smothered it; but did it in such a Manner as that the Gentlemen
of the Committee were fully of Opinion that he had Abettors and Encouragers of
his Memorial: It is certain that he was seen but a very short Time before he
delivered his Memorial to the Council going to the honorable Gentleman's House
at M -- n in Company with one of his Agents here; and while he was under
Confinement that the honorable Gentleman's two chief Associates and Agents in
the Combination openly attended him, and were the only Persons, who appeared to
countenance and advise him.

Upon the ^1th of November the Committee made their Report that they had fully
heard and considered what M -- n had to offer in Justification or Extenuation
of his Memorial etc. and were thereupon unanimously of Opinion, that in order
to support the Honor of the Government, and to express a due Resentment of his
Insolence and Contempt of the Authority thereof, he should be forthwith
committed to the common Goal in the County of Suffolk, there to remain during
the present Sitting of the General Court, and until he should recognize before
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County in the Sum of
two Hundred Pounds, with two Sureties in the Sum of one Hundred Pounds each, to
be of good Behavior for the Space of six Months from that Time. -- Which
Report was read and unanimously accepted, and an Order was passed by both
Houses accordingly and was consented to by the G -- r. -- But on the same
Morning M -- n having sent a Petition to the General Court acknowledging his
Fault in exceeding submissive Terms, promising to behave himself dutifully for
the future, and praying that the Court would discharge him from his
Confinement, and that he might be freed from further Censure, it was proposed
in Council that M -- n should be ordered to attend the whole Court in the
Council Chamber, and that his Petition should be publicly read to him and he
be admonished for his Fault, and thereupon discharged; which was agreed to by
the House of Representatives; and he accordingly appeared and was admonished by
the Secretary (who was one of his Majesty's Council) and ordered to withdraw;
After which an Order was passed by both Houses and consented to by the G -- r
remitting the former Sentence of the Court for his Imprisonment, and finding
Sureties for his good Behavior, and discharging him from his Confinement upon
his Payment of Fees and Costs; which was done accordingly.

I shall trouble you Sir, with one Circumstance more relating to this Affair,
as it may serve to discover to you the Temper and Spirit of the honorable
Gentleman's Associates and Agents. -- M -- n in his Application to the
Secretary's Office for Copies of the Papers, with which he was to furnish the
honorable Gentleman, desired among other Things that he might have a List of
the particular Members of Council present at the Board, when his Petition to
the Governor and Council for an Order to the Sheriff of Suffolk, directing him
to break in upon the Protection and Privilege given to the Members of the
General Assembly by a Law of the Province was considered and dismissed; this
was requested by him that it might appear that Mr. Watts and Col. Leonard the
two Members of Council, who were late Directors of the Land Bank Scheme, were
present at the Dismission of the Petition, and be supposed of Course to have
voted upon it: But when the Secretary returned for Answer, that though what he
asked was out of Course and unprecedented, yet he should have a List of the
Members present (if he desired it) with a special Note to this Effect, viz.
That the Petition was dismissed nemine Contradicente, and that neither of the
two Land Bank Gentlemen voted in the Affair; also that an Order had been made
by the Board that they should not vote, debate, or speak in any Matter which
should come before the Board concerning the Land Bank Scheme, except in
answering Questions which they might be asked for the Board's Information, and
that such Order had been duly observed by them ever since their Sitting there,
M -- n thereupon said, That would not serve the Turn, or to that Purpose, and
refused taking a List with such a Note of the Proceedings at the Board; but
desired he might have a Copy of the Vote of Council in the usual Form; in which
Case the honorable Gentleman may be at Liberty to suggest that two Land Bank
Members were present at the Vote of Council, and be silent as to the other
Circumstances of that Proceeding. -- This may serve you for a Specimen of their
Candor and Honesty in their Representations.

I can assure you, Sir, that the Combination have great Dependence upon the
honorable Gentleman's Representation of the Matters contained in M -- n's
Papers, and there upon declare that they doubt not but that he will be able to
prevent the Act of this Government for finishing the Land Bank Scheme from
receiving his Majesty's Royal Approbation; and that he will soon find a Way to
show his Majesty the Difference between his own and his Suc -- r's Proceedings
with Respect to the Persons lately concerned in that Scheme; and herein I doubt
not but that they speak their own Sentiments, and those of the honorable
Gentleman, who could have no other Design or View in taking the Charge of M --
n's Papers, and taking out authenticated Copies of his own and his Suc -- r's
Proceedings, not only in the Case of the Land Bank Company but other Parts of
their respective Ad -- ns, than to show (as his Associates call it) the
Difference between them.

The honorable Gentleman and the Combination (as I am informed) also build
great Hopes upon the Success of his former memorable Agency from this Province
in 1728-9, a short Account of the Particulars of which, as you may be desirous
to know them, I shall here give you. -- The honorable Gentleman was not
remarkable for any great Share of Influence and Interest among his Countrymen
'till he distinguished himself by so virulent an Opposition to the late Mr. B
-- tt's Ad -- n of his Majesty's G -- t in this Pro^^^^, particularly with
Respect to his Royal Instruction for procuring the Salary to be settled, that
he negativ'd him from being a Member of his Majesty's Council: This first
procured him that Degree of Popularity and Interest, which induced the House of
Representatives to appoint him in 1728, one of their Agents to represent to his
Majesty several Matters of Complaint against the then G -- r, and particularly
to obtain from his Majesty the recalling of his Instruction concerning the
fixing of the Salary.

The honorable Gentleman went accordingly Agent in the Province's Service with
this Commission; and in the Account of his Proceedings in the Execution of it,
which he from Time to Time gave to his Principals in joint Letters from himself
and Mr. Wilks the Assembly's other Agent, he expresses himself thus concerning
the Point of fixing the Salary, viz. in a Letter dated the 25th of April 1729,
he says, If we must be compelled to a fixed Salary, doubtless it must be better
that it be done by the supreme Legislature than to do it our selves: If our
Liberties must be lost, much better they should be taken away, than we be in
any Manner accessory to our own Ruin: And in another Letter to the Speaker of
the House of Representatives, dated October 8th 1729, speaking of fixing the
Salary he says, it is against the Light of Reason and Conscience; and in
another of the 24th of the same Month Mr. Wilks and he write thus to the
Assembly concerning the same Matter, We shall therefore be careful and vigilant
to make the best Defense and do all in our Power to prevent so great an Evil's
coming on the Province.

In a little Time after, the News of G -- r B -- tt's Death arrived in London,
upon which as the honorable Gentleman whose Opposition to his Majesty's Royal
Instruction had procured him the Agency from the Province, so the Credit which
he gained by Means of that Agency with the late Lord T -- d then one of his
Majesty's prin -- l S -- ies of State, as being a Person of great Interest and
Influence among his Countrymen, and thereby qualified for his Majesty's
Service among them, and to bring them to pay a due Obedience in particular to
his Royal Instruction for fixing the Salary, procured him the Honor of being
appointed to succeed Mr. B -- tt in this G -- t, which he readily deserting the
Trust reposed in him by his Country, accepted with a stronger Instruction from
his Majesty to himself for procuring the Salary to be fixed, than that which
the late G -- r B -- tt had. -- You may perhaps, Sir, have a Curiosity to know
with what Address the honorable Gentleman upon his Arrival in his G -- t
executed his Majesty's Commands with Regard to the beforementioned Royal
Instruction, and in what Terms his then Ex -- cy pressed upon his Countrymen
the doing of a Thing, which but a few Months before the late Agent had
represented to them as the Destruction of their Liberties -- A very great Evil
to the Province, -- To be a Matter against the Light of their Reason and
Conscience; -- and the Ruin of the Country: Why, Sir, In his first Speech to
the Council and Assembly after mentioning his Majesty's Instruction to him for
obtaining the Settlement of the Salary, and telling them that while he resided
at the Court of Great Britain he hoped they were sensible he did every Thing in
his Power consistent with Reason and Justice for preserving and lengthning out
the Peace and Welfare of the Province; and that pleasing was the Sight whilst
he beheld and said, Ye are my Brethren: Ye are my Bones and my Flesh, and that
he had no Interest separate from their true and real Interest; and after having
observed his Majesty's Kindness and Goodness to them in placing one at the Head
of his G -- t here, in whom they themselves had placed the Trust and Confidence
of their Affairs, He proceeds thus, viz.

The Fame of Cato's Wisdom reflected Honor on old Rome, whilst he made so
brave a Stand for the Liberties of his Country, but when Caesar had shut him up
in his little Utica and offered him Terms of Honor, his murdering himself
rather than submiting to a Power, he could no longer rationally resist, has
left a lasting Brand of Infamy on the Memory of that great Patriot. -- And
tells them in the next Words that he mentioned this as some Illustration of the
Dispute lately subsisting between his Majesty and the People of this Province,
meaning the Dispute concerning the fixing the Salary.

But, Sir, notwithstanding the persuasive Argument contained in this Paragraph
of his Ex -- cy's Speech to induce his Countrymen to settle the Salary on
himself, by extolling their Wisdom for refusing to settle it upon G -- r B --
t, and the fine Illustration contained in it of the People's Part in the late
Dispute between his Majesty and them, and the brave Stand for the Liberties of
the Country made by their Agent during his Residence at the Court of Great
Britain on the one Hand, and of his Majesty's Part in the Dispute by his
Instruction to his Governor on the other, the Assembly continued as averse to a
Compliance with the Royal Instruction, as they were in the Time of G -- r B --
tt; and his late Ex -- cy's Interest and Influence among his Countrymen fell so
far short of effecting the Settlement of a Salary of l. 1000 Sterling per Annum
upon his Majesty's Governor for the Time being; that though upon his Accession
to the G -- t he found the Salary raised by G -- r B -- tt in his Ad -- n from
a much lower Sum to the Value of l. 1000 Sterling, yet he could not prevail
with his Countrymen to continue that Allowance to himself, but left it little
better than l. 650 Sterling, when he quitted the C -- r to his Suc -- r; so
that his Success in his Majesty's Service was much the same with that which he
had in the Province's: In the Service of the Province he went Agent with a
Commission to obtain from his Majesty the recalling of his Instruction to his G
-- r for the Settlement of the Salary, and returned to the Province with a
stronger Instruction for enforcing the Settlement of it than that was, which he
went to get recalled: In his Majesty's Service he came over G -- r, and brought
with him an Instruction for fixing the Salary, but instead of getting it fixed,
the Value of it was diminished during his Ad -- n about l. 350 Sterling below
what his Pred -- r had prevailed on the Assembly to raise it up to, and his Suc
-- r afterward(pursuant to his Majesty's express Instruction to him for that
Purpose) prevailed upon them to raise it up to again, notwithstanding his
utmost Efforts to prevent it, and his Disputes from Time to Time with the
People concerning it: And as the Event of his Conduct in other Parts of his
Majesty's Service was generally the same, so the like Contrast between his and
his Suc -- r's Ad -- n will be found, Sir, upon reviewing some of the principal
Proceedings in both Ad -- ns, to run through the whole of them; Instances of
which, since it is undoubtedly one Part of the honorable Gentleman's Business
in going to London, to make his own Comparison there between his and his Suc --
r's G -- t, I shall take the Liberty of troubling you with, that if you should
find him unjust to his Suc -- r in his Comparison on your Side of the Water,
you may be able to set him right by the following one in the Instances herein
after mentioned.

The Regulation of the Paper Currency within the Province was not only Part of
the late G -- r's general Duty, but was also expressly enjoined him by
particular Instructions from his Majesty; and the Law of the Province for
making the Bills of Credit a Tender for the Payment of Debts(Specialties and
express Contracts in Writing excepted) according to their nominal depreciated
Value, had been found in it is Effects by long Experience before his Accession
to the G -- t to be the Bane of the Province, and had been publicly declared
by his Ex -- cy in a Message to the Assembly soon after his Arrival to the G --
t to be neither for his Majesty's Service nor the Good of the Country: yet when
that Law was expired, he with his Eyes thus open revived it again for ten
Years, without providing the least Remedy against the Mischiefs of it, which
were thereby continued and multiplied in the Province during the whole Time of
his Ad -- n; Whereas his Suc -- r upon the Expiration of the same Law in the
Time of his Ad -- n prevailed upon the Assembly to provide a sufficient Remedy
for Creditors against the future depreciating of the Bills, whenever they shall
think fit to take the Benefit of it.

His Majesty's Royal Instructions made it his late Ex -- cy's indispensable
Duty to take especial Care that all the Bills of Credit on the Province should
be drawn in and sunk at the several Periods limited in their respective
Emission Acts (which also is provided to be done by the Province Law) and
forbad him to permit any Bills of Credit to be emitted by the Assembly, except
for the necessary Support of his Majesty's Government; yet he permitted much
larger Quantities of the Province's Bills to be outstanding beyond their stated
Periods, than any G -- r ever suffered before, though not under the same
Restraint by his Majesty's Instructions, to the detriment of the Country, and
in Breach of the Royal Instructions; and encouraged one bad Scheme of Bills of
Credit for a Medium of Trade to be carried on by an unlawful Combination of
private Persons; and for a long Time permitted another much worse Scheme of
Bills of a like Nature, to the exceeding great Confusion and Disorder of the
Province, and plainly contrary to the Tenor of his Majesty's Commands: Whereas
his Suc -- r has constantly exerted his best Endeavors for drawing in as well
the before mentioned Arrears of Bills, as the Bills emitted since his own
coming to the Ad -- n as fast as the Circumstances of the People can bear it,
and for bringing the before mentioned two Schemes to a Conclusion in the most
speedy Manner, and so as to prevent both the public and private Mischiefs,
which the Land Bank Scheme in particular threatened, and has effected it with
even more Success hitherto than could well be expected.

Promoting the Preservation of his Majesty's Woods reserved by the Charter of
King William and Queen Mary for the Use of the Royal Navy, and countenancing
and supporting the Surveyor General of the Woods in the Execution of his Office
is an undoubted Part of a G -- r's Duty within this Province, and what is
enjoined him by his Majesty's Royal Instructions; yet his late Ex -- cy, though
he made a Show of doing it in some of his Speeches to the Assembly, did not
scruple openly to condemn in his Conversation the Acts of Parliament made for
the Preservation of the Woods as cruel and unjust, or to that Effect; and in
Fact greatly discouraged and discountenanced the late Surveyor General by
promoting and countenancing, in the extraordinary Manner which I have before
mentioned, Complaints brought by reputed Destroyers of the Woods against him,
and the Court of Admiralty for Matters done in the Execution of their
respective Duties with Regard to the Preservation of the Woods, and when the
Destruction of several Thousands of his Majesty's white Pine Trees had been
lately made, and transmitting those Complaints home to be laid before his
Majesty with a View (as manifestly appeared by the Tenor of them) to render the
Surveyor General and Court of Admiralty obnoxious to his Royal Displeasure:
Which Conduct, together with his permitting the Orders of his Majesty in
Council made for the Relief of Workmen employed in cutting down Trees for the
Service of the Royal Navy to suffer repeated Contempts in the provincial
Courts, without using any Endeavors for supporting his Majesty's Authority,
and carrying his Royal Orders into Execution, but on the other Hand joining to
support the Prosecutor of those Workmen in his Defense against their Appeal to
his Majesty in Council at the Province's Expense, has a plain Tendency to
encourage the Destruction of the Woods, and the harrassing of Workmen employed
in the before mentioned Service, and seem to have visibly produced those ill
Effects in the Province: Whereas the present G -- r has caused the before
mentioned Orders of his Majesty in Council to be complied with; and prevailed
on the Assembly to pass an Act for the better Preservation of the Royal Woods
in this Province, and Protection of the Workmen employed in cutting them for
the Use of the Navy, and discouraging vexatious Prosecutions against them, and
otherways exerted himself for the same Ends; which will in all Probability have
a considerable Effect for the Preservation of his Majesty's Woods and the
Service of his Royal Navy.

Supporting the general Jurisdiction of his Majesty in Council with Respect to
hearing and determining of Appeals made from Judgments of the provincial Courts
of Judicature given in all Suits whether real or personal, that may deserve his
Royal Consideration(which is plainly declared and affirmed by the Royal
Charter) by causing such Orders of his Majesty in Council to be carried into
Execution within the Province is unquestionably Part of his G -- r's Duty: Yet
his late Ex -- cy not only neglected that Part of his Duty with Respect to the
two before mentioned Orders, but when he was served with 'em, though by the
Latter of 'em he was specially commanded to support his Majesty's Authority in
the Premises and to cause every Part of his Royal Order to be complied with,
declared his Sentiments in Effect to be, that his Majesty in Council had no
Jurisdiction in that Case, in Opposition to his Royal Determination of that
Point in his Council, to whom only the Determination of it does or can in the
Nature of it, of Right appertain: Which Conduct of his late Ex -- cy appears in
it is Consequences to have had a bad Influence upon the Minds of the People in
that Respect, and seems from some late Proceedings to have contributed to
encourage and confirm not only the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston, but the
Assembly itself in the same mistaken Notions: Whereas his present Ex -- cy has
taken all proper Opportunities of asserting his Majesty's Jurisdiction in
Council upon the beforementioned Appeals, not only as a Matter essential to
his Government, but as a valuable Privilege of his Subjects in this Province;
and has effectually supported it hitherto by causing the two Royal Orders,
which had twice suffered Contempt in his Pred -- r's Time to be complied with.

It was also unquestionably his late Ex -- cy's Duty to have caused the ten
Companies of new raised Levies in this Province for his Majesty's Service in
the late Expedition, which the Assembly had by their Vote obliged themselves to
have transported to his Majesty's other Forces in the West Indies at the
Expense of this Government, to have been transported there accordingly; but
instead of that he not only suffered one of those Companies consisting of an
Hundred Indians (which had been raised by the Advice and Influence of his
present Ex -- cy whilst he was a private Gentleman in the Province) to be broke
up and dispersed, for Want of being properly secured upon Castle Island, which
might have been done, and he promised(as I am informed) to do upon the
Application of their Captain to him for that Purpose; and another of those
Companies, with whom the present G -- r had nothing to do, to be likewise broke
up and dispersed; and a third to be upon the Brink of sharing the same Fate,
which it would have done had not the present G -- r, then a private Gentleman,
timely prevented and saved it for his Majesty's Service, but even to dismiss
four of the other Companies, by Means of which Proceedings three of them were
lost, and the fourth would have been lost, had it not been a second Time saved
for his Majesty's Service by the Advice and Vigilance of the present G -- r
then also a private Gentleman, and the Captain and and Leiutenant's
indefatigable Diligence, and great Expedition, by which it was at last with
much Difficulty recovered: So that instead of ten Companies, which his late Ex
-- cy might have indisputably sent into the Service, and it is most evident
that his present Ex -- cy would have sent actually there, had he been then G --
r,(as indeed any other of his Majesty's G -- rs upon the Continent at that
Time, when the unfortunate Event of the Expedition could not be foreseen, would
gladly have done, had it been in his Power) he sent only five, one of which
also had been twice saved from being lost to his Majesty by his present Ex --
cy, when a private Gentleman, as I have before mentioned.

It is likewise evidently, Sir, the Duty of his Majesty's G -- r of this
Province to take as much Care, as may be, that the Branch of the Legislature,
which consists of his Majesty's Council, shall not be over-balanc'd by the
House of Representatives; yet his late Ex -- cy by splitting of old Townships
and unnecessarily erecting new ones out of them put it into the Power of the
Towns thus newly erected during his Ad -- n to send sixteen new Members at
present to the House of Representatives, and when the Number of their
respective Families shall be increased to 120 in each Town, to send thirty two
Members; whereby he went farther toward destroying the original Balance
between those two Branches of the Legislature in this Way, than any of his Pred
-- rs ever did: Whereas the present G -- r, upon finding soon after his
Accession to the G -- t three engrossed Bills for the like Purpose laid before
him for his Consent, put an immediate Stop to this pernicious Practice, though an
established one with the Assembly, by declaring his fixed Resolution not to add
farther by this Means to the Number of the Representatives, which already
consists of between 110 and 120 sitting Members, and may, whenever the Towns
please to send 'em, receive a present Addition of at least 60 more, and, when
all the Towns shall arrive to the above mentioned Number of Families, may be
increased to about 300 Representatives for the Towns already in being, and
would within a Century more, if this Practice had gone on, between the new
Townships erected out of the old ones, and the new created Towns have bid fair
to have equalled the Number of the Members of Parliament in Great Britain;
whilst his Majesty's Council consists of only 28 Members, and cannot
consistently with the Royal Charter have their Number increased; and even those
28 are every Year chosen entirely by the Representatives together with the old
Counselors for the past Year.

It is also a considerable Part of the Duty of his Majesty's G -- r to
cultivate such an Harmony between himself and the other two Branches of the
Legislature, as may enable him in the best Manner to promote his Majesty's
Service and the true Interest and Welfare of the People within the Province; to
bind the People with strongest Ties of Duty and Affection to his Majesty's
Person and Government, and to conciliate his Royal Favor and most tender
Regards to them; and to establish as much as may be a general Tranquillity and
Satisfaction under his own Ad -- n throughout the Province: As to the first and
last of these Particulars, you are sufficiently sensible, Sir, from your own
Knowledge of the late and present State of the Province, how miserably divided
the several Branches of the Legislature were when his late Ex -- cy quitted the
Ad -- n; what Quarrels, Altercations and Expressions of Resentment passed
between the late G -- r and House of Representatives in the latter End of his G
-- t; what a strong Opposition reigned then in the House, and how general a
Dissatisfaction throughout the Province: On the contrary how entirely the Scene
of Affairs has been changed by his present Ex -- cy's Ad -- n; how soon he
united all Parties in the Assembly in his Majesty's Service and the Interest of
the Country; what Tranquillity and Satisfaction is spread through the whole
Province, notwithstanding the public Taxes are greatly increased, and
Executions are daily issuing out to draw in a most heavy Arrear of the
outstanding Bills of Credit; and the Debtors find themselves pinched by the
late Law for securing the Value of outstanding Debts; And how well affected
they are to the present Ad -- n: And as to the other Particular, you are
equally acquainted with the present G -- r's Endeavors to conciliate the Royal
Favor to his Majesty's Subjects with this Province by justly representing the
Duty and Affection, which he is persuaded they bear to his Majesty's Person and
Government, and on the other Hand with the fixed Opinion which had been
unhappily concieved in the Province from the late G -- r's Speeches and
Conduct, that his Representation of the People had a Tendency to give his
Majesty and his Ministry a bad Impression concerning them, and to persuade his
Majesty that they were refractory and ill affected to Government; and that such
Representations were calculated to raise an Opinion of his own Services to the
Crown at the Expense of that Share of their Sovereign's Favor, which they
apprehended their Loyalty and Zeal for the Service of his Majesty's Government
justly entitled them to: But how well this Persuasion concerning the late G --
r may be grounded I will not take upon me to say.

The Preservation of the public Peace and Tranquillity of the Country from
religious as well as civil Disturbances, and the discountenancing of every
Thing, which has a Tendency to promote a general Enthusiasm among the People
destructive of good Order in their Assemblies, and of the Principles necessary
for the Maintenance of Government in the State, is an indispensable Part of a G
-- r's Duty; yet though it was publicly known that Mr. Whitefield's Preaching
and Itinerancy in several Parts of North America, before his Arrival at Boston,
had produced Disorder and Confusion among the People, and possessed the Minds
of many of the Populace with Notions dangerous to the well being of the
Constitution both in Church and State, his late Ex -- cy, contrary to the
Example of all other G -- rs upon the Continent, in a most unprecedented Manner
publicly countenanced, courted, and caressed him, and his Successor Tennent in
these Parts, and thereby contributed to his growing into the People's Favor to
such a Degree, as even to intimidate (as I have been credibly informed) some
sober, learned Ministers in the Province from discharging their Duty by openly
opposing his Doctrines; and what miserable Effects his preaching produced in
several Towns within the Province, the Factions and Disorders subsisting there
to this Day in some of 'em, and the Impieties, which have been practiced by
some of his Followers upon the Principles, which they at first imbibed from
him, afford sufficient Evidence. -- And to give you one indisputable Proof and
flagrant Instance of the late G -- r's publicly espousing of these mischievous
Itinerants, and encouraging their preaching, I shall here transcribe Part of
two Articles out of one of Mr. Whitefield's Journals printed at Boston in 1741;
the first of which is dated October 14th 1740, under the Title -- Sudbury,
Marlborough, Worcester, wherein he says thus, Got to Marlborough eight Miles
from Sudbury about 4; preached in the Meeting House to a large Congregation: at
first my Heart was dead and I had but little Freedom, but before I had
finished, the Word came with such a Demonstration of the Spirit, that great
Numbers were very much melted down: When I came into the Meeting House I turned
about, and to my great Surprise found G -- r B -- r there; He was affected, and
though it rained, and he was much advanced in Years, he went in Company with us
as far as Worcester, fifteen Miles from Marlborough, whither we got about eight
at Night; here we were kindly entertained at the House of Col. C -- r: we spent
the Remainder of the Evening very agreably with the G -- r, and after Prayer
retired to Rest And in the Article immediately following dated October 15th
under the Title -- Worcester and Liecester, he goes on thus, viz. Perceived the
G -- r to be more affectionate than ever; after Morning Prayer he took me by
myself, kissed me, wept, and exhorted me to go on in stirring up the Ministers;
for, says he, Reformation must begin at the House of God: As we were going to
Meeting, says he, Mr. Whitefield do not spare Rulers any more than Ministers,
no not the chief of them: I preached in the open Air to some Thousands; the
Word fell with Weight indeed, it carried all before it: After Sermon the G -- r
said to me, I pray God I may apply what has been said to my own Heart; pray,
Mr. Whitefield, that I may hunger and thirst after Righteousness: Dinner being
ended, with Tears in his Eyes he kissed and took his Leave of me: Oh that we
may meet in Heaven! I have observed that I have had greater Power than
ordinary, whenever the G -- r has been at public Worship: A Sign this, I hope,
that the most High intends effectually to bring him home and place him at his
own right Hand; Even so Lord Jesus; Amen and Amen: Was enabled much to rejoice
in Spirit; preached in the Afternoon at Liecester six Miles from Worcester with
some though not so much Power as in the Morning. I have undoubted Assurance, that
before this Journal was printed his late Ex -- cy had the Revisal and
Correction of it, at least of the two Paragraphs, before transcribed, and
approved of their being published with his Name printed at Length in the first
of 'em; and shall leave you now to your own Observations upon these
extraordinary Paragraphs; and proceed to inform you that when his present Ex --
cy first came to the G -- t, upon which Occasion he was invited, according to
the usual Custom in such Cases, by the President and Corporation of Harvard
College at Cambridge to an Entertainment there, Part of which is a
Congratulatory Latin Oration, to which it is the Custom for the G -- r to make
some short Answer, his Ex -- cy upon being appriz'd by a reverend Gentleman of
good Sense and Learning that the Youth of the College had been much infected by
Mr. Whitefield, who was suffered to preach to 'em at their College Meeting
House in the Time of the late G -- r's Ad -- n, and that it might be of Service
to 'em if he would take Occasion in his Answer to the Oration in a few Words to
express his Disapprobation of Whitefield's Doctrines and the Notions, he had
infused into 'em, as well as give Countenance and Spirit to the President and
Fellows and some Ministers to follow his Example, very readily embraced that
first Opportunity of declaring his Sentiments accordingly in their public Hall,
and contributing as much as he could thereby to discountenance and discourage
the enthusiastic Tenets lately propagated among them: which Example of his Ex
-- cy was soon after followed upon a more public Occasion by the worthy Pre --
t of the College in his next public Commencement Speech before the greatest
Part of the Ministers of the Country; and I am persuaded had other good Effects.

I might show the same Contrast between the late and present Ad -- n in several
other Instances; but those before mentioned are sufficient; and I have been led
thus far, much against my Inclinations, by the honorable Gentleman's own
apparent Scheme for making a Comparison on your Side of the Water between his G
-- t and his Suc -- r's, to his Justice in doing which I can by no means trust,
and have therefore furnished you with this Account, that you may the better
examine and correct what he may offer to advance wrongfully to the Prejudice of
his Suc -- r's Character and Conduct in his Ad -- n.

I am, SIR, Yours etc.


