THE TREATY Held with the INDIANS OF THE SIX NATIONS, AT Lancaster, in
Pennsylvania, in June, 1744.

To which is prefixed, An Account of the first Confederacy of the SIX NATIONS,
their present TRIBUTARIES, DEPENDENTS, and ALLIES, and of their RELIGION, and
Form of GOVERNMENT.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM PARKS.

THE PREFACE.
AS it is likely the following Treaty may fall into the Hands of many Persons
who are unacquainted with, or have any Idea of, the Power, Strength, and
Confederacy of the Six Nations of Indians, their present Tributaries,
Dependents, Allies, and Form of Government; I judged the publishing the
following instructive and entertaining Account of them, might be useful; and
the more so, as it never was made Public 'til lately, that it was communicated
to a Friend, by a Person CONRAD WEISER.
of good Understanding and Probity; one who is very well skilled in the Indian
affairs, It is customary among them to make a Compliment of Naturalization into
the Five Nations; and considering how highly they value themselves above all
others, it must be accounted no small one. -- I had this Compliment from one of
their old Sachems, which he did by giving me his own Name: He had been a
notable Warrior; and he told me, that now I had a Right to assume to my self
all the Acts of Valor he had performed. C. COLDEN's History of the Five
Nations, M. S.
adopted into one of their Tribes, is of their Council, and their constant
Interpreter at the Philadelphia Treaties, as he was at This.

This Confederacy have been generally styled the Five Nations of Indians,
bordering upon Pennsylvania and New York; but, since the Junction of the
Tuscarora's of Carolina to them, they are called the Six Nations, of whom the
following Account is given:

1. The Conymkos or Mohawks; the first Promoter of the Confederacy. The Indian
Idiom; they always style a whole Nation in the singular Number.
He is styled in the Council of all the Nations, Docaryhoogou, i. e. President,
or Eldest.

2. The Onayiuts or Onoyders, were the first that joined in the Confederacy
with the Mohawks, by putting themselves under their Protection. He calls the
Mohawk his Father, and in Return he is called a Son: The Mohawk used him for
his Ambassador to the other Nations: In Council he is styled Niharontaquoa, or
the great Tree A Tree is their most frequent Emblem of Peace. To plant a Tree
whose Top may reach to the San, and it is Branches may extend over the whole
Country, is a Phrase for a lasting Covenant of Peace.


3. The Onontago's were the next that joined, and of their own Accord became
Confederates; they are therefore called by the Mohawks, Brothers; and by the
Onoyders, Fathers, because they had not been forced into the Alliance as the
Onoyders were: He is called in Council Sagochsaanagechteront, i. e. the Arms,
or Names-bearer.

4. The Jenontowano's or Sinikers, next joined in the Alliance of their own
Consent; they are styled by the Mohawks and Onontago's, Brothers, and by the
Onoyders, Fathers: His Title in Council is Onughkaarydaawy, whose Signification
is not known, and Dyionenhookaraw, i. e. Open Doors for Friends and Enemies.

5. The Caiukquo's, the last of the Five Nation Alliance, being compelled
thereto by the rest, is Brother to the Onoyders, and Son to the others; is
styled in Council Ganunawantoowano, or the The great Pipe, or Calumet of the
Indians, resembles the Olive Branch of Antiquity, always a Badge of Peace.
great Pipe.

6. Tuscarora's joined in the Alliance about thirty two years ago, being
compelled thereto by the English of Carolina: He is Brother to the Onoyders and
Cayukquo's, and Son to the others; has no Title in Council, but is frequently
called a Fool.

The Dependents and Tributaries of these Nations.

Mohickons, who formerly lived on Hudson's River, and in New England; they have
been conquered by the Five Nations, their Breech-Cloth taken from them, and a
Petticoat put upon them. When they apply to their Conquerors, they humbly call
themselves Women: The Five Nations call them by the same Name when they speak
severely to 'em: At other Times they call them Cousins, and are in Return
called Uncles.

Delawares are in the same Condition as the Mohickons, were dealt with in like
Manner; and are Tributary in an All the Nations round them have, for many
Years, entirely submitted to them, (the Five Nations,) and pay a yearly Tribute
in Wampum: They dare neither make War nor Peace without the Consent of the
Mohawks. Two old Men commonly go about every Year or two to receive this
Tribute, and I have had Opportunity to observe what Anxiety the poor Indian,
were under, whilst the two old Men remained in that Part of the Country where I
was. An old Mohawk Sachem, in a poor Blanket and a dirty Shirt, may be seen
issuing his Orders with as absolute Authority as a Roman Dictator, or King of
France. C. COLDEN's History.
Indian Sense.

Shawanese are Brethren to the Six Nations, but are not in the Confederacy:
Their Coming from the Spanish Dominions is remembered by many now living. The
Five Nations gave them Lands on the West Branch of Susquehanna, and therefore
claim a Superiority over them, for which the Shawanese mortally hate them. The
greatest 'Part of 'em, a few years ago, went to settle on the River Ohio, which
is a Branch of the Missisippi, and heads with the West Branch of Susquehanna.
One Tribe of them is quite gone down to New Spain; there are a few left still
at Wyomink on the North Branch of Susquehanna, and others have a large Town on
an Island in the West Branch, about 50 Miles above the Forks. They are the most
restless and mischievous of all the Indians.

Conestogo Indians have been all destroyed by the Five Nations, except a few
whom the Onoyders adopted: When these had forgot their Language, they were sent
back to Conestogo, where a few are now left, and speak the Onoyder's Language.

Nantikooks are in Alliance with the Six Nations, and not Tributary;
acknowledging themselves to be sheltered by their Wings: They live within the
Borders of Maryland, a few about Conestogo, and some have settled lately at the
Mouth of the River Skohooniaty or Jeniaty, which is a Creek that falls into the
Susquehanna from the West beyond the Mountains.

Tutolo's originally lived in Virginia, there are but few of them; they settled
lately at Shamokin, (on the East Side of Susquehanna, just below the Forks) and
are entirely devoted to the Six Nations.

The several Nations of Indians with whom the Six Nations or Iroquois are in
Alliance; according to the Information given CONRAD WEISER, Esquire in open Council
at Turpehawkin, at their Return from the Treaty at Philadelphia, in July, 1742.
1. A Nation of Indians, living on the West Side of the Lake Erie, and along
the Streights of Huron's Lake. They are called by the Iroquois,
Unighkellyiakon; consisting of about Thirty Towns, each of about 200 fighting
Men. 2. The second Nation, lives among the preceding, called -- consisting of
Four Towns of their own People, and 400 able Men in all. 3. The third Nation,
called by the Iroquois, Tshisagech Roanu signifies Nation or People, in the
Language of the Six Nations.
Roanu, lives on the East Side of the Huron's Lake; several of the Council have
been there, and all agree they have Three large Towns of 600, 800, and 1000
able Men. 4. The fourth, called Twightwis Roanu, Two large Towns, and about 200
Men in all, live at the Heads of Huakiky River, near the little Lakes. 5.
Oskiakikas, living on a Branch of Ohio, that heads near the Lake Erie, Four
large Towns of about 1000 Warriors. 6. Oyachtawnuh Roanu, near Black-River,
consisting of Four Towns, and 1000 Warriors. 7. Keghetawkegh Roanu, upon the
great River Missisippi, above the Mouth of Ohio: Three Towns; the Number of
People uncertain. 8. Kerhawguegh Roanu, several Savage Nations, as their Names
signify, (the People of the Wilderness) live on the North Side of Huron's Lake;
they neither plant Corn, nor any thing else, but live alogether upon Flesh,
Fish, Roots and Herbs; an infinite Number of People, of late become Allies to
the Six Nations.
Thus far proceeds CONRAD WEISER'S Account.

I shall now give the best Account I could collect, of their RELIGION, and Form
of GOVERNMENT. As to their RELIGION, It appears from several Passages in their
Treaties with the English, that they believe in One GOD, the Creator of the
Universe; that there is a future State of Rewards and Punishments; the
Influence of evil Spirits upon human Actions. As a Reward to the first Founders
of their Union, they believe them to be now Gods in Heaven. Their Form of
Worship I have not learnt. Upon the Whole, they seem to be the best Sort of
Deists.

Their Form of GOVERNMENT, is a Council of their oldest and wisest Men, who
have been great Warriors: Every one of the Six Nations have such a Council, in
which all Matters relating to that Nature, are determined: And if it is of
great Moment, they consult their young Warriors, and the Business is debated
with great Deliberation. In Foreign Affairs, which relate to the Union in
general, every one of the Six Nations sends Deputies out of their Council, to a
General Council; and this General Council, as well as the Particular Ones,
consult the young Warriors, and have their Concurrence, before any Matter of
great Consequence is determined. All their Debates in Council, are managed with
great Decency and Deliberation; and the Resolution is imprinted in the Memory
of One chosen from among them, of great Reputation and Elocution, who is
appointed to speak in Public. He is assisted by a Prompter, who puts him in
Mind of any Thing he forgets. They have no coercive Power over their young
Warriors; they can only persuade and admonish; nor have they any Punishment
but Death; Crimes that by their Laws do not deserve that, are forgiven, after
proper Reproofs.

When any Proposals are made by them, in their Treaties with the white People,
or by the white People to them, they make the Io -- hau, or Shout of
Approbation, which is performed thus: The Speaker, after a Pause, in a slow
Tone pronounces the U -- huy; all the other Sachems in perfect Silence: So soon
as be stops, they all with one Voice, in exact Time, begin one general Io',
raising and falling their Voices as the Arch of a Circle, and then raise it as
high as at first, and stop at the Height at once, in exact Time; and if it is
of great Consequence, the Speaker gives the U -- huy thrice, and they make the
Shout as often. It is usual, when the white People speak to them, as they give
a Belt or String of Wampum, for the Interpreter to begin the U -- huy, and the
Indians to make the Shout.

The Six Nations, as was observed before, border upon the Provinces of
Pennsylvania and New York: The rest, which are mentioned as their Dependents
and Allies, lie near the French Settlements, some amidst, and some beyond them.
The Wisdom of the Chiefs in this Consederacy has gained them no less
Reputation than their courage; which indeed has struck Terror into the remotest
Indian Nations of North America, and forced them to court the Friendship and
Protection of such a formidable Power.

The Moderation and Equity of the first Proprietor of Pennsylvania, gained the
absolute Confidence and Affection of this brave People: They were convinced of
his Tenderness for them, and in Return they have erected him lasting Monuments
in their grateful Hearts: They revere this good Man's Memory, and his Praises
will only cease with the Nations themselves.

The following Clauses from a Collection of Charters, etc. printea at
Philadelphia 1740, are, amongst many others, strong Proofs of the Proprietor's
equitable Regard to these People.

That no Man, says he, shall by any Ways or Means, in Word or Deed, affront or
wrong any Indian; but he shall incur the same Penalty of the Law, as if he had
committed it against his fellow Planter: And if any Indian shall abuse, in Word
or Deed, any Planter of this Province, that he shall not be his own Judge upon
the Indian; but he shall make his Complaint to the Governor of the Province, or
his Lieutenant or Deputy, or some inferior Magistrate near him; who shall, to
the utmost of his Power, take Care, with the KING of the said Indian, that all
reasonable Satisfaction be made to the said injured Planter.

That all Differences between the Planters and the Natives, shall also be ended
by Twelve Men, that is, by Six Planters and Six Natives, that so we may live
friendly together, as much as in us lies, preventing all Occasions of
Heart-burnings and Mischief.

A Conduct regulated by such Principles of Love and Justice, could not fail to
influence this discerning People, and biass them in favor of the ENGLISH; a
Continuance of the like Conduct must attach them inviolably: And the present
worthy Governor and Council seem so sensible of the Necessity of cultivating a
good Understanding with the Six Nations, as to be likely to omit no Opportunity
of brightening the Chain, or increasing the Fire of Friendship with them.

The Confidence which these Nations repose in their Interpreter, is a Proof of
his Industry, good Sense, and Address: Nothing could have happened more
favorably to the English Settlements, than that those delicate Affairs should
be in the Hands of a Person equally just, and a Friend to both.

The FRENCH are perpetually laboring to debauch their Faith to the ENGLISH:
Their Emissaries, the Priests, an indefatigable, artful, insinuating Race, are
constantly laboring to gain Admittance amongst them. They assume all Shapes,
try every Spring; they magnify the Power and Grandeur of FRANCE; they study to
render the ENGLISH diminutive and contemptible; they foment every little
Occasion of Disgust, and leave no Stone unturned to prejudice us in their
Esteem.

Hitherto the Honor of the Six Nations, and the experienced good Intentions
and Probity of the ENGLISH, have been a sufficient Barrier against all their
Intrigues: But it cannot be imprudent to countermine the intended Mischief, by
giving suitable Encouragement to proper Persons, to converse with the Indians,
and study their Genius. An open-hearted Generosity wins them effectually: The
Temper of the ENGLISH is happily suited to this; and the additional
Qualifications of Integrity and Prudence, must in Time pave the Way to an
Ascendency in their Councils; and by this Means the Subtilty of the FRENCH
would be utterly defeated.

One sees, in the following short Sketch of the Behavior of the Indians,
strong Traces of good Sense, a nice Address in the Conduct of their Affairs, a
noble Simplicity, and that manly Fortitude which is the constant Companion of
Integrity. The Friendship of a Nation like this, though under the Appellation of
Savages or Barbarians, is an Honor to the most civilized People: I say nothing
of the Advantage which is derived from them by Commerce: And the FRENCH well
know, by dear Experience, how terrible they are to their Enemies in War.

When we speak of the Five Nations in FRANCE, ( says an DE LA POTERIE' s
History of North America, in Dr. COLDEN' s History, etc.
Author of that Country) they are thought, by common Mistake, to be mere
Barbarians, always thirsting after human Blood: But their true Character is
very different. They are the fiercest and most formidable People in North
America; at the same Time as politic and judicious, as well can be imagined:
This appears from the Management of the Affairs which they transact, not only
with the FRENCH and ENGLISH, but likewise with almost all the Indians of this
vast Continent. IN THE COURTHOUSE AT LANCASTER, The 22d Day of June, 1744.
PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex on Delaware.
Commissioners for Virginia. The Honorable Thomas Lee, Esquire and Colonel William
Beverley,
Commissioners for Maryland. The Honorable Edm. Jennings and Philip Thomas,
Esqs; Colonel Robert King and Colonel Thomas Colvill,
Richard Peter's, Esquire Secretary of Pennsylvania. William Black, Secretary for
the Virginia Commissiorers. Witham Marshe, Secretary for the Maryland
Commissioners. THE DEPUTIES OF THE ONONDAGOE's, SENECA's, CATUGA's, ONEIDO's
and TUSCARORA's. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


THE Governor and the Commissioners took some of the Indian Chiefs by the Hand,
and after they had seated themselves, the Governor bid them welcome into the
Government, and there being Wine and Punch prepared for them, the Governor and
the several Commissioners, drank Health to the Six Nations; and Canasateego,
Tachanoontia, and some other Chiefs returned the Compliment, drinking the
Healths of Onas, Assaraquoa, and the Governor of Maryland.

After they were all served with Wine, Punch, Pipes and Tobacco, the Governor
told the Indians, as it was necessary and indeed customary, That they should
have some Time to rest after so long a Journey, and as he thought three Days
would be sufficient for that Purpose; therefore, on Monday he proposed to speak
to them, after which the Commissioners would take their own Time to deliver
what they had to say.

CANASATEEGO answered the Governor,

We thank you for giving us Time to rest; we are come to you, and shall leave
it entirely to you, to appoint the Time when we shall meet you again.

We likewise leave it to the Governor of Maryland, by whose Invitation we come
here, to appoint a Time, when he will please to mention the Reason of his
inviting us.

As to our Brother Assaraquoa, we have at this present Time, nothing to say to
him; not, but we have a great deal to say to Assaraquoa, which must be said at
one Time or another; but not being satisfied, whether He or We should begin
first, we shall leave it wholly to our Brother Onas, to adjust this between us,
and to say which shall begin first.

IN THE COURTHOUSE AT LANCASTER, June the 25th, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.



The Governor spoke as follows:

Honorable Gentlemen, Commissioners for the Governments of Virginia and
Maryland, and BRETHREN, Sachems or Chiefs of the Indians of the Six Nations,

At a Treaty held by me two Years ago, in behalf of the Government of
Pennsylvania, with a Number of the Chiefs of the Indians of the Six Nations, I
was desired by them to write to the Government of Maryland, concerning some
Lands in the back Parts of that Province, which they claimed a Right to, from
their Conquests over the ancient Possessors, and which have been settled by
some of the Inhabitants of that Government, without their Consent, or any
Purchase made from them.

It was at that Time understood, That the Claim was upon Maryland only; but it
has since appeared, by some Letters formerly wrote by Mr. President Logan, to
the late Governor of Maryland, that it related likewise, to some Lands in the
back Parts of Virginia.

The Governors of those Colonies soon manifested a truly equitable Disposition,
to come to any reasonable Terms with the Six Nations, on account of those
Lands; and desired, that, for that End, a Time and Place might be fixed for a
Treaty with them.

But before this could be effected, an unfortunate Skirmish happened, in the
back Parts of Virginia, between some of the Militia there, and a Party of the
Indian Warriors of the Six Nations, with some Loss on both Sides. Who was the
Aggressors, is not at this Time to be discussed, both Parties having agreed to
bury that Affair in Oblivion; and the Government of Virginia, having, in Token
of the Continuance of their Friendship, presented the Six Nations, through my
Hands, with Goods to the Value of One Hundred Pounds Sterling, to prevent
further Hostilities, and to heal this Breach.

I had, before the Present was given, made a Tender of my good Offices, which
both Parties accepted, and consented, on my Instances, to lay down their Arms:
Since which, the Faith pledged to me has been mutually preserved, and a Time
and Place has been agreed upon, through my Intervention, for accommodating all
Differences, and for settling a firm Peace, Union, and Friendship, as well
between the Government of Virginia, as that of Maryland, and the Indians of the
Six Nations.

The Honorable the Commissioners for these two Governments, and the Deputies
of the Six Nations, are now met at the Place appointed for the Treaty.

It only remains therefore for me to say, that if my further good Offices shall
be thought useful, for the Accomplishment of this good Work, you may rely most
assuredly upon them.

The foregoing Paragraph was intended to be spoke, but was not.
But I hope, Honorable Gentlemen Commissioners, it will not be taken amiss, if
I go a little further, and briefly represent to you, how especially necessary
it is, at this Juncture, for His Majesty's Service, and the Good of all His
Colonies, in this Part of His Dominions, that Peace and Friendship be
established between your Governments, and the Indians of the Six Nations.

These Indians, by their Situation, are a Frontier to some of them; and from
thence, if Friends, are capable of defending their Settlements; if Enemies, of
making cruel Ravages upon them; if Neuters, they may deny the French a Passage
through their Country, and give us timely Notice of their Designs.

These are but some of the Motives for cultivating a good Understanding with
them, but from hence, the Disadvantages of a Rupture are abundantly evident.
Every Advantage you gain over them in War, will be a Weakening of the Barrier
of those Colonies, and consequently be, in Effect, Victories over yourselves,
and your Fellow Subjects. Some Allowances for their Prejudices and Passions,
and a Present now and then, for the Relief of their Necessities, which have, in
some Measure, been brought upon them, by their Intercourse with us, and by our
yearly extending our Settlements, will probably tie them more closely to the
British Interest.

This has been the Method of New York, and Pennsylvania, and will not put you
to so much Expense in Twenty Years, as the carrying on a War against them will
do, in One.

The French very well know the Importance of these Nations to us; and will not
fail by Presents, and their other usual Arts, to take Advantage of any
Misunderstandings we may have with them.

But I will detain you, Gentlemen, no longer; your own superior Knowledge will
suggest to you, more than I can say, on this Subject.

FRIENDS and BRETHREN, Sachems or Chiefs of the Indians of the Six Nations,
These, your Brethren of Virginia and Maryland, are come to enlarge the Fire
which was almost gone out, and to make it burn clearer, to brighten the Chain
which had contracted some Rust, and to renew their Friendship with you; which
it is their Desire, may last so long as the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars shall
give Light.

Their Powers are derived from the great King of England, your Father, and
whatever Conclusions they shall come to with you, will be as firm and binding,
as if the Governors of these Provinces were themselves here.

I am your Brother, and, which is more, I am your true Friend: As you know from
Experience that I am so, I will now give you a few Words of Advice.

Receive these your Brethren with open Arms; unite yourselves to them in the
Covenant Chain, and be you with them as one Body and one S^ul.

I make no Doubt, but the Governor of Canada has been taking Pains to widen the
Breach between these, your Brethren of Virginia, and you; but as you cannot
have forget the Hatred the French have always born to your Nations, and how
kindly on the contrary you have been treated, and how faithfully you have been
protected by the great King of England, and his Subjects, you will not be at a
Loss to see into the Designs of that Governor. He wants to divide you from us,
the more easily to destroy you; which he will most certainly do, if you suffer
yourselves to be deluded by him.

As to what relates to the Friendship, establithed between the Government of
Pennsylvania, and your Nations, I will take another Day to speak to you upon it.

And to enforce what had been said, the Governor laid down a Belt of Wampum;
upon which, the Indians gave their usual Cry of Approbation.

After a short Pause, the Governor ordered the Interpreter to tell the Indians,
That as they had greatly exceeded their appointed Time of meeting the
Commissioners, he recommended to them, to use all the Expedition possible, in
giving their Answer to what had been said, that they might forthwith proceed to
treat with the respective Commissioners, on the Business they came about.

Then the Governor addressed himself to the Honorable Commissioners, in the
following Manner:

GENTLEMEN, the Honorable the Commissioners of Virginia and Maryland, If, in
the future Course of this Treaty, my good Offices shall be thought useful, you
may most assuredly rely upon them. For which Speech, all the Commissioners
returned the Governor their Thanks.

Then Canasateego repeated to the Interpreter, the Substance of what the
Governor had spoke, in order to know if he had understood him right; a Method
always made Use of by the Indians: And when the Interpreter told him, he had
taken the true Sense, Canasateego proceeded to return the Thanks of the Six
Nations, for the Governor's kind Advice, promising to follow it, as far as lay
in their Power; but as it was their Custom, when a Belt was given, to return
another, they would take Time till the Afternoon, to provide One, and would
then give their Answer.

In the COURTHOUSE at LANCASTER, June the 25th, 1744. P. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


CANASATEEGO's Answer to the Governor's Speech, delivered in the Morning.

BROTHER ONAS,

You spoke, in the Presence of Assaraquoa, and the Governor of Maryland, to us,
advi^^ng us to receive them as our Brethren, and to unite with them in the
Covenant Chain, as one Body, and one Soul. We have always considered them as
our Brethren, and as such, shall be willing to brighten the Chain of Friendship
with them.

But since there are some Disputes between us, respecting the Lands possessed
by them, which formerly belonged to us; we, according to our Custom, propose to
have those Differences first adjusted, and then we shall proceed to confirm the
Friendship subsisting between us, which will meet with no Obstruction, after
these Matters are settled.

Here they presented the Governor with a Belt of Wampum, in Return for the Belt
given them in the Morning, by the Governor.

Then the Governor, in Reply, spoke as follows:

I receive your Belt with great Kindness and Affection; and as to what relates
to the Governments of Virginia and Maryland, the Honorable Commissioners now
present, are ready to treat with you. I shall only add, that the Goods for the
Hundred Pounds Sterling, put into my Hands by the Governor of Virginia, as a
Token of his good Disposition to preserve Friendship with you, are now in Town,
and ready to be delivered, in Consequence of what was told you by Conrad
Weiser, when he was last at Onondago. Then the Governor, turning to the
Commissioners of Virginia and Maryland, said,

GENTLEMEN,

I have now finished what was incumbent upon me to say, by way of Introduction,
to the Indians; and as you have full Authority from your respective
Governments, to treat with them, I shall leave the rest entirely to you, and
either stay, or withdraw, as you shall think it most for your Service.

The Commissioners said, they were all of Opinion, it would be for their
Advantage to have the Governor to stay with them; and therefore, they
unanimously desired he would favor them with the Continuance of his Presence,
while they should be in Treaty with the Indians: Which, his Honor said, he
would, at their Instance, very readily do, believing it might expedite their
Business, and prevent any Jealousy the Indians might conceive, at his
withdrawing.

The Commissioners of Maryland ordered the Interpreter to acquaint the Indians,
that the Governor of Maryland was going to speak to them; and then spoke as
follows:

FRIENDS and BRETHREN, of the united Six Nations,

We who are deputed from the Government of Maryland, by a Commission under the
Great Seal of that Province, now in our Hands, and which will be interpreted to
you, bid you welcome; and, in Token that we are very glad to see you here as
Brethren, we give you this String of Wampum.

Here the usual Cry of Approbation was given,

When the Governor of Maryland received the first Notice, about Seven Years
ago, of your Claim to some Lands in that Province, he thought our Friends and
Brethren of the Six Nations, had little Reason to complain of any Injury from
Maryland; and that they would be so well convinced thereof, on further
Deliberation, as he should hear no more of it: But you spoke of that Matter
again to the Governor of Pennsylvania, about two Years since, as if you
designed to terrify us.

It was very inconsiderately said by you, That you would do yourselves Justice,
by going to take Payment yourselves. Such an Attempt would have entirely
dissolved the Chain of Friendship, subsisting not only between us, but perhaps
between the other English and you.

We assure you, our People, who are numerous, courageous, and have Arms ready
in their Hands, will not suffer themselves to be hurt in their Lives and
Estates.

But however, the old and wise People of Maryland, immediately met in Council;
and upon considering, very cooly, your rash Expression, agreed to invite their
Brethren, the Six Nations, to this Place, that they might learn of them, what
Right they have to the Land in Maryland; and, if they had any, to make them
some reasonable Compensation for it.

Therefore, the Governor of Maryland has sent us to meet and treat with you,
about this Affair, and the brightening and strengthening the Chain, which has
long subsisted between us; and as an Earnest of our Sincerity and good Will
toward you, we present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Here the Cry of Approbation was given.

Our great King of England, and his Subjects, have always possessed the
Province of Maryland, free and undisturbed from any Claim of the Six Nations,
for above One Hundred Years past; and your not saving any Thing to us before,
convinces us, you thought you had no Pretense to any Lands in Maryland. Nor can
we yet find out, to what Lands, or under what Title, you make your Claim.

For the Susquehannah Indians, by a Treaty above Ninety Years since, which is
on the Table, and will be interpreted to you, GIVE and YIELD, to the English
Nation, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, the greatest Part, if not all, of the
Land we possess, from Patuxent River, on the Western, as well as from Choptank
River, on the Eastern Side of the great Bay of Chesapeak: And near Sixty Years
ago, you acknowledged to the Governor of New York, at Albany, That you had
given your Lands, and submitted yourselves, to the King of England.

We are that great King's Subjects, and we possess and enjoy the Province of
Maryland, by Virtue of his Right and Sovereignty thereto: Why then will you
stir up any Quarrel between you and ourselves, who are as one Man, under the
Protection of that great King?

We need not put you in Mind of the Treaty, which, we suppose, you have had
from your Fathers, made with the Province of Maryland, near Seventy Years ago;
and renewed and confirmed twice since that Time.

By these Treaties, we became Brethren: We have always lived as such, and hope
always to continue so.

We have this further to say, that although we are not sati^fied of the Justice
of your Claim to any Lands in Maryland; yet we are desirous of showing our
brotherly Kindness and Affection, and to prevent, by any reasonable Way, every
Misunderstanding between the Province of Maryland and you, our Brethren of the
Six Nations.

For this Purpose, we have brought with us a Quantity of Goods, for our
Brethren the Six Nations, and which will be delivered you, as soon as we shall
have received your Answer, and made so bright and large a Fire, as may burn
pure and clear whilst the Sun and Moon shall shine.

We have now freely and openly laid our Bosoms bare to you; and that you may be
the better confirmed of the Truth of our Hearts, we give you this Belt of
Wampum.

Here the usual Cry of Approbation was given.

After a little Time, Canasateego spoke:

BROTHER, the Governor of Maryland, We have heard what you have said to us; and
as you have gone back to old Times, we cannot give you an Answer now; but we
shall take what you have said into Consideration, and return you an Answer some
Time Tomorrow. He then sat down; and after some Time, spoke again:

BROTHER, the Governor of Maryland, If you have made any Enquiry into Indian
Affairs, you well know, that we have always had our Guns, Hatchets, and Kettles
mended, when ever we come to see our Brethren: Brother Onas, and the Governor
of New York, always do this for us; and we give you this early Notice, that we
may not thereby be delayed, being desirous, as well as you, to give all
possible Dispatch to the Business, to be transacted between us. The
Commissioners of Virginia and Maryland said, since it was customary, they would
give Orders to have every Thing belonging to them mended, that should want it.

In the COURTHOUSE at LANCASTER, June the 26th, 1744. P.M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


CANASATEEGO spoke as follows:

BROTHER, the Governor of Maryland, When you invited us to kindle a
Council-Fire with you, Conedogrvanict was the Place agreed upon; but
afterward, you, by our Brother Onas, on second Thoughts, considering that it
would be difficult to get Provisions, and other Accommodations, where there
were but few Houses or Inhabitants, desired we would meet you our Brethren at
Lancaster, and at his Instance we very readily agreed to meet you here, and are
glad of the Change: For we have found Plenty of every Thing, and as yesterday
you bid us welcome, and told us you were glad to fee Us; we likewise assure
you, we are glad to see you, and in Token of our Satisfaction, we present you
with this String of Wampum. Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER, the Governor of Maryland, You tell us, That when about seven Years
ago, you heard by our Brother Onas, of our Claim to some Lands in your
Province, you took no Notice of it; believing as you say, That when we should
come to re-consider that Matter, we should find we had no Right to make any
Complaint of the Governor of Maryland, and would drop our Demand: And that,
when about two Years ago, we mentioned it again to our Brother Onas, you say we
did it in such Terms, as looked like a Design to terrify you: And you tell us
further, That we must be besides ourselves, in using such a rash Expression, as
to tell you, We know how to do ourselves Justice, if you should still refuse.
It is true we did say so, but without any ill Design: For we must inform you,
That when we first desired our Brother Onas to use his Influence with you, to
procure us Satisfaction to our Lands, we at the same Time desired him, in case
you should disregard our Demand, to write to the great King beyond the Seas,
who would own us for his Children, as well as you, to compel you to do us
Justice: And two Years ago, when he had found you paid no Regard to our just
Demand, nor that Brother Onas had conveyed our Complaint to the great King over
the Seas, we were res lv'd to use such Expressions as would make the greatest
Impressions on your Minds; and we find it has had it is Effect: For you tell us,
that Your wise Men held a Council together, and agreed to invite us, and to
enqui^e of our Right to any of your Lands, and if it should be found that we
had a Right, we were to have a Compensation made for them. And likewise you
tell us, that Our Brother the Governor of Maryland, by the Advice of these wise
Men, has sent up to brighten the Chain, and to assure us of his Willingness to
remove whatever impedes a good Understanding between us. This shows, that your
wise Men understood our Expressions in their true Sense.

We had no Design to terrify you, but to put you on the doing us the Justice
you had so long delayed: Your wise Men have done well, and as there is no
Obstacle to a good Understanding between us, except this Affair of the I and,
we, on our Parts, do give you the strongest Assurances of our good Dispesition
toward you; and that we are as desirous as you, to brighten the Chain, and to
put away all Hindrances to a perfect good Understanding: And in Token of our
Sincerity, we give you this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER, the Governor of Maryland, When you mentioned the Affair of the Land
Yesterday, you went back to old Times, and told us, you had been in Possession
of the Province of Maryland, above One Hundred Years; but what is a Hundred
Years, in Comparison of the Length of Time since our Claim began? Since we came
out of this Ground? For we must tell you, that long before a Hundred Years, our
Ancestors came out of this very Ground, and their Children have remained here
ever since.

You came out of the Ground in a Country that lies beyond the Seas; there you
may have a just Claim, but here you must allow us to be your elder Brethren,
and the Lands to belong to us long before you knew any Thing of them.

It is true, that above One Hundred Years ago the Dutch came here in a Ship,
and brought with them several Goods, such as Auls, Knives, Hatchets, Guns, and
many other Particulars, which they gave us: And when they had taught us how to
use their Things, and we saw what Sort of People they were, we were so well
pleased with them, that we tied their Ship to the Bushes on the Shore; and
afterward, liking them still better the longer they staid with us, and
thinking the Bushes too slender, we removed the Rope and tied it to the Trees;
and as the Trees were liable to be blown down by high Winds, or to decay of
themselves, from the Affection we bore them, again removed the Rope, and tied
it to a strong and big Rock: Here, the Interpreter said, they mean the Oncido
Country. And not content with this, for its further Security, we removed the
Rope to the big Mountain, Here, the Interpreter says, they mean the Onondago
Country. and there we tied it very fast, and rolled Wampum about it; and to
make it still more secure, we stood upon the Wampum, and sat down upon it, to
defend it, and to prevent any Hurt coming to it, and did our best Endeavors,
that it might remain uninjur'd for ever.

During all this Time, the New-comers the Dutch, acknowledged our Right to the
Lands, and solicited us from time to time, to grant them part of our Country,
to enter into League and Covenant with us, and to become one People with us.

After this, the English came into the Country, and as we were told, became one
People with the Dutch: About two Years after the Arrival of the English, an
English Governor came to Albany; and finding what great Friendship subsisted
between us and the Dutch, he approved it mightily, and desired to make as
strong a League, and to be upon as good Terms with us, as the Dutch were, with
whom he was united, and to become one People with us; and by his further Care
in looking into what had passed between us, he found, That the Rope which tied
the Ship to the great Mountain, was only sast'ned with Wampum, which was liable
to break and rot, and to perish in a Course of Years: He therefore told us,
that he would give us a Silver Chain, which would be much stronger, and would
last for ever: This we accepted, and saft'ncd the Ship with it, and it has
lasted ever since.

Indeed, we have had some small Differences with the English, and during these
Misunderstandings, some of their young Men would, by way of Reproach, be every
now and then telling us, that we should have perished, if they had not come
into the Country, and furnished us with Strowds, Hatchets, Guns, and other
Things necessary for the Support of Life: But we always gave them to
understand, that they were mistaken; that we lived before they came amongst us,
and as well or better, if we may believe what our Forefathers have told us: We
had then Room enough, and Plenty of Deer, which was easily caught; and though we
had not Knives and Hatchets, and Deer, such as we have now, yet we had Knives
of Stone, and Hatchets of Stone, and Bows and Arrows, and these served our
Uses, as well then, as the English ones do now: We are now straightned, and
sometimes in want of Deer, and liable to many more Inconveniences, since the
English came among us, and particularly from that Pen and Ink Work, that is
going on at the Table; and we will give you an Instance of this.

Our Brother ONAS, a great while ago came to Albany, to buy the Susquehannah
Lands of us; but our Brother the Governor of New York, who, as we suppose, had
not a good Understanding with our Brother Onas, advised us not to sell him any
Land, for he would make an ill Use of it; and pretending to be our good Friend,
he advised us, in order to prevent Onas, or any other Persons imposing upon us,
and that we might always have our Land when we should want it to put it into
his Hands; and told us, he would keep it for our Use, and never open his Hands,
but keep them close shut, and not part with any of it, but at our Request.

Accordingly, we trusted him, and put our Land into his Hands, and charged him
to keep it sase for our Use: But some Time after, he went away to England, and
carried our Land with him, and there sold it to our Brother Onas, for a large
Sum of Money; and when, at the Instance of our Brother Onas, we were minded to
sell him some Land, he told us, we had sold the Susquehannah Lands already, to
the Governor of New York, and he had bought them from him in England; though when
he came to understand, how the Governor of New York had deceived us, he very
generonsly paid us for our Lands over again.

Though we mention this Instance of an Imposition put upon us, by the Governor of
New York, yet we must do the English the Justice to say, We have had their
hearty Assistance, in our Wars with the French; who were no sooner arriv^^
amongst us, then they began to render us uneasy, and to provoke us to War; and
we have had several Wars with them; during all which, we constantly received
Assistance from the English; and by their Means, we have always been able, to
keep up our Heads against their Attacks.

We now come nearer home: We have had your Deeds interpreted to us, and we
acknowledge them to be good and valed; and that the Conestogo or Susquehan^ah
Indians, had a Right to sell those Lands to you, for they were then theirs; but
since that Time we have conquered them, and their Country now belongs to us,
and the Lands we demanded Satisfaction for, are no Part of the Lands comprised
in those Deeds, they are the Cohongoronta Lands; those, we are sure you have
not possessed One hundred Years; no, nor above ten Years, and we made our
Demand, as soon as we knew your People was settled in those Parts; these have
never been sold, but remain still to be disposed of; and we are well pleased to
hear you are well provided with Goods, and do assure you, of our Willingness to
treat with you, for these unpurchas'd Lands: In confirmation whereof, we
present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

CANASATEEGO added, That as the three Governors of Virginia, Maryland and
Pennsylvania had divided the Lands among them, they could not for this Reason
tell, how much each had got, nor were they concerned about it, so that they
were paid by all the Governors, for the several Parts each possessed, and this
they left to their Honor and Justice.

IN THE COURTHOUSE AT LANCASTER, June the 27th, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


The Commissioners of Virginia, ordered the Interpreter to let the Indians
know, the Governor of Virginia was going to speak to them; and then spoke as
follows:

SACHEMS and Warriors of the Six united Nations, our Friends and Brethren,

At our Desire, the Governor of Pensylvania invited you to this Council-Fire;
we have waited a long Time for you; but now you are come, you are heartily
welcome, and we are very glad to see you: We give you this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

BRETHREN, In the Year 1736, four of your Sachems wrote a Letter to James Logan
Esquire then President of Pennsylvania, to let the Governor of Virginia know, that
you expected some Consideration for Lands, in the Occupation of some of the
People of Virginia.

Upon seeing a Copy of this Letter, the Governor with the Council of Virginia,
took some Time to consider of it: They found, on looking into the old Treaties,
that you had given up your Lands to the great King, who has had Possession of
Virginia above One Hundred and Sixty Years; and under that great King the
Inhabitants of Virginia hold their Land; so they thought there might be some
Mistake.

Wherefore they desired the Governor of NewYork to inquire of you about it: He
sent his Interpreter to you in May 1743, who laid this before you, at a Council
held at Onondago; to which you answer,

That if you had any Demand or Pretensions upon the Governor of Virginia, any
Way, you would have made it known to the Governor of New York.

This corresponds, with what you said to Governor Thomas, in the Treaty made
with him at Philadelphia, in July 1742; for then, you only make your Claim to
Lands in the Government of Maryland.

We are so well pleased, with this good Faith, of you our Brethren of the Six
Nations, and your Regard to the Treaties made with Virginia, that we are ready
to hear you, on the Subject of your Message, eight Years since.

Tell us what Nation of Indians you conquered any Lands from in Virginia, how
long it is since, and what Possession you have had? And if it does appear, that
there is any Lands on the Borders of Virginia, that the Six Nations have a
Right to, we are willing to make you Sa^is^^^^ion: To confirm which we give you
this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

We have a Chest of new Goods for you, and the Key is in our Pockets: You are
our Brethren, the Great King is our common Father, and we will live with you as
Children ought to do, in Peace and Love.

We will brighten the Chain, and strengthen the Union between us, so that we
shall never be divided; but remain Friends and Brethren, as long as the Sun
gives us Light.

In Confirmation whereof, we give you this Belt of Wampum.

All the Indians present, gave the usual Cry of Approbation.

Tachanoontia Replied,

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

You have made a good Speech to us, which is very agreeable; and for which, we
return you our Thanks: We shall be able to give you an Answer to every Part of
it, some Time this Afternoon; and we will let you know when we are ready.

In the COURTHOUSE at LANCASTER, June the 27th, 1744. P. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


TACHANOONTIA spoke as follows:

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

Since you have joined with the Governor of Maryland, and Brother Onas, in
kindling this Fire, we gladly acknowledge the Pleasure we have, in feeing you
here, and observing your good Dispositions, as well to confirm the Treaties of
Friendship, as to enter into further Contracts about Land, with us: And in
Token of our Satisfaction, we present you with this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

In your Speech this Morning, you were pleased to say, We had wrote a Letter to
James Logan, about Eight Years ago, to demand a Consideration for our Lands, in
the Possession of some of the Virginians; that you held them, under the great
King, for upwards of One Hundred and Sixty Years, and that we had already given
up our Right; and that therefore, you had desired the Governor of New York to
send his Interpreter to us last Year, to Onondago, which he did; and, as you
say, we, in Council at Onondago, did declare, That we had no Demand on you for
Lands; and that if we had any Pretensions, we should have made them known to
the Governor of New York.

And likewise, you desire to know if we have any Right to the Virginia Lands;
and that we will make such a Right appear, and tell you what Nation of Indians
we conquered those Lands from.

Now we answer.

We have the Right of Conquest, a Right too dearly purchased, and which cost us
too much Blood, to give up, without any Reason at all, as you say we have done,
at Albany. But we should be obliged to you, if you would let us see that
Letter, and inform us, who was the Interpreter, and whose Names are put to the
Letter; for as the whole Transaction cannot be above a Year's Standing, it must
be fresh in every Bodies Memoty, and some of our Council would easily remember
it.

But we assure you, and are well able to prove, that neither we, nor any Part
of us, have ever relinquished our Right; or ever gave such an Answer, as you
say is mentioned in your Letter.

Could we, so many Years ago, make a formal Demand by James Logan, and not be
sensible of our Right? And has any Thing happened since that Time, to make us
less sensible? No: And as this Matter can be easily cleared up, we are anxious
it should be done; for we are positive, no such Thing was ever mentioned to us
at Onondago, nor any where else.

All the World knows, we conquered the several Nations living on Susquehanna,
Cohongaronta, and on the Back of the great Mountains in Virginia: The
Conoy-uch-sugh-roonoa, Coch-naw-wasroonaw, Tohod-irough-roonow, and
Canuts-hinough-roonaw, feel the Effects of our Conquest, being now a Part of
our Nations, and their Land at our Disposal.

We know very well, it has often been said, by the Virginians, That the great
King of England, and the People of that Colony, conquered the Indians who lived
there; but it is not true: We will allow, they have conquered the
Sachdagugh-roonaw, and drove back the Tuscaroras; and that they have, on that
Account, a Right to some Part of Virginia: But as to what lies beyond the
Mountains, we conquered the Nations residing there; and that Land, if ever the
Virginians get a good Right to it, it must be by us. And in Testimony of the
Truth of our Answer to this Part of our Speech, we give you this String of
Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

We have given you a full Answer to the first Part of your Speech, which we
hope will be satisfactory: We are glad to hear you have brought with you a big
Chest of new Goods, and that you have the Key in your Pockets. We do not doubt
but we shall have a good Understanding in all Points, and come to an Agreement
with you. We shall open all our Hearts to you, that you may know every Thing in
them; we will hide nothing from you. And we hope, that if there be any Thing
still remaining in your Breast, that may occasion any Dispute between us, you
will take this Opportunity to unbosom your Hearts, and lay them open to us;
that henceforth, there may be no Dirt or any other Obstacle in the Road between
us. And in Token of our hearty Wishes to bring about so good a Harmony, we
present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

We must now tell you what Mountains we mean, that we say are the Boundaries
between you and us. You may remember, that about Twenty Years ago, you had a
Treaty with us at Albany, when you took a Belt of Wampum and made a Fence with
it on the Middle of the Hill, and told us, that if any of the Warriors of the
Six Nations came on your Side of the Middle of the Hill, you would hang them;
and you gave us Liberty to do the same with any of your People, who should be
found on our Side of the Middle of the Hill: This is the Hill we mean; and we
desire that Treaty may now be confirmed.

After we left Albany, we brought our Road a great deal more to the West, that
we might comply with your Proposal; but though it was of your own making, your
People never observed it, but came and lived on our Side of the Hill; which we
don't blame you for, as you live at a great Distance, near the Seas, and cannot
be thought to know what your People do in the back Parts: And on their
settling, contrary to your own Proposal, on our new Road, it fell out, that our
Warriors did some Hurt to your Peoples Castle; of which a Complaint was made,
and transmitted to us by our Brother Onas; and we, at his Request, altered the
Road again, and brought it to the Foot of the great Mountains, where it now is:
And it is impossible for us to remove it any further to the West, those Parts
of the Country being absolutely impassable, by either Man or Beast.

We had not been long in the Use of this new Road, before your People came like
Flocks of Birds, and sat down on both Sides of it; and yet we never made a
Complaint to you, though you must be sensible, these Things must have been done,
by your People, in manifest Breach of your own Proposal, made at Albany.

And therefore, as we are now opening our Hearts to you, we cannot avoid
complaining, and desire all these Affairs may be settled: And that you may be
the stronger induced to do us Justice for what is past, and to come to a
thorough Settlement for the future, we, in the Presence of the Governor of
Maryland, and Brother Onas, present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

Then Tachanoontia added, He forgot to say, that the Affair of the Road must be
looked upon, as a Preliminary to be settled before the Grant of Lands; and that
either the Virginia People must be obliged to remove more Easterly, or if they
are permitted to stay, that our Warriors, marching that Way to the Southward,
shall go Sharers with them in what they plant.

IN THE COURTHOUSE AT LANCASTER, June the 28th, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


The Governor spoke as follows:

FRIENDS and BRETHREN, of the Six Nations,

I am always sorry, when any Thing happens, that may give you or us the least
Uneasiness; but as we are mutually engaged, to keep the Road between us clear
and open, and to remove every Obstruction that may lie in the Way: I must
inform you, That three of the Delaware Indians, lately murdered John Armstrong
and Indian Trader, and his two Men, in a most barbarous Manner, as he was
traveling to Alligany, and stole his Goods of a considerable Value.

Shikalamy, and the Indians settled at Shomockin, did well, they seized two of
the Murders, and sent them down to our Settlements; but the Indians, who had
the Charge of them, afterward suffered one of them to escape, on a Pretense,
that he was not concerned in the bloody Deed; the other is now in Philadelphia
Goal.

By our Law, all the Accessaries to a Murder, are to be tried and put to Death,
as well as the Person that gave the deadly Wound; if they consented to it,
encouraged it, or any otherwise assisted in it, they are to be put to Death;
and it is just, it should be so.

If upon Trial, the Persons present at the Murder, are found not to have done
any of these Things, they are set at Liberty.

Two of our People were, not many Years ago, publicly put to Death, for
killing two Indians. We therefore expect, you will take the most effectual
Measures, to seize, and deliver up to us, the other two Indians, present at
these Murders, to be tried with the Principal now in Custody. If it shall
appear, upon their Trial, that they were not advising, or any ways assisting in
this horrid Fact, they will be acquitted and sent home to their Towns: And that
you may be satisfied, no Injustice will be done to them, I do now invite you,
to depute Three or more Indians, to be present at their Trials.

I do likewise expect, that you will order strict Search to be made, for the
Remainder of the stolen Goods, that they may be restored to the Wife and
Children of the deceased.

That what I have said, may have it is due Weight with you, I give you this
String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

The Governor ordered the Interpreter to tell them, He expected a very full
Answer from them, and that they might take their own Time to give it, for he
did not desire to interfere with the Business of Virginia or Maryland.

They said, They would take it into Consideration, and give a full Answer.

The Commissioners of Virginia let them know by the Interpreter, that they
would speak to them in the Afternoon.

IN THE COURTHOUSE CHAMBER AT LANCASTER, June the 28th, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable the Commissioners of Maryland. WITHAM MARSH,
Secretary. The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


The Commissioners desired the Interpreter to tell the Indians, they were going
to speak to them. Mr. Weiser acquainted them therewith. After which the said
Commissioners spoke as follows:

Our good FRIENDS and BRETHREN the Six united Nations,

We have considered what you said, concerning your Title to some Lands now in
our Province, and also of the Place where they lie: Although we cannot admit
your Right, yet we are so resolved to live, in brotherly Love and Affection
with the Six Nations, that upon your giving us a Release in Writing, of all
your Claim to any Lands in Maryland, we shall make you a Compensation, to the
Value of Three hundred Pounds Current; for the Payment of part whereof, we have
brought some Goods, and shall make up the rest, in what Manner you think fit.

As we intend to say something to you, about our Chain of Friendship, after
this Affair of the Land is settled: We desire you will now examine the Goods,
and make an End of this Matter.

We will not omit acquainting our good Friends the Six Nations, That not
withstanding we are likely to come to an Agreement, about your Claim of Lands;
yet your Brethren of Maryland, look on you to be as one Soul and one Body with
themselves: And as a broad Road will be made between us, we shall always be
desirous of keeping it clear, that we may from time to time take Care, that the
Links of our Friendship be not rusted. In Testimony, that our Words and Hearts
agree, we give you this Belt of Wampum.

On presenting of which, the Indians made the usual Cry of Approbation.

Mr. Weiser acquainted the Indians, That they might now look over the several
Goods, placed on a Table in the Chamber, for that Purpose: And the Honorable
Commissioners bid him tell them, if they diflik'd any of the Goods, or if they
were damaged, the Commissioners would put a less Price on such, that were
either disliked or damnified.

The Indians having viewed and examined the Goods, and seeming dissatisfied at
the Price and Worth of some of them; required Time to go down into the
Courthouse, in order for a Consultation to be had by the Chiefs of them,
concerning the said Goods, and likewise, that the Interpreter might retire with
them, which he did; accordingly they went down into the Courthouse, and soon
after returned again into the Chamber.

Mr. Weiser sat down among the Indians, and discoursed them about the Goods;
and in some short Time after they chose the following, from among the others;
and the Price agreed to be given for them, by the Six Nations was, viz.

l. s. d. 4 Pieces of Strowds at 7 l. 28 00 00 2 Pieces ditto at 5 l. 10 00 00
200 Shirts 63 12 00 3 Pieces of Half-Thicks 11 00 00 3 Pieces Duffel Blankets
at 7 l. 21 00 00 1 Piece ditto 06 10 00 47 Guns, at 26 s. 61 02 00 1 Pound of
Vermilion 00 18 00 1000 Flints 00 18 00 4 Dozen Jews Harps 00 14 00 1 Dozen
Boxes 00 01 00 150 Weight of Bar Lead 03 00 00 50 Weight of Shot 01 00 00 2
Half Barrels of Gunpowder 13 00 00 Pennsylvania Money 220 15 00

When the Indians had agreed to take these Goods, at the Rates above specified,
they informed the Interpreter, that they would give an Answer to the Speech
made to them this Morning, by the Honorable the Commissioners of Maryland; but
did not express the Time when such Answer should be made.

A sufficient Quantity of Punch, was by order of the Honorable Commissioners,
prepared for, and given to the Indians.

12 o'Clock the Commissioners departed the Chamber.

IN THE COURTHOUSE AT LANCASTER, June the 28th, 1744. P.M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut, Governor, and c. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter,


The Commissioners of Virginia desired the Interpretes, to let the Indians
know, That their Brother Assaraquoa was now going to give his Reply, to their
Answer, to his first Speech, delivered to them the Day before, in the Forenoon.

SACHEMS and Warriors of the Six Nations,

We are now come to answer what you said to us Yesterday, since what we said to
you before, on the Part of the great King our Father, has not been satisfactory.

You have gone into old Times, and so must we: It is true, that the great King
holds Virginia by Right of Conquest, and the Bounds of that Conquest to the
Westward, is the great Sea.

If the Six Nations have made any Conquest over Indians, that may, at any Time
have lived, on the West Side of the great Mountains of Virginia; yet they never
possessed any Lands there, that we have ever heard: That Part was altogether
deserted, and free for any People to enter upon, as the People of Virginia have
done, by order of the great King, very justly, as well by an ancient Right, as
by it is being freed from the possession of any other; and from any Claim, even
of you the Six Nations our Brethren, until within these eight Years.

The first Treaty between the great King, in behalf of his Subjects of
Virginia, and you, that we can find, was made at Albany, by Colonel Henry
Coursey, seventy Years since; this was a Treaty of Friendship, when the first
Covenant Chain was made, when we and you became Brethren.

The next Treaty was also at Albany, about Fifty eight Years ago, by the Lord
Howard Governor of Virginia; then you declare yourselves Subjects to the great
King our Father; and gave up to him all your Lands, for his Protection.

This you own in a Treaty, made by the Governor of New York with you, at the
same Place, in the Year 1687, and you express yourselves in these Words:

O Brethren, you tell us, the King of England is a very great King; and why
should you not join with us in a just Gause, when the French join with our
Enemies in an unjust Cause? O Brethren, we see the Reason of this: For the
French would kill us all, and when that is done, they would carry all the
Beaver Trade to Canada; and the great King of England would lose the Land
likewise: And therefore, O GREAT SACHEM beyond the great Lakes, awake, and
suffer not those poor Indians that have given themselves, and their Lands,
under your Protection, to be destroyed by the French without a Cause.

The last Treaty we shall speak to you about, is that made at Albany by
Governor Spotswood, which you have not recited as it is; for the white People,
your Brethren, of Virginia, are in no Article of that Treaty, prohibited to
pass and settle to the Westward of the great Mountains: It is the Indians,
tributary to Virginia, that are restrained, as you, and your tributary Indians
are, from passing to the Eastward of the same Mountains, or to the Southward of
Cohongoronta; and you agree to this Article in these Words:

That the great River Potomack, and the high Ridge of Mountains, which extend
all along the Frontiers of Virginia, to the Westward of the present Settlements
of that Colony, shall be, for ever, the established Boundaries between the
Indians, subject to the Dominion of Virginia, and the Indians belonging to, and
depending on the Five Nations: So that neither our Indians shall not, on any
Pretense whatsoever, pass to the Northward or Westward of the said Boundaries,
without having to produce a Pasport, under the Hand and Seal of the Governor or
Commander in Chief of Virginia; nor your Indians pass to the Southward or
Eaftward of the said Boundaries, without a Pasport in like Manner, from the
Governor or Commander in Chief of New York.

And what Right can you have to Lands that you have no Right to walk upon, but
on certain Conditions? It is true, you have not observed this Part of the
Treaty, and your Brethren of Virginia have not insisted on it with a due
Strictness; which have occasioned some Mischief.

This Treaty has been sent to the Governor of Virginia, by Order of the great
King, and is what we must rely on; and being in Writing, is more certain than
your Memory: That is the Way the white People have, of preserving Transactions
of every Kind, and transmitting them down to their Childrens Children for ever;
and all Disputes among them are settled by this faithful kind of Evidence, and
must be the Rule between the great King and you.

This Treaty your Sachems and Warriors signed: Some Years after the same,
Governor Spotswood, in the Right of the great King, had been, with some of the
People of Virginia, in Possession of these very Lands, which you have set up
your late Claim to

The Commissioners for Indian Affairs at Albany, gave the Account we mentioned
to you Yesterday, to the Governor of New York, and he sent it to the Governor
of Virginia; their Names will be given you by the Interpreter.

BRETHREN,

This Dispute is not between Virginia and you; it is sitting up your Right
against the great King, under whose Grants the People you complain of are
settled: Nothing but a Command from the great King can remove them: They are
too powerful to be removed by any Force of you, our Brethren; and the great
King, as our common Father, will do equal Justice to all his Children:
Wherefore we do believe, that they will be confirmed in their Possession.

As to the Road you mention, we intended to prevent any Occasion for it, by
making a Peace between you and the Southern Indians, a few Years since, at a
considerable Expense to our great King; which you confirmed at Albany: It
seems, by your being at War with the Catawbas, that it has not been long kept
between you.

However, if you desire a Road, we will agree to one, on the Terms of the
Treaty you made with Colonel Spotswood; and your People, behaving themselves
orderly, like Friends and Brethren, shall be used, in their Passage through
Virginia, with the same Kindness as they are, when they pass through the Lands of
your Brother Onas.

This, we hope, will be agreed to, by you, our Brethren; and we will abide by
the Promise made to you Yesterday.

We may proceed to settle what we are to give you, for any Right you may have,
or have had, to all the Lands to the Southward and Westward of the Lands of
your Brother the Governor of Maryland, and of our Brother Onas.

Though we are informed, that the Southern Indians claim these very Lands that
you do.

We are desirous to live with you, our Brethren, according to the old Chain of
Friendship, to set tle all these Matters fairly and honestly: And as a Pledge
of our Sincerity, we give you this Belt of Wampum.

On presenting of which, the usual Cry of Approbation was given, by all the
Indians then present.

In the COURTHOUSE Chamber at LANCASTER, June the 29th, 1744 A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable the Commissioners of Maryland. WITHAM MARSH, Secretary
to the Treaty. The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


Mr. Weiser informed the Honorable Commissioners, the Indians were ready to
give their Answer to the Speech, made to them here Yesterday Morning, by the
Commissioners.

Whereupon CANASATEEGO spoke as follows, looking on a Deal Board, whereon were
some black Lines, describing the Courses of Potomack and Susquehannah Rivers:

BRETHREN,

Yesterday you spoke to us, concerning the Lands on this Side Potomack River;
and as we have deliberately considered of what you said to us on that Matter,
we are now very ready to settle the Bounds of such Lands, and release our Right
and Claim thereto.

We are willing to renounce all Right to Lord Baltimore, of all those Lands
lying Two Miles above the uppermost Fork of ' Potomack, or Cohongoronta River,
near which Thomas Crissup has a hunting or trading Cabin, by a North Line, to
the Bounds of Pennsylvania: But in case such Limits shall not include every
Settlement or Inhabitant of Maryland, then such other Lands and Courses, from
the said Two Miles above the Fork, to the outermost Inhabitants or Settlements
as shall include every Settlement and Inhabitant in Maryland; and from thence,
by a North Line to the Bounds of ' Pennsylvania, shall be the Limits.

And further, If any People already have, or shall settle, beyond the Lands now
described and bounded, they shall enjoy the same, free from any Disturbance of
us, in any Manner whatever; and we do, and shall accept those People, for our
Brethren, and as such, always treat them.

We earnestly desire to live with you as Brethren, and hope you will show us
all brotherly Kindness: In Token whereof, we present you with a Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

The Honorable Commissioners ordered Punch to be given to the Indians, which
was done accordingly; soon after which, the Commissioners and Indians departed
from the Courthouse Chamber.

In the COURTHOUSE Chamber at LANCASTER, June the 30th, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable the Commissioners of Virginia. WILLIAM BLACK,
Secretary to the Treaty. The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER,
Interpreter.


GACHRADDODOW, Speaker for the Indians, in Answer to the Commissioners Speech
at the last Meeting, with a strong Voice, and proper Action, spoke as follows:

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

The World at the first, was made on the other Side the great Water, different
from what it is on this Side, as may be known from the different Colors of our
Skin, and of our Flesh; and that which you call Justice, may not be so amongst
us: You have your Laws and your Customs, and so have we: The great King might
send you over to conquer the Indians, but it looks to us, that God did not
approve of it; if he had, he would not have placed the Sea where it is, as the
Limits between us and you.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

Though great Things are well remembered among us, yet we don't remember that we
were ever conquered by the great King; or that we have been employed by that
great King to conquer others: If it was so, it is beyond our Memory. We do
remember we were employed by Maryland, to conquer the Conostogas; and that the
Second Time we was at War with them, we carried them all off.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

You charge us with not acting agreeable to our Peace with the Catawbas; we
will repeat truly to you what was done. The Governor of NewYork, at Albany, in
Behalf of Assaraquoa, gave us several Belts from the Cherrokees and Catawbas;
and we agreed to a Peace, it those Nations would send some of the great Men to
us, to confirm it Face to Face; and that they would trade with us; and desired,
that they would appoint a Time to meet at Albany, for this Purpose: But they
never came.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

We then desired a Letter might be sent to the Catawbas and Cherrokees, to
desire them to come and confirm the Peace: It was long before an Answer came;
but we met the Cherrokees and confirmed the Peace, and sent some of our People
to take Care of them, until they returned to their own Country.

The Catawbas refused to come, and sent us Word that we were but Women; that
they were Men, and double Men, for they had Two This is a Figure by which the
Indians express Strength and Power. So when the Governor of Canada designs to
explain to the Indians the Power and Strength of the grand Monarch, he tells
them his P -- k is as large as he can span with both his Hands.
P -- ks; that they could make Women of us, and would be always at War with us.
They are a deceitful People; our Brother Assaraquoa is deceived by them; we
don't blame him for it, but are sorry he is deceived.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

We have confirmed the Peace with the Cherrokees, but not with the Catawbas;
they have been treacherous, and know it, so that the War must continue till one
of us is destroyed: This we think proper to tell you, that you may not be
troubled at what we do to the Catawbas.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

We will now speak to the Point between us: You say you will agree with us as
to the Road; we desire that may be the Road which was last made the Wagon
Road. It is always a Custom, among Brethren or Strangers, to use each other
kindly: You have some very ill-natured People living up there; so that we
desire the Persons in Power may know, that we are to have reasonable Victuals
when we are in Want.

You know very well when the white People came first here, they were poor; but
now they have got our Lands, they are become rich, and we are now poor: What
little we have had for the Land goes soon away, but the Land lasts for ever.
You told us you had brought with you a Chest of Goods, and that you have the
Key in your Pockets; but we have never seen the Chest, nor the Goods that are
said to be in it; it may be small, and the Goods few; we want to see them, and
are as desirous to come to some Conclusion as you are: We have been sleeping
here these Ten Days past, and have not done any Thing to the Purpose.

The Honorable Commissioners told them, they should see the Goods on Monday,
and ordered some Punch, sufficient for the Number of Indians then present.

IN THE COURTHOUSE AT LANCASTER, June the 30th, 1744. P. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. Commissioners of Maryland.



The three Governments entertained the Indians, and all the Gentlemen in Town
with a handsome Dinner; the Six Nations in their Order, having returned Thanks
with the usual Solemnity of Ioaban: The Interpreter informed the Governor and
Commissioners, that as the Lord Proprietor and Governor of Maryland, was not
known to the Indians, by any particular Name, they had agreed in Council, to
take the first Opportunity of a large Company, to present him with one; and as
this with them, is deemed a Matter of very great Consequence, and attended with
Abundance of Form: The several Nations had drawn Lots, for the Performance of
the Ceremony; and the Lot falling on the Cayuga Nation, they had chosen
Gachraddodow one of their Chiefs, to be their Speaker; and he desired Leave to
begin, which being given: He, on an elevated Part of the Courthouse, with all
the Dignity of a Warrior, the Gesture of an Orator, and in a very graceful
Posture, spoke as follows:

As the Governor of Maryland had invited them here, to treat about their Lands,
and brighten the Chain of Friendship; the United Nations, thought themselves so
much obliged to him, that they had come to a Resolution in Council, to give to
the great Man who is Proprietor of Maryland, a particular Name, by which they
might hereafter correspond with him; and as it had fallen to the Cayuga's Lot
in Council, to consider of a proper Name, for that chief Man, they had agreed
to give him the Name of Tocarry-hogan, denoting Precedence, Excellency, or
living in the Middle, or honorable Place, betwixt Assaraquoa and their Brother
Onas, by whom their Treaties might be better carried on. And then addressing
himself to the Governor of Pennsylvania, the Honorable the Commissioners of
Virginia and Maryland, and to the Gentlemen then present, he proceeded:

As there is a Company of great Men now assembled, we take this Time and
Opportunity to publish this Matter, that it may be known Tocarrybogan is our
Friend, and that we are ready to honor him; and, that by such Name, he may be
always called and known among us; and we hope, he will ever act toward us,
according to the Excellence of the Name we have now given him, and enjoy a long
and happy Life. The Honorable the Governor and Commissioners, and all the
Company present, returned the Compliment, with three Huzza's; and after
drinking Healths to our gracious King and Six Nations, the Commissioners of
Maryland proceeded to Business in the Courthouse Chamber, with the Indians,
where Conrad Weiser Interpreter was present.

The Honorable the Commissioners, ordered Mr. Weiser to tell the Indians, That
a Deed, releasing all their Claim and Title, to certain Lands lying in the
Province of Maryland, which by them was agreed to be given and executed, for
the Use of the Lord Baron of Baltimore, Lord Proprietor of that Province, was
now on the Table, and Seals ready fixed thereto.

The Interpreter acquainted them therewith, as desired, and then gave the Deed
to Canasateego the Speaker, who made his Mark, and put his Seal and delivered
it; after which, Thirteen other Chiefs or Sachems of the Six Nations, executed
it in the same Manner, in the Presence of the Honorable the Commissioners of
Virginia, and diverse other Gentlemen of that Colony, and of the Province of
Pennsylvania and Maryland.

Plenty of Wine and Punch was given to the Indians.

The Honorable the Commissioners of Maryland drank Healths to the great King
and the Lord Baltimore, the Six Nations and the several Chiefs, who drank and
returned the same Healths, and that of the said Commissioners.

At the House of Mr. George Sanderson in LANCASTER, July 2d, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable the Commissioners of Maryland. WITHAM MARSH, Secretary
to the Treaty. Several of the Chiefs of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER,
Interpreter.


The Chiefs of the Six Nations of Indians, who had not signed the Deed of
Release of their Claim to some Lands in Maryland, tendered to them on Saturday
last, in the Chamber of the CourtHouse, of this Town, did now readily execute
the same; and caused Mr. Weiser likewise to sign it, as well with his Indian,
as his own proper Name of Weiser, as a Witness and Interpreter.

Then the Honorable Commissioners, drank Health to the Six Nations, and the
Chiefs or Sachems then present; in their Turn, drank Health to the great King
over the Water; thereby meaning, our Sovereign Lord the King of Great Britain,
and also to Tocarry-bogan, meaning the Right Honorable the Lord Baltimore,
Lord Proprietor of the Province of Maryland. Afterward the several Honorable
Commissioners and the Chiefs separated.

In the COURTHOUSE at LANCASTER, July the 2d, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, and c. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


CANASATEEGO spoke as follows:

BROTHER ONAS,

The other Day, you was pleased to tell us, you was always concerned, when ever
any thing happened, that might give you or us Uneasiness, and that we were
mutually engaged, to preserve the Road open and clear between us; and you
informed us, of the Murder of John Armstrong and his two Men. by some of the
Delaware Indians, and of their stealing his Goods to a considerable Value: The
Delaware Indians, as you suppose, are under our Power. We join with you in your
Concern, for such a vile proceeding; and to testify, that we have the same
Inclinations with you, to keep the Road clear, free and open; we give you this
String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER ONAS,

These Things happen frequently, and we desire you will consider them well, and
not be too much concerned. Three Indians have been killed at different Times at
Tohio, and we never mentioned any of them to you, imagining it might have been
occasioned by some unfortunate Quarrels, and were unwilling to create a
Disturbance: We therefore desire you will consider these Things well; and to
take the Grief out of your Heart, we give you this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER ONAS,

We had heard of the Murder of John Armstrong, and in our Journey hither, we
had a Conference with our Cousins the Delawares about it, and reproved them
severely for it; and charged them to go down to our Brother Onas, and make him
Satisfaction, both for the Men that were killed, and for the Goods.

We understood by them, that the principal Actor in these Murders, is in your
Prison, and that he had done all the Mischief himself; but besides him, you had
accused and demanded two others, who were in his Company, when the Murder was
committed.

We promise faithfully, in our Return, to renew our Reproofs, and to charge the
Delaware's to send down some of their Chiefs, with these two young Men, but not
as Prisoners, to be examined by you; and as we think, upon Examination, you
will not find them guilty, we rely on your Justice, not to do them any Harm,
but to permit them to return home in Safety: We likewise understand, that
Search has been made for the Goods, belonging to the deceased, and that some
have been already returned to your People, but that some are still missing: You
may depend upon our giving the strictest Charge to the Delaware's, to search
again with more Diligence, for the Goods, and to return them, or the Value of
them in Skins: And to confirm what we say, we give you this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER ONAS,

The Canoy Indians have informed us, that they sent you a Message some Time
ago, to advise you, that being ill used by the white People, in the Place where
they have their Land, and that they had come to a Resolution of removing to
Shomcckin, and requested some small Satisfaction for their Lands: And as they
never have received any Answer from you, they have desired us to speak for
them: We heartily recommend their Case to your Generosity; and to give Weight
to our Recommendation, we present you with this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

The Governor having conferred with the Honorable Commissioners of Virginia and
Maryland, made the following Reply:

BRETHREN,

I am glad to find, that you agree with me, in the Necessity of keeping the
Road between us, clear and open; and the Concern you have expressed, on account
of the barbarous Murders mentioned to you, is a Proof of your brotherly
Affection for us.

In Crimes of this Nature, be not strictly inquired into, and the Criminals
severely punished, there will be an Fnd of all Commerce, between us and the
Indians; and then you will be altogether in the Power of the French; they will
set what Price they please on their Goods, and give you what they think fit for
your Skins: So it is for your own Interest, that our Traders should be safe in
their Persons and Goods, when they travel to your (...).

BRETHREN,

I considered this Matter well, before I came from Philadelphia, and I advised
with the Council there upon it, as I have done here, with the Honorable the
Commissioners of Virginia and Maryland; I never heard before, of the Murder of
three Indians at Hohio: Had Complaint been made to me of it, and it had
appeared, to have ^^en committed, by any of the People under my Government,
they should have been put to Death, as two of them were, some Years ago, for
killing two Indians.

You are not to take your own Satisfaction, but to apply to me, and I will see
that Justice be done you; and should any of the Indians rob, or murder, any of
our People; I do expect, that you will deliver them up, to be tried and
punished in the same Manner, as white People are: This is the Way to preserve
Friendship between us, and will be for your Benefit, as well as ours.

I am well pleased with the Steps you have already taken, and the Reproofs you
have given, to your Cousins the Delawares; and I do expect, you will lay your
Commands on some of their Chiefs, to bring down the two young Men that were
present at the Murders: If they are not brought down, I shall look upon it as a
Proof of their Guilt. If, upon Examination, they shall be found not to have
been concerned in the bloody Action, they shall be well used and sent home in
Safety: I will take it upon myself, to see that they have no Injustice done
them.

An Inventory is taken of the Goods already restored, and I expect Satisfaction
will be made for such as cannot be found, in Skins, according to their Promise

I well remember the coming down of one of the Canoy Indians, with a Paper,
setting forth, that the Canoys had come to a Resolution, to leave the Land
reserved for them by the Proprietors; but he made no Complaint to me of ill
Usage from the white People: The Reason he gave for their Removal was, that the
Settling of the white People all round them, had made Deer scarce; and that
therefore, they chose to remove to Joniatta, for the Benefit of Hunting. I
ordered what they said to be entered into the Council-Book: The old Man's
Expenses were born, and a Blanket given him at his Return home.

I have not heard from the Proprietors yet on this Head; but you may be
affur'd, from the Favor and Justice they have always shown to the Indians,
that they will do every Thing that can be reasonably expected of them, in this
Case.

In the COURTHOUSE Chamber at LANCASTER, July the 2d, 1744. P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable the Commissioners of Virginia. WILLIAM BLACK,
Secretary to the Treaty. The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER,
Interpreter.


The Indians being told by the Interpreter, that their Brother Assaraquoa was
going to speak to them, spoke as follows:

SACHEMS and Warriors, our Friends and Brethren,

As we have already said enough to you, on the Subject of the Title to the
Lands you claim from Virginia; we have no Occasion to say any Thing more to you
on that Head, but come directly to the Point.

We have opened the Chest, and the Goods are now here before you: They cost Two
Hundred Pounds Pennsylvania Money, and were bought by a Person recommended to
us by the Governor of Pennsylvania, with ready Cash: We ordered them to be good
in their Kinds, and we believe they are so. These Goods, and Two Hundred Pounds
in Gold, which lie now on the Table, we will give you, our Brethren of the Six
Nations, upon Condition, that you immediately make a Deed, recognizing the
King's Right to all the Lands that are, or shall be, by His Majesty's
Appointment, in the Colony of Virginia.

As to the Road, we agree you shall have one; and the Regulations are in a
Paper, which the Interpreter now has in his Custody to show you: The People of
Virginia shall perform their Part, if you and your Indians perform theirs: We
are your Brethren, and will do no Hardships to you, but, on the contrary, all
the Kindness we can.

The Indians agreed to what was said; and Canasateego desired that they would
represent their Case to the King, in order to have a further Consideration,
when the Settlements increased much further back: To which the Commissioners
agreed, and promised they would make such a Representation faithfully and
honestly; and for their further Security that they would do so, they would give
them a Writing, under their Hands and Seals, for that Purpose.

They desired that some Rum might be given them, to drink on their Way home;
which the Commissioners agreed to, and paid them in Gold for that Purpose, and
the Carriage of their Goods from Philadelphia.

Canasateego further said, That as their Brother Tocarry-hogan, sent them
Provisions on the Road here, which kept them from starving; he hoped their
Brother Assaraquoa would do the same for them back, and have the Goods he gave
them, carried to the usual Place: Which the Commissioners agreed to, and
ordered Provisions and Carriages to I provided accordingly.

After this Conference, the Deed was produced, and the Interpreter explained to
them, and, according to their Rank and Quality, they put their Marks and Seals
to it, in the Presence of the Commissioners of Maryland, and of several
Gentlemen of Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania, as Witnesses; and when they
delivered the Deed, Canasateego delivered it to the Commissioners of Virginia,
for the Use of their Father the great King, and hoped he would consider them:
On which, the Gentlemen and Indians present, gave three Shouts.

Canasateego, Tachanoontia, Shickcalamy, and several others, said, they hoped
something would be given them to drink, for they were very dry.

The Commissioners ordered a sufficient Quantity of Wine and Water to be mixed,
and drank Health to the great King and the Six Nations, their Brethren, and
departed with the rest of the Gentlemen from the Chamber.

In the COURTHOUSE at LANCASTER, July the 3d, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


The Governor spoke as follows:

FRIENDS and BRETHREN of the Six Nations.

At a Treaty held with many of the Chiefs of your Nations, Two Years ago, the
Road between us was made clearer and wider; our Fire was enlarged, and our
Friendship confirmed, by an Exchange of Presents, and many other mutual good
Offices.

We think ourselves happy, in having been instrumental to your Meeting with our
Brethren of Virginia and Maryland; and we persuade ourselves that you, on your
Parts, will always remember it, as an Instance of our good Will and Affection
for you: This has given us an O^^^rtunity of seeing you sooner than perhaps we
(...) otherwise have done; and as we are under (...) Obligations by Treaties,
we to hear with our (...) for you, and you to hear with your Ears for us, we
take this Opportunity to inform you of what very nearly concerns us both.

The Great King of England, and the French King, have declared War against each
other: Two Battles have been sought, one by Land and the other by Sea; the
Great King of England commanded the Land Army in Person, and gained a complete
Victory; Numbers of the French were killed and taken Prisoners, and the rest
were sorc'd to pass a River with Precipitation, to save their Lives: The Great
God covered the King's Head in that Battle, so that he did not receive the
least Hurt; for which you, as well as we, have Reason to be very thankful.

The Engagement at Sea was likewise to the Advantage of the English: The French
and Spaniards joined their Ships together, and came out to sight us: The brave
English Admiral burnt one of their largest Ships, and many others were so
shattered, that they were glad to take the Opportunity of a very high Wind and
a dark Night to run away, and to hide themselves again in their Harbors. Had
the Weather proved sair, he would, in all Probability, have taken or destroyed
them all.

I need not put you in Mind how much William Penn, and his Sons, have been your
Friends, and the Friends of all the Indians; you have long and often
experienced their Friendship for you: Nor need I repeat to you how kindly you
were treated, and what valuable Presents were made to you, Two Years ago, by
the Governor, the Council, and the Assembly of Pennsylvania. The Sons of
William Penn are all now in England, and have left me in their Place, well
knowing how much I regard you, and all the Indians: As a fresh Proof of this, I
have left my House and am come this far to see you, to renew our Treaties, to
brighten the covenant Chain, and to confirm our Friendship with you. In
Testimony whereof, I present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

As your Nations have engaged themselves, by Treaty, to assist us, your
Brethren of Pennsylvania, in Case of a War with the French, we do not doubt but
you will punctually perform an Engagement so solemnly entered into. A War is
now declared, and we expect you will not suffer the French, or any of the
Indians in Alliance with them, to march through your Country to disturb any of
our Settlements; and that you will give us the earliest and best Intelligence
of any Designs that may be formed by them to our Disadvantage, as we promise to
do of any that may be to yours. To enforce what I have now said to you, in the
strongest Manner, I present you with this Belt of Wampum. Which was received
with the usual Ceremony.

After a li^^le Pause, his Honor the Governor spoke again:

FRIENDS and BRETHREN of the Six Nations,

What I have now said to you, is in Conformity to the Treaties subsisting
between the Province of which I am Governor, and your Nations: I now proceed,
with the Consent of the Honorable Commissioners of Virginia and Maryland, to
tell you That all Differences having been adjusted, and the Road between us and
you made quite clear and open, we are ready to confirm our Treaties with your
Nations, and establish a Friendship that is not to end but with the World
itself: And in ^^half of the Province of Pennsylvania, I do, by this fine Belt
of Wampum, and a Present of Goods, to the Value of Three Hundred Pounds,
confirm and establish the said Treaties of Peace, Union, and Friendship; you,
on your Parts, doing the same.

The Governor further added,

The Goods bought with the Hundred Pounds Sterling, put into my Hands by the
Governor of Vuginia, are ready to be delivered when you please: The Goods
bought and sent up by the Peo le of Pennsylvania, according to the List which
the Interpreter will explain, are laid by themselves, and are likewise ready to
be delivered to you at your own Time. After a little Time, the Commissioners of
Virginia spoke as follows:

SACHEMS and Warriors of the Six Nations,

The Way between us being made smooth by what passed Yesterday, we desire now
to confirm all former Treaties, made between Virginia and you our Brethren of
the Six Nations, and to make our Chain of Union and Friendship as bright as the
Sun, that it may not contract any more Rust for ever; that our Childrens
Children may rejoice at, and confirm what we have done: And that you and your
Children may not forget it, we give you One Hundred Pounds in Gold, and this
Belt of Wampum

On presenting of which, the Indians gave the usual Cry of Approbation.

FRIENDS and BRETHREN,

Although we have been disappointed in our Endeavors to bring about a Peace
between you and the Catawbas, yet we desire to speak to you something more
about them: We believe they have been unfaithful to you, and spoke of you with
a foolish Contempt; but this may be only the Rashness of some of their young
Men.

In this Time of War, with our common Enemies, the French and Spaniards, it
will be the wisest Way, to be at Peace among ourselves; they the Catawbas, are
also Children of the great King, and therefore we desire you will agree, that
we may endeavor to make a Peace between you and them, that so we may be all
united, by one common Chain of Friendship; therefore we give you this String of
Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BRETHREN,

Our Friend Conrad Weiser, when he is old, will go into the other World, as our
Fathers have done; our Children will then want such a Friend, to go between
them and your Children, to reconcile any Differences, that may happen to arise
between them, that like him, may have the Ears and Tongues, of our Children and
yours.

The way to have such a Friend is, for you to send three or four of your Boys
to Virginia, where we have a fine House for them to live in, and a Man on
purpose, to teach the Children of you, our Friends, the Religion, Language, and
Customs of the white People.

To this Place we kindly invite you to send some of your Children; and promise
you, that they shall have the same Care taken of them, and be instructed in the
same Manner, as our own Children; and be returned to you again when you please:
And to confirm this, we give you this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the Cry of Approbation.

Next spoke the Commissioners of Maryland:

FRIENDS and BRETHREN, the Chiefs or Sachems of the Six united Nations, The
Governor of Maryland invited you hither; we have treated with you as Friends,
and agreed with you as Brethren.

As the Treaty now made, concerning the Lands in Maryland, will, we hope,
prevent effectually, every future Misunderstanding between us, on that Account;
we will now bind faster the Links of our Chain of Friendship, by a Renewal of
all our former Treaties: And that they may still be the better secured, we
shall present you with One Hundred Pounds in Gold.

What we have further to say to you is, let not our Chain contract any Rust;
when ever you perceive the least Speck, tell us of it, and we will make it
clean; This we also expect from you, that it may always continue so bright, as
our Generations may see their Faces in it. And in Pledge of the Truth of what
we have now spoken, and our Affection to you, we give you this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

Canasateego, in Return, spoke as follows:

BROTHER Onas, Assaraquoa, and Tocarry-hogan,

We return you Thanks for your several Speeches, which are very agreeable to
us; they contain Matters of such great Moment, that we propose to give them a
very serious Consideration, and to answer them suitably to their Worth and
Excellence: And this will take till Tomorrow Morning, and when we are ready,
we shall give you due Notice.

You tell us you have beat the French; if so, you must have taken a great deal
of Rum from them, and can the better spare us some of that hot Liquor, to make
us rejoice with you in the Victory.

The Governor and Commissioners ordered a Dram of Rum to be given to each, in a
small Dram-Glass, which the Governor called a French Glass.

In the COURTHOUSE at LANCASTER, July the 4th, 1744. A. M.
PRESENT, The Honble GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. The Honble The
Commissioners of Virginia. The Commissioners of Maryland.
The Indians of the Six Nations. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


CANASATEEGO Speaker.

BROTHER ONAS,

Yesterday you expressed your Satisfaction, in having been instrumental to our
meeting with our Brethren of Virginia and Maryland; we, in Return, assure you,
that we have great Pleasure in this Meeting, and thank you for the Part you
have had in bringing us together, in order to create a good Understanding, and
clearing the Road: And in Token of our Gratitude, we present you with this
String of Wampum.

Which was received with the Io-hah.

BROTHER ONAS,

You was pleased Yesterday to inform us, That War had been declared between the
Great King of England, and the French King; that Two great Battles had been
sought, one by Land, the other at Sea, with many other Particulars: We are glad
to hear the Arms of the King of Great Britain were successful, and take Part
with you in your Joy on this Occasion.

You then came nearer home, and told us, you had left your House and was come
this far, on Behalf of the whole People of Pennsylvania, to see us, to renew
your Treaties, to brighten the Covenant Chain, and to confirm your Friendship
with us: We approve this Proposition, we thank you for it. We own with
Pleasure, that the Covenant Chain between us and Pennsylvania, is of old
standing, and has never contracted any Rust; we wish it may always continue as
bright as it h^s done hitherto: And in Token of the Sincerity of out Wishes, we
present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the Io-hah.

BROTHER ONAS,

You was pleased Yesterday to remind us of our mutual Obligation to assist each
other, in Case of a War with the French, and to repeat the Substance of what we
ought to do, by our Treaties with you; and that as a War had been already
entered into with the French, you called upon us to assist you, and not to
suffer the French to march through our Country, to disturb any of your
Settlements.

In Answer, we assure you we have all these Particulars in our Hearts; they are
fresh in our Memory; we shall never forget that you and we have but one Heart,
one Head, one Eye, one Ear, and one Hand: We shall have all your country under
our Eye, and take all the Care we can, to prevent any Enemy from coming into
it; and in Proof of our Care we must inform you, that before we came here, we
told The Governor of Canada.
Onantio, our Father, as you are pleased to call him, That neither he, nor any
of his People, should come through our Countries to hurt our Brethren the
English, or any of the Settlements belonging to them; there was Room enough at
Sea to sight, there be might de what be pleased; but he should not come upon
our Land to ^o any Damage to our Brethren. And you may depend upon our using
our utmost Care to see this effectually done: And in Token of our Sincerity, we
present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the Io-hah.

After some little Time, the Interpreter said Canasateego had forgot something
material, and desired to mend his Speech, and to do so as often as he should
omit any Thing of Moment; and thereupon he added,

The Six Nations had a great Authority and Influence over sundry Tribes of
Indians in Alliance with the French, and particularly over the Praying Indians,
formerly a Part of ourselves, who stand in the very Gates of the French; and to
show our further Care, we have engaged these very Indians, and other Indian
Allies of the French, for you: They will not join with the French against you;
they have agreed this with us before we set out: We have put the Spirit of
Antipathy against the French in those People; our Interest is very considerable
with them, and many other Nations; and as far as ever it extends, we shall use
it for your Service.

The Governor said, Canasateego did well to mend his Speech; he might always do
it whenever his Memory should sail him in any Point of Consequence; and he
thanked him for the very agreeable Addition.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

You told us Yesterday, that all Disputes with you being now at an End, you
desired to confirm all former Treaties between Virginia and us; and to make our
Chain of Union as bright as the Sun.

We agree very heartily with you in these Propositions; we thank you for your
good Inclinations; we desire you will pay no Regard to any idle Stories that
may be told to our Prejudice; and as the Disputes about the Land is now
entirely over, and we perfectly reconciled, we hope, for the future, we shall
not act toward each other but as becomes Brethren and hearty Friends.

We are very willing to renew the Friendship with you, and to make it as firm
as possible, for us and our Children, with you and your Children, to the latest
Generation: And we desire you will imprint these Engagements on your Hearts in
the strongest Manner: And in Confirmation that we shall do the same, we give
you this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the Io-hah, from the Interpreter and the Six Nations.

BROTHER Assaraqu^a,

You did let us know Yesterday, that though you had been disappointed in your
Endeavors, to bring about a Peace between us and the Catawbas, yet you would
still do your best to bring such a Thing about: We are well pleased with your
Design, and the more so, as we hear you know what Sort of People the Catawbas
are; that they are spiteful and offensive, and have treated us contemptuously:
We are glad you know these Things of the Catabas: We believe what you say to be
true, that there are some amongst them, who are wiser and better; and as you
say, they are your Brethren, and belong also to the great King over the Water,
we shall not be against a Peace on reasonable Terms, provided they will come to
the Northward to treat about it. In Confirmation of what we say, and to
encourage you in your Undertaking, we give you this String of Wampum.

Which was received as before.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

You told us likewise, you had a great House provided, for the Education of
Youth, and that there were several white People and Indian's Children there, to
learn Languages, and to write and read and invited us to send some of our
Children amongst you, etc.

We must let you know, we love out Children too well, to send them so great a
Way, and the Indians are not inclined to give their Children Learning: We allow
it to be good, and we thank you for the Invitation; but our Customs differing
from yours, you will be so good as to excuse us.

We hope Conrad Weiser's Indian Name.
Tarauchia Wagon, will be preserved by the good Spirit, to a good old Age; and
when he is gone under Ground, it will be then Time enough for us to join with
you to look out for another; and no doubt, but among so many Thousands, one fit
and proper Man, such as he may be sound; and while he is alive, we have no
Reason to complain.

Here they laid down a String of Wampum, which was received with the usual
Ceremony.

BROTHER Tocarry-bogan,

You told us Yesterday, that since there was now, nothing in Controversy
between us, and the Affair of the Land settled to your Satisfaction; you would
now brighten the Chain of Friendship, which had subsisted between you and us,
ever since we became Brethren: We are well pleased with the Proposition, and we
thank you for it: We are also inclined to renew all Treaties, and keep good
Correspondence with you. You told us further, if ever we should perceive the
Chain had contracted any Rust, to let you know, and you would take Care to take
the Rust out, and preserve it bright: We agree with you in this; and shall on
our Parts, do every Thing to preserve a good Understanding, and to live in the
same Friendship with you, as with our Brother Onas and Assaraquoa: In
Confirmation whereof, we give you this Belt of Wampum.

On which the usual Cry of Io-hah was given.

BRETHREN,

We have now finished our Answer, to what you said to us Yesterday, and shall
now proceed to Indian Affairs, that are not of so general a Concern.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

There lives a Nation of Indians, on the other Side of your Country, the
Tuscarora's, who are our Friends, and with whom, we hold Correspondence; but
the Road between us and them, has been stopped for some Time, on account of the
Misbehaviour of some of our Warriors: We have opened a new Road for our
Warriors, and they shall keep to that Road; but as that would be very
inconvenient, for Messengers, going to the Tuscaroro's, we desire, they may go
the old Road: We frequently send Messengers to one another, and shall have more
Occasion to do so, now that we have concluded a Peace with the Cherrokees: To
enforce our Request, we give you this String of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER Assaraquoa,

Among these Tuscaroro's there lives a few Families of the Conoy Indians, who
are desirous to leave them, and to remove to the rest of their Nation, among
us; and the straight Road from them to us, lies through the Middle of your
Country: We desire you will give them free Passage through Virginia, and
furnish them with Passes; and to enforce our Request we give you this String of
Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony.

BROTHER Onas, Assaraquoa and Tocarrybogan, At the Close of your respective
Speeches Yesterday, you made us very handsome Presents, and we should return
you something suitable to your Generosity: But alas, we are poor, and shall
ever remain so, as long as there are so many Indian Traders among us; theirs,
and the white People's Cattle, have eat up all the Grass, and made Deer scarce:
However, we have provided a small Present for you; and though some of you gave
us more than others, yet as you as all equally our Brethren; we shall leave it
to you, to divide them as you please. And then presented three Bundles of Skins.

Which was received with the usual Ceremony from the three Governments.

We have one Thing further to say, and that is; we heartily recommend Union and
a good Agreement between you our Brethren: Never disagree, but preserve a
strict Friendship for one another, and thereby, both you as well as we, will
become the stronger.

Our wise Forefathers, established Union and Amity between the Five Nations;
this has made us formidable, this has given us great Weight and Authority, with
our neighboring Nations: We are a powerful Confederacy; and by your observing
the same Methods, our wise Forefathers have taken, you will acquire fresh
Strength and Power: Therefore, whatever besals you, never fall out one with
another.

The Governor replied,

The Honorable Commissioners of Virginia and Maryland, having desired me to
speak for them; I, on the Part of those Governments, as well as on behalf of
the Province of Pennsylvania, return you Thanks, for the many Proofs you have
given in your Speeches, of our Zeal for the Service of your Brethren the
English; and in particular, for your having so early engaged in a Neutrality
the several Tribes of Indians in the French Alliance: We don't doubt but you
will faithfully discharge your Promises.

As to your Presents, we never estimate these Things by their real Worth, but
by the Disposition of the Giver: In this Light we accept them with great
Pleasure, and put a high Value on them. We are obliged to you for recommending
Peace and a good Agreement amongst ourselves: We are all Subjects, as well as
you, of the Great King beyond the Water, and in Duty to His Majesty, and from
the good Affection we bear each other, as well as from a Regard to our own
Interest, we shall always be inclined to live in Friendship.

Then the Commissioners for Virginia, presented the Hundred Pounds in Gold,
together with a Paper, containing their Promise, to recommend the Six Nations,
for further Favor, to the ^^ng.

Which they received with the Io-hah; and the Paper was given by them, to
Conrad Weiser to keep for them.

The Commissioners for Maryland presented their Hundred Pound in Gold.

Which was likewise received with the Io-hah.

CANASATEEGO said:

We mentioned to you Yesterday, the Booty you had taken from the French, and
asked you for some of the Rum which, we supposed to be a Part of it, and you
gave us some; but it turned out unfortunately, that you gave it us in French
Glasses: We now desire you will give us some in English Glasses.

The Governor made Answer:

We are glad to hear you have such a Dislike for what is French; they cheat you
in your Glasses, as well as in every Thing else: You will consider, we are at a
Distance from Williamsburg, Annapolis and Philadelphia, where our Rum Stores
are, and that, though we brought up a good Quantity with us, you have almost
drank it out; but notwithstanding this, we have enough lest to fill our English
Glasses, and this will serve to snew the Difference between the narrow
Inclinations of the French, and generous Dispositions of your Brethren the
English toward you. The Indians gave in their Order, five Io-hah's, and the
Honorable the Governor and Commissioners, calling for some Rum, and some
middle-siz'd Wine-Gl^sses; drank Health to the great King of England, and the
Six Nations, and put an End to the Treaty, by three loud Huzza's, in which all
the the Company joined.

In the Evening the Governor went to take his Leave of the Indians; and
presenting them with a String of Wampum, he told them, that was in Return for
one he had received from them, with a Message, to desire the Governor of
Virginia, to suffer their Warriors to go through Virginia unmolested; which
was rendered unnecessary by the present Treaty.

Then presenting them with another String of Wampum, he told them, that was in
Return for theirs; praying him, as they had taken away one Part of Conrad
Weiser's Beard, he would please to take away the other, which he had ordered to
be done.

The Indians received the two Strings, with the usual Io-bah; and then
Canasateego spoke as follows:

We have been hindered by a great deal of Business, from waiting on you, to
have some private Conversation with you; chiefly to enquire after the Healths
of Onas beyond the Water; we desire you will tell them, we have a greatful
Sense of all their Kindnesses for the Indians.

Brother Onas told us, when he went away, he would not stay long from us; we
think it is a great While, and want to know when we may expect him; and desire,
when you write, you will recommend us heartily to him; which the Governor
promised to do, and then took his Leave of them.

The Commissioners of Virginia gave Canasateego a Scarlet Camblet Coat, and at
the same Time delivered the Passes to them, according to their Request, and
took their Leave of them in form.

The Commissioners of Maryland presented Gachraddodow with a broad Gold-lac'd
Hat, and took their Leave of them in the same Manner.

The Indian Road as agreed to at LANCASTER, June the 30 th, 1744.
THE present Wagon Road from Cohongoronto above Sherrando River, through the
Counties of Frederick and Augusta by Colonel James Wood's, Jacob Tunk's, Jost
Hiti's, Benjamin Allin's, the Widow Givans's, Colonel James Paton's, Patrick
Campbell's, ' Patrick Haye's, Gilbert Campbell's, Robert Young's Mill, Joseph
Long's, Robert Loney's, George Robinson's Mill, on Roanoke, to Adam Herman's at
Tom's Crock on New River, above the Blue-Ridge; shall be the established Road,
for the Indians our Brethren of the Six Nations, to pass to the Southward, when
there is War between them and the Catawbas.

But before they shall at any Time, enter the Borders of Virginia, they shall
obtain a Pass, under the Hand and Seal of some Magistrate of Repute, as shall
be appointed for that Purpose, by the Governor of New York or Pennsylvania,
whose Name shall be certified to the Governor of Virginia; which Pass shall
mention, the Name and Nation of the Captain, and the Number of Indians in the
Company, and the Business they are going upon, which pass, shall be also from
Time to Time signed, by every Justice, to whom they shall produce it, in their
Journey through Virginia, which Pass shall also serve them in their Return.

The Indians having such Pass, shall not permit any Frenchman to go with them,
under the Protection thereof; and they the said Indians, shall not take or
kill, any Thing belonging to any of the People of Virginia, without their
Leave, but behave themselves orderly and peaceably like Brethren, in their
Passage through the Country, both going and returning: And when they are in
Want of Provisions, they shall apply to the first Justice of the Peace,
Captain, or other superior Officer, who shall happen to live on, or nigh the
said Road; which Justice or Officer, shall supply them with sufficient
Provisions, to serve them to the next Justice or Officer, and so on, throughout
their Journey through Virginia; the said Indians making no unnecessary Delays,
ranging far out of the said Road.

And the Governor of Virginia will take due Care, that what is hereby agreed
to, on the Part of the People of that Colony, shall be faithfully complied
with, on Condition that the Indians of the Six Nations, who shall have such
Passes shall behave themselves, in the Manner, as above is expressed.

COPY of the Commissioners Promise, delivered the Six Nations in Writing, at
Lancaster, the 4 th of July, 1744. See Page 72.
WHEREAS the Six united Nations of Indians have, for a Consideration in a Deed
made by them to His Majesty this Day, recognized the Right and Title of our
most gracious Sovereign, in and to the Colony of Virginia, as it now is, or
hereafter shall be bounded: And whereas it may be for the Service of His
Majesty, and the Peace and Safety of the Inhabitants of the said Colony, We,
the Commissioners of Virginia, do, at the Desire and Request of the said Six
Nations of Indians, Promise to move the Governor and Council of Virginia, to
represent their Case to our said Sovereign Lord the King, to the End His
Majesty may extend His further Grace and Favor to the said Six Nations. GIVEN
under our Hands at Lancaster, in Pennsylvania, this Second Day of July, in the
Eighteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King GEORGE the Second, Anno
Dom' 1744.

THOMAS LEE. WILL. BEVERLEY.


COPY of the Pass for the Six Nations, to bring the Canoy Indians through
Virginia; delivered them in Writing, by the Commissioners, at Lancaster, July
the 4 th, 1744. See Page 70.
PURSUANT to an Agreement made this Day between us, Thomas Lee, and William
Beverley, Esqrs. Commissioners for Virginia, and the Six Nations of Indians, We
do hereby require all His Majesty's Subjects in Virginia, to Permit Charles
Corry-hati-centha, and Adam Wick-quach-quy-wick, Indians of the Canoy Nation,
and the others with them, (not exceeding Ten in Number) to pass through the said
Colony of Virginia, to the Tuscaroro Towns to the Southward; and to return Home
again, with all or such of the Indians of the Canoy Nation, residing with the
said Tuscaroros, as shall think fit to return with them, without any
Molestation.

Given under our Hands at Lancaster, in Pennsylvania, this Fourth Day of July,
in the Eighteenth Year of our Sovereign Lord King GEORGE the Second, Anno
Domini 1744. THOMAS LEE. WILL. BEVERLEY.


COPY of the Pass for the Six Nations, to send Messengers, the old Road, to the
Tuscaroros; according to the Proposition, in Page 70.
At a Treaty with the Indians of the Six Nations, continued and held at
Lancaster, in Pennsylvania, on the 4th Day of July, in the Eighteenth Year of
our Sovereign Lord King GEORGE the Second, Anno Domini 1744.

AT the Request of the said Indians, We, Thomas Lee, and William Beverley,
Esqrs. Commissioners for Virginia, do agree, That the said Indians shall, from
Time to Time, have Liberty to send any Number of Indians of their Body, not
exceeding Six Persons, through the inhabited Part of the Colony aforesaid, to
visit their Allies, the Tuscaroros, living to the Southward thereof: But the
said Messengers shall first obtain a Pass, from the Person to be appointed by
the Governor of Pennsylvania, (...) like Manner as they are to do, in their
Passage to the Catawbas, and behaving themselves in a civil Manner, as Friends
and Brethren ought to do, both in their Going and Returning. GIVEN under our
Hands the Day and Year above written.

The Form of a Pass, proposed for the Warriors of the Six Nations, going
through Virginia the new Road, to the Catawbas.
SUFFER and Permit (...) Captain of (...) Indians of the Six united Nations,
(or as the Case is, if Tributaries) to pass through Virginia along the Indian
Road, as agreed to by the Treaty, held at Lancaster the 30th Day of June, 1744,
they behaving themselves peaceably, as Brethren.

GIVEN under my Hand this (...) Day of (...) Anno Domini (...)
To all whom it may concern.
(...)


