SOME REMARKS On a late PAMPHLET Entitled, The State of Religion in
New England, since the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield's Arrival there.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Late of Pembroke-College in Oxford.

In a LETTER to a Minister.

The Second Edition.

Glasgow: Printed by William Duncan, and sold by the Booksellers in Edinburgh
and Glasgow. 1742.

BOSTON: N. E. Reprinted and Sold by S. Kneeland and C. Green in Queen Street.
1743.

SOME REMARKS ON A Late PAMPHLET, entitled, The State of Religion in
New England, since the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield's Arrival there, etc.
Cambuslang, August 31st. 1742. Rev. and dear Sir,
I Have read the Pamphlet, entitled, " The State of Religion in New England,
since the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield's Arrival there, in a Letter from a
Gentleman in New England to his Friend in Glasgow" -- I think the Contents no
Way answer the Title Page -- It rather ought to be entitled, The State of
Religion falsely Stated -- For I am persuaded some Things are therein asserted
without sufficient Evidence to prove them, and many more Things set in a very
wrong Light: -- The Design of the Pamphlet itself is base and wicked -- It Is
intended if possible, to eclipse the late great and glorious Work, begun and
carried on for some Time in New England, to invalidate the Testimonies that
have been given of it, and thereby of Consequence to bring a Reproach upon, and
to hinder the spreading of a like glorious Work, which GOD of his infinite
Mercy has for some Time been carrying on in this Land -- Give me Leave to send
you a few Observations upon this Anonymous Pamphlet. I call it Anonymous,
because the Publisher has not thought proper to put down the Name of the Writer
of the first Letter Mr. A. M. at length, which I think he was bound in Duty to
do -- The Publisher indeed in the Advertisement prefixed to the Letter tells
us, The Reader may depend upon it, that the following Letter is Genuine, from a
Gentleman who has always had a good Character for sound Understanding,
Integrity, Sobriety of Manners, Piety, and notwithstanding his Engagements in
secular Affairs, has never been an unconcerned Spectator of any Thing that
might affect the State of Religion. But I must beg the Publisher's Pardon, if I
tell him* That I am one of those Readers who cannot depend upon all this merely
upon his desiring me to do so. -- For really there is one Thing in the Letter
which makes me shrewdly suspect, that the Letter itself is not Genuine, at
least that there has been some Additions made to it since it came to Scotland
-- For the supposed Writer of this Letter, Page 15, says, In the Preface to the
Sermon published by Mr. Edwards of Northampton, which I see is reprinted among
you. Now, how this Gentleman May 24 th could see at Boston, that Mr. Edwards's
Sermon was reprinted in Scotland, which was not done 'till the June following,
I know not. If it be said, that by the Words among you he means in Britain, I
see that the printed Advertisement in the London Weekly History, of the
Publication of Mr. Edwards's Sermon in England, is dated May 1 st, and says,
"This Day is published" -- I myself was one that was chiefly concerned in
publishing of it -- I sent the first Copy to Scotland, and to my certain
Knowledge it was never published in Britain 'till May 1st. -- Is it probable
that People at Boston should know of this May 24? -- What a Character this
Gentleman has always had for "sound Understanding, Integrity, Sobriety of
Manners and Piety," I will not take upon me to determine; nor does the
Publisher give us Opportunity to know what Character the Gentleman really has
had, since he does not publish his Name: But however that be, I fear he has
forfeited his good Character "for found Understanding, Integrity and Piety," by
writing this Letter. And though he may not be altogether an "unconcerned
Spectator of any Thing that might affect Religion," yet, I fear he has been so
taken up with his Engagements in secular Affairs, that he has not given
himself sufficient Time to enquire into Matters of Fact, has heard with others
Ears, and seen with others Eyes, and has not himself attended as he ought, to
the one Thing needful.

He says in the Beginning of his Letter, Page the 3d, I am sorry you have had
such Accounts of Persons, and Things transmitted you from this Country, as you
mention in your Letter; they are far from being true, and must come from Men of
narrow Minds, and great Bigotry, or from such as basely affect Popularity, or
well-meaning weak Christians, of little Knowledge of human Nature, or the
History of Mankind. What Accounts this Gentleman refers to I know not -- If he
means the Accounts in the Weekly History, as I suppose he does; I think this
Gentleman is sadly mistaken. Most of the Accounts were transmitted by the
Honorable Mr. Willard, Secretary of the Province -- The Rev. Dr. Colman -- The
Rev. Mr. Prince -- The Rev. Mr. Cooper: Persons I am intimately acquainted
with, and who are by no Means Men of narrow Minds, great Bigotry, or little
Knowledge of human Nature, or the History of Mankind: But have deservedly had a
good Character for sound Understanding, Integrity, Sobriety of Manners and
Piety.

Now whether they, or this anonymous Writer are to be credited most, I leave
any reasonable Man to judge. Indeed he boldly asserts, That these Accounts are
not true: But what Proofs does he bring of the Falsity of them? None at all --
Let us but know who this Writer is, I am persuaded my honored Friends at
Boston will soon bring him to the Test of these Assertions.

He goes on thus, Indeed, says he, some Persons of very good Sense were once
inclined to think GOD was doing Wonders in this Place viz. Boston -- And I am
persuaded these very same Persons have not altered their Opinion yet, but
actually believe that GOD has done Wonders, if turning People from Darkness to
Light, and making them new Creatures, is doing Wonders.

But that was a Time when a superstitious Pannick run very high, and bore down
every Body, that was not well fixed and established; either by a natural
Steddiness of Temper, or by strong Reasoning and Reflections -- But as soon as
the Passions of the People subsided, and Men could cooly and calmly consider,
almost every one of but tolerable Sense and Understanding in religious Matters,
in great Measure changed their Opinions of the Spirit that prevailed here, and
had been raised by Whitefield and Tennent.

What! Had been raised by Whitefield and Tennent! GOD forbid that either Mr.
Tennent or I should ascribe any of that Work to ourselves. -- No, it was raised
by the Holy Spirit of God -- It was no superstitious Pannick, but a plentiful
Effusion of the Holy Ghost. It Is true, it did run high; Glory be to GOD for it!
and did bear down every Body, except those who would not submit to the
Redeemer's Scepter, through Self-righteousness and Unbelief; which I am afraid
this Writer terms, Natural Steddiness of Temper, strong Reasoning and
Reflection. Nor is it true that almost every one of but tolerable Understanding
in religious Matters, in a great Measure have changed their Opinions of the
Spirit that prevailed at that Time. No, dear Sir, They yet believe it to be a
glorious Work of GOD, as is evident from the late Writings of some of these
eminent Ministers in New England, mentioned in the Title Page of the Pamphlet.

What the Writer says of me in the following Paragraph, p. 4 th, is not worthy
Notice. He is welcome to make as free with my Character as he pleases, and I
freely forgive him -- However I thank him for doing me the Justice to say,
"That I collected Money for the Orphan House in Georgia -- It was not then for
myself: Nor does he charge me with embezzling the 5 or 600l. He could not do
this justly, because before the writing of this Letter an Account came to
Boston how I had expended it. And as for being "a bold and importunate Beggar",
I acknowledge that I learned that from the wise Man who tells me, Whatever thou
find in thy Hand to do, do it with all thy Might; and from the Apostle Paul,
who in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. viii. 9. sh^ws himself to
be the most bold, insinuating and importunate Beggar for pious Uses that I ever
yet met with.

I think I am much obliged to the Writer for what he says concerning me in this
Respect. But I wish he had not made so free with the Character of my honored
Friends. He cries out against Slander in others, at the same Time through the
whole Letter, he is guilty of the most palpable Slander himself -- He is pretty
favorable to the Rev. Mr. Webb, and the Rev. Mr. Cooper of Boston. He only
calls them, p. 7 th, "Two great Admirers of Whitefield and Tennent, flaming
Zealots, for certain favorite Opinions and Tenets." -- And so indeed they are
blessed Champions, I know them well, for certain favorite Opinions, and Tenets
of the Church of Scotland -- Such as Original Sin, imputed Righteousness of
Christ, Election, and other glorious Gospel Truths. But as for Mr. Tennent he
seems quite angry with him.

Never was a Man more wrongfully represented. This Letter-writer says, "He has
often heard that Mr. Tennent had always been remarkable in the Jerseys, for his
Uncharitable and divisive Courses," But does the hearing of this prove the
Truth of it? I have the Happiness of being personally and very intimately
acquainted with Mr. Tennent. I scarce know a Man of a more catholic Spirit.
"He is a Man of no Learning." His Writings prove the contrary. His Antagonists
abroad dare not say they have found it so. His great Business in his Sermons is
either to puzzle, or to fright the Hearers, but especially the last, which he
did by roaring out, and bellowing Hell and Damnation, Devils, and all the
dreadful Words he could think of. Indeed, to the Honor of the Grace of GOD be
it spoken, he is a Son of Thunder, especially in his Application, and when he
is preaching the Law; at such Times, under him, People cannot easily sleep: But
with^^ he is a Workman that needs not be ashamed, and is taught of God rightly
to divide the Word of Truth. As for puzzling his Hearers, I fear that Mr. A. M.
thinks he did so, because he generally insists much on the New Birth, Imputed
Righteousness, Divine Faith, and the other peculiar Doctrines of the Gospel.
These Things are all Foolishness to the natural Man, and puzzled Nicodemus
himself, when discoursed of by our blessed Lord. John iii. 9. Nicodemus
answered and said unto him, How can these Things be? Ministers in general, he
calls Carnal, Unconverted, Blind-leaders of the Blind, Rational, Moral, Dry,
Husky Preachers, that were leading the People to Hell. I suppose Mr. Tennent
said, That carnal blind Preachers who preach Morality, without due Regard to
Gospel Grace and Motives; who do not preach Justification by Faith,
Regeneration, etc. they who do not preach Christ as All in All, were
Blind-leaders of the Blind, and were leading the People to Hell. But it is
absurd to suppose he thought that all Ministers in general were such. I know a
great Body of Ministers, that he thinks most highly of. But, he exhorted People
to leave them, to go about exhorting one another, and telling their
Experiences. This I cannot believe is truly represented; for I have now a
Letter by me published by Mr. Tennent, against Persons going about in the
Character of Exhorters. But if he only exhorted Christians not to for sake the
assembling of themselves together, to provoke one another to Love, and good
Works, and to tell one another what GOD had done for their Souls, he did no
more than what every Gospel Minister should do. He says, "He was followed by
all sorts of People." This I think was a Proof that he was of a catholic
Spirit, and not of a divisive uncharitable Temper. "As much as Whitefield was"
-- And I pray GOD he may be followed a thousand Times more! And by many
preferred to him -- Very justly -- "He was most Censorious and Uncharitable,
every one that was not exactly of his Mind he damned without Mercy. -- This is
Calumny indeed. -- I know many Ministers who do not think as Mr. Tennent does
in all Respects whom he notwithstanding highly values. But I suppose the Writer
was angry with him, because he pronounced all damned that were not born again,
and that did not believe in, and lay hold on the imputed Righteousness of Jesus
Christ. -- His Master authorizes him to pronounce such damned -- He that
believes not shall be damned. -- His Sermons were sometimes as confused and
senseless as you can imagine -- It is well they were not always so. He seemed
to have a particular Quarrel with Reason, Learning and Morality; for he seldom
finished a Sermon without saying something against them -- Never I believe, but
when these Things are magnified to the Prejudice of divine Revelation,
Illumination, or Christ's imputed Righteousness -- For Mr. Tennent is a solid,
learned, rational, and not only a moral but truly holy Man. The Rev. Doctor
Colman in a Letter to me, published in the first Weekly Paper printed at
Glasgow, writes thus of him -- We received him just as we did you, as an Angel
of Christ -- He was abundant and fervent in Labors, and GOD has been pleased
to own his Labors with abundant Success -- The honorable, and truly pious
Secretary Willard, writes thus, There has been so evidently the Finger of GOD
in directing you into this Province, and (after your Departure) the Rev. Mr.
Tennent, through your earnest and importunate Request to him, and in the
wonderful Success that has attended both his and your Ministry; as also the
Labors of our own Ministers for some Months past, that many that like not the
Work are sadly put to it, to keep their Eyes shut against the Evidences of it.

The Rev. Mr. Cooper in a Letter printed in the Weekly History No. 2d, which
the Printer has mistaken for Colman, calls him, "Dear Mr. Tennent -- He came"
says he, In the Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel indeed. He was with us
several Months. Many Thousands were awakened, and I believe many truly
converted. There is quite another Face of Religion in this Town, as well as in
many Places in the Country. Many Ministers as well as People greatly quickened.
Blessed be God who put it into your Heart to move him to come, and inclined his
Heart to come, and help us. I could bring a Cloud of Witnesses to testify the
Falseness of the Character given Mr. Gilbert Tennent by this Letter-Writer: The
Account which he gives of himself to me in a Letter published in the Weekly
History No. is admirably sweet. His Book entitled the Presumptous Sinner
detected, and his many printed Sermons, and his Preface to his deceased
Brother's Treatise upon the New Birth, which is now in the Country, which I
would recommend, show him to be a Man of great Learning, Solidity and Piety.
And I am not without some distant Hopes that, the People of Scotland will have
an Opportunity of hearing him ere long, and then they may judge for themselves.

After such a false and scandalous Character given of that great Man of God Mr.
Gilbert Tennent, I think I may justly suspect the Truth of all that this Writer
says in the subsequent Part of the Letter. From such a Letter-Writer as this,
What Truth can we expect?

The Writer himself gives me Leave to speak in this Manner -- For he seems to
make the Validity of what follows to depend on the Character he gave of me and
Mr. Tennent p. the 6 th, From such Men as these ( Whitefield and Tennent) and
such Doctrines and Ways of Preaching as theirs, says he, What Fruit can you
expect? Now all he says about me is, That I collected in New England 5 or 600
L. Sterling. for the Orphan-House in Georgia. That I was a bold and importunate
Beggar etc. This could have no Influence upon the People's Minds, to raise a
bad Spirit among the People. And as for the Character he gives of Mr. Tennent,
I have proved it to be absolutely False: Consequently whatever he builds upon
the Foundation of Mr. Tennent's bad Character, amounts to nothing at all, since
he has not proved the Character given of him to be true.

But suppose Mr. Tennent was the Man he is represented to be; Does it therefore
follow that all the great and glorious Work carried on in New England, by other
Ministers, and in other Places where Mr. Tennent and I never were, is
Enthusiasm and Delusion? By no Means; and yet this is the whole Drift of the
Pamphlet.

Surely the Writer knows not what Spirit he is of: In the 6, 7, 8, 9 th and 10
th Pages, he represents Things in a most ridiculous Dress, and takes upon him
to condemn all the Converts to a Man, though he could not possibly be acquainted
with the hundredth Part of them, as Self-conceited, superstitious,
enthusiastic, censorious, Slanderers. At the same Time he seems to ridicule
the Concern the People were under when they were brought to cry out, What shall
we do to be saved". He laughs at them for asking one another How do you feel?
Have you seen Christ? He boldly asserts that the boasted Converts, not one in a
Hundred excepted, make Religion consist, in the Feeling of inward Impulses,
Impressions, and in an inexplicable Faith, Joys, Extacys, hearing of Sermons,
and such like. In short he by this and the whole Drift of his Letter, seems to
me to be far from deserving the Character given him in the Advertisement
affixed to the Title Page of the Pamphlet.

Page the 11 th, He falls foul of Mr. Moorhead, and speaks almost as freely of
him as of Mr. Tennent -- I cannot say I was very intimate with Mr. Moorhead
when at Boston: But the Letters that have come from him, and from others
concerning him, bespeak him to be a Man of a good Spirit, and one whom God has
blessed with Success. And I have great Reason to believe that he is a Man not
over credulous: Because I have heard from his Friends here, that he did not
overmuch favor the Work of God that was at Northampton in New England some
Years ago, and therefore probably would not readily favor the late Work in
Boston and other Parts, had he not sufficient Evidence that it was a Work of
God.

Page 14 th, The Letter-Writer takes upon him to assert that a Pamphlet
published in Scotland entitled, Christ's riding in the Chariot of Salvation, is
stuffed with abominable Lies. As a Proof of it, he urges That the Students in
Boston, got nothing by Whitefield and Tennent but Enthusiasm, Pride, a Contempt
of their Betters, etc. What they got by me I know not, but I have great Reason
to believe they got something that was good, under God, by Mr. Tennent. For Dr.
Colman in a Letter to me which was printed in the Glasgow Weekly History No. 1
st, writes, At Cambridge the College is a new Creature; the Students full of
God, and like to come out Blessings in their Generations, and to be so now to
each other. Many of them are now we think truly born again, and several of them
happy Instruments of Conversion to their Fellows. The Voice of Prayer and
Praise fills their Chambers; and the Sincerity, Fervency, and Joy, with
Seriousness of their Heart, sits visibly on their Faces. I was told Yesterday
that not seven of a Hundred remain unaffected. I know how the good Tidings of
this will affect and please you. God give you like Joy every where in the Fruit
of your Labors.

And the honorable Secretary Willard about the same Time writes to me thus:
But that which forebodes a more lasting Advantage, is the new Face of Things at
the College, where the Impressions of Religion have been, and still are very
general, and many in a Judgment of Charity brought home to Christ; and diverse
Gentlemen's Sons, that were sent there only for a more polite Education, are
now so full of Zeal for the Cause of Christ, and of Love to Souls, as to devote
themselves entirely to the Studies of Divinity.

The same Page he would fain tax Mr. Gilbert Tennent with a Lie; for it was he
wrote the Account in the Weekly History No. 1 st. In the abovementioned
Pamphlet, says he, It is said, When Mr. Gilbert Tennent preached at Marblehead
and Charlestown, his Voice had like to have been drowned with their Outcries.
But he mistakes: It is not said so: For I have searched narrowly into the
Pamphlet and Weekly History, and find no Mention of an Outcry but only a great
Shock given at Marblehead. It was at Portsmouth where Mr. Gilbert Tennent
writing to his Brother says, That there were, viz. at Portsmouth and
Charlestown, in Time of Sermon such Outcries that his Voice had like to have
been drowned. I think Mr. Tennent is the best Judge of what he heard with his
own Ears. Mr. A. M.'s living near Charlestown, and having never heard a Word of
this from the Minister with whom he frequently conversed, is no Proof it was
not so. It might have been so, and yet might not come into the Minister's Mind
to tell Mr. A. M. of it.

In the same Page he finds Fault with the Accounts given of some young Children
who talked of the Things of GOD as if they were People of 70 or 80 Years. Alas!
says he, How easily are Mankind deceived? How fond are they to impose on
themselves and others? Some of these I have conversed with: But did he converse
with all, or with these mentioned in the Pamphlet? If not, How can he urge this
as another Lie in the Pamphlet? I take Mr. Abercromby, who sent the Account of
the Children, and who is a Preacher of good Character, to be a better Judge of
the Matter than Mr. A. M. But this anonymous Letter-Writer seems resolved to
condemn every Thing in the Gross. Indeed he does speak favorably of the Church
of England. I must do Justice, says he, to the Church of England, p. 16 th.
There are three Congregations of that Way in Boston: They all live in Love and
Peace; their Ministers speak against Enthusiasm and Bigotry every Day; not
above three or four at most, of some Thousands that are of the Episcopal
Persuasion, are taken with this New-Light, as they call it. They all, says be,
stand fast to the Church, and their Numbers increase very fast.

One would imagine by this Mr. A. M. is a Church of England Man, and it should
seem a bigoted One too: And then no Wonder he speaks against the New-Light.
Their Ministers I believe do preach against what I fear he terms Enthusiasm,
viz. The powerful feeling Operations of the Holy Ghost. But I cannot think they
preach so much against Bigotry. For the Head of them, in a Conference See my
Journal.
I held with all three of those Ministers in Boston, to prove that we ought all
to be of the Church of England, brought this Text, Father, I will, that they
may be all One, even as thou O Father and I are One. They assert baptismal
Regeneration, deny Perseverance and free Justification by Faith without Works,
and seem to think of Mr. Gilbert Tennent just as this Letter-Writer does. No
Wonder then he is so friendly to them.

But why should I say more? It would be endless, as well as take up too much of
my precious Time, to be more particular in my Observations upon Mr. A. M.'s
Letter. There are some Matters of Fact mentioned in it, such as "a blind Lad's
preaching in Connecticut, p. 12. Mr. D -- 's Manner of Preaching in a hot Day,
p. 13," and some other Things which I cannot take upon me to make Replies to,
and which if true, will by no Means prove the late Work of God in New England
to be only Enthusiasm and Delusion. Ere long I hope to see Boston. Then I will
endeavor to send an impartial Account. Indeed Mr. A. M. p. 17 th, seems not to
care for my Return to Boston. But I hope to have a prosperous Journey to them
in some Months, by the Will of GOD, and see how they do.

In the mean while give me leave to observe, that the Publishers of this
Pamphlet (for I believe there are more than one concerned in it) have almost
saved me the Trouble, and have taken an effectual Way to confute themselves.
For they have annexed to this Letter an Appendix containing Proofs for the
Facts in the foregoing Letter, extracted from Sermons preached by some of the
most eminent Ministers in New England, lately printed at Boston. But these
Extracts by no Means contain Proofs of the Facts recorded in the foregoing
Letter, consequently all the Facts in the foregoing Letter which are not proved
by these Extracts, we have Reason to doubt of. I have not an Opportunity of
getting all the Sermons of the Rev. Ministers mentioned in the Title Page: But
it grieved me when I saw Extracts taken out of their Writings, to prove that
the Work lately begun and carried on in New England was Enthusiasm and
Delusion. This was the chief Reason of my writing you this Letter. It will
grieve them to hear that their Writings have been used to so bad a Purpose. The
Compilers of the Pamphlet have deal with their Sermons, as the Devil dealt with
the Scripture when he tempted our Lord in the Wilderness, I mean marred and
wholly misapplied them. The Publishers style them at the Head of the Appendix,
some of the most eminent Ministers in New England. They depend much upon their
Authority, to prove the Facts of Mr. A. M.'s Letter. And I desire no other
Authority than these very eminent Ministers Sermons out of which the Extracts
are taken, to prove that the Work lately begun and carried on in New England is
not Enthusiasm and Delusion, but a great and mavelous Work of the Spirit of
God.

The Compilers indeed in order to make the World believe they had been
impartial, have published a Sentence or two wherein Dr. Colman has written
favorably of the Orphan-House in Georgia, and says the Order of it is
admirable, etc. but this is only a Disguise. For they have been far from acting
fair in this Respect. The Doctor complains in the P. S. of that Letter, p. 44.
That some of my Friends have made too free with my Letters in printing only
Part of them, and mixing them with Part of others without Distinction. I think
it is my Duty to take all the Blame from off my Friends as to printing only
Parts of his Letters, upon my self; for I was the only Person concerned: But as
for mixing them with others without Distinction, I know nothing of it. The
Letters were sent to me from the Doctor. I thought it would be improper to
publish any other Parts of the Doctor's Letters than what respected the Success
of the glorious Gospel, and that I thought he would gladly have published: But
if the Doctor found Fault with my Friends, I am sure he justly may blame these
Compilers who have published only Part of this Letter of his. One would have
thought they should have taken a Caution from this very P. S. But they were
afraid as it would seem, of the Contents of it; for a Friend who has seen and
read the whole Letter sends me the following Extract out of it. I hope we are
retrenching our Superfluities and Luxury; our young People have thrown by much
of their Finery and Gaiety, and seem to have Eye and Heart on Things spiritual
and heavenly; and if God build them up into Families with their present prudent
pious Dispositions, it promises greatly for the next Generation; That Glory
will dwell in our Land, and his Work appear to Children's Children. And in that
very Part of it they have printed, the Doctor says enough to overthrow the
whole Design of the Pamphlet. All this, P. 42, notwithstanding, there has been
a great and glorious Work of God going on among us, from the Day of Mr.
Whitefield's Visit to us. I have a Sermon of the Doctor's now before me
entitled, The Word of God magnified by him, preached April 29. 1742, wherein
his Testimony is humbly given for the great and wondrous Work of GOD's Grace
manifest in many Parts of the Land. The last Paragraph of that Sermon begins
thus, I close with giving Glory to GOD for the great and good Work of his Grace
which he has so visibly begun, spread, and is carrying on in every Part almost
of our Provinces. This very Sermon I believe has been in the Hands of the
Compilers of this Pamphlet. How then could they be so barefaced, and so
injurious, to the good Man's Character, as to print any Part of his Letter, to
subserve so base a Design? I believe they will not have the Doctor's Thanks for
this.

The like Treatment they have given the Revd. Mr. Turell, another of the
eminent Ministers from whom they have taken Extracts to prove the Facts of Mr.
A. M.'s Letter. I am persuaded Mr. Turell will be much concerned to find any
Part of his Sermon thus misused; and how the Compilers of this Pamphlet could
dare to make this Use of his Writing I cannot imagine; for, in the very first
Page of the Preface to that very Sermon out of which they have taken their
Extracts, he speaks of himself as one of the Friends and zealous Promoters of
the good Work: Nay he begins his Preface with these Words, The Occasion of my
publishing this brief Direction to my People, is partly to vindicate my
Character which has been injured by a Report spread, that of a zealous Promoter
of the glorious Work of GOD's Grace and Spirit appearing, I am become an
Opposer: Which shows that Mr. Turell would not care to be represented as an
Opposer of that Work, and consequently would not choose that his Writings should
be produced to prove the principal Facts in this Letter of A. M.'s, who would
represent the whole as Enthusiasm and Delusion.

What Opinion Mr. Turell had of Persons of this Gentleman's Spirit is evident
from the 4th Page of the same Preface, which the Compilers of the Pamphlet
could not but see. His Words are these, As for the profane Triumphs of the
Opposers; (of such I mean) who attribute the Whole of this glorious Scene to
the Devil, or wild Enthusiasm, a heated Imagination, etc. I detest their
Opinion, though I am far from judging their State. I am confident that of the
many that I have discoursed with under the common Impressions (two or three
excepted) they have been all wrought upon in a Way agreeable to the Gospel: And
just as I should have desired some Years ago. And I must testify to the Glory
of GOD and his sovereign rich Grace, that I do behold the distinguishing Marks
of GOD's Spirit on many: My Brethren, let us pray for the Preservation,
Revival, Progress, and universal Spread thereof. In p. 14 th of his Directions,
he says, I charitably believe some Scores in this Place have been seriously
wrought upon; and the far greater Part of them have declared, God has made me
the happy Instrument of their Awakening. And P. 18 th, says he, The Names of
Whitefield and Tennent (though liable to err) I have once and again mentioned to
you with Honor; they have been raised by God to do abundance of Good. How does
this agree with the Account Mr. A. M. gives of the Spirit raised by us, and
with that scandalous Character he gives of Mr. Tennent in particular: And when
these Quotations are Parts of one of the Treatises out of which one of the
Extracts mentioned in the Appendix is taken, and are written by one of those
eminent Ministers whose Writings are referred to, to prove the principal Facts
recorded in Mr. A. M.'s Letter.

But what surprises me most of all is, That they should extract any Thing from
Mr. Parsons to prove Mr. A. M.'s Matters of Fact. Indeed in the Passage cited
from him, see Page 41 st of the Pamphlet, to use the Words in the Glasgow
Weekly History, No. 35. I see only a Warning, against rashly concluding Persons
to be in a converted State, because some who have been thus well judged of do
afterward full away into Errors, or appear to be deluded or Impostors; and the
Warning enforced by an Instance, and indeed but by one Instance, of a Person
who was Visionary. Mr. Parsons's Caution to others against concluding too
rashly that People are converted, is a Presumption that he is cautious in that
Matter himself; yet in this very Sermon of Mr. Parsons, out of which the
Extract mentioned in the Appendix is taken, He says Page the 44 th, I hope not
less than an hundred and fifty Souls are converted in about nine Months past:
Though his Parish is small, consisting only of 120 Families. I could heartily
wish that the whole Sermon was printed. It is directly levelled in many Parts
of it against Persons of Mr. A. M.'s Spirit and Sentiments, and is intended as
a needful Caution for those lately converted to avoid Extremes, and take Care
to walk consistently. He has all along been a great Promoter of this Work: In a
Letter dated December. 16th. 1741, to Dr. Colman, and which is printed in the
Weekly History, he mentions a most wonderful Effusion of the Holy Ghost in his
Congregation: In that Letter he makes an honorable Mention of Mr. Tennent. I
have Reason, says he, to bless the Lord that he sent him for our Help; and
indeed by an Inquiry since, I find his Labors were blessed to give a more
general Shock than appeared at the very Time.

The other eminent Ministers Sermons I have not yet met with: But I have great
Reason to believe they have been treated in the same Manner. The Time would
fail me, dear Sir, to send you all the Vouchers that might be produced for the
glorious Work in New England. Messirs. Prince, Webb and Cooper, in a Preface to
a Sermon by Mr. M'Gregere, a Presbyterian Minister, and which I hope also will
be Reprinted, speak nobly of it. Mr. Edwards's Sermon I think is most
admirable, and answers all the Objections that Mr. A. M. or Others can make
against it. In short, if any Work had all Marks of a divine Signature, this
undoubtedly has.

When I consider how Mr. A. M. so quarrels with it, and endeavors to represent
it in so ridiculous a Light, I cannot but wish he may consider Romans viii. 7. 1
Cor. ii. 14. That the carnal Mind is Enmity against God, and the natural Man
discerns not the Things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually
discerned. The Sum of the of the Matter seems to be this; There has been a
great and mavelous Work in New England, but, as it should seem, by the
Imprudences of some, and the overboiling Zeal of others, some Irregularities
have been committed in several Places, which Mr. Tennent himself in a Letter to
Mr. Parsons printed in the Boston Gazette, has born his Testimony against, as
strongly as any of these eminent Ministers. This, dear Sir, is nothing but what
is common. It was so in Old-England some few Years ago. Many young Persons
there ran out before they were called. Others were guilty of great Imprudences.
I checked them in the strictest Manner my self, and found as they grew
acquainted with the Lord Jesus, and their own Hearts, the Intemperance of their
Zeal abated; and they became truly humble Walkers with God. After a gathering
there will always be a sifting Time. And the Church is generally shaken before
it is settled. But must the whole Work of God be condemned as Enthusiasm and
Delusion because of some Disorder? No, I wish with all my Soul, that those who
had extracted from Mr. Parsons had observed what he says Page the 41st, and 42
d. It is very much to be feared, says he (speaking to Persons who cried down a
whole Work of God because of the Imprudencies and Miscarriages of a few) That
you are Strangers to the sanctifying Influence of the Holy Ghost, when you can
so easily pass over the Table of the rich Dainties which God spreads for his
own Children, which while they feast upon, their Souls are drawn out in Rivers
of Pleasure and Love; and like the Crow light upon, and greedily pick up, every
Bit of filthy Carrion you can meet with.

Dear Sir, as I allow you to publish my Letter, out of Compassion to the
Compilers and Publishers (...) the Pamphlet, I cannot but express my Concern,
that they may seriously consider, whether this mentioned by Mr. Parsons be not
directly their Case: And that they may take heed lest the God of this World may
have blinded their Eyes. Since they had this and the other Sermons before them,
they must sin against Light and Knowledge in publishing such a Tract. And
therefore to use the Words of Mr. Parsons in his Sermon Page 42 d. It is not
possible that you should be innocent, but on the contrary plunge yourselves
under amazing Guilt by such a dreadful Conduct. Whilst you stand amazed at the
Rings of the Wheels as Things too high and dreadful for you; whilst you know
not what to make of the Effusions of the Holy Spirit, but are blundering at
every Thing amiss, when God is working a Work of his astonishing Grace before
your Eyes which you will not believe; Beware lest that come upon you, which is
spoken of in the Prophets, Behold ye Despisers and wonder and perish! Dear
immortal Souls, say he, I beseech and persuade you, by the Mercies, of God and
the astonishing Love of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would not sacrifice the
Operations of the blessed Spirit to your own Prejudice, arising from our
Imperfections: I beseech and charge you by the coming of the great* Jehovah in
the Word of his Grace, that you do not despise his glorious Name, and the
Riches of his Mercy now offered you. I charge and admonish you by the Dignity
and Worth of your immortal Souls; by the powerful Impressions of an approaching
Change; by the certain tremendous appearing of the great Judge* by the
inexpressible Agonies of Hell, and in conceiveable Joys of an everlasting
Heaven, that you do no longer reject, nor once more cavil against the glorious
Interest and Kingdom of the blessed Jesus triumphing at this Day, and inviting
the miserable Slaves of the Devil, to become the happy Subjects of it. I warn
and charge you before the great God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Angels, upon your Peril, that you take diligent Heed to these Things. And if
you reject to hear, if you dare reject or boldly despise the Admonition,
remember you are answerable at the great Tribunal, and must expect a most
fearful Share of Torments among the damned World, for such unspeakable Guilt.

Thus speaks this worthy Man: My Heart warmed, dear Sir, whilst I was reading
his Discourse; it is close, succinct and powerful: How could the Publishers
after reading such a dreadful Warning, print any Thing out of his Sermon, to
prove the Work in New England Enthusiasm? I would heartily join with him and
the other Ministers in New England, was I there, in bearing a faithful
Testimony against any Thing that I might judge to be inconsistent with the
precious Rules of the holy Scriptures. At the same Time, I pray that even the
Ministers themselves may act with the same Caution they recommend to their
People, and then I doubt not but we shall see a happy End put to what may now
be irregular or disorderly. The dear Redeemer has assured us, that the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against his Church. He will cause that all Things
shall work together for her Good. The Wrath of Man shall turn to his Praise,
and the Remainder of it shall he restrain. He will bring Order out of
Confusion, and the Church shall be more than Conqueror through his Love. I will
therefore conclude this long Letter with the Words of the Psalmist in the
second Psalm.

WHy rage the Heathen? and vain Things
why do the People mind?
2 Kings of the Earth do set themselves,
and Princes are combined
To plot against the Lord, and his
anointed, saying thus,
Let us asunder break their Bands,
and cast their Cords from us.
He that in Heaven sits, shall laugh:
the Lord shall scorn them all.
Then he shall speak to them in Wrath,
in Rage he vex them shall.
6 Yet notwithstanding I have him
to be my King appointed:
And over Sion my holy Hill
I have him King anointed.
Upon this Assurance I rest in Peace, and am, Reverend and dear Sir, in the
Kingdom and Patience of Jesus. --

Your affectionate and obliged Friend, Brother and Servant, George Whitefield.

In a few Days will be Published,
DIVINE INFLUENCE the true Spring of the extraordinary Work in several Places
in the West of Scotland, illustrated in a Letter from the Rev. Mr. ALEXANDER
WEBSTER, one of the Ministers of the City of Edinburgh, to a Gentleman in the
Country. --

And as there is a remarkable Uniformity in the Work of GOD, as it has appeared
there and in this Country; so this Performance is excellently suited to
vindicate it from many of the Objections made against it amongst Us; and is
wrote in so scriptural and rational, so masterly and polite a Manner, that it
is not doubted but it will be read with Approbation by the Judicious and
Unprejudiced.


