M. T. CICERO'S CATO MAJOR, OR HIS DISCOURSE OF OLD AGE: With Explanatory NOTES.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, MDCCXLIV.

The Printer to the Reader.
THIS Version of CICERO'S Tract de Senectute, was made Ten Years since, by the
Honorable and Learned Mr. LOGAN, of this City; undertaken partly for his own
Amusement, (being then in his 60th Year, which is said to be nearly the Age of
the Author when he wrote it) but principally for the Entertainment of a
Neighbor then in his grand Climacteric; and the Notes were drawn up solely on
that Neighbor's Account, who was not so well acquainted as himself with the
Roman History and Language: Some other Friends, however, (among whom I had the
Honor to be ranked) obtained Copies of it in M.S. And, as I believed it to be
in itself equal at least, if not far preferable to any other. Translation of
the same Piece extant in our Language, besides the Advantage it has of so many
valuable Notes, which at the same time they clear up the Text, are highly
instructive and entertaining; I resolved to give it an Impression, being
confident that the Public would not unfavourably receive it.

A certain Freed-man of Cicero's is reported to have said of a medicinal Well,
discovered in his Time, wonderful for the Virtue of its Waters in restoring
Sight to the Aged, That it was a Gift of the bountiful Gods to Men, to the end
that all might now have the Pleasure of reading his Master's Works. As that
Well, if still in being, is at too great a Distance for our Use, I have, Gentle
Reader, as thou feast, printed this Piece of Cicero's in a large and fair
Character, that those who being to think on the Subject of OLDAGE, (which
seldom happens till their Sight is somewhat impaired by its Approaches) may
not, in Reading, by the Pain small Letters give the Eyes, feel the Pleasure of
the Mind in the least allayed.

I shall add to these few Lines my hearty Wish, that this first Translation of
a Classic in this Western World, may be followed with many others, performed
with equal Judgment and Success; and be a happy Omen, that Philadelphia shall
become the Seat of the American Muses.

Philadelphia, Febr. 29. 1743,4.
CORRIGENDA.
Page 24, dele the last Line of the Triplet.

Page 49, line 2d in the Notes, read (...).

Page 60 at the Bottom, and p. 61, 1st line of the Notes, read Thurium.

Page 64, lin. 13, 14, read -- Intemperate Life.

Page 70, line 7th in the Notes, read Actium.

Page 92, last line, read -- In Palling --

Page 95, first line of the Notes, read Idaea Matter.

Page 100, last line, read -- Impetuous Desire.

Page 141, last line, read Grentemesnil.

Page 142, line 12th from the Bottom, read Bostar's Body.

Also a few Mistakes in the Dates of Lives, and c. the Author having
accidentally used different Chronologies, which vary frequently two Years.
These are left to the Correction of the Reader; who is also desired to excuse
the Italic Types used in some Greek Words.

INDEX to the NOTES.
AEDile's Office 22 23 AEmilius Paulus 32 -- Sextus 61 Africanus P. 63
Agamemnon 66 Albinus Spurius 25 Ambivius Turpio 100 Annibal 21 25 Appius C1.
Coecus 34 35 Archytas 80 Arganthonius 129 Asdrubal 73 Atilius Calatinus 119 --
Regulus 139 Atticus Titus Pomponius 1 Augurs 26 Bocchar 73 Brutus L. Junius 138
Burning dead Bodies 27 Caius Duillius 94 -- Sulp. Gallus 101 Cartbage 38 Cato
M. Porcius 9 -- 's Age and Offices 22 67 -- 's Origines 78 -- de re rustica 108
-- 's Son Marcus 127 Caecilius Statius 55 -- L. Metellus 64 119 Cethegus 103
Cicero's Age 7 Cincian Law 23 Cincinnatus L.Q. 111 Cineas 88 Cleanthes 48 52
Commencement of Old Age 118 Corvinus Valerius 117 Coruncanius Titus 34 35
Crassus P. Licin. 62 103 Crates 51 Curious M. Dentatus 33 34 Cylon of Croton 47
DEcius P. Mus 90 Two Decij 138 139 Democritus 47 48 Dentatus Man. Curious 110
Devoting, the Manner of it 91 Diogenes the Babylonian 49 53 Duillius C. 94
ENnius 2 3 Epicurus 90 FAbius Q. Maximus 21 -- 's Age 22 Fabricius C. Luscinius
33 Flaminius T. Q. 3 4 -- Lucius 86 GAllus C. Sulp. of the Eclipse in Macedon
101 Gorgias 29 Graeciae Magnae Inhabitants 150 HEsiod 45 -- 's Works 108
Hippocrates 49 Historians the Books of ancient lost 143 Home^ 46 IDaea Matter 95
Isocrates 28 54 Junius Brutus 138 LAertes 109 Laelius and Scipio 10 12 Lepidus
AEmilius 120 Livius Andronicus 103 Livy's 2d Decad 26 Lucius Flaminius 86
MAncinus Caius 85 Marcellus M. Cl. 144 146 Masinissa 39 71 Metellus C. 64 119
Milo of Croton 59 Mitio and Demea 124 Mother of the Gods 95 NAEvius Cneius 41
102 Numantia 85 O Ld-Age its Commencement 118 PAulus AEmilius 3^ Plato 47 50
Plato's Phaedon 150 Plautus M. Accius 103 Pisistratus the Tyrant 133 135
Pontifox Maximus 65 Pontius the Centurion 70 Pontius the Samnite 82 Posthumous
Spurias 83 Praetor's Office 23 Pyrr^us 24 33 88 Pythagoras 46 Q Uastor's Office
22 REgulus M. Atil. 139 Romans who, to save their Country, exposed themselves
to a certain Death 146 147 Roman Funerals 27 Rostr^ 69 SAlinator 19 (...) 82
Seipio;s and (...) 10 12 Seipio's ^ Brothers 128 Scipio Cn. and P. Corn. 63 144
Scipio Nasica 40 97 Seriphian 20 Sextus AEmilius 61 Simonides 45 Socrates 47 51
Solon 57 33 Sophocles 43 55 Sophonisha 74 Statius Caecilius 55 Stesichorus 45
46 Stoies 51 Strength of Sides 30 Suasor legis 23 Superstition of the Romans 26
Sybaris 60 Syphax 71 TArentum 24 Tartessus 129 (...) 42 Theophrailus 55
Terence's Adelphi 124 Terentius C. Varro 145 Tithonus 9 Titus P. Atticus 1 --
Q. Flaminius 3 4 -- Coruncanius 34 35 Troubles of Rome 5 Turpio Ambivius 100
VAlerius Corvinus 117 Voconian Law 31 XAnthippus 140 Xenophon's Symposium 98
ZEno 48 51
THE CATO MAJOR Of M. Tullius Cicero, OR His DISCOURSE OF OLD - AGE, ADDRESSED
TO Titus Pomponius Atticus, to whom this Discourse is addressed, was of an
ancient Family of Rome, of the Equestrian Order, the second in Dignity amongst
the Romans. Of all Cicero's Friends He appears to have been the most intimate
and the most esteemed: For of the 36 Books now extant of Tully's Epistles,
there are no less than 16, composing a distinct Tome, directed to Atticus
alone. His Character in Life, as left us by his intimate Friend Cornelius
Nepos, may be justly accounted the most beautiful we have received from
Antiquity of either Greek or Roman. Nor does it appear to have been paralleled
in any Age: For though he lived in the Times of the greatest Factions and
Divisions in Rome, as those of Sylla, Marius and Cinna, Caesar and Pompey,
Brutus and Cassius, with Anthony, Lepidus and Octavius (afterward^ Augustus,)
he conducted himself with such consummate Prudence and Integrity, that though
caressed by all, he neither joined with, nor offended any of them. But being
possessed of a vast Estate, neither acquired on his Part, nor improved by any
lucrative Measures whatsoever; for his Patrimony was about the Value of 160
thousand Pounds Sterling; and by the Will of a surly Uncle, whom none besides
could please, he received about 800 thousand more, with many other Legacies
from his Friends and Admirers: Of this vast Estate, I say, besides his annual
Expense on a genteel and hospitable, yet frugal Table, he spent the greatest
Part in relieving the Distressed of every Party (as each had their Turns,
octavius excepted) without any other Distinction than that of their Worth and
Wants ^ and without any Conditions or Expectation of Retribution. In his Youth,
to avoid being engaged by his Friends in the Contentions with Sylla, he retired
to Athens, where he spent most of his Time in Study, and the Income of his
Estate in public and Private Benefactions; and became so dear to the People
there, that they almost adored him; yet he would never allow them to erect so
much as one Statue to his Honor, though it was their constant Practice to all
such as deserved well of their State. From hence it was he took the Name of
Atticus (or Athenian, for so the Word imports) here alluded to by Cicero. But
his Life may be read more at large in the mentioned Author Cornelius Nepos, now
in English. I shall therefore only add, That he was about two Years older than
Cicero, but survived him 12 Years, dying in his 78th Year, in the 722d after
the Building of Rome, and about 30 Years before the Birth of our Savior;
Cicero being put to Death by M. Anthony's Order, in his 64th Year, and in the
710th of Rome. That his Sister was married to Quintus Cicero, Brother to the
Author; his Daughter to the Emperor Augustus's great Friend and Favorite M.
Agrippa, whose Daughter by her was the first and the beloved Wife of Augustus's
Successor the Emperror Tiberius; but he was obliged to part with her, to marry
his Father-in-Law Augustus's Daughter, the infamous Julia. I shall, in relation
to both Cicero and Atticus, add a Sentence of Seneca's, in his 21st Epistle to
Lucilius. Cicero's Epistles (says he) will not suffer Atticus's Name to die.
His Son-in-Law Agrippa, his Grandson-in-Law Tiberius, or his Grand-Nephew
Drusus Caesar, would have availed him nothing; amongst all those great Names
and Assinities he would not have been remembered, had not Cicero grasted him
into his own Fame. Yet Attieus wrote some valuable Books himself, but they are
all lost.
TITUS POMPONIUS ATTICUS.
CHAP. I.
SAY, Titus, if some sovereign Balm I find
To sooth your Cares, and calm your ruffled Mind,
Shall Not I deserve a Fee?
For I may address you, Atticus, in the same Lines, in which the Ennius, born
in Calabria, now Part of the Kingdom of Naples, under the Consuls Q. Valerius
and C. Mamilius, in the 515th Year of Rome, as A. Geilius from Varro informs
us; went to live in the Island Sardinia, to which Marcus Cato, the Speaker in
this Tract, being sent Praetor, and becoming acquainted with Eunius, he there
began to learn Greek of him, and on his Return brought him to Rome; which,
Nepos says, was an Act of greater Importance than a Triumph. He wrote the
Annals of Rome in Verse, which, though highly valued by the Romans, and (...)
quoted by Cicero, are now, excepting some Fragments, entirely lost. He is more
Particularly mentioned again in this Discourse.
Poet,

In Heart as great, as in his Fortunes poor, applied to Titus Quinctius
Flaminius, who, when Consul in the Year of Rome 556, overcame Philip the last
King of that Name, and the last but one of Macedon; after which, at the great
Solemnity of the Isthmian Games that then ensued, and at which there was a
general Concourse from all the neighboring Parts and Countries, he by public
Proclamation restored to the several States of Greece their ancient Liberties,
after they had been deprived of them, and continued in Subjection to others,
but principally to the Kings of Macedon, above 120 Years. This Conquest, with
his other Actions, added greatly to the former Luster of his Family, but it
received a severe Blow from this Cato, the principal Speaker here, who, when he
was Censor, by virtue of that Office degraded Titus's Brother Lucius Flaminius,
who had also been Consul, and bore other high Offices, from his Place in the
Senate; which is mentioned further on in this Discourse, as by Cato himself,
and the whole Story is there given more particularly. [See Note 63.] His Life
may be read at large amongst those of Plut^r^h.
Flaminius: Though I am fully assured, you are far from being in his Condition,
disturbed with Thoughts,

That Wrung his Soul the live-long Nights and Days.

For I well know the Evenness and just Composure of yours, and that you took
not only your Name from Athens, but also brought home with you those nobler
Improvements, the most consummate Prudence and Humanity. And yet, to be free
with you, I cannot but think you are sometimes touched with the same Pains at
Heart, that, I assure you, deeply affect me. From the late Revolution in the
State, by the Usurpation of Julius Caesar, who, without any other Right or
Pretense to it, than that of the Power of his Army, the Subjects as well as
himself of the CommonWealth, instead of obeying the Senate's Order to disband,
he made War on his native Country, Pursued Pompey, who commanded the Army of
the Senate, into Greece, and at Pharsalia in Thessaly entirely routed him; made
himself, on his Return to Rome, perpetual and absolute Dictator, and became the
first of the Roman Emperors. For though about three Years after, by the
Conspiracy of Brutus, Cassius and others, in Hopes of recovering their
Liberties, he was stabbed in the SenateHouse; yet his Sister Julia's Grandson
Octavius, a Youth then, but of about 18 Years, whom he had by Will made his
Heir, found Means to get into the same Seat, and cloth himself with the same
Power; and from him it was continued (though only for four Successions in his
own, or rather in his Wife Livia's Family, who all proved Tyrants, and two of
the four, Celigula and Nero, mere Monsters of Cruelty) till Rome itself became
a Prey to the Goths, or other Northern Nations. But on mentioning this first of
the Roman Emperors, it may not be amiss here to observe of him, that though he
was a Person of the sublimest Genius, adorned with every Accomplishment of
Nature or Art, and not at all of a cruel Disposition, but on the contrary of a
Temper truly clement and generous; yet by the Iniquity of the Times, he seemed
to have been sent into the World for the Destruction of Mankind: For Pliny,
after a most exalted Character of his Abilities [ Not. Hist. L.7.c. 25.] tells
us, that he himself acknowledged he had in his Wars destroyed the Lives of
1,192,000 Men, exclusive of these that sell in those horrid Civil Wars he
engaged his Country in; for which Lipsius, on mentioning this, [ De constantia,
Lib. 2. c. 22.] justly calls him Pestem perniciemque generis bumani, The Pest
and Plague of Human Kind. And though the Numbers of those that fell in their
Civil Contentions, are not menaioned, yet they may be guessed at, by comparing
the two last Census taken of the Men of Rome, that are mentioned by Livy in the
Epitomes of his Books still extant; for it is noted in that of his 98th Book, in
the 682d Year of the City, that the Number was no less than 450 thousand Men,
but in the Year 706, on Caesar's Return from his Victory over Pompey, the
Number was reduced to 150 thousand; so that the City of Rome alone, and chiefly
by these Contentions, lost two full Thirds of her People, and she still
continued to lose by the ensuing Wars after Caesar's Death, carried on by
Octavius (afterward Augustus) and Anthony, against Brutus and Cassius, etc.
But these are Matters of a more important Weight, that require Arguments from
a deeper Fund to support us under them; which may hereafter be applied to them.
The Subject I have now chose to write on, is OLD AGE; which, as it is advancing
on us both, and in a little Time must unavoidably seize us, I would look out,
and endeavor to find the best and surest Means, to make the Burden of it sit
as easy on us as possible. Though for your Part, I am well assured, that as you
bear all Accidents and Events with the greatest Firmness and Moderation; so you
will equally dispense with all the Inconveniences that can attend this State.
But as I resolved to write on the Subject, you (Atticus) of all Men appeared to
me the most worthy and proper to direct it to; for being made yours, we may in
common apply it to our Use together. In what Year of his Life Cicero wrote this
excellent little Tract, does not clearly appear. He was born in the 647th Year
of Rome; J. Caesar made himself Master of the Empire after his Return from
Egypt in the 706th Year; after which, Cicero wrote most of his Philosophical
Discourses. From his Preface to his 2d Book de Divinatione, we find, that this
was composed after his Academics, his Books de Finibus, his Tuseulan Questions,
and those de Natura D^orum: And from the same and other Hints we also learn,
that it was wrote before those de Divinatione, his Laelius or of Friendship,
his excellent Offices, and his Book de Fato; all which we find were wrote after
Caesar's Death. [Vid. his Preface to Laelius, de Offic^^s, Lib. 2. and his
Preface to that de Fato.] It Is therefore probable he wrote this in the last
Year of Caesar's Life, who was murdered on the Ides (the 15th Day) of March,
A. U. 709, that is in Cicero's 63d Year. He was himself murdered in his 64th
Year, by Order of M. Anthony, the next Year after Caesar's Fall.
And as to my own Part in it, I must own, the Thoughts that flowed on me from
the Subject, in composing it, proved so entertaining and delightful to me,
while about it, that they have not only divested the Prospect of Old Age, now
before us, of every thing shocking or frightful, but they have rendered my
Expectations of it even agreeable and comfortable. Which leads me to say, We
can never sufficiently admire the Excellency of Philosophy; to whose Dictates
whoever submits, he will never find himself at a Loss in any Stage or Condition
of Life, to render it not only supportable, but easy. But on other
Philosophical Subjects I have already wrote several Tracts, and shall still
continue to write. This on Old Age (as I have said) comes to you. I choose for
my Speaker in it (not Tithonus was said to be the Son of Laomedon, King of
Troy, of such admirable Beauty, that, according to the Fictions of the Poets,
Aurora the Goddess of the Morning, fell in Love with him. And of her he
obtained that he might live very long; which he did to that Degree, that
wearing gradually away, he shrunk at length into a Grasshopper. The Moral of
which is plain, i.e. That Tithonus was very comely in his Youth, an early
Riser, and regular in his Life; that by these Means he attained to a great Old
Age, in which he still preserved his Agility, but grew very thin, and became
vastly altered from his former State, when in his Bloom.
Tithonus, as Aristo of Chio laid his; for a fabulous Person would take off
from the Weight of it; but) Old Marcus Porcius Cato] of which Name there were
two Persons very famous in the Roman History: And the Lives of both are in
Plutarch, and Author now in the Hands of most English Readers of History. But
of the Eldest, who is the Person intended here by Cicero, I shall add the
following Account from the great Historian Livy, whose Work is not yet so
common in our Language. In Bo. 39. c. 40. speaking of the Election of Censors,
in the 570th Year of the City, for which there stood six Candidates of the
Nobility, and as many of the Commons, of whom Cato was one; (and he was
Perfectly Novus Homo, a New Man; so they called those of obscure Families who
got Offices in the State; but new as he was, he had been Consul 11 Years
before, in the 36th of his Age:) The Historian, I say, having named the 12
Candidates, proceeds thus: But Marcus Porcius Cato had vastly the Advantage of
them all, as well of the Patricians as the Plebians of the greatest Families.
[For there were Illustrious ones of the latter as well as of the former.] This
Man (says he) was Master of such natural Abilities, and of so much Spirit, that
wherever he had been born, he would have made his Fortune. He was skilled in
every Art, both of public and private Life, and equally in Affairs of both
City and Country. Some have rose by their Knowledge in the Law, others by
Eloquence, and others by their military Achievements: But he was so equally
qualified for them all, that one would think him born to that alone, whatever
it was, that he took in Hand. As a Soldier he was brave, and signalized his
Courage in many Engagements; and when advanced to the highest Posts, a no loss
consummate General. In Peace, when consulted in Matters of Right, he showed the
highest Skill; and in pleading a cause, no less Eloquence. Nor did this appear
during his Life only, as in those whose Talents in that Way flourish and die
with them; for His remain and live consecrated to Futurity in his Writings of
every kind; as his extant Orations, as well in Defense of himself, as both for
and against others, fully show: For he gave his Adversaries Work, both by his
Impeachments and his Vindications: And indeed he was rather too much engaged in
Contention: Nor is it easy to say, whether the Nobility bore harder on him, or
he on the Nobility: For his natural Temper, it must be owned, was somewhat of
the harshest, and his Tongue of the fre-est. But then he had a Soul
impenetrable to all the Allurements of Pleasure; most rigidly honest and
unblemished, above courting the Favor of Men, and no less contemning Riches.
For Parsimony, and for Patience in Fa^igues and in Dangers, his Constitution
both of Body and Mind Seemed firm as Iron; and such as even Old Age, to which
all things yield, could not break or subdue: For in his 86th Year he had a
public Oration in his own Defense, which he also put in Writing; and in his
90th, he impleaded Servius Galba before the Commons. Thus wrote Livy of Cato
above a Hundred Years after his Death. From which Character we may observe
Cicero made a most proper Choice of his Speaker, and the following Discourse
will be found as justly to suit the Character. Other Particulars of his L^^fe
will occur further on; [for some of which, see Note 56, 71, 89, and c.] The
Word he alludes to for his Name, is Catus, which signifies circumspect,
cautious, cunning. -- The other of the same Name was his Great Grandson, by his
Son Marcus and Tertia, Paulus AEmilius's Daughter, both mentioned hereafter,
called Cato Junior, or Uticensis from the Place of his Death; who for his
Virtues gained a greater Reputation, and became more famous, even than his
Ancestor; of whom (since his Life, as I have said, is in Plutarch) I shall here
only give this short Character from Velleius Paterculus, an old Roman
Historian, who wrote about 75 Years after his Death; and in Book 2. chap. 35.
speaks thus of him: He was the very Image of Virtue itself; in his Disposition
more like a God than Man; who never did a good Thing that he might be seen to
do it, but because he could not act otherwise; whose only Rule in Life was
Justice; untoucht with any human Vice, and ever in himself superior to every
Attack of Fortune. I shall also further observe, that He is the principal Hero
of Lucan's Pharsalia, a Poem never finished, but generally wrote with a true
Spirit of Liberty, even under the Tyranny of Nero; but it cost the Author his
Life. In the 9th Book of that Poem, after a most beautiful Character of that
Excellent Great Man, the Poet concludes (according to the Religion of that
Time, when Rome took upon it to people Heaven with Gods, as it now does with
Saints to be Prayed to) with those most remarkable Lines; Ecce parens verus
patriae, dignissimus aris
Roma tuis, per quem nunquam jurare pudebit,
Et quem si steteris unquam cervice solutd
Tunc olim factura deum --
Thus Englished by N.Row:

His Country's Father here, O Rome, behold,
Worthy thy Temples, Priests, and Shrines of Gold;
If ever thou break thy lordly Master's Chain,
If Liberty be ever restored again,
Him thou shall place in the divine Abodes,
Swear by his holy Name, and rank him with thy Gods.
To avoid seeing the Subversion of the Liberties of Rome, he killed himself, in
the 49th Year of his Age. Livy Epit. lib.114.


Marcus Cato; that the Respect paid to his Name and Character, may give the
greater Force and Authority to what is said. At his House I suppose Scipio and
Laelius.] There were two Pairs of illustrious Romans of these Names, noted for
their mutual Friendship. The first flourished in the Time of, and acted very
great Parts in the 2d Punic or Carthaginian War: For this Scipio was the Man,
to whom Rome not only owed its own Deliverance and Safety, but nearly all her
Advantages and Conquests over the Carthaginians; who, after they had brought
that City to the very Brink of Ruin, were afterward obliged, and principally
by the Conduct of Scipio, to submit to hard Conditions of Peace; [see Note 24
and 29.] For which he afterward bore the Name of Scipio Africanus, as the
Conqueror of Afric: And in all these Actions Laelius was his almost inseparable
Companion. But the Pair of the same Names here intended by Cicero, were two
Generations younger. This Scipio was the real Son of the Great Paulus AEmilius,
whose Life is amongst those of Plutarch, [see Note 24.] but was, after the
Manner of the Romans, adopted by the Son of the first Great Scipio Africanus;
who, being himself but of a weakly Constitution of Body for a Son to succeed
him, chose one of that illustrious Family of the AEmilii: Hence laying down his
paternal Name, he, according to Custom, took that of the Family he was grafted
into; and afterward, for his Conquest and Demolition of Carthage in the 3d
Punic War [see Note 29.] he also bore the Name of Scipio Africanus; but to
distinguish him from his Grandfather, he was called Africanus Junior, and
frequently from his own Father's Name, Scipio AEmilianus. He had also the Title
Numantinus given him, from his Reduction, or more properly, the utter
Destruction of the famous (the glorious) City of Numantia in Spain; in which,
as brave a People as ever were known on Earth, and who as little deserved it,
were utterly destroyed, Men, Women and Children; not in open Battle, nor by
taking the Place by Force; for the Romans durst not engage them; but by hemming
them in with greater Numbers, and utterly starving them. Yet this Scipio was in
himself a most excellent Person, and in all other Respects, save in these two
inhuman Achievements, the Destruction of Carthage and of Numantia, which were
done in Obedience to the State, and were in those Times accounted glorious; he
appears to have deserved the Character given him by the beforementioned
Paterculus, L. I. C. 12. which is this: A Man who equaled the Virtues of his
Grandfather Scipio, and of his own Father Paulus AEmilius; who, for every
Accomplishment, either for the Sword or Gown [War or Peace] for his natural
Abilities, and his vast Improvements of these, was undoubtedly the most eminent
of his Age; who, in the whole Course of his Life, never did, spoke or thought a
thing that was not worthy of Praise. But having opposed the Party of that
turbulent Tribune Caius Gracchus, Brother to his Wife Sempronia, and Grandson
to the first Great Scipio Africanus beforementioned, by his admired Daughter
Cornelia, and consequently this Scipio's own First-Cousin, as was shown before,
by his Adoption; after he had been waited on home in full Health by the
principal Senators, he was the next Morning found dead in his Bed, strangled as
some thought, or, as others, poisoned, and not without his Wife's Privity: Nor
was his Death further inquired into; such was the Confusion of the Time. Thus
ended that very Great Man, in the 56th Year of his Age, and in the 625th of the
City. Vell. Paterc. lib. 2. c. 4. and Live. lib. 59. in (...). and Freinsheim
Suppl. But notwithstanding all the Opportunities he had of enriching himself,
we find by (...) Victor, that he died but poor, as Cato also did, (see Note
89.) which is a further Proof of the Integrity of both. Plutarch wrote the
Lives of both these Scipio's, but they are both lost. His Friend Laelius, was
Caius Laelius, surnamed Sapiens, the Wife, who was Consul the 614th Year of the
City. Cicero taking Occasion from the known Friendship between him and Scipio,
makes him the chief Speaker (as Cato is here) in that other fine Discourse of
his, which bears his Name LAELIUS, on the Subject of Friendship, wrote
afterward, and directed to the same T. P. Atticus, with this.
Scipio and Laelius to be met, expressing their Wonder to the Old Man, how with
such Ease and Cheerfulness he could support the Weight of his Years; to which
he fully answers them. And if his Language appear somewhat refined here, above
what we meet with in his own Writings, I desire it may be attributed to his
learning Greek, and reading their Authors; on which, it is well known, he spent
much Time and Pains in his latter Days. In this Discourse however, you have my
own Sentiments on the Subject, which I give you as follows; and thus they begin:

CHAP. II.
SCIPIO. Laelius here with me, Cato, as we greatly admire your Wisdom and vast
Compass of Knowledge in general, so we have been particularly wondering to see
how very easily and cheerfully you bear your Age; for we cannot perceive it
gives you any Manner of Trouble; while we have observed others complaining of
theirs, as if the Burden were unsupportable. CATO. Indeed, my Friends, you
place your Wonder on a Matter far below deserving it, a Business in which there
is little or no Difficulty at all; provided proper Measures be taken in it. For
know this, that those who have no Aid or Support within themselves, to render
their Lives easy, will find every State irksome: While such as are convinced,
they must owe their Happiness to themselves, and that if they cannot find it in
their own Breasts, they will never meet with it from abroad; will never
consider any thing as an Evil, that is but a necessary Effect of the
established Order of Nature; which Old Age most undoubtedly is. It Is certainly
strange, that while all Men hope they may live to attain it, any should find
Fault with it, when it comes their Share. Yet such is the Levity, Folly, and
Perverseness of Mankind, that we see there is nothing more common. But, oh!
they say, it has crept on us too fast, and overtaken us sooner than we thought
or expected. In the first Place, pray who put them on thinking wrong? How can
they say, Old Age creeps faster on Manhood, than Manhood succeeded Youth and
Childhood? Or how would it sit lighter at the Age of Eight Hundred Years, if
that were the Term of it, than at Eighty? For the longer Duration of the
preceding Age, when once it is past, abates Nothing from the Effects of Old
Age, when come; nor affords any Relief against the Follies and Weakness of such
as sink under it. Wherefore, if you have, as you say, admired my Wisdom, (which
I wish were equal to your Opinion of it, and that I truly merited the Name I
bear) I know nothing it consists in more effectually than this, that I follow
Nature, my most excellent Guide, as my God, and submit to his Power in all
things; who if, through his Conduct, all the preceding Parts of Life have been
well performed, it is not probable, that he will suffer the last Act, as it is
common with bad Poets, to wind up ill. But it was absolutely necessary, that
some Term, some Period should be set; and that, as it is with the Fruits of
Trees, and of the Earth, Seasons should be allowed for their Springing,
Growing, Ripening, and at last to drop. This wise Men will submit to, and
cheerfully bear: Nor could any thing else be meant by the Stories told of the
Giants Warring against the Gods, than Men's Rebelling against Nature and its
Laws. LAELIUS. But, Cato, you would highly oblige us both (for I may venture to
speak for Scipio as well as myself, since we both hope, or doubtless wish at
least, to live to be old in our Turn) if you would be pleased to instruct us
beforehand, how, and by what Methods, we may avoid the Inconveniences that
generally attend Old Age, so as to render it the more easy to us, when we reach
it. CATO. With all my Heart, Laelius, in case you both desire it. SCIPIO. We
both earnestly desire it, Cato, if not too troublesome; for as you are now well
advanceed toward the End of a long Journey, which we probably are to travel
after you, we would gladly know of you, how you find it, in the Stage you are
arrived at.

CHAP. III.
CATO. Well, I shall do my best to satisfy you. I have indeed been diverse times
in Company with other Old Men, my Equals, as you know the Proverb, Birds of a
Feather will flock together; when they have been loud in their Complaints of
the Inconveniences of Old Age; particularly Salinator was Consul in the 566th
Year, Albinus in the 568th, but Cato in the 559th Year of the City. See Note 17.
Caius Salinator and Spurius Albinus, Men of Consular Dignity; who used heavily
to lament, that they had outlived all the Enjoyments in Life, for which it was
worth the living; and that they found themselves slighted and forsaken by those
who had formerly followed them, and had treated them with the highest Respect.
But to me such Men appear to lay their Charge entirely wrong; for if what they
complained of, were owing only to their Years, the Case must be the same with
me, and all others of the like Age: Yet I have known several who have lived to
be very old, without complaining at all; for they appeared not only easy, but
pleased at their being delivered from the Tyranny of their former youthful
Passions; and far from finding themselves slighted, were still honored and
revered by those about them. But the true Ground of such Complaints lies wholly
in the Manners of the Men: For such as take Care to be neither peevish,
humoursome, nor passionate in Old Age, will find it tolerable enough; but a
perverse Temper, a fretful or an inhumane Disposition, will, where ever they
prevail, render any State of Life whatsoever unhappy. LAELIUS. That is very
true, Cato, but may not some allege, it is your easy Circumstances in Life,
with your Power and Dignity, that produce this happy Effect, and render your
Old Age in particular so easy; but these, you know, are Articles that fall but
to very few People's Share. CATO. I confess, Laelius, there may be something in
what you say; but the Point lies not altogether there: For, as it is related of
Themistocles, that a certain One of Seriphos, a small barren Island in the
AEgean Sea.
Seriphian having on some Difference told him, that if he was great, it was
owing to the Reputation of his Country, and not to himself: It Is true indeed,
replied Themistocles; if I had been born in Seriphos, I should never have been
great, nor would you, if you had been born an Athenian: So, much the same may
be said of Old Age; for it is certain, that to one oppressed with Poverty,
however otherwise qualified, Old Age can never prove easy; nor to a weak
imprudent Person, however rich, can it be otherwise than troublesome. But the
best Armor of Old Age, Scipio and Laelius, is a well spent Life preceding it;
a Life employed in the Pursuit of useful Knowledge, in honorable Actions and
the Practice of Virtue; in which he who labors to improve himself from his
Youth, will in Age reap the happiest Fruits of them; not only because these
never leave a Man, not even in the extremest Olg Age; but because a Conscience
bearing Witness that our Life was well spent, together with the Remembrance of
past good Actions, yields an unspeakable Comfort to the Soul.

CHAP. IV.
WHEN I was a Youth, I took a strong Affection for Quintus Fabius Maximus, who,
after the Romans had in several successive Battles been defeated at the Rivers
Ticinus and Trebia, and the Thrasymene Lake, by Annibal, was in the 537the Year
of Rome, appointed Dictator or (...) Commander, an Office that legally was to
continue but Six Months, and for that Time abrogated the Power of the Consul
and of all other Magistrates, but that of the Tribunes of the People, and of
the lower ones, necessary for administering Justice and keeping the Peace; but
under him his Master of Horse had also a considerable Power. In which Time he
kept Annibal at a Bay; constantly declining, however provoked, to engage with
him; though by the Rashness of Minucius, his Master of Horse, invested with too
much Power by the People, all had like to be lost again; and after he laid
down, the terrible Battle of Cannae was fought, wherein 80 Senators and 45,000
of the Roman Army fell. Two Years after this, Fabius was the fourth time
Consul, and after six Years more, the fifth, An. urb. 545.
Quintus Maximus, who recovered Tarentum, though then well advanced in Years, as
if he had been my Equal: For, there was in that Great Man, a solid Gravity,
tempered with an engaging Sweetness; which in his Old Age did not at all alter
or abate. Yet he was not very old, though somewhat stricken, when I first applied
myself to him; for he was In the 521th Year of Rome, 233 Years before Christ,
therefore Cato was born in the 520th.
the first time Consul but the Year after I was born, and in his fourth
Consulate I was in the Service, though very Twenty Years of Age. -- A Quaestor in
the City was a Treasurer; in the Army he took an Account of, and received what
was gained to the Public from the Enemy; kept Lifts of the Army, and took
Accounts of the Slain on both Sides. The AEdile's Business was to look after
all Buildings, public and private, Weights and Measures, to order the public
Games, and c. Praetors were the chief City-Magistrates in Rome, and abroad were
Governors in Civil Affairs.
young, at Capua; the fifth Year after this I went Quaestor to Tarentum, then I
was made AEdile, and At Thirty Years.
four Years after, Praetor, when Tuditanus and Cethegus were Consuls, and when
Maximus, being then very old, When a Law was proposed, it was read publicly to
the People, and then fixed up for three Nundinae, or 27 Days; after which, the
People being met, some Person of Authority (^or it was not allowed to all) who
approved of the Law, besides the Proposer, recommended it to the People, in a
public Speech. This was called, suadere (...), and the Speaker, Suafor legis,
as here this Fabius did for the Law here mentioned, the Year before he died,
which was in the 55Is It of Rome, having(as Live. l. 30. C.26. hints, but gives it
not as certain) born the Office of Augu^ for 62 Years.
spoke for the A Law proposed by Marcus Cincius, the Tribune, that those who
pleaded Causes, should take no Fees nor Rewards.
Cincian Law against Presents and Fees. He was also far in Years when,
continuing in Arms as if he had been in his Bloom, he commanded the Army
against Annibal, and by his Patience and declining to fight, broke that
General's Measures, though then in his Heat of Youth triumphing on his vast
Successes. Which our Friend Ennius justly expresses in these Lines:

One Man our State retrieved by wise Delays;
For be of Blame regardless as of Praise,
His Country's Safety only had in View:
Wherefore his Fame still more illustrious grew,
And to the vaulted Skies on soaring Pinions flew.
But how admirable was his Vigilance, his Skill and Contrivance in the Recovery
of Tarentum or Tarentus, a great City, situate to the Head of the great Bay of
that Name, now Taranto, was surrendered to the Consul Papirius, in the Year of
Rome 482, two hundred seventy-two Years before Christ, after Pyrr^us had left
it, but with a Garrison of Epirotes in it; of whom the City being tired,
submitted to the Romans; by whom, for the abusive Treatment of their
Ambassadors about nine Years before, they were then besieged. In the 2d P^nic
War, in the 542d Year of Rome, some Conspirators in the City, incensed at their
Hostages being put to Death in Rome, for attempting to make their Escape,
betrayed it to Annibal: Which was very much owing to the Negligence of
Salinator, then Governor of it. Livy, Bo. 25. tells the Story particularly,
without mentioning or blaming the Governor, whom he does not name; sparing him
probably in regard to his Family: But Polybius, in the Excerpta we have of his
8th Book, is much more particular, and says he was drunk the Evening of the
Night it was taken. For this Reason it is, probably, and because Sp^rius
Albinus had gained so ill a Character for his Conduct in the Army, that Cicero
makes Cato mention these two particularly, in Page 19 of this, to their
Disadvantage. The Words which Cato here says he heard Salinator himself utter,
Plutarch in Cato's Life says were spoke in the Senate: He doubtless meant, that
if he had not defended the Castle (which he did bravely enough) Fabius could
not have recovered the Town. But that does not at all appear: It was regained
much as it was lost, viz by Treachery, but of a meaner fort; for it was
betrayed by its Governor's Love to a young Woman in the City, that had a
Brother in the Roman Army, who under Fabius laid the Plot. Annibal was the
Contriver of the first Delivery, and Fabius of the Second; upon the News of
which Annibal only dropped this Expression, "Well (says he) I see the Romans have
also their Annibals." See Livy Bo. 27. and Plutarch in the Life of Fabius.
Tarentum? Upon which I remember, Salinator, who, having lost the Town, had
sled into the Castle, telling Fabius boastingly in my hearing, that if it had
not been for him, he would not have gained Tarentum: It Is very true, replied
Fabius, smiling, for if you had not lost it, I should not have recovered it.
Nor did he excel in Arms more than in Civil Affairs; for when Consul the
second time, his Colleague Spurius Servilius refusing to concern himself, he The
second Decad of Livy being lost, this I think is no where else mentioned.
resolutely opposed Caius Flaminius, the Tribune of the People, in his Attempt
to divide amongst the Commons the Lands taken from the Piceni and Gauls. And
though he was himself The Romans were so exceedingly superstitious, that they
would undertake nothing of Moment without some previous Divination. For this
they had Augurs Auspices and Aruspices appointed. The Augurs were the Chief, of
whom there was a College, consisting at first, by Romulu's Institution, of only
three, but afterward gradually increased to nine, and under the Emperors, to
fifteen. Their Business was to pronounce good or ill Luck from the Flight or
Chirping or Noise of Birds; the Feeding of Chickens kept for that Purpose, and
c. For most gross Instances of this Superstition of theirs, see Plutarch in the
Life of Marcellus, near the Beginning.
Augur, he freely declared, that the best Auspices were always to act for the
Good of the State, and the worst to act against it. Many were the Excellencies
I observed in that Great Man; but none with more Wonder than his Behavior on
the Death of his Son Marcus, a Person of very great Merit, who had also been
Consul. I have by me the Funeral Oration he composed and delivered livered
himself at his The Dead Bodies of the Romans were commonly burnt in a Funeral
Pile, at which the nearest Friend of the Deceased, if of Note, made a Funeral
Oration, which was generally a Panegyric on the Deceased and his Family.
Funeral Pile; which as often as I look on, I can scarce think even the
greatest of the Philosophers worthy to be compared to him. Nor was he great in
public Life any; for he excelled yet more in private, and within his own
Walls: How noble were his Discourses there! How instructive his Precepts! What
a vast Knowledge of Antiquity was he possessed of! How skilled in the Laws, and
in Augury! For a Roman, he was very learned; and he had treasured up in his
Memory, not only all the Wars of Rome, but those of other Nations. And I was on
all Occasions no less fond of hearing him speak, than as I had been assured of
what I then feared, and what has since accordingly proved too true; that when
he was once taken from us, I should never find another Man to improve by.

CHAP. V.
BUT you may wonder, perhaps, that on this Occasion I should run so largely
into the Praises of Fabius: It Is on this View only, that from this Account of
him, you may be convinced, that it would be almost impious to imagine, the Old
Age of a Person, who thus acted and behaved to the last, can be esteemed
unhappy. It Is true, that all Men cannot be Scipio's or Fabius's, to have the
Pleasure of reflecting on such great Actions in their past Life, as their
taking of Towns, or their victories by Land or Sea, and their Triumphs for
them. Nor is this at all necessary to Man's Happiness: For a calm contemplative
Life, or a Life well and virtuously spent in the just Discharge of one's
immediate Duty in any Station, will ever be attended with a Serenity of Mind in
Old Age: Such a Life as we learn Plato led, who died at his Studies in the
Eighty-first Year of his Age: Such as that of Isocrates, who is said to have
wrote his Oration, called the Isocrates was Contemporary with Socrates, Plato,
etc. at Athens: He taught Rhetoric or Oratory in a private School, and many of
the greatest Men of the Age, were his Scholars. This Panath^naic is one of his
Orations, which we have yet extant; it is by much the longest of them all; the
Subject is, the Commendation of his Countrymen the Athenians, and to prove
their Merit, in respect to the rest of Greece, was greater than that of the
Lacedaemonians: Toward the End of it he says, He then wanted but three Years of
a Hundred: Of which it is strange, that neither his Commentator Wolfius nor
Fabricius have taken any Notice, though they both quote this Passage of Cicero
for his Age. [See Note 43d toward the End.] Philostratus says, he died of
Grief, on hearing the Athenians had lost the Battle of Chaeronea. (Which was
fought against Philip of Macedon, Olympiad. 110. 3. the 415th Year of Rome.
Gorgias was of Leontium in Sicily; he went about the Cities of Greece, teaching
the young Men Oratory, and the Philosophy of that Time, for very high Pay. He
is said to have been the first who offered to speak extempore, to any Subject
that should be proposed to him. He was much honored, though Plato in a Dialogue
that bears his Name, exposes him for his Presumption. His Statue was erected of
Gold in the Pythian Temple: Pliny, lib. 33. c. 4. says, by himself, and at his
own Charge; but Philastratus, Cicero, de Orat. lib. 3. and others, say, it was
done by the Public. Pliny adds, that it was erected in the 70th Olympiad. i.
e. about the 254th Year of Rome.
Panathenaic, in his Ninety-fourth Year, and to have lived Five Years after;
whose Master, Gorgias of Leontium, lived One Hundred and Seven Years, and till
his Death never left off his Studies. This Man being asked, how at such an Age
he could think Life desirable, answered, Because he had no Reason to complain
of Life, nor did he feel any real Inconveniency from Age: An Answer truly
noble, and worthy of a great and learned Soul. It is the Weak and Foolish only,
who impute to Old Age what is purely owing to themselves. Ennius, whom I just
now quoted, was far from this; for in these Lines,

As the swist Racer, that has often run
The Olympic Course, and often the Prize has won,
Rests quiet in Old Age, when his fleet Labor's done;
He compares his own Old Age to that of a noble Race-Horse, which after his
Victories, was allowed to live at Ease. But you cannot but remember the Man
himself; for now, under the late Consuls Titus Flaminius and Marcus Attilius,
it is but Nineteen Years since his Death, which happened in the Consulate of
Marcius Philippus the second time, and Servilus Caeapio; the same Year that I,
then Sixty-five Years of Age, with a firm clear Voice, and full Strength of By
many Passages in Cicero, and others of the Ancients, we find Strength of Sides
as well as Voice, was absolutely required in an Orator; for they very properly
used the Word Sides, as we do Lungs: I say, manner of Force; but their whole
Motion depends on the Muscles of the Sides and Breast.
Sides, spoke for and carried the The Voconian Law was, that no Woman should
enjoy by Will, more than one Fourth Part of an Estate of a full Rate or Cense,
that is, of 100,000 Sesterces, which is about 800 Pounds Sterling.
Voconian Law. Ennius, then at the Age Seventy Years (for so long he lived)
bore those two heavy Loads, as most Men would account them, viz. Age and
Poverty, in such a Manner, that he really appeared rather delighted, than to be
at all uneasy under them.

CHAP. VI.
BUT on considering the Subject we are upon, I find there are four
Inconveniences charged on Old Age, which, they say, render it unhappy. One is,
that it disables Men from Business; another, that it renders the Body infirm;
the third, that it deprives us of the Pleasures of Life; and lastly, that it is
the next Neighborhood to Death. Now let us examine the Weight of each of these
particularly, and see how far the Complaint is just. It Is said, it disables
from Business: But pray what kind of Business? Is it such as Youth is capable
of? And because Men have not still the same bodily Strength they had in Youth,
are they therefore incapable of what is properly the Business of Age? Did
Fabius, think you, do nothing? Did your Father Lucius Paulus AEmilins had by
his first Wife Papiria, two Sons and two Daughters mentioned in History; and
putting her away (without assigning any other Reason for it, than Julius Caesar
on the like Occasion did afterward, by holding out his new Shoe, and asking if
it was not handsome, but did they know where it pinched him?) he married a
second; he also gave away these two Sons, to be adopted (after the Roman
Manner) into other Families: The younger was adopted by Scipio, the Son of the
Great Publius (...) Scipio Africauns beforementioned, and is the Person here
spoke to. [See Note 8.] The other Son of Paulus was adopted into the Family of
Fabius Maximus, and became also famous: One of the Daughters, named Tertia, was
married to Cato's Son Marcus here mentioned [see Note 89] who died a few Years
before; the other Daughter was married to one of the Tubero's, of a very poor,
but virtuous Family. [See Plutarch in Paulus AEmilius.] He lost two Sons just
at the time of his Triumph over Perseus, King of Macedon; both of them by his
second Marriage, the one of fourteen Years, five Days before the Triumph, and
the other of twelve years, within three Days after it; so that he had none left
to succeed him in Name, or in his own Family. He was in all things a great Man
in himself, but unhappily the Minister of the Senate's Severity, in executing
their Commands upon the Epirotes, for joining with Perseus, after they had
submitted to Rome. For his Army in one Day plundered 70 of their Towns, and
took 150,000 Captives, whom they sold for Slaves; and from the Prey each
Horseman had (as Livy says, lib. 45. c. 34.) four hundred Denarij, about L. 12.
10. Sterling, and each Footman half as much. It Is therefore strange that
Plutarch (in Paul. AEmil.) should say, they had but eleven Denarij, or about 6
Shill. 10 d. each. But into the Public Treasury he brought 135,000 lb. Weight
of Silver, and 13,860 Pound of Gold, all carried in Baskets before him, with
other vast Riches besides, in his Triumph, which was exceeding splendid.
Lucius Paulus, Scipio, my dear deceased Son's Father-in-Law, do nothing? Did
the Caius Fabricius Luseinius, with the others here named, were all famous in
the Time of the War with Pyrr^us; the Time when Rome seemed to be at its
Height of Glory for Virtue; though they were much more so afterward for
Conquest and Empire. Fabricius was Consul twice, viz. in the 472d, and 476th
Years of Rome, and he triumphed twice: Pyrr^us landing with Forces in Italy to
assist the Tarentines against the Romans, gained the first Battle against the
Consul Albinus; but being convinced, in that Engagement, of the Roman Bravery,
he was rather desirous, upon his Victory, to make an honorable (...) for
himself, and a safe one for his Allies of Italy, than to prosecute the War.
Fabricius being sent to redeem the Roman Captives, was treated with the utmost
Civility by Pyrr^us, who pressed him (being known to be very poor) to accept of
a Present of Gold, as a Token of Friendship only; but he obstinately refused
it: The next Day he endeavored to terrify him with an Elephant, but in vain..
Pyrr^us gave 200 Captives their Freedom without Redemption: To the rest (about
1600) he gave Liberty to go home to keep their Saturnalia (Festivals kept in
December, like the modern Christmas) on Fabricius's Word that they should
return, if Peace were not made, or they were not redeemed; which they did
punctually at the Day. When Censor, he was very severe, and turned Rusinius (a
Man of great Merit, who had been twice Consul and Dictator, and had triumphed)
out of the Senate; for no other Crime, than that he had Ten Pounds of
Silver-Plate in his House; a Piece (as was then judged) of intolerable Luxury;
on which Val. Max. (^^. 2. c. 9.) is pleasant: And this is mentioned in Livy's
Ep^t. lib.14. Yet Fabricius had a small Silver Salt, and a little Silver Cup
with a Horn Foot to it, which he had received of his Ancestors, and kept for
his Libations or Sacrifices. On his Return from Pyrr^us, he was first made
Lieutenant to the Consuls, and the next Year Consul; being then General,
Pyrr^us's Physician (whom Plutarch calls Timochares, others Nicias) coming into
the Roman Camp, offered to Fabricius for a suitable Reward to poison Pyrr^us;
which he heard with Detestation, and (as Plutarch, in Pyrr^us's Life, relates
it) revealed it directly to Pyrr^us, in a very handsome Letter, which he gives
there; but by others it is told variously, though all agree in the Substance of
the story.
Fabricius's, the Manius Curious Dentatus was thrice Consul. In the Fasti he is
marked as if he had been four times, but it does not appear he was more than
thrice. His first Consulate was in the 464th Year of Rome, and he then
triumphed twice in the same Year, viz. over the Samnites and the Sabines. The
second time [mark'd the 3d] was in the Year 479, fifteen Years after the first;
he then fought with, and entirely routed Pyrr^us, after his Return from Sicily
to Italy; upon which Pyrr^us abandoned his new Allies, quited Italy, and failed
to his own Country Epirus, leaving only a Garrison in Tarentum; and Curious led
a Triumph for his Victory. Curious was made Consul again the next Year, to
oppose Pyrr^us, in case he should return, as he pre^^nded to the Tarentines. He
had most of the Glory of this War. But he was no less famous for his great
Mod^^ty, and conten^^d Poverty; of which on In^^^^ is given in this Discourse,
in chapter 16. His Farm, on which he lived and wholly depended, consisted only of
seven Roman Jugera, or about four English Acres and an half, as others in that
Neighborhood then did; and being offered more by the Senate, he refused it,
saying (as Pliny, lib. 13. c. 3. has it) that he was a dangerous Citizen [
perniciosus civis] whom seven Jugera could not (...); for (he adds) that was
the Quantity assigned to the Commons, after the Expulsion of the Kings.
Curius's, the Titus Coru^^canius was Consul in the 474th Year of Rome, the
first Year that Pyrr^us attacked and beat the Romans: But he was not in the
Battle himself, but at the Head of another Army warring with the Tuscans, whom
he vanquished, and had a Triumph for it.
Coruncanius's, and such other Old Men, do nothing, when by their Counsels and
Authority they supported and steered the Commonwealth? Appius Claudius Caecus
was Consul in the 446th Year of Rome, and again in the 457th. In the 473d Year
he was carried to the Senate in a Chair on that Occasion, having, because of
his Blindness, left it for many Years. His Speech is in Plutarch, in the Life
of Pyrr^us. He is mentioned again, in Chapter xi.
Appius Claudius was not only old, but had also the Misfortune to be blind; yet
he, when the Senate seemed inclined to make a Peace, and enter into an Alliance
(...) Pyrr^us, had Courage enough to express himself to the Sense which Ennius
gives us in his Annals in Verse:

What Frenzy now has your wild Minds possessed?
You, who were Ennius's Style was very old.
erst with sagest Counsels blessed,
Your selves on sure Destruction thus to throw!
With the rest that follows; spoke with great Strength and Gravity; for you
know the Poem: But the Speech itself that Appius then made in the Senate, is
still extant in his own Words. And this Part he acted no less than seventeen
Years after he was the last time Consul, which was ten Years after the first:
And before he was Consul the first time, he had been Censor. Which shows, that
in the Time of Pyrr^us's War, he must have been very old; yet this Account of
him we have from our Ancestors. -- They talk idly therefore, who pretend that
Age disables from Business. They might with as much Justice assert, that a
Pilot on board a Ship does nothing, because he neither mounts the Shrowds,
hawls the Ropes, nor works at the Pump; but without any bodily Labor, minds
only the Steerage, and directs the Helms-Man; which is of more Importance to
the Ship's Preservation, than the Work of all the rest besides. For it is
neither by bodily Strength, nor Swiftness, nor Agility, that momentous Affairs
are carried on; but by Judgment, Counsel, and Authority: The Abilities for
which are so far from failing in Old Age, that they truly increase with it.
Unless you imagine that I, who, when I was in the several Stations of a
Soldier, of Tribune, of Lieutenant General, and of Consul, personally active in
the War, am now idle and do nothing, because I am no longer, as formerly, in
the Field. But though not there, it will be allowed, I believe, that I am
employed, at least, to full as good Purpose at home. I now direct in the Senate
what our Armies are to do abroad, and lay down the Plan beforehand, how our
dangerous Rival, Carthage, that I am sure has been long meditating further
Mischief, is to be prevented in her Designs, and effectually humbled. For I
shall ever think, while that Place stands, it will be contriving our Ruin; and
that short of its total Destruction, Rome can never be secure. And the Glory of
accomplishing this, Carthage ('it is said) was built by Dido from Tire, about 70
Years before Rome. Both these Cities increasing vastly in Strength and Power,
became jealous of each other. Their first War began in the 490th Year of Rome,
264 before Christ, and continued 23 Years: The Carthaginians being worsted in
this long and bloody War, were on the Peace obliged to pay the Romans a Yearly
Tribute of 1200 Talents [about 225,000 L. Sterling.] and to give up all their
Claim to the Islands between Italy and Afric, as Sicily, Sardinia, etc. Tired
with this Tribute 24 Years after the Peace, at the Instances of Annibal, a
second War was commenced, in which that General led an Army of 100,000 Foot and
Horse, from Spain through Gaul into Italy; and gaining many great Battles, and
overrunning the whole Country, had nearly put an End to Rome. In Spain also
the two Scipio's, endeavoring to prevent Hasdrubal from marching to join
Annibal in Italy, were with their Armies cut to Pieces, [See Note 97.] after
which none caring to venture thither, Publius Cornelius Scipio, mentioned
before at Note 7, Son of Publius one of those Scipio's, and Nephew to the
other, being then but 24 Years of Age, offered himself; and transporting some
few Forces over thither, with the few seattered Remains of the Romans, which he
collected, he had in five Years Time such Success, that he not only entirely
defeated Hasdrubal, but expelled all the Carthaginians from Spain: He then
proposed to transport the Army into Asric, to draw Annibal out of Italy; but
the Senate, thinking the Attempt too desperate, would not furnish him either
with Men or Money for the Expedition: Upon which, borrowing Money on his
private Credit, and persuading many who admired his Virtues, to accompany him,
he made up a small Army of Volunteers, failed over to A^ric, there gained over
to the Roman Interest Masinissa, a King in Asric, who continued faithful to the
Romans above 60 Years; and had such vast Success, that Annibal with his Forces
was obliged to quit Italy, had hasten home to save his own Country; but there
he was also entirely defeated. The Carthaginians, as they had begun before this
Battle to sue for Peace, on the Loss of it submitted to the hard Terms the
Senate of Rome imposed on them, in the 17th Year after his second War began.
But the City flourishing in Trade, and still growing in Wealth and Power, gave
some of Rome perpetual Apprehensions, left some Turn of Fortune might enable
them to be even with Rome again: Amongst whom this Cato was the principal; but
he was opposed in his Endeavors, to bring the Senate to a Resolution to
destroy the Place, by Scipio Nasica, and many others; who looked farther before
them, and formed to foresee, that whenever all Danger from that Rival Power
should be entirely removed, and Rome should have none capable of giving them
any further Jealousy or Fear, all Discipline would be lost, Vice and Luxury
would prevail, and, as it truly proved, introduce such Seditions, as would at
length utterly sink and ruin their whole Liberties. However 53 Years after the
last Peace, in the 605th Year of the City, a third War was declared against
Carthage, on Pretense of their disturbing that near Ally and good Friend of
Rome, Masinissa. The Carthaginians made the humblest Submissions to divert it;
they delivered three hundred Hostages, and all their Arms, to obtain Peace:
After which they received the Terms from the Senate; one of which being that
Carthage itself should be demolished and razed to the Ground, and that they
should not build again within less than ten Miles of the Sea. The People
enraged at this, resolved rather all to lose their Lives, and die in their
native Place. With the deepest Indignation therefore, and in a Fury, they set
to make themselves new Arms; they cast up new Works; built Ships, and gave the
Romans their Hands full for three Years. But this Scipio, having in the 2d Year
of it been sent Commander against them, took and destroyed the Place, the 4th
Year after the War began, which was about 3 Years after this is supposed to
have been spoke to Scipio.
Scipio, I hope the immortal Gods have reserved for you; that what your
excellent Grandfather made so great and happy a Progress in, may by your Virtue
and Conduct, as his worthy Successor, be completed. This is now the
thirty-third Year, since that Great Man was taken from us; but his glorious
Actions will perpetuate his Fame for ever. He died the Year before I was
Censor, nine Years after my Consulate, under which at the ensuing Election he
was chosen again, and made the second time Consul. But had his Life been
protracted to a Hundred Years, can you suppose it could ever have proved
burdensome to him? He would not then indeed, as formerly, have given Proofs of
his Abilities in youthful Exercises, as Racing, Leaping, Tilting or Fencing;
but he would have done it abundantly by Strength of Reason, cool Judgment, and
mature Counsel. And hence it is, that because it has been constantly observed,
that Old-Men principally excel in these, therefore our Ancestors gave the
great Council of the State the Title of Senate, as consisting of a Body of
Senes, or Old-Men, as the Word imports. The Lacedaemonians also, for the same
Reasons, give their supreme Council no other Title than that of the Old-Men.
And to show the Justness of this, if you look into foreign Story, you will
find, that the Downfall of the greatest States has been generally owing to the
giddy Administration of unexperienced Young Men; as on the contrary, others
have been supported, or the tottering have been recovered, by the Prudence and
wise Counsels of the Aged. Thus in a Play of the Poet C^eius Naevius, one of
the first Dramatic Writers of Rome, bore Arms in the first Punic War, and
exhibited his first Piece in the 519th Year of the City. A.Gell. lib. 17. c. 21.
Naevius, where one asks this Question, But how happened it, that in so small a
Compass of Time you overset and lost so great a Government? The Answer is, A
Parcel of young, raw and ignorant (...) started up, who took upon them to act
the Statesmen; and found Means to insinuate themselves with, and manage the
People. For it is a Truth but too well known, that Rashness attends Youth, as
Prudence does Old Age.

CHAP. VII.
BUT it is alleged, that Memory fails in Old Age. That it does so, I freely
grant; but then it is principally, where it has not been properly exercised; or
with those who naturally have no Strength of Brain: For such as have, will
pretty well retain it. Themistocles, the brave Athenian General, who in the
first of the 75th Olympiad, defeated Xe^xes's vast Fleet at Salamis, 4^0 Years
before Christ. Nine Years after which, the Athenians bam^^ed him. One offering
to teach him the Art of Memory, he said, He would rather he should teach him
that of Forgetting. His Life is among those of Plutarch.
Themistocles could call every Citizen of Athens by his Name; and do you think,
when he became old, that if he met Aristides, he would salute him by the Name
of Lysimachus? For my own Part, I not only know these who are now living, but I
remember their Fathers and Grandfathers: Nor when I read over the Inscriptions
of the Tombs, do I find I am in Danger of losing mine. I never yet heard of an
Old Man that forgot where he had hid his Treasure. The Oldest will remember
what engages their Thoughts and Care, as when they give or take Security, with
such other Affairs as concern them. How do the Lawyers, the Pontiffs, the
Augurs, and the Philosophers, who live to a great Age? What a vast Number of
Particulars must all these comprehend in their Memories? Men will retain their
Understanding and Abilities, while they continue their Application and
Diligence. This we find true, not only in Men of great and public Characters,
but in those also, who have lived a quiet and unactive Life, and spent it only
in Study. Sophocles of Athens, a famous Tragic Poet, is allowed by all to have
lived to a great Age, but Authors do not agree in the Length of it. Some say,
he died at 83; but I think, without good Grounds. The Author of his Life,
prefixed in Greek to the Scholia on him, says he was born the 2d Year of the
71st Olympiad [the 495th Year before Christ] 15 Years before the Birth of
Euripides, whom he also survived (he says) six Years. That Euripides lived
seventy-five Years, is particularly proved by J. Barnes in his Life. By which
Account, Sophocles must have lived ninety-six Years. This Story is also in
Lucian, in his Macrobij, or Long-livers, who says, Sophocles was choked with a
Grape-stone, at the Age of 95 Years; that the Judges admired the Work, and
condemned his Son Jophon (who was also a Tragic Writer) of Madness. Sophocles
is said to have wrote 123 Tragedies, of which we yet have most of the Names;
but no more than seven of the Pieces themselves left, amongst which this,
called Oedipus Coloneus, is still extant.
Sophecles wrote Tragedies at a very great Age^ And when his Sons, apprehending
that through his Application to that Business alone, he neglected all his other
Affairs, and consequently they would be ruined; they cited him to the Court,
that (as you know it is with us, when People by their ill Conduct ruin their
Estate, it is taken from them, and committed to better Hands; so) the Judges of
Athens should take the same Order with him, as become incapable of Business: He
is said to have read to the Judges a Part of his Tragedy, called Oedipus
Coloneus, that he had then in Hand, and to have asked them, whether they
thought that the Work of a Dotard: Upon which they acquitted him. Consider
then, whether Age can be truly said to destroy the Capacity or extinguish the
Abilities of the Mind. Was this Man, was Designing in these Notes to give the
Ages of all the long-lived Persons here mentioned by Cicero, as far as they can
be found in the ancient Writings now extant, or in others that I have; I must
observe, That it is impossible to make so much as a rational Conjecture of the
Age of him he first names after Sophocles, viz. Hesiod; nor (I dare venture to
say) did Cicero himself know any thing certain of it, further than that, by
what Hesiod says of himself, in his Piece called Works and Days, it appears he
was an Old Man. Some have believed he lived before Homer; many that they were
Contemporaries; and others, that Hesiod was considerably younger; amongst whom
was Cicero himself, as he shows further on in this Piece; or probably Cato
might have wrote so in his Origines. Varro, a great Antiquary of Rome,
Contemporary with Cicero, fixed Homer's Age at about 160 Years after the Taking
of Trvy. Eusebius and Tatian reckon up many other different Opinions. H.
Dodwell, our late Antiquary, a Man of vast Industry and great Penetration in
these Studies, brings it about 350 Years lower, or to the 30th Olympiad, that
is about 660 Years before Christ.
Hesiod, was Simonides of the Island Ceos, a famous Poet, who wrote much; but
nothing of his is now extant, except some Epigrams in the Anthologia, and a few
Fragments. Plato calls him a divine Man. This is he who answered Hiero the
Elder of Syracuse, inquiring of him, what GOD was, in the well known Manner,
mentioned by Cicero, de not. Deor^m, lib. I. that is, First taking one Day to
consider of it, he then took two, and then four, still doubling the Time; for
which he gave this Reason, that the more he thought of it, the more Time he
wanted. He was born in the 55th, and died in the 78th Olympiad, aged above
ninety Years.
Simondes, or Stesichorus of Sicily, a Poet much older than Simonides, was born
in the 35th Olympia^, about 640 Years before Christ; he was Contemporary with
Phalaris, Tyrant of Agrigentum; diverse of whose Epistles, or of those now
extant, called the Epistles of Phalaris, are directed to him, menacing him
highly for the Opposition he truly made to him; though those Epistles themselves
are judged not be genuine. Suidas says, Stesichorus wrote 26 Books of Poems, in
the Doric Dialect; but nothing of his is extant. Lucian says, he died aged 86
Years.
Stesichorus, or those I mentioned before, For these two, see Note 21^^
Isocrates and For these two, see Note 21^^
Gorgias, or None doubt Homer lived to a good Age; but none can pretend to say
what that was. Herodotus has left a small Piece, called Homer's Life, in which
he is as particular in what the People of the several Towns and Places where
Homer (as he says) had been, as if it had not been 50 Years since he was there;
and yet he says his Birth was 622 Years before Xerxes passed the Hellespont
into Greece, which was in the 74th Olympiad; and from hence probably Varro's
Computation, which is the same with this, was taken: He also gives a particular
Account of the Manner of his Death, [as he pretends] but says not a Word at
what Age.
Homer? Or were those Princes of the Philosophers, Pythagoras was of the Island
Samos; but some believed, though born there, he was of a Phaenician Extract,
Authors also very much differ about the Time of his Birth, and Particularly
three late great ones of our own Country, viz. Bishop Lloyd, Dr. Bently, and H.
Dodwell. It is however a settled Point amongst them, that he was not born
before the last Year of the 43d Olympiad, nor as^^ the last Year of the 52d;
that is, that he was born between the 604th and the 568th Years before Christ.
From Samos he went over to Phaenicia; thence into (...) where he conversed much
with their Priests; thence he went into Chaldea, and to Babylon, where some
think he might have seen the Prophet Daniel. After about 22 Years spent in
these Travels, he returned to Samos, where finding the Government usurped by
Solyson, a Tyrant, he went to Lucania in Italy, where he was highly esteemed;
being, by those of Metapontum, accounted a God. He had many Followers; but not
admitting all that came to him, he particularly disgusted one Cylon of Croton,
a young Man of great Wealth and Power, to that Degree, that by a formal
Conspiracy, all his Scholars were barbarously murdered, except two, of whom
Lysis was one. Porphyry wrote his Life, of which we have a large Fragment;
Jamblichas more fully, both in Greek, which we also have. It is also in
Diogenes Laertius, and in Stanly's Lives of the Philosophers, with a particular
Account of his Doctrine. M. Dacier has wrote it more elegantly, prefixed to his
Translation of the Golden Verses, and of Hierocles's excellent Commentaries
upon them; all now translated into English. Pythagoras's Doctrine was certainly
excellent; it rendered all those who adhered to it, highly virtuous, and most
useful Men: But this ought to be remembered, that though many have pretended to
give some Account of it, yet we have nothing of it truly certain; for neither
himself, nor his Followers, would ever publish any thing: Only there are some
sew Epistles of theirs, that are accounted genuine; but chiefly on moral
Duties. And the Golden Verses, so called truly, show both what these and the
Men themselves were. But many Things delivered by others, as the Opinion of
that Sect, are to be suspected for fabulous: And it is to be doubted whether
any Sect was ever more belyed and and abused. Pythagoras is said by Jerome
[that is, by Eusebius] to have died in the 70th Olympiad, at the Age of 95, or,
as others say, 75; so it is in Eusebius's Greek Text, as published by Scaliger,
Page.166. Jerome in his Version gives only the Olympiad, not his Age. Diog.
Laertius quotes Heraclid^s, giving him 80; but others, he says, allow him 90
Years: And the great I^. Casaubon on the Place, thinks it ought to be 99,
because Tzetzes, who generally copies from Laertius, has it so. An anonymous
Writer of his Life, of which we have an Account in Photius, Cod.259, gives him
104 Years; and a medical Author, cited by Menagius on Laertius, allows him 117
Years: So that there are no less than 42 Years Difference between the lowest
and highest.
Pythagoras, or Democritus of Abdera, a City in Thrace, has been accounted, by
many, the Author of the Atomical Philosophy, on which Epicurus afterward
built: But it is a Mistake; for, as Dr. Cudworth, Vossius, and others show, it
was much more ancient: And Cicero, de Not. Deorlib.1. mentions Leucippus as
prior to him in that Doctrine. He was contemporary with Socrates and Plato, but
kept himself a Stranger to Athens; having, as some say, never seen it. He seems
to have seen further into Nature, than any other Philosopher of his Age; but
all his own Writings are lost, save some Citations in Stobaeus, with some sew
others. But diverse Things are extant under his Name, of which none are genuine;
as of Chemistry, Charms, etc. Fabricius has also, in his Bi^lioth. Gr. Vol. 4,
published a Fragment upon Sympathy and Antipathy in Greek, said to be lately
discovered in a Library in Italy, as a genuine Piece of Democritus's; but, in
my Opinion, it not only discovers itself by its Silliness, but by the Words,
(...) O mighty Emperor, which occur about the midst of it: It therefore seems
rather to have been wrote under some of the Roman Emperors much later; unless
it was addressed to the King of Persia, which is not altogether improbable; for
Thrace submitted to those Monarchs, and Democritus's Father entertained Xerxes
himself when there: But further, it is wrote in the common, and not in the
Ionic Dialect, as all others of Democritus's Writings were. And of the same
kind we have diverse little Places under the same Name, in the Collection of
Greek Geoponics, or Hunsbandry, which were never wrote by this Democritus, though
some perhaps might by another of the Name. He was so intent on Discoveries in
Nature, that the said, he would prefer one to the Crown of Persia. He traveled
into Egypt, and over many (...) of Asia, in quest of Knowledge; and continued
very much abroad, till he was 80 Years old; then retiring and consining himself
much, he applied himself to the Diffection of Animals, and to consider the
minute Parts of their dead Bodies. The City of Abdera hereupon thinking him
mad, and having a great Value for him, sent unknown to him an Embassy to the
great Physician Hippocrates, to come to cure him. He came at their Call, though
it was no very small Voyage; and after some Discourse with Democritus, declared
to the People, That he was the only Man he found truly in his Senses in the
Place. There is extant a long and pleasant Letter of Hippocrates amongst his
Works, giving a particular Narrative of the whole Affair; though some of late,
and others formerly, suspected whether it be genuine. Democritus thought all
the Cares of Life Folly, and therefore always laughed at them. Plato had such
an Abhorrence of his Corpuscular Philosophy, though it is now allowed on all
hands to be the only true, that he has never so much as once mentioned him in
his Writings. Laertius and Lucian agree, that he lived to the Age of 104 Years:
And Censorinus says, he lived to near the Age of Gorgias, which was noted
before to be 108 or 107. Democritus used to say, To advise well, to speak well,
and to act well, were the three great Points Men should study.
Democritus, or Plato's Character is so well known, that much need not be said
of him. Dacier has largely wrote his Life, and prefixed it to his French
Version of the Select Dialogues, published in 2 Vols. since done into English.
I shall briefly observe, that he was the Son of Aristo, born at Athens the 3d
Year of the 87th Olympiad, 430 Years before Christ. He applied himself in his
Youth to the genteeler Exercises, as Athletics, Painting, Music and Poetry; in
which last we have some small Things of his that are good. He also served in
the Wars, at 20 Years of Age: But quitting all these, on observing the solid
Wisdom of Socrates, he gave himself entirely up to him. AElian (Var. Hist. lib.
3.27.) says, that the Night before Plato's Father came to recommend his Son to
Socrates's Care, he ( Socrates) dreamed, that a young Swan flew from the Altar
in the Academy, dedicated to Cupid, into his Bosom, and from thence flew up to
the Heavens, singing so sweetly, as to charm both Men and Gods. He traveled
into Egypt, and then to Italy, to see Archytas the Pythagorean, as is mentioned
in this Piece of Cato, and to converse with others of that Sect. He was thrice
in Sicily, chiefly on Dion's Account. It Is agreed he died in the 81st or 82d
Year of his Age. The Christian Fathers admired him much. Vid. Aug. de Civ. Dei,
lib. 8. c. 4, and seq.
Plato, or Socrates his Character is also well known. M. Charpentier, one of
the first Members of the French Academy, has excellently wrote his Life; which
is in English prefixed to Byshe's Translation of Xenophon's 4 Books of the
Memorable Things of Socrates, with his 5th of Oeconomics. He was born the 3d
Year of the (...) Olympiad, and condemned and put to Death the 1st of the 95th
Olympiad, aged 70 Years. He never wrote any thing that was published; but Plato
made him one of the Interlocutors in most of his Dialogues.
Socrates, or those who came afterward Zeno was of Cittium, in the Island
Cyprus. He followed Merchandise in his Youth, and coming to Athens with a Cargo
of Purple and other Phaenician Goods, he lost his Ship and all on board, but
saved himself. Going on shore, he went into a Bookseller's Shop, where hearing
the Man reading some Pieces of Xenophon, he asked whether and where any such
Men were then to be found; ( Crates happening at that time to be passing the
Shop) Yes, says the Man, there goes one of them, pointing to Crates: Zeno
immediately followed and accosted him, and from that Day became his Disciple.
He plied his Studies exceeding close, gained great Repute, and was the Founder
of the Sect of Stoics, so called from Stoa, a Portico in which their Lectures
were held. He wrote many Books, but they are all lost. He said, the best Voyage
he had ever made, was that in which he had lost all. If he died (as Eusebius
says Gr. Chron. p. 182) the 1st of the 129th Olympiad, he must have been born
the 3d of the 109th, i. e. 342 Years before Christ; for he lived 98 Years, as
both L^c^tius and Lucian say, in perfece Health; and then stumbling as he went
out of the Door of his School, in the Words of a Greek Verse he said aloud, Why
do you call, I come: Upon which he went home, abstained from Food and died; and
was succeeded in the School by the following
Zeno and Cleanthes of Assus in Lxsia in Asia Minor, came to Athens exceeding
poor, having only four Drach^as (about (...) Sterling.) in his Pocket: There
hearing Zeno discourse, he applied himself wholly to him. To maintain himself,
having attended in the School all the Day, he wrought at Nights in drawing
Water for the Gardens, and in grinding or bolting for the Baker; and keeping
himself hearty and in good Case, while he was not observed to do any thing in
the Day, and was known to have no Estate, he was called on by Areopagus (a
great Court at Athens) to render them (according to an excellent Law of theirs)
an Account how he lived; which he did by calling the Gardener and Baker, for
whom he wrought, to witness for him. The Court were so pleased with this, that
they ordered ten Minae (about L. 31. 5. Sterling.) of the public Money to be
given him, which his Master Zeno persuaded him not to accept. But Autigonus,
King of Macedon, afterward gave him much more. He used to pick up dry
Shoulder Blade Bones of Oxen, to take down his Master's Lectures on, for want
of Paper, or of the other Materials then in Use for Writing. He succeeded Zeno
in his School, and grew into very high Esteem with the Athenians. He lived to
the Age of 99 Years; then having a Swel^^ng rise on his Lip, and being ordered
by the Physicians to (...) two Days, in order to (...) the Humor; having (...)
so, he began to consider, what further (...) he had in Life; and thereupon
resolved, since he had (...) to (...), he would eat no more at all; but (...)
that Day a Letter from a distant Friend, (...) a (...) of Service of him, he
eat enough to enable him to go abroad and do that Business; which having (...)
he returned, wholly abstained from Food, and died.
Cleanthes, or he, whom you yourselves have seen in Rome, Diogenes, called the
Babylonian, is mentioned by Cicero in diverse Places of his Works. He was a
Hearer of (...), who succeeded Cleanthes before mentioned, and the next in that
School. The succession was thus:

The Old or First Academics,

1. Plato, 2. Speusippus, 3. Xenocrates, 4. Polemo, 5. Crates and Crantor,
carried on the Academic School.

Stoi^s,

Under Crates Sprung, 6. Zeno, 7. Cleanthes, 8. Chrysippus, 9. Diogenes.

This Diogenes, together with Carneades the Academic (of the 2d School) and
Critolaus the Peripatetic, were sent jointly by the City of Athens (in the
599th Year of Rome, or 155 Years before Christ) to the Senate to (...) off a
Fine of 500 Talents [93,750 L. Sterling.] laid on them, upon the Complaint of the
Oropians, or at least a Mitigation of it, The youth of Rome hearing them,
especially Carneades speak, were so taken with their Eloquence, that they
applied themselves with the utmost Eagerness to the Study of it. Cato observing
this, though he must then have learned Greek himself, being about 80 Years of
Age, and apprehending the Consequence, if the Youth declining the severer
Institutions of their Ancestors, should run into the Novelties, and study the
Arts of Greece, prevailed with the Senate to send those Gentlemen a going;
which they did, with a favorable Answer, remitting, as some say, four Fifths
of the Fine. [See Plutarch in Cato, and Suppl. Livij. lib. 47. 25.] I find this
Diogenes's Age mentioned by none but Lucian, who says he died at 89 Years. Aul.
Gellius, lib. 7. 14. Macrobius Sat. lib. I. 5. Seneca de Ira, lib. 3. all
mention these three.

In closing this Account of Old Men, I shall add, That It Is strange Cicero
should omit naming a Person he so much admired, as Theophrastus; who says, in
the Preface of his Characters of Vices, that he wrote them in the 99th Year of
his Age: And Ferome, in Epist. 2. ad Nepotianum, says, he lived to 107 Years,
and then complained he must die just as he began to be wi^e. I shall wind up
this whole Account of Long-livers, by observing, That notwithstanding it has
been said of diverse of them, that though they had wrote much, all their Books
were now lost; yet there are still extant three Greek Pieces, all wrote by
Persons living in the same City ( Athens) and in the same Age, each of whose
Authors was, at the Time of writing them, above 90 Years old, and two of them,
viz. the two last, near a hundred; these are Isocrates's Panathenaicus, and
Sophocles's Tragedy of Oedipus Coloneus, both mentioned before, and that which
I just now noted, Theophrastus's Characters, translated of late Years into
most, if not all, the politer European Languages. And the Reason why nothing
like this has appeared in these latter Ages, may deserve to be inquired into,
and considered. But the Observation I thought proper for this Place.


Diogenes the Stoic; I say, Were any of these disabled by Age, or did it oblige
them to Silence? Did they not all, without sinking under it, continue their
Studies as in Youth, to the last of their Days, and to an extreme Old Age? But
to insist no longer on those diviner Studies, that may perhaps communicate a
Vigor to both Mind and Body, and to descend to low and common Life; I can name
several old Countrymen of my particular Acquaintaintance in this Sabine
Neighborhood, who never on account of their Age, decline their Business; nor
ever have any considerable Work carried on, either in Planting, Sowing, Reaping
or Storing, but they are themselves at the Head of it: Though you may say, this
is not so much to be wondered at, in the Business of the Year, because (as It Is
said) no Man thinks himself so old, but that he may live one Year longer: But
this alone is not the Case with these Men I speak of; they take not Pains only
in such Work, as they may expect themselves to reap the Fruits of; but they
freely labor also in such as they are sure can produce none in their Time:
They raise Nurseries, and plant Trees, for the Benefit only of another
Generation, or, as our Statius Cecilius, a Poet of Rome, but an Insubrian, or
of Cisalpine Gaul by Birth, was Contemporary with Ennius, and died the next
Year after him. Cicero, or Cato, calls him here by both Names, but both note
the same Man. Vossius de Poetis Lat. These Quotations being from Comedy, are
not truly in Verse, and there^^ore not in Rhyme here.
Staticus expresses it in his Synephebi, "They plant to profit a succeeding
Age." Nor, if you ask one of these Men, for whom it is he is thus laboring,
will he be at any Loss to answer thus, I do it, he will say, for the Immortal
Gods, who, as they bestowed these Grounds on me, require at my Hands that I
should transmit them improved to Posterity, who are to succeed me in the
Possession of them.

CHAP. VIII.
THAT Poet was much just in what he said of an Old Man providing for his
Successor, than in this other Saying of his:

Indeed were Age with no more Ills attended
Than this alone, this were alone sufficient;
That many Things by living long we see
We never wished to see --
And I say, as probably, many Things we wished, but ^earce could hope, to see.
But are we exempt from this in Youth, more than in Old Age? Do not Men in all
Ages see Things happen that displease them? I take the same Poet to be yet more
in the wrong, where he says,

But this in Age I think the worst of all,
That old Foll^s find the World grows weary of them,
And they become a Burden to their Friends.
On the contrary, I say, rather a Pleasure, if it is not their own Faults: For,
as the wife and good are in Age delighted with the Company of young People of
Sense and good Inclinations, and nothing makes Age ^it lighter on them, than
the Regard and Esteem of such; so all young People, who desire to recommend
themselves to the World by a virtuous Life and solid Accomplishments, must of
course be pleased with the Opportunity of improving themselves by the Advice
and Informations of the most Experienced: And thus I judge it is, that I
observe you to be no less pleased with my Conversation, than I truly am with
yours. But you see that Old Age is so far from becoming languid and unactive,
that it is always stirring, ever employing itself about something or other;
generally indeed about such Things as the Person has been most conversant in,
in the former Part of his Life. Nay some are so very averse to Idleness, that
they rather choose to be learning something new, as Solon, one of those seven,
called the Wisemen of Greece, was Archon or Praetor of Athens, the 3d of the
46th Olympiad, 594 Years before Christ; and having done many great Services for
that Republic (though he was himself a Native of Salamis, an Island not far from
Athens) the People would have given him the absolute Command, but he refused
it. [ Diog. Laert.] At Athens as formerly at Rome, Debtors who could not pay,
were made Servants or Slaves to the Creditors; Solon having 7 Talents [L.1312.
10. Sterling.] due to him, remitted it; and caused all the Citizens in the same
Manner to remit their Debts. The City at that Time had only Draco's Laws, said
(because of their Severity) to be wrote in Blood: These he abolished, and gave
the People new ones, many of which were excellent. He foretold Pisistratus's
Usurpation, but was not believed: When that Man got Possession of the
Government, Solon went to Craesus, King of Lydia; his Conversation with whom is
well known: Pisistratus proved moderate in his Government, and invited Solon
back, but he declined to come. He wrote many Elegies, some Fragments of which
are extant. He died in Cyprus, at 80 Years of Age; Lucian says 100: His Body
was by his Order carried to Salamis, and buried in a Corn-Field, which he
required to be plowed over him. See further, Note 92.
Solon we see glorying of himself in his Elegies, that daily learning
something, he grew old: As I also did, who, when I was well advanced in Years,
applied myself to learn Greek, and studied both the Language and their
Literature with such Eagerness, as if my Thirst for them were never to be
satisfied; for I longed to be satisfied; for I longed to be acquainted with
their Affairs, and gained so much Knowledge in them, that from thence I have
been able to cite the several Examples you have heard from me: Nay so strong a
Bent I had that Way, that hearing Socrates in his Old Age had learned to play
on the Fiddle (for Music with them was a reputable Exercise) I had almost got
into the Humor of learning that too, but I declined it: However I took true
Pains in their other Studies.

CHAP. IX.
I MUST further say, that I do not now so much as wish to have the Strength of
Youth again (for this is another of the Charges against Old Age) more than I
wished in Youth for the Strength of an Ox or Elephant. For it is our Business
only to make the best Use we can of the Powers granted us by Nature, and
whatever we take in Hand, to do it with all our Might. How silly then, and
unworthy of a Man, was that of Milo, of Croton, a City of the Brutij in the
South of Italy, now in the Kingdom of Naples, was six times Victor at the
Olympic Games. Diverse odd Stories are told of his great Strength, as that he
carried a large Ox on his Shoulders, through the whole Olympic Field, as if it
had been a Lamb: It is commonly added, That he began with carrying a Calf, and,
continuing that Practice every Day with the same Creature, till it grew to its
full Size, gained Strength by it. Whence the Proverb, Taurum seret, qui vitulum
^ulit; He'li carry an Ox, that begins with a Calf; which sometimes is
interpreted to another Sense. What Solinus tells of him, is much stranger, That
with a Blow of his Fist he felled an Ox, and eat him all up she same Day. Aul.
Gellius, ^. 17. c. 16. gives this Account of his Death, That seeing a Tree
split down in Part, to try what Strength he had left, he attempted to rive it
quite asunder; and when he had forced it in Part, the Tree recovering itself,
bound his Hands in the Rist, and held him, being alone and without Help, till
he p^rish'd. -- But the Story Diodorus Siculus gives us, in which this Milo was
concerned, is much more worthy of Notice. Sybaris was a wealthy populous City,
in the Borders of Lucania and the Brutij, and had diverse others subject to it:
The Faction of one Telys (a Citizen of great Power) prevailing, 500 of the
principal Inhabitants were banished by him, and their Estates confiscated.
These fled to Croton, and to the Altars there for Refuge. Telys on hearing
this, by a Message required the Crotoniates to surrender them, or otherwise
they might expect a War. The Crotoniates long doubtful what to do, were
prevailed on by Pythagoras, then present, rather to depend on the Assistance of
the Gods, and hazard a War, than betray their Supplicants. The Sybarites
hereupon brought an Army of 300,000 Men into the Field; the Crotoniates met
them with 100,000, with Milo at their Head; fought the Sybarites, beat them,
and, giving no Quarter, cut ^l^ost the whole Army in the Battle and Flight to
Pieces; and utterly destroying the Town, put an End to their whole Dominion: So
that Sybaris was no more heard of, but in Story, by that Name; for Thetrium was
built by the Athenians in its Place. Strabo, an excellent Geographer, under the
Reign of Augustus C^esar, who, as well as Diodorus, relates this, says, That
these two Towns were but 200 Stadia, i.e. 25 Miles, distant from each other. --
The Action must have happened near the 50th Olympiad, and about 600 Years
before Christ. -- This was not necessary for illustrating Cicero; but my Design
in relating it, is to note the vast Populousness of some Countries in former
Ages. It Is true, that in those Times, War was not carried on by Mercenaries, as
now; but every Man from 16 to 60 was obliged to bear Arms. Many other
astonishing Instances may be given, of the vast Numbers of People in those
Times in Italy, Greece, Sicily, Egypt, Asia, etc. But nowhere more than in the
Old Testament, where it is said [2 Chronicles. c. 13.] that Abijah led an Army of
400,000 Men against Jeroboam, who met him with another of 800,000, and that
500,000 of the latter fell in the Battle; yet their two Cities were not 50
Miles distant from each other, nor their whole Dominions taken together; much
above thrice the Extent of Yorkshire.
Milo of Croton, who, when weakened with Age, beholding the Athletae (or
Wrestlers) at their Exercises, he looked on his own Arms, and with this
Expression, But these Arms are now dead that once -- fell a crying: But the
Trifler mistook; for not his Arms only, but rather himself was dead; since he
never had any thing valuable in him, but the Strength of his Back and Limbs;
and if these were gone, the whole Man were gone with them. I find no Sextus
AEmilius, in the Roman History; perhaps it should be M. AEmilius, that is
M^rcus AEmilius Lepidus, who was Consul the first time in the 507th Year of the
City, and was also Pontifex Maximus, Prince of the Senate, and Censor; and died
old, in the Year of Rome 602, about a Year or two before this Discourse was
held or supposed; for by Cato's being in his ^4th Year, as he says, that would
fall in the 603d of Rome. But the various Readings give L. AElius, one Perhaps
of that poor, but excellent Family of the AElij Tuberones, into which P.
AEmilius's second Daughter was married, as was observed in Note 24.
Sextus AEmilius never made such Complaint, nor Mentioned before in Note 27.
Titus Coruncanius, who lived many Years before him, nor Publius Licinius
Crassus I suppose, who was Consul in the Year 583; or rather his Father, of the
same Name, who was Consul in the 549th Year, and bore all the other great
Offices, as Pont.Max. and Censor; and died in the 571th of Rome. Livy, lib. 42.
c. 28. and lib. 39. c. 46.
Publius Crassus, more lately; whose Old Age was employed in framing and
drawing up Laws for their Country, and who appeared rather to improve in
Prudence and Knowledge to the last of their Days. I own indeed that the Orator
is not in all Respects so capable in Old Age as he was in Youth: For in that
Business, not only Skill and Abilities of the Mind are required, but also
Strength of Body and of the Lungs. Yet those who had a good Voice in their
Youth, will not wholly lose it in Age: For though it abates in Strength, it
acquires a kind of Softness and Fluency, that render it agreeable. You see my
Years, and yet I have not lost mine. But even when it becomes low, and in some
measure sails, the Gravity and Composure with which an Old Man sedately, yet
eloquently, delivers himself, not only draws Attention, but gains the Favor of
the Audience; or, if he cannot depend on his own Utterance, he may however put
it into the Mouth of a Scipio or a Laelius, and do good Service with it. For,
what can be more honorable, what more desirable in Life, than to see Old Men
waited on by Numbers of the Young, making their Court to them for their Advice
and Instruction? For none, certainly, will deny, that the Aged are the best
qualified for instructing of Youth, and training them up in the Knowledge, as
well as animating them to the Discharge of every important Duty in Life; than
which there can be nothing of greater Moment and Consequence, nor of greater
Advantage to the Public. And indeed I have often thought See Note 97.
Cneius Scipio and Publius Scipio, and your two Grandfathers, See Note 24.
L. AEmilius and See Note 7 and 29.
P. Africanus, extremely happy on this Account, when I have seen them walk thus
attended by the young Nobility of our City, who seemed entirely to depend on
them. And I must ever think, that all those who spend their Time in improving
others in Knowledge, and teaching the nobler Arts, when their natural Strength
of Body fails them, are entitled to our highest Regard and Esteem; though it is
undoubtedly true, that even this Decay is oftener owing to some unhappy Courses,
and living too fast in Youth, than to the natural Effects of Old Age alone. For
a libidinous and intemporate Life in Youth, will unavoidably deliver over the
Body languid and enervate to succeeding Old Age. Cyrus in his Dying-Speech, as
given us by Xenophon, denies that he ever found himself weaker in his Old Age,
or less capable of performing any Duty, than he had been in his younger Years.
And when I was a Boy, I remember Lucius Caecilius Metellus was the first time
Consul in the 502d Year of Rome, 250 Years before Christ, when, commanding in
Sicily in the first Punic War, he defeated Asdrubal the Carthaginian General,
killed 20,000 of his Men, with 26 Elephants, and took above a hundred, which he
presented to Rome for a Show. Eutrop. lib. 2. He was second time Consul in 507;
and, by what is said here, he must have been made Pontifex in 511, and have
lived to 533, at which Time Cato must have been only 14 Years old.
Lucius Metellus, who, having been created Ponti^ex Maximus.) The Romans, though
they did not practice all the little Fopperies of the Greeks in their Religion,
as Diod. Siculus notes; yet not only the People, but the Government itself,
were as Superstitious as any in the World; as was observed at Note 19: Which
was principally owing to the solemn Institutions of their second King, Numa
Pompilius, who, during his long Reign of 43 Years, applied himself to little
besides. He appointed an Order of Priesthood, of which he made 4 Chief
Pontiffs, who took their Titles [as Plutarch and Varro say] from their having
the Charge of their great wooden Bridge over Tiber: These were afterward
increased to 9, and again to 15: They were chosen out of the greatest Men of
Rome for Authority in the State; they held their Offices for Life; the
Succession was by Election, and generally made by their own College: Yet the
Choice was twice put into the Power of the People by their Tribunes; but was
soon after the first time restored to the College by Sulla, and the 2d time
Caesar, having gained the absolute Power, took it from the People; and making
himself Pontifex Maximus, all his Successors in the Empire constantly bore the
Title, even after they became Christians, till Gratian, about the Year of
Christ 380, rejected it.
Pontifex Maximus four Years after his second Consulate, continued his
Presidence in that College twenty-two Years, appeared to the last as vigorous,
as if he had not been sensible of any Decay. I need say nothing of myself; though
you know it is a Privilege allowed old People to talk of themselves.

CHAP. X.
FOR do not you observe in Homer, how Nestor is on all Occasions glorying of
his own former Exploits? For he lived, it is said, to three times the common Age
of Man; that is, He lived to see three successive Generations: And yet he had
no Reason to apprehend his being thought tiresome on these Subjects; since (as
Homer says) his Discourse flowed more sweet than Honey from his Tongue: And
herein bodily Strength had no Share or Concern at all. Yet the Great Agamemnon,
King of Mycenae in Peloponesus, and Brother of Menelaus, was General of all the
Forces of the Greeks, that went against Troy. He makes this Wish, in Homer's
Iliad B. or Book 2. v. 372 in the Greek; in English thus, by A. Pope, v. 440.

To him the King, How much thy Years excel
In Arts of Council, and of speaking well:
Oh would the Gods, in Love to Greece, decree
But ten such Sages as they grant in thee,
Such Wisdom soon should Priam's Force destroy,
And soon should fall the haughty Towers of Troy.

Commander of all the Greeks, never once wished, that he had ten Men in the
Camp of Ajax's Strength and Courage, but ten such as Nestor: For by the
Assistance of such Counselors, he doubted not but Troy would soon fall. But to
return. I am now in my Eighty-fourth Year, and I wish indeed, I could boast the
same of myself as Cyrus did. Yet this I can truly say, that though I have not the
same Strength of Body as formerly, when I Both Plutarch, in the Life of Cato,
and C. Nepos say, he went into the Service at the Age of 17; and we saw before
at Note 13, that he was in it at the Retaking of Capua in his 20th Year. He
went Quaestor in his 30th Year, with Scipio Africanus, into Sicily and Afric,
where (his Office engaging him in the Business of the Public Accounts, and
Scipio being of a free Temper and a generous Disposition) they widely
disagreed; in so much that Cato, repairing to Rome, and there applying himself
to Q. Fabius Maximus, whom he principally chose [as we saw before at Note 11]
for his Patron, this Affair, together with a Complaint of the Locrians, a
People situate near Sicily, was laid before the Senate; and being highly
exaggerated by Fabius, a Praetor and two Tribunes were appointed, and very
close Orders given them to inquire into Scipio's Conduct: Who returning,
confirmed the Complaint of the Locrians; but in relation to Scipio, as Plutarch
gives it, in the Life of Cato, they reported, that when not otherwise engaged,
he took his Diversion and enjoyed himself with his Friends; but at the same
time he neglected no Business. Livy, on the other hand, who is much larger in
his Account of the Whole [Bo. 29. c. 22.] without mentioning Cato at all, but
making Fabius the chief Complainant, represents those Ambassadors charmed with
the excellent Order they found both the Fleet and Army in, of which they made
Report to the Advantage of Scipio in the highest Degree. -- Scipio embarked for
Afric in the 550th Year of Rome, when Cato must have been about 30 Years old.
He was Consul in the 559th, and had Spain for his Province, where he obtained
signal Victories over the Spanish Inhabitants, (for the Carthaginians, in the
late Peace made 6 Years before, had entirely surrendered to Rome, and quitted
all their Pretenses to Spain) and the next Year, on his Return to Rome, viz.
560, he led a Triumph for these Victories. Three Years after this he went
Tribunus militum, or Tribune of the Soldiers [generally of the Infantry, a kind
of Major General of the Foot] under Manius Acilius Glabrio, one of the Consuls,
in the 563d of Rome, into Macedon and Thessaly, to oppose Antiochus Magnus,
King of Syria; who, under Pretense of asserting the Liberties of Greece (for
which there was no Occasion, since T. Q. Flaminius, as in Note 3. had put the
Greeks in Possession of these five Years before) made War against the Romans;
and posting himself in the famous Straits of Thermopylae (where Leonidas, and
300 Lacedaemonians, opposing Xerxes so gallantly, died) was by Cato's Conduct,
in surmounting the Clifts, entirely defeated. He was chosen Censor 11 Years
after his Consulship, in his 50th Year; on which Livy, Bo. 39. as quoted before
at Note 7. is large. As to his Age, as he was born [as in Note 12] in the 520th
Year of Rome; and Cicero in his Brutus gives the Consuls of the Year he died
in, who by the Fasti were so in the 605th Year; he should have died, according
to that Account, in his 85th Year: But this directly contradicts the Historian
Livy, whose Business it was more exactly to consult and consider the Annals,
and who [at Note 7] positively says, he impleaded S. Galba in his 90th Year;
and C. Nepos, another good Historian, says, he was engaged in Public Affairs
80 Years; by which he should have lived to near 100 Years. These Historians
therefore, are most to be depended on: For Cicero has been observed in some
other Cases to miss in his Computations.
first served in the Punic War, or when I was Quaestor in it; or when Consul in
Spain; or when Tribune to the Consul Glabrio, I fought at Thermopylae: Yet, as
you see, Age has not yet wholly unstrung me. The Senate finds no Defect in such
Abilities as are proper for that Place; these are not wanting at the The Rostra
was a public Place in Rome, where the Orators, and those who spoke to the
People on any public Affair, whether in relation to the Laws or Judgments,
and c. delivered what they had to say. This Name Rostra, was given it, from its
being built up with the Beaks of the Ships, that the Romans, on taking Antium,
a Seaport Town to the South-east of the Mouth of Tiber, and destroying their
Fleet, brought as Trophies to Rome. vid. Live. l. 8. c. 14. in fine. And not as
Lipsius says, ( de Magnitud. U. Romae, lib. 3. c. 8.) from those gained at the
Battle of Antium, fought by Augustus some Years after this Discourse was wrote.
Rostra; nor am I wanting to my Friends or my Clients. For I never could
approve of that old Proverb, though commended (I know) by some, which bids us be
old betimes, if we would contintinue old long. On the contrary I would rather
choose to be old for a less Time, or die sooner, than to make myself old before
I truly am. I therefore keep myself constantly employed; and no Man, I believe,
ever yet found me quite idle. But I have not the Strength of one of you; nor
have you the Strength of This was some Officer then noted for his great
Strength, not elsewhere mentioned, that I know of.
Pontius the Centurion; is he therefore to be preferred to you? He who has but
a moderate Share of Strength, and applies it properly to make the best Use of
it, as far as it will go, I assure you will rarely have Occasion to complain
for want of more. Milo is said to have entered the Olympic Field carrying an Ox
on his Back: Now, if the Choice were given you, which would you prefer, Milo's
Strength of Body, or Pythagoras's Abilities of Mind? In short, while you have
Strength, use it; when it leaves you, no more repine for the want of it, than
you did when Lads, that your Childhood was past; or at the Years of Manhood,
that you were no longer Boys. The Stages of Life are fixed; Nature is the same
in all, and goes on in a plain and steady Course: Every Part of Life, like the
Year, has its peculiar Season: As Children are by Nature weak, Youth is rash
and bold; staid Manhood more solid and grave; and so Old Age in its Maturity,
has something natural to itself, that ought particularly to recommend it. I
suppose, Scipio, you hear how your Grandfather's Host Massinissa, Son of Gala,
King of the Massylians, a Nation of the Numidians in Africa. His Story is
extream'y remarkable. The two Scipio's in Spain, mentioned before at Note 50,
but largely spoke of in Note 97. sent Legates to Syphax, King of the Numidians,
to engage his Friendship to the Romans; in which they succeeded. The
Carthaginians Provoked at this, prevailed with Gala to make War upon Syphax;
which he accordingly did, by sending his Son Massinissa, a Youth of great
Spirit, though but 17 Years of Age, with an Army against him. This young General
entirely defeated Syphax; and being in the Interest of the Carthaginians, he
went over as their Ally into Spain where he very much contributed to the
Overthrow of the Scipio's. [Pag. 63.] His Father Gala dying, his Brother
^Esalce Masinissa's Uncle, succeeded him; and on his Death soon after, Gala's
Son Capusa, who, being young and weak, one Mezetulus of the royal Blood,
rebelled against him, raised an Army, and fought the young King, who with most
of his Army was cut off. Yet Mezetulus on his Removal claimed not the Crown to
himself, but set up Lacumaces, another younger Son of Gala, to whom he
pretended to be Guardian. Masinissa (who objected not to his Uncle ^Esalce's
Succession to his Father, for so the Law of their Country appointed) hearing in
Spain of his Uncle's and Cousin's Death, hastened over to Afric, landed in
Mauritania, and obtained of its King Bocchar, 4000 Men, with whom he marched
into Massylia; and meeting there only 500 of his Countrymen, who went to
receive him, he, according to Promise, dismissed his Escort, the Moors. His
Numbers increasing, and gaining one Battle, Lacumaces fled to Syphax.
Masinissa, doubting his own Strength, proposed an Accommodation; of which
Syphax approved at first, till Asdrubal of Carthage, showed him the Danger of
such a Neighbor, and prevailed with him to carry on the War. This he
accordingly did, and overthrew Masinissa, who with a few about him, fled to the
Mountains, and there lived on Plunder. Syphax sent a Commander (whose Name also
was B^c^har) with Forces against him, who entirely defeated and pursued him to
a large rapid River: Masinissa, with four more, took it; two of whom were
carried away by the Violence of the Stream, and perished; but Masinissa, though
sorely wounded, with the other two escaped. B^c^har and his Men, believing them
all lost, reported the Matter so to Syphax, to his and his People's no small
Joy, as well as to that of Asdrubal. But Masinissa, as soon as he had recovered
of his Wound, to their (...) Mo^ti^ication, and to the equal Joy of his
Friends, appeared again, as if he had dropped out of the Clouds, and in a little
Time collecting an Army of 6000 Foot and 4000 Horse, was ready to oppose
Syphax; who then began to consider M^sinissa as an Enemy that would require h^s
utmost Thought and Care. He therefore raised a larg^ (...), marched himself
against him, and sending his Son (...) with another Body round, to attack him
on the Rear while he himself engaged in the Front, Masinissa was entirely
routed again; and it was only by his singular Dexterity, that he narrowly
escaped the great Diligence Vermina used in the Pursuit: But from that Time he
was obliged to keep private and at a Distance, till the Romans landed. In this
Time Asdrubal, apprehending the Romans might as formerly make a Descent on
Afric, judged it necessary to bring Syphax into a strict Alliance with
Carthage: For which end he gave him his Daughter Sophonis^a, a fine Woman, in
Marriage. Scipio landing, sent Laelius into the Country before him. Masinissa
then presently appeared; and joining him, drew great Numbers of Numidians to
their Assistance. Their first Battle was with Syphax, whom they defeated, and
took himself, with his beautiful Queen Sophonisba, Prisoners. She fell at
Masinissa's Feet, imploring his Mercy, as of the same Country with her, and
that she might rather die, than be delivered up to the Pride of the Romans.
This he not only promised; but, charmed with her Looks and Behavior, married
her himself the same Day. Scipio highly offended at this, reproved him for it;
and he knowing his Dependence must be wholly on the Romans, to be as just to
his Bride as lay in his Power, and to keep his Word to her, sent her a Bowl of
Poison with a proper Message, which she bravely took, and, as she desired, died
free. This is all related by Livy, lib. 29. Massinissa, by the Favor of the
Romans, greatly enlarged his Dominions. He reigned 60 Years; was always
faithful to the Romans, and left this younger Scipio his Executor. Live. lib.
50. Epit.
Massinissa, now at the Age of Ninety Years, employs his Time; that it is
indifferent to him, whether he walks or rides; if he sets out on a Journey on
Foot, he will not mount; or if he gets on Horseback, he will not light; that
no Rain nor Weather can oblige him, when abroad, to cover his Head; and that,
being thin of Body, he is so active, as in his own Person to discharge all the
several Duties of his Station, as a King and a General. You see therefore, that
constant Exercise with Temperance, will still preserve a competent Share of our
pristine Vigor.

CHAP. XI.
BUT allowing it, that Old People lose their Strength, I say again, they do not
want it. The Laws, their Administration, the Institutions and Discipline of our
Ancestors, public and private, are their proper Business; but from Employments
that require Strength of Body in their Execution, we are exempted. It is
therefore so far from being the Case with us, that more is expected from us
than we are able to perform, that, to say the Truth, there is much less. But it
will be alleged, perhaps, that some People are so weakened with Age, that by it
they are rendered incapable of every kind of Business whatsoever: To which I
answer, That this is not so much the Fault of Age, as of Constitution, or the
want of Health, which happens to all Ages. How weakly was Publ. Africanus's
Son, he who adopted you, Scipio: He was all his Life so exceedingly infirm,
that he scarce ever knew what Health was: Though had he not been unfortunate in
that particular, he might otherwise have proved another Glory to our State; for
he had not only all his Father's Greatness of Soul, but the further Advantage
also of having that adorned with the politest Literature. What Wonder is it
then, if some Old Men labor under Weakness, since the Youngest, we see, cannot
escape it? We must prepare ourselves, my Friends, against Old Age; and as it is
advancing, endeavor by our Diligence to mitigate and correct the natural
Infirmities that attend it: We must use proper Preservatives, as we do against
Diseases; great Care must, in the first Place, be taken of our Health; all
bodily Exercise must be moderate, and especially our Diet; which ought to be of
such a kind, and in such Proportion, as may refresh and strengthen Nature,
without oppressing it. Nor must our Care be confined to our Bodies only; for
the Mind requires much more, which without it will not only decay, but our
Understanding will as certainly die away in Old Age, as a Lamp not duly
supplied with Oil. The Body, we know, when overlaboured, becomes heavy, and, as
it were, jaded; but it is Exercise alone that supports the Spirits, and keeps
the Mind in Vigor. Hence it is, that you see Old Men disadvantageously
represented by Caecilius, and other Comic Poets on the Stage, when the
Characters of weak and credulous, or dissolute Old Fellows, are exposed to
Contempt and Ridicule: But these are the Vices only of such as, when gray with
Years, abandon themselves to Idleness and Extravagance, and not of Old Age
itself. For as Wantonness and loose Desires are more peculiar to Youth than to
the Aged; and yet not to all Youth, but to such only as are by Nature viciously
inclined, or have been loosely educated; So that silly Dotishness, that is
imputed to Old Age, will be found only in Persons of weak and abject Spirits.
Appius Claudius Caecus, mentioned before. See Note 28.
Appius had four stout Sons, and five Daughters; yet though he was very old, and
blind besides, he was able not only to govern that great Family, but also to
manage his large Dependencies of Clients: He kept his Mind ever intent upon his
Affairs, without flagging or bending under his Age, and maintained not only an
Authority, but a Command over his People: His Servants stood in Awe of him; his
Children revered him, and they all loved him; and that whole Family constantly
kept up to the sober and strict Discipline derived to them by Succession from
their Ancestors. Thus Old Age is ^ver honorable, where it takes Care to
support its proper Rights, and gives them not weakly away, but asserts them to
the last. For, as we commend such Youths, as show something of the Solidity of
Age; so we do the same by the Aged, who express the Liveliness of Youth: And
whoever pursues this Method, though he may become old and decayed in Body, will
never be so in Mind, nor be found so in his Understanding. I am now on the
seventh Book of my Origines, Cato's Origines was a Work much esteemed by the
Romans, but is lost to us. C. Nepos informs us, that its first Book contained
the Actions of the People of Rome, (probably to the Time of the first Punic or
Carthaginian War) the 2d and 3d gave the Origin or first Rise of all the Cities
of Italy; the 4th was the History of the first Punic War; the 5th gave the
second, which was in his own Time; in the following he related their other
Wars, till the Conquest of Lusitania, now Portugal; which I judge to have been
the Conquest mentioned by Livy, lib.41. c. 11. for which L. Posthumous
triumphed about 20 Years before this Discourse; for I find Sergius Galba, whom
Nepos names, nowhere mentioned in relation to these Wars.
wherein I am collecting all the Monuments of Antiquity of every kind. I am
also making out those Orations, that I formerly delivered in pleading the
several Causes I defended. I am further treating of the Civil Law, and of that
of the Augurs and Pontiffs. I read much Greek, and, agreeable to the
Pythagorean Precept, the better to exercise my Memory, I recollect at Night
what I have heard, said or done in the Day. These are the Methods I pursue to
keep my Mind employed; and while with a constant and assiduous Application I
continue these Exercises, I cannot say I am sensible of any Want of Strength. I
am still able to serve my Friends; I come duly to the Senate, and there propose
such Matters of Weight, as I have long pondered and digested; and I support
what I propose with Arguments, to which bodily Strength can contribute nothing.
And if for want of a competent Share of that Strength, I should be rendered
incapable of all this; yet I could please myself, even on my Couch, with
running them over in my Thoughts. And whoever will pursue the same Methods, and
practice thus, will scarce be sensible of the Advances of Old Age, but
gradually sliding on, and insensibly decaying, without any sudden Changes, will
at last drop like ripe Fruit, or go off like an expiring Light.

CHAP. XII.
THE third Charge against Old Age was, That it is (they say) insensible to
Pleasure, and the Enjoyments arising from the Gratifications of the Senses. And
a most blessed and heavenly Effect it truly is, if it eases of what in Youth
was the sorest and cruellest Plague of Life. Pray listen, my good Friends, to
an old Discourse of Archytas, of Tarentum, was of Pythagoras's School,
contemporary with Plato, whose Life he saved when Dionysius, the Tyrant of
Syrocuse, intended, for some free Discourse, to put him to Death. He governed
the Tarentines, and seven times commanded their and their Confederates Armies.
He was a great Mathematician and Mechanic, and made a Wooden Pigeon that would
by Springs fly about in the Air. A. Gellius, lib. 10. 12. Diog. Laertius,
Strabo, Suidas, AElian, Athenaeus, speak of him. H^race remembers him also, in
that Ode, beginning with, Te maris et terrae numeroque carentis arenae
Mensorem cohibent Archyta -- Lib. 1. Od. 28.

Archytas the Tarentine, a great and excellent Man in his Time, which I learned
when I was but young myself, at Tarentum, under Fabius Maximus, at the Time he
recovered that Place. "The greatest Curse, the heaviest Plague, said he,
derived on Man from Nature, is bodily Pleasure, when the Passions are indulged,
and strong inordinate Desires are raised and set in Motion for obtaining it.
For this have Men betrayed their Country; for this have States and Governments
been plunged in Ruin; for this have treacherous Correspondences been held with
public Enemies: In short, there is no Mischief so horrid, no Villainy so
execrable, that this will not prompt to perpetrate. And as Adultery, and all
the Crimes of that Tribe, are the natural Effects of it; so of course are all
the fatal Consequences that ensue on them. It Is owned, that the most noble and
excellent Gift of Heaven to Man, is his Reason: And it is as sure, that of all
the Enemies Reason has to engage with, Pleasure is the most capital, and the
most pernicious: For where its great Incentive, Lust, prevails, Temperance can
have no Place; nor under the Dominion of Pleasure, can Virtue possibly subsist.
That this might appear more plain, he desired his Hearers to form to themselves
the Idea of a Person in the highest Raptures, enjoying the most exquisite
Pleasures that could be conceived; and then try whether they could so much as
imagine, such a Person in that State of Enjoyment, capable of Reflection, or
making any more Use of his Reason, than if he were entirely divested of it. He
therefore insisted, that nothing was more detestable, nothing more directly
destructive to the Dignity of Man, than the Pursuit of bodily Pleasure, which
it is impossible to indulge to a Height, and for a Continuance, without damping
or extinguishing all the brighter Faculties of the Soul, and all the Powers and
Light of the Understanding. This Discourse our Host Nearchus of Tarentum, who
had continued firm in the Roman Interest after that City was betrayed to
Annibal, said, Archytas had used to Caius Pontius the Samnite, the Father of
Pontius This was in the Year of Rome 433. The Story is so remarkable, and may
be so usefully applied, that it is well worth knowing. The Samnites were the
toughest Enemies the Romans had to deal with in Italy. They had been at War
with them at times for 30 Years; and now resolving, if possible, entirely to
subdue them, the two Consuls here named, led the better Part of the Forces of
Rome against them. Pontius used Means to deceiye and decoy them, till they
unwarily marched into a Vale, surrounded on all Sides, but at two De^iles, with
thick unpassable Forests and Mountains, and coming to the Outlet, they found
it closed up with vast Trees and Stones heaped together by the Samnite Army,
who, much contrary to the false Informations, artfully given the Roman Consuls
by suborned Shepherds, were there watching their Enemy; and when they would
have returned by the Way they came in, they found that Entrance in the same
Condition with the other. The Romans thus shut up, and in a manner besieged,
could find no possible Means of extricating themselves, or to prevent their
starving. The Samnite General Pontius having them at this Disadvantage, sent to
his Father Herennius Pontius, who was in great Repute for his Virtue and
Wisdom, for his Advice what he should do with the Enemy then in his Power. The
Father advised his Son to dismiss them honorably, and make a Peace with Rome;
for this generous Action would for ever engage the Friendship of the Romans.
The Son could not think of entirely giving up such an Advantage, and therefore
sent to his Father again, desiring him to consider further of it. He then
advised the General to put them all to the Sword; for by this, Rome would for a
long Time be so weakened, that their Neighbors might for that Time at least
live in Peace. This last Advice the Son thought too cruel, and, by the Advice
of the Army, sending for his Father, prayed his Presence; who being very old,
to oblige his Son, came to the Camp in a Wagon, and there supported both Parts
of his Advice with Reasons, said he knew no Medium, and returned. But the Son,
resolving to take a middle Course, gave all the Romans their Lives concluded
Articles of Peace, to be confirmed by the Senate; took Hostages; but disarmed
them all, and obliged the whole Army, with the Consuls, to p^ss or creep sup
bastam, under the Pike; a Mark of the greatest Ignominy. And thus they all
returned home disarmed, in the utmost Confusion; which was also greater in the
City, than if they had been utterly defeated or destroyed. Postbumius the
Consul hereupon told the Senate, they were not obliged by what he and his
Colleague Veturius had done; advised that they who signed the Articles, might be
sent back bound to the Samnites, with the Officer called a Fecial, a kind of
Herald, to deliver them. This being done, and these Men delivered to Pontius
bound, Postbumius said, he was now no longer a Roman, but a Samnite; and having
his Feet at Liberty, kicked the Fecial Officer, and said, Now Rome has just
Cause to make War on the Samnites, since one of those People (meaning himself)
had violated the Law of Nations, and abused a sacred Officer of the Romans.
Pontius justly provoked at this Fraud and Prevarication of the Romans, in a
most reasonable Speech [as Livy, the Roman Historian, himself gives it, lib.
9.c.11.] refusing to receive the Consuls, highly upbraided the Romans for their
Breach of Faith, loudly expostulated with those present, and insisted, That if
they had any Regard to Justice, Honor, or for the Gods they swore by, they
should either ratify the Peace made on his giving the Army their Lives and
Freedom, or they ought to return to the same Place they had been by his Favor
delivered from, where their Arms should be all restored to them, to use again
as they pleased. And then he ordered those who were bound to be untied, and,
telling them he had nothing to say to them, the Samnites would now insist on
the Articles, which was all they had in Exchange for the whole Army of Rome;
bid them go about their Business. Accordingly they went home. The Romans
immediately carried on the War against them, in which Pontius had many
Engagements with them; but at length, upon an entire Defeat of his Army, by
Fabius Gurges, whom he had vanquished but a little before, he was taken
Prisoner by him, led in Triumph at Rome 25 Years after the other Action, and
ungenerously there put to Death. -- There is another Case in the Roman History,
exactly parallel to this; when Mancinus the Consul, being with his Army caught
by the Numantines in Spain, much in the same Manner, for making a Peace that
displeased the Senate, was sent back, and in the same Manner delivered to that
People, but refused by them; and then by a fresh Army, under the Command of
this great Man, but ill employed, Scipio AEmilianus, they were famished to
Death, and utterly destroyed; on no other Pretense, than to cover the Scandal
the Romans conceived they underwent in being so shamefully beaten.
who beat our Consuls Spurius Posthumous and Titus Veturius at Caudium; that
their Old Men had handed down the Relation to them, and that Plato of Athens
was present at the time; which is probable enough; for I find Plato was at
Tarentum the Year that There is no such Pair of Consuls together to be found in
the Roman Fasti. In the various Reading of the Text, there is, instead of L.
AEmilius and Appius Claudius, Lucius Camillus and Publius Claudius; who truly
were Consuls in the 400th Year of Rome: And this well suits Plato's Age; for he
must then have been about 42 Years.
Lucius AEmilius and Appius Claudius were Consuls. Now this Discourse I repeat
to you, that from hence you may learn, how much those, who cannot as they ought
in their Strength of Age resist the Allurements of Pleasure, are afterward
obliged to their Years, that cure them of their irregular Inclinations they had
not before the Power to correct. For all Voluptuousness is undoubtedly an Enemy
to Reason ^ it obstructs wise Counsels, blinds the Understanding, and is in its
own Nature inconsistent with true Virtue. It was with great Uneasiness to
myself, that when Censor, I returned This is touched in Note 3, but it requires
to be Further spoke to. Val. Maximus, l. 2. c. 9. gives the Story, much as
Cicero has it here; but Livy, the chief of the Roman Historians, delivers it
otherwise. He says, Lib. 39. c. 42. That Lucius Q. Flaminius, going with the
Army into Gaul, prevailed with a noted beautiful Youth (whom he calls Philip of
Carthage) on great Promises made to him, to go with him to the Camp: That the
Lad, in toying with the Consul, often used to upbraid him, that, to gratify
him, he had lost the Pleasure of the Shows of Gladiators [or Fencers] that were
then exhibiting in Rome: That as they were one Evening at Supper, and merry
over their Liquor, Word was brought to the Consul, That a noble Boian [these
were a People of Gaul] was come over with his Children to submit himself, and
crave the Protection of the Romans: That desiring to see the Consul himself,
the Gentleman was called in; and while he was addressing himself to him by an
Interpreter, Lucius asked his -- He-Miss, whether (since he complained of
losing the Sight of Gladiators dying at Rome) he would be pleased to see that
Gaul die there before him? That, the Lad jestingly consenting, Lucius taking
his Sword that hung by him, rose up and gave the Man, as he was speaking, a
Wound in the Head, and then, as he endeavored to escape, pursed and run him
through the Body. -- Livy gives this from Cato's own Speech, which he seems to
have then had by him; and blames another Historian, for delivering it wrong,
and only upon Hearsay, as by this of Livy, Cicero seems to have done here.
Plutarch tells it both Ways, in the Lives both of T. Flaminius and of Cato.
Lucius Flaminius, Brother to that Great Man Titus Flaminius, out of the
Senate, seven Years after he had himself been Consul. But I could not bear,
that such a scandalous Instance of his Dissoluteness should pass without public
Censure. For while he as Consul commanded the Army in Gaul, to please a lewd
Strumpet he carried with him, he caused one of the Prisoners who were under
Sentence of Death, to be brought in before them, and there, to gratify her in
her barbarous Request, that she might see a Man put to Death, he struck off his
Head on the Spot. His Brother Titus being then Censor, this was not in his Time
taken Notice of; but when Flaccus and I succeeded him, we judged it incumbent
on us, in Discharge of our Trust, to exert the Authority of our Office, and
brand with Ignominy an Action so detestable, that it not involved the Actor
himself in Infamy, but also cast a Reproach on the whole State.

CHAP. XIII.
I HAVE often heard our Old Men, who said they had it from their Elders,
relate, that Caius Fabricius, when he was sent Ambassador to Pyrr^us, to redeem
the Captives, was strangely surprised, when This Cineas, in studying Eloquence,
was a Hearer of the famous Orator Demosihenes of Athens, and was thought to
express his Manner the nearest of any of his Age. He afterward attended
Pyrr^us, who said of him, that he had gained more Places by Cineas's Eloquence,
than by his own Arms. Plutorch gives this fine Relation of him, That feeling
Pyrr^us bent on his Expedition into Italy, [see Notes 25,26.] taking a proper
Opportunity for it; These Romans, says Cineas to Pyrr^us, are accounted a very
brave People, and are said to have subdued many valiant Nations about them;
should it please God to grant us to conquer them, pray what are we to do next?
Why then, said Pyrr^us, all the rest of Italy will lie open to us: For when
once we have subdued Rome, no other Nation there will pretend to resist us; and
Italy, you know, as it is a rich and large Country, will be a noble
Acquisition. That it would, said Cineas; and pray, what are we to do next? Then
answered Pyrr^us, As Sicily lies close by it, and now since Agathocles's Death,
is all in Confusion, we will step over thither, and make that easily our own
also. And shall we rest there? said Cineas. No, answered Pyrr^us; Carthage and
Africa lie so near, and so tempting, that we must have these also; nor will it
be difficult, since Agathocles himself was once so near taking Carthage, and
with no very great Force neither. And what Course are we to take next? said
Cineas. Then you very well know, replied Pyrr^us, that those who have hitherto
given us so much Trouble, will no longer be able to oppose us: We shall get the
better of all our Adversaries. That Is very probable, said Cineas, when you have
made so many large Conquests, you may easily get Macedon, and reduce all Greece
to Reason: But after all these mighty Achievements, pray Sir, be pleased to
tell me what Use we are to make of them, and what is to follow next? Why then
truly, Cineas, said Pyrr^us, smiling, we'll sit down, be m^rry and drink, and
enjoy ourselves in Quiet with our Friends. And if that be all, answered Cineas,
pray, what hi^d^rs us from doing just the same, as Things now stand? You well
know, you have now, as much as you then would, all the necessary Means for
this, in your Power; and you may be as merry, a^ quiet, and enjoy your Friends
as much as you will ever be able to do, after all the vast Farigues and
Hazards, and Effusion of Blood, these Undertakings must necessarily be attended
with; and after you have not only involved infinite Numbers of People, who have
never offended you, in all the dire Calamities of War, but must also expose
your best Friends to numberless Dangers. -- Pyrr^us was not well pleased with
this Close. He proceeded, as has been noted, to Italy; and being there
disappointed, he passed over into Sicily, where he was more so; and returning
to Italy, he was there soundly beat by the Romans, and obliged to fly. At home
in Epirus and Crecce he continued restless; and at length, in Argos, had his
Brains beat out, by a Potsheard thrown from the Top of a House by an old Woman.
His Life is in Plutarch, which see.
Cineas the Orator, who attended Pyrr^us, told him, there was in Athens a great
Professor of Wisdom, who laid it down as his Grand Principle, that all we do
should be directed only to Pleasure; and that See Note 26.
M. Curious and See Note 27, and for Fabricius, Note 23.
Titus Coruncanius hearing this from Fabricius, used to wish, that Pyrr^us and
the Samnites could be converted to that Epicurus is meant here, who was then
living: For Laertius says, he was born the 3d of the 109th Olympiad, seven
Years after Plato's Death, and died in the 2d of the 127th Oly^^^ad, in the 72d
Year of his Age: He therefore must have lived nine Years after Pyrr^us's
Expedition into Italy. Epicurus had in his own Time a very ill Character given
him by the Philosophers of other Sects, and the same has through all succeeding
Ages stuck to him; but many think him much wronged. His Physics, or Opinions of
Nature, were grosily absurd in many Things; but his Morals, that are so much
decried, were very different from what they are generally accounted. He
proposed Pleasure, it is true, for the End of Action; but that Pleasure was to
consist in the Tranquillity of the Mind, and inward Satisfaction, and not in
voluptuous Enjoyments: For he is said to have been perfectly temperate himself,
and that all his Doctrine tended to the same. He wrote much, but nothing of his
remains, save what Lacrtius has in his tenth Book, which is wholly bestowed on
his Life and Doctrine. Gassendus explained it in some large Volumes.
Professor's Religion; for then it would cost Rome much less Trouble to master
them. M. Curious was for some Time Contemporary with Publius Decius Mus, was the
first time Consul in the 442d Year of Rome; and this 4th time, when he fell,
was in the 459th. The two Consuls Quintus Fabius Maximus [there were diverse
from time to time of that Name of the same Family] being the 5th time Consul,
and this Decius (as has been noted) the 4th, were engaged in a doubtful and
almost desperate Battle with the Gauls and Samnites; with whom two other
Nations, the Etrurians (or Tuscans) and the Umbrians, were also at the same
time Confederates against Rome. When the Fight had continued long, nearly equal
on both Sides, and at length the Gauls made some Impression on the left Wing
where Decius commanded, and his Men began to break and fly, nor could he by any
Means restrain them; invoking his Father's Name, who had before devoted
himself, he called to him the Pontiff that attended, to repeat to him the Form
to be used in Devoting; which he took in the same Manner his Father had done,
and in the same Manner also the Romans got the Day: For the flying Forces,
hearing what their General had done, rallied of themselves, and with new
Spirits vigorously attacked their Enemies, and bore all before them. -- To
devote one, I^ to offer him up as accursed for an atoning Sacrifice, for the
Safety of others: And the Method of it is curious enough to render it worth
knowing. We have it particularly in (...),in his Account of this Decius his
Father Devoting himself, [ Lib. 8. c. 9.] in the 414th Year of Rome; and it was
thus: The Romans and the Latins after a long (...), they drew out equal Forces
and engaged. Victory inch^^g to neither Side, and one of the Consuls, Decius,
almost despairing of it, resolved on a desperate Action, which he hoped might
secure it. He called on the (...) who was with him, to repeat before him the
(...) Form of Devoting; for he would offer himself up, he said, (...) an
Atonement for the Army. The (...) him to put on the Civic Gown; and covering
his Head, to put up his Hand within his Gown under his Chin, and treading on a
Weapon, to repeat these Words after him: O Janus, Jupiter, Father Mars,
Qu^^inus, B^llona! Ye Home Gods, Foreign Gods, Indigetes and lower Gods, who
have us and our Enemies in your Power! and ye Infernal Gods! I pray, (...) and
(...) you, that you will make good and prosper Strength and Victory to the
Roman People; and that you will confound, terrify and do to Death the Enemies
of the Romans! As I have now conceived in Words, so, for the Public Weal, Army,
Legions and Auxiliaries of the Roman People. I devote [or accurse] the Legions
and Auxiliaries of their Enemies, together with my self, to the Infernal Gods,
and to the Earth. This done, he sent Notice of it to the other Consul T.
Manlius. Then putting on his Armor and mounting his Horse, he rode into the
thickest of the Enemy, and carried Destruction before him, till he was cut in
Pieces: Which was one necessary Part of the Ceremony; for without it, all the
rest would have been void. And therefore, when this Man's Grandson Publius
Decius, being consul with Sulpicius, in the 2d Battle the Romans had with
Pyrr^us; and it was reported, that he, after his Grandfather's and Father's
Example, would also devote himself; Pyrr^us apprehensive left it might give
some Terror to his Men, sent Word to the Consul, that he should leave off
Fooling; for that he would take Order, if he attempted it, to disappoint him,
he should not fall in that Manner in the Field, but meet with a Death less to
his liking. He neither did, however, nor had proposed to attempt it. Livy, lib.
s. and (...) in Pyrr^us.
Publius Decius, who five Years before Curious was the first time Consul, had in
his own fourth Consulate devoted himself for the public Safety. Fabricius and
Coruncanius living in the same Age with him, must also have known him well. And
all these, not only by their own Conduct, showed their firm Persuasion, but
they were further confirmed in it by that Action of Decius, That there is
something truly great and excellent in its own Nature worthy to be contended
for, and which all good Men would, in Despite of all the Allurements of
Pleasure, for its own sake pursue, and labor to obtain. Thus I judged it
necessary to be the more full on this Head of Pleasure, and show the Dangers of
it, to the end you might clearly see, it is so far from being a Disadvantage to
Old Age, its Palling our Inclinations to Pleasure, that on the contrary it is
rather a great and valuable Blessing. For if it is in a good Measure dead to
the Enjoyments others find in Banqueting, sumptuous Feasts and Carousings, it
is freed at the same time from all the troublesome Effects of these; as Fumes,
Crudities, uneasy Sleep, or the want of it; with diverse other such like
Disorders. Yet as Nature has so ordered it, that Pleasure should have a very
strong Hold of us, and the Inclination to it appears deeply founded in our very
Composition, (and it is with too much Justice that the divine Plato calls it the
Bait of Evil, by which Men are caught as Fish with a Hook;) therefore, though
Age is not taken, nor can well bear, with those splendid sumptuous Feastings
and Revels, yet we are not so insensible to the Pleasures of Life, but that we
can indulge ourselves, and take a real Delight in sober and temperate
Entertainments with our Friends. I remember, when I was a Boy, I often saw The
Romans having had great Success for four Years against the Carthaginians, in
their first War with them, by Land; but lying exposed to them by Sea, as having
no Fleet, resolved to build one; and ordered the Consuls, of whom this Duillius
was one, to proceed to the Work; and in sixty Days ( Livy says) after the
Timber was fallen, they had [ incredible] 160 Ships of War completed, and at
Anchor: To furnish which with Men, those designed for the Service, were taught
all the Motions and Management of Oars, in which, while their Ships were
building, they were exercised on shore. But finding on Trial these Ships much
more unwieldy than those of their Enemies; to balance this, they contrived an
Engine placed at their Heads, by which, when closed in with another Ship, they
would grapple and hold her so fast, that she could not possibly get clear. They
framed also on the Engine a kind of Platform to stand on, and enter other Ships
by it. Thus they fought at Sea, as if they had been on Land, Hand to Hand with
their Enemies: And in the first Engagement, Duillius sunk 14 Ships, killing
3000 Men, and took 31 Ships more with 7000 Prisoners; for which he triumphed.
Caius Duillius, Marcus's Son, who gained the first Victory over the
Carthaginians at Sea, returning home from Supper with Torches and Music before
him; a Practice that he thought fit (though without any Precedent for it) to
continue in his private Station: So great was the Pleasure he gave himself,
though not without some Vanity, in keeping up the Memory of that great Action,
But why should I quote others, and not rather return and speak of myself? In my
Youth I had always a Set of select Companions; for those Societies or Clubs now
in Practice, took their Beginning when I was Quaestor, at the Time the Commonly
called Id^amater, the Idaean Mother. In the 549th Year of Rome, a little before
Annibal left Italy, the Roman Armies were seized with so violent a Sickness,
that they were in Danger of being all lost; nor were the Carthaginians clear
from it: And about the same Time dreadful Prodigies from the Heavens were seen,
as Raining Stones, (of which we hear so often in their History, that we may
reasonably believe they must (...) nothing but large Hail by it; for they
accounted even great Thunder-Storms at Denunciation of the (...) of their
Gods.) Those who had the Sibylls Books in keeping, consulting them on these
Calamities, said, they found an oracle there, declaring, that when a foreign
Enemy should invade Italy, the Country might be delivered from them, if the
Idaean Mother were brought from Pessinus to Rome. This was a Place in Phrygia
in Asia Minor. And (...) this the Romans fitted out five large Ships, with a
(...) Embassy to Attalus, the King of those Parts, to (...) the Favor. They
took the Oracle of Delphi in their Way, to consult that also, and know their
Success: The Answer was favorable, further telling them, "The worthiest Man of
Rome must be appointed to receive the Goddess into the City." Attalus, to
oblige the Romans, though they had then no Intercourse with Asia, granted their
Request; and showed them a great Stone, which the Inhabitants called by that
Name: And they brought her Divinity to the River Tiber, where Scipio Nessica
was appointed, as the best Man in Rome, to receive her. Thus Livy, Bo. 29. c.
10, and c. Herodian, who wrote the History of the Reigns of ten Emperors, about
the Year of Christ 240, in the Life of Comm^dus, tells a long Story of that
Goddess, and the Devotion yearly paid her at Rome: He says, The Image was
framed by no mortal Hands, but sent down from Heaven by Jupiter; that the Ship
that brought her, sticking fast in the River Tiber, a Vestal Virgin, who was
accused of Unchastity, to prove her Innocence, hawled the Ship along, only by
her Girdle. But Livy, writing the History of the Time, says nothing of this:
For Miracles are often best known some Centuries after they are said to have
been wrought.
Mother of the Gods was brought to Rome. My Friends and I then had our Meetings
and Collations duly; but these were always moderate, though it was at an Age when
our Blood was warm, which inevitably cools as Years come on. Nor did I ever
measure my Pleasure in those Entertainments by any sensual Gratifications
whatever, but solely by the Conversation or Discourses we held on various
Subjects. For our Ancestors very wisely called those Meetings of Friends to eat
and drink together, by the Name of Convivium, or Living-together; as if Society
were the Design of them: A Term much more proper than that of the Greeks, whose
Name for them imports nothing but Eating and Drinking together; as if they
preferred that Part of the Entertainment, which is truly in itself the least
valuable.

CHAP. XIV.
IN such regular Entertainments, when seasonable, I own, I have always, in View
of what I have mentioned, taken a sensible Pleasure: Nor do I choose for my
Companions only Persons about my own Age; for of these there are now very few
left; but those also of yours. And I think myself much obliged to my Age, that
it has increased my Inclination for Discourse and Conversation, and rendered the
Business of Eating and Drinking a Matter still of more Indifferency to me. Yet
where others take a Pleasure even in these, that I may not be thought to
declare War against all Gratifications of Sense, as Nature requires
Refreshment, and Old Age is not without its Relish; I think such Entertainments
even for the sake of good Cheer, so far as this is comfortable to Nature, are
very allowable, and may sometimes be indulged, when duly limited within the
Bounds of Moderation. But what now gives me the greatest Pleasure in these
Cases, is to practice the Method instituted by our Ancestors, that is, That the
Conversation should turn on Subjects proposed by the Master of the Feast, and
that the Cups should be moderate and cooling, in a cool and shady Place in
Summer, as in that of In Xenophon's Works there is a Tract called the
Symposion, or Feast, consisting of the pleasant Discourses of the Guests; which
is more natural than that of Plato's.
Xenophon; or in the Sun, or, if colder, by a good Fire in Winter: The Method
that I now practice amongst my Sabine Neighbors, whom I frequently meet on
such Occasions, and spend a good Part of the Night with them. It Is said of Old
Cato, that he could be free enough sometimes with the Creature: Hence Horace,
l. 3. Ode 21. Narratur et prisci Catonis
Saepe m^ro caluisse virtus.
Old Cato would, it is said, with Wine
Make his reverend Face to shine.

But to return to the Charge. It is alleged that Old Age is not sensible to
that Titillation of Pleasure, that is found in the other Parts of Life; which
is certainly true: But at the same time it has this great Advantage to balance
it, that it does not so much as wish to have it. Saphocles said well, who, when
he was asked at a great Age, whether he had yet any Acquaintance with Venus,
answered, Heavens forbid! I thank the Gods I am got rid of that Tyranny. Such
as are addicted to those Pleasures, will think it hard to be debarred of them;
but others, who have gone through, and (...) past them, find themselves happier
in being deprived of the Inclination. Nor can any one be said to want, what he
does not so much as wish for. And this State, I say, of not desiring, is
preferable in itself even to that of enjoying. It Is true, that Men in their
Prime have a greater Gust to all Pleasures; but then most of these are, in the
first Place, but mean in themselves; and in the next, if Old Men have not the
same to such a Height, they either desire them not at all, or they have a
competent Share of such as are fit for them. As those, perhaps, who sit in the
Pit at the Theater, have more of the Pleasure in seeing Turpio Ambivius was a
famous Actor in Rome, about the 590th Year of the City. He is mentioned in what
is called the Didascalia, of 4 of the 6 Comedies we have of Terence, to have
been the principal Actor of them.
Turpio Ambivius act, than such as sit at a greater Distance in the Galleries;
yet these last, though they have less, are not wholly without theirs: So Youth,
as it has a nearer Communication, and livelier Relish for Pleasure, may be more
powerfully affected with it; yet those, whose Age has distanced them from the
gayer Scenes of it, have their Share of Delight, and enjoy as much of it at
least, as they crave or wish for. For how solid, how sincere, think you, must
that Pleasure be to the Mind, when, after it has happily worked through the
ruffling Tides of those uneasy Passions, Lust, Ambition, Emulation, Contention,
and every strong impetutous Desire, it finds itself arrived at its Harbor, and
like a Veteran discharged from the Fatigues of War, got home, and retired
within itself into a State of Tranquillity? But if it has the further Advantage
of Literature and Science, and can by that Means feed on, or divert itself with
some useful or amusing Study, no Condition can be imagined more happy than such
calm Enjoyments, in the Leisure and Quiet of Old Age. How warm did we see Caius
Sulpicius Gallus, the first of the Romans [(...) says, lib.2. c.12.] who
applied himself to the Study of the Stars, in which he was very famous. Being
Tribunus Milit^m in the Army commanded by Paulus AEmilius, the Day before the
great Battle, in which Perseus, King of Macedon was defeated, and his Kingdom
thereupon made a Province, [see Note 24] he gave public Notice to the Army,
that the ensuing Evening the Moon would be eclipsed and darkened from the 2d to
the 4th Hour, [that was then, from near 10 to near 12 at Night in our Account]
and as this could be soretold, by the Knowledge only of the Course and Motions
of the Sun and Moon, they should not therefore be surprised at it, or account
it a Prodigy. But the Macedonians, it seems, were not so happy, as to have such
a skilful Adviser amongst them; for the Eclipse happened accordingly, and the
Greeks were much terrified. Livy, who [ lib.44. c.37.] relates this, says, it
was the Night before the 4th of September, which both Calvisius and Pelavius
having calculated, find to have fallen on the 21st of June, 168 Years before
Christ, according to our present Account; for the Roman Calendar was at that
Time, for the Reasons given by Censorinus [ cap. 20.] exceedingly perplexed and
uncertain, till Julius Caesar in his (...) Consulate, being then also Pontifex
Maximus, 45 Years before Christ, regulated it, and established our present
Julian Account. This Sulpicius Gallus, two Years after that Battle, was Consul
himself; and Paulus AEmilius, the Consul and General in it, natural Father to
this Scipio [see Note 24] was his great Friend.
Gallus, your Father's intimate Friend, Scipio, in Pursuit of his Astronomical
Studies to the last? How often did the rising Sun surprise him, fixed on a
Calculation he began over Night? And how often the Evening, on what he had
begun in the Morning? What a vast Pleasure did it give him, when he could
foretell to us, when we should see the Sun or Moon in an Eclipse? And how many
others have we known in their Old Age delighting themselves in other Studies?
which, though of less Depth than those of Gallus, yet must be allowed to be in
themselves ingenious and commendable? How pleased was Cncius Naevius, see Note
30.
Naevius with his Poem of the Punic War? And how Marcus Accius Plautus: we have
20 of his Comedies still extant, and amongst them, those two here named.
Plautus with his Truculontus and Pseudolus? I remember even Old Livius
Andronicus was the first Roman Poet, mentioned by their Writers: There is
nothing of his remaining, but a few short Fragments from the Quotations of
Grammarians; according to Cicero in Tuse. Qu^est. lib.1. as also in his Brutus.
He acted that first Piece in the 512th Year of Rome, 240 Years before Christ.
Livius, who had his first Dramatic Piece acted six Years before I was born, in
the Consulship of Cento and Tuditanus, and continued his Compositions till I
was grown up toward the State of Manhood. What need I mention The same with
Publius Crassus mentioned before. See Note 49.
Livinius Crassus's Studies in the Pontificial and Civil Law? Or those of
Scipio Nassica, see Note 70.
Publius Scipio, now lately made Supreme Pontiff? And all these I have seen,
not only diverting themselves in Old Age, but eagerly pursuing the several
Studies they affected. With what unwearied Diligence did we behold Marcus
Cethegus is mentioned by Cicero in his Brutus, or Book de claris Orat^ribus, as
the first Orator amongst the Romans worth Notice, or that bore that Character:
And his Name was the more famous for the honorable Mention Ennius made of him
in his Annals, some of whose Verses Cicero there quotes, and says, he was
Consul 9 Years before Cato, that is, in the 550th Year of Rome, 204 Years
before Christ, the 15th of the second Punic War.
Marcus Cethegus, whom Ennius justly enough called the Soul of Persuasion,
applying himself at a great Age to Oratory, and the Practice of Pleading? Upon
all which let me ask you, what Gratifications of Sense, what voluptuous
Enjoyments in Feasting, Wine, Women or Play, and the like, are to be compared
with those noble Entertainments? Those pure and serene Pleasures of the Mind,
the rational Fruits of Knowledge and Learning, that grafted on a good natural
Disposition, cultivated by a liberal Education, and trained up in Prudence and
Virtue, are so far from being palled in Old Age, that they rather continually
improve, and grow on the Possessor. Excellent therefore was that Expression of
Solon, which I mentioned before, when he said, That daily learning something,
he grew old: For the Pleasures arising from such a Course, namely those of the
Mind, must be allowed incomparably to exceed all others.

CHAP. XV.
BUT I am now come to speak to the Pleasures of a Country-Life, with which I am
infinitely delighted. To these Old Age never is an Obstruction. It is the Life
of Nature, and appears to me the exactest Plan of that which a wise Man ought
to lead. Here our whole Business is with the Earth, the common Parent of us
all, which is never found refractory, never denies what is required of it, nor
fails to return back what is committed to it with Advantage, sometimes indeed
with less, but generally with a very large Interest. Nor is it the View of this
Increase only which yields Delight, but there arises yet a greater from a
Contemplation of the Powers of the Earth, and Vegetation: For to me it is most
affecting to behold, how, when the Soil is duly labored and mellowed, and
receives after harrowing the scattered Seed into its genial Bosom, warmed with
due Heats and Vapors, it there cherishes it in its vital Embraces; and then
opening, shoots it upwards, and rears it into a verdant Blade; which taking
fast Hold with its fibrous Roots below, Springs up into a jointed Stalk,
preparing new Seed again in its Cells, which gradually enlarges from the Ear,
with the Grain exactly ranged in decent Rows; and is secured with Awns, to
de^end it from the Rapine of the little Birds, that would otherwise assail and
make Prize of it. But why should I enter into Particulars, or observe upon the
first Planting, Shooting and Growth of the delicious Vine? I should never have
done, if I indulged myself in representing at large the Pleasure I take in
these Solaces of my Old Age. Nor must I dwell on that plastic Power seen in all
the Productions of the Earth, which from so small a Grain in the Fig, or the
little Stone of a Grape, or from the minute seeds of others, raises up such
bulky Trunks with their shady Heads and extended Branches. But who can consider
the Variety in the Methods of Propagation, by Shoots, Sprouts, Loppings,
Quicksets and Slips, without being seized at the same time with Admiration and
Delight? The Vine, that naturally runs low, and cannot rear itself without a
Support, is for this end provided with Tendrils, by which, like so many Hands,
it lays hold on every thing it meets with, that may raise it; and by these Aids
expands, and becomes so luxuriant, that to prevent its running out into useless
Wood, the Dresser is obliged to prune off its superfluous wandering Branches:
After which, from the standing Joints, in the ensuing Spring, the little Bud,
called the Gem, pushes out the new Shoot, whereon the tender young Grape is
formed; which gradually swelling by Nourishment from the Earth, is at first
austere to the Taste, but, guarded with Leaves around, that it may neither want
due Warmth, nor suffer by too scorching Rays, it ripens by the Sun's enlivening
Beams, and acquires that delicious Sweetness and beautiful Form, that equally
please both the Taste and Eye; and then enriches the World with that noble
Liquor, the Advantages of which I need not name. Yet it is not the Sense of
these, nor of all the Advantages of Husbandry, as I have said, that so nearly
affects me, as the Pleasure I find in their Culture alone: Such as ranging the
Vines, and their supporting Perches in exact and even Rows, in arching and
binding their Tops, lopping off the woody and barren, and training and
encouraging the fruitful Branches, to supply every Vacancy; and then
contemplating the Beauty and Order with the Process of Nature in the Whole.
What need I mention the Pleasure of improving the more barren Grounds, and
rendering them fruitful, by bringing down Water in refreshing Rills, on the
over-dry; and as carefully carrying it off from the wet and sunken; or by
digging, and repeatedly trenching, to render them mellow? Or of the Advantages
of Manure, of which I treated in my This Book of Cato's, de Re Rustica, is
still extant, and is the oldest Book in Prose, that we have in the Latin
Tongue; but does no great Honor to the Author.
Book of Husbandry, though the learned We have one, or as some account them, two
short Books of Hesiod's, called Works and Days, with two others, in which,
among some other Things, he lays down several Rules for Husbandry: And from
these Virgil copies in his Georgies, but very much enlarged and far exceeded
him.
Hesiod, amongst his Rules on that Subject, has not one Word of it. And yet
This seems to be a Lapse of Memory in Cicero; for there is no such Passage in
Homer, as we now have his Works, as that Laertes was dunging his Fields. If any
where, it should be in the 24th or last Book of the Odyssey. But there
Spondanus, on the 226th Verse, Listraonta phyton, etc. notes, that Gifanius had
observed this Passage here in Cato, to be a Mistake in Cicero. Yet Cicero in
his Time might perhaps have read it in that Sense in Homer, as Koprizonta, or
kopreuonta, Dunging instead of listraonta or listre^enta, Levelling the Plants;
which is indeed an odd Expression.
Homer, whom I take to have lived some Ages before him, makes Old Laertes
diverting the Thoughts of his Son Ulysse's Absence, by rustic Labors and This
seems to be a Lapse of Memory in Cicero; for there is no such Passage in Homer,
as we now have his Works, as that Laertes was dunging his Fields. If any where,
it should be in the 24th or last Book of the Odyssey. But there Spondanus, on
the 226th Verse, Listraonta phyton, etc. notes, that Gifanius had observed this
Passage here in Cato, to be a Mistake in Cicero. Yet Cicero in his Time might
perhaps have read it in that Sense in Homer, as Koprizonta, or kopreuonta,
Dunging, instead of listraonta or listrenenta, Levelling the Plants; which is
indeed an odd Expression.
Dunging the Fields. But besides the Pleasures already mentioned, from
Cornfieldsd, Meads and Vines, there is yet a vast Fund for others, from
Orchards, Cattle, Bees, and Gardens, with the endless Varieties of beautiful
Flowers, that yield an Entertainment ever new and ever delighting: For in
Orchards there arises a Pleasure not only from the Ranges of fruitbearing
Trees, all answering to the View in just and exact Order; but above all, from
their Improvement by Grafting; the finest Invention, in my Opinion, in
Husbandry.

CHAP. XVI.
I Could with Pleasure further proceed in enumerating many other Recreations,
and delightful Entertainments the Country yields; but I am sensible I have
dwelt rather too long on these already. You will however excuse me, I hope, and
impute it in Part to the Pleasure the Agreeableness of the Subject yields me;
and in some Part also, if you please, to the Talkativeness of Old Age; a Fault
that, I must acknowledge, even while I am defending it, most commonly attends
it. But thus employed Manius Curious Dentatus, for his History see Note 26
before. -- I shall only add here, That Plutarch [Apophth. Rom.] says, he was
then boiling (others say roasting) Turnips for his Supper: And Val. Maximus,
who has the same Story [ lib. 4. c. 3.] says, he was eating out of a Wooden
Di^h, and that by his Furniture we may judge what were his Viands, and c.
Manius Curious, after he had triumphed over the Samnites and Sabines and
Pyrrhus, spent his Old Age here in my Neighboring Farm; which as often as I
view, I am seized with Wonder, but can never sufficiently admire, either the
great Moderation of the Man, or the regular Discipline of his Time. Curious, as
he sat one Evening by his Fireside, met with a tempting Encounter: The
Samnites, for whom he was too hard in the Field, in Hopes of softning him, sent
him a large Present of Gold; but he with a brave Disdain rejecting it, sent
back the Messengers with this Answer only, That he wanted none of their Gold,
but thought it much more glorious to command those who valued it, than to
possess it himself. Now, could so great a Soul fail, think you, of making his
Years easy to himself, and agreeable at any Age? But to return to a
Country-Life, that I may not quit the Subject I am upon, I mean, my own
Old Age: In those Days the Senators, that is, the Senes, or Old-Men of the
State, dwelt in the Country, and lived on their Farms, (...) Quinctius
Cincinnatus was Consul of Rome in the 293d Year of it, 459 Years before Christ;
being surrogated in the Place of Valerius Poplic^la, who was killed in
recovering the Capitol from Herdonius [Liv. l. 3. c. 19.] the Romans being
exceedingly pressed by the (...) 2 Years after, and finding themselves obliged
to appoint a Dictator, they chose Quinctius, who then lived on his small Farm,
that had consisted at first but of seven Roman Jugera, which makes in the Whole
but about four and a half English Acres; but by paying a Fine for his Son
Saeso, was reduced to four Jugera, or two and a half Acres only. On this Farm
the Messenger sent to him from the Senate, found him at Work; who desiring him
to put on his Gown, that he might receive the Pleasure of the Senate, he left
his Plow, and called on his Wife Racilia (for her Name is also remembered) to
bring it to him; he put it on, and was then saluted by him, Dictator; an Office
so high, that it superseded all the other Powers, as has been noted before.
Livy, lib. 3. c. 26. pursues the Story, the Sum of which was this: He repaired
to Rome, raised Levies, marched against the Enemy, who then besieged the Consul
with his Army in the Camp; subdued, and made them all pass sub jugo, a Mark of
Subjection; triumphed for his Victory; and, having settled Affairs, laid down
that great Office, which of Right he might have held for 6 Months, the 16th Day
after he entered on it. But the other Part of the Story, of his causing Maelius
to be put to Death, was 20 Years after, when in a great Old Age he was chose
Dictator again, on purpose to quell that Conspiracy. Livy, Bo. 4. c.13, and c.
has the Story. Both Livy and Val. Maximus, l. 4. c. 4. have some fine
Reflections on the first Part of this Account of Cincinnatus.
L. Quinctius Cincinnatus was at his Plow, when he was called to take upon him
the supreme Office of Dictator. This also was he, by whose Command his Master
of the Horse, Servilias Hala, put Spurius Maelius to Death, for attempting at
sovereign Power, and to make himself Absolute in the City. So Curious, and many
others of those brave Old Men, were called from time to time off their Farms,
to take upon them the highest Trusts and Charges in the State or War: And from
hence it is, that the Sergeants or Messengers that wait on the Senate, first
had, and to this Day retain their Name of Viatores, or Way-Men. Now, can we
imagine that those great Men found themselves distressed by Old Age, while they
would thus in the Country give themselves up to all the Variety of delightful
Employments, that the Business of it either furnishes or requires? As for me, I
must own, I think it impossible that any other kind of Life whatever can exceed
it. For besides that Mankind cannot possibly subsist without it, there is not
only a vast Pleasure derived from viewing and considering the Particulars I
have mentioned, but it also fills the Heart with Joy to behold, how by proper
Care and Management every thing is produced in Abundance, that can be
subservient either to the Support and real Necessities of human Life, (...)
even to the Pleasures and Delectation of it, as well as what is required for
the Service of the immortal Gods. Those therefore who make Pleasure their Aim,
and think there is no other Good in Life, may here effectually find it. For can
there be a greater than to see our Labors crowned with full (...), our Cellars
with Wine, Oil, Honey, and all kind of Provisions? Our (...) with Cheese; and
Plenty of Pigs, Kid, Lambs and Fowl around us? Our Gardens also are, as the
Country People call it, a lasting Flitch, from whence they may constantly cut,
and it as constantly supplies them. Here also at suitable Times are our Labors
seasoned with the agreeable and innocent Diversions of Hunting and Fowling; to
say nothing of the delightful Prospect of Meadows in their Verdure, and Groves
of planted Trees; as well as those of Vines and Olives that have been mentioned
already. But I shall wind up, with observing, That as there is nothing more
profitable, so there is not in Nature, in my Opinion, any thing more beautiful
or affecting, than to behold a Plantation, with all the Parts of it, in
complete and perfect Order. And this, as I have said, is a Pleasure, that
Old Age is so far from being incapable of enjoying, that it is by a kind of
Impulse of Nature solicited and drawn to it. For no where else can it meet with
such suitable Entertainments. Here the cool Shades and refreshing Breezes, with
purling Streams, invite a^^cad to pass the Summer's sultry Heats; and here good
rousing Fires furnish large Provision against the colder Blasts of Winter. To
others therefore we can freely resign all other Diversions, in Arms and Horses,
with their military Exercises, and all their Accoutrements, their Tennis, and
every other Sport; only, if they please, they may leave us Checquers and
Tables; or even these also we can give up; since Old Age can be very easy and
very happy without any such trifling Amusements.

CHAP. XVII.
ALL the Writings of Xenophon are on many Accounts highly useful; and I would
advise you diligently to read them; which I doubt not but you do of yourselves.
How fully and excellently does he, in that Book called his Oeconomics, set out
the Advantages of Husbandry and a CountryLife? And that you may see he thought
no Employment so ^it for a King as this, Socrates there discoursing with
Critobulus, tells him, that when Lysander of (...), a Person of great Merit,
went to Cyrus the Younger, King of the Persians, at Sardis, with the Presents
their Allies had collected; Cyrus entertaining him with great Courtesy and
Civility, showed him a Garden planted with extreme Elegance; in which Lysander
observing the beautiful Forms of the Trees in their Ranges, exactly disposed in
the quincuncial Order; the Cleanness and Neatness of the Walks and Borders, and
the delicious Fragrancy of the Flowers that breathed all around their
refreshing Odours; he was greatly taken with them all: But above all the rest,
he said, he admired the Ingenuity of the Man, who had designed, and with so
much Art and Skill disposed the Whole. This is all my own Doing, said Cyrus;
the Design was mine, I marked and measured out the Walks and Rows, and many of
the Trees I planted with my own Hands. Then Lysander observing also at the same
time the Neatness of his Person, and viewing his Purple, with the Richness of
his Attire, set off, after the Persian Manner, with much Gold and Jewels, said,
They may justly call you happy, Cyrus, since you are at the same time both good
and great; your Virtue and your Fortune equally adorn each other. And this
Happiness, I say again, is left for Old Men to enjoy; nor can Age or any Length
of Years disable them, while they have Health and Strength to walk, from
enjoying, to their last Period, those sweet Amusements and Diversions, that
rural Scenes and the Employments of a Country-Life afford. We find that Marcus
Valerius Corvus or Corvinus. Livy, a^ Historian of great Gravity, Bo. 7. c. 26.
tells this very odd Story of him: That being a Tribune of War, when the Roman
Army under the Consul L. Furius Camillus, was to engage that of the Gauls, a
Champion of that Nation, remarkable both for his Size and Armor, stepping out,
challenged the whole Roman Army, to send out any one of their bravest Men to
fight him in single Combat. This Valerius took the Challenge, met him, and had
no sooner began to engage, than a Crow or Raven [but corvus is properly a
Raven, though often rendered a Crow] lighted on his Helmet or Headpiece, and as
often as he attacked the Gaul, the Bird with his Bill and Claws did the same,
flying at his Eyes and Face ^ which so confounded the Man, that he soon fell a^
Valerius's Feet, and was dispatched by him; and then it flew away to the
Eastward. Hence the Victor took the Name of Corvus or Corvinus, for it
frequently occurs wrote both these Ways. Val. Maximus, B. 8. c. 13. brings him
as an Example of one that lived to a great and happy Old Age, and says, he
lived to 100 Years in Vigor both of Body and Mind; was six times Consul in the
space of 47 Years; discharged the greatest Trusts; kept his Farm in most
exquisite Order, and set a noble Example both in public and private Life.
Pliny, N.Hist. B.7.48. mentions also his living to 100 Years, and that he was 6
times Consul, a Number that none besides, except C. Marius, before the Time of
the Emperors over equalled.
Marcus Corvinus lived to a Hundred Years, and spent his last Days in
Agriculture on his Farm. Between his first and last Consulate there were
fourtysix Years; he therefore was engaged in public Employments and Trusts of
Honor the full Term It may appear strange, that in this Discourse, where so
many Instances are given of Persons who had attained to a great Age, and
preserved in it their Vigor both of Body and Mind, Cato should be made to
place the Commencement of Old Age at the 46th Year of Life: But the Author
Cicero had good Authority for it. His Friend (...), who always (...) the
Character of the most learned of all the Romans, (...) Censorinus, de die
natali, c.(...). (...) him) divided the Life of Man into 5 Stages, each
consisting of 15 Years: Those in the first Stage, he calls (...), Boys; in the
2d to 30 Years, (...), or Youths; in the 3d to 45, Juvenes, Young Men, so
called, he says, a ^word, from helping, because they (...) the State in bearing
Arms; from thence to 60 he (...), because on entering on that Stage, they begin
(...), to wax old; and from (...) to the End of Life, for which he (...) no
Term, they are Senes, or Old-Men. (...) goes on to say, That (...) the
Physician divided Life into 7 Stages; the Terms of which are to 7, 14, 28, 35,
42, 56, and from thence to the End: That Solon made 10, each of 7 Years; to
which Staseas added 2 more, making the last Term 84, or 12 times 7; which
agrees with our present Tables, calculated by Dr. Halley, for valuing (...) or
Estates for Lives; for these make 85 the last Period, beyond which no Chance
for living is estimated.
that our Ancestors set for the Commencement of Old Age. But in this, his
latter Days were more happy and glorious than his pr^ceding Life, that he was
more illustrious in himself, and clothed with a greater Authority (...) from
the Toil that commonly attends it: For Authority I esteem the Crown and Glory
of Old Age. How conspieuous did this appear in See Note 53 before.
L. Caecilius Metellus? And how in Atilius Calatinus was Consul in the 496th
Year of Rome; a short Account of whose Life is given by (...) Victor, amongst
his illustrious Men; but there appears nothing very particular in it, worth
noting here. And it is to be questioned, whether in all the Monuments we have
lost us of Antiquity, there can any thing be now produced that should entitle
him to so high a Character: For in (...) Supplements to Livy, lib. 17. 22.
there is a very disadvantageous Story of him and his Army, who in the first
Punic War besieged (...) (now Mistretta) in Sicily, which the Inhabitants,
obliging the Carthaginian Garrison, who were possessed of it, to surrender, or
suffer them at least to surrender to the Romans; these without Mercy, and
without Distinction of (...) or Age, put the greater Part of those Inhabitants
to one Sword, and sold the rest for Slaves. Florus, l.2. c.2. gives him the
Title of Dictator, but his Story is obscure. It was to save this Army, that
Calpurnius Flamma, with 300 more, (...) their own Lives, as in Note 100.
Atilius Calatinus? on whom many Nations agreed in conferring this great and
noble Character, That He was the worthiest Man of his Country; as it is fully
declared in that Copy of Verses now inscribed on his Tomb, which therefore are
well known. Justly then might he be accounted honorable and great, in whose
Praises the Voices of all Nations conspired. How deservedly great did the late
Supreme Pontiff, See Note 49.
Publius Crassus, as also his Successor in the same Dignity, AEmilius Lepidus
was the first time Consul in the 567th Year of Rome, 8 Years after Cato; he was
the second time in the 579th Year. He was chosen one of the Pontiffs in the
Year 556, and Pontifex Maximus about the Year 571, and continued so near 30
Years, till his Death, which was about the Year 602. See Note 47. It Is noted in
the Argument of the 48th Book of Livy, (for that and all the rest from the 45th
are lost, but the Arguments remain) that he was 6 times appointed by the
Censor's Prince of the Senate, and that he ordered his Sons at his Death, that
his Funeral Should be without any Pomp or Charge.
Marcus Lepidus, appear to us all? why should I again mention See Notes 24 and
51.
Paulus, or See Notes 7 and 52.
Africanus, or Note 11.
Maximus? Who all bore so great an Authority with the People, that not only
their Opinions when declared, but even their Looks and Nods carried an Awe with
them, and in a manner commanded Submission. Old Age in a Person graced with
Honors, is attended with such Respect and Authority, that the Sense of this
alone is preferable to all the Pleasures Youth can enjoy.

CHAP. XVIII.
YET in all I have said, I desire to be understood to mean the Old Age of such
Persons only, as have in their Youth laid solid Foundations for Esteem in
advancing Years; for on no other Terms ought we to expect it. And hence it was,
that what I once said in a public Speech, met with so general an Applause,
when I observed, That miserable was that Man's Old Age, who needed the Help of
Oratory to defend him. Gray Hairs and Wrinkles avail nothing to confer the
Authority I am here speaking of: It must be the Result of a Series of good
Actions, and nothing but a Life honorably and virtuously led, through all the
advancing Steps of it, can crown Old Age with this blessed Harvest of its past
Labors. Nor are those common Marks of Respect, though but of little Moment in
themselves, to be altogether slighted; such as Morning-Salutations; to have the
Way or Upper-hand given; to be waited on home or from home, and to be
consulted; which, both with us and in all well-regulated States, in Proportion
as they are more or less so, are most strictly observed and practiced. Lysander
of Sparta, whom I lately mentioned, was wont to say, That Lacedemon was of all
Places the most honorable Sanctuary for Old Age: For nowhere in the World is a
greater Deference paid to Years, and in no Place Gray Hairs more reverenced and
regarded. I find this also related, That a very old Man coming into the Theater
at Athens, to see the Play, and the Throng being so great, that he could find
no Room nor Seat among his own Citizens, passing along toward that Part where
the Ambassadors of Lacedemon, then present, were placed; they all immediately
rose up to give him a Seat: The Athenians observing this, clapped, and much
applauded the Action; upon which one of the Spartans passed this just
Reflection, That the Athenians (he perceived) knew very well what was right,
but they knew not how to do it. There are many good Institutions in our College
of Augurs, and particularly in this I am now speaking of, that the oldest Man
always leads, and all the Members deliver their Opinions according to their
Rank in Years; the Ancientest always taking Place, not only of such as have
been in higher Posts that themselves, but even of those, who at the time bear
the supreme Command, and are at the Head of Affairs in the State. Now, what
Satisfaction, think you, can all the Pleasures of Sensation taken together,
yield, that will bear a Comparison with those the Mind must feel, from the
Returns of reverencial Respect paid to the Authority of such an honorable Old
Age? Which whoever enjoys and rightly applies, seems to me to have well and
happily performed in acting his Part in the Drama of Life, and at last like an
approved Actor, he makes his last Part the best, and quits the Stage with an
universal Plaudit. But it is said, People as they grow in Years, become more
peevish, morose and passionate; and you may add covetous too: But, as I have
said, these are the Faults of the Men, and not of Old Age. Yet something of a
little Moroseness might probably, though not altogether justly, be excused; for
they may sometimes be apt to think themselves slighted and played on; and
further, a frail Body can bear but little, and therefore will be the sooner
offended. But all this may by proper Application be prevented or remedied: For
by Reflection and a watchful Guard kept on the Motions of the Heart, natural
Temper may be sweetened, and our Conduct softened. Of this we see frequent
Instances in Life, and on the Stage a remarkable one in the two Brothers Mitio
and Demea, Characters directly opposite in two Brothers; the latter of whom
ruined his own Son by his Moroseness: The other by his mild Treatment of his
Nephew, Brother to that Son, made him a fine Gentleman. Terence was
contemporary with Cato, and his Comedy of the Adelphi was first acted in the
year of Rome 594, by the Names of the Consuls in the Didascalia prefixed to it.
in Terence's Adelphi. How rough and peevish is the one, how mild and good the
other? And so the Case will generally hold. Some Wines four with Age, while
others grow better and richer. A Gravity with some Severity is to be allowed;
but by no means Illnature. What Covetousness in Old Men can mean, I must own, I
cannot comprehend; for can any thing be more senselessly absurd, than that the
nearer we are to our Journey's End, we should still lay in the more Provision
for it?

CHAP. XIX.
WE are now come to the fourth and last Charge, which is thought most nearly to
affect Old Age, and to give the greatest Anxiety of all others, viz. The
Aproach of Death, which it is certain can be at no great Distance. But miserable
is the Case of that Old Man, who in so long a Course of Years, has not laid in
a sufficient Provision against those Fears, and enabled himself to contemn
Death, which is either to be slighted, as being in Reality nothing in itself,
in case it puts an entire End to us, Soul as well as Body; or else, it is to be
valued, and to be desired and wished for, if it leads us into another State, in
which we are to enjoy Eternity: And between these there can be no Medium. What
then am I to fear in Death, if after it, I am to have no Sense, and therefore
can feel no Pain; or otherwise am to become immortal in another State by the
Change? But again, can there be any one so void of Sense, as to think himself
sure of living even to the next Evening? Nay, Youth in its greatest Vigor is
subject to many more Casualties, and exposed to much greater and more frequent
Dangers that may shorten Life, than Old Age itself, which is allowed to be
drawn so near its End. Their Heat of Blood, and the frequent Changes of Heats
and Colds, which they undergo, render them more liable to Fevers and other Fits
of Sickeness, which, when they happen, bear heaviest on the strongest
Constitutions; nor have they generally, when sick, the Patience to be so
carefully nursed, as more elderly and experienced People. And from these and
such like Causes it is, that we see so few attain to Old Age. But happy would
it be for the World, if more lived to reach it: For as Prudence and Skill are
gained by Experience, and this depends on, and is enlarged by Length of Days;
we might from greater Numbers of People grown old in such Experience, expect to
see the Affairs of Life, both public and private, more regularly administered:
And indeed without some such, Government could scarce subsist at all. But to
return to the Consideration of Death impending. How can that be accounted an
Unhappiness peculiar to Old Age, which we well know is common, and frequently
happens to the Youngest, as well as to the Old? I found by near Experience in
my own Cato's Son and Namesake died Praetor of the City of Rome, the same Year
that Lepidus died, as in Note 87. viz. in the Year 602; and, as it is noted in
the same Argument of Livy there mentioned, viz. of Book 48. his Father gave him
but a very mean Funeral, being able to afford no better, for that he was Poor:
[ M. P. Cato funus mortui filii, in Pr^tura, tenuiss^no, ut valuit (nam pauper
erat) sumplu facit.] Which, considering the offices that Cato bore, and his
Frugality, adds not a little to his Character of Probity. -- Plutarch gives
this remarkable Story of Young Cato, in the Life of his Father, That being in
the Army, under P. AEmilius, afterward his Father-in-Law, in the great Battle
fought with Persons, King of Macedon, [Note 24] his Sword was struck out of his
Hand, and he lost it; upon which, getting together a Company of Young Men of
his Acquaintance, they made such an Impression on the Enemy, that they cleared
the Way before them to the same Place again, where he recovered it amongst
Heaps of the Slain: And adds, That in his Time [ Plutarch's, above 250 Years
after] Cato's Letter to his Son was extant, congratulating him on the Bravery
of that Action.
dear Son, and we saw in the Death of your See Note 24. -- These were Brothers
to Scipio, but by half Blood, viz. the Sons of Paulus AEmilius by his 2d Wife,
as Scipio was born of his first.
two Brothers, Scipio, who we expected were growing up to the highest Honors
in Rome, that no Age is privileged, but Death is common to all. It may however
be said, perhaps, that Youth has Room at least to hope they have Length of Life
before them, which in Old Men would be vain. But foolish is that Hope: For what
can be more absurd, than to build on utter Uncertainties, and account on that
for sure, which probably may never happen? And to what is alleged, that the
Old Man has no Room lest for Hope, I say, Just so much the happier is his
Condition, than that of the Young; because he has already attained, and is sure
of what the other only wishes and hopes for: The one wishes to live long, the
other is at the End of that Wish, he has got it; for he has lived long already.
Yet O good Gods! What is it in Life that can be said to be of long Duration?
Though we should hold it to the utmost Extent of Age, or admit we should live the
Days of that Tartessus, a City on the North Side of the River Baetis, ^ow
Guadelqui^ar, or the River of Sevil in Spain, and near the Mouth of it;
supposed by some to be the Tarshish that Solomon sent his Ships to; the
Phaenicians his Neighbors were the first ('it is said) who failed thither, where
they found Silver in such Plenty, and got so much of it in Exchange for their
Goods, that they could not carry it off, Aristotle says, but, to have the more
of it, they threw away their Anchors, to make others of that Metal: But this is
in his Book of wonderful Stories, and therefore may be more strange than true.
The Phoceans, a Greek Colony in Ionia, were the next who failed thither, in the
Time of this Arganthonius, who was exceeding Kind to them, inviting them to
slay with him, and when they excused themselves, he gave them Money enough to
wall in their Town against the Medes, who were then invading them. Her^^otus
gives the Story of Arganthonius and the Ph^ceons, l.1. c.163. The learned
Bochort derives his Name from two Phoenician Words, Arc-antho, Long lived.
Canaan, c. 34.
Tartessian King, (for I have read that one (...) Arganth^nius reigned at Cadiz
four-score Years, and lived to a hundred and twenty;) yet in my Opinion nothing
can properly be termed lasting, that has a certain Period fixed: For when that
is once come, all the past is over and gone; and in the Business of Life, when
that is run out, nothing remains to us, but what results from past good and
virtuous Actions. The Hours, and Days, and Months, and Years, all slide away,
nor can the past Time ever more return, or what is to follow be fore-known. We
ought all to be content with the Time and Portion assigned us. No Man expects
of any one Actor on the Theater, that he should perform all the Parts of the
Piece himself: One Role only is committed to him, and whatever that be, if he
acts it well, he is applauded. In the same Manner, it is not the Part of a wise
Man, to desire to be busy in these Scenes to the last Plaudit. A short Term may
be long enough to live it well and honorably; and and if you hold it longer,
when past the first Stages, you ought no more to grieve that they are over,
than the Husbandman repines that the Spring is past, and the Summer-Heats come
on; or after these the more sickly Autumn. The Spring represents Youth, and
shows what Fruits may be expected; the following Seasons are for ripening and
gathering in those Fruits: And the best Fruits of Old Age are, as I have
repeatedly said, the recollecting, and, as it were, seeding on the Remembrance
of that Train and Store of good and virtuous Deeds, of which, in the Course of
Life, we laid in a kind of Provision for this Season. But further we are to
consider, that as all we enjoy is from Nature, whatever proceeds from, or is
conformable to the established Laws of This, must in itself be good. Now, can
any thing be more agreeable to those Laws, than that People in Old Age should
die, since, more inconsistently with the Order of Nature, we find the same
thing happens to Youth, even in the Prime of their Years? But the Difference is
great; for Young Men seem to be forced from Lift, as Fires are extinguished by
great Quantities of Water thrown on them; when on the contrary, Old Men expire
of themselves, like a Flame when all its Fuel is spent. And as unripe Fruit
requires some Force to part it from its native Bough; but when come to full
Maturity, it drops of itself, without any Hand to touch it: So Young People die
by something violent or unnatural; but the Old by mere Ripeness. The Thoughts
of which to me are now become so agreeable, that the nearer I draw to my End,
it seems like discovering the Land at Sea, that, after the Tossings of a
tedious and stormy Voyage, will yield me a safe and quiet Harbor.

CHAP. XX.
ALL other Stages of Life have their first Periods, at which they change into
the next succeeding; but Old Age has no certain Limits; it may end sooner or
later. All we have to do, is to live it well while it lasts, and do our best to
discharge the respective Duties of our Station, with a just Contempt of Death,
that, come when it will, we may without Surprise be prepared for it. And this
will give Old Age more Courage and Resolution, than even Youth itself in its
highest Vigor can pretend to. On this was Solon, see Note 45. It is there
said, his Discourse with Craesus, King of Lydia, is well known: But the Moral
of it is so good and suitable to this Discourse, that it may properly come in
here. Plutarch, in his Life of Solon, says, he was sent for by Craesus; but
Herodotus with (...) Probability, says, that absenting himself from Athens,
after he had given them his Body of Laws, and traveling into Egypt, in his
Return from thence through Asia Minor, he took Sardis, where Craesus had his
Royal Seat, in his Way. Craesus was that Time accounted the richest king then
known, and gloried much in his Magnificence, of which he was desirous Solon
(whose Fame had reached those Pares) should be a Witness. Sending therefore for
him to his Palace, and causing his Treasures and other Marks of his Grandeur to
be shown to him, when he afterward came into his Presence, he asked Solon, who
he thought was the happiest Man in the World? not doubting but he must answer,
Craesus himself. Solon said, the happiest Man he had known, was one Tellus.
Craesus disappointed in his Answer, asked, what Prince or Hero was this Tellus?
Solon replied, He was an honest Man of Athens, who lived above Want, and in
good Repute brought up several Children as reputably; then being called to the
Defense of his Country, signalized himself in the Battle with (...), whom (...)
overcame, and afterward died fighting (...) in the same Cause; for which a
Monument was erected in Honor of his Memory. Craesus then asked Solon, whom he
allowed to be happy in the next Degree? Solon said, next to Tellus he had known
none happier than Cleobis and Biton, two Young Men of Argos, who, when their
Mother wanted Creatures to draw her in her Carriage to the Temple of Juno,
harnessing themselves, supplied their Place, and drew here 5 Miles to the
Solemnity; where being arrived, and the whole Assembly greatly admiring and
applauding their Dutifulness and Affection, their Mother servertly prayed the
Goddess, to reward her Sons filial Piety with the choicest Blessings she had in
Store: And her Prayers were heard; for the Youths sleeping the same Night in
the Temple, never awaked again, but crowning their Life with a glorious Action,
by the special Favor of the Gods, honorably ^^ded it. Craesus grew angry, and
asked what he thought of Him? Solon in Answer made several fine Reflections on
the Uncertainty of all Things in human Life; and concluded, That no Man was to
be esteemed happy before his find was known. Upon which Craesus dismissed him
with Scorn. But afterward had ru^ful Occasion to remember him. For, making War
on Cyrus, King of Persia, he was defeated; then bes^^ged in his Capital, taken
Prisoner and condemned to the ^^^mes. When laid bound on the Pile, he cried out
with a mighty Voice, O Solon! Solon! Solon! Cyrus hearing him, stop the
Execution, to know the Meaning of it: Craesus told the whole Passage; which so
affected Cyrus, that he not only gave him his Life, but large Possessions with
it, and took him into Favor. Heredot. l. 1. Plut. in Solon.
Solon's Answer to Pisistratus grounded, who, when asked by that The Ancients
called those Tyrants, who took the Government upon them against the People's
Consent, without Regard to their Manner of Administering it. -- Athens was a
free State, under an Archon chosen by the People, and the Government popular.
Pisistratus was a Citizen, wealthy, and for many excellent Qualities dear to
the People; but secretly ambitious, which Solon discovered, though in vain: For
though he was their Law-(...), the other was better heard, and at length gained
his End by this Trick. There were at that Time two Factions in the State; the
one of the Inland-Men, the other of the Shoar-Men and Citizens. Pisistratus
being one Day in the Country, gave both himself and his Mules some Wounds, and
driving into the City in that Condition in his Chariot, calling the People
together, he bid them see how their Adversaries had used him, they had resolved
to murder him, and he had narrowly escaped with his Life. The People hereupon,
to secure him for the future, granted him a Guard of fifty Young Men. On the
Foot of this Grant, he added what Number he thought fit; and then possessing
himself of the Citadel, he usurped the Government; yet made no Change either in
the Magistracy or the Laws, save that he made himself Sovereign. But he was
soon expelled; recovered it again by a stranger Contrivance; expelled a 2d
time, reinstated himself a 3d time, died possessed of it, and left it to his
Children, who were expelled totally by Harmodius and Aristogiton, to whom
Statues in Remembrance of this Action were erected.
Tyrant, on what Foundation he built his Presumption in so boldly opposing him,
answered, On his Age. [As if he should say, You can but take my Life, and of
that there is now so little left, that it is not to be regarded.] But the most
desirable End of Life is, when with our Understandings clear, and our Senses
entire, the same sovereign Power of Nature that formed us, again dissolves us.
For, in our Frame, as in all other Things, Ships, Edi^ices, and the like, the
Work is best taken to Pieces by the same Hand that first put it together. And
as all Things with Age become crazy and tender, it is then done by much the
easiest. Thus Old People, for the little Remainder of Life that is left them,
should stand loose and indifferent, neither anxious to have it prolonged, nor
precipitantly or without just Cause to shorten it; remembering the Precept of
Pythagoras, That no Man should quit his Post, but at the Command of his
General, that is, of God himself. And in regard to those we are to leave behind
us, though some have commended Solon for saying -- He wished not to die unmourned
and unlamented by his Friends; in which his Sense doubtless was, that he
desired while he lived to be loved and valued by them; Yet I know not but that
of Ennius is altogether as just,

Let none with Tears or Sighs my Funeral grace:
For his Meaning was, that a Death crowned with Immortality, ought by no means
to be lamented.

Again, if we consider the Article of Death, or the Pain supposed to attend it,
we shall find, that in Dying there is either no Pain at all, or, if any, it is,
especially to Old People, of a very short Continuance. And after it, there is
either no Sense at all, (as I have said) or such as we have great Reason to
wish for. But this is a Subject which concerns not Old Men alone: It is the
Business of the Young as well as the Old, to meditate on Death, and to make the
Thoughts of it so familiar to them, that in every Age they can despise it, and
so guard themselves against it, that it can never surprise them. Without this
Provision it is impossible at any Stage of Life, to have the Mind free and easy;
since no Man can be ignorant that he must die, nor be sure that he may not that
very Day. How then can such as dread Death have, under such absolute
Uncertainties, so much as one quiet Minute? But I need not dwell on this Head,
when I reflect on our own History, and consider, not only such Examples of
Intrepidity and a noble Contempt of Death; as that of Lucius Junius Brutus got
his Name of brutus (brute of stupid) by his counterfeiting himself a Fool, of
very silly, under the Reign of Tarquin the Proud, the last King of the Romans.
He was Tarquin's own Sister's Son; but the King, his Uncle, having amongst
others put his elder Brother to Death, and becoming, by his Cruelty and
Injustice, generally odious, Junius vowed his Destruction; and the better to
conceal it, affected that Appearance. He happened in riding from the Camp at
Ardea toward Rome, to be in Company with his Kinsman Tarquinius Collatinus,
Husband to Lucretia, whom the King's Son Sextus had ravished; when her
Messenger meeting him, brought him the melancholy Account of it, Junius
immediately laid hold on the Occasion, joined Collatinus the Husband, and
Lucretius her Father, in their Revenge; and carrying the bloody knife, with
which Lucretia had stabbed herself, through the City, incited the People to rise,
and assert their Liberty; which they effectually did, by expelling Tarquin and
all his Race. Junius and Collatinus were hereupon chose the two first Consuls
of Rome. A Conspiracy to restore Tarquin was formed the same Year, in which
Junius's own two Sons were engaged. These, with others, their Father caused to
be lashed, and beheaded in public in his Sight. Tarquin then, with the
Veientes, his Allies, made War against Rome; and the two Armies meeting, Aruns
the King's Son spying Junius at the Head of that of Rome, made directly up to
him; and they so suriously engaged, that each run his Lance through the other's
Shield and Body, and both died on the Spot. And the Roman Women mourned a whole
Year for Brutus, as the Avenger of violated Chastity. Live. I. 1 and 2.
Lucius Brutus, who so bravely fell in defending the Liberties of his Country;
or of the Sea Note 68 at large.
two Decij, who devoting themselves for the safety of it, pushed with their
Horses into the midst of the Enemy, with no other View, than to be cut in
Pieces; nor of Marcus Atilius Regulus, being in the Year 498 of Rome (256 Years
before Christ) elected the second time Consul, in the Place of ^. Caedicius,
who was chosen for that Year, but died soon after, embarking in the 9th Year of
the Romans first War with the Carthaginians with his Colleague Lucius Manlius
Vulso, in a Fleet of 330 Ships [tho' this was but the 5th Year since the Romans
had any Fleet at all, see Note 69] and 140,000 Men, each Ship carrying about
420, engaged that of the Enemy, consisting of 360 Ships and 150,000 Men,
commanded by Hanno and Hamilcar; sunk 30 of them, and took 63, with the Los of
24 on their own Side, which were all sunk, and none taken. After this Victory
they invaded Africa, and besieged and took Clupca. This Year being expired, and
new Consuls chosen, the Senate ordered Manlius to return with the Fleet and
Army, excepting 40 Ships, 15,000 Foot, and 500 Horse, to be left under the
Command of Regulus, during whose Government they continued to him as
Pro-Consul. Regulus on receiving these Orders, remonstrated to the Senate, that
if he continued longer absent from home, his Farm [which consisted only of 7
J^gera, or 4 and a half English Acres] would be ruined; for that his Hind or
Manager that he had left on it, was dead, and another had run away with his
Implements of Husbandry; and his Wife and Children would want Bread. Upon which
the Senate appointed another to take Care of his Business. and made good the
Loss of what was stole from him, out of the public Treasury. [ Val. Max. l. 4.
c. 4.] Regulus then augmenting his Troops, carried on the War successfully: But
his Army lying near the River Bagrada, exceedingly suffered by a monstrous
Serpent; which was Proof against all their Weapons, till they brought battering
Engines against it. Silius Italicus says, it was 100 Yards in Length; but Pliny
calls it only 120 Feet, or rather says, its Skin of that Length, was sent to
Rome, together with its Jaw Bone, which were kept there in a Temple, to the End
of the Numantine War, that is, at least 120 Years. Valerius Maximus, l. 1. c.
8. from a Book of Livy (the 18th) now lost, is large in the Account of the
Army's Sufferings by it, and says, it was more terrible and destructive, than
all their Enemies Forces. Regulus having gained several Victories over the
Carthaginians, was willing to make Peace with them, that he might himself have
the Honor of ending the War; and the Carthaginians earnestly desired it, but
the Terms he proposed appeared intolerable. Xanthippus with some Mercenaries
that they had sent for, arriving soon after from Lacedemon, observing their
past Mistakes, at their Request` took on him the Command of their Army, gave
Regulus Battle, defeated him, and destroyed his whole Army, then consisting (as
Eutropius says) of 47,000 Men, excepting 2000 that escaped to Clupea; killing
(as he gives it) 30,000, and taking 15,000 Prisoners, with Regulus himself,
whom they sent in Chains to Carthage. The Romans, notwithstanding this Loss, so
vigorously carried on the War, that the Carthaginians five Years after sent
Ambassadors to Rome, and with them Regulus himself, to sue for Peace, or, if
they could not obtain it, at least for an Exchange of Prisoners; taking
Regulus's Oath to return, if they did not succeed. [So sacred was an Oath by
their Idols held by those Heathens, that are now so little regarded, even by
Christian Princes, as well as others.] Coming to the Senate, Regulus behaved as
a Carthaginian, whose Subject he said he was; but being required to give his
Sentiments as a Roman, he advised both against a Peace and an Exchange. See
Horace, Bo. 3. Ode 5. on this Subject. His Friends on the Senate's taking his
Advice, used their utmost Endeavors to dissuade him from returning with the
Ambassadors, since he could expect nothing but the most cruel Treatment; nor
would the Senate either encourage his Return or his Stay. But, his Oath and
plighted Faith, he said, was of more Weight with him, than the Fear of Tortures
or Death. He was unmoveably fixed, refused to see his Wife and Children, and
embarked and returned in the same Company he came in. Upon his Arrival, the
Carthaginians incensed against him, caused him (as it is said) to be tormented
to Death, by cutting off his Eyelids, placing him erect on his Feet in a
narrow Wooden Case drove full of sharp Spikes with their Points toward his
Body; that he should not lean, or sleep, or rest, without running upon them;
and exposing him in that Condition with his Face turned all Day to the Sun,
till he expired. This Account of his Death, or the Substance of it, we have
from Cicero in another Place, from Livy (Argum. 18. B.) Silius Italicus,
Appian, Florus, Orosius, Zonaras, and others of the Ancients; and yet some late
Critics reject it, and treat it only as a Fable. Palmerius (Jaques Paumier de
Grantemesnil, a very learned Frenchman) in his Observations upon Appian, I
think was the first who modestly proposed his Doubt, and gave his Reasons from
Polybius's Silence in the Case, who, he says, has largely and prolixly given
the History of the first Punic War; but chiefly from a Fragment of the 24th
Book of Diod. Siculus, an excellent Historian, recovered, with others, last
Century by Peirese, and published by ^. Val^sius, in which there is this
Expression in Greek, 'oti 'e meter, etc. That the Mother -- of the Youths (that
is Regulus's Wife and Mother of his Children) being deeply affected with her
Husband's Death, and believing he died (di' ameleian) for want of Care being
taken of him, caused [or advised] her Sons to treat the Prisoners ( Bostar and
Hamil^ar that were delivered to them) with Rigor: Which they effectually did,
by shutting them up together in a narrow Closet, without Victuals; so that
Bostar died in 5 Days, but Hamilcar continued till the Tribunes hearing of it,
summoned the young Men, and threatening them with Death, for so highly
dishonouring the State, obliged them to take due Care of them; upon which,
throwing all the Blame on their Mother, they burnt Bostar's Boby (according to
the Roman Custom,) sent his Bones to Carthage to his Relations, and by proper
Care restored Hamilcar to his Health and Strength. From which Passage in so
faithful an Historian, Palmerius concludes, that the Family of the Atilij (i.
e. of Reguius) to excuse that Barbarity, framed this Story of Regulus's Death,
which, being to the Dishonor of the Nation they were at War with, and greatly
hated, easily obtained Credit, and passed afterward for Truth. Which indeed is
not improbable. J. le Clear, in a Note on Freinsheimius's Suppl. to Livy, (lib.
18.) joins in this with Palmerius. -- But though, for the sake chiefly of this
late Discovery, I have already dwelt too long on it here; I cannot forbear
adding, That Palmerius ought not to have said, that Polybius has given the
History of this War largely or prolixly ( fuse ne dicane prolixe,) for he
professes to give only a summary Account of it, as but preparatory to that of
those Actions, with which he designed to begin his History: And therefore, though
that War continued near 24 Years, and was, as he himself says, the greatest and
most terrible that had ever been known, (the Romans, who had not one large Ship
when it began, having lost 700 of five Banks of Oars, that is, of 300 Rowers
each, and the Carthaginians 500 such, besides vast Numbers of others; and, as
near as I can judge, not less than 300,000 Men on each Side;) yet Polybius
bestows but about two Thirds of his first Book upon the Whole. Livy gave it 4
Books, from the 16th to the 19th inclusive; but these, with all the rest of his
2d Decad, from 11 to 20, are lost, and only the Arguments saved. Appian's
History of it is also lost, and he only barely mentions it, with Regulus's
Death, in his Beginning of that of their 3d War. Diodor. Siculus's Account of
it is also lost; for of his 40 Books we have but 15, with that Fragment
mentioned before, and some other few Scraps. Of Polybius's 40 Books there
remain but 5 whole, with some Excerpts of 12 more, and some other Fragments. Of
Livy's 140 Books there remain but 35, i.e. from 1 to 10, and from 21 to 45; but
Freinsheimius has given us excellent Supplements of the rest. Of Appian's 24
Volumes of the Roman Wars there are about 8 or 9 left, for their Divisions are
uncertain. So that a great Part of the Roman History, and particularly of this
great War, excepting what Polybius has given, as mentioned above, is to be
picked out only from scattered Hints in other old Authors, or from Epitomes, as
Florus, Eutropius, Justin, and such like: But there is nothing mentioned in any
Part of these Notes, but what is taken from the Original Authors themselves.
When or how Bostar and Hamilcar were taken, I find nothing, nor their Captivity
mentioned, but in that Fragment of Diodore. They were committed to the Charge
of Regulus's Family, as a Pledge for him, as he was a Captive at Carthage.
Marcus Atilius, who, to keep his Word to his Enemies, returned to certain
Tortures and Death; or of the two Cneius Cornelius Scipio and Publius Corn.
Scipio, two Brothers, Sons of Cneius C. Scipio, in the Year of Rome 541, the
7th of the 2d Carthaginian War, and 212 before Christ, were at the Head of the
Roman Forces in Spain, to defend their Dominions and Allies, and oppose the
Carthaginians, who had three Armies there, commanded by Mago, Gisgo's Son, and
Asdrubal; which last resolving to march with large Reinforcements, to join his
Brother Annibal in Italy, by the same Route through Gaul, and over the Alps that
Annibal before had taken; the two Scipio's thought it incumbent on them, at any
Hazard to prevent him; and they thought themselves strong enough to effect it,
by the Help of the Auxiliaries they had raised: These were 30,000 Celtiberians,
on whom they chiefly relied. But the Brothers dividing their Forces, and
sending these Spaniards to march before them; Asdrubal falling in with their
Leaders, found Means to persuade them to disband, and return home. Thus
denuded, they were exceedingly distressed, but by none more than by Masinissa,
then a young Man, and in the Carthaginian Interest; who was afterward so
stanch a Friend to the Romans, and particularly to Scipio Africanus, Son to
Publius, one of these Brothers. [See his Story in Note 58.] Publius entering on
a desperate Action, he and his whole Army were cut off: And Cneius, before he
knew any thing of his Brother's, had much the same Fate. Yet some of the Roman
Forces escaped. Mercius, a single Roman Knight, of no Name or Character before,
rallied these, and did such Wonders with them, that I know nothing in the Roman
History, that exceeds his Actions and Conduct. Livy, B. 25.
Scipio's, who, to obstruct the Passage of the Carthaginians, exposed and lost
their own Lives; or of your Grandfather Lucius Paulus AEmilius, Father to L.
Paulus AEmilius at Note 24. He was Consul in the 537th Year of Rome, the 2d of
the same War, with Caius Terentius Verro, a Plebeian, raised to that Dignity by
the Fury of the Commons and their Tribunes, who exclaimed against all the
Patrician Order or Nobility, as if They were fond of continuing the War.
Paulus, a Man of excellent Conduct and great Experience, finding how unequally
he was mated, did all he could to temper and moderate his Collegue's Rashness;
but in vain. Annibal well knowing Varro's Character, and as well how to manage
him, for some time played him to raise his Impatience, and then gave him
Battle, near the Village Cannae in Apulia; in which, Polybius says, 70,000 of
the Roman Army fell, with both the Consuls of the last Year. Livy says, there
were killed 21 Tribunes of War, and 80 of the Senatorial Rank. Paulus having
his Horse killed, was offered another after the Defeat to escape; but, though the
Battle was fought against his Advice, he disdained to survive the Loss: He
chose to die fighting; while Terentius, whose Rashness was the Cause of it,
saved himself by Flight, accompanied only with 70 Horse to Venusie; the Town
where Horece 152 Years after was born.
Lucius Paulus (Scipio) who resolved by his own Death to atone for the Rashness
of his Colleague, in our shameful Overthrow at Cannae; or of Marcus Claudius
Marcellus was five times Co^ul, the first in the Year 532. He was a most
excellent General, and the first who gave the Romans an Instance, that Annibal
could be beat. It was he who took Syracuse, after a Siege of three Years; the
great Mathematician Archimedes having so long defended it by his astonishing
Engines. He was generally successful in what be undertook, and this probably
led him to the last Action of his Life, which was too rash: For, in his 5th
Consulate, in the 545th Year of Rome, (...) before Christ, being with the Army
in Apulia, encamped a few Miles from that of Annibal, he rode out with his
Colleague Crispinus, who was also there, and a Guard of 220 Horse, to view a
Hill that lay between the two Camps, with a Design to possess and fortify it.
But Annibal, who was never wanting for a Contrivance, had placed an Ambush of
about 2000 below it. These Surrounding the Consuls, and the few that stayed
with them (for most of their Men fled) Marcellus, as he was courageously
defending himself, was run through with a Lance, and died: Crispinus and
Marcellus's Son escaped grievously wounded. Annibal on finding his Body, caused
it (according to Custom) to be burnt, and sent his Bones and Ashes in a Silver
Urn to his Son, as Plutarch says, who has given us his Life; but he quotes
Valerius Maximus and Livy, for what is not to be found in their Books, as we
now have them; though we have the Passages in both, that mention this Act of
Humanity in A^^bal, viz. Valerius Maximus, lib.5. c.l. and Livy, lib. 27. c.28.
for neither of them say any thing of sending away the Bones.
Marcus Marcellus, whose Death even the most inveterate of our Enemies thought
fit to honor with a Funeral. (...), I need not dwell on this Head of the
Contempt of Death, when I reflect not only on the noble Instances of it in such
Great Men as these, but even on those of our Instances of this are to be found
in Livy. particularly when ^. ^^lius Calatinus mentioned in Note 86) in the
first Punic War, was leading the Roman Army from (...) in (...), which they had
most barbarou^^y destroyed, to the Siege of Camarina, they fell in their March
into such a disadvantageous Situation, and were so surrounded by the
Carthagirian Army, that it appeared impossible for them to avoid either being
all then, or all cut to (...), till M. Calpburnius Fl^mma, a Tribune, with 300
Men, whom he led or, with these Words, Come Soldiers, let us march on and die,
and by (...) the rest of the Army, took Possession of a Hill, where they along
kept the Enemy so long employed, before they could quite vanquish and destroy
them, that the main Body sound Means to retreat. All the 300, it is said, (...)
there; but Hamme was found with some (...) lest, and recovered. (...) was when
in the War (...) the (...), P. Decius (...), one of those who devoted
themselves as in Note68) to (...) the Roman Army, acted the same (...), but
with better Fortune; for their (...) were so (...) at the Attempt, that they
both let the Army retreat, and these People also escape. The Story is in Livy,
lib. ^. C. 31, and c. and both these Passages are mentioned in Menliu^'s (...)
against redeeming the Roman Captives taken at (...), Livy, lib. 22. ^.
Legions themselves (as I have noted in my Origines) who, when the Service or
Honor of their Country called, have offered their own Lives as Victims, and
cheerfully marched up to Posts, from which they knew there was no Probability
they should ever return. Now, if Young Men, or those in the Vigor of Life, and
many of them not only uncultivated by Learning, but mere Rusticks, who never
had the Opportunity of Instruction, could so easily contemn Death; shall Old
Men who have had the Advantage of Literature and Philosophy, be afraid of it?
By living long we come to a Satiety in all things besides and this should
naturally lead us to a Satiety of Life itself. Children we see have their
particular Diversions; and does Youth, when past Childhood, pursue or desire
the same? Youth also has its peculiar Exercises; and does full Manhood require
these as before? Or has Old Age the same Inclinations that prevailed in more
vigorous Years? We ought then to conclude, That as there is a Succession of
Pursuits and Pleasures in the several Stages of Life, the one dying away, as
the other advances and takes Place; so in the same Manner are those of Old Age
to pass off in their Turn. And when this Satiety of Life has fully ripened us,
we are then quietly to lie down in Death, as our last Resting Place, where all
Anxiety ends, and Cares and Fears subsist no more.

CHAP. XXI.
BUT why should I not speak freely, and without Reserve communicate my whole
Thoughts on this Subject; of which as I am now drawing nearer to it, I seem to
have a clearer Sense and View? I must say then, I am clearly of Opinion (Scipio
and Laelius) that those great Men, and my very good Friends, your Fathers, though
dead to us, do now truly enjoy Life, and such a Life as alone can justly
deserve the Name. For while we are closed in these mortal Frames, our Bodies,
we are bound down to a Law of Necessity, that obliges us with Labor and Pains
to attend to the Discharge of the several incumbent Duties it requires. But our
Minds are of a heavenly Original, descended from the blissful Seats above,
thrust down and immersed into these gross Habitations of the Earth, a Situation
altogether unsuitable to a divine and eternal Nature. But the immortal Gods, I
believe, thought fit to throw our immortal Minds into these human Bodies, that
the Earth might be peopled with Inhabitants proper to contemplate and admire
the Beauty and Order of the Heavens, and the whole Creation; that from this
great Exemplar they might form their Conduct and regulate their Lives, with the
like unerring Steadiness, as we see is unvariably pursued, not only in those
celestial Motions, but through the whole Process of Nature. Nor have I been led
into this Belief from my own Reasonings only, but by the Authority of those
great and exalted Souls, the Philosophers who have lived before us. For I have
heard, that Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans, whom I may call our They resided
in the South-east Parts of Italy, formerly called M^gna Gr^cia, or Great
Greece, now the Kingdom of Naples. The People were from Greece, and spoke that
Language.
Countrymen; for their Habitation was in Italy, and thence they had the Name of
the Italic Sect: I have heard, I say, that those Philosophers laid it down as
their fixed and grand Principle, that our Minds are an Ess^ux or Portion of the
Divine Universal Mind, that governs the Whole. I have also seen and considered
the In Plato's Phaedon, now in English from Dacier's French Version.
Discourse that Socrates held with his Friends, the last Day of his Life,
concerning the Immortality of the Soul: That Great Socrates, who was judged by
Apollo's Oracle to be the wisest of Men. But my Conclusion is thus, and I am
fully persuaded in myself, That a Being so active, and so swist in Thought, as
to be consined by no Distance of Time or Place; that treasures up in Memory
such Multitudes and Varieties of Things past, and from these also can form a
Judgment of what is to ensue; that can comprehend within itself so many
different Sciences and Arts; strike out new Inventions, and by fresh
Discoveries still add to what has been known: Such a Being, I say, as is
capable of all this, I am fully persuaded, can never be of a mortal Nature.
For, as it is ever in Motion, yet is not put into it by any thing extrinsic to
itself, but it is Itself the Spring of all its Motion; therefore, since it
cannot depart or go out from itself, it must necessarily ever continue, and
cannot end. Again, as it is in Nature simple and unmixt, without any
Composition of different or dissimilar Parts, it cannot therefore be divided;
and if not divided, it cannot be dissolved and die. This seems also to be an
Argument for the Pre-existence of Souls, and that they were endued with
Knowledge, before they entered on this Stage; that Children so readily apprehend
Things altogether new to them in this Life, learn many difficult Arts, and take
in the Notions of Things, as if they were natural to them, and they were not
now learning any thing new, but were only recollecting what they had known
before. Thus Plato argues.

CHAP. XXII.
AND in In his Cyropaedia, Book 8.
Xenophon, Cyrus the Elder in his last Discourse to his Children, expresses
himself thus: Do not, my dear Children, imagine, that when I leave your, I
shall be no more: For in the Time I have been with you, you could never see my
Mind, but only knew by my Actions, that it was lodged in this Body. Be you
therefore persuaded, that though you no longer see its Lodging, yet it still as
surely exists, as before. For even the Fame and Honors of illustrious Men,
could not, as we see they do, continue after Death, unless their Souls, by
their Existence, in some Measure contributed to their Duration. I never indeed
could persuade myself, that Souls confined in these mortal Bodies, can be
properly said to live, and that when they leave them, they die; or that they
lose all Sense when parted from these Vehicles: But, on the contrary, when the
Mind is wholly freed from all corporeal Mixture, and begins to be purified, and
recover itself again; then, and then only, it becomes truly knowing and wife.
-- Further, when the Body is dissolved by Death, it is evident what becomes of
all the several Parts of it; for every thing we see returns to the Elements of
which it was formed: But the Mind alone is never to be seen, neither while it
is actuating the Body, nor after it leaves it. -- You may further observe, that
nothing so much resembles Death, as Sleep: But the Soul in Sleep, above all
other Times, gives Proofs of its divine Nature: For when free, and disengaged
from the immediate Service of the Body, it has frequently a Foresight of Things
to come: From whence we may more clearly conceive what will be its State, when
entirely freed from this bodily Prison. Now, if the Case be thus, you are then
to consider and honor me, as a Knowing Spirit: But if my Mind should also die
with my Body, let it be your Care, first to pay all Reverence to the Gods, who
support and govern this mighty Frame; and also, with a due and pious Respect
for my Name, keep me always in your Remembrance. Thus Cyrus on his Deathbed.

CHAP. XXIII.
AND now, to mention some of our own People. No Man, Scipio, shall ever prevail
on me to believe, that either your Father Mentioned in Notes 24, 8, and 97.
Paulus, or two Grandfathers Mentioned in Notes 24, 8, and 97.
Paulus and Africanus, or Africanus's Mentioned in Notes 24, 8, and 97.
Father and his Uncle, or diverse other illustrious Men, whom I need not name,
would have undergone such vast Fatigues to atchieve those glorious Actions
which are consecrated to the Remembrance of all Posterity, if they had not
clearly discerned, that they themselves had an Interest, and a kind of Right
and Property in Posterity, by their still continuing to exist, and to be
Sharers as well as Witnesses of their Fortune. Do you imagine, that even I (for
as I am an Old Man, I must talk a little of myself;) I say, that I would have
undertaken such hazardous Attempts, and undergone such Fatigues by Day, such
Toils by Night, at home and abroad, if I had supposed the Glory of my Actions
must terminate with my Life, and all my Sense of it end with my being here? For
if I had no further Views, might it not have been more eligible to me, to have
past away my Days in Quiet and Ease, free from Toils and Care, and without
Labor or Contention? But my Spirit rousing in itself, I know not how, had
Futurity always so much in View, as if it were assured, that as soon as it
quitted this Life, it would then truly live, and not before. And were it not
really so, that our Souls are immortal, why is it that the greatest of Men so
ardently aspire to immortal Glory? Or why are the Wisest ever the most easy and
content to die, and the Weak and Foolish the utmost unwilling? Is it not, think
you, because the most Knowing perceive, they are going to change for a happier
State, of which the more Stupid and Ignorant are incapable of being sensible?
For my Part, I have a passionate Desire to see your Fathers again, whom I loved
and honored while here; and I not only long to meet those I knew and loved,
but those illustrious Souls also, of whom I have heard and read, and have with
Pleasure mentioned them in my Writings. Nor would I now on any Terms agree to
be stopped in my Passage to them; no, not on Condition to be restored to the
Bloom and Vigor of Youth again: Or should any heavenly Power grant me the
Privilege of turning back, if I pleased, from this Age to Infancy, and to set
out again from my Cradle, I would absolutely refuse it; for as I have now got
well nigh to the End of my Race, I should be extremely unwilling to be called
back, and obliged to start again. For, if we consider Things aright, what is
there in Life to make us fond of it? or that we can on solid Judgment pronounce
truly valuable? Or who is there, or ever has been, who has not at some Time or
other met with Trouble and Anxiety sufficient to make him weary of it? This
Comfort however attends the Thought, that the more the Satiety grows upon us,
the nearer we approach to its End. I am therefore ^ar from being of the Mind of
some, and amongst them we have known Men of good Learning, who lament and
bewail the Condition of human Life, as if it were a State of real Misery: For I
am not at all uneasy that I came into, and have so far passed my Course in this
World; because I have so lived in it, that I have Reason to believe, I have
been of some Use to it; and when the Close comes, I shall quit Life as I would
an Inn, and not as a real Home. For Nature appears to me to have ordained this
Station here for us, as a Place of Sojournment, a transitory Abode only, and
not as a sixth Settlement or permanent Habitation. But Oh the glorious Day, when
freed from this troublesome Rout, this Heap of Confusion and Corruption below,
I shall repair to that divine Assembly, that heavenly Congregation of Souls!
And not only to those I mentioned, but also to my dear Cato, than whom a more
virtuous Soul was never born, nor did ever any exceed him in Piety and
Affection. His Body I committed to the Funeral Pile, which he, alas! ought to
have lived to do by mine: Yet his Soul did not forsake me, but keeping me still
in View, removed to those Abodes, to which he knew, I was in a little Time to
follow. I bore the Affliction indeed with the Fortitude that became me, to
outward View, though inwardly I severely felt the Pangs of it; but in this I have
supported myself, that I knew our Parting was to be neither far nor long, and
that the Time is but short till we shall happily meet again.

Now, these, my Friends, are the Means (since it was these you wanted to know)
by which I make my Old Age sit easy and light on me; and thus I not only disarm
it of every Uneasiness, but render it even sweet and delightful. But if I
should be mistaken in this Belief, that our Souls are immortal, I am however
pleased and happy in my Mistake; nor while I live, shall it ever be in the
Power of Man, to beat me out of an Opinion, that yields me so solid a Comfort,
and so durable a Satisfaction. And if, when dead, I should (as some minute
Philosophers imagine) be deprived of all further Sense, I am safe at least in
this, that those Blades themselves will have no Opportunity beyond the Grave to
laugh at me for my Opinion. But whether immortal or not, or whatever is to be
our future State; as Nature has set Limits to all its other Productions, it is
certainly fit our frail Bodies also should at their proper Season be gathered,
or drop into their Grave. And as the whole Course of Life but too much
resembles a Farce, of which Old Age is the last Act; when we have enough of it,
it is most prudent to retire, and not to make a Fatigue of what we should
endeavor to make only an Entertainment. This is what I had to say of Old Age;
which I wish you also may live to attain, that you may from your own
Experience, witness the Truth of the several Things I have now delivered you in
this Conversation.

FINIS.

