Mr. Dickinson's REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Wetmore's LETTER.

REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Wetmore's LETTER In Defense of Dr. Waterland's DISCOURSE
OF REGENERATION. WITH A VINDICATION Of the received Doctrine of REGENERATION;
And plain Scripture-Evidence, that the Notion of BAPTISMAL REGENERATION is of a
dangerous and destructive Tendency.

By Jonathan Dickinson, A. M.

Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth-Town, New Jersey.

2 Timothy i. 13. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me,
in Faith and Love which is in CHRIST JESUS.

BOSTON: N. E.

Printed by J. DRAPER, for S. ELIOT, in Cornhill, and J. BLANCHARD, at the
Bible and Crown on Dock-Square.

M,DCC,XLIV.

REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Wetmore's LETTER In Defense of Dr. Waterland's Discourse
OF REGENERATION.
REGENERATION being by our blessed LORD himself determined to be of absolute
Necessity to all that would ever enter into the Kingdom of GOD, it must be
acknowledged to be of vast Consequence, to have a right Apprehension, as well
as a sensible Experience of this great Change, upon which our eternal Interest
does so immediately depend. By this Consideration, I was sometime since excited
to publish a Discourse upon the Nature and Necessity of Regeneration; and to
annex some Remarks upon a Treatise of Dr. Waterland's upon that Subject, which
was industriously handed about the Country, and seemed to threaten the
Seducement of many of our People from the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
in that most important Concern.

The Rev. Mr. Wetmore has thought fit to undertake the Defense of Dr.
Waterland's Scheme, in a Pamphlet, entitled, A Letter occasioned by Mr.
Dickinson' s Remarks upon Dr. Waterland's Discourse of Regeneration: He does
not indeed pretend, that his Discourse is an Answer to my Remarks. He might
probably foresee how very poor an Appearance such a Pretense would make in the
Title Page, when all my Arguments against his Scheme are wholly overlookt in
the Treatise; and not so much as an Attempt made to answer any one of them. He
tells us, that all which appeared needful, by way of Antidote to the Poison of
this confident Performance of Mr. Dickinson, is to show, that believing the
Doctrines this Author so highly faults the Clergy of the Church of England, and
particular Dr Waterland for teaching, as they are in reality taught, cannot
possibly be any Prejudice to any Man, in respect of his Hope and Comfort here,
or his Happiness in Eternity ( P 6)

I Am not therefore called to vindicate my Remarks upon Dr. Waterland: this
Author gives me no Occasion or Opportunity for it. My Arguments against the
Dr.'s Discourse are yet unanswered, and (for ought that appears in this Letter
of Mr. Wetmore's) are altogether unanswerable. But it seems, our Author has
this Satisfaction, that he supposes his Doctrines (whether true or false) cannot
possibly be any Prejudice to any Man, in respect of his Hope and Comfort here,
or his Happiness in Eternity -- That is, he thinks his Doctrines true, and
would be willing to prove them so; and though he cannot answer the Arguments
against them, he has this to recommend them to our Acceptance, that the Belief
of them will do us no hurt, if it does us no good. -- I think, he don't pretend
to prove any special Advantage, that can follow from the Entertainment of his
Principles. It is (it seems) sufficient to his Purpose, to show that they are
not injurious and mischievous. -- We need not then be very solicitous about
coming into his Sentiments; nor filled with any Anxiety lest our side of the
Question should prove a Mistake, since there is so little danger of an Error on
that Hand. If Baptism be Regeneration, we are as safe as the Gentlemen who
oppose us; being regenerated as well as they. But if it should prove otherwise,
and by resting upon our Baptism, we should fall short of that New Birth, which
is absolutely necessary to all who would see the Kingdom of GOD; It is obvious,
what the Consequence of such a fatal Mistake must be. -- It is therefore open
to every Man's View, which Side of the Question it becomes a wise Man to take,
where there is such infinite Danger on the one Hand, and none at all on the
other. And this will appear in a yet stronger Light, when I have shown (as I
hope to do in the sequel) that this Gentleman can produce no good Evidence at
all, either of the Truth or the Safety of his Principles.

I shall first endeavor to consider, Whether a Mistake in this Doctrine be so
innocent and indifferent, as Mr. Wetmore would represent it.

I shall then take some brief Notice of the Objections he is pleased to make
against some Expressions of mine, in my Remarks upon Dr. Waterland.

And next proceed to consider the State of the Question as represented by this
Author: And then answer the Arguments he brings in Support of his Opinion.

First, I am to consider, Whether a Mistake in this Doctrine be so innocent and
indifferent, as Mr. Wetmore would represent it.

He demands, Whether it can be any Prejudice to such as truly believe in
CHRIST, repent of their Sins, and live in Obedience to the Gospel-Precepts,
that they think verily, and so declare, that they were born again, when they
were baptized? (P. 8)

I must answer this Question in the Affirmative. For though the Danger of this
Doctrine does not so much, and so immediately affect true Believers and sincere
Penitents, as others; yet it may prove very injurious to them also. -- Their
supposing, that they were regenerated at their Baptism, may make them
inattentive to, and insensible of the great and gracious Change wrought in
their Souls at their Regeneration; and prevent that Peace with GOD through our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, that Access by Faith into the Grace wherein they stand, that
rejoicing in Hope of the Glory of GOD, and that glorying in Tribulations, which
the Apostle tells us are consequent upon our Justification by Faith (Romans v. 1,
2, 3.) and may render their Lives exceeding dark and uncomfortable, though their
State be safe. -- Besides, this may prevent their Discharge of several Duties,
which they owe to GOD, such as giving him the Praise due to the Glory of his
Grace, by which they are accepted in the Beloved, their Rejoicing in CHRIST
JESUS, their crying Abba, Father; and their serving him without Fear, in
Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of their Lives.

But the great and (I may justly say) the infinite Mischief, that is done by
this Principle, is to Unbelievers and impenitent Sinners. Multitudes of these
seem to quiet their Consciences with a vain Apprehension of their regenerate
State, and to cry Peace to themselves, while walking in the imagination of
their own Hearts. They may be sensible, perhaps, of the sinfulness and
irregularity of their present Conduct; but they keep their Consciences asleep,
with their good Purposes and Designs, with their legal Repentance and dead
Faith, with their lifeless Devotions, and temporary Reformations; and thus live
and die Strangers to that vital Change, without which, our blessed Savior
assures us, we can never see the Kingdom of GOD -- It is not therefore (as Mr.
Wetmore supposes) the only Question, Whether a bare Opinion, that Baptism is
Regeneration, will exclude Men from the Kingdom of Heaven, that believe in
JESUS CHRIST, and denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World? ( P. 8) But it is a Question of
vastly greater Concernment, whether they who by a vain Dream of a baptismal
Regeneration quiet their Consciences in an unconverted State, are not laying a
Foundation for mourning at the last, and lamenting the destructive Error when
it is too late?

But we are told, that such a Mistake (if it were indeed a Mistake) would not
render any Man incapable of doing every Thing that the holy Scriptures require
as the Condition of Salvation. ( P. 8.)

To which I answer, He that has no other Regeneration than his Baptism, is
incapable (while in his present State) of doing any Thing which the Scriptures
require, as the Terms of Salvation. He is indeed capable of the external Duties
of Religion; and thereby of being in the Way of the Blessing, and wherein only
he may hope for the Influences of GOD's sovereign Grace, which he can neither
deserve nor claim, by any Thing he does or can do. He is capable of an external
Reformation, and of a careful Endeavor to live a Life of Morality: But by
these Things he can never answer either the penal or preceptive Demands of that
Law, which curses him for the least Imperfection of his Obedience, and for his
not continuing in all Things written therein to do them. He is dead in
Trespasses and Sins. (Ephesians. ii. 1) He is in an Estate of Enmity to GOD; and
cannot please him (Rom viii 7 8) He is a Child of Wrath (Ephesians ii 3.) In a Word,
He cannot believe in Christ, without being born of GOD. (1 John v 1) And
without Faith, it is impossible to please GOD. (Heb xi. 6) This is evidently
the Case of every unregenerate Soul: And thence it is, that he who is not born
again, cannot see the Kingdom of GOD. (John iii. 3.) -- How dreadful then must
the Disadvantage be, for Sinners to be ignorant of the Danger and Misery of
their State, of their Necessity of a vital Change, and of their Impotence and
utter Inability to make this great and infinitely important Change in their own
Hearts! Of what unspeakable Importance is it, that such as these should awake
out of their pleasing Dream; that they may meditate an Escape from the Wrath to
come, and being sensible of their undone and miserable State, they may be
brought to the Footstool of GOD's sovereign Mercy! -- How dreadful will the
Issue be, after they have flattered themselves with their vain Imaginations of
a regenerate State; and of their Capacity of doing every Thing, which the
Scripture requires as a Condition of their Salvation, to find that a deceived
Heart has turned them aside, and that they have a Lie in their right Hand! --
Though it be possible for Men to experience a Work of Grace in their Hearts (as I
doubt not some have done) even under the Prejudice of this Mistake; yet they
will not be likely to be very solicitous about that necessary Change, while they
delude their Souls with an Apprehension, that they have had it already; and
therefore not very likely to be in the Way of obtaining that Grace, by which
they may be capable of complying with the Scripture-Terms of Salvation.

Had I esteemed this to be a mere Logomachy, or verbal Controversy (as it seems
this Gentleman does) I should not have provoked him to have spent so much Time
and Pains for nothing, but to vindicate the Acceptance of the Word
Regneration; nor should I now mispend my Time in so vain and fruitless a
Controversy. But it is notorious, and open to every one's Observation, that the
Patrons of baptismal Regeneration are avowed Opposers of the Doctrines of
special Grace, and of those Experiences of a new living Principle of spiritual
Action, which (if I have any Understanding of the Gospel of CHRIST) are
absolutely necessary to our eternal Safety. These Things are treated by 'em
with Reproach and Contempt, under the Characters of Cant, Enthusiasm,
Fanaticism, and the like; as is abundantly exemplified by this Author: And it
is no more than what this Principle of theirs naturally leads them to. By
supposing all those Texts of Scripture, which speak of the Necessity of the new
Birth, the new Creature, the new Man and c refer to Baptism only, they easily
(with Dr. Waterland and Mr. Wetmore) suppose, that a sincere Endeavor to do
the best they can, and to be daily gaining Ground of their Vices and Passions,
is all the Change necessary to a State of Favor with GOD. -- I cannot
therefore but conclude that while I am impleading this Error of theirs, I am
endeavoring to defend one of the most important Articles of our Faith and
Hope; and endeavoring to pluck poor unwary Souls out of a Snare, that may
prove most destructive and ruinous to them.

I am in the next place, to take Notice of his Objections, against some
Expressions in my Remarks.

He insinuates that my great Aim was to possess my credulous Readers with
groundless Prejudices against and Aversions to the Clergy of the Church of
England: -- And complains of my warning my Hearers (in Page 30 of my Sermon) in
the Apostle's Language, 2 Timothy iii. 5. From such turn away. ( P. 1) -- In the
Place he refers to, I admonished my Hearers against the Ministry of such, who
would quiet Men's Consciences with a Form of Godliness, without the Power,; who
would put poor sleepy Sinners into a vain Dream of having already received a
baptismal Regeneration; who would encourage their Hopes of a safe State, merely
from their Morality; and who leave the Necessity of the converting Influences
of the blessed Spirit, and of a vital Union to CHRIST by Faith, out of their
Creed; and flatter Sinners with an Imagination of Safety, without experiencing
either the one or the other. -- Now then let the Appeal be made to the World of
Mankind, Whether his finding such Fault with this Address, and his applying
these Characters to the Clergy of the Church of England, don't abundantly
justify what I have above observed, with Respect to the great importance of our
steadfast Adherence to the Doctrine of Regeneration, as it has been generally
received in the Protestant Churches. I must therefore be so far from giving
Satisfaction to this Gentleman, as to the Matter of this Complaint, that I must
renew my Exhortation to all who have any Value for their eternal Interests, to
turn away from such Doctrines as tend to satisfy their Minds, and give them
Hopes of Salvation, without the Experience of a new and living Principle of
Grace in their Hearts.

He complains, that I represent the great Importance (of the Doctrine I plead
for) with as strong a Claim to Infallibility, as the Pope himself. (P. 4)
Because I deduced this Corollary from full (and I think, unanswerable) Proof,
that Baptism is not that Regeneration, which the Scriptures make necessary to
Salvation; viz. From hence it appears, that we cannot see the Kingdom of GOD, in
Consequence of these Principles espoused by some of our episcopal Clergy. How
harsh soever the Consequence may be supposed, it is nevertheless infallibly
certain.

Upon this he exclaims. -- I find we need not go to Rome for Infallibility:
Behold and admire! But what Cause of this tragical Exclamation? Can any Thing
be more infallibly certain, than a Consequence justly deduced from Premises
truly and fairly stated? Let him therefore, if he can, first show what Defect
there is in the Premises, before he exclaims against the Conclusion. If this be
what he dare not attempt, he must yet allow me to suppose that Conclusion to be
infallibly certain.

But he flouts at the Expression, and seems to suppose it incongruous and
ridiculous, to speak of seeing the Kingdom of GOD in Consequence of Principles
espoused and professed. 'This (he tells us) is a low Discovery for an
infallible Doctor.' -- I would enquire of this Gentleman, whether they who
shall finally see the Kingdom of GOD, will not be saved in Consequence of their
believing the Scriptures to be the Word of GOD; our blessed Savior to be the
SON of GOD; and Holiness to be necessary to eternal Happiness; and whether all
practical Godliness, both of Heart and Life, be not in Consequence of these
Principles? Or to speak directly to the present Purpose, whether a proper
Concern about, and Endeavor to obtain a new Birth, or saving Conversion unto
GOD, be not in Consequence of our believing the Necessity of that great and
important Change? Or on the contrary, whether Security, Carelessness and
Negligence about obtaining the renewing Influences of the Spirit of GOD, are
not too commonly seen, in Consequence of a Disbelief of the Necessity of
converting and regenerating Grace? -- If these Things are so, Men may be saved
or perish in Consequence of the Principles they espouse and profess. If not,
there are no Principles, that we can profess or practice upon, which will have
any Influence upon our eternal Salvation.

But he would fain know, if seeing the Kingdom of GOD can be said infallibly to
be in Consequence of believing any Doctrine whatsoever, without Obedience to
the Will of GOD. -- (P. 4.) I answer, No. by no means. But I can tell him, that
speaking impertinently will always be the infallible Consequence of changing
the Question in Debate. He might have remembered, that I had fully proved (...)
him, that Obedience to the Will of GOD was the necessary Fruit, or (if he
pleases) the infallible Consequence of our being born of GOD. On the contrary,
Dr Waterland, and this Gentleman, teach us, that a Man may be born of GOD,
while he remains an impenitent Hypocrite, and lives in a Course of Sin. Now
then the Question fairly stated between him and me, is this: Seeing
Regeneration is by the Suffrage of our blessed LORD himself absolutely
necessary in Order to our seeing the Kingdom of GOD, and we have such different
Principles with Respect to the Nature of this Change; Which of those Principles
has the directest Tendency toward the Kingdom of GOD, THAT which supposes
Obedience to the Will of GOD, both in Heart and Life, a necessary Fruit and
Consequence of Regeneration; or THAT which supposes the Regenerate may finally
live and die in Disobedience and Impenitence? -- We both agree, that
Regeneration is absolutely necessary to Salvation; but we vastly differ with
Respect to the necessary Consequences of that Regeneration, upon the Hearts and
Lives of Men. -- He supposes, that this Regeneration which is so absolutely
necessary to Salvation, may leave Men finally impenitent and wicked; while, I
insist upon it, that it must be always accompanied with all the Graces of the
blessed Spirit, and must always bring forth the Fruits of Holiness and new
Obedience: And I have shown him, that our blessed LORD and his Apostles do
abundantly insist upon the same Thing: To which he has not seen Cause to make
any Reply.

Mr Wetmore again, as it seems with a very indecent Heat of Spirit, complains
of my enquiring why the moral Heathen may not be in a State of Salvation, as
well as such Pretenders to Christianity, that have no other Marks of the New
Creature, than those given us by Dr. Waterland, viz. Sincerely to endeavor to
do the best they can; and to be daily gaining Ground of their Vices and
Passions; and to find themselves after strictest Examination, to be upon the
improving Hand. -- Upon this he cries out. What Sound is this to christian
Ears, from the Mouth of a pretended Christian infallible Teacher? Behold the
Effect of sectarian Liberty! How much does Christianity suffer by the mad Zeal
of Enthusiasts? -- But would not less Heat and better Argument have done his
Business full as well? -- I have shown him, that these Characters may be found
in those, who have never been weary and heavy laden with their Sins; who have
never had any true Repentance for Sin; who have never had any saving Faith in
CHRIST JESUS; who have never had any Humility, spiritual-mindedness, or Victory
over the World; who have never had old Things pass away, and all Things become
new; and in a Word, who have never had CHRIST in them, without which they must
be Reprobates. -- Why then should Mr. Wetmore be so very angry at this, without
giving any Reason at all of his vehement Exclamation? -- If moral Heathen are
as capable as others, 'sincerely to endeavor to do the best they can;' if they
may be and have been sometimes daily gaining Ground of their Vices and
Passions; and if they may find themselves after the strictest Examination, to
be upon the improving Hand: Then the moral Heathen may have such Marks of a
State of Salvation, as the Doctor assures us are sufficient; and the Christian
which the Doctor there describes, has no better Marks of a converted State,
than a moral Heathen may attain to. -- Let Mr. Wetmore take what Advantage he
can of this Reasoning: I can foresee but one Answer he or any Man else can
give; and that is such an one as he has already given. However, he should have
remembered, that it is such an one, as Michael the Archangel would not give
even to the Devil, when disputing about the Body of Moses.

But the professed Christians in the Question, were baptized. -- If so, I must
again make my former Remark; and observe, that if they have no more
Christianity, than these Gentlemen make the Evidence of a converted State,
their Christianity and their Baptism will but aggravate their Guilt. For, how
much greater the Obligations be, they are under to be Christians indeed, so
much the greater will their Guilt be, if they rest short of a saving Change.

Nothing is more certain, than that the Scriptures do require other
Qualifications, in Order to our inheriting the Kingdom of GOD, than Dr.
Waterland and Mr. Wetmore have made the Marks of a converted State. Besides
gaining Ground of our Vices and Passions, and being upon the improving Hand,
they do require an Illumination of our Understandings, (Ephesians. i. 18) a
Renovation of our Affections, (Col. iii. 2) a Subjection of our Wills to the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, (Psalm. cx. 3.) and a captivating our very Thoughts unto the
Obedience of CHRIST, (2 Cor. x. 5) They do require Faith in JESUS CHRIST, (Mark
xvi. 16) sincere Repentence, (Acts iii. 19) Love to GOD above all Things,
(Matt. xxii. 37) spiritual-mindedness. (Romans viii. 6) Victory over the World,
(1 John v. 4) a being renewed in all the Faculties of our Souls, (Ephesians. Iv. 23)
the Fruits of the Spirit in our Hearts and Lives, and a walking in the Spirit.
(Gal. V. 22, 2^.) and in a Word, that CHRIST be in us by his Image and
Influence, if we would not be Reprobates. (2 Cor. xiii. 5.) -- And I think it
equally certain, that a Man may have those Marks of a safe State given by the
Dr., and Mr. Wetmore; and yet have none of these Graces, Influences, and Fruits
of the Spirit. A moral Heathen is therefore as capable of the Marks given by
these Gentlemen, as a nominal Christian, who is destitute of those
Scripture-Marks I Have mentioned. -- There is Nothing in the Nature of Things,
Nothing in the Christian Institution, that renders it impossible, or
improbable, for a Heathen to attain to what is proposed by these Gentlemen, as
the Marks of Conversion, in the same Manner, and in the same Degree, as any
professed Christian in the World is capable of, who has no higher Attainment
than these under Consideration. -- Whence it follows, either that Baptism
alone, without any religious Seize but what are common with us to the
moral Heathen, will entitle a Man to Salvation; or else, that the baptized
Christian will be more inexcusable in the Day of Judgment, than the moral
Heathen, on Account of his violating his baptismal Covenant.

Thus we may see how little Cause this Author had for his repeated wrathful
Exclamations; and how great Cause every one has, who would secure the eternal
Safety of his immortal Soul. to be fearful of embracing the dangerous Doctrines
taught by these Gentlemen; and of satisfying his Mind with no higher
Seize in Religion, that what may be found among the Heathen themselves,
while he rests short of all those Graces and internal spiritual Qualifications,
which the Word of GOD makes necessary to our future Happiness and Glory.

Mr. Wetmore proceeds to complain of my Uncharitableness; and spends some Pages
in the declamatory Style, in Praise of Charity, and in severe Censures upon
those whom he calls uncharitable. ( P. 10. and c.) -- But whence this Heat? I
have endeavored to prove and I think I have fully proved, that what these
Gentlemen call Regeneration, is not the new Birth which our blessed Savior
declares necessary to Salvation, and which is particularly described in the
Word of GOD; and therefore not the new Birth, by which we must be prepared for
the Kingdom of GOD And if this be Uncharitableness, I must still remain just so
uncharitable, till I can obtain a very different View of this Case, from what I
can find in my Bible. -- Is it Uncharitableness, to assert the Truth of those
Doctrines, taught by our blessed LORD himself, and by his inspired Apostles?
Thus Uncharitable must we necessarily be toward some People or other, in
retaining any one essential Article of the Christian Faith -- Would it not
therefore have been much more to the Purpose, if this Gentleman had considered
the Arguments brought, and the many Texts of Scripture alleged in Proof of my
Point, than thus to confute them all in the Lump, by passionate Exclamations?
-- But he seems conscious to himself, that this could not be done, or at least
that he would but in vain attempt it: We might else have expected something of
that Kind, in this his Undertaking -- If he thinks it can be done, I do now
entreat him (whilst in his charitable Frame) out of mere Compassion to such
poor deluded People, as he is pleased to style us, ( P. 12.) distinctly to
consider and answer the Arguments I have brought against his Principles. We
shall else still conclude, that our Adherence to the Doctrines fully and
plainly taught in the divine Oracles, may be justified, though he is pleased to
call us uncharitable.

Well! Whether I am in the due Exercise of Charity or not, we may reasonably
expect our Author will exemplify this excellent Grace to us, at least while he
is writing so fine a Panegyric upon it. Let us then look and see what a mighty
charitable Disposition he has manifested, toward those who differ from him in
the Subject of the present Debate. -- Whatever they may pretend as to Holiness,
(says he) The Way of Peace they have not known. ( P. 11) -- They are Disturbers
of Church and State, and promote Strife, and Variance, and Confusions in all
Societies; which is a shrewd Sign their Opinions, which they think themselves
so wise in being tenacious of, are not the true Wisdom from above: but such as
St. James tells us, are earthly, sensual, devilish, ( P. 12.) -- Factious Men,
who pervert the Scriptures, and wrest them (as St. Peter expresses it) to their
own Destruction. ( P. 18.) -- Which no Man can do ( that is, no Man can find
the Marks of Grace truly in himself) that lives in a State of Schilm and
uncharitable Separation from the Communion of that national Church, of which he
ought to be a peaceable Member. ( P. 39) -- Had I imitated this Reverend
Author, in the numerous rhetorical Flourishes of the like Kind, which his
Discourse abounds with, I could not have harangued with a very good Grace upon
the Necessity of Charity; but must have exposed my (...) to that just
Admonition of our blessed Savior, Matthew. vii. 3.

Another very heavy Complaint much insisted on against me, is, that I have
said, the ancient Fathers held many such ridiculous Opinions, as would now
expose a Man to the Contempt and Scorn of the World, if he should make a
Profession of them.

This is a Fact so notoriously open to every one's Observation, who has any
Acquaintance with Antiquity, that there is but very little Room for this
Author's fine Harangue, to prove the Fathers the only Interpreters of
Scripture: And as little Room for Mr. Wetmore to press them all into his
Service, in support of the Opinion he is now pleading for.

But that I may take off the Odium, which he is endeavoring to bring upon me,
by his passionate Appeal to the Populace upon this Subject, I will give a few
Instances, which have a special Reference to the present Debate; out of the
many which might have been produced, to show how criminal soever Mr. Wetmore
represents that Saying of mine, it is nevertheless strictly and ungainsayably
true.

Our Author tells us, that this Change ( Regeneration) is wrought by the
Operation and Influence of GOD's Holy Spirit, in and with the Application of
Water, according to CHRIST's Institution. ( P, 27.) -- But what say the ancient
Fathers upon this Point? Hear Two of them, which were truly ancient. --
Tertullian, directly contrary to Mr. Wetmore's Hypothesis, declares, Not that
we obtain the Holy Spirit in the baptismal Waters; but being cleansed in Water
by the Angel, we are prepared for the Holy Spirit. -- Then comes the laying on
of Hands, to invite the Holy Spirit by that Benediction. -- And thus the Angel
who presides at Baptism, makes Way for the coming of the Holy Spirit, by that
cleansing from our Sins which our Faith obtains, being plighted to the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost. -- Then being gone out of the Water, we are anointed to the
blessed Unction, according to the Custom under the Priesthood, with an Horn of
Oil De Baptism C. 5, 6, 8.
. -- To the same Purpose that of Cyprian, If a Man could be baptized out of the
Church, according to the Faith of Heretics, and yet obtain Remission of Sins,
he could according to the same Faith obtain also the Holy Spirit; and there
would be no Need that Hands should be laid on him, that he might receive the
Holy Spirit Epi^. 73. ad Jub.
. -- Here is fully represented, not only the Practice, but the Opinion of
Antiquity upon the Subject in Debate. Mr. Wetmore supposes that we obtain the
Holy Spirit in Baptism. The Ancients supposed that we did not obtain the Holy
Spirit in Baptism; but by the Imposition of Hands, and the Anointing which with
them immediately succeeded Baptism. So that if they supposed them born of Water
by Baptism, they supposed them born of the Spirit afterward. -- Now it is
offered to this Gentleman's Choice, to give up which he pleases, either his
favorite Opinion, which he so stiffly contends for; or his lofty and
extravagant Panegyric upon the ancient Fathers. -- Evident it is, that if his
Opinion be true, their Sentiments and Practice were not only inconsistent, but
ridiculous too.

I shall proceed to consider some other of their Customs, in the Administration
of Baptism, and the LORD's Supper; as represented by Tertullian. As we are
going into the Water (says he) we protest there, as we did also before that in
the Church, in the Presence of the Bishop, that we renounce the Devil and his
Pomp and Angels. Then we are dipped three Times, answering somewhat more than
what our LORD has determined in his Gospel. Being thence received of GOD as his
Children, we taste a Mixture of Milk and Honey; and from that Time for a Week
together, we forbear the ordinary Use of the Bath. The Sacrament of the
Eucharist, which was appointed by our LORD at a Meal-Time, and given in Charge
to all, we receive in our Assemblies before Day; and only from the Hands of the
Bishop. We make Oblations for the Dead; and for their Martyrdom on a stated Day
Yearly. We reckon it unlawful to Fast, or to Worship kneeling, on the LORD's
Day; and all the while between Easter and Whitsunday. We take great Care, that
none of our Wine or our Bread should fall to the Ground. In the beginning of any
Business, going out, coming in, dressing, washing, eating, lighting Candles,
going to Bed, sitting down; or whatever we do, we sign our Foreheads with the
Sign of the Cross. De C^ron, C. 3.


Now what will Mr. Wetmore say to these Things? What is the Cause, that he
don't believe and practice according to this ancient Pattern? Have I not now a
fair Occasion to turn his own Artillery upon him; and to observe to him, that
when he boldly intrudes his novel Interpretations of Scripture, I think I offer
him good Reason when I tell him, that the Fathers of the Christian Church, Men
of Piety and Sense, and such as would sacrifice their very Lives for the Honor
of CHRIST, had a different Opinion, and a different Practice from his! ( P.
18.) -- Let him then keep to his Rule. Let him make the ancient Fathers his
Pattern in the Case before us: Let him dip Children three Times, when he
baptizes them: After Baptism, let him give them to taste of a Mixture of Milk
and Honey; then lay Hands on them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost; and
proceed to anoint 'em with Oil: Let him administer the LORD's Supper before
Day; make Oblations for the Dead once a Year; declare it unlawful to fast, or
to worship kneeling on the LORD's Day, all the Time from Easter to Whitsunday;
and be conscientiously scrupulous, not to suffer a Piece of Bread, or a Drop of
Wine to fall to the Ground, during that Time: Let him cross himself in the
beginning of any Business, as going out, coming in, dressing, washing, eating,
lighting Candles, going to Bed, and c. And let the World about him be
admonished, not to call these Things ridiculous. For they were the Opinions and
Practices of the ancient Fathers; and such Points in the purest Ages of
Christianity, we may reasonably imagine were well sifted; and what the Mind of
the Apostles themselves was in such Points, would be fought and preserved with
Care. (P. 17)

I had before instanced in an Opinion and Practice, which generally obtained
among the Ancients, viz. their administering the LORD's Supper to young Infants.
This they supposed absolutely necessary to Salvation, from their odd
Construction of that Text, John vi. 53. This Principle and Practice obtained at
least as early as Cyprian's Time; Vid. Sermon. de Lapsis, Sect, 20.
and continued long in Use in the Church. -- What Mr. Wetmore's Sentiments are
about it, is hard to determine. He makes a long Apology for it. But should he
come into this Practice, he would not only be esteemed erroneous, but
ridiculous too, even by his own Party, as well as ours.

I might allege many more Particulars, which would abundantly justify that
saying of mine, which he so loudly complains of. But what I have already said,
is not only sufficient for that Purpose; but also to show, that Mr. Wetmore
himself will be determined by the Judgment of the Fathers, no further than they
agree, or he imagines they do agree, with him in Sentiment. I shall therefore
dismiss this Subject, but with one Remark more.

I have before shown him, that though the Ancients may frequently speak of our
being regenerated by Baptism; yet they seem to mean no more by it, than that
Baptism is an outward Sign, Seal, Pledge or Token of Regeneration; and not
properly in any Respect the new Birth it self. They put the Sign for the Thing
thereby signified; it being a Seal and Representation thereof. This appears to
be their Meaning, by their denying the absolute Necessity of Baptism to
Salvation: and their so frequently calling Baptism the Sign and Seal of Faith.
And I may now add to what I then observed upon this Head, that if we allow
Augustine to interpret his own Meaning, and the Meaning of others who used the
same Language, they could intend no more by baptismal Regeneration, than is
here supposed. He speaking of the Jewish Sacraments, observes; When the
Sacraments were common to all, the Grace which is the Virtue of the Sacraments,
was not common. Even so now, the Laver of Regeneration is common to all; but
the Grace by which the Members of CHRIST are regenerated with their Head, is
not common to all. In Psalm. 78.
It was a noted Distinction with him, between a Sacrament and the Matter of a
Sacrament; and he tells us, We must always distinguish the Matter from the
Sign, lest we transfer that to one, which belongs to the other. De Baptism.
Parvul. Vid. Calvini Institutiones, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Sect. 15. where much of
this Nature is cited from this Father.
-- Now if we understand the ancient Fathers in this Sense, in which by the
common Suffrage of learned Men they ought to be understood, and in which St.
Augustine certainly is to be understood, if we will allow him to explain his
own Meaning, all Mr. Wetmore's high Pretenses from the Fathers will come to
nothing. We may even venture to understand the Scriptures for ourselves,
without any Danger from that Quarter.

I shall take Notice of but one Complaint more against me, which is, that I am
one of that Sort, who are famous for Infant-damning Opinions; and, if my sort
of Regeneration be necessary for every one that gets to Heaven; and my six
Marks the Characters of every Child of GOD; and without those Marks no seeing
the Kingdom of GOD, as I assert, ( P. 22.) What will become of Infants, dying
in the Womb, at the Birth; or any Time before they are capable of experiencing
my Marks? -- But how have I made my self famous for Infant-damning Opinions?
Has any Thing that I have ever written, preached, or spoke, given the least
Handle for such an Accusation! I challenge this Gentleman to produce so much as
the Shadow of an Instance of this Kind, to justify his Charge -- But without
those six Marks there is no seeing the Kingdom of GOD; and, Infants are not
capable of experiencing those Marks. -- The six Marks he speaks of, are (1) A
new Principle, (2) That this Principle be spiritual and supernatural, (3.) That
this be wrought by the immediate Influence of the Spirit of GOD, (4) That this
Principle extends to all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul, (5) That it is a
Principle which enclines and enables the Soul to the Exercise of Faith in
CHRIST; and, (6) That it is a Principle of new Obedience to GOD. I would now
enquire of this Gentleman, what is it that renders Infants incapable of such a
new Principle in their Souls; and of being thus renewed in the Spirit of their
Minds, by the Influences of the Holy Ghost? -- If they are not capable of
actually believing and holy living, yet are they not capable of that Principle,
from whence these shall proceed when they come to the Exercise of Reason? And
does not even Dr. Waterland himself seem to allow this Capacity to Infants?
They are (says he) capable of being savingly born of Water and the Spirit; and
of being adopted into Sonship, with what depends thereon: For though they bring
no Virtues with them, no positive Righteousness; yet they bring no Obstacle or
Impediment. ( P. 23)

Certain it is that Infants are capable of the renewing Influences of the
Spirit of GOD; and of having a new Principle in their Souls; or they are
incapable of the Kingdom of GOD. For I think no one can pretend, that they
shall be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven, under the Guilt, Pollution and
Dominion even of original Sin. And now who is justly most famous for
Infant-damning Opinions; He that supposes them incapable to be renewed and
qualified for the Kingdom of GOD; or. I that suppose them capable Subjects both
of Grace here, and of Glory hereafter?

But it is high Time, that I should now proceed to the next Thing proposed,
which was to consider the State of the Question, as represented by this Author.
And that I may give the Reader a proper View of the Case, I will place his
Sentiments in one Column, and the Doctrine of our blessed Savior and his
Apostles in another, that the Opposition may be most open to every one's
Observation.

Mr. WETMORE'S Principles.
Sonship is GOD's Grant; and the Person adopted no more but a recipient and
merely passive. But this is not by any new Creation of any Principle of Faculty
in the Soul of the Regenerate, as Mr. D -- n imagines; but something indeed
specifically different from what he seems to fancy, ( P. 23.)

Opposite TEXTS of Scripture.
But as many as received him, to them gave be Power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name; which were born, not of Blood; nor of
the will of the Flesh; nor of the will of Man: but of God. Joh. i. 12, 13. For
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Romans viii 14. And
because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying Abba, Father. -- And if a Son, then an Heir of God, through
Christ, Gal. iv. 6, 7. See also 2 Cor. v. 17.

Mr. WETMORE'S Principles.
It [Adoption or Regeneration] is only the Grant or Bestowment of a Favor or
Grace, -- which is done by the Sacrament of Baptism; in which Men may be
active, and exert their Will and Choice, in what relates to the Qualifications
on Man's Part; and complying with the Conditions, on which GOD has promised to
grant such a Favor. ( P. 23.)

Opposite TEXTS of Scripture.
That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. Joh. iii. 6. Being born again,
not of corruptible Seed; but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives
and abides forever. 1 Pet. i. 23. Of his own Will begat be us. Jam. i. 18. The
Wind blows where it lists; and we hear the sound thereof; but cannot tell
whence it comes, or whither it goes, so is every one that is born of the
Spirit John iii 8

Mr. WETMORE'S Principles.
They are regenerated in this Sense of the Word, as it is used metaphorically,
to signify a great Change made in the State and Circumstances of the Person,
upon whom GOD bestows the Dignity and Privilege of Sonship in CHRIST JESUS. I
don't mean any inward Change wrought, upon the Faculties of the Soul. P. 24.)

Opposite TEXTS of Scripture.
Whatsoever is born of God does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him;
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God 1. Joh. iii 9. And have put on the
new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that created
him. Col. iii. 10,

Mr. WETMORE'S Principles.
What we may affirm is, that whosoever is born again, he is said to be so on
Account of some Influence of the Holy Spirit by whom all Sanctification and
Blessing is derived to the Creature. ( P. 28.) -- And if the Water used is so
sanctified, as to serve any holy and religious Purpose whatsoever; that
Sanctification must be by the Holy Spirit's Influence -- If it be only to
render the Water sacramental, that is, to consecrate it. ( P. 29.)

Opposite TEXTS of Scripture.
According to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeration; and RENEWING
of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our
Savior, Tit. iii. 5. 6 That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, John iii.
6 We know, that whosoever is born of God, sins not: but he that is begotten
of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not. 1 John v. 18.

Mr. WETMORE'S Principles.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. We may understand here no
more, than to be received into CHRIST, his Body or Church, with a Right to such
Privileges as belong to that Society -- And therefore every one that is made a
Member of this Society, is taken out of that wretched, miserable, guilty State
they were in before; estranged from GOD, and liable to his Curse; thus a Child
of Wrath, as St. Paul says, all are by Nature, Ephesians. ii. 3. but by Baptism
brought into a State of Favor in CHRIST; and thus quickened and saved, ( P. 19)

Opposite TEXTS of Scripture.
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the Dead, by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of Life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness
of his Death, we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. Knowing
this, that our old Man is crucified with him, that the Body of Sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin; for he that is dead, is
freed from Sin. Romans vi. 4, -- 7.

Mr. WETMORE'S Principles.
This is agreeable to Reason, that when Persons in a natural State, guilty are
polluted, are admitted into a Covenant of Favor and Friendship with GOD, their
former Guilt must be removed by a gracious free Pardon. ( P. 29. 30) -- This
Benefit seems to be applied to all, that by Baptism are made Members of
CHRIST's Body ( P. 30.) -- Nor does there appear to me any Absurdity in
supposing Baptism to seal Remission of former Guilt, even where the Person is
unworthy, and makes his Profession hypocritically -- (P 31.)

Opposite TEXTS of Scripture.
He that believes not is 'condemned already, because he has not believed in
the Name if the only begotten Son of God. He that believes not on the Son,
shall not (...) Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him. Joh. iii. 18, 36.
For in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any Thing, nor
Uncircumcision: but Faith which works by Love. Gal. v 6. For in Christ Jesus,
neither Circumcision avails any Thing; nor Uncircumcision; but a new
Creature, Gal. vi. 15.

Mr. WETMORE'S Principles.
Only as Pardon is a free Act of Grace and Mercy, I don't see why GOD may not
bestow that, as well as many other Blessings in this World, upon those that
don't deserve them. -- Those that have received Forgiveness of GOD, and yet
continue Wicked, may expect his Severity will be increased against them at the
Day of Judgment. ( P. 31.)

Opposite TEXTS of Scripture.
That will by no Means clear the Guilty. Exodus xxxiv 7. For the Gifts and
calling of God are without Repentance. Romans ix. 29. Whom be justified, them be
also glorified. Rom viii. 30. Whosoever is born of God -- keeps himself, and
that wicked one touches him not 1 John v. 18. Whosoever abides in him, sins
not: whosoever sins, has not seen him; neither known him 1 John iii. 6.



I may even Challenge this Gentleman to form any Propositions more directly
contradictory one to another, than these Doctrines of his are to the Scriptures
I have placed in Opposition to them. This therefore must be a sufficient
Admonition to every one, who has a reverential Regard to the sacred Standard
of our Faith and Practice, and any Value for the Salvation of his Soul, to take
Heed of such Principles, so directly regugnant to the Oracles of Truth.

Can it possibly be true, that Adoption is not by any new Creation of any
Principle in the Soul of the regenerate; but something specifically distinct;
and yet all that have Power to become the Sons of GOD, have received the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, are born not of the Will of Man but of GOD are led by the Spirit
of GOD, have the Spirit of his Son in their Hearts are Heirs of GOD through
CHRIST; and are new Creatures, having old Things passed away; and all Thing
become new in them? -- Can it possibly be true, that Regeneration is only a
Favor or Grace done by the Sacrament of Baptism; and yet that all the
regenerate are spiritual Persons, and born of an incorruptible Seed? -- Can it
be true, that Men may be active and exert their Wills and Choice in
Regeneration; and yet, they be born not of the Will of Man; but of the Will of
GOD, of his own Will and nothing else; even as the Wind blows where it
lifts; and we know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes? -- Can
Regeneration be without any inward Change; and yet all the Regenerate be so
changed, that they cannot commit Sin; but have the Seed of GOD remaining in
them; and are renewed after the Image of Him that created them? -- May we be
said to be born of the Spirit, while Partakers of no farther divine Influence,
than what consecrates the Water; and renders it sacramental; and yet the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, being made Spirit or spiritual, and being made free
from Sin, and keeping our selves that the wicked One touches us not, should be
the necessary Characters of all who are born of GOD? -- Are we to understand no
more by the Salvation consequent upon Faith and Baptism, than to be received
into the Church; and to have a Right to such Privileges as belong to that
Society? Is this to be taken out of that wretched guilty State, that we were in
before, while Children of Wrath; and yet all who are truly Partakers of this
Salvation consequent upon Faith and Baptism, must be not only buried with
CHRIST by Baptism into Death; but walk in Newness of Life, have their old Man
crucified, the Body of Sin destroyed, that henceforth they should not serve
Sin; and they so dead, as to be freed from Sin? -- -- Can the impenitent
Hypocrite have all his former Guilt done away by Baptism; and yet be condemned
already, under the Wrath of GOD; and his Baptism avail nothing, without Faith,
that works by Love; and the new Creature? -- May Men receive Forgiveness of GOD
at their Regeneration; and yet continue wicked, to their greater Condemnation
at last; when GOD will by no Means clear the Guilty; but determines to glorify
all, whom he pardons and justifies; and when they are born of GOD, do keep
themselves from the wicked one, they abide in him, they do not sin, if they
have ever seen him or known him? -- When the greatest Contradictions can be
reconciled, when Light and Darkness, Truth and Error can be proved to be the
same Thing, then, but not till then, can this Gentleman's Doctrines be proved
conformable to the Word of GOD.

I shall next proceed to consider the Arguments brought by Mr. Wetmore to
confirm these his Notions of Regeneration.

He observes, that this figurative Way of Description alluding to a Birth, is
applied to more Cases than one in holy Scripture, which Mr. Dickinson don't
seem to have a just Apprehension of; but applies all Texts of this Nature to
one only Thing, which he will have called Regeneration, and allows that Term to
be used for Nothing else; nor any other Expressions that have any Affinity to
it. ( P. 19.)

This is but an artful Changing the Question. Had he spoke to the Purpose, he
should have shown us, that Regeneration, being born again, begotten of God. or
born of God, being created anew, or made new Creatures, being born from above,
or born of Water and the Spirit, are Expressions applied to more Cases than one
in holy Scripture. For he knows, or should know, that this is the Point before
us: and not whether some Allusions may be found in Scripture to a natural
Birth, in a different View from what I am pleading for. -- If no such Instances
can be found, and these Expressions do retain one invariable Meaning through the
whole Word of GOD, all his Reasonings upon this Head are altogether
impertinent; and therefore all the Instances he assigns to confirm that
Argumentation, are wholly foreign to the Business before him. -- Suppose it
true, that a Change from Sorrow to Joy is illustrated by a Birth in Scripture;
Suppose the Term Children of GOD is used with Respect to the Resurrection:
Suppose great Streights and Difficulties are described by a like Metaphor; and
that the Children of Israel were truly GOD's People, in this metaphorical
Sense, as this Gentleman takes Pains to prove ( P. 19, and c.) What Conclusion
will these Premises afford him? How will it follow from thence, that to be
regenerate, to be begotten, or born of GOD, to be new created, or a new
Creature, to be born from above, or to be born of the Spirit, may signify no
more than to be baptized, when it cannot be proved, that these Expressions are
ever once used in that Sense; or that they any where in the Bible, have any
other Meaning than what I have assigned them?

But the Word Regeneration is always used in a metaphorical Sense, except when
used to signify the Resurrection; and all those Expressions of being begotten
of GOD; and born of GOD; and born from above; and whatever else seems to infer
a new Birth, are figurative; and can mean no more than the Production of some
great Change or Alteration, which may bear some Analogy, in a figurative Way of
speaking, to that Change that passes upon the State of an Infant, when it first
comes into the World; or is produced by Generation.

Well, what then? Will it thence follow that all the most distant Allusions to
a Birth or Creation, must be understood in the same Sense with these strong and
emphatical Expressions under Consideration; because both the one and the other
are metaphorical? -- He tells us that great Streights and Difficulties are
described by a like Metaphor. ( P. 20.) Will it therefore follow that
Affliction is Regeneration; and that every one under suffering Circumstances,
is regenerated? How then does Regeneration signify Baptism only, (as he so
strenuously endeavors to prove) if it signifies any Thing else, as well as
Baptism? How will this Reasoning serve his Cause, any better than ours, when it
is directly calculated to undermine both the one and the other? But the Comfort
is, that it is altogether impertinent and inconclusive. -- There is not the
least Appearance of a Consequence in this Arguing, that because some distant
Allusions to a Birth, a Creation, and c. are used in Scripture without any
determinate Signification, for very different Events, that therefore the Terms
New Birth, New Creation, and c. which are never used in Scripture but with one
determinate Signification, and for one Event only, are to be understood in the
same loose and uncertain Sense. -- -- Our blessed Savior and his inspired
Apostles have limited the Use of these Expressions, to one most important
Event, upon which they assure us that our eternal Interests do most immediately
depend; and it is therefore too bold an Undertaking, to endeavor to represent
them as being of such ambiguous and uncertain Signification. -- Of what
mischievous Consequence must it be to the Souls of Men, to interpret Scripture
after such a Manner! There is something spoken of, as absolutely necessary to
our seeing the Kingdom of GOD. But what is it that is required? Mr. Wetmore
teaches us, that it may signify 'a Change from Sorrow to Joy,' it may signify
the Resurrection, it may signify great Streights and Difficulties, it may
signify being In Covenant with GOD: -- But there is no determinate Idea to be
annexed to it; and yet it does signify Baptism Now (if this Reasoning should be
received) what dreadful Danger must we be in, of taking up with any Thing, or
Nothing, instead of what is required of us, as absolutely necessary to our
eternal Salvation!

As for the Texts of Scripture cited by him, to this Purpose, there are but two
of them which have any Reference at all to the Subject before us. These only I
shall therefore consider.

The first Text alleged by him, which has any Relation to the present Debate,
is Mat. xix 28 Ye that have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of
Man shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, ye shall also sit, etc. He supposes
the Regeneration in this Text, to express the general Resurrection ( P. 19.)
But assigns no Reason why it should thus be understood. -- There can be nothing
more natural and easy, than to understand this Text according to the common and
received Interpretation given to it. They followed CHRIST in the Regeneration
of Sinners to himself; and in his bringing the Church into a new and spiritual
State: Or they followed him as his Children, that were indeed born to him by
the Influences of his holy Spirit. -- This is the Sense, which the Word
Regeneration, and the other Synonymous Terms every where obtain in Scripture.
This is the most natural Interpretation of the Text before us, the Sense which
first offers to the Mind; and makes the Text most familiar and intelligible;
and he neither does, nor (I believe) can give any Reason at all, why we should
here change the received Interpretation of the Word.

The other Text he cites is, 1 Pet. i. 3 Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us
again to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead. From
which he argues, St. Peter does not say we are begotten to this Hope by a new
Creation in our Souls, as Mr. Dickinson would describe Regeneration or GOD's
begetting us; but in a quite different Manner, viz. by the Resurrection. -- To
which it is sufficient Answer, that St. Peter does not say, that we are not
begotten to this Hope by a new Creation, or the Creation of a new Principle in
our Souls. And I Am sure, that such a new Principle in our Souls is so far from
being inconsistent with our entertaining a lively Hope from the Resurrection of
CHRIST, that it is the only Foundation from which such a lively Hope can
proceed. -- The Words are plain and familiar; and at the very first View
represent to us the Sense I am pleading for; and are accordingly so understood,
by all the Commentators I have read upon the Text. God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ has begotten us, that is, he has given us a new and divine
Principle of Life, whereby we can entertain a lively Hope, from the
Consideration of Christ's Resurrection from the Dead.

Upon the whole then, he can find no one Text in the Bible, where Regeneration
or the other Expressions of the same Significancy are used, in any other Sense
than that which I am pleading for. -- But on the contrary, we are assured by a
Variety of full and clear Testimonies from the divine Oracles, that no Man can
have these Characters applied to him, but what has indeed experienced the
renewing Influences of the divine Grace. -- We know (says the Apostle) that
whosoever is born of God, sins not: but he that is begotten of God, keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not. It therefore never can be true
in any Case whatsoever, that any Man can be born of GOD, and continue in Sin;
or be begotten of GOD, and not keep himself from a Subjection to the wicked
one. The Apostle assures us, that he knows it is otherwise. And that gives us a
better View of the true Meaning of the debated Expressions, than all the
unscriptural Imaginations and Surmises of Mr. Wetmore and his Brethren. See
likewise to the same Purpose 1 John iii. 9. Ephesians. iv. 24. 1 John v. 4. cum
multis aliis.

Hitherto Mr. Wetmore has been only clearing his Way, for a more full and
direct Proof of his Point, which we are now to expect. But having said so much
already, before he comes directly to the Business before him, he thinks it
proper to proceed in a most brief and compendious Way.

All that will therefore be necessary (says he) to determine this whole
Controversy with Mr. Dickinson, is to show, that such a Change of State and
Relation is made in Christian Baptism, that the Persons baptized are truly said
to receive the Privilege to be called the Children of GOD, according to the
Acceptance of that Phrase both in the old Testament and new; and that this
Change is wrought by the Operation and Influence of GOD's Holy Spirit, in and
with the Application of Water, according to CHRIST's Institution.( P. 24)

Is this all that is necessary to determine this whole Controversy? Then it
seems, there is no necessity of answering nor indeed of taking any Notice at
all of the clear and full Scripture-Evidence brought against his Hypothesis The
Gentleman might probably think, that was too hard a Piece of Work; or would
take him up too much Time. He therefore chooses a more concise and easy Method
of dispatching his Business, lest the tedious Task of answering Arguments would
have quite spoiled the Plausibility of his Harrangue.

Is it sufficient, to show that the Persons baptized, are truly said to receive
the Privilege, to be called the Children of GOD? -- But how becomes it
sufficient, to show one Thing, when his Business was to prove another of a very
different Nature? -- The Point in Debate between him and me is, Whether Baptism
be Regeneration. What he attempts to prove is, that professed Christians may in
some Sense or other be called the Children of GOD. By the same Argument he may
as well prove, that all Orphans are regenerate; for a Father of the Fatherless
is God in his holy Habitation, (Psalm. Ixviii. 5.) And that all Men every where
are regenerate; for there is one God and Father of all. (Ephesians. iv 6) That the
holy Angels are regenerate; for they are called the Sons of God. (Job xxxviii.
7) And that even the Gentiles who were neither circumcised nor baptized, were
regenerate; for these were called GOD's Sons and Daughters, (Isai xiiii 6.)
Bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the Ends of the Earth. Is it
because Mr. Wetmore could say nothing at all to the Purpose, that he thus
seriously undertakes to prove a Point quite foreign and impertinent to the
Matter in Debate? -- As GOD is the Father and Creator of the Universe, all
Creatures are his Offspring (Acts xvii. 28, 29) and all intelligent Beings,
whether holy Angels. Men or Devils, may in this Sense be called his Children.
-- As GOD is pleased to bring some Part of Mankind into a nearer external
Relation to himself, by their spiritual Privileges and CovenantObligations,
these may in a more appropiate Sense be called his Children, or the Children of
his Covenant But what is this to Regeneration? -- Are they all who in these
Respect are called the Children of GOD, so born of the Spirit, that they are
Spirit, or spiritual Joh. iii 6
? Are they so freed from Sin, that they cannot commit Sin 1 John iii. 9.
? Have they all overcome the World 1 John v. 4
? Are they all begotten to a lively Hope 1 Pet. ^ 3.
? Does the Seed of GOD remain in them all 1 John iii.9.
? Do they all keep themselves, that the wicked one touches them not 1 John v.
18.
? Are they all created anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that they walk in
them Ephesians. ii. 10.
? These, all these, are the necessary and actual Characters of every regenerate
Person. And if they are not (as certainly they are not) the real Characters of
all, that in some Sense or other are called the Children of GOD in Scripture;
then this Reasoning of his is the Height of Impertinence.

But to be regenerate, or to be the Children of GOD, is the same Thing. ( P.
23) -- I answer, they are just so much the same Thing, as to be regenerate, or
to be in Heaven, is the same Thing. Both Adoption and eternal Salvation are the
Consequence of Regeneration; and therefore cannot be the same Thing. As natural
Generation preceeds Sonship, and cannot for that Reason be the same Thing with
it; so Regeneration does, in Order of Nature, preceed Adoption; and cannot for
that Reason be the same Thing with it.

What then will become of Mr. Wetmore's two Propositions, by which alone he
endeavors to establish his Doctrine of baptismal Regeneration? Suppose it
true, that such a Change of State and Relation is made in Christian Baptism,
that the Persons baptized are truly said to receive the Privilege, to be
called the Children of God: Suppose it is also true, That this Change is
wrought by the Operation and Influence of GOD's Holy Spirit, in and with the
Application of Water, according to CHRIST's Institution: it is all no more to
the Purpose, than if he had undertaken to prove any other Propositions
whatsoever. And yet this is all the Evidence which he pretends to offer in
Confirmation of his Principles; and upon which he would have Men run the
Venture of an Exclusion from the Kingdom of GOD. -- It would be to mispend my
own and my Reader's Time, to take any distinct Notice of the Method he uses to
illustrate and confirm his Propositions; since both the Propositions and their
Illustration, are such an egregious trifling, and wandering away from the
Subject in Debate.

I therefore proceed to take some Notice of his Corollaries. He first infers,
that it will appear very natural, to understand the Washing of Regeneration
(Tit. iii. 5.) to mean Baptism: especially considering, what is predicated of
it there is expressly predicated upon Baptism, (1 Pet. iii. 21.) that it now
saves us, according to our Savior's Promise ( Mark xvi. 16.) He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved. This being then the most natural and obvious
Interpretation, which according to the best Rules of interpreting Scripture,
should always be received, when such Interpretation is neither contrary to
Reason, nor any other Text of Scripture. ( P. 34.) -- Had Mr. Wetmore quite
forgot, that I had largely proved from a great Variety of Scripture Testimony,
that this Interpretation is both contrary to other Texts of Scripture, and to
Reason too? And is it not something diverting, to see him with a grave
Countenance take that for granted, and draw his Consequences from it (...)
Postulatum not to be disputed, which is so largely disproved in the Discourse
he is animadverting upon, without taking any Notice of the Evidence brought
against him? -- Let us however attend to his Reasoning.

It will appear (he tells us) very natural to understand the Washing of
Regeneration (Tit. iii. 5) to mean Baptism, especially considering, that what
is predicated of it there, is predicated of Baptism, 1 Pet. iii. 21. -- Well
then he allows, that being saved by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, is
predicated of the Laver of Regeneration in Tit. iii. 5. His Words can have no
other Meaning; for there is nothing else predicated of the Laver of
Regeneration in that Text. Whence it follows, that all who are regenerated, are
saved by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost. For if this be predicated of
Regeneration it is applicable to all who are regenerated. It is therefore an
inevitable Consequence, that if all who are baptized, are not saved by the
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, then all who are baptized are not regenerated; and
therefore that Baptism is not Regeneration. -- I cannot foresee what Answer Mr.
Wetmore can give to this. He cannot pretend, that all baptized Persons are saved
by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost; for he allows that there are some that come
in Hypocrisy, and are wicked after Baptism who may be considered as Exoticks (
P. 30.) Which Characters are just as contrary to the Renewing of the Holy
Ghost, as Light and Darkness, GOD and Belial. There cannot be a greater
Solecism, than to speak of wicked Hypocrites being (while such) renewed by the
Holy Ghost. -- But perhaps he intended to represent no more, as predicated of
the Laver of Regeneration than being saved. Let him however remember, that the
Salvation spoken of in the cited Text, is by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost;
and he has no Authority to separate what GOD has joined together.

But Salvation is predicated of Baptism, 1 Pet. iii. 21. -- By this he must
doubtless intend, that all who are baptized are saved; for what is predicated
of Baptism, is applicable to all the baptized. If therefore -- being saved --
means the same Thing in this Text, as it does in Tit. iii. 5. then all that are
baptized, are renewed by the Holy Ghost; which is not only most notoriously
false in Fact, but contrary to his own Concessions. -- If being saved, does not
mean the same Thing in this Text as in Tit. iii. 5. then this Text is most
impertinently cited, to prove that Baptism is meant by the Laver of
Regeneration, and is nothing at all to his Purpose: For how can the Use of the
same Words in one Text, show us how they are to be understood in another, where
they are used in a very different Sense, and with a very different Design? How
can being saved without the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, signify the same Thing
with being saved by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost? -- This Text therefore, in
what Sense soever he understands it, is far from justifying his Interpretation
of the Laver of Regeneration.

The Words of this Text are, The like Figure whereunto, Baptism does also now
save us (not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a
good Conscience toward God,) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. In these
Words are several Things worthy of particular Notice. It is observable, that
the bare Administration of this Ordinance of Baptism, or the Application of
Water, here called the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, does not save
us. Whence it follows, that this Ordinance may be administered to those, who are
no way Partakers of the Salvation here spoken of. For there are some baptized,
who have no gracious Qualifications; but are in Hypocrisy and Impenitence (as
our Author himself allows) and therefore have nothing but the outward
Application of the Ordinance. There is no Reason to suppose these to be
Partakers of any divine Blessing with the Ordinance, who do but mock GOD in
their Attendance upon it: These therefore are not saved by it. -- It is further
observable from this Text, that those whom Baptism saves, are such in whom is
the Answer of a good Conscience toward God: which (according to Mr. Wetmore's
own Interpretation of these Words, P. 8) implies to profess Faith and
Repentance; and promise future Obedience to GOD, with a good Conscience, i.e.
honestly and sincerely. They therefore who do not act sincerely, but come in
Hypocrisy (as he allows, some may do) are not saved by Baptism; because they
want the Qualification of a good Conscience, to which as a necessary Means,
this Text ascribes the Salvation here spoken of. -- It is moreover observable
from this Text, that they whom Baptism saves, are saved by efficacious Grace or
Virtue derived from the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Whence it follows, that
they who have no Interest in the Benefits proceeding from the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ, but are excluded by their Unbelief, Impenitence, and Hypocrisy,
are not saved by Baptism. -- -- Upon the whole then, it is most clearly and
unquestionably evident from this Text, that Baptism is not the Laver of
Regeneration. If the Laver of Regeneration saves all the Partakers of it, by
the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, [and Baptism does not save all that Partake of
it, by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost; if it saves none but those who have a
good Conscience, and have experienced the Power of Christ's Resurrection, then
Baptism is not the Laver of Regeneration -- I hope, this Gentleman will no more
pretend to press this Text into his Service, till he has removed these
Difficulties out of the Way.

His second Corollary is, that it will appear the most genuine and easy
Interpretation of Joh iii. 5. Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, to
understand the baptismal Regeneration I have described. ( P. 34) This he
endeavors to confirm by two Arguments. The first is taken from Ver. 10. Art
thou a Master of Israel, and know not these Things? Whence he argues: The
Ground of our Savior's Question to Nicodemus must necessarily be a known
Practice among the Jews of near Affinity to that of which he spoke; and such a
Practice was known among them. -- I might here enquire of him, how he proves
that such a Practice was known among the Jews as baptizing Proselytes; and
calling them new born, or regenerate? Was there any Institution in the
Levitical Law, upon which such a Practice was founded? If not, can it be
supposed, that our blessed Savior would do so much Honor to an humane
Invention and Tradition (if there had been that Tradition among them) as to put
so much Stress upon it: -- Or can he so much as prove, that this Practice had
ever obtained among the Jews in our Savior's Time? The Authorities he pretends
to bring, are much too late to prove any such Thing; and what he cites from
them, is nothing to his Purpose. If they called Proselytes new born, or new
born Infants, what is this to Baptism, of which they say nothing at all? Or how
does this prove that they esteemed Baptism to be Regeneration? In short, the
whole Notion (as far as appears by any Thing brought either by Dr. Waterland or
by Mr. Wetmore, in Confirmation of it) is but a mere chimerical Fiction. -- But
suppose it true, suppose that such a Practice was known among the Jews as
baptizing Proselytes, and calling them new born, or regenerated; How could
Nicodemus know by this, the Necessity of Christian Baptism, an Ordinance not
yet instituted, nor ever heard of in the World? How could he know, that because
Heathens were washed with Water when admitted Proselytes into the Jewish
Church, that therefore a Jew must be baptized in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, if he would ever enter into the Kingdom of GOD
our Savior? How could he know, because Proselytes to the Jewish Church were
baptized with Water, that therefore they who would hope for Salvation according
to the Christian Dispensation, must be born of Water and of the Spirit? -- It
is most certain, that Nicodemus, though a Master in Israel, could know none of
these Things; and it is therefore certain, that our Savior did not, could not
mean Christian Baptism, in the Text before us -- This Matter is largely and
particularly cleared up in my Remarks on Dr. Waterland; to which I refer the
Reader for further Satisfaction. But Mr. Wetmore has rather chosen to overlook
all that is there said against this trifling Notion, as unworthy of his Regard,
than to undergo the Drudgery of answering it.

Another Argument he brings to confirm his Interpretation of this Text, is
taken from the 12 th Verse of this Chapter. If I tell you of earthly Things and
ye believe not, how shall you believe, If I tell you of heavenly Things? From
whence he argue: To be born again of Water and the Spirit, are called earthly
Things, as the lowest GospelMysteries -- -- which it is much more natural to
apply unto Baptism, than the other Sense of Regeneration.

But why may not the other Sense of Regeneration be called an earthly Thing,
that is, what can be represented in an easy and familiar Manner, and
exemplified by common and well known Similitudes; and what was plainly
represented and explained in the Old Testament? Why (I say) may it not in these
Respects be called an earthly Thing, in comparison of those sublime and
heavenly Doctrines, taught in the remaining Part of this Discourse of our
LORD's with Nicodemus? Such as his coming down from Heaven, and being in Heaven
at the same Time ( ver 1.3) His being lifted up upon the Cross, that Believers
in him might have eternal Life. (ver. 14, 15) His being the Son of Man in
Heaven; (ver. 13.) and yet the only begotten Son of God here upon Earth: (ver.
16) -- And such as the eternal Life, to be obtained by all that believe in him;
and the Condemnation, that all Unbelievers are already under. ( ver.18) These
are plainly the Things here compared, by the Denomination of earthly and
heavenly Things. This Text therefore is nothing to Mr. Wetmore's Purpose.

His third Corollary is, that a persevering Piety and Virtue by the renewing
Influences of the Holy Spirit, must be added to Regeneration, to qualify Men
for the final Happiness of CHRIST's Kingdom. Under this Head he has some very
useful Admonitions, with which I heartily concur: But lest his Reader should
fall into some dangerous Mistakes, with respect to the important Truths therein
represented; I shall take leave to add a few Things, which are absolutely
necessary, in order to procure and secure this persevering Piety, which he
recommends.

1. It is necessary, for those who would obtain a Principle of Piety, to be
emptied of themselves; and to have a sensible feeling Impression of their own
Impotence and Misery. It is necessary, that they should have a realizing View,
that they are by Nature Children of Wrath, (Ephesians. ii. 3.) that their carnal
Minds are Enmity to God. (Romans viii. 7.) that while they remain in the Flesh,
in their original and natural State, they cannot please God. (Romans viii. 8.)
And that they therefore as guilty perishing Sinners lie at GOD's Mercy, and
cannot by their own Power help themselves. -- It is therefore dreadfully
dangerous for any to imagine, that Baptism seals the Remission of their former
Guilt, though they make their Profession hypocritically; as taught by this
Author, ( P. 31.) and that those baptized Persons, who want a Covenant-Claim to
eternal Happiness, don't want to be regenerated, but reformed; as we are taught
by Dr. Waterland. ( P. 11, 12.)

2. It is necessary, for those who would persevere in Piety and Virtue, that
they obtain a new living Principle of Grace in their Hearts by Regeneration:
otherwise, whatever Streams there may be, without a living Fountain to supply
them, they must quickly dry up. It is necessary, that they be created anew in
Christ Jesus unto good Works, that they may walk in them, Ephesians ii: 10. It is
necessary, that they put on the new Man, which is renewed after the Image of
him that created them Col. iii. 10. It would be very dangerous for them to
suppose, that by Baptism they are brought into a State of Favor in CHRIST, and
thus quickened and saved; as Mr. Wetmore teaches ( P. 29.), and that this is not
from any new Creation of any Principle in the Soul of the regenerate; but
something indeed specifically different from it; as he also teaches. ( P. 23)

3. It is necessary, in order to their obtaining this Principle, that they
depend only upon GOD's free and sovereign Grace, remembering that such guilty
unworthy Sinners can have no Claim to Mercy that they are Clay in the Hands of
the Potter, that GOD will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy (Rom ix 18, 21)
and that if ever they are Partakers of his Salvation, it will only be because
it has so seemed good in his sight, Matt. xi. 26. It is necessary that they
should for this Reason be in earnest, in working out their own Salvation with
fear and trembling, because, it is God that works in them both to will and to
do of his good Pleasure. Phil. ii. 12, 13 -- It will be very dangerous for 'em
to suppose with this Gentleman, that a good Conscience and a good Life,
comprize all the Requisites to a comfortable Hope. ( P. 7.) Or that if we
sincerely endeavor to do the best we can; and are daily gaining Ground of our
Vices and Passions; and after strictest Examination find ourselves upon the
improving Hand, we are in a State of Salvation ( P. 5) For GOD will bring all
to his Foot, to depend only upon his sovereign Grace in CHRIST, whom he makes
Partakers of his saving Mercy.

4. It is necessary, that besides active Diligence in Duty, Believers firmly
depend upon the gracious Promises of the Covenant, for persevering Grace; that
they depend upon it, that whom God has called, he has also justified; and
whom he has justified, he will also glorify, (Romans viii. 30) that Nothing
shall separate them from the Love of Christ. (ver. 35) that none shall be able
to pluck Christ's Sheep out of his Hands, (Joh. x. 28) that he will never leave
them nor forsake them, (Heb xiii. 5.) but they shall be kept by the Power of
God, through Faith unto Salvation. (1 Pet. i. 5.) -- This is necessary, in
order to keep up their Hope, to invigorate their Duties, to fill them with
Thankfulness to GOD for the unspeakable Gift of his Grace, and to enable them
to rejoice in Hope of the Glory of GOD. -- It is therefore very dangerous, to
teach with Dr. Waterland, that all christian Blessings may be forfeited and
finally lost, if a Person revolts from GOD, either for a Time or for Ever; and
then such a Person is no longer in a regenerate State, or a State of Sonship,
with respect to any saving Effects. ( P. 11, 12.) And it is equally dangerous,
to teach with Mr. Wetmore, that Men may be admitted into a Covenant of Favor
and Friendship with GOD, have their former Guilt removed by a gracious and free
Pardon; and yet be finally impenitent. ( P. 31, 32)

5. It is necessary, that they who have this Hope in them, should feel the
Power of the divine Grace in their Hearts; and find by examining themselves,
that Christ is in them, and they not Reprobates. (2 Cor. xiii. 5) They should
know, that they abide in him by the Spirit which he has given them. (1 John
iii. 24.) They should find, that they are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit,
by the Spirit of God dwelling in them (Romans viii 9.) And they should have that
Experience which works Hope, which will not make ashamed. (Romans v. 4, 5.) How
very dangerous is it therefore, to teach with Dr. Waterland, that the Marks of
a renewed Heart and Mind have a Tendency to perplex some, and to deceive
others; and therefore may prudently be thrown aside, as Things of human
Invention. ( P. 42, 43) Or to teach with Mr. Wetmore, that we may properly be
said to be Children of Hope, or begotten to Hope; as those that enjoy great
Advantages to know GOD, and the Way to be happy, are called Children of Light.
( P. 21.)

I would entreat all who have any Value for their Souls, to consider these
Things, not as mere Matters of Speculation; but as Affairs of highest
Importance to their eternal Welfare. I would entreat them, that they be not
soon shaken in Mind; but that they continue in the Faith, grounded and settled;
and that they be not moved away from the Hope of the Gospel, which they have
heard.

It may be expected, that before I conclude, I should make up the Account with
this angry Gentleman, with Respect to the very rough and abusive Treatment, I
have met with in this Discourse of his. But as personal Matters don't at all
affect the Debate between us, and such Invectives ordinarily recoil upon the
Author himself, doing very little Harm to those against whom they are levelled,
I shall wholly pass them over: and conclude with my hearty Prayer to GOD, that
both he and his Readers may so be born of Water and the Spirit, and so
experience the Effects of regenerating Grace in their Hearts, as to be
qualified for, and finally be Partakers of the Glory and Blessedness of the
Kingdom of GOD.

AMEN.
PROPOSALS For Printing by SUBSCRIPTION, FAMILIAR LETTERS, UPON

I. THE Danger of Infidelity.

II. The general Evidence of Christianity.

III. A brief History of our blessed SAVIOR'S Life, out of the Prophecies of
the old Testament

IV. The full Evidence of the Facts reported by the sacred Historians of the
miraculous Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and c. of CHRIST.

V. The Internal Evidences of Christianity.

VI. Objections against Human Impotence, and Inability to help ourselves,
answered.

VII. The Difference and Distinction between a true living and a common dead
Faith.

VIII. The Difference between a saving Faith, and the Antinomian Faith.

IX. The Difference between a true and a legal Repentance.

X. Directions for a close Walk with GOD. The whole may take up about Twelve or
Fifteen Sheets.

By JONATHAN DICKINSON.

If this Work finds Acceptance, the Author has Thoughts of continuing some
Meditations upon the more important Doctrines of Christianty, especially on the
laboring Truths of the present Times. In the same Epistolary Way.

Subscriptions are taken in by S. ELIOT in Cornhill, and J. BLANCHARD in Dock
square, BOSTON.


