Mr Parsons's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

RELIGION recommended to the SOLDIER. A SERMON Preached to the ancient and
honorable Artillery-Company, June 4. 1744. Being the Day of their Election of
Officers. By Joseph Parsons, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in Bradford.

Heb. xi.32, 33. -- The Time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and
of Sampson, and of Jephthae, -- Who THROUGH FAITH SUBDUED KINGDOMS --.

BOSTON: Printed by B. GREEN, and Company for D. HENCHMAN and J. EDWARDS, in
Cornhil. 1744.

To His EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire Captain General and Governor in chief,
over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.
May it please your Excellency,
WITH the greatest Satisfaction every one beholds your superior Abilities
employed for the Prosperity of this People: Your great Learning not only gives
Satisfaction to your own Mind, and entertains and instructs those who have the
Honor to be your familiar Friends, but is of that kind as to be a common and
extensive Good. By your consummate Wisdom you suppress a Party-Spirit in the
State, and unite the Hearts of all Men to one another, and in your self. And by
your unwearied Application, we see our Fortifications in a Condition to free us
from perplexing Cares about the Enemy; and such speedy and vigorous Measures
taken to guard our exposed Frontiers as calm our Minds under the sad
Apprehensions we had entertained of a War, in which New England is peculiarly
interested.

And permit me to say, the evident Concern you have discovered, ever since your
Advancement to the Chair of Government in this Province, to apply proper and
seasonable Remedies to every Evil our State labors under, and make us a
prosperous People, has endeared you to all Men. Your Excellency cannot be
insensible what Engagements of Affection and Esteem your Wisdom and Goodness
have laid those under, who have the Honor to have them more immediately in
View; while the great Satisfaction which others, in lower and more distant
Scituations, take in your happy Administration may be more unknown. Give me
Leave upon this Occasion to testify the grateful Resentments which your
paternal Concern for our common Good begets in their Minds.

That I may not alone appear unacquainted with our Happiness under your wise
Administration, when I had so favorable an Opportunity to speak of it, I have
chosen to run the Danger of being accounted impertinent, in presenting to your
Excellency the following very imperfect Discourse.

That this Province may long enjoy the happy Fruits of your Goodness and
Greatness from the Chair of Government, and your Excellency much of the divine
Presence in your Administration, and hereafter a distinguishing Reward in the
everlasting World, is the sincere Prayer of,

May it please your Excellency, Your Excellency's most dutiful and most humble
Servant, Joseph Parsons.

RELIGION Recommended to the SOLDIER.
II. SAM. XVII.viii. -- And thy Father is a Man of War --.


THESE Words are a Branch of David's Character, one of the most politic Princes
and greatest Captains of his Day; to whose military Prowess, under GOD, was
owing the growing Greatness of the Hebrew Nation, now near the Summit of it is
Perfection. The Fame of him had gone far and wide, beyond the Limits of Judea;
his very Name opened to him the Way to Victory, and the Lord bro't the Fear of
him upon all Nations. 1 Chronicles. xiv.17.


This is not the only Place in which the same Character is given him. It was
part of the Recommendation which introduced him at first into the Presence of
Saul, and opened the Way to his Marriage with a Daughter of that King, and
afterward to the Throne of Israel.

That this was his established Character appears, not only from the History of
his Life, but also from the Argument of Hushai, the King's Friend, in the Text
and Context; and the Success of it. For to what else is it to be ascribed, but
the Terror of his Name, that the Counsel which Hushai gave, so manifestly
designed to further the Escape of the King, should prevail in Opposition to
that of Ahitophel, the Oracle of the Age? Which, had it been pursued, must
undoubtedly have issued in the utter Ruin of David, and the Establishment of
his rebellious Son in his usurped Dominion? It was Ahitophel's Opinion that the
King was now to be followed with a select Body of Troops, while weary and weak
handed: And that he knew well, this was the Moment of Success and Victory, and
Crisis of Absolom's Affairs, appears from the Despair into which he fell upon
his Counsel's being rejected.

From this probable Design, Absalom and his Courtiers were diverted by the
Argument of Hushai, in which he strenuously applies to their Fears; and
represents the Danger of the Enterprise from the heroic Qualities of David and
his Men. Thou know thy Father and his Men, says he, that they be mighty
Men; and they be chaffed in their Minds, as a Bear robbed of her Whelps in the
Field: AND THY FATHER IS A MAN OF WAR, and will not lodge with the People. Here
let me observe, This is not the first Time that a well laid wicked Design has
been conducted to the true Moment of Execution, and then failed through
Cowardice, and, perhaps, the magnified Dangers represented by a guilty
Conscience.

The Phrase of the Text is capable of the greatest Latitude* Yet I suppose, by
what follows, Hushai had his Eye upon the political Part of it. Ahitophel's
Scheme proposed to smite the King only, and bring back all the People. And to
this it is that Hushai answers, Thy Father is a Man of War and will not lodge
with the People* Behold he is now hid in some Pit, or some other Place.

From the Words taken in the largest Sense, I might enter into the military
Character of an accomplished Soldier, describe the Art of War, and point out
and recommend the best Manner of making it. But this I hope would be without my
Province, because I am sure it is beyond my Capacity. But the gracious
Character, and moral Accomplishments of a military Man, may well fall under the
Consideration of a Minister of JESUS CHRIST, and a Teacher of that Gospel, in
which is bro't down from Heaven, the Wisdom which is necessary for Men in every
Station and Condition in Life. Considering therefore the words of my Text as
spoken of a religious Hero, I shall hence take Occasion to speak to christian
Soldiers of that gracious Turn of Mind, and those virtuous Accomplishments,
which will crown their military Achievements, and be their Security and Glory.
This will be to consider RELIGION in a peculiar Light, and as it has a special
Relation to a particular Order of Men; a Light in which, I confess, I have not
been much used to consider it; a Light in which I little expected ever to be
called to consider it, and least of all upon this Occasion.

In discoursing upon these Words, what I propose to do is,

I. To consider more generally, true Religion, as a very useful and necessary
Qualification in the Character of a Soldier.

II. I shall select out of the Circle of CHRISTIAN GRACES, some Virtues as the
peculiar Accomplishment and Glory of a Soldier.

I. True Religion is a very requisite Qualification, in the Character of a
Soldier. By true Religion, as it appears in the Life, I mean the Man, that,
from a just Apprehension of his Obligations to his Maker and himself, and an
effectual Belief of the Doctrines and Motives revealed by CHRIST in the Gospel,
has made a deliberate and most sincere Resignation of himself to GOD; and
whose Heart, hereupon, is by divine Grace steadfastly resolved to pursue eternal
Life, in the Presence of GOD and CHRIST, as his great End, and to make every
other Consideration give Way to this. As there is nothing more reasonable, than
that all our Faculties should be devoted to the Service of GOD, who gave them
and claims them, and who has, of his free unmerited Grace in Christ, been
pleased to promise to reward the due Exercise and Improvement of them; so it
will be found, upon Examination, to add a true Luster to all the Glories of
this World, direct the Exercise of every Power to its proper End, and give it
fresh Vigor in all its Operations. Every Order of Men, and the military Order
in particular, may, if they consider the Matter, easily discern the great
Advantage of Religion in their proper Calling. I will endeavor to illustrate
this Point, as briefly as I can, in a few Particulars.

1. One Advantage of Religion to the Soldier is: it rectifieth his Aims and
directs them to true and noble Ends. It enlarges his Views beyond the Limits
of this short Life, and elevates his Designs to the unspeakable and eternal
Glories of the heavenly World; which otherwise would be confined to the Glories
of this, and a deathless Fame, as he imagines, after himself is dead. Instead
of this imaginary Immortality, he pursues a real one; and considers himself as
happy in this, that GOD has placed him in such a Condition of Life and
Calling, as gives him an Opportunity to exercise the sublimest Grace, whereby
he may come at last to shine in distinguishing Glory.

There is indeed a Love of Fame and Glory in this World, which is then virtuous
when it is pursued in the Paths of Religion, and in Subordination to the Glory
of GOD. All Desire of Glory is not a faulty Ambition, any more than all Love of
the World is the Sin of Covetousness; and God himself has been pleased to
gratify this Desire, as a Reward of a religious Care to glorify him. Them that
honor me, says he, I will honor; and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. 1 Samuel 2.30.
This Desire of Honor here, under a religious Regulation, as it is in generous
Minds a mighty Principle of Action, is suited to the noblest Purposes, gives the
World the most illustrious Examples of great and gracious Actions, and is of
most efficacious Influence in the Hand of Providence, in bringing about its
great Designs. And the Soldier, of all Men, is supposed best to know it is Power
and Influence upon the Minds and Actions of Men.

But it is the Character of the christian Soldier, to make every Prospect of
worldly Glory give Place to his Hopes of that which is above. And if at any
Time he finds himself inclined to pursue worldly Honor, by any Means
inconsistent with those Hopes, he considers it as a Stratagem of his Grand
Adversary the Prince of Darkness to destroy him. And with a just Indignation
replies to it, as the Captain of his Salvation did before him, get thee behind
me Satan.

Now, this is one great Advantage of Religion to a Soldier; inasmuch as, by
directing his Aims to the Glory of God, it alters the Nature of his Actions, is
a Restraint from Wickedness and Motive to Virtue, and puts him in the Way of
obtaining true Happiness and everlasting Honor. For he may be assured, that as
CHRIST made himself of no Reputation, and became obedient to Death, even the
Death of the Cross, and was therefore by GOD highly exalted, and had a Name
given him above every Name, that at the Name of JESUS every Knee should bow;
Phil. 2.7, 8, 9, 10.
he also shall be glorified with him, if he imitates his great Example.

2. True Religion makes the Soldier a Blessing to the World. For hence, every
Enterprise being undertaken and conducted with a Regard to the Will of GOD, and
consequently to the Laws of Equity and the good of Mankind, he will not come
within Reach of the Psalmist's Imprecation, Scatter thou the People that
delight in War Psalm. 68.30.
. The charitable Spirit of the Gospel, governing in his sanctified Mind, makes
him value less the Glory of Conquest than the Happiness of his
Fellow Creatures. He will abhor the Tho'ts of murdering them by Thousands and
ten Thousands to eternise his own Name; and would not invade a peaceable
Neighbor, contented within his own just Limits, though to open the Way to
universal Empire, and be renowned as Alexander, or Caesar.

No; if he Delights in War, it is to suppress the injurious Spirit, and, if
possible, destroy it out of the World. For such an End he willingly offers
himself unto the Lord, devoting the Strength of his Body, the Fortitude of his
Mind, his Estate and Life, and all that is dear to him. Such a Soldier is a
Blessing to the World, the Defense of the weak, the Security of his Country,
and the Scourge of cruel and ambitious Tyrants, the great Disturbers of the
Repose and Happiness of Mankind.

3. True Religion engages the Providence of GOD on our Side, and this is of
the greatest Importance to the Soldier. For, whatever atheistical Men have
imagined, there is a GOD in Heaven, who is no unconcerned Spectator of what is
done on Earth; but holds the Reins of Government in his Hands, and whose
Counsel shall stand against all the Devices of the Sons of Policy and War. He
puts down one and sets up another. He makes the Wrath of Man to praise
him, and the Remainders of Wrath he restrains. It is he who gives Victory to
Kings. Thine O Lord, is the greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the
Victory and the Majesty; and all that is in the Heavens and the Earth is thine;
and there is no Restraint to the Lord to save by many, or by few.

This is not a Doctrine peculiar to Revelation; but has been assented to and
practiced upon by the Heathen World. And even those Lacedaemonians. Plut.
Nations, that, from Ignorance of the supreme Being, and confined Views of the
Nature and Perfections of the Deity, accounted it no better than Profaneness
and Irreverence to their Gods, to invoke them upon Occasions of lesser Moment,
could not miss this glaring Truth. There is a divine Providence governing the
World, which by solemn Prayer is to be engaged on our Side in the great
Concerns of War.

What signifies then the most refined Policy, or the greatest Expertness in
military Affairs, if GOD be with our Adversaries? If the Lord be not on our
Side, when Men rise up against us, they will swallow us up quick, when their
Wrath is kinled against us. Psalm. 124, 2, 3.


But the truly religious Soldier has the greatest Encouragement to hope in
that Providence which extends it self to the minutest Circumstances, as well as
to the most important Actions. And our Savior has taught him to conclude that
he, who clothes the Lillies of the Field, who feeds the Ravens, and whose
Providence is concerned in the Fall of a Sparrow, will much more concern
himself for his own Children.

4. By Religion those particular Graces or christian Vertuos are formed into
the Soul, and maintained and cherished there, which are the Soldiers peculiar
Glory, and of the greatest Usefulness and Necessity in his Calling. It is my
Design, as I proposed, to speak to some of these more particularly presently.
But here I would say more generally and briefly.

By Religion the Soldier learns to despise the Terrors of Death. A prospect of
Usefulness in this World makes him wish to live, that he may attain to the
greater Glory hereafter, in the future World: But his Apprehension of that
Glory makes him wish to depart and be with Christ. By Religion then he is
formed to live usefully, or to die nobly: He is fitted for his Calling in all
Conditions, being equally prepared for Victory or Death; and having resigned
himself to the Will of GOD, and learned in every State to be content, nothing
can come amiss. If Dangers arise, if the Clouds gather, and the Heavens grow
black, and all the Presages of a desolating Tempest appear, his religious Mind
quiets it self in GOD. He is exercised in the Use of Weapons peculiarly fitted
for the evil Day; and has Advantages above others to withstand; and, having
overcome all, to stand. The Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith,
and the Hope of Salvation are his Defense; and the Sword of the Spirit, the
dread of his spiritual Adversaries, may well be so of his earthly ones. By his
Prayers, the threatened Dangers are diverted, or he is carried through them, and
sometimes marvellously crowned with Success and Victory. But the worst that can
happen is temporal; and this he little regards.

On the other hand, if he succeeds according to his Wishes or beyond them, he
still maintains an equal Temper of Mind. As Adversity cannot depress him,
neither can Success elate him into any indecent Misbehaviour. And this too
Religion does for him, by begetting and keeping up in his Mind a continual
Sense and Expectation of everlasting Joys in the Presence of GOD; Joys too big
to leave Room for the meaner ones of this short Life; and too entertaining to
give way to them.

I proceed now,

II. To consider some christian Graces as the peculiar Accomplishments and
Glory of a Soldier.

1. In the Front of these stands Fortitude. Christian Fortitude is a Virtue
built upon a steadfast and influential Belief of this practical Principle, that
the Path of Duty is always to be pursued through the worst that can happen, and
all Events to be left with GOD. It is the Firmness of a Mind not to be diverted
from its Purpose by Dangers or Sufferings; but which will risk every thing that
is dear in proportion to the Value of a proposed End. It is therefore as
distant from that Temerity, which is sometimes mistaken for it, when Men hazard
their Lives from false Notions of Honor, or a kind of enthusiastic Bravery,
as Reason is from Madness. The same Reason which directs a Man to plunge into
the midst of Dangers when called by his Duty, teaches him too not to expose
needlessly a Life which is of the greatest Concern to every one.

This Virtue is the Soldiers peculiar Glory; and the want of it utterly
destroys his Reputation. The World, from the highest to the lowest, seems
agreed to pay it the most distinguishing Regards: The Recital of brave Facts
fires our Minds with a Spirit something like that by which the Hero performed
them; and that History pleases most which is fullest of them; while the Heart
sickens within at the Mention of a cowardly Action.

This Firmness and Intrepidity of Spirit owes much to machanical Principles;
and in this Light is to be considered as a special Gift of the GOD of Nature,
resulting from a peculiar Disposition of the humane Frame, and supported by
outward Accidents in the Course of Providence, as Food and Exercise proper to
that End.

In this Light, though it cannot be considered as a christian Grace, it ought to
be as a Gift of Nature; and is indeed a valuable Talent betrusted with the
Possessor, and as such to be improved to gracious Purposes, and to be accounted
for in the great Day of Retribution.

It is a Qualification very useful to a Soldier; and, as I apprehend, so
necessary, that, without a good Degree of it, no Man ought to choose, and devote
himself to, a military Life. And for it GOD is to be praised, as well as for
the Strength and Activity of our Bodies, or the rational Endowments of our
Minds; and the Soldier is to maintain it by a virtuous Life, temperate in all
Things; and he that, by intemperate Practices and a soft effeminate Course of
Living, destroys it, is no less culpable than he that weakens his Reason with
Wine.

But as it it a christian Grace, it is the Result of the Reasonings of our own
Minds upon the Word of Truth, the great Instrument of Sanctification, under the
Influences of the holy Spirit. It springs from a Sense of our Obligations to
GOD, from a Love to his Commands, from a Fear of his Displeasure, from the
Hopes of his Rewards, and from the Baseness of being affrighted by any
Consideration whatsoever from the Duty which we owe him.

It is this which distinguished the Fortitude of David from that of the Lion
and the Bear. And being built upon religious Principles, like them is uniform
and invariable. It is not merely a Flush of Spirits, appearing only in the Heat
of Action; but is indeed most illustrious when those Fluids are at the lowest
Ebb. A Prospect of Glory may give a Spring to the Spirits, to which the Honor
of a great Day may be chiefly to be ascribed. But when in Adversity all Things
conspire to depress Nature and sink the Heart, then in our Patience to possess
our Souls, to put our Trust in GOD and hope against Hope, and betray no
Meanness of Thought by any Action unworthy our Character, exhibits the Glory of
Courage in the strongest Light. And I add, it is remarkable that some of the
greatest Heroes which the World has produced, have been formed to act with
Success and Applause, in the most exalted Stations, by proceeding Sufferings.
This was the Case of David, the Man of War in our Text. And thus an Hero of our
own, WILLIAM the third of glorious Memory, to which we owe much of the
Succession of the Crown in the illustrious House of Hanover, by a Series of
Calamities was prepared to be the Deliverer of Europe from the grasping Designs
of a neighboring ambitious Monarch; and by his Presence of Mind, the Wisdom of
his Conduct, and his persevering Constancy in a Course of ill Success, had a
juster Claim to the Title of THE GREAT, than he that had it.

But if it be true that a State of Suffering exhibits the Grace of Fortitude in
the fairest and strongest Light, we may behold it in the highest Perfection if
we look into our BIBLES, upon the Life and Death of JESUS, the Captain of our
Salvation; who was a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Griefs; whose Constancy
was not to be shaken by a Prospect of Sufferings which Language cannot
describe; but who, for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross and
despised the Shame, and is set down at the right Hand of the Throne of GOD.
Heb. 12.2.
And, it is particularly to be noted, He is said to be qualified by Sufferings
for the great Undertaking of leading the Sons of GOD to Glory; in Consequence
of which, he was himself crowned with Glory and Honor. Heb. 2.10.


2. Clemency is to be considered as another christian Grace, and a very useful
Qualification, and great Ornament to a Soldier. It is an humane benevolent
Disposition toward all Men, inclining to Kindness and Favor, where there is
Room to bestow them. It is the offspring of those Commands in the Gospel, Love
one another, Love your Enemies.

In some Respects it has the Advantage of Strength or Fortitude. By these
indeed Armies are beaten, Castles taken, and the Bodies of Men fettered in
Chains of Subjection: But Clemency seizes the Soul, wins over the Affections
to your Side, and subjects the conquered to your Service upon Principles never
to be dissolved. It is the distinguishing Spirit of the Gospel, and like it is
divine Author conquers it is Opposers by Miracles of Love; while Fortitude like
Moses effects it is Designs by the Methods of Destruction.

Great Conquests have been made by this Virtue: And in searching into the
Histories of former Times to acquaint our selves with the Polices of War, you
will find Instances of those that, even after repeated Victories, could never
complete their Conquests but by Clemency. An Hero then seems at the Top of his
Wishes, when, having surmounted the greatest Difficulties, he subdues his Enemy
and pardons him at his Feet. He triumphs for a double Victory gotten at the
same Time, over his Enemy, and over himself. And to deny himself the Pleasure
of Revenge, where the Affronts received have been very great, is often the
harder Task.

3. The Fear of GOD is another Grace very ornamental and beneficial to a
Soldier: Critics, as I remember, have given us this as an Instance of the
Sublime, I fear my GOD, I fear none but him. Sublimity in Sentiment, by being
interwoven in the Habits of the Mind, and produced into Practice, forms the
Hero. And it is as necessary that he fear GOD as that he fear none but him. And
you may observe, they that have been so destitute of this Principle as even to
dare to aspire at being deifted themselves, have anon discovered less of the
Man, and more of the Brute and the Devil, than the vilest Part of their
Fellow Creatures; whilst others under the Influence of it, and particularly
our religious Warrior in the Text, have not only had the Applause of their own
Time, which Flattery often gives, but the Praises of unprejudiced Posterity.

This Principle, David tells us, was taught him by GOD himself. The GOD of
Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me; he that rules over Men must be
just ruling in the Fear of GOD; And he shall be as the Light of the Morning
when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds; as the tender Grass
springing out of the Earth by clear Shining after the Rain. 2 Samuel 23.3.4.
And under the Influences of it you find him in all Circumstances. If he
enterpriseth a great Action, it is in the Fear of GOD; if he comes off with
Victory and Honor, still it is in the Fear of GOD and his Goodness; or if he
fall into Adversity, the Fear of GOD occasions Self Examination, Humiliation
and Repentance, and opens a Door of Hope in the GOD of his Salvation.

4. Loyalty is a very necessary Virtue in a Soldier. Subjection to the higher
Powers is an apostolic Precept, and binds the Soldier's Conscience. The same
Text that bids us Fear GOD adds honor the King. 1 Pet. 2.17.
He then that rebels against his Sovereign, that unsheathes the Sword which he
put into his Hands, and turns the Point against him, though upon the loudest
Calls of PRIVATE Interest or Revenge, breaks the strongest Ties of Conscience
and Christianity. And if the Degrees of moral Virtue are to be estimated by the
good or Mischief they do in the World, Disloyalty in a Soldier must be
accounted a Sin of the first Magnitude. This is the Root of that justly dreaded
Evil, a civil War. And if the Connection between them were shown, and the
consequent Tragedies and continual Horrors described without any Exaggrevation,
no Man of any Consideration but would tremble to remember he had ever
entertained a disloyal Though It in his Heart.

Often there is in Disloyalty such Ingratitude as is utterly inconsistent with
true Honor. The rebellious Soldier is one that has lived upon his Sovereign's
Bread and worn his Honors; and therefore, barely from the Ingratitude of his
Actions, if he had lived at Athens, he would, by the Law of the Land, have been
reduced to the ignominious State of a Slave; or amongst the Macedonians,
punished with Death.

Nor let it be imagined, there is any Thing criminal in the Life and Character
of David upon this Head. It is true, the injurious Treatment of his Prince, and
his Design upon his Life drove him into the Wilderness for his Security. But
notwithstanding all the Wrongs he had to complain of in the dearest concerns,
and the continual Danger of Death in which he lived, he never enterprized any
Thing against his Crown or Life; but generously diverted the Purpose of another
against the latter, choosing rather to leave the Redress of his Wrongs to that
GOD, at whose Tribunal all the Kings of the Earth must appear like common Men,
than to make himself a Judge and Revenger in his own Cause against his
Sovereign. 1 Samuel 26.8.
The Part which David acted was no other than that of a Man conscious of his
own Integrity, persecuted by a tyrannical Prince, and flying from the many
unmerited Deaths that pursued him. -- But I forget I am discoursing to
New-English Soldiers, whose Affection to the House of Hanover, and Loyalty to
his present Majesty are so firmly secured, that to say much upon this Head, may
be though it very needless. My Excuse, if it needs any, must be, the Satisfaction I
take in speaking upon this Subject convinces me of the Pleasure with which I
should be heard, if I could do it any Justice.

5. The Love of One's Country is another Virtue well becoming a Soldier. Every
Member of the Body politic has a proper Office assigned it; and the meaner
ones are not without their Usefulness. The Eye cannot say to the Head, I have
no need of thee; nor again, the Hand to the Foot, I have no need of you. 1 Cor.
12.21.
While the Merchant and the Husbandman supply the Soldier with foreign or
domestic Provisions, for the Support and Comfort of his Life, he, in his Turn,
secures them in their Possessions, by his military Skill and Courage. The whole
Body fitly joined together, is compacted by that which every Joint supplieth;
and every Part, exerting its proper Influence, makes an Increase of the Body,
building it self up in the mutual Love and Care of all the Members. Ephesians. 4.16.
Love is the Union of the whole Body, directing its various Powers to the same
End. All the Endeavors of the Community to promote its own Welfare, take their
Rise from the Love of one's Country, as Self-Love in every Man is the Principle
of Self-Preservation.

It is therefore no less absurd and monstrous, for a Man to entertain a Spirit
of Enmity against his Country, than to be a Self-Hater. And for a Soldier to
employ his military Powers to oppress and ruin his Country, is for one Hand to
cut off the other, and then destroy the whole Body.

The sacred Scriptures give us many noble Instances of this Passion. And the
Enemy seemed to know the Power of it in virtuous Minds, when, to aggravate the
Sense of Misery in the People of GOD, they required them to sing one of Zion's
Songs. How shall we sing, says the Psalmist, the Lord's Song in a strange
Land. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right Hand forget her Cunning. If I
do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth; if I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief Joy. Psalm. 137.5, 6.


It was a Love to their Country, a mighty Affection to the happy Privileges
which GOD had given them, that spirited many of the Captivity to leave the
Possessions which they had gained in foreign Lands, and return through very great
Discouragements, to the Land of their Forefathers Nativity; whilst many others
of less Courage, or more Love to their worldly Acquisitions, contented
themselves to enjoy their religious Privileges in the best Manner they could
amongst the Heathen. But in none does this Grace appear with greater Advantage,
than in Nehemiah, though born and educated in a strange Land. The great Honor he
had in the Persian Court might have prevailed with another to have neglected
the ruinous State of his Country, and the Wall of Jerusalem still broken down
in many Places, and consequently exposed continually to the Inroads and Insults
of their Enemies. But the Use he made of it was to secure the Favor of the
Monarch for his People, and to be sent into Judea, with a Commission to rebuild
the Walls and Gates of that City. A great Example this, and what deserves often
to be though it upon by a religious Soldier, that he preserve in himself a Love to
his Country, and an Affection to its Privileges, civil and religious. For no
Men are more likely to be a Blessing to their People, by preserving and
defending them, or a Blast, by deserting and destroying them: In their Hand is
the Sword to preserve or destroy.

6. Obedience to Superiors, is another Virtue very necessary for Soldiers.
This is a Duty of great Importance to the Community; and the Neglect of it is
the Inlet to Anarchy and Confusion. No State, no Church can subsist long
without it; and the Success of our Arms is necessarily connected with it.

If every private Soldier was first to be satisfied of the Wisdom of his
Officer's Command before he moved, he would often be reasoning when he should
be fighting; and in the mean Time Opportunities would be lost, which could no
more be recalled than the Moment in which they presented themselves.

Neither are the greatest Dangers to be regarded, in Opposition to a
Superiour's Command. When the religious Soldier first entered upon his Calling,
he devoted his Life to the Service of his GOD, his King and Country. To risk it
then, when commanded, is the very Thing he came out for: Duty is to be
considered and not Danger. If he returns, he comes back with Honor and
Satisfaction, and stands fair for Preferment: If he falls, he dies greatly, and
in a Manner not undesireable; and his Memory shall be blessed. He dies in the
Bed of true Honor, which is better than that of a Fever.

And as a most ready and strenuous Obedience is of the greatest Importance in
the Time of Action, it is also of great Necessity in the Time of Instruction. I
am sorry there is any reason to complain, the little Respect, which is paid to
Officers in some Country Towns in the Discharge of their Duty, is to be
assigned as one Reason of the little Proficiency made by military Exercises.
Whether this Fault be so general as to have been observed by those that have
gone before me, I know not. But that it is common enough to justify this
Remark, I make no Doubt. And I am persuaded the great Liberty of Speech which
Soldiers take in the Field before their Officers, and even in the Time of
Exercise, sometimes in an unmannerly good Humor, at other Times in angry
Resentment, is an Evil that needs greatly to be reformed. And it becomes them
to be subject, if not for Wrath, yet, for Conscience sake. And this minds me to
say,

7. Lastly, A teachable Spirit is a necessary Qualification in a Soldier. It is
so in acquiring Knowledge and Skill in any Art; and no Man can expect to excel
in military Skill without it.

Instead therefore of bringing to military exercises an idle, careless, or
ludicrous Spirit, they should be attended with a Desire and Design to learn the
Duty of a Soldier, and become expert in the Handling of Arms. He that is
convinced that this Kind of Skill is necessary to accomplish him for the
Defense of his Country, ought to account the Time of military Exercises too
precious to be trifled away. And I am persuaded, if Soldiers came to them with
an Appetite to the Skill that is to be acquired by them, and a conscientious
Disposition to make the best Improvement of them for that End, few as they are,
they would be greatly serviceable.

But as few if any Arts are arrived at such Perfection as to be incapable of
receiving Improvement from the ingenious and industrious, a Genius will not
content it self to learn only what has been taught before; but will be
ambitious of adorning his Art with new Additions of Knowledge, or a better
manner of performing it. Soldiers, I presume, are not subject to a Spirit of
Bigotry; and if any new Methods should be found out more beautiful and
expeditious than what had been in use, I suppose a Fondness for old Practices
would hardly prevent their being laid aside for new that are better. Uzziah
King of Judah, a Prince of a warlike Genius, is mentioned with Honor in the
sacred Scriptures for the great Improvements he made in the Art of War. You
read, 2 Chronicles. 26.14, 15.
He prepared for them through out all the Host Shields, and Spears, and Helmets,
and Habergeons, and Bows, and Slings to cast Stones. And he made in Jerusalem
Engines invented by cunning Men to be upon the Towers and upon the Bulwarks to
shoot Arrows and great Stones withal: And his Name spread far abroad, for he
was marvelously helped till he was strong. I am very sensible several other
Virtues, have an equal claim to be considered as the Soldiers peculiar
Accomplishment and Glory; but the Desire I had, not to exceed the expected
Limits of these Discourses, caused me to omit them.


To sum up all, this is the religious Turn of Mind, and such as these the
Christian Graces which are the Accomplishment and Glory of a Soldier. Indeed
they are so of Men of every Condition, and in every Relation which they
sustain. They shine equally in the Cabinet as the Camp, they are the Glory of
the State and of the Church, of a Community and every Member of it. It is the
Righteousness which exalts a Nation, and it is Opposite the Sin which is the
Reproach of any People. The ancient Spartans were so sensible of the Power of
these Virtues, that they though it Walls and Fortifications unnecessary for the
Security of a valiant People. Cities should not be walled with Stone and
Timber, but with the Courage of the Inhabitants, said one of their Agesilaus.
Plut.
Kings to him that asked, why Sparta was without Walls.

By these, they seemed to think, the Valor of their Citizens would be
diminished. I don't design to recommend this Lacedemonian Policy to my
Countrymen: I only observe, the unavoidable Deficiencies of these are best
supplied with that christian Grace, which is of infinitely superior Force to
any moral Virtue in the Heathen World.

And, what is greatly to be regarded, it is to such Persons, to such Armies,
and to such a State and People, that the encouraging Promises of the Protection
and Presence of GOD are made in his Word. Agreably you read in the Prophet, He
that walks righteously and speaks uprightly, he that despises the Gain of
the Oppressor, that shakes his Hands from holding of Bribes, that stops his
Ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his Eyes from seeing Evil: He shall
dwell on high: His Place shall be the Munitions of Rocks, Bread shall be given
him, his Waters shall be sure. Isa. 33.15, 16.


Let me now enforce what I have been saying to Men of the MILITARY ORDER, and
then I shall conclude.

There are two Things which it has been my Design to recommend in this
Discourse. One is, a religious Dedication of our selves to GOD, made with the
utmost Seriousness and Sincerity, arising from a real and influential
Conviction of the Truths of the Gospel, made in our Minds by the Word and
Spirit of GOD. And the other is, the Consideration and Improvement of those
Christian Graces, which will be the peculiar Ornament of a Christian Soldier.

The first is certainly of the greatest Consequence to the Man, whose Calling
it is to hazard his Life for his King and Country. If to die well be of
infinitely the greatest Concern to every Man, it especially becomes those to be
prepared for Death, whose Business in Life lies upon the very Margin of the
Grave. The Uncertainty of Death, how little soever it is heeded, is an
unanswerable Argument with every one to a speedy Repentance; but it strengthens
with every Man in Proportion to the peculiar Hazard his Life is incident to.

It is not, my Brethren, a Profession of Christianity by Baptism, or any other
Ordinance; it is not a mere Form of Godliness, and a Name to live, while in
Heart and Life we are dead to the Belief and Practice of the Gospel, which I am
now recommending: But an Apprehension of the Importance of spiritual and
everlasting Things, and an Heart formed to all the virtuous Purposes of the
christian Life, with a just Abhorrence of all Sin, and an answerably virtuous
and heavenly Life and Conversation.

This only can make Death safe, and justify any Man in devoting himself to a
Life of Dangers. By this, that Fortitude of Spirit, which is a christian
Virtue, is distinguished from the Rashness of him, that, tho'tless of the
future, rusheth like the Horse into the Battle. And without this, Christianity,
the genuine Parent of true Courage, would only serve to beget in Men, Terrors
that would utterly unfit them for Action. For, I make no Doubt, the Gospel of
Christ, believed, but not obeyed, would dishearten the Soldier in the Day of
Battle, (if he had any just Apprehension of his guilty Condition) and give the
heathen Stranger to the Doctrines of everlasting Misery in the future World, a
great Advantage over him. And finally, by this the Favor of GOD is secured,
who covers the Head in the Day of Battle, and crowns the Soldier with
Success and Victory.

Such Considerations as these, were they duly entertained, would have a
peculiar Influence upon every Man that sustains a military Character.

But besides this, you have heard, it is incumbent upon the religious Soldier,
to maintain and cherish in himself, the particular Graces of the christian
Life, as the peculiar Accomplishment and Ornament of a military Man. Every
Soldier, examining himself, should make an Estimate, in part, of his
Qualifications for a military Life, by the Strength of such gracious Habits
within him, and the Constancy and Uniformity of their Operations in his Life.
And in accomplishing himself for his Calling, while, with much Pains and
Diligence in military Exercises, he perfects himself in the Art of War, let him
by no Means forget to improve himself by moral ones, so very necessary to
finish his Character as a Soldier. This Kind of military Virtue is gained,
maintained, and improved by Exercise as well as the other.

By frequent Meditation therefore upon the Nature and Tendency of the several
Graces of Christianity, let him acquaint himself with the Excellency of that,
the Merchandise of which is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain
thereof than fine Gold; which is more precious than Rubies, and not to be
equalled by all the Things that thou can desire. By Prayer let him engage
the sanctifying Influences of the holy Spirit, promised to them that ask him of
GOD their heavenly Father; and by continual Practice and Watchfulness, let
every Call of Corruption be constantly denied, and every gracious Disposition
exerted, in common Life, as there shall be Occasion. Let him remember, He that
is slow to Anger is better than the Mighty, and he that rules his Spirit, than
he that takes a City. Thus, by the daily Repetition of gracious Actions, let
him strengthen the Habits of them within himself, and improve in the holy Art
of living to GOD; that his Heart being established in Grace, he may know the
Usefulness of it in his military Calling.

But it is now Time to come to a Conclusion, and I shall do it with an Address
to the Gentlemen that have called me to the Service this Day.

Gentlemen,

I consider the ancient and honorable Artillery-Company, as a School of
military Instruction, diffusing its Influences into the most distant Parts of
the Province. By your Exercises it is, that some of our most accomplished
Soldiers have acquired their excelling Skill in these Matters, whereby they
have been able to instruct others. The Usefulness of your Exercises, and
military Accomplishments, is not confined within yourselves, but is very
extensive.

This Consideration, therefore, ought to fix your Aims, and quicken your
Endeavors after the highest Degrees of Perfection in military Virtue. The
Prospect of Usefulness is your Argument, and the more Good you have it in your
Power to do, the stronger it is. This is your End, whether you read in the
Study, or practice in the Field; whether you search into the Reasons of ancient
Customs, or the Practice of the present Day; whether you record, from the
Histories of former Times for future Use, the Stratagems of War, the Policy of
which pleases you best; or the heroic Sentiments of some great Captain that
strike you most, or any divine Reflections of singular Influence upon your
military Life. Your End in all these Things is the Glory of GOD, and the
Service of your King and Country. What Care and Pains then become you to excel
in every illustrious Accomplishment of the Soldier, that by the Force of your
Instructions and reputable Examample, others may learn of you the sublimer as
well as the more common ones?

If there be any Time, which, more than other, requires the Accomplishment of a
Soldier, in Perfection, it is now. GOD, who has been lifting up an Ensign to
the Nations, and as a just Punishment to an ungodly World, suffered the Lusts
of Men to break forth into Wars and Fightings, has, the other Day, caused the
Alarm of War to be sounded in our Ears also. On one Side, we are in Fears from
the Invasions of exasperated Powers from afar; and on the other, from the Sword
of the Wilderness in the Hands of bloody Men, whose tender Mercies are
Cruelties. We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told us, what
bloody Tragedies have been acted upon the Stage of New England in their Day;
such as, in the Relation, might seem rather the Work of Fancy than of a
faithful Historian. And to render our Prospects the more dismal, what Grounds
have we to fear our Wickedness has made us ripe for the Judgments of an
incensed GOD, and to have the same things acted over again?

It is now no Time for Soldiers to content themselves with showy Exercises and
splendid Appearances, which like the Lilly, bloom and wither in a Day. The
Defense of your Country calls you into the Field, not of Exercise, but of
Battle. You are to handle your Arms in good earnest, and not as one that beats
the Air: You are not now to fence for Exercise or Ostentation, but to defend
your selves; and what is more your Country, and drive away the Enemy from the
Gates.

It is high Time therefore that, being the Subjects of Grace and
Sanctification, you live in the daily Exercise of every Christian Virtue; and
by such a Life, accompanied with a careful Self Examination, you had made your
Calling and Election sure; and were able to think with Calmness and
Indifference upon that which is so much the dread of all Men, and through Fear of
which so many are all their Life Time subject to Bondage. Sin unrepented of,
and unforsaken, is a Thing most destructive to true Valor, and will be the
worst Enemy in the Day of Battle. And he that is under the Influence of it may
well dread Death; and is prepared to run away to his everlastidg Infamy, which
would be worse than Death, were it not for what is to follow. The Wicked flee
when no Man pursues, but the Righteous are bold as a Lion.

But on the other Hand, having secured the Salvation of your Souls, through the
Merits of the REDEEMER, you may not only be fearless and undaunted at all the
hideous Forms that Death can wear, but even wish to die in the Defense of your
Country, the greatest Honor any Man can aspire to next to, that of dying for
the Honor of CHRIST, who first died for him; and, what is infinitely more, may
be calm as your own Consciences in that universal Ruin, when the Heavens shall
be on Fire, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, and the World and
the Works of it shall be burnt up. I will conclude all, addressing the
following Words of the same Apostle to this whole Assembly. 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing
then that all these Things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye
to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness?

FINIS.

