Dr. Chauncy's SERMON On the DEATH of Mr. Cornelius Thayer.

CORNELIUS'S Character. A SERMON Preached The LORD'S DAY after the Funeral OF
Mr. Cornelius Thayer, One of the Deacons of the first Church of CHRIST in
Boston; Who died, April 10. 1745. Aetat. 60.

By Charles Chauncy, D. D. One of the Pastors of said Church.

Psalm. xxxvii. 37. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the upright: For the End of
that Man is Peace. BOSTON: Printed for D. GOOKIN in Marlborough-Street, over
against the Old South Meeting House. 1745.

A Funeral SERMON, etc.
ACTS x. 1, 2. And there was a certain Man in Cesarea, called CORNELIUS; -- a
devout Man, and one that feared GOD with all his House, which gave much Alms to
the People, and prayed to GOD always.
IT IS an excellent Man we have here characterised to us. And the Character
given of him we may be sure is just, as it was penned under the unerring
Guidance of the SPIRIT of Truth. And 'twas put on sacred Record, not so much
for his sake, as ours; not so much to do Honor to him, as to commemorate the
Grace of GOD appearing in him, and to serve Mankind, by presenting to public
View a most shining Example of pure and undefiled Religion before GOD and the
FATHER.

This good Man is mentioned by Name, and express No^^^^ taken of the Place of
his Abode, and Station he filled in (...) Life: From which Circumstances
several Notes might be gathered, profitable for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness. -- But I shall confine my self to his religious
Character; as it is from what is said of him upon this Head, that we shall be
let into a just Idea of that dear Servant of God, lately taken from us, who,
for so long a Time, was an Ornament to his Profession, as well as Office in
this Church of CHRIST.

The Character of CORNELIUS, as it is given in the Text, and some other Verses
of the Chapter, may be comprised in (...) following Particulars.

I. His Piety toward GOD. A devout Man, and one that feared GOD with all his
House, and which prayed to GOD always. II. His Charity and Justice toward Men,
together with his good Reputation in the World. Which gave much Alms to the
People. It is added, v. 22. A just Man, and of good Report among all the Nation
of the Jews. III. His Faith in JESUS CHRIST, and Profession as his Disciple; of
which Things we have an Account in the latter End of the Chapter.
Accordingly, these are the Heads I shall (...) consider, and apply as I pass
along. The whole (...) then be concluded with some Account of that eminent
Christian, whose Death gave rise to my Meditations on this Subject.

In The first Thing observable in the Character of CORNELIUS, is his Piety. He
is called a devout* Man, i. e. according to the Import of the Original [(...)],
a pious religious Man, a true Worshipper of the true GOD. He was born indeed of
Gentile Parents; and, it is probable, they educated him in the Superstitions and
Idolatries of the Pagan Nations. But these he renounced, and became a Proselyte
to the Jewish Religion; acknowledging the GOD of Israel to be the true GOD, and
worshipping him as such, according to the Mosaic Institution, with an upright
Heart.

He did not worship he knew not what. His Devotion would then have been blind,
and nothing better than Superstition. So the Apostle Paul told the Athenians,
when he saw them paying their Devotions to an unknown Object. Ye Men of Athens,
(says he, Acts* 17* 22, 23.) I perceive (...) all Things ye are too
superstitious. For as I passed by, and beheld your Devotions, I found an Altar
with this Inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly
worship, him declare I unto you. Neither did he mistake the proper Object of
Worship; doing Service to an Idol, instead of the GOD who made Heaven and
Earth, and is over all GOD blessed for ever: He would then have deserved the
Character of an idolatrous, not a pious devout Man. But the Being he did Homage
to was the GOD of the Universe, the GOD of Israel, the one true and living GOD;
besides whom there is no other suitable Object of religious Adoration.

And he worshipped the true GOD according to his own Appointments. It Is true,
he does not appear to have been what the Jews call, a Proselyte of the
Covenant, i. e. one who had submitted to Circumcision, and the whole Mosaic
Institutions, and was counted as a Jew, and conversed with as such. But he so
far embraced Moses and the Prophets, as to make the Old-Testament-Revelation
the Rule of his Worship. He was no observer either of Heathenish Rites or
Jewish Traditions. He did not go about to invent Methods of pleasing GOD, as
though those of his own instituting were not sufficient. This indeed has been too
much the Way of the World in all past Ages, and is so at this Day. The Church
of Rome has invented Pilgrimages, Penances, Processions, and numberless other
Superstitions; adding them to those Exercises of Piety the Scripture has
pointed out: Yea, they have introduced the Virgin Mary, and an hundred other
Saints both dead and alive, as so many Mediums of Approach to the divine
Majesty, to the great Dishonor, if not Exclusion, of JESUS the one Mediator
between God and Man. And what Multitudes of poor deluded People are there, who
think themselves, and would be though it by others, eminently devout and pious,
because they are religiously strict in these and such like Observances?
CORNELIUS'S Devotion was not of this Kind. He sacredly adhered to the
Prescriptions of the Bible; thinking it enough, if he exercised himself in
those Acts of Religion GOD had appointed. These he looked upon as bearing the
Stamp of divine Authority; and these he observed, hoping for the Presence and
Blessing of his Maker.

And as he worshipped the true GOD in his own Way, so he took Care to do it
with an honest Mind, having a single Eye to the divine Glory. He did not honor
GOD with his Lips, while his Heart was far from him; he did not flatter him
with his Mouth, or lie to him with his Tongue, his Heart not being right with
him: But he was sincere in his religious Performances; the Man inwardly he
seemed to be outwardly. He did not put on Religion as a Cloak, nor wear the
Form of it because it was the Fashion; but he had a real Regard for GOD, and
from this Principle observed his Sabbath, went up to his Sanctuary, and
attended the Duties of his Worship. Nor did he content himself with the outward
Exercises of Religion, but his chief Concern was with his Heart, that he might
inwardly honor GOD by unfeigned Acts of Faith in him, Love to him and
Dependence on him.

Thus CORNELIUS was a devout, i. e. a pious religious Man. But the Text is
particular in mentioning two observable Instances of his Piety or Devotion; his
fearing God with all his House, and his praying always.

The first Instance is, his fearing God with all his House.

By this Fear of GOD, we must not understand that Uneasiness of Mind, which is
the Result of an Apprehension of him, as merely a powerful and angry Being.
This is a wrong Notion of the DEITY. And a Fear of him arising from such a
false Conception, is nothing better than superstitious Awe and Dread.

Neither by this Fear of GOD are we to understand that Perturbation of Mind,
which is founded on Consideration of those many Sins, whereby we have exposed
our selves to the divine Resentments. This indeed is a reasonable Fear of GOD;
though whenever Men, through a Sense of Sin, so employ their Thoughts on his
severer Attributes, as to forget his milder Ones, especially as he has made a
Representation of them in the Gospel of his SON JESUS CHRIST; and are so
overwhelmed with a Dread of his Anger, as to have no Hope in his Mercy, this is
mere Horror of Soul, founded on false Ideas of GOD, such as are neither fetched
from Reason, nor Scripture: And the Tendency of it is, not to bring Men to GOD
by Repentance, but to drive them away from him through Fright and Despair.

But besides these Senses of the Fear of God, there is yet another; viz. an
humble Awe and Reverence of him, accompanied with Love to him, and consistent
with sweet Delight in him. The Subjects of this Fear are good Men: The
Foundation of it, just Conceptions of GOD; a due Consideration of his Majesty
and Power, as tempered with Compassion and Grace: And in whomsoever it resides,
it disposes them to please GOD, and restrains them from every Thing offensive
to him, or that would argue a Neglect or Contempt of him. This is that filial
Fear of GOD which is so much celebrated in the Scripture: And in this Sense it
was, that CORNELIUS feared him.

He had upon his Mind an habitual Awe of GOD; not such an one as drove him from
his Presence; not such an one as made his Life uncomfortable to him: But his
Reverence of the divine Majesty was mixed with Love to him, and a Childlike
Confidence in him. And it had a powerful Tendency to keep him from every Thing
disrespectful toward GOD, either in Thought, Speech or Behavior; and to put
him upon expressing the lowest Prostration both of Body and Soul before him: As
in Children who have in their Minds a true Fear of their Parents; the Influence
of this Passion is not to fill them with a flavish uneasy Dread, but it tends
rather to engage their Care to behave toward them with all dutiful Submission.

It Is added in Commendation of CORNELIUS'S Fear of God, that it had a good
influence upon his whole Family. He feared God with his whole House. His
Religion was not confined to himself; but all under his Roof were the better
for it. It may be, they also feared God. It was the Happiness of several pious
Men in that Day, to have their whole Houses converted together with themselves,
and brought over to the Profession of the true Religion. So we read of the
Nobleman at Capernaum, ( John 4. 5^.) that he himself believed, and his House;
and of Crispus the Ruler of the Synagogue, ( Acts 18. 8.) that he believed on
the Lord with all his House. And it is a Salutation sometimes to be met with in
the Epistles, (1 Cor. 16. 19.) To such an one, and the Church in his House;
importing, that the Family was converted, as it were, into a Church of CHRIST.
And it is possible, this might be the Case of CORNELIUS'S Family. His Piety
might have an Influence, under the divine Blessing, to diffuse Religion through
his whole House. Or however this was, as became a true Fearer of God, he took
all proper Care, that his Family might be a religious One. He, no doubt,
instructed them in the Knowledge, and urged them to the Service of GOD: He, no
doubt, set up the Worship of the GOD of Israel in his Family; resolving with
Joshua of Old, As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord: He, no doubt,
discouraged the out-breaking of Sin in his Children and Servants; warning them
against it, and laying the Restraints of his Authority upon their Lusts and
Vices: He, no doubt, carried them to the Throne of Mercy, humbly and fervently
praying to GOD for them, and teaching them to pray to him themselves: Nor can
it be supposed but he recommended Religion to their Love and Practice, from his
own exemplary good Conversation.

And what a noble Evidence was this of the Truth of his Piety? It Is
particularly mentioned to Abraham's Honor, and as that whereby GOD knew him to
be a pious holy Man, that he took all suitable Care to promote Religion in his
Family. I know him (says God, Genesis 18. 19.), that he will command his Children
and his Household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do
Justice and Judgment. And the like Commendation is here given of CORNELIUS,
whereby he is declared to be a spiritual Son of Abraham, a Partaker of his
virtuous Disposition.

The next Instance the Apostle gives of CORNELIUS'S Piety, is, his praying
always. Not that he spent his whole Time in praying. This he could not do; it
was not consistent with the Frame of his Nature, nor with many Duties that are
necessary as well as Prayer: But the Meaning is, he was a Man of Prayer,
disposed to the Duty, and much used to the Practice of it.

He prayed always, i. e. He was always in a Frame for Prayer; habitually
inclined to this noble Exercise of Piety. He was ever ready to open his Lips,
that he might make known his Requests to GOD. This was the settled permanent
Disposition of his Mind.

He prayed always, i. e. It was his frequent Practice, the daily Employment of
his Life. With the devout Psalmist, he began and ended the Day with GOD;
showing forth his Loving Kindness in the Morning, and his Faithfulness every
Night. And it is observable, the Sacrifice which GOD appointed to be daily
offered in the Morning and in the Evening, is called the continual
Burnt-offering (Numb. 28. 6.); and for the same Reason, and with like
Propriety, Prayers daily put up to GOD, Morning and Evening, may be called
continual praying, praying always.

He prayed always, i. e. upon all proper and fit Occasions. He did not confine
himself to stated Seasons for Prayer; but eyed the Face of Providence, and
betook himself to GOD in humble Supplication, as new Occasions called for it.
He, no doubt, had his Days of more solemn Prayer, in a Way of Humiliation and
Thanksgiving, as his own Circumstances, or the Affairs of the Public, made them
seasonable and necessary. Nor was he a Stranger to Ejaculatory Prayer. We may
rather suppose, it was his Practice, in this Way, to lift up his Heart to GOD
in devout Acknowledgments, as fresh Occasions were offered therefore, from what
he daily met with in the Course of Providence.

He prayed always, i. e. he prayed and did not faint; he prayed without growing
weary of the Duty. He did not, as the Manner of some is, practice it for a
while, and then lay it aside; but continued in Supplication, watching thereunto
with all Perseverance.

And, I may add, he so prayed, with such Faith, Humility, Sincerity, Submission
and holy Fervor of Soul, that his Prayers were graciously accepted of GOD. So
he was assured by the Angel of the Lord, who said unto him (Context v. 4.), thy
Prayers are come up for a Memorial before God.

Thus I have set before you the Character of CORNELIUS, as a devout religious
Man.

And have we not reason herefrom to reflect upon our selves with Grief and
Shame, that we fall so far below him in true Piety? The best of us all may
blush, while we see our selves reproved by the Example of one, whose
Seize in Religion were so considerable, under smaller Advantages than
ours, who, from Children, have been favored with the Gospel, and all the
external Privileges of the Kingdom of GOD. O how languid is our Devotion! How
slight the Awe of our Minds toward the divine Majesty! How feeble its
Influence to restrain and govern us! How cold and lifeless are our Prayers! How
remiss our Endeavors to promote Religion, either in our Selves, or our Houses!

And are there not those who give too much Reason to be lamented over, as
having no true Fear of GOD before their Eyes? Why else are they so indifferent
to the Duties of Piety? Why do they so often profane the Name, and cast
Contempt upon the Day and Sanctuary of GOD? Why else are they so indisposed to
Prayer, and seldom engaged in this necessary Exercise of Religion? It may be,
there are some who never in all their Life entered into their Closets, to put up
a Prayer to almighty GOD! And can it be said of such, that they reverence their
Maker? If Men restrain Prayer before GOD, it is a sad Sign they have cast off
the Fear of him. (Job 15. 4.) And to this also it is owing, that so little
Religion, or good Order, is to be seen in many of the Families of the present
Age. How uninstructed are their Children and Servants? How unused to good
Counsel and serious Advice? How let alone to go on in the Ways of Sin, without
Correction or Restraint? And are there no Families where GOD was never
worshipped? Are there no Families, where the Heads of them, instead of
Religion, encourage Vice by their evil Example, by their Profaneness, their
Intemperance, their Injustice, their Pride, their ungoverned Wrath and Passion?
How unlike are such to devout CORNELIUS, who feared GOD with his whole House?

O see your selves condemned by his Example! And let me persuade you from it to
fear God your selves, and then to do what you can to possess your whole Houses
of the like religious Temper of Mind.

Charity, we say, begins at home. Your Religion, be sure, must do so. See to it
that you be yourselves Men of true Piety and Devotion; and approve yourselves
such, by a constant Attendance on all the divine Appointments. -- Exercise your
selves to Godliness; but take Care that it be'nt that bodily Exercise which
profits little. -- Don't content yourselves with an external Show; Don't
observe the Institutions of Religion merely to be seen of Men: But look well to
your Aims, that they be good; and to your Hearts, that they be sincere. Take
diligent Heed, that you may serve the Lord with all your Heart, and with all
your Soul; for the Lord searches the Heart, and has Pleasure in Uprightness.

And being religious your selves, give Proof that you are so by suitable
Endeavors to promote Religion in your Families. Like CORNELIUS, Fear God with
your whole House. Let this be your faithful diligent Endeavor.

You can in no other Way expect Comfort in your Families. If Family-Religion is
neglected, what may be looked for but an untowardly Temper and Conduct, in the
several Members of it? The Effect whereof must be Disorder, Vexation, and
Trouble: Whereas, if Religion is duly kept up in the Family, it will powerfully
tend to correct the bad Dispositions, whether of Children or Servants, and
engage them to behave well in their respective Places. And if this, under the
divine Influence, should be the Effect, what happy Families should we have? GOD
would delight to dwell in them, to do them Good and not Evil.

And it is a Matter of vast Importance to the Public, that Religion be
maintained in Families; especially that the Children in them be well instructed
and governed. Their good or evil Behavior, when they are grown up, and gone
forth into the World, will very much depend upon the Care that has been taken
of them, while Children in the Family. If they have been early taught the
Principles of Virtue; if their Minds have been betimes impressed with the Fear
of GOD; if, from their first coming to a Capacity of moral Conduct, they have
been kept under Restraints from Sin; if they have, all along as they grew up,
had a good Example set before them, there will be a happy Prospect of their
rising up a Generation to seek and serve the Lord. These are the Children that
are the Hopes of a Country, and of whom it may be expected they will be
Blessings in the World. Whereas, on the other Hand, if they are neglected,
little or no Care taken to engage them for GOD, and inure them to the Exercises
of Religion, what may be expected but that they should prove the Troublers of
Israel? And the evil Effects of their bad Education may be of lasting
Continuance. For, when those Children who have not been trained up in the Ways
of Piety, come to have Children themselves, it is most probable they will
neglect them, take no Care to plant in their Minds the Seeds of Religion; and,
by this Means, the Generation which springs out of their Loins will be likely
to tread in their Steps, and so Vice and Ignorance, Profaneness and Irreligion,
will descend from Children to Children's Children, GOD only knows how long.

In a Word, it is a great Charge that is devolved on you who have the chief
Direction of Families. You are, in a Measure, accountable for the Souls of your
whole Houses as well as your own. And the Day is coming, it hastens apace, it
lingers not, when it will certainly be demanded of you, what Care you have
taken to walk in your House with a perfect Heart; what Pains you have been at
to train up your Children and Servants for GOD; what Instructions, Counsels and
Warnings you have given them; what Prayers you have put up to GOD for them: And
if it should then appear, that you neither served GOD, your selves, nor
endeavored that your Families might do so; But neglected their Souls, as well
as your own: You will not be able to answer it to GOD, or them. If through your
Neglect of Family-Religion, or, what is worse, the Influence of your bad
Family-Example, your Children or Servants should perish in another World, O
what a doleful Account would you have to give up at the Bar of CHRIST! And
should any of them there charge upon you the Ruin of their Souls, could you be
able to bear up under it? Don't the Forethought of such an Accusation strike
you with shuddering Horror? -- But, Beloved, we are persuaded better Things of
you, and Things that accompany Salvation; though we thus speak.

II. The next Thing observable in CORNELIUS'S Character is, his Charity and
Justice toward Men, together with the good Reputation he had gained in the
World.

He was a Man of Charity; ready to distribute, willing to communicate: And he
was large and generous in his Distributions. So the Apostle describes him,
Which gave much Alms to the People. He does not appear to have been a Man of a
vast Income; but yet, in Proportion to what he had, he did a great deal for the
Poor. It Is probable, he lived frugally in his Family, retrenching all needless
as well as sinful Expenses, that he might have it in his Power to be thus
beneficent. He was not like many Christians, in these Days, who can see their
Brethren have Need, and shut up their Bowels of Compassion; neither was he
charitable in Word and Tongue only, but in Deed and in Truth. If he saw a
Brother or Sister naked, or destitute of daily Food, he did not content himself
with saying unto them, Be ye warmed, be ye filled; but as far as his Ability
would reach, gave them those Things which are needful for the Body.

And he was, no doubt, prompted hereto from a truly benevolent Heart. Had he
sounded a Trumpet before him, when he did his Alms, that he might have Glory of
Men; had he opened his Hand to relieve the Poor, not from a Principle of real
Love to his Neighbor, but to serve his own Ends; -- it would not have been
declared to him from Heaven, that his Alms were come up for a Memorial before
God. The merciful GOD accepted his Charities to the Poor: We may therefore be
sure they Proceeded from a truly charitable Mind. He was not one of those
hard-hearted Men, who could not be touched with a Fellow-Feeling of his
Neighbor's Miseries; he was not one of those sordid Creatures, who imagine all
is lost that is not laid out upon themselves; but he had a hearty Good Will to
Mankind, those of them especially who worshipped the true GOD in Sincerity; and
was ever disposed to all the Exercises of Kindness toward them. He was
tenderhearted and compassionate; apt to show Favor, ready to all the Offices
of Humanity. In a Word, he was eminent for his benevolent Spirit and Conduct;
one of those good Men for whom one would even dare to die.

And he was a just Man, ( v. 22.) as well as charitable. What he gave away in
Alms to the Poor was his own, not the Property of his Creditors. He did not
defraud one Man that he might exercise Charity toward another; much less did
he think of atoning for his Injustice by being bountiful to the Necessitous.
Neither did he heap up Riches, and not by right. He would not steal, nor cheat;
he would not deceive, nor overreach; he would not impose on the Ignorance of
his Brother, nor make an unreasonable Advantage of his Necessity; he would not
be unfaithful to a Trust reposed in him; he would not neglect the Payment of
his Debts, nor violate his Promise; he would not keep back the Wages of the
Poor, nor defer the Hire of the Labourer to his Damage. He was, in short, a
downright honest Man. A Vein of Fairness and Equity run through all his Dealings
with Mankind. He ever made that Law of Reason, as well as of Christianity, the
Rule of his Conduct, All Things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto
you, do ye even so to them.

The Apostle adds, in this same 22d v. that he was a Man of good Report among
all the Nation of the Jews; of a fair Character, highly esteemed among his
Neighbors, commonly reported to be a Man of an excellent Spirit. His Behavior
had been so blameless and inoffensive, so expressive of Reverence toward GOD,
and Benignity and Righteousness toward Men, that he had a good Name among the
whole Nation of the Jews; they all spoke well of him. The true Fearers of GOD
embraced him as a pious holy Man, and admired the divine Grace appearing in
him. And, it is probable, those who had no Religion themselves saw so much of
GOD in his devout, humble, charitable, and universally exemplary Conversation,
that they venerated his Person, and treated him with all decent Respect.

Let us now take Occasion, from this Part of CORNELIUS'S Character, to reflect
upon our own. And may we not see our selves reproved and condemned by his
Example? May it not be said of too many of us, that, instead of giving much
Alms to the Poor, we have given scarce any at all? O how deaf have we been to
their Cry! How often have we shut up the Bowels of our Compassion! How little
have we done for their Relief under Difficulties and Necessities! Have we not
laid out that to pamper our Lusts, or adorn our Bodies, which might have better
been bestowed to feed the Hungry, and cloth the Naked? -- And are there none
of us, who have added Injustice to Uncharitableness? Can we lay our Hands upon
our Hearts, and say, that we have all along, in the Course of Life, been fair
and honest in our Dealings? Have we never oppressed the Poor and Fatherless?
Have we never wronged our Neighbor? Have we carefully kept our selves from
every Method of Fraud and Deceit, in our Trade and Traffic? Are there no Acts
of Cozenage, no Instances of Cheating and Overreaching, that lie heavy upon
our Consciences? Let us review our past Conduct. And wherein we may have failed
of doing justly, or loving Mercy. let us humble our selves before GOD, and
repent.

And let us learn, from the Example of CORNELIUS, both to give Alms and do
Justice.

With him, let us give much Alms to the Poor. This is a great Duty, much
insisted on in the Bible, and much is dependant on it. Inquiry will be made at
the great and final Judgment, what Distributions we have made to the Poor? What
Charities we have bestowed for the Relief of their Necessities? And according
to what then appears, you will be absolved or condemned. If you have showed no
Mercy, neither will you then find Mercy; but that will be your Doom, Depart
from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no Meat; I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye
clothed me not; sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not. -- Inasmuch as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. Whereas, on the
other Hand, if you have remembered the Poor, and opened your Hearts and Hands
for their Help and Comfort, that will be the happy Sentence pronounced on you,
Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
Foundation of the World. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me Drink; I was a a Stranger, and ye took me in; naked,
and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came
unto me. -- Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Do you believe, my Brethren, a coming Day of Judgment? Do you expect to see
the Son of Man descending from Heaven in great Glory, with his holy Angels, to
call the World to an Account? Do you hope to be found of your Judge, at that
Day, in Peace? To do good and communicate, forget not: For with such Sacrifices
God is well pleased. Be liberal in your Distributions to Uses of Charity. And
be not weary of well-doing, neither faint in your Minds; but, as you have
Opportunity, do Good to all Men, especially unto them who are of the Household
of Faith: So will you be acquitted at the Bar of CHRIST, and received to the
Rewards of Mercy in GOD's heavenly and eternal Kingdom.

And let me persuade you to do Justice as well as give Alms. This is equally a
Matter of Necessity, as you would hope, upon good Grounds, to give up your
Account another Day, with Joy and not with Grief. Don't look upon the Practice
of Honesty, as little better than Pagan Morality, and below the Refinements of
Christianity. Deceive not your selves. CHRIST is not a Minister of
Unrighteousness: And his Religion is so far from allowing its Professors to
deal falsely, that it enjoins the contrary under the Penalty of Damnation. It Is
true, the mere outward Part of Honesty, without an inward righteous Principle,
is of no Value, religiously speaking: Neither ought our Honesty, or any other
Virtue, to be placed in the Room of CHRIST, and depended on, instead of him, to
procure for us the Favor of GOD, and Admission into Heaven: But this don't at
all weaken our Obligations to the Practice of Righteousness. The Law of Honesty
is the Law of Christianity; and if we think of being religious without being
honest, we only put a Cheat upon our selves. The righteous Lord loves
Righteousness; and they only who do Righteousness will be accepted of him:
Neither will CHRIST save any but such. His Merits are no Refuge for religious
Knaves; his Wounds no Sanctuary for spiritual Cheats, Extortioners and
Oppressors: And for such Persons to shelter themselves in our SAVIOR'S
Propitiation, is to profane and desecrate it. The plain Truth is, dishonest
Dealing is a shameful Thing in those who call themselves Christians; and
whatever their Pretenses, or Hopes are, while they go on in the Practice of it,
the LORD JESUS CHRIST will not own them for his Disciples at the great Day; but
doom them to the Place of Weeping, and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth.

III. But I must now go on to the last Article in CORNELIUS'S Character, his
Faith in CHRIST, and Profession as his Disciple.

We have hitherto considered him, not as a Christian, but an excellent good
Man: For so he really was, before he ever heard of CHRIST, as come in the
Flesh. It Is probable, indeed, as he was a Jewish Proselyte, that he had heard
of the Promise made to the Fathers, and believed it: But now that it was
fulfilled, and CHRIST actually come, 'twas necessary that he should believe in
him as such. And in order to this, he was directed by an Angel, sent on Purpose
from GOD, to go to Peter, one of the Apostles of CHRIST: And it was from him,
and under his Preaching, that he first heard of CHRIST, and was enabled by
Faith to embrace him as the SAVIOR, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles
also. The first Sermon concerning CHRIST, CORNELIUS ever heard, we have
recorded in this Chapter, from the 34th to the 43d v. And the Effect it had
upon him, and those that were with him, is recorded also in the following
Verse, While Peter yet spoke these Words, the holy GHOST fell on all them which
heard the Word. And that the holy GHOST so fell on them, i. e. Cornelius and
Company, as to dispose and enable them to receive CHRIST by true Faith, we
learn from the 15th Chapter of the Acts; where the Apostle Peter, giving the
other Apostles an Account of the Effect of this very Sermon upon CORNELIUS and
the other Gentiles with him, says, v. 8, 9. God gave them the holy GHOST,
purifying their Hearts by Faith.

So that CORNELIUS was a Believer in CHRIST: And, as such, he took upon him the
Badge of Discipleship; was baptized in the Name of the Lord, as we read in the
last Verse of the Chapter.

How he behaved himself in his christian Capacity, we are not particularly
told; but he, no doubt, continued steadfastly in the Doctrine of CHRIST, and
made Improvements in Grace and Holiness, in Proportion to the greater
Advantages he was now favored with. We may reasonably suppose, if he was a
good Man, while only a Jewish Proselyte, he was much more so now that he was a
Believer in JESUS; having seen and heard those Things, which many Prophets and
Kings have desired to see and hear, but could not.

And if Faith in CHRIST was a matter of Necessity in Respect of CORNELIUS, it is
certainly so in Respect of us, who live where his Gospel is preached, and the
Evidences of it, as a Revelation from GOD, have been clearly set before us. We
are the Persons to whom our SAVIOR speaks, as it were, by Name, in those
Words, Mark 16. 16. He that believes shall be saved: But he that believes not
shall be damned. And again, John 3. 18. He that believes on him is not
condemned; but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. And yet again, v. 36. He
that believes on the Son has everlasting Life: And he that believes not the
Son, shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him.

Take Heed then, my Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of
Unbelief in departing from the living God, and his only begotten Son JESUS
CHRIST. -- Don't satisfy your selves with any Religion without CHRIST, nor with
any Thing in Religion to the Exclusion of him. Deceive not your selves: There
is not Salvation in any other; for there is none other Name under Heaven given
among Men, whereby you can be saved. -- Receive it as a faithful Saying, and
account it worthy of all Acception, that CHRIST JESUS came into the World to
save Sinners. And count all Things but Dung, that you may win CHRIST, and be
found in him, not having your own Righteousness, which is of the Law; but that
which is through the Faith of CHRIST, the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith:
Yet, see to it that your Faith has a due Influence both on your Hearts and
Lives; that it be an inward, active, powerful Principle of holy Obedience;
showing it self in all the genuine Exercises of Love to GOD, and the REDEEMER,
and your Neighbor: So may you look for the Mercy of the LORD JESUS CHRIST to
eternal Life.

I have now done with my Text. But it remains, as I promised at first, to give
you some Account of that excellent Servant of GOD, whose Death gave Occasion to
the preceding Discourse.

And I am inclined to this, not that I might flatter a dead Friend, but do
Honor to that Grace of God, which was exceeding abundant toward him, in Faith
and Love that is in CHRIST JESUS. Such conspicuous Instances of high
Seize in the christian Life are very uncommon. And GOD expects a just
Notice should be taken of them. It would be a Wrong to the World, Injustice to
the Memory of the Dead, and a withholding from GOD the Glory due to his rich
Grace in JESUS CHRIST, to be silent, when so fair an Occasion is offered
publicly to recommend Religion. And I am the rather disposed to this Service,
as, in the present Case, I shall be under no Temptation to exceed the Truth,
and none will suspect I am governed by sinister Views.

The Person whose Death we are lamenting, seems so like to the Scripture
CORNELIUS, that, I doubt not, your Thoughts were upon him, while I was opening
the Character in the Text: Nor was he at all inferior to him, either as a
devout Man; fearing God with all House, and praying to God always: Or as a
charitable Man; giving much Alms, considering his Estate, to the Poor: Or as a
just Man, and of good Report among all the People by whom he was known: Or as a
sound Believer in JESUS CHRIST.

I shall not confine my self to the Method of my Text in giving his Character;
but choose to speak of the Things that were exemplary in him, as they may come
to Mind: And I shall say nothing but what I came to the Knowledge of, either by
personal Acquaintance and Conversation with him, or have seen under his own
Hand in Papers that he has left behind him.

It was when between fifteen and sixteen Years of Age, that he had awakened in
him a serious Concern about his Soul, and everlasting Salvation. His Sins were
now set in Order before him, and his Soul filled with Distress, from the View
he had of himself as exposed to the Curse of the Law, and the Wrath of GOD. And
he made a good Use of his Convictions; was enabled, under the Influence of
them, to break off from his Sins, and vain Companions, and betake himself to a
serious and diligent Attendance on the appointed Means of Conversion;
especially secret Prayer: In which he was most earnest and importunate with GOD
to take Pity upon such a poor miserable Sinner. I find him writing upon this
Head in the following Words. Never did any Person more earnestly seek for Food
for their Bodies to nourish and strengthen them, than I did for Opportunies to
pour out my Soul before GOD, in humble and importunate Prayer for Grace and
Mercy. This was my constant and daily Work, not only on frequent and fixed
Seasons for solemn Prayer; but by constant keeping my Heart with GOD, and by
earnest ejaculatory Prayer, pouring out my humble and fervent Petitions to the
GOD of all Grace, that he would be pleased, in his infinite Mercy, to have
Compassion on my miserable Soul, and not suffer me to perish under his Wrath
forever. And he was particular in his Care, not to stifle his Convictions, but
lay himself still more open to them, that he might know the Worst of himself,
and the All Sufficiency of CHRIST, and be enabled to repair to him as the alone
SAVIOR, in the Gospel-Way. I humbly bless GOD, says he, that he did not suffer
me to take any Methods, or use any Means, to stifle the Convictions of the
blessed SPIRIT, and so recover my carnal Ease and Rest; but that I was
influenced to do all that lay in my Power to cherish these Convictions, and to
lay my Soul open yet further to them, by earnestly begging of GOD, that he
would be pleased to make me yet more and more sensible of my dreadful Estate,
and show me the Worst of my self, and the absolute Need I stood in of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST; and that he would discover him to my Soul, as a most suitable and
all-sufficient SAVIOR for such a miserable undone Sinner as I am, and persuade
and enable me to receive him by a true and living Faith, and heartily accept of
him in all the Offices he is invested with, as the Mediator and Savior of his
People; as a Prophet to instruct me in the whole Will of GOD; as a Priest to
atone for my Sins, and procure a perfect Righteousness for my Justification
before GOD; and as a King to rule and govern me, mortify my Lusts, and subdue
all my spiritual Enemies. And he went on humbly and diligently waiting upon
GOD, in the Ways of his own Institution, 'till he was enabled to receive the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, with a Faith disposing him to commit the whole Affair of his
Salvation into his Hands, trusting in him and him alone for Righteousness and
Strength; with a Faith that purified his Heart, and showed it self by Works, in
a uniform steady Course of Obedience to the Gospel, through the After-Course of
his Life.

He was but a very young Man, when he came into Fellowship with this Church;
and he did it, after great Exercise of Mind, and upon full Conviction of his
Duty in this Regard. His Words are; I was, at this Time, impressed with a very
great Concern of Soul as to my Duty in coming to the Lord's Table, and
exercised with very great Fears about my Qualifications to come to that holy
Ordinance; but a Sense of Duty was so strong upon my Heart, that I could not, I
dared not, neglect, or delay any longer; considering that positive Command of
my dear and blessed SAVIOR, This do in Remembrance of me: And so I soon
complied with my Duty in this Regard, and gave up my Self to GOD wholly and
forever. And he was religiously strict in his Attendance on this, and all the
other Duties of Piety, whether public, or private, or secret: Nor did he
content himself with this, but made it his Endeavor, depending on the divine
Strength, to do the whole Will of GOD, by living soberly and righteously, as
well as godlily. He made Conscience indeed of his Words, yea, his Thoughts, as
well as Actions. And it was the Labor of his Life to behave like a Christian
in every Relation he sustained, to approve himself a good Husband, a good
Father, a good Neighbor, a good Friend, a good Member both of Church and
Commonwealth.

And he was particularly concerned about his inward Principles and Springs of
Action; not satisfying himself with the external Performance of Duty, but
realising the Necessity of right Aims and Views, and that the Heart be right
with GOD. And such had been his Care upon this Head, as that he was able to
write in these Words; I have long ago found by happy Experience, that now I
perform the Duties of Religion from quite other Principles and Dispositions,
and from other Ends, than I formerly did. Now it is with a View to GOD: And the
pleasing and glorifying him, I can sincerely say, is the great End I aim at, in
all the Duties I perform. I can truly say, and therein approve my self to GOD
who searches my Heart, that to please and glorify him is the very Top of my
Ambition and Desire. I humbly bless GOD I can say, I do love him with all my
Heart and Soul, and Strength and Mind; and that I love him for himself, on
account of the infinitely amiable Perfections of his Nature, such as his
Holiness and Justice, his Goodness and Mercy; and that it is my desire and
endeavor to be conformed to him, in these and all other his communicable
Perfections, in the highest Measure I am capable of. I can truly say, I love
the Law of GOD for this Reason, because it is holy; that I delight in it after
the inward Man, and desire nothing more than to be conformed to it in the Frame
and Temper of my Mind. -- I hate all Sin for this Reason, because it a
Transgression of GOD'S holy Law; and I desire that all Sin may be rooted out of
my Heart.

And he was careful, not only that his Aims and Principles might be good, but
that he might also place his Dependence right; not on his own Works of
Righteouness, but the Merits of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Accordingly, though he
made it the grand Business of his Life, to walk before GOD in all his
Commandments and Ordinances blameless, yet he was thoro'ly sensible what a
poor, frail, imperfect Man he was; that all his Righteousness was but as filthy
Rags, and that he could have Hope no where but in the Mercy of GOD, and
Righteousness and Blood of CHRIST. Hear his Language upon this Head.
Notwithstanding, says he, the Experience I have had of GOD'S gracious Workings
on my Heart, and a steady constant Practice of the Duties of Religion from my
Youth up, I bless GOD, he has, by his holy SPIRIT, effectually shown me in the
clearest and most convincing Light, the Imperfection of my Graces and Duties,
and that they must all be renounced in Point of Justification, and that I must
be justified freely by the Grace of GOD, through the Redemption that is in the
LORD JESUS CHRIST. And I trust, GOD has bro't me off from any Dependence on
these, and enabled me to receive CHRIST, and depend upon his Righteousness
alone for Salvation: And my hearty Desire is to be found in CHRIST, not having
on my own Righteousness, which is of the Law; but that Righteousness which is
through the Faith of CHRIST, the Righteousness of GOD by Faith.

But there are some observable Things in the Life of this good Man, which must
not be passed over without special Notice.

The first is, The Christian Temper of Mind, and noble Resolutions, with which
he went out into the World when he came of Age. I shall give you what I have to
say here in his own Words. Says he, When I arrived at Age, and came into the
World to act for my self, I bless GOD that by his Grace, I can say, I came into
it with this Disposition and Resolution, to make the Glory of GOD, and in
Conjunction therewith, and Subordination thereto, the Salvation of my precious
Soul, my great and principal Care; that I would, by the Help of Grace, make
this World, and all the Affairs and Concerns of it, stoop and be subordinated
thereto; that by a prudent Management of my particular Calling, I would make it
subservient to my general Calling; and that I would endeavor to follow the
Advice of my blessed Savior, Seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and to rely on his Promise for the Addition of other Things, as
he should see them to be needful for me. Accordingly, I was bro't to conclude
with my self, that to be rich or great in this World was not necessary for me,
but to be religious and holy was necessary, absolutely so; and so I was brought
to this Resolution, to hearken to, and comply with, that Admonition of GOD, by
his holy Prophet, Seek thou great Things for thy self? Seek them not. And to
this it was owing, that I never involved my self in the Business of this World,
so as to make it become a Snare to my Soul; nor suffered any worldly Affairs to
hinder me from waiting on GOD, either in the public, or private, or secret
Duties of Religion. How happy would it be, if our young People would generally
set out in the World, under the Influence of such holy Dispositions and
Resolutions! Making Religion their principal Business, and subordinating their
temporal Affairs to the Concerns of their Souls and eternal Salvation.

Another Thing I cannot but esteem exemplary in him, was the considerate
religious Temper, with which he engaged in the weighty Affair of Matrimony. He
writes thus upon it; When I came to a Resolution to alter my Condition, by
entering into the married State, this I considered as a Matter of great Weight,
and that it would be my making or undoing in the World. And it put me upon most
humble and importunate Supplications to GOD, my heavenly Father, for Guidance
and Direction. And he speaks with Thankfulness, of being directed to one, with
whom he lived happily; and that they lived together as Heirs of the Grace of
Life. It would be well, if our young Men and Women would bear in Mind this good
Example, and act according to it. This of Marriage is one of the most momentous
Affairs of Life; and yet, it is too commonly engaged in with no more
Consideration, than if it was a very trivial Concern. -- It ought to be though it
upon in a serious Manner, and carried to GOD, by frequent and earnest Prayer,
as a Matter of the greatest Importance; that which has a near Connection, not
only with our temporal Happiness or Misery, but the Happiness or Misery of our
Souls in another World. If, in any Thing of a temporal Nature, you need the
divine Guidance, it is in this: And you should religiously acknowledge GOD, that
he may direct your Steps. Those Matches, in which GOD is not consulted, are
most likely to prove Curses.

Another Thing worthy of Remark in this good Man, is that Truth and Honesty he
ever made Conscience of exercising, in the Course of his Trade and Business. He
writes upon this Head in these Words; I am able, with Comfort, to look back
upon the Whole of my Concerns in the World, and can sincerely say, I am not in
the least conscious to my self of any Fraud, or of deceiving any Man, in the
Course of my Dealing with him. And, as for any Promises or Engagements that I
might, at any Time, bring my self under, it has been my conscientious Care, at
all Times, to fulfill them, in the exactest Time, and to the Satisfaction of
every Person to whom I stood engaged; always believing and realising, that a
Man cannot be a good Christian without being a just and honest Man. And he
herein certainly judged right. In vain may any pretend to be the Disciples of
CHRIST, if they break their Promises, neglect the Payment of their just Debts,
and use the Methods of Fraud and Deceit in their Trade and Commerce. This
deserves our serious Consideration in this Day of prevailing Dishonesty. For
though it is not eno', that we deal justly; yet this must be one Ingredient in
our Character, or we shall never inherit the Kingdom of GOD.

Family-Religion also is that in which he is worthy of Imitation. Says he,
Joshua's Resolution has been mine, As for me and my House, we will serve the
Lord. And it has been my constant and unfeigned Desire and Endeavor to walk in
my House, with a perfect Heart; and to set the LORD always as present before
me. And when it pleased GOD to increase my Family, by giving me Children, it
was always the great Concern of my Soul to be faithful to GOD and them, by
instructing them, and bringing them up for GOD; and by setting an holy Example
before them. He has left, in Writing, a large Form of Instruction, by Way of
Question and Answer, of his own drawing up: And as it was the Form he
ordinarily used in Instructing his Children, he committed it to Writing for
their Benefit, not knowing but it might please GOD to take him away, while some
of them were young: And it is done with good Judgment, and discovers
considerable of Knowledge in Religion. His Children, it is to be hoped, will
(...), and make a wise and and good Use of it.

He was likewise eminently a Man of Prayer. Few, I believe, were ever more
constant in an Attendance on this Duty, or made it more their Business. I have
heard him say, that Prayer to GOD had been his daily Employment, the Work and
Business of his Life, from the Days of his Youth. And in his Papers I find him
saying, That, for the Space of Forty Years, hardly ever twenty-four Hours had
rolled over his Head, but, at least, two Hours of it had been spent in serious
servent Prayer to GOD, in Secret, in his Closet, and in his Family. And he did
not attend this Duty, as forced to it by his Conscience, or as esteeming it a
Task; but it was a real Pleasure to him, in this Way, to repair to his heavenly
FATHER. I have heard him say, Prayer was the Delight of his Soul: Nor otherwise
could he have been so abundant in it.

In fine, His Charity is what deserves an honorable Mention. I humbly thank
GOD, says he, that, by his Blessing on my poor Endeavors, and small Business
in the World, I have been enabled, not only to provide for my Family, and to
live comfortably, but also to exercise my self in Works of Charity, as my
Ability and Opportunity have required; and that, I hope, from a sincere Love to
GOD and CHRIST, and out of Obedience to his blessed Will, and that I might
honor the Lord with my Substance, and testify my Gratitude to him for his
great Goodness to me.

I would add here, I have had Occasion to observe in him, since his
Introduction into the Deacon's Office, a peculiar Concern for the Poor: And he
always appeared to me, not only faithful and prudent in distributing the
Charities put into his Hands for their Use, but conscientious in doing the
utmost himself to relieve them under their Necessities. And he took Pleasure in
ministering to their Help; and was ready, upon proper Occasions, to provoke his
Friends and Neighbors to Love and good Works. In these, as well as in all
other Respects, he used the Office of a Deacon well, and purchased to himself a
good Degree, and great Boldness in the Faith, which is in CHRIST JESUS.

I have now acquainted you, in some Measure, with the Spirit and Life of this
good Man; his Love to CHRIST, and uniform, regular, humble and close Walk, with
him. And what might be expected as the Fruit, but a good Hope toward GOD; yea,
a comfortable Assurance of his being interested in his Favor here, and of
dwelling with him in Heaven hereafter? And this accordingly was the Effect. I
was never acquainted with many, who enjoyed such a constant, uninterrupted
Serenity of Soul, arising from the full Assurance of Hope. He speaks upon this
Article in these Words; With the most profound Humility of Soul, and in the
deepest Sense of my own Unworthiness, I would acknowledge and admire the free
and sovereign Grace of GOD toward me, in making me the Subject of so
distinguishing a Favor, as to be able to say, with the holy and blessed
Apostle Paul, I knew a Man in CHRIST above fourteen Years ago. And if it should
be enquired, how I came by this Assurance of my good Estate toward GOD? I
answer, By the SPIRIT of GOD witnessing to his own Work in my Soul, and not by
any hasty sudden Transport of Affection; though of this I have had considerable
Experience in the Course of my Life. This Assurance, I bless GOD, is not like
Jonah's Gourd, which came up in a Night, and withered in a Night; but is the
Effect of long waiting, and earnest and diligent seeking. I can say, and I
bless GOD that I can say it, that I have made a Work and Business of Religion
for full forty Years. And I have now this for my Rejoicing, the Testimony of my
Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not by fleshly Wisdom, but
by the Grace of GOD, I have had my Conversation in the World. And I humbly
acknowledge, it is by the Grace of GOD that I am what I am: And his Grace
bestowed on me was not in vain: But I labored in Religion; yet, not I, but the
Grace of GOD that was with me. And I most humbly give Thanks to GOD the Father,
who has made me meet to be a Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. There is another Passage in his Papers, from whence you may collect, how
he came to such a settled Assurance of his Interest in the Mercy of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST to eternal Life: And I the rather take this Opportunity to relate
it to you, because it discovers so clear and sound a Judgment in the true
Scripture Way of arriving at Assurance. It is this; Sanctification is certainly
the best and most certain Evidence of our being pardoned and justified, let Men
boast and brag of their strong Faith in the Merits and Righteousness of CHRIST,
and that they are justified thereby, while they have no Regard to inherent
Grace and Holiness, as the Evidence hereof. This is bold Presumption; and
plainly shows, that they have no true Knowledge and Experience of that
Scriptural Assurance, which does and will afford true, solid, and lasting Joy
and Comfort. In order to be satisfied in this great Gospel Privilege, that the
blessed GOD has pardoned and justified me, by imputing the perfect
Righteousness of his SON, the Lord JESUS CHRIST, to my Soul; would I ascend up
to Heaven, to search into GOD'S secret Counsels? No, I would rather descend
into my own Heart, and make this serious and solemn Inquiry, whether the holy
SPIRIT of GOD has come and taken Possession of me, and set up his Kingdom of
Grace in me, subdued my Lusts, and destroyed the Dominion of Sin and Satan in
me, and enabled me heartily to embrace the Lord JESUS CHRIST, submitting my
Soul and Conscience to his Rule and Government? What better Evidence can I
have, that I am a Child of GOD, than to find that he has wro't the Temper of a
Child in me? How can I know that GOD loves me, but by finding the Love of GOD
rooted in my Heart? How can I come to know that I have a sure Title to Heaven,
and that I shall certainly enter into Heaven when I leave this World, but by
finding that I live in Heaven, and converse with spiritual and heavenly Things,
now while I am living here on the Earth?

Thus you see, how this good Man came by his Hope of Heaven. And it was always
(from the Time of my Acquaintance with him) the same steady firm Persuasion,
without wavering or Interruption: And so it continued, through the whole of his
lingering Sickness. I never perceived in him the least Uneasiness, through Fear
of Death; but often had Occasion to take Notice of his calm and placid State of
Mind, his Willingness to die, and strong Faith that he should die in CHRIST,
and go to be with CHRIST, in his heavenly FATHER'S Kingdom. So far as fell
within my Observation, he was a Stranger, both in Health and Sickness, to a
rapturous Kind of Joy; but he was favored with that, which, in my Opinion, was
much more desirable, a manly, solid, stable Satisfaction of Soul, ever
accompanied with a becoming Seriousness and Solemnity of Spirit. The greatest
Emotion I ever saw in him was a few Days before our last Sacrament, when,
looking upon me with a pleasant, yet serious Countenance, he said with some
Degree of Warmth, I should esteem it a great Favor, if GOD would please to
call me hence before the next Sabbath, that, while you, and the Church I belong
to, are celebrating the Memorial of my dying SAVIOR, at his Supper on Earth, I
may be sitting down at the Supper of the Lamb in GOD' s heavenly Kingdom:
Nevertheless, not as I will, FATHER, but as thou will. He would often say, I
bless GOD, I can with Appropriation call GOD MY FATHER, and JESUS CHRIST MY
SAVIOR. He would often say, I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded,
that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that Day. He
would often say, I know GOD has wro't his own Work in my Soul; and I am
confident of this very Thing, that he which has begun a good Work in me, will
perform it unto the Day of CHRIST. He would sometimes say, GOD is with me, and
he will be with me; he has prepared me for himself, and he will take me to
himself I have heard him say, He had not the least Doubt of his going to Heaven
when he died; For (said he) God has made me meet for the heavenly Inheritance.

I would not suggest by all this, as though he was free from Infirmities and
Faults. In this Sense, there is none that does Good, no, not one. And he would
often, in the Midst of his strongest Expressions of Assurance, speak of himself
as a poor, frail, imperfect, sinful Man; and say, after all, ' that I esteem
the fittest Prayer for me, GOD be merciful to me a Sinner: But then, he once
added what I cannot but think worth mentioning, So long, says he, as I know that
my Heart is right with GOD, and that he has formed his own blessed Image in me,
the Remains of Sin don't at all weaken my Hope. I desire, indeed, to be humble
under a Sense hereof, and to mourn for my Infirmities and Sins; but they shall
not make me part with my Hope. It was not the Design of CHRIST to make
Believers perfect in this World. Perfect Freedom from Sin, and Perfection in
Holiness, are reserved for Heaven: And I hope to enjoy these Blessings there.

In a Word, through his whole Confinement, 'twas more than a Recompense for a
Visit to him, to behold the Serenity of his Soul, the Strength of his Faith in
GOD and CHRIST, his entire Contempt of the World, perfect Indifference to Life,
and constant actual Willingness and Readiness for Death. This indeed was very
much his habitual Frame for a Course of Years before his Sickness: And it
continued, yea, increased, in that trying Time. He was, all along, in his
Sickness, in the lively Exercise of Faith and Hope; and often expressed, even
his Longings to be with CHRIST, which is best of all. The last Time I saw him
was about three Hours before his Death; and he enjoyed the same calm State of
Mind, and expressed the same Assurance of Hope, he had all along done. The only
Difference was, his Strength so far failed, and Tongue faulter'd, that it was
with Difficulty I was able to understand what he said: Though I distinctly
remember, the last Words I heard him utter were these, When you come to Heaven,
you will find me there.

Under these Circumstances, by Faith looking beyond the Grave to the Joys of
his LORD, his Body fell asleep, while his Spirit, I have no Doubt, was received
to the Spirits of just Men made perfect: And when the Son of Man shall come, in
the Clouds of Heaven, at the great and last Day, to awake those who sleep in
the Dust, He, among the Dead in CHRIST, shall rise: And it will be to Honor
and Immortality in GOD'S heavenly and everlasting Kingdom.

And can the surviving Relatives of such a Servant of JESUS CHRIST be
disconsolate? Mourn you may; but let it be for your selves, not for him. For
your Loss is his Gain. He is now got above the Reach of Sin and Sorrow: He is
now in the Paradise of GOD, in Company with holy Angels, and perfected Spirits,
yea, he is in the Presence of JESUS the SAVIOR, and of GOD the Judge of all.
And would you wish him back again into this World of Misery? As ye loved him,
rejoice that he is gone to the FATHER: Rejoice in his Happiness, while you
grieve that you shall no more have the Benefit of his Company here on Earth.

We unitedly bow the Knee to the GOD and FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST;
beseeching him to be the Widow's GOD and Husband. And may she be quickened in
her Preparations to follow after her departed Companion, that she may again see
his Face, and live with him in Glory.

Nor can we wish any Thing better for the bereaved Children, than that their
Father's GOD would be their GOD, and give them a double Portion of that good
Spirit which rested on him. O remember the Instructions, the Counsels, the
Warnings he has given you! They will rise up in Judgment against you, if you
don't. -- Let it be your sollicitous Endeavor to supply his Place in the
World, and be a like Blessing in it.

And let us all duly resent the Death of this Man of GOD. His Death is a Loss,
not only to his Family, but to the Town, and especially this Church, and the
Poor of it. -- There are few such Men left among us. -- Help, LORD, for the
godly Man cease; the Faithful fail from among us. -- The LORD is thining our
Glory. -- Let us follow them who, through Faith and Patience, are gone to inherit
the Promises.

And may it please the good GOD, as he takes from us Men of Faith and Prayer,
and an exemplary Conversation in CHRIST, to raise up others to supply their
Place! And may there never be wanting, instead of the Fathers, the Children, to
uphold the Worship and Ordinances of CHRIST in this House. GOD grant it for his
Mercies Sake, in his beloved Son JESUS.

AMEN.

