TWENTY THREE SERMONS UPON THE CHIEF END of MAN. THE Divine Authority of the
sacred SCRIPTURES, THE BEING and ATTRIBUTES of GOD, AND THE Doctrine of the
TRINITY, Preached at PHILADELPHIA, Anno Dom. 1743.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Jer. iii. 15. And I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart, which shall
feed you with Knowledge and Understanding.

Prove. ii. 3, 4, 5. Yea if thou cryest after Knowledge and liftest up thy Voice
for Understanding; if thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for
hid Treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
Knowledge of God.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of the Bible
in Second Street. MDCCXLIV.

PREFACE
Candid Reader,
SEEING that Corrupt Principles tend to infect the Heart and Practice, it is
therefore highly necessary to beware of them; we read of damnable Heresies, as
well as damnable Practices, (2 Pet. ii. 1.) Seeing that the main Doctrines of
Religion, have, in a Measure, the same Relation to Piety in Practice, as a
Foundation to a Superstructure, it is therefore like building a Fabric in the
Air to inculcate the one without having regard to the other. It is doubtless a
commanded and Important Duty to be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and to
contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints: But how shall we be able to
comply with this divine Precept, unless we know the Truths we are to be Zealous
for? And how can we expect to know them without the Use of proper Means to that
End, such as Reading, Meditation, Prayer?

We are commanded to hold fast the Form of sound Words, 2 Timothy i. 13. The
original Word Hypotoposis, signifies a Scheme or Skeleton. This plainly intends
not only the Relation and Harmony of the great Truths of Religion to and among
each other, but the Necessity we lie under of adhering to them; but how shall
we do this without Knowledge? To suppose that we need not know but a few
Principles, and that the Knowledge of many hinders our religious Progress, is
to reflect upon the Wisdom and Goodness of God in revealing so many in the
Scriptures: And to say in other Words that the chief Part of the Scriptures is
Vain, or rather Prejudicial to our Souls benefit, which is an awful Position!
If the Doctrines of the Scriptures need not be known, why have they been
revealed? Can they be of Service to us without our Knowledge of them; but
possibly some may Object that Paul asserted, he desired to know nothing among
the Corinthians but JESUS CHRIST and him crucified. I answer that Place of
Scripture is to be taken comparitively, viz. That he desired to know nothing so
much among them as Christ and him crucified, he desired to make Christ in his
Person, Natures, Offices, Relations, and Sufferings, together with the Benefits
thereby purchased, the principal Subject and main Scope of his ministeral
Labors. He desired to make all his Sermons on every Subject tend to promote
the Knowledge of CHRIST, Love to him and Faith in him. Neither is it unusual in
Scripture to take absolute Expressions in a comparative Sense. Thus the
Almighty says, That he will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, i. e. rather than
Sacrifice. Now if we take the aforesaid Scripture in another Sense, viz. That
Paul desired to know nothing more than the Doctrine of CHRIST'S Crucifixion:
This tends to cast contempt upon the chief Part of the Scriptures and render
them vain and useless. And it is likewise contrary to the Apostles Practice,
for he preached and wrote by divine Inspiration many other Truths; and surely
he may be reasonably supposed to know his own Intention best.

It is indeed our Wisdom and our Duty to proportion the Degree of our Zeal, for
the several Truths of Religion to their respective Weight and Place in the
Christian System, but without Knowledge and Judgment this is Impracticable. We
are enjoined to continue in the Faith, grounded and settled. Col. i. 23. But
how can this be expected without the Knowledge of the Doctrines of Faith, can
we continue in that which we know not? Surely Ignorance is the Cause of
Unsteadiness in the Principles of Religion; because of this, some are like
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, by
the Slight of Men and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
(Ephesians. iv. 14.) It is no new Thing for false Teachers by good Words and fair
Speeches to deceive the Hearts of the Simple, (Romans xvi. 18.) The false
Apostles ensnared the Galatians by great Shows of Piety and Affection to them,
as well as by unjust Reflections against faithful Ministers. Gal. iv. 17. They
zealously affect you, but not well, yea they would exclude us that you might
affect them.

Surely our Establishment in the great Principles of Religion, tends to the
Glory of God and our own growth in Goodness. This is our Excellency, and indeed
it is one great End of the Gospel Ministry. ( Ephesians. iv. 11, -- 13.) Whereas
the Contrary tends to the Dishonor of God and our selves, and much Mars our
Growth in Holiness: For how can a Plant thrive that is often moved? Is it
likely that those will glorify God by suffering for Truth who know it not? Let
us therefore abhor these Popish Principle's, viz. That Ignorance is the Mother
of Devotion, and that it is our Duty to believe implicitly or simply. Surely
without Knowledge the Mind cannot be good. Acquaintance with the first
Principles of the Oracles of God enriches the Mind and is a Lamp to the Feet.
The Knowledge of divine Truths in their due Series and Connection, much
confirms our belief of them, and thereby inflames our Love, and Influences our
Practice. To help forward that good Design I have been induced to offer the
following Discourses to public View; and would entreat the Reader to peruse
the whole before he condemns a Part, that so he may have an Oppertunity of
judging for himself whether the Truths therein contained do not harmonize among
themselves, and tend to promote the Glory of God as well as the Creatures self
Abasement and eternal Happiness. And if they be found attended with these
Characters, are they not worthy of Credit and Acceptance? Surely the Doctrines
of Religion should not be judged of according to the prejudices of our
Education or corrupt Byasses of Passion, but calmly and impartially weighed in
the Scales of Scripture and Reason. For Truth will not vary according to our
Humor: It is therefore undoubtedly our Interest to know it, whether we like it
or not. In the mean time we should beware of resting satisfied with the
Doctrinal Knowledge of Truth, without feeling the efficacious Influence thereof
upon Heart and Life, for such as know their Masters Will and do it not, must
expect to be beaten with double stripes. Now that the following Sermons may be
blessed of the most high God, to the equal promoting of Truth and Holiness, is
the earnest Desire and Prayer of thy Servant for CHRIST'S Sake.

Philadelphia, June 23. 1744. G. TENNENT.

SERMON I.
1 Corinthians, x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the Glory of God.


THE Principal Thing in human Actions, that demands enquiry and deserves
Attention, is their Form, or in other Words, the Principles we act from, and
Mark we aim at in them. These are the Ingredients that do chiefly constitute
their Goodness or Malignity; and these that God, who is a Spirit, principally
regards; external Services without the Heart, will not be accepted of by God. (
Gal. vi. 15.)

It is much to be lamented, that the generality of Mankind seem to be
satisfied, if the surface or matter of their Actions be good, without searching
into the Spring and Scope of them! But unless GOD be principally Eyed in what
we do, however specious our Actions may be, we do but bring forth Fruit to
ourselves, and so are, with Ephraim, empty Vines.

Now the great Mark at which we should a^m chiefly in all our Actions, whether
Natural, Civil or Religious, is the Glory of the most high God. And this indeed
is the Point of Truth, which our Text expressly asserts, Whether therefore ye
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. If Gods Glory
should be our main Mark, even in our natural Actions, such as eating and
Drinking; how much more so should it be of our Religious?

Now the Method I purpose to use in the Prosecution of this Subject, is as
follows, viz. I. I shall endeavor to show, what are the Kinds and Nature of
God's Glory. II. What is supposed by, and implied in our aiming at God's Glory.
III. I purpose to show, how we should Glorify God. IV. Why we should aim at his
Glory as our chief Mark in all our Actions. V. Answer Objections to the
Contrary: And then proceed to some practical Improvement of the whole


I return to the first proposed, which was to show, the Kinds and Nature of
God's Glory. And here it may be observed, that the Glory of God is twofold,
viz, Essential and Declarative.

The Essential Glory of God, consists (at least principaly) in the infinite
eminence of the Supreme Being. As Honor and Praise is due to any excellent
Good, so Glory is due to the most eminent; now the highest or most transcendent
Eminence belongs to God, both on the Account of his Essence and Attributes, he
alone is Jehovah, infinite in all possible Excellency, his Perfections are
underiv'd, immense invariable and eternal: Whereas the excellencies of all
Creatures are derived, limited, dependant, variable, and therefore not worthy
to be compared with the divine Atributes. Now the superior Eminence of the
supreme Being, is the Foundation of all the divine Glory, for which he deserves
to be esteemed and praised by his Creatures, and therefore he is called the
Father of Glory; (Ephesians. 1.17.) The King of Glory, (Psalm. 24.8.) The Lord of
Glory, (Act 7.2.)

Some Divines are of Opinion, that to the essential Glory of God, besides the
infinite Eminence already spoken of, two Things concur, namely a certain
brightness of that Eminence, together with the Knowledge of it. To illustrate
the first of these, they mention Isa. 35.2. The Glory of Lebanon shall be given
unto it, the Excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the Glory of the
Lord, and the Excellency of our God. Hence the Son of God is said to be the
Brightness of his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1.3. And hence the Glory of the Lord is
said to shine round about the Shepherds, at the Time of our Lords Nativity,
Luke 2.9. And hence it is, the Almighty is said to dwell in Light, which no Man
can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.16. Which Brightness does not so much dazzle the
Eyes of the Body, (as the Sun does) as of the Mind; though according to the
Account we have in Scripture, of some extraordinary Appearances of divine
Majesty, there was sometimes an outward brightness added, to be as it were a
symbol or Sign of the divine Presence.

But the other Particular which concurs to the divine Glory, is the Knowledge
of his Eminence; hence the Face of God is called the Face of his Glory, Judge.
24.25. and his Name is Glorious, Matt. 6.9. because by the Face and Name, the
Majesty and Eminence of a Thing is known; this Knowledge in the utmost
Perfection belongs only to God, who on this Account is said to dwell in Light
inaccessible, which no mortal Eye has seen or can see; nevertheless a more
imperfect Knowledge thereof by God's Word and Works, happens to Creatures in
various Degrees, 1 Cor. 13 12. Now we see through a Glass darkly, but then Face
to Face. But to proceed,

The declarative Glory of God consists in the Manifestation of the Former,
either objectively by God himself, in furnishing us with matter for Praise, in
all the Fruits of his Bounty toward us and others, and particularly by
engraving in legible Characters, the Footsteps of his divine Perfections, in
his Word and Works, which induce intelligent Beings to Praise him; and hence
the Heavens are said to declare God's Glory, and the Earth his handy Work.
God's Glory is likewise manifested by rational Creatures two Ways, namely
actively and passively. Actively when with design, they admire, adore and extol
the divine Perfections, and say with the inspired Apostle, Romans 11.33. O the
Depth! of the Riches, of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out? The unsearchableness of the
divine Attributes deserves our wonder, and their divinity our religious
Reverence. God is glorified passivly by intelligent Beings, either with Design
when they suffer patiently and cheerfully for Truth and Duty, or without Design
when they suffer for their Sins as Malefactors, surely the Glory of God's
Justice is known by the Judgment which he executes. I proceed to the.

2d. Proposed, which was to show what is supposed by and implied in, our aiming
at God's Glory, as our highest Mark. And,

1st. It supposes that intelligent Beings acting as such, design some End,
which induces them to concert and improve such Measures as have a direct
Tendency to compass the End they propose.

2dly. It supposes this, viz. That the ends of Actions may be various, yea and
lawfully so, viz. Supreme and Subordinate, if our highest End be right, we are
safe, although with a less degree of Love we aim at lower Ends, which are in
themselves lawful; for things that are Subordinate, do not clash or oppose each
other, e. g. in our natural and civil Actions we may aim at our bodily Support
and Comfort, if in the mean Time we make God's Honor our principal Mark, And
so in our religious Actions we may, yea we ought to aim at our own Salvation as
an End, if so be, we in the mean Time prefer God's Honor and Glory, to all our
Interests in this and the other World, it is well.

3dly. It Supposes this, viz. that the last End can be but one, of two equal
Ends or Marks, neither of them would be the last, or Principal. When two Ends
unequal in might and Dignity concur, the Laws of Reason and Justice require a
Subordination; namely that the Inferior should give place to the Superior.

But our aiming at God's Glory in all our Actions, as our highest Mark and End,
implies these Things following, viz.

1st. A saving experimental Knowledge of God. Until we have an affecting Heart
humbling Knowledge, of the divine Perfections by Faith, we are not disposed to
love him aright, and direct our Actions to his Honor: For as the proverb is,
(ignoti nulla capido) after an unknown Thing there is no Desire.

2dly, A strong and transcendant Love to God, because of his essential
Excellency and communicative Goodness; as we cannot love God supreamly, except
we know him, so we cannot aim at his Glory as our highest End, until we love
him with a Superior and transcendent respect; for our aims and desires follow
our Love, and are proportioned to the Degrees thereof.

3dly. Our aiming at God's Glory, as our highest Mark in all our Actions,
implies our prefering his Honor to all our Interests, whether on Earth or in
Heaven, whether of Body or Soul. As Love to God follows naturally after the
experimental Knowledge of God, (in the manner before mentioned) so our
prefering God's Honor to all our Interests, follows naturally and necessarily
after, and flows from that Love to God, which is supreme and transcendent in
Degree. If we love God above ourselves, with all our Souls and Strength as
Jehovah requires, we shall be easily induced to prefer his Glory, to all our
Interests of every Kind. And,

4thly, It implies, our referring all we do to God, his Honor and Glory;
desiring more that God should be thereby glorified, then after any benefit
accruing to ourselves. The,

3d. Proposed comes now to be considered, which was to show, how we should
glorify God? Here I shall mention a few out of many Instances, that might be
enlarged upon. And,

1st. We should glorify God, by professing his Truth before Men, at all Times
and in all Places, whatever Contempt and Hardships we are exposed to thereby
notwithstanding, if we are ashamed of CHRIST and of his Truths, in this
adulterous Generation, we may expect that he will be ashamed of us, when he
comes in the Glory of his Father with the holy Angels. My Dear Brethren, we
should be valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and contend earnestly for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints. O let us not betray the sacred Depositum of
Truths that is in our Hands, which has been transmitted to us, through much
Expense of the Labor and Blood of our Ancestors; to adhere firmly to the dear
and precious Truths of CHRIST in the Time of a Tempest, when many make
Ship-wreck of the Doctrines of Faith, and a good Conscience, and are like
foolish Children tossed about with every wind of Doctrine, by the Craft of
those that lie in wait to deceive, is truly Noble, and reflects Glory and
Honor upon God and Religion.

2dly. We should glorify God by confessing our Sins agreeable to Joshua's
Council to Achan, Josh. 7.19. by this we Acknowledge, and thereby Honor God's
Justice, Holiness, Truth, Omniscience. -- By this we own that God knows one
secret Sins and might justly damn us for them, etc.

3dly. We should glorify God, by a Strong Superlative and passionate Love to
him, above all others, with devout Asaph, Psalm 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven
but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee! And,

4thly. We should glorify God, by a firm Faith and Hope in the Word of his
Promise, with blessed Abram, notwithstanding of the most dark and contrary
Aspects of divine Providence, Romans 4.18.20. Who against Hope believed in Hope,
-- He staggered not at the Promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in
Faith giving Glory to God. And,

5thly. We should glorify God, by obedience to Gods commanding and disposing
Will; to the first actively, and to the latter passively. Now our Obedience
should be humble, thankful, cheerful, charitable, fruitful, heavenly; with
Abram, we should ever look upon our selves, to be less than the Least of all
God's Mercy's, and with Paul far less then the least of all Saints: When God
gives us the comfort of Mercies, we should give to God the Glory of them; with
the Man who was healed of his Leprosy, who we are told. Luke 7.15. turned back
and glorified God; with the Treasurer of the Queen of Candace, we should go on
in our Way rejoicing. And does not Solomon inform us, that our Obedience should
be attended with Charity? Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and
with the first Fruits of all thine Increase; so shall thy Barns be filled with
Plenty, and thy Presses burst out with new Wine. And does not our Lord inform
us, that herein is his Father glorified, that we bring forth much Fruit, Joh.
15.8. By a purity and heavenliness of Conversation becoming the Gospel, God is
much glorified! 1 Peter 2.12. Having your Conversation honest among the
Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil Doers, they may by your
good Works which they shall behold; glorify God in the Day of Visitation. Mat.
5.16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. And it is likewise much to the Honor
of God, when those that profess his Name, choose rather to suffer then Sin. 1
Peter 4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the
Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you; on their Part he is Evil spoken
of, but on your part he is glorified. I now proceed to the,

4th. Proposed, which was to show, why we should aim at the Glory of God as our
chief Mark in all our Actions?

It is true eternal Salvation, or our enjoying God (which supposes our
Propriety in, or rightful claim to God as ours; and implies our Communion with
him here imperfectly, and in the Life to come perfectly) is a great Motive of
religious Obedience, the Expectation thereof should doubtless influence and
excite us in the Service of God.

And most certainly there is a Connection between glorifiing and enjoying God,
so that he who rightly performs the former, is not like to miss the latter.
Psa. 50 23. Whose offers Praise glorifieth me: And to him that orders his
Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God.

The enjoying of God may be likewise called an End, and that properly, (but a
Subordinate one) which we may and ought to aim at in our religious Obedience.
And it is doubtless an End, the Highest in its Kind, and next, in Order,
Dignity and Importance, to that of the Glory of God. On this Account the
venerable Assembly at Westminster in their larger Catechism, call it the
highest End of Man; it is certainly that, which intelligent Beings should seek
after, next to the divine Glory. The Assembly did not design to put the
aforesaid Ends upon a Par or equal Balance, by their Answer to the first
Question in their Catechisms, in which they are both mentioned together; No, by
no means, they intend only to represent the Connection subsisting between them,
as well as their infinite Moment and Importance, and the Order in which we
should seek after them; which is evident from their different Manner of wording
them, the Order in which they place them, and the Scriptures they bring for the
Confirmation of what they offer upon this Head. In the Larger Catechism the
Question is worded thus, What is the chief and highest End of Man. God's Glory
they signify by their Answer, is the chief End of Man; and enjoying God fully,
the highest End, i. e. (as has been before observed) of its kind, next to the
other: Their giving the Glory of God the first Place in their Answer, shows
that they prefer it in point of Dignity to the other, although those Ends are
inseparably connected together, (in the Manner before mentioned) yet they are
realy distinguished: It is one Thing to aim at Gods Honor, and another to aim
at our own Comfort, as the aforesaid Ends are distinguished realy; for one may
aim at his own Comfort, and have no true regard to Gods Glory at all, therefore
they cannot be both Supreme; but one must be Chief and the other Subordinate or
referred to it.

Now that the Glory of God is the chief End (above all others) at which we
should aim in the whole Course of all our Actions, will appear by the following
Arguments, viz.

1st. It is but reasonable that that End, for which Man and all the other Works
of God were principally made, should be Man's chief End: But the End for which
Man and all the other Works of God were principally made, was certainly the
Glory of God, as the sacred Scriptures expressly testify. See Prove. xvi. iv.
Rev. iv. xi. Romans xi. xxxvi. Surely Jehovah is the best Judge of the End, for
which he has made his Creatures, and to which he has adapted them, seeing his
Understanding is infinite.

2dly. That which God commands us to aim at principally, and prosecute
unweariedly, is doubtless the chief End of our Actions; but that is the Glory
of God, as the Words of our Text and other Places of Scripture do manifest.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of
God. See 1 Pet. iv. 11. Romans xi. 26. God's Authority of commanding his
Creatures, is founded upon the strongest Claims of Right; namely, creating,
redeeming, protecting and providing Goodness. (See Ps. ciii. 3. Ps. lxvi. 89. 1
Cor. vi. 19, 20.) Jehovah has an absolute Control over us, because we are the
Product of his Power, and Monuments of his Mercy; and therefore we cannot
without equal Injustice and Ingratitude, dispute his commanding Authority.

3dly. That which the Saints of the old and new Testament principally desired,
is the last End of acting (by right) but this the Scriptures inform us, was the
Glory of God, by the following Instances or Examples, viz. of Moses who was
willing rather to be blotted out of the Book that God had written, than that
Israel should be destroyed. ( Ex. xxxii. 12, 32.) and the Reason was because
God's Name would have been reproached among the Heathen, by their Destruction
as he himself elsewhere observes. How much was the Psalmist occupied in
extolling the divine Praise and Glory, and exciting others thereto? Yea such
was the Flame of his Devotion, that he even summons'd the inanimate Creation to
conspire in celebrating the divine Honor! How memorable likewise to the same
Purpose are the Words of Asaph Ps. lxxiii. 25. Who have I in Heaven but thee,
or on Earth that I desire besides thee? In those Words it appears that he
preferred God himself, and by consequence his Glory to Heaven and the Comforts
of it! Nehemiah, Jehosophat, and Elijah also express a generous and passionate
solicitude respecting the Name and Glory of God, Nehemiah i. 11. Be attentive
to the Prayer of thy Servants, who desire to fear thy Name. What will thou do
unto thy great Name said Jehosaphat? I have been jealous for the Lord God of
Hosts, said Elijah! 1 Kings xix. 10. How emphatical and vehement are the Words
of Paul, Romans ix. 3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from CHRIST,
for my Brethren my Kinsmen according to the Flesh. I may add the Example of all
the Saints of the first Age of the Gospel Dispensation, who lived not to
themselves, but to Christ who dyed for them! 2 Cor. v. 25.

4thly. That which all other Ends serve as Means, must needs be the chief and
last End; but this is the very Case in respect of the Glory of God, our
Election, Remission, Adoption, Redemption, Sanctification, Salvation, etc. is
to the Praise of God's Glory, Ephesians. i. 3, 4, 5, -- 12.

5thly. That which has an after End, is not the last and chief it self, but
our enjoying God has an after End, namely, his Glory, and therefore it is not
the last and chief. (See 2 These. i. 3. Rev. xix. 5.)

Seeing that the great God himself is the best of Beings, and is self existent,
it is therefore necessary, that he should be his own last End, for it would be
absurd for him to aim at any Thing below himself, or his own Glory as his chief
End; but all Things besides him are below him, and therefore cannot be his
principal Mark.

6thly. That which is the best Good, ought to be the last and chief End of our
Actions; it is contrary to Reason to make a less Good our last End: For that
would be to prefer, a less to a greater Good. Now that the Glory of God is the
best Good, appears evidently from the Almighty's making it the chief End of all
his Works. To say that Jehovah did not choose the best Good for his principal
End, would be to charge infinite Wisdom with Folly in his Councils and Conduct,
which is as ridiculous as it is blasphemous! The divine Glory appears likewise
to be the best Good, because of its near Relation, to the best of Beings.

7thly. He who brings forth Fruit chiefly to himself, is an empty and baren
Vine, Hos. x. 1. Zec. vii. 5, 6. When ye fasted, -- did ye at all fast unto me?
When ye did eat and drink -- did not ye eat for your selves and drink for your
selves? Now he who in serving God aims at the enjoying of God, as it respects
himself, above the Glory of God, he brings forth Fruit to himself, and not to
God: For he aims at himself chiefly, and not at Jehovah. Neither does the
different Kind of the Benefit, alter the Case; for both temporal and eternal
Benefits, as they respect us under the Notion of a last End, are of the same
Kind, and do differ but in degree.

8thly. If we ought to love God above our selves, than we ought to prefer his
Glory to our Happiness, for Love when it is supreme, includes both the chief
Esteem and Prosecution in Affection and Practice. (See Cant. v. 10. Phil. iii.
7, 8. Ps. lxxiii. 25, 84. Ps. ii.) But it is evident, that we ought to love God
above our selves, from those Words of CHRIST, Mark, xii. 30.31. in which is
explained, the Scope and Substance of the first Table of the Decalogue, or ten
Commandments; there we are enjoined to love God with all our Heart, Soul and
Strength, and our Neighbor as our selves. Therefore the Consequence is plain
and certain, that we should prefer God's Glory to our Happiness considered,
strictly and subjectively, as a Comfort that respects us.

9thly. To prefer our selves to God, is something very like to Blasphemy and
Idolatry; but to make our subjective Happiness our chief End, and the Glory of
God but as a Mean tending to obtain it, is to prefer our selves to God. As
appears thus, viz.

God as he is the first and best Being and Cause of all the rest, merits the
first Honors of his Creatures, by a two fold irrefragable Right; not only in
respect of the intrinsic Dignity or inward Worth of his ineffably glorious
Essence, but also in respect of his almighty Efficiency, and communicative
Goodness toward his Creatures, now that which we make the last and chief End
of our Actions, upon it we confer the first Honors. Because by this Instance,
we declare it to be the chief Good in our esteem! Now if we make the enjoying
of God, or our subjective Happiness, the last End of our Actions, we ascribe
the Honors which only and essentially belong to God to our selves, because we
attribute them to these Things that are ours, and as they are ours; contrary to
the express Declarations of God. See Isa. xxviii. Isa. xlviii. 11. The Almighty
assures us in the forementioned Scripture, that he will not give his Glory to
another.

What can Jehovah expect of us, but to be glorified by us which consists in an
internal Esteem, and external Acknowledgment of that infinite and supreme
Excellency, which results from all his venerable Attributes!

And now what is spiritual Idolatry, but the inward giving of this supreme
Esteem, Veneration and Love, either to other Creatures or to our selves? And
what is Blasphemy, but the denial of some essential Attribute or Perfection of
God? either by our Mind Speech or Practice, or an ascribing to the divine
Nature, some Imperfection, contrary to its essential Perfection? Now when we
make our subjective Happiness our last End, do we not give that supreme Love to
our selves, which is due to God only?

To be the chief Good is an essential Attribute of God, now when we esteem any
Thing besides God, or his Glory, to be the chief Good, and prosecute it as
such, do we not implicitly deny the aforesaid Attribute? And when we propose
the divine Glory, only as a Mean to obtain another Good which we suppose to be
supreme; do we not make it, and by consequence God himself, (in our Opinion) a
less Good? and so ascribe to him an Imperfection, contrary to the essential
Perfection, and transcendent Eminence of his Nature.

Is it not a Maxim every where acknowledged, that the last End is better than
all the Means, which tend to it; and that their Goodness both in respect of
Kind and Degree, consists principally in a certain Relation to the End, and
suitableness to attain it. And therefore when we make our subjective Happiness
our last and chief End we judge it better than the Glory of God, and so prefer
it thereto, in Opinion and Practice; now if we prefer our Things, (considered
as such) to the Things that are Gods, consequently we prefer our selves to God,
which is a horrible Evil, contrary to the two first Precepts of the moral Law.

10thly. If our Happiness considered strictly and subjectively, (as a Good or
Comfort respecting us) ought to be the last End of all our Actions, then
nothing is supernatural, is either required or found in the whole Business of
Religion. The Reason of the Consequence is this, Nature is so prone to self
Interest, that it needs not a foreign Aid to excite or assist it in this
Pursuit. Surely that which is agreeable to corrupt Nature, is not above it, and
does not Scripture as well as sad Experience testify, that self seeking is
agreeable to Nature, is not this the Cry of those, who are in that State? Ps.
xlvi. Who shall show us any Good, Phil. ii. 2. All Men seek their own Things.

The Desire of Happiness is certainly inate in, and co-natural to all, although
many pursue wrong Measures to attain it; vainly imagining, that it is placed in
the Honors, Profits or Pleasures of this uncertain Life! But this Error of the
Judgment may be corrected by the Light of Reason, especially when assisted by
external Revelation, so that Men may with more Decency seek their Happiness,
that is themselves, by the external Performance of religious Duty, chiefly upon
their own Account. What is necessary here, but the Light and Strength of
Nature, but natural Pride and self Love? According to this Scheme, where is
there any supreme Love to the divine Majesty, where is there any Thing truly
great, ingenuous, and supernatural in the whole Business of Religion? But on
the contrary to love God, with our whole Soul whom we naturally hate, and
intend his Glory above our own Happiness, is both against and above Nature,
until it be renewed by supernatural Light and Grace! Here indeed is something
truly great, good, ingenuous, and supernatural. For this the Infusion of a
Principle of divine Life into the Souls of the Elect, is absolutely necessary,
and to this indeed it bends freely (for the most part) of its own accord, as
Streams from a living Spring. This divine Life inclines such as are Saints
indeed, to live to CHRIST, and not to themselves.

The Scriptures positively and frequently assert that there is something
supernatural in Religion! ( John vi. 44. Ephesians. i. 19. ii. 10. John iii. 3.)
and to deny it, is to deny the Substance and Soul of Piety altogether, and to
leave nothing but a selfish Husk, an empty Shadow, a dead Carcass in the Room
of it! Again, another Argument may be this, viz. To love Pleasures more than
God, is certainly sinful, but to make our subjective Happiness our last End,
and not the Glory of God, is to love our Pleasures more than God; and therefore
it is sinful. (See 2. Tim. iii. 4. Mark. xii. 30, 31.) But to proceed,

Another Argument may be this, that which takes away the chief inward
Differences, between Sincerity and Hypocrisy, is a false Doctrine; but the
making of our subjective Happiness the chief End of our Actions does so, as
appears thus. There are surely some Differences between Hypocrisy and
Sincerity, otherwise we would not be so frequently exhorted in Scripture to
examine and prove ourselves, but these Differences are principally found in the
fountains of Action: For as to the external Form, who can go farther than a
Hypocrite, now if there be no Difference in the Roots of Action, where are we?
How can we know our State? are we not exhorted to impossible Things? And
without the Knowledge of our State toward God, how can we attain a true and
reasonable Peace? But the merciful Lord JESUS, has left Peace as a Legacy to
his Disciples; and Marks of Sincerity, among which this is one, viz. That the
Love of CHRIST constrains his People. 2 Cor. v. 14. and this Love is with the
whole Heart, as was proved before.

One Argument more may be mentioned under this Head, and it is this, viz. If
all Things are from God, and by God, and to God, then Man's subjective
Happiness is not his last End, but the Case is really so, ( Romans xi. and last
ver.) The Reason of the Consequence is this, our Salvation is one, among other
Things, which are derived from God, and therefore by a parity of Reason should
be referred to him, or which is the same to his Glory. God is the cause
efficient, directing, and final of all Things, and especially of those, which
relate to Salvation, concerning which the Apostle discourses in the aforecited
Place. If all Things are derived from God as a Cause efficient, and are
disposed by him as a Cause directing, it is but highly reasonable, that they
should be referred to him as a Cause final, namely, that they should be to him
and for him, from whom they have borrowed their original; and this is no other
than a natural, rational, and necessary Circulation. The Rivers return again to
the Ocean, these Waters which they have received from it, Ecles. i. 7. most
certainly to do all Things to the glory of God, is to turn Necessity into
Virtue, for that shall be the final Event of all, whether we will or nill.

It is needless to add, that our Lord JESUS has taught the Doctrine, I have
been laboring to establish, by the Order of that Pattern of Prayer, which he
has left for our Instruction and Imitation.

To the Arguments that have been already offered, I shall add some absurd
Consequences of the contrary Opinion, And

1st. One absurd Consequence thereof is this, that it destroys entirely what it
pretends to establish, namely, the Happiness of Mankind; as appears thus,
without a Conformity of our Wills to God, it is impossible to be happy in the
Enjoyment of him, for two cannot walk together except they be agreed. Without
Harmony, there is no Happiness, now where chief Ends are different, this cannot
possibly be attained. Different chief Ends are contrary to each other, they
have no Subordination, otherwise they cannot be chief, and having no
Subordination, they must needs be opposite, and being opposite, the whole Train
of Means, or subordinate Ends, that have a Relation to them respectively,
cannot but be contrary! And thus it is in the present Case, according to the
Opinion I oppose: For hereby God is supposed, to aim at himself or his own
Glory as his chief End, and to this all his Councils and Actings have a
principal Reference: On the contrary Man is supposed to aim at himself, or or
his Happiness (strictly and subjectively considered) as his chief End, and to
this all his Consultations and Actions have a principal Reference. Now here are
two Beings, an uncreated and a created, set in a dreadful Opposition to each
other, pursuing contrary Ends, having no acknowledged Dependence upon each
other!

For the blessed God to aim at himself, or his own Glory chiefly, seeing every
Thing else is infinitely beneath his Dignity, is just and reasonable. But for
an inferior Animal who has borrowed his Being, his Breath, and all his Benefits
from the Almighty Power, and unexcited Goodness of God! to forget the Rock out
of which he was hewn, and reject his Dependence upon, and Subordination to his
great Creator, good Redeemer and liberal Benefactor, in his Aims and Actings,
and set up for himself in Opposition to the Supreme Majesty, is as unreasonable
as ungrateful, as unjust as cruel, a Monster of complicated Wickedness, too big
to be expressed by a human Tongue, and not to be thought of without extreme
Abhorrence!

Dr. Van Mastricht justly describes the Will of God thus, viz. That it is
nothing else, but his most wise Propension to himself, as his highest End, and
to his Creatures for himself as Means. Now the Creatures Will, according to the
Opinion I am opposing, is directly contrary, being propense to themselves or
their Happiness as their chief End, and to God and his Glory only for
themselves as a Mean. Now inasmuch as God is a simple Being, his will is
himself, and therefore the Nature or Attributes of God are contrary to such, as
seek and serve him chiefly for their own Sakes! And how then can they behold,
or enjoy him with Pleasure? Nay, on the contrary it must needs fill them with
Horror, to behold all the divine Attributes contrary to them, and therefore
engaged against them to destroy them! And pray how can they enjoy him, whose
being is so opposite to them? Does not Pleasure spring from the suitableness
between the Object and Faculty, and Enjoyment necessarily suppose Harmony and
Complacence? And how can this be without an Agreement between God and the
Creature, in respect of their principal Aims? To speak with Reverence, what
Complacency (can it be with Reason supposed) the Almighty should take, in a
Creature who makes itself its chief ^d, and subjects his Glory to its
Interests, and thus grasps at his Crown and Dignity, and sets up its self as
his Rival and Competitor! But a

2d. Absurdity which follows from the contrary Opinion is this, viz. that Man
proposes to himself, and pursues a lesser Good, as his last End! Here I speak
of Happiness abstractly, and for Arguments sake suppose it attainable,
according to the contrary Notion. That the Happiness of Creatures is a lesser
Good, than God's Glory is evident from God's proposing the Latter as his chief
End, in all his Works; to say that he proposed a lesser Good, as his highest
End, would reflect Dishonor upon his infinite and unerring Wisdom. If
therefore the Gory of God be the greatest Good; it is an Argument of great
Folly and Weakness, to propose a less, as our last End! If it be objected, that
though God's Glory be the greatest good absolutely, yet that it is not so
relatively; I answer it is the greatest Good even relatively for the following
Reasons.

1st. Because our Happiness is inseperably connected with our seeking it in the
first Place, and highest Degree by divine Appointment.

2. It is a great Ingredient in Happiness it self. We cannot secure Happiness,
(so far as I see) but in this Way; we cannot love God as we ought, prefer him
to our selves, or be sincerely subject to his Sovereignty; and without these
Things, we cannot reasonably expect to come to the Enjoyment of God. A

3. Absurdity is this, if glorifying God or the Glory of God, be but a Mean
appointed to bring Men to Happiness as their last End, then when this is
obtained perfectly, the Mean conducing to it ceases of its own Accord; so that
at this Rate there will be no glorifying God in Heaven; but this Consequence is
directly contrary to the Holy Scriptures, See 2 These. 1.10. He will come to be
glorified in his Saints. And are not the Heavenly Hosts said to cast their
Crowns at the Redeemers Feet? A

4. Absurdity is this, that the Notion of Happiness (considered strictly and
subjectively) being the chief End of Human Actions, destroys Self-denial, one
of the Terms of the glorious Gospel, Mat. 16.24. these Words of Christ
(aparnesastho eauton) deny himself, signifies a Total or universal Self-denial.
'Thus Leigh, in his Critics omnino neget Prorsus Neget says Reynolds, Abdicet
seipsum says Beza.' but the Words of Pool in his Critics, are remarkable upon
this Place, viz. 'That a Man is not commanded here to deny himself simply, but
respectively, so far as he is contrary to God.' Doctor Bates observes, that
Self-Denial includes all that in the order of Nature belongs to us. Now our
subjective Happiness, considered strictly, is but self-sublimated, and
therefore if we do not, in our aims and actings, subordinate it to the divine
Glory, we deny CHRIST and not ourselves.

5thly. The aforesaid Doctrine destroy's Christian Simplicity, as appears thus,
the Nature of Simplicity consists in directing the Mind to God in a direct
Line, and in excluding all evil Design; and hence it is called a single Eye by
our Lord, Mat. vi. 22.23. It likewise inclines to constancy and uniformity in
the pursuit of the single Scope or supreme Mark it proposes, ( Philip. i. 20,
21. 2. Cor. i. 12.) But on the contrary, Hypocrites have a double Heart, a
squint Eye, which looks contrary Ways. A

6th. Absurdity is this that the Doctrine I have been opposing, destroys the
necessity of that Love, which the Gospel requires so absolutely, and inculcates
so pungently and frequently. For if we need not aim at God's Glory above our
selves, or our subjective Happiness considered strictly, then we need not love
him above or equal to our selves; the Reason is this, the highest Love
necessarily includes the highest esteem and Pursuit, and so (e contra) a small
degree of Love, little Esteem and indifferent Pursuit. And thus the very Heart
of Godliness is struck at, by robbing it of those two principal Ingredients,
without which it cannot subsist, viz. Transcendent love to God, and of its
exalted view or aim; the Glory of God, (chiefly) and by substituting in the
room thereof, sordid selfish Principles and mercenary aims: And thus Self is
the Foundation and Scope of this Religion, which looks not like the sublime and
supernatural Religion of the Holy JESUS, but is nearer akin to that of his
inveterate Enemies the Pharisees, for what was their Religion, but a circle of
lifeless Duties and Ceremonies, performed from selfish Principles and with
selfish Views? Notwithstanding of their Learning pretense to and fame for
Religion, they were Strangers to the Power and Life of it, having no higher
Principles than Nature polished by Education and Art. Self was the Foundation
and Scope of their Religion.

If it be objected, That these Men aimed chiefly at their own Honor and
Interest in this World only.

Answer, It is true some of them did so, but not all: Paul before his
Conversion, and the young Man in the Gospel were, of another Stamp; they had a
regard to their eternal Salvation, and were serious in seeking of it. And the
other Pharisees, who were such gross Hypocrites as to aim at the Honors and
Wealth of this World, chiefly in all their Actions, whether Civil or Religious,
(it should be observed, that they) aimed at themselves in so doing, and not at
God or his Glory, and so made themselves their highest Mark. It is likewise
highly probable, that they aimed at Wealth and Honor under the notion of
Happiness, imagining that therein or thereby they should obtain Felicity: And
this is no doubt the Scope of the grosser sort of Hypocrites of every Tribe and
Order at this Day! Their cry is, who shall show us any good? Now if we make our
subjective Happiness in Heaven, our chief End, the Mark is formally the same in
both, it is Self in both, it is Happiness in both that is aimed at: The
Difference lies not in the End proposed, but in a Mistake of the Judgment
concerning the Means that lead to it. The Error of some of the old Pharisees
was more gross, and this is more subtle, but it is but a chip of the same
Block, there is as little Love to God, in the one as in the other.

And indeed the aforesaid Notion does well agree with the Mohammedan imposture,
for through the whole Alcoran there is a deep silence, about supernatural
Principles of Worship, such as Regeneration, transcendent Love to God, as also
of supernatural Aims, at the Glory of God above all; the chief Things that I
find inculcated in the Alcoran, (its foperies excepted) is some main Branches
of natural Religion, enforced by the Consideration of eternal Pleasures, to be
afterward enjoyed, as the Reward of good Works, and eternal Pains to be
endured as the Punishment of bad. The chief Difference as to the Question under
debate, is only this, (so far as I see) that Mahomet aimed at sensual
Pleasures, and such as hold the Opinion I am opposing, aim at spiritual
Enjoyments principally, but both are of the same Mind, as to the Substance of
the matter, viz. Dependence upon Works, and aiming at themselves as their
highest Mark, without a superlative Regard to God's Glory. A

7th. Absurdity is self Worship, if we must aim at our subjective Happiness,
(or our selves) as our last End, then we must esteem, love, desire after, and
pursue ourselves above all: For what we make to be the chief End, we declare to
be the chief Good, and that must be so respected. Now, is not this inward
Worship the most noble kind of Worship? and this we give to our selves,
according to the Scheme I am opposing. We may indeed give the Cap and the Knee
to our maker, but the Heart must be given to our selves. A lesser degree of
Love, for our own sakes, we may allow our Creator, but the highest Degree must
be given to ourselves forsooth, and is not this worse Idolatry then the Papists
are guilty of in worshipping images, for this Reason, namely, the Papists (for
the most Part) allow their Images but an inferior kind of Worship, (which they
call Duleia) but this is giving to our selves the supreme ( latria or) Worship.
So that according to the aforesaid Opinion we are to allow the great God no
more Regard and Honor, than the Papists do the Sign of the Cross, and their
rotten rediculous Relicts; for according thereto, God is not the terminative
Object, but only the medium of Worship.

8. Another Absurdity which naturally flows from the aforesaid Opinion is this,
viz. A making that the chief End which is not the last. After enjoying God in
Heaven, the Saints do praise him, and aim at his Glory, and for this End they
are saved, that the Glory of God's Grace may appear therein, ( Ephesians. i.) That
which is the chief End, must needs be the last, for this Reason, because all
other Things are referred to it, which they cannot be except it be the last:
But on the Contrary, the aforesaid Opinion, makes that the chief which is not
the last, and is therefore absurd.

Seeing we are not our own in respect of Creation, it is God that made us and
not we our selves, etc. We have therefore no Right to aim at our own Happiness
above the Glory of that Being, who has brought us into Existence; therefore it
is most unjust to do so, neither are we our own in respect of Preservation,
Redemption, and Covenant Dedication, therefore it is most Ungrateful and
Sacrilegious to aim at our own Happiness above the divine Glory, it is God who
holds our Souls in Life, therefore should we sing his Honors and make his
Praise glorious, Psalm lxvi. We are not our own for we are bought with a Price,
and therefore should we glorify God in our Bodies, and in our Spirits which are
Gods; we also belong to God by covenant Contract, ( Ezekiel. xvi. 8. Jer. xxxi.
33.) and therefore cannot without Sacrilege seek ourselves above his Glory.

Forasmuch as the blessed God is possessed of the highest, yea infinite,
incomprehensible and inexpressible Eminence, it is but equal and highly
reasonable, that to him should be ascribed the highest Honors. Surely we
should render to God the Things that are Gods, Matt. xxii. 21. And therefore it
is most unjust and unreasonable to aim at our own Happiness, or any Thing that
is ours, above our Makers Glory: And such as do so should remember God's
Judgment upon Herod, because he would not give to God the Glory of his Gifts,
but burnt Sacrifice to his own Nett, and offered Incense to his own Dregs, (
Acts xji. 23.) And likewise the Curse which Jehovah denounces upon the
Blessings of those Priests, who will not lay it to Heart, to give Glory to his
Name, Mal. ii. 1, 2. It is very absurd to imagine that the divine Majesty
should embrace Enemies into his Bosom, and yet this will follow from the Scheme
I am opposing; for a Man may hate God in his Heart, and yet externally submit
to his Government, not for God's Sake but his own. Now the opposite Notion
supposes that the Almighty would receive such selfish sordid Souls, into his
glorious Embraces, than which nothing can be more false and unreasonable.

But to draw to the Conclusion of this Discourse, I would beg of my Hearers to
examine themselves, by what has been offered, whether they act generally from a
right principle, Love to God, and to a right End, the Glory of God. As also
whether they habitually labor to glorify God in the manner before described?
viz. by professing Christ's Truths, confessing of their Sins, and likewise by
Faith, Love, Obedience, Active and Passive? If so, rejoice in God your Savior,
whatever your Affliction be! What though you be contemned, traduced and rejected
by your professed Brethren unjustly; but yet with pious Pretenses, as if God
was thereby honored, yet be not cast down, but consider that sweet Scripture,
Is. lxvi. 5. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that Tremble at his Word, your
Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my Names sake, said, let the
lord be glorified: But he shall appear to your Joy and they shall be ashamed!
But on the other Hand, such as are satisfied with an outward form of Religious
Duties, and have no Solicitude about the Principle from which, and the End to
which they act, and labor not to glorify God in the Manner before expressed in
the Course of their Lives, are certainly graceless Hypocrites, and may
therefore expect to be out asunder at last by the Sword of divine Justice.
Consider these solemn Words of our Lord, Matt. v. 20. Except your Righteousness
exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye can by no means
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And elsewhere if your Eye be evil, your whole
Body is full of Darkness; your religious Performances are wild Grapes, and have
(comparatively) but a show of Good; with Ephraim, you are but empty Vines,
because ye bring forth Fruit to your selves. Remember Sinners, that the Ax is
laid to the Root of the Tree, and that every Tree, that brings not forth good
Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire.

SERMON II.
1. Corinthians x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or Drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the Glory of God.


THE Heart is certainly the main Spring of practical Religion; when that is set
right in its aims, then all the Wheels of Motion keep their proper Distances
and Spheres, and answer a valuable End: But when this main Spring is wrong
set, all is wrong; the Motion of the Souls Powers is irregular and vain,
because it tends to a wrong Mark.

It is therefore of the last necessity that we be careful in choosing of and
fixing upon a right Mark in our Actions: And what can this be but GOD and his
Glory? Let us therefore give him our Hearts, and make his Honor the chief
scope of all we do: It will be but of little Service to us to cleanse the
outside of the Cup and Platter, if the inside be neglected, and our aims be
wrong.

Do not therefore think it strange my Hearers, that I dwell so long upon this
Subject, for indeed it is the very turning Point and Foundation of all
practical Godliness. We ourselves are surely such as our governing aims be.

You may remember that in the preceding Sermon, I observed the following Point
of Truth, viz. That the great Mark at which we should aim chiefly, in all our
Actions, whether Natural, Civil or Religious, is the Glory of the most high
God. And that the Method I proposed to pursue in the Prosecution of it, was as
follows, viz. 1st. I was to show the Kinds and Nature of God's Glory.

II. What is supposed by and implied in our aiming at God's Glory.

III. I purposed to show how we should glorify God.

IV. Why we should aim at his Glory, as our chief Mark in all our Actions.

V. I was to Answer some Objections to the contrary, and then proceed to some
practical Improvement of the Whole.

The first four general Heads I have discoursed upon, that which yet remains to
be treated of, as the Subject of the present Sermon, is the 5th general Head,
namely to answer Objections.

But before I proceed to treat directly upon the 5th Proposed, I shall beg
Leave to cite some Sentences, extracted from the writings of diverse worthy
Divines, tending to confirm and illustrate what has been already offered. And
here I shall first mention, the Glosses of some Annotators upon the Text I am
discoursing from. Mr. Pool in his Annotations upon it, after having cited Prove.
xvi. 4. The Lord has made all Things for himself, observes, That it is
impossible it should be otherwise, for whereas every reasonable Agent, both
propounds to himself some Reason of his Actions, and the best End he can
imagine; it is impossible, but that God also in creating Man should propound to
himself some End, and there being no better End than his own Glory, he could
propound no other to himself: The Glory of God being the End which he
propounded to himself in creating Man, it must needs follow that that must be
the chief and greatest End which any Man can propound to himself in his
Actions. To confirm this Gloss, he in his Critics cites Menochius, Estius,
Grotius, Meed, and Rabi Jonah, in his Book upon Fear, who says, That we ought
to belive in one God, and direct all our Actions to his Name, and that he who
does not so, is not like to receive a Reward.

Mr. Matthew Henery, upon the Words of our Text says, That in all we do, we
should aim at the Glory of God, at pleasing and honoring him; this is the
fundamental Principle of all practical Godliness; the great End of all
practical Religion. -- And upon Prove. xvi. 4. he says, That God is the first
Cause, and last End of all, all is of him and from him, and therefore all is to
him and for him. He designs to serve his own Purpose by all his Creatures, and
he will not fail of his Design, the Wicked he is not glorified by, but will be
glorified upon.

Mr. Burkit upon the Words of our Text says thus, The Apostle directs us, to
refer all our Actions in general, both natural, civil and religious to the
Glory of God; to make that our sepream Aim, our ultimate End in all we do, in
all we design, in all we desire. A Christian is to perform his natural Actions
to spiritual Purposes, and whilst he is feeding his Body at his own Table, must
have an Eye at his serving God, both with Soul and Body. But especially and
above all in our religious Duties, we must propound the Glory of God as our
principal Aim, our chief Scope, our supreme End.

Doctor Bates in his Harmony of the Divine Attributes, p. 175, 6. says, That
Godliness contains three Things, 1st. That our Obedience proceeds from love to
God, as its vital Principle; this must warm and animate the external Action,
this alone makes Obedience as delightful to us, so pleasing to God. 2dly. That
all our Conversation be regulated by his Will as the Rule. 3dly, That the glory
of God be the supreme End of all our Actions, this Qualification must adhere
not only to necessary Duties, but to our natural and civil Actions, Our Light
must so shine before Men, that they may see our good Works etc. Matt. v. 16. 1
Cor. xi. 31. A general Designation of this is absolutely necessary. (1 Pet, iv.
11.) And the renewing our Intention in matters of Moment. For he being the sole
Author of our Lives and Happiness, we cannot without extreme Ingratitude and
Disobedience neglect to glorify him in our Bodies, and Spirits which are his.
(1 Cor. vi. 19.20.) This religious Tendency of the Soul to God, as the Supreme
Lord, and our utmost End; sanctifies our Actions, and gives an excellency to
them, above what is inherent in their own Nature.

Dr. Manton in his second Volumn of Sermons p. 91 says 1 The Glory of God
must be regarded in the first Place 1 Cor. 10.31. whether in eating or drinking
etc. If in eating and drinking says he, and the use of our ordinary Comforts,
much more in the Supreme and important Actions of our lives, such as we would
make a Business of, God must be specially eyed therein; God only is independent
and self sufficient of himself and from himself; but self seeking is monstrous
and unnatural in the Creature! They are of him and by him, and for him. ( Romans
xi. 36.) the Motion of the Creatures is circular, they end where they began. 2
The saving of our own Souls, that must be regarded next to the Glory of God,
for next to the Love of God, Man is to love himself and in himself. 1 The
better Part; the great Errors of the World, come from mistaking self, and
misplacing Self, they misplace Self, when they seat it above God and prefer
their Interests before the Conscience of their Duty to him. Then they mistake
Self, thinking self is more concerned as a Body than a Soul. And prefer the
Satisfactions of the carnal Life, before the Happiness of the Spiritual, and
page 55. he adds, that the End ennobleth a Man, and still the Man is according
to his End, low spirits have low Designs, Mat. vi. 22. The Light of the Body is
the Eye, if therefore thine Eye be single, thy whole Body shall be full of
Light; but if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness.

Dr. Thomas Tailor in his Catechetical Exercises, approved by twelve of the
most eminent London Ministers page 140 proposes this Question, viz. What are we
to learn that God created us, for his Glory in a special Manner, above other
Creatures? gives this Answer, to refer our selves and all Things belonging to
us, to his Glory as our chief End; in Imitation of God, whose Glory is so dear
to himself, that he propounds it to himself, as the chief and principal End,
of all his Decrees and Actions; so dear it should be to us, as to propound it
in our first Intentions, as the Scope of all the Actions and Occurrences of our
Lives.

Dr. Ridgely in his Body of Divinity, page 1 speaking upon the Answer, to the
first Question, in the Westminster Catechism, viz. that to glorify God and
enjoy him, is the chief and highest End, says. If it be inquired with what
propriety these) may be called chief and highest, the Answer is easy, viz. that
the former is absolutely so, beyond which nothing more excellent, or desirable
can be conceived, the latter is the highest and best in its kind; which
notwithstanding is referred, as a Means leading to the other. And page 5 thus
having considered, that it is our indispensable Duty, to make the Glory of God,
our highest End in all our Actions, we denying him that Tribute of Praise,
abuse our superior Faculties and live in vain.

Esquire Leigh in his Body of Divinity, page 244 says we should do all to him, and
for him, even to show forth our Apprehension of his Name, doing whatsoever Good
we do, and leaving whatsoever Evil we leave that we may declare our high Esteem
of him, and make it appear, that we judge him most wise good, excellent. -- And
whatsoever is not thus done, with reference to the Name of God, wants so much
of Goodness, as it does of this Reference! If we aim at only or chiefly, and be
moved only or chiefly, by Temporal Benefits and Respects of this Kind; looking
to our selves; our Deeds are hollow and seemingly good alone, not real; if we
look to ourselves alone in respect of eternal Benefits; and not above our
selves to him and his Name, that also is but Hypocrisy; but this is Truth, to
make our Ends and Motives the same with God's, and to have an Eye still above
and beyond our selves even to God's Name.

Mr. Watson in his Body of Divinity, page 3. has these Words It is a
glorifying God when we aim purely at his Glory: It is one Thing to advance
God's Glory, another Thing to aim at it; God must be the terminus ad quem, the
ultimate End of all our Actions, thus CHRIST ( John viii. 50.) Its the Note of
a Hypocrite, he has a squint Eye, he looks more to his own Glory, than God's
Glory; he cites this saying of Cyprian, quem non gula Philautia superavit (i.
e. Self-Love has vanquished even those that have escaped gluttenous Excesses)
let us take heed of this autolatreia self-worship, and aim purely at God's
Glory.

Mr. Dolittle in his Body of Divinity, approved by 20 of the most famous of the
London Ministers, page 2 Quest. 7 says, Am I not such as my chief End is? If
the World be my chief End, am I not a Worldly-Man? If Pleasure be my chief End,
am not I a voluptuous Man? If Honors, am not I an ambitious Man? If
self-interest, am not I am carnal selfish Man? If God be my chief End, am not I
a Godly Man? And page 3. where there is a Subordination of Ends, wherein that
which is an End in respect of some Means, is it self a Means to some farther
End. Do not I stop in any End till I come to the chief and highest End? is not
my reading the Scripture, and hearng the Word preached, a Means to my knowing
God's Will as my End? Is not Communion with him a Means to my Enjoyment of him
in Heaven, as my End? Is not my Enjoyment of God in Heaven, a Means to my
glorifying him in Heaven, as my last and highest End, beyond which I cannot go?

Mr. Gurnal in his Christian Armor, page 363. 4. says, look thou propoundest
right Ends, in thy desire of Reconciliation with God. -- It is lawful for thee
to look to thy own Safety; God will give thee leave to look to thy self, this
thou may do, and yet not neglect him; but never was any Peace true or sure,
where only Self-Love made it; whether it be with God, or between Man and Man,
thou see thou art undone, if thou keep thy old Side, and therefore thou
seek Peace with God, as the Kings that served Hadarezer, 2 Samuel 10.19. well
this may be all allowed thee to come over to God, because his is the surer
Side; never any made Peace with God, but this Argument weighed much with them;
but take heed this be not all, thou aimest at; or the Chief thou aimest at,
this thou may do and hate God as much as ever. Like those who are said to
yield feignedly to David's victorious Arms, because no help for it. A Man taken
in a Storm, may be forced under the Pent-House of his greatest Enemy for
Shelter, without any change of his Heart, or better Tho'ts of him, than before
he was wont. And then proceeds to observe, that we must first eye the Honor of
God Ps. lxxix. 9. And adds, Certainly if God could not be more glorified, in
our Peace and Reconciliation, than in our Death and Damnation, it were a wicked
Thing to desire it.

Mr. Flavel in his first Vol. page 676 says, There is two Ends in Duties, one
supreme and ultimate, viz. the glorifying of God, which must and ought to take
the first Place of all other Ends. Another secondary and subordinate, viz. The
Good and Benefit of our selves, to invert these, and place our own Good in the
Room of God's Glory, is sinful and unjustifiable, and he that aims at himself
only in Religion, is justly censured as a mercenary Servant.

Mr. Baxter in his Saints-Rest, page 18 9 says, He that makes not God, his
chief Good and ultimate End, is in his Heart a Pagan, and vile Idolater, and
does not take the Lord for his God.

Mr. How in his whole Works, page 154. 5. says, That to pray to him, (meaning
God) that he would do this or that, finally and ultimately for any thing else,
than his own Name, is humbly to supplicate him, that he would resign the
Godhead, and quit his Throne to this or that Creature. 2. -- That primitive
Nature, was no doubt pointed upon God, as the last End. Otherwise Creature had
been made with an Aversion to him, and in the highest pitch of Enmity and
Rebellion; since there can be no higher Controversy than about the last End.
And adds, that the Design of renewing Grace, is to restore us to our original
State, and fix us in that absolute Subordination to God which was original and
natural to us; then he observes, the Controversy is taken up, which was about
no lower Thing than the Deity; who should be God he or we? Whether we should
live and be for our selves, or him? -- The only proper genuine Breath of the
New Creature, -- is to thee O Lord be all Things, may thou ever be All in
All, let the Creation, and all Things he Nothing, otherwise than in thee and
for thee.

Mr. Willard in his Body of Divinty, page 6. 7. says, That Man can have no
other last End, but God and his Glory, for then it must be either the Creature
or himself, a third cannot be thought of; but it can be neither of these, as
will appear. -- 1. Because the Creature is inferior to him, a Man's End is to
be looked for, above himself, and not beneath him; but Man is superior to
these. 2. Because that Man is the Creatures next End, that therefore cannot be
his last End, that that should be made for Man's Service, and yet that Man
should be to serve that, implies a Contradiction. 3. Because the Creatures
cannot satisfy him, Man's last End and objective Happiness is the same, (
Ecles. i. 8.) 2. Neither can he be his own last End: For, 1. The End must be
something better than the Means, that serve to it. 2. There is a better being,
than Man, and therefore he cannot be his own chief End: The last End, and chief
Good, are one and the same; there is therefore no resting, until we come there.
3. A Man cannot be his own Happiness, and therefore not his own chief End. An
End that cannot happify him, is not worthy of that Name! Again he asserts, that
Man's next chief End, to the glorifying of God is to enjoy him forever!

Mr. Vincent also in his Exposition of the Assembly's Catechism, approved of by
40 Divines, is also of the same Sentiment with the rest I have mentioned; as
appears from the Reasons he gives, why Men should chiefly design the glorifying
of God in all their Actions; which are these, viz. because God has made them,
preserves them, has redeemed them, and given his Word and Spirit to direct and
assist, and promised his Kingdom to encourage them, to glorify him. See page, 4.
From the aforesaid Words it appears that Mr. Vincent looked upon the Glory of
God to be the End, and Happiness but as a Motive exciting to seek after it. I
now proceed to the

5. General Head, which was to answer Objections. Objec. 1. " That which God
promises on his Part in his covenant Dealings, with Man is Man's chief Good, or
which is the same, Man's chief End; but the Thing God promises is Salvation,
ergo. Had God promised any Thing less, it would not be called the exceeding
Riches of his Grace, and that Salvation is promised by God in his Covenant
Dealings with Man; is evident from Mark xvi. 16. He that believes, shall be
saved.

Ans. If that which God only or chiefly promised, in the New Covenant was
Salvation, considered strictly and subjectively, or separated from his Glory,
then the Consequence would avail, otherwise not, but God has no where promised,
a Salvation separated from his Glory, as appears from what has been before
observed, to which I will add one Place of Scripture, Ps. l. 15. Call upon me
in the Day of Trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Object. 2. It is our first and most deeply Fundamental Duty, to take the Lord
for our God; which most essentially includes our taking him, (the Enjoyment of
him, and not our glorifying him, or his Glory) for our supreme Good; which is
acknowledged by all to be our chief End.

Ans. The Notion of enjoying God, separate from glorifying him, or his Glory;
is an antiscriptural ridiculous Whim! If it be a fundamental Duty, to take the
Lord for our God, then it must be a fundamental Error (in practical Religion)
to take our selves for our God; by prefering what respects us, to his Honor,
viz. our enjoying him, to his Glory: For here God is not regarded for himself,
but only as he respects us, it is true the Word GOD is mentioned, in enjoying
him, but that is only a Flam, a Blind: For its still in Subordination to the
sordid god-Self!

Does not that Faith which is included, in taking the Lord for our God, draw us
out of ourselves to CHRIST, and unite us to his Person, before it gives us
Communion in his Benefits? ( Gal. ii. 20. Phil. iii. 8, 9.) And does it not
excite us to admire the Former more than the Latter? ( Cant. v. 10.) Surely to
those that believe, CHRIST is precious! And is it not the Sign of an Harlot, to
do the contrary, viz. to regard in Marriage, the Portion more than the Person?

Object. 3. Is praising God for Blessings, a greater Good than the Blessings
for which they praise him? If so, the Saints have a hard Bargain, in giving a
greater Good for a less, if not, than the Enjoyment of God is a greater Good,
than praising of him, and so is our chief Good and last End!

Ans. I will be bold to assert, that the Saints praising God, is
(terminatively) more noble, than the Benefits they offer Praises for,
considered strictly; because of its near Relation to the best of Beings;
neither is the Consequence reasonable, that thus the Saints would have a hard
Bargain, in giving a greater Good for a less. The Force of this Consequence, is
built upon a supposed Analogy, between civil Bargains among Men and the Saints
praising God for Benefits they receive from him, in the following Particulars.
1. In civil Bargains, the Commodity a Person gives in exchange, for Good he
deserves, he no ways owes before to the Person he deals with. 2. The Good he
gives is in his own Power, it is his proper Right by Inheritance or Purchase,
which he can dispose of as he sees best, to advance his worldly Interest. 3.
The Good exchanged, is profitable to the Receiver. 4. In this kind of Truck,
when there is not some Proportion in the Value of the Things exchanged, it is
said to be a hard Bargain. If the Case was so in God's Dealings with his
People, there would be some Reason for the aforesaid Consequence, otherwise
none at all! Are not Men's Praises a Debt they owe to God upon many Accounts, a
Debt which they cannot pay, 'til Power be given them of God, and that brought
into exercise by his gracious Operations, a Power which they have no hereditary
Right to, nor are they able to purchase it by their Doings; a Debt which when
paid, profits not the Receiver, for our Goodness extends not to God. Though
Praise be the Creatures Act, yet it is God who works all our Works in us! And
thus the Sophism evanishes.

Obj. 4. The End and Scope of our Faith, is our chief End, for Faith is the
greatest Duty, we owe to God, and the Foundation of all the Rest, yea it is the
Gift of God, and the greatest Gift we can receive in this World; it hence
follows, that the End of the greatest Gift, and the greatest Duty, is Man's
chief End; but the End of Faith is Salvation 1 Pet. i. 19. Erg.

Ans. That which is the final or supreme Scope of Faith is our chief End, no
doubt, but what is only its intermediate or subordinate Scope, is not; neither
does the Place of Scripture aduc'd prove any more!

Obj. 5. Man's greatest Motive to Duty, is his chief End, but his greatest
Motive to Duty is his Salvation; Erg. the Actions of a rational Creature, must
have a Motive or incitement, for whoever acts without a Motive, acts without
Reason. It is the distinguishing Character of a rational Creature, to propose
to himself an End, and then to pursue that End in proper Methods; hence
Logicians tell us, the End is first in the Intention, and last in the
Execution; which makes it evident, that the Motive and the End are synonimous,
consequently the greatest or chief Motive, is the chief End. Now that Man's
greatest Motive to Duty is his Salvation, appears from the following Places of
Scripture; are we commanded to be faithful to Death, what is the Motive? Why
thou shall receive a Crown of Life, Rev. ii. 10. are we commanded to walk
uprightly, and what is the Motive? Why the Lord will give Grace and Glory; and
lastly are we commanded to Love the Lord our God, with all our Heart and Soul,
etc. And what is the Motive? Why this do, and thou shall live, Luke x. 28.

Ans. The Places of Scripture brought to confirm the aforesaid Objection, do
only prove, that the Expectation of obtaining Happiness in the Way of Duty, is
a great Encouragement to the Performance of it; and that it is so proposed by
God himself in his Word, but what is this to purpose? The Thing to be proved
is, that Salvation strictly and subjectively considered, is the greatest Motive
to Duty: of this there is not a Word in the preceding Proofs. The contrary
thereto appears in the following Scriptures. ( Mat. v. 16. John xv. 8.) And let
me farther add, that the aforesaid logical Maxim, serves to prove the Glory of
God, to be the chief End, thus, if that which is last in Execution, is or ought
to be the first in Intention, then by consequence God's Glory ought to be first
intended by us, because it is last in Execution, ( Ephesians. i. 6.)

Obj. 6. That which the Saints, of both the Old and New Testament made their
great Motive to do and suffer for God, we ought to make our great Motive, etc.
And that this is as aforesaid, our chief End, but the Saints, etc. made their
Salvation their great Motive, etc. Erg. Its hard if we cannot find one Saint in
the Old or New Testament that will direct us, what we ought to make our chief
End, and they all made their Salvation their chief Motive: For this Moses
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter, and chose to suffer
Afflictions with the People of God, it is applicable to all these Heroes,
mentioned in the xi. of the Hebrews, as appears by the first Verse of the
Chapter. Now Faith is the Substance of Things hoped for; what was it that
animated Paul, to press toward the Mark, through all the Difficulties he met
with? why the Prize of the high calling in CHRIST JESUS, Phil. iii. 14. What
was the Motive, that enabled the Hebrews to take joyfully the spoiling of their
Goods? why because they knew they had in Heaven a better and an enduring
Substance, Heb. x. 3, 4. What enabled the Apostles to bear with Patience, the
Afflictions they sufferd but this? that they worked out for them, a far more
exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Ans. The Scriptures adduc'd in the Objection, do not prove the laboring
Point, namely, that Salvation considered strictly, was the highest Motive of
those good Men mentioned, and therefore the Argument does not conclude. The
Objectors Opinion concerning all God's People, is much what, with Satan's
concerning Job, as I humbly conceive; which appears thus, after God himself had
given an honorable Character of Job, namely, that he was a sincere Man, one
that feared God and eschewed Evil, which imply an unfeigned Love to God's
Majesty, and transcendent Regard to his Glory. But Satan in Opposition to the
just Encomium, that God himself had given of Job, suggests, that Job was not
such an upright Man, that his religious Service did not spring principally from
Love to God, or Regard to his Glory; but was directed to, by, and selfish Ends;
and therefore that he was but a Mercenary and a Hypocrite. Does he fear God for
Naught, said Satan, touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy Face.
The Devil here insinuates, that Job had no noble internal Principles of Love
and Holiness, no supreme and endeared Regard to the Divine Honor, but that he
was moved chiefly or only, by outward selfish Respects; and that if these were
taken away, he would quit his Religion entirely, and curse his Maker; this is
in Substance the same with the Representation given by our Objector, of all the
Saints of the Old and New Testament, in the Objection which I am now
considering; all the Differences between the Objector's and Satan's Opinion,
are these, The Objector he holds, that the Saints eyed chiefly in all their
Actions, the Happiness of the higher Part of self, the Soul; but Satan the
Happiness of the lower Part of self, the Body, the Objectors Opinion, concerns
the whole Army of the Saints in all Ages, which is very uncharitable, but
Satan's only a particular Person, namely, Job. I know not that we have any
Account in Scripture, that Satan has been so bold as to impeach all the Saints
at once, with the aforesaid Charge! Again the Objector offers his Opinion as a
Commendation of the Saints, which is not so sensible as could have been wished;
but Satan as an Accusation against Job! Once more the Objector offers his
Opinion, with a deal of Confidence, and Airs of Assurance; but Satan begins
modestly, and holds it till just the Close of his Speech; but the Objectors and
Satan's Opinion are the very same in this substantial Point, namely, in
excluding that transcendent Love to God for himself, and supreme Regard to his
Glory, which are essential to true Godliness, and constituting selfish
Considerations in the Room thereof. It is true the Objector has the Advantage
of Satan in this particular, namely, in believing that the Saints had a chief
Regard, to the Interests of the higher Part of self the Soul, whereas Satan was
of Opinion, that Job eyed chiefly the Interest of the lower Part of Self the
Body. But again it must be owned, that Satan had the Advantage of the Objector,
in other Particulars, viz. 1 In that he offered his Opinion as an Accusation
and so the God of infinite Wisdom took it. 2. In that he did not accuse the
whole Body of the Saints, by the Lump, but a particular Person. 3. That he
managed his Argument with Modesty, for the most Part, for he proposed and
insisted on his Allegation, (mostly) by way of Query does Job, said he, fear
God for naught? Thus it is evident that the Objector and Satan harmonize in
Judgment substantially, and differ only in the Case aforesaid, in some
Circumstances; which if compared and weighed it would be hard to determine,
which had the better of it. But leaving the Decision of this to Persons of
greater Capacities, I proceed to observe, that the Devils Accusation being
offered, and the great God himself having another Opinion of Job's Integrity,
puts the Matter to Issue, and lets Satan try him with all his Darts; (only to
spare his Life) the Devil being full of Rage, and Desire to make his Accusation
good, lest he should be posted for a Liar or false Accuser, as indeed he well
deserved; environed him with all his Terrors, and shot the most envenomed Darts
at him that he had in all his Hellish Quiver, he soon disrobed him of all his
Ornaments, and cruelly bereaved him of his massy Wealth, dear Relations, Health
and Ease, in a sudden and tremenduous Manner! And left him nothing but a
scolding Wife, who was almost as great a Tormentor as himself, and fain would
allure him to make the Enemy's Impeachment good, by cursing his God, whose
Language Sr. Richard Blackmore sets in just and flaming Colors, in the
following Lines.

Do thou not see that thy Devotion's vain?
What have thy Prayers procured but Woe and Pain!
Have thou not yet thine Interest understood?
Perversely righteous, and absurdly good!
These painful Sores, and all thy Losses show,
How Heaven regards the foolish Saint below!
Incorrigibly pious cannot thy G^
Reform thy stupid Virtue with his Rod!
But even when poor Job, was under a horrible Complication of all manner of
Misery, that the subtilty and Malice of his formidable Enemy, could invent and
inflict upon his Mind and Body; while in the mean Time, the God he loved
withdrew his beamy Smiles, and on the contrary shot Arrows dipped in burning
Vengeance, into his perplexed Soul, and compassed him with the most affrighting
Terrors! I say while Heaven it self frowned, and Earth and Hell conspired to
distress and shake that gallant noble Soul, yet he remained, like a Rock
impregnable amidst all the boisterous Billows, with which he was environed
round: For notwithstanding some humane Weaknesses, that dropped from his
troubled Soul, in the Height of his Anguish; yet he would never speak
dishonourably of his God, or reproachfully of his Religion! He kept firm to the
divine Majesty, in the midst of the terrible Tempest! And thus the Objector and
Satan (respecting the Opinion aforesaid) are solidly confuted by the Book of
Job. The Case now in controversy, has been fairly tried and God himself the
Judge of Heaven and Earth, has brought in the Verdict in Job's Favor, Job. i.
21. in all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foollishly, and Chapt. xlii. 7.
Ye have not spoken of me the Thing that is Right as my Servant Job has!

Obj. 7. All the Works of God, were not made for one and the same End: For if
they were, there had been Need of but one sort of Beings only; if the Wicked
are made for the Day of Evil, ought that to be always in their Eye? ought all
their Actions to tend to that, as their chief Good and last End? Ought that to
fire their Affections, raise their Desires, and actuate their Wills? Secret
Things belong to God, Things revealed to us! If there be a Covenant between God
and Man, the Principal aim of both cannot be the same! In all Covenants there
are two contracting Parties at least, a Mediator is not a Mediator of one,
there is also the Thing covenanted for, and the Consideration, or what each
party expects of the other, what God expects from us, is that we glorify him,
and what he promises, is that he will be our God, or supreme Good, which
certainly can be nothing less than the Enjoyment of him!

Ans. The Different sorts of Creatures, serve indeed different subordinate or
lower Ends, but what then; cannot they in the mean Time serve one and the same
highest End? Do not the brute Creation, while they serve the Good of Mankind,
at the same Time objectively declare the Glory of God's Wisdom, Power and
Goodness in their Formation, Order and Usefulness? The End which the Almighty
had in View in the Formation of all, viz. His Glory, is answered by all, though
in a different Manner: Rational Creatures do or ought to glorify God actively;
and for this they had a Capacity given them and a command laid upon them, and
if they do it not actively, as it is their Duty, they shall passively; as the
Psalmist justly observes, The very Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Earth shows his Handy Works; the inanimate Creation offer Occasion to
thinking Beings to praise God: Now though the Glory of God be differently
expressed according to their several Ranks of Existence, yet it is the same
principal Design that God has in all, namely his declarative Glory; and it is
the same thing that is manifested by all, though in a different Manner, viz. The
Honor of the divine Attributes, and indeed herein the unsearchable Riches, and
magnificence of divine Wisdom and Power are illustriously displayed, in
conducting the various Orders of Beings within the vast Circle of the spacious
Universe to one supreme uniform End, worthy of his Councils!

Now if Gods declarative Glory be his highest End, in the Creation of all, as
both Scripture and Reason demonstate, then it must be the Creatures last End
too, otherwise these Absurdities will inevitably follow, viz. 1st. That God
will miss his End, which would destroy the divine Felicity, and so is
Blasphemous! And 2d. It would be the Creatures Duty to contradict their
Creator, which is monstrous Blasphemy likewise! Conformity to our Creator is
equally our Honor and Duty! It is most evident, that God requires a great Part
of our Submission to his Sovereignity, and Obedience to his Law in this very
Thing, that we harmoniously concur with himself, in carrying on the same great
design with him, of his GLORY, in that Way which best suits the order of our
Being: And indeed when we do otherwise, we walk contrary to God, and may expect
therefore, that, so continuing, he will walk contrary to us. Had Man still
continued in his original Integrity, he had still made it his highest design to
Glorify and Honor the Author of his Being! It is true we are now to consider
Man in his fallen State, wherein he is exposed to deserved Punishment for his
Transgression, and therefore has just Reason to be anxiously concerned about
his escaping the Wrath to come; but the Transgression of the Creature, does not
cannot disolve his Creators claim of right to his Love and Homage. And when a
Sinner is truly sanctified, he is again restored to much of that primitive
rectitude which was lost by Sin, ( Ephesians. iv. 24) and consequently makes that
again his highest aim and design, to which he was engaged and inclined by the
Law of his Creation.

Neither is it any Part of God's secret Council, that he has made all Things
for his Glory; this Truth is as plainly revealed as any in the Scriptures:
Neither is it any part of God's secret Council, that it is our indispensable
Duty to do all to the Glory of God: To aim and design chiefly that God in all
Things may be glorified, consider the following Places of Scripture, Isa.
xliii. 7. I have created him for my Glory. Psalm. l. 15. Call upon me in the Day
of Trouble, I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify me. God's Secret Council
concerns subordininate Ends or the Means which compass the aforesaid great
Ends, namely, God's declaritive Glory, either actively or passively by the
whole Creation.

The Question in the Objection is Sophistical, viz. If the Wicked are made for
the Day of Evil, ought that to be allways in their Eyes, etc.

Answer, No! Here it is insinuated, that those who hold God's Glory to be the
chief End of Man imagine, or maintain, that what is God's subordinate End,
should be Man's principal End, which is false and unreasonable; they only hold
that what God has made his chief End, should be ours; and we should pursue
this, in that Way which is accommodated to our reasonable Nature, and to which
we are under an Obligation by precept. The Damnation of any Creature, was never
God's chief End in making it; to imagine so, is to reflect upon the Wisdom and
Goodness of the divine Nature, namely, in a^ming at something below himself, as
his highest End, and in delighting in the Misery of his Creatures as such!
Besides the method by which we ought to pursue or prosecute our chief End,
(God's Glory) is prescribed to us, by the divine Precept, and that is by Faith
and Obedience, thereby seeking our own Happiness, and that, principally,
because God will be thereby more Glorified, than in our Damnation!

But it is farther added in the Objection, That if there be a Covenant between
God and Man, the principal aim of both cannot be the same.

Answer, The contrary is evident. God's aim in the Covenant of his Grace, is
both his own Glory, and his Peoples Happiness. ( Ephesians. 1.17.) And the aim of
God's People is the very same, but the Glory of God is the principal Scope of
both: The seeming Strength of the aforesaid Argument, flows from a false
Foundation, viz. A strict resembling of the Covenant of Grace with human
Covenants, which gives Room to suspect those that form or use it, to be tainted
with Arminian Errors.

Obj. 8. Moses and Paul could not aim chiefly at the Glory of God, or
glorifying of him in those Expressions, of being blotted out of the Book that
God had written, and of desiring to be accursed from Christ, etc. because by
their suffering this, they could not glorify God, neither could the Almighty
glorify himself in punishing the Innocent, and sparing the guilty; the truth
is, the Words are only hyperbolical Expressions of their abundant Love to their
Brethren, and Kinsmen according to the Flesh.

Answer, The Instance as to Moses, mentioned Ex. 32.12. is plainly this, That
such was his Regard to the Glory of God, that he would choose Death rather than
the Heathen Nations should insult the Almighty, and behave themselves proudly
against him, upon the Occasion of his destroying the People in the Wilderness;
which he foresaw they would be apt to do, and therefore plead that Israel might
be spared, (See Number. xiv. 13 to the 17) much after the same manner God himself
expresses his own Regard to his Glory. ( Deuteronomy. xxxii. 26, 27.) As to the
Instance of Paul, I shall crave leave to cite the Words of Mr. Matthew Henery
upon it; which are these, I could wish, he does not say I do wish, for it was
no proper means appointed for such an End; but if it were, I could wish that I
my self were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren; a very high pang of Zeal
and Affection for his Countrymen, he would be willing to undergo the greatest
misery to do them good: Love uses to be thus bold and venterous, and self
denying, because the Glory of God's Grace in the Salvation of many, is to be
preferred before the Welfare and Happiness of a single Person. Paul, if they
were put in Competition, would be content to forego all his own Happiness to
purchase theirs. thus far he. Whither we understand by the Word accursed,
Excommunication, or temporal Death, with Chrysostom and Pool, or the loss of
eternal Happiness, with Estius, Toletus, Ludovicus dediu, Calvin, Menochius;
yet it shows a great Love; what a fleshly Love? No, the Chapter will inform us,
that it was Love to their Souls, and a desire after their Happiness, and
consequently he had an Eye to God's Glory, which is thereby manifested! The
Reason offered to confirm the Objection, viz. That by suffering those Things
God could not be Glorified, etc. is answered by considering, that the desires
of those holy Men were not absolute and peremtory, but Hypothetical or
Conditional, viz, that rather than God's Glory should be eclipsed, they were
willing to endure those Things, if they were appointed Means to obtain such an
End. To suppose that their Love was wholly Carnal, is to confront the Context
of the Places whence the aforesaid Instances are borrowed, and pass an
uncharitable Censure upon those Worthy's, as though they were Persons of the most
sordid Disposition and Character!

Objection 9. Asaph acted chiefly from selfish Principles, in Religion, as
appears from Psalm lxxiii. 12.13.14. Behold these are the ungoldly who prosper
in the World. Verily I have cleansed my Heart in vain, and washed my Hands in
Innocence, for all the Day long have I been plaug'd and chastned every morning.

Answer, Asaph only tells us of a past Temptation, what a posing Difficulty it
had been to him, to consider how that the Godly had generally the hardest Lot,
as to worldly Comforts: This ( arcanum or) secret of divine Providence, had so
exercised him, that he, through the Corruptions of his Nature and Temptations of
the Devil, was like to have entertained hard and unbecoming Tho'ts of Religion;
nay it appears that he had been guilty of this in some degree, for his Feet
were almost gone! But in his more composed frame, he reflected upon the corrupt
influences of those Temptations with abhorrence! He calls himself a Fool and a
Beast on that Account (as well he might) ver. 22. So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee. In a time of violent Temptation, he was
drove to be pretty much of the selfish Opinion I am opposing, viz. to think it
was a poor Thing only to serve and glorify God, except it was attended with
other Advantages; but afterward when he grew more calm, and got out of the
violence of Temptation, he calls himself a Fool, an Ignoramus, and a Beast (or
as the Word is interpreted a great Beast) for it; and acknowledges, that such
Speeches, would be an Offense against the Generation of God's Children. See
ver. 15.

Object. 10. It was Paul's Sentiment, that the chief if not the only Motive to
Obedience, was the hope of eternal Life, for if the Dead arise not to receive
their Reward, let us eat and drink, walk in the Way of our own Heart, and in
the Sight of our own Eyes, and give a loose to all our Desires! If in this Life
only we have hope, we are of all Men most miserable; what advantageth it me,
that I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus, if the Dead arise not.

Answer, The aforesaid Passage of the Apostle Paul's Writings (1 Cor. xv.) are
foreign to the laboring Argument; for what he says in them, is upon the
Supposition of no future State at all after this Life; and upon the Supposition
of the consequent Falsehood of the Doctrines of the Gospel, (ver. 14.15. and
seq.) Upon this Hypothesis he observes, that the Christians of that age were
indeed the most miserable of Mankind, to expose themselves to such heavy
Persecution for nothing, for an imposture. Whereas in this Argument, we
consider a future State as most certain and the Doctrines of the Gospel as most
true and worthy of all Acceptance; and that there is an inseparable connection
between believing Obedience in this Life, and complete Happiness in the Life to
come: And so the Question is, which ought to be the chief and last End of our
Obedience, the Glory of God, or the obtaining our own Happiness merely
considered as such, without any respect to the Glory of God, or eternal
glorifying of him in Heaven?

Now if the aforesaid Expressions of the Apostle Paul, be supposed to favor
the latter of these Opinions, they must be taken in the following Sense, viz.
That were his Obedience to God nothing concerned, with his future Happiness;
but that he could be saved without Holiness, as well as with it, that then he
would be at no pains, or care to serve God at all; but on the contrary give a
loose to all his vicious Inclinations.

But by this Sense of the Words, the Objector makes (in his Opinion) the
Apostle Paul, to be a Hypocrite, and an Epicure; for hereby it is necessarily
supposed, that he had no Supernatural Principles of Action, such as divine
Life, Love, Holiness; but that on the contrary he had a superior Inclination to
live after the Flesh, but was restrained from acting according thereto, merely
by the external Consideration of Advantages, to be had by it in the next State!

Besides the blessed Apostle is condemned, as an Epicure by the Objector; what
has been already said gives Weight to this, to which I may add, that of
ascribing the Epicures proverb to him as his fixed Judgment, only that he was
diverted from acting accordingly by selfish Considerations. The Proverb that
was very Familiar among the Epicurians, was this.

Lude, bibas, comedas, post mortem nulla voluptas. i. e. play, eat, drink, for
after Death there is no Pleasure, and that of Martial.

"Vita nimis sera est, crastina vive Hodie.
Life tomorrow is too late, live to day.
Now the Apostle Paul used the aforesaid Epicurian Proverb, namely, let us eat
and drink, etc. with a design to confute it, as appears from the 33 and 34
verses of the Chapter. Possibly the Force of his Reasonings may be carried thus
far, viz. that supposing the Dead rise not, the Epicurian Notion would be then
more tolerable: But to suppose that he spoke absolutely here, is, in other
Words, to say. that he believed there was no intrinsic Excellency in Holiness,
or Comforts attending the sincere Pract^e of it in this Life, but that it was
only eligible, because of ^e Advantages ensuing upon it, in a future State. And
not this the Sentiment of a selfish sordid Soul? But the Apostle appears to be
a Person of a very different Character by his Writings. See Romans 6.2. How shall
we (i. e. how can we) who are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? Those that
are Regenerated have an inward fixed Principle, termed in Scripture, the Seed
of God, which creates a habitual Aversion against Sin, and propensity to
Holiness!

Obj, 11. Self Love is the Foundation of all the Love, we owe or pay to God,
what God is in himself we know not: The only thing to determine our desire,
love, and fear of God, is his Attributes, as manifested to us in Creation,
Protection and Redemption; its nothing to the Purpose to tell how lovely and
excellent God is in himself, absolutely considered; for though we consider him as
clothed with all possible Perfections, without having to do with us, it will
only raise our Admiration; if we consider him as able and willing to make us
happy, this will raise Desire; if we consider him as just and powerful, and are
under Apprehensions that he will punish us, this raises Fear; if realy punished
by him, without hopes of release, this raises Aversion, etc. if we consider him
as good and merciful, and we are realy possessed of it, this raises Love, 1 John iv. 19. We love him because he first loved us.

Answer, The falsehood of the Position, contained in the above Objection, will
appear by the following Considerations, viz. 1st, Then we owe no love to God
because of his essential Excellency, which is absurd; for what is infinitely
amiable is a proper Object of Love, and because it deserves it, it therefore
demands in Reason and Justice our supreme Affection. 2dly, The aforesaid
Position, destroys entirely the necessity of supernatural Principles of Action,
infused by Regeneration; for if we must love only for Benefits received, and
not for the sake of the Giver considered abstractly, than there is no need of
any thing but Nature, to excite to this. The Pagans who had nothing but natures
Light to direct them, taught and practiced this. Lycurgus the Lacedemonian
Lawgiver, would make no law against Ingratitude, because as he observed, It
was a prodigious Impiety, not to repay a Benefit: And Seneca, in his Book de
Beneficiis, says, Not to return one good Office for another, is inhuman; but to
return evil for Good, is diabolical, p. 104. and in p. 54. 5. 6. he says, all
benefits must be gratuitious, a Merchant, says he, sells me Corn, that keeps me
and my Family from starving, but he sold it for his Interest, as well as I
bought it for mine, and so I owe him nothing for it. -- This, says he, is more
properly the driving of a Trade, then the cultivating of a generous Commerce;
thus far he. Now though I believe that we may eye our own Happiness, in our
religious Service, yet when we do this above the divine Glory, it comes under
Seneca's lash, and is solidly confuted by him in the preceding Lines.

3dly. The aforesaid Position, justifies the Devils, and damned's hating God,
for they are punished by God, without Hopes of release, and therefore may have
an Aversion to him, according to the preceding Objection. And farther if we
are to love him only because of the Love he expresses to us, then when he
punishes us, though most justly for our Offenses, and therewith deprives us of
all hopes of Mercy, we may hate him Law-fully, (for there is no Medium between
love and hatred) that is, we may hate infinite Holiness, Justice and
Excellency, which is absurd!

4. If we are bound to love God only, because of the Benefits we receive or
hope for from him, then we are not bound to love him at all; for the Respect we
offer to him is not for himself, but for the Benefits we receive, and thus true
Love to God, which is the Fulfillment of the Law, and Scope of the Gospel, is
destroyed entirely by this Notion. For according to it, our Love ought to be
wholly centered upon the Benefits we receive for our own sake, and so upon
ourselves: Even Seneca, the Pagan Stoic, could say, this for that, is rather a
truck than a Benefit.

5. The aforesaid Position destroy's the Creators Right to the Creatures Love
and Obedience, when he does not perceive them to be profitable to himself and
therefore if a Person in despair, should hate God, even in this Life, he is
justified by the aforesaid Position in so doing. But,

6. The aforesaid Objection is inconsistent with itself, for while it allows,
that a view of the divine Perfections, without any Relation to our Benefit, may
cause Admiration, this Opposes the other Part of it, for what is Admiration,
but a high degree of Esteem, and is not this the Foundation of all rational
Love?

7. The aforesaid Position contradicts the Experience of true Believers, who
even in the dark Hours of Dessertion, when they think they are forsaken of and
hated by God, yet through that inward Principle of divine Life which is infused
into them by Conversion; feel workings of Desire in them after God, and Love to
him: Jonah was an Instance of this, Jon. 2.4. Then I said, I am cast off out of
thy Sight, yet will I look again toward thy holy Temple. When Asaph feared
that God had forgotten him, and that his Mercy was clean gone from him, yet he
would acknowledge his infirmity, remember God, meditate upon his Works, and
talk of his wondrous Doings; and Job in his Distress professed, that though God
should slay him, yet he would trust in him.

8. The aforesaid Position destroys the Reasonableness of loveing our Enemies
of blessing them that curse us and doing good to those that despitefully use
us! For if Self-Love, be the Foundation of all the Love we owe or pay to God,
then it follows unavoidably that it is more so of all the Love we owe or pay to
Man, than the hating those that hate us, and cursing those that curse us, etc.
is in itself Reasonable; for there is no selfish Motive if we consider those
Things simply to excite us to do otherwise. But does not this Notion expressly
contradict the Gospel of CHRIST as well as the true Interests of Society, and
justify the dreadful Pagan Principle of hating our Enemies!

And as for the Text cited in the Objection, it will not bear the weight that
is laid upon it, for it says not, that the Saints of old, loved God either only
or chiefly, for his love to them, and yet this is the thing in Question; the
Tendency of the aforesaid Objection is to sap the Foundations of the whole
Gospel, and to put natural Religion or Deism in the Room of it.

Obj. 12. The Difference between Hypocrisy and Sincerity may be known according
to the Scheme of making Man's subjective Happiness his last End thus. 1. From
their Works; Hypocrites do all to be seen of Men, and consequently have
nothing, but outward Performances, but the sincere Christian, Glorifies God in
Thought as well as in Word and Action.

Ans. This Proposition is indefinite and so equivalent to a universal, it is as
much as to say, every Hypocrite does as aforesaid. And this is not true in
fact; we have no Reason to believe that Paul before Conversion did all to be
seen of Men! Besides if the Proposition were true, it would then follow by the
Law of contraries, that every one that had, or has good Thoughts and
Resolutions, which are Acts of the Mind and Will, or any Desires after his own
Salvation, must be a sincere Christian: By this rule, Abimeleck the Pagan,
Balam the Wizard, Saul the Tyrant, Simon the Sorceror, and Judas the Traitor
are dubbed for good Men! But a 2. Sign of Sincerity that is offered is this, The
Hypocrite does it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but the Sincere an
incorruptible.

Ans. Both the aforesaid Signs are the same, for both respect the End of
Action, and both respect a temporal Reward; though there be some Difference in
Specie, yet the Genus or Kind is the same: What view to Honor or worldly
Interest, had the foolish Virgins or those graceless Jews, whom the Apostle
Paul speaks of ( Romans x.) who had a Zeal, but not according to Knolwedge? But
pray observe and see if the Objector, does not prove himself to be a Hypocrite
by his own Signs! Thus; If he be a Hypocrite, who makes the Interest of the
lower part of Self, the Body, in this World his chief End; will it not follow,
that he is also a Hypocrite, who makes the Interests of the higher Part of
self, viz. the Soul, (without regard to God's Glory) in the next World his
chief End? Are they not both built on the same Foundation of immoderate
Self-Love? all the Difference between them is this, that the first respects the
lower Part of Self, and so is more gross; and the Latter the higher Part of
Self, and so is more subtle and plausible; but is there any more Love to God
for himself, in the one than in the other?

But I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject. And

1. Methinks what has been said, serves to inform us of the Difficulty of
Religion; and of the great Danger we are in of being deceived, as to our State
and Condition toward God. Surely strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way,
that leads to Life and few there be that find it, there is a Generation that
are pure in their own Eyes and yet are not cleansed from their Filthiness!

2. From what has been said we may learn, the absolute Necessity of the New
Birth, in order to serve God acceptably here, and enjoy him hereafter! For
without a Principle above nature, we cannot aim at God above our selves. A
Fountain may send out Water upon a Level with it self, but not above the Level;
and thus all that is done by us, while in a State of Nature, being done chiefly
upon our own Account; it is but (in some Sense) a serving of ourselves, and
therefore cannot be acceptable to God; and hence the Apostle asserts that he
that is in the Flesh cannot please God. The Church of England in their Articles
of Faith, justly say, That Works done before the Grace of CHRIST, are not
pleasing to God, but have in them the Nature of Sin. However though they be
sinful in respect of their Manner of Performance, yet when we conform to the
Command even in Externals, the Matter thereof is good, because commanded; and
it is in this Conformity that unconverted Sinners can only with Reason expect
supernatural Grace; for Jehovah will be inquired of by the House of Israel to
do it for them. And

3. We may therefore learn, the Necessity of examining ourselves; whether
indeed we do aim at the Glory of God, in what we do? Now we may know this by
the following Marks, viz. 1. When we are content to be outshin'd by others in
Gifts and Esteem if so be God's Glory may be thereby advanced. ( Phil. i. 15.)
2. When we habitually prefer God's Glory, to all other Things, that come at any
Time in Competition with it, such as Credit, Estate, Relations. 3. When in the
General, we can be content, that God's Will should take Place, though it cross
ours, ( Mat. xxvi. 33. John xii. 28) 4. When the Reproaches that come upon
God's Name, by the Falls of Professors, and declining State of Religion,
distress us more for the General than all our worldly Concerns! 5. When we find
at Times hard grapling, to come at this Disposition, because of the Opposition
of selfish Corruptions. And can after experiencing the Work of Conversion feel
sometimes the witnessing of our Conscience that in Simplicity and Godly
Sincerriy, we have had our Conversation in the World. 2 Cor. i. 12. 6. When we
feel the Love of CHRIST, sometimes sweetly constraining us to Duty. 7 when we
bewail over the Remains of Hypocrisy in us!

4. If we find the aforesaid Characters in us there is ground of Hope and
Comfort for us; and though we have many Weaknesses to lament, yet we are complete
in CHRIST, and he who has begun a good Work in us, will carry it on to the Day
of the Lord JESUS. He that sees in secret, will by and by reward us openly,
and make our Righteousness shine as the Light, and our Judgment as the Noon Day.

But alas how doleful and dangerous is the Case of all that want the aforesaid
Signs! Their selfish Services are rejected, that God, who is a Spirit, casts
them back as Dung upon their Faces, he will at last tear off their Hypocritical
Masks, and condemn their Persons to eternal Burnings, except they repent! O
consider, with trembling those dreadful Words of CHRIST, Mat xxv. Go ye
accursed into everlasting Burnings, prepared for the Devil and his Angels! What
shall become of those who bring no Glory to God? But are as Bernard speaks (aut
Peccatum aut Sterilitas) either Sinfulness or Barreness, an unprofitable Burden
to the Earth, and Poison to the Air! O let such think on these solemn Words of
our Lord, Mat. xxv. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter Darkness!
And how dismal is the Case of all such, who by open Impieties bid Defiance to
Heaven who declare their Sin as Sodom and refuse to blush! Surely Indignation
and Wrath shall be upon every Soul that does Evil, upon the Jew first and also
upon the Gentile! But what shall I say of those Monsters of impiety, who cast
inglorious Reflections upon the very Work of God's holy Spirit, in convincing
and converting Sinners, and comforting Saints? And call it Hypocrisy,
Mechanism, Enthusiasm and Disorder! Woe to these proud Potsherds that thus
contend with their Maker, that like brute Beasts speak Evil of what they
understand not! O let such think on the Words of our Savior to persecuting
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, it is hard for thee to kick against the
Pricks! This Opposition is a dreadful Step, to the unpardonable Sin.

In fine let us be all exhorted to aim at God's Glory and to glorify him. For
this is of absolute necessity, to obtain true Comfort, in Life, at Death and
throughout Eternity!

SERMON III.
2. TIMOTHY. iii. 16.17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness.

That the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.


THE Apostle having in the preceding Verses informed Timothy of the Apostasy
of many from the Truth, and exhorted him to constancy in cleaving thereto, in
the Face of all Opposition; does in the Words before us, as a Mean and Motive,
propose an ample Commendation of the HOLY SCRIPTURES, in which we may observe,
these Particulars,

1st. The Subject commended, all Scripture, (pasa graphe) i. e. all the Holy
Scripture, not only the Old but the New Testament, in all their Parts. The Word
Scripture signifies Writing. And

2d. We have the Commendation, which represents three Things, viz, the
original, use, and design, of the Scriptures.

And 1st. The Original, it is given by Inspiration (theo pucusios) i. e. by the
immediate and infallible guidance of the Holy Spirit, 2. Pet. i. 20, 21.
Knowing this first, that no Prophesy of Scripture is of any private
Interpretation, for the Prophesy came not in old Time by the Will of Man, but
Holy Men of old, spoke as they were moved to it by the Holy Ghost.

2d. The Use of the Holy Scriptures, they are profitable, (ophilemos) which
does not only signify, a certain Convenience, as some imagine, but their
Necessity, Sufficiency and Perfection! Here a fourfold profitableness of the
Scriptures is mentioned, viz. 1st. For Doctrine, (pros didascalian) i. e. as
Mr. Pool observes in his Synopsis, for Instruction in the sound Truths of the
Christian Religion. The Original Word is derived from a Verb, that signifies to
teach; this Sense of the Word is confirmed Romans xv. 4. For whatsoever Things
were written aforetime, were written for our Learning, that we through Patience
and Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope! Here observe, that the first Use
of the sacred Scriptures, is to instruct: And the first Duty of those who
Minister in Holy Things, is to Teach, and afterward to Exhort.

And thus we may see, that every Religion that is not grounded upon Knowledge,
is a false Religion! And that all such who would work upon Men's Passions, and
exhort them before they instruct their Minds, act contrary to the holy
Scriptures, and to right Reason! Such do but delude Mankind, and build a Babel
of Confusion, but God is a God of Order, and not of Confusion! But 2dly, the
Scriptures are proffitable for reproof, (pros elenchon) i. e. to convince and
confute Heretics, and refel their Errors. This Word respects the polemical Use
of the Scriptures, to convince gainsayers and stop their Mouths, Tit. i. 9,
11. Holding fast the faithful Word as he has been taught, that he may be able
by sound Doctrine both to exhort and convince the Gainsayers, whose mouths
must be stopped. -- Here the Word Convince is the same in the Original, with
that in the Text which is translated Reproof, add hereto, that a Principal use
of the Scriptures, is to convince of Sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment,
Joh. xvi. 8.9. The original Word translated Reprove, is the very same with that
in our Text, and signifies to convince demonstratively: Now although the holy
Spirit is the efficient Cause of this, without whose energy the Word has no
Influence upon Men's Minds, yet the Scriptures are the Instrumental Cause, for
by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. Now that the Reproof in the xvi. of John's
Gospel, before mentioned, respects not only evil Actions, but a State of Sin,
appears from these Words of our Lord in the 9th ver. of Sin, because ye have
not believed on me.

3dly, For Correction, (pross epanorthosin) Correction presupposes Evil, and
seeing that this is Twofold, viz. either of Sin or Punishment, therefore
Correction is also twofold: By the one we are freed from the Evil of Sin,
which is called Reprehension; and by the other from the Evil of Sorrow, which
is called Consolation. Both these the original Word (epanorthosis) includes.

4thly, For Instruction in Righteousness, (pross paideian ente dicaiosune) the
Word (paideia) signifies both Instruction and Direction. The word
Righteousness, every moral Good. This Phrase seems to import the exhortatory
Use of the holy Scriptures, those who have begun Well, the holy Scriptures both
direct and exhort to persist in their pious Course; and therefore in these four
Uses all the Business of the Scriptures is described.

But 3dly, we have in these Words the End and Scope of the Scriptures, and that
is, that the Man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly furnished. -- Who are we
to understand by the Man of God?

Answer, In general all pious People; but especially Ministers of the Gospel.
The Word perfect (Artios) is explained by the following Sentence, the holy
Scriptures give sufficient Direction for all Goodness of every kind, that may
be called Perfect, which has all its Parts. It is the manner of the Hebrews to
use many Words in expressing that which they have a mind to impress on their
Readers!

In discoursing upon this Text of Scripture, I shall according to the Order of
it,

I. Labor to prove the divine Original of the holy Scriptures. And,

II. Speak of their Use. The

1st. General Head of Discourse, is the divine Original of the Scriptures, or
to prove that they have been given forth by divine Inspiration, and are
therefore infallibly true, and of divine Authority. To this End let it be
considered,

1st. That a divine Revelation is necessary, seeing that nature teaches that
there is a God, or some first Being, from whom are all things as their first
Principle, and to whom all things tend, as their last End, and who is therefore
above all. It is but reasonable that this supreme Being, should be worshipped if
he is above all, more excellent than all, and we have received our All from
him, (as it is incontestibly evident;) then these Things should be acknowledged
with due Reverence, and what is this but the Worship of God? Surely he from
whom our Beings and all our Benefits do proceed, has a just Right to our Homage
and Service. And seeing he has made rational Creatures, in some sort, capable
of it, is it not reasonable to conclude, that the supreme Being, who always
acts with the wisest Design, does and will require that moral Service for which
he has given a Capacity? the Case must be so, otherwise the Almighty has given
a Capacity to no Purpose, which is unworthy of his infinite Wisdom!

Well, seeing the Almighty does require some Worship and Service of his
reasonable Creatures; may we not infer from his infinite Goodness, that he has
given them some certain and infallible rule, to direct them therein; especially
considering, that there are some things in Religion, which cannot be known by
the Light of Nature, viz. all those Institutions which Spring from the mere
Will or good Pleasure of God, cannot be found out by the force of human
Reasoning, without some special Revelation from God. As Jehovah makes his
unatainted Purity manifest in moral Laws, so the Glory of his Sovereignty
appears in his positive Injunctions, respecting which his Pleasure could not be
known without some divine Revelation. And thus all that tribute of Honor,
which redounds to his Sovereignity thereby, would be entirely lost; from all
which Considerations, the necessity of some supernatural Revelation, some
divine Law to direct Mankind in the Affairs of Religion, is of the last
Necessity.

Neither, 2dly. Is it impossible that the Almighty should communicate his Mind
and Will to his Creatures by immediate Revelation: If a Creature can impart his
Mind to another, much more the Creator; for surely there is no excellency in
Creatures, but what is eminently in him. If it is not inconsistent with the
Glory and Majesty of God to behold and be present with all Things, then surely
it cannot be injurious to his Honor to communicate his Mind to reasonable
Creatures: Nay, on the contrary, it is an Indication of his Goodness and
Wisdom, to favor intelligent Creatures with such intimations of his Will, as
are suitable to the Capacity he has given them, and subservient to promote
their Happiness.

Neither is it in any respect absurd or impossible for the Almighty to
communicate his Mind to Mankind by immediate Revelation. Surely he that made
the Soul can find easy access to the Work of his own Hands, and form what
Impressions on it he pleases! If a finite Spirit can communicate its Ideas to
the Soul of Man, as all confess, except Sadduces, how much more can the Father
of Spirits? To deny the reality of Inspiration, is not only to reject the
credibility of Scripture History, but to confront the avoved Sentiments of the
Pagan World, who all declared it to be agreeable to Reason!

Having premised these few particulars, I shall proceed to mention those
Characters of Divinity which are impressed on the Scriptures. And

1st. Methinks the Antiquity of the Scriptures, is an Argument of their divine
Authority: The Books of Moses (next to the Decalogue) are the most ancient
Writings in the World. This Justin Martyr, who lived in the second Centuary,
and Eusebius after him, make fully evident. But the Words of Tertulian, in his
Apology, are very memorable! Our Religion, says he, far out does all that you
can boast of in that Kind; for the Books of one of our Prophets only, viz.
Moses, (wherein it seems God has enclosed, as in a Treasury, all the Christian
Religion preceding so many Ages together) reach beyond the antientest you
have; even all your public Monuments, the Antiquity of your Originals, the
establishment of your Estates, the Foundations of your Cities, all that are
advanced by you in all Ages of History and Memory of Times. -- I think I may
say more, they are older than your very Gods, your Temples, Oracles, and
Sacrifices! Have you not heard mention made of that great Prophet Moses, he was
cotemporary with Inachus, and preceeded Danaus (the antientest of all that have
a Name in your Histories) 393 Years: He lived some hundred Years before the
ruin of Troy; and Homer the oldest Writer among the Greeks; lived, as Pliny
says, 250 Years after the subverssion of that City. Every of the other
Prophets, succeeded Moses, and yet the last of them was of the same Age with
your prime wise Men, Lawgivers and Historians! thus far he.

It is certain, that neither the Writings 'Homer, Trismegistus, Pythagoras,
Berosus, Plutarch, Cicero, Seneca, or any other can vie with the Books of Moses
for Antiquity! Now is it not Reasonable to believe, that to be the best
Religion which was first? Is not Truth always the first born? Is it not absurd
to imagine that the most early Notices of Religion should be counterfeit? How
can it consist with the divine Goodness to suffer Mankind to be thus imposed
upon, under pretense of his Authority, in a Matter that concerns their
everlasting Interest, without any Thing from him, either before or since, to
detect the Fraud? Certainly this is unworthy of God, and contrary to the Reason
of Men; and therefore the Scriptures, being the most Ancient, must needs
proceed from the God of Truth. But

2. The Majestic Style of the Holy Scriptures speaks them to be of a Divine
Original. The Style of the Scripture is very different from all human Writings,
in it we find a stately plainess, a majestic Simplicity, commanding Reverence
from all intelligent Beings, who do without Prejudice attend thereto. God is
represented as speaking with a Sovereignty, Grandeur, and Majesty, becoming the
Dignity of his Being and extent of his Government, e. g. Isa. i. 2. Hear O
Heavens! And give ear O Earth! For the Lord has spoken. Isa. lxvi 1. Thus
says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth my Footstool! Isa. xl.
12.15. Who has measured the Waters in the Hallow of his Hand, and meeted out
the Heavens with a Span; and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a Measure;
and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance; Behold the
Nations are as a Drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small Dust of the
Balance! Behold he takes up the Isles as a very little Thing, Ps. lxxvi. 12.
He shall cut of the Spirit of the Princes, He is terrible to the Kings of the
Earth, Ps. xcvii. 1, 5. The Lord reigns let the Earth rejoice, let the
Multitude of Isles be glad thereof. Clouds and Darkness are round about him,
Righteousness and Judgment, are the Habitation of his Throne, a Fire goes
before him, and burns up his Enemies round about, His Lightnings enlightened
the World, the Earth saw and trembled, the Hills melted like Wax, at the
presence of the Lord, at the Presence of the Lord of the whole Earth! Here are
no Apologies, begging Pardon of the Reader, or any Arts used to insinuate into
his good Opinion as is common in human Writings. Agustine says, That the Holy
Scriptures seemed rude and unpolished to him, because he did not understand its
inward Beauty; but when converted to Christianity, he declared, that when he
understood them, no writing appeared more wise and eloquent. Gregory Nazianzen,
a Man of great Learning, when he became acquainted with the sacred Scriptures,
judged, All the Ornaments of Literature among the Greek Philosophers, to be
vastly inferior to them. Illiricus observes, That although we find not in the
Holy Scriptures, that delicate Itch of Words, that numerosity of Sounds or
those pleasing Trifles with which the vain glorious Orators of Greece and Rome
beautified their famed Harangues, yet we find there a grave and masculine
Eloquence exceeding all others. Thus far he: It Is true a great Part of the
Scripture is destitue of the Sweetness of Sound, and Pomp of Diction. But yet
there is more Beauty in that plainess, than in all the Flowers of Ciceronian
Rhetoric. Neither would it become the Majesty of Heaven, to use the
Philosophical Subtilties of Plato and Aristotle! A Pearl needs no painting -- A
Prince need not play the Orator! Plainess well becomes Royal Power and Majesty
in the Publicaion of Laws. In the sacred Scriptures, Commands are issued forth
with Sovereign Majesty, and Obedience peremtorily required, and no other Reason
assigned but the Legislators Will. Here are Promises to the Obedient, of all
needful Blessings here, and immortal Glory hereafter. Here are Threats
denounced against the Disobedient of every Order, from the Prince on the Throne
to the Beggar on the Dunghill; and that of no less than eternal Miseries! Here
Injunctions are introduced, with a thus says the Lord! He that has Ears to
hear let him hear. Where do we find any Thing like to this, in any human
Writings?

3. The Matters therein treated of, are so sublime and transcendent, that they
could never be devised by a human Mind. Here the essential and personal Glory
of the great Three ONE, is represented in a surprising Light. Here a rational
and consistent Account is given of the Original Source of that Depravity and
Misery, which taints and infests the whole human Race! viz. That both were
occasioned by the Apostasy of Adam, the federal Head and Representative of his
whole Offspring. This the Pagans groaned under, but ascribed it to a Fabulous
Cause! Here a Method of Cure is opened, every Way worthy of God, and every Way
suited to all the Maladies under which our fallen Nature labors! namely, that
the Son of God should assume the human Nature under its ruinous Circumstances,
into an inseparable Union with his Deity, and therein mediate and satisfy for
the Sins of Men, by his Suffering and Obedience! What finite Mind could invent
a Scheme in which the Divine Attributes shine forth with such humble Beauty and
harmonizing Glory? A Scene which gives Room for the displays of Sovereign
Mercy, without infringing upon the unalienable Rights of Justice! Besides the
sacred Scriptures give us a rational Account of the Origin and End of the
World. The infinite Grandeur of the Almighty is most nobly represented, in the
Manner of the Worlds Formation; he did but speak and behold it existed, his
single sovereign Beck caused it to spring in a Moment, from the Womb of empty
Nothing into Being; and how awful and affecting is the Representation which the
Divine Oracles give us of the Resurrection of the Dead and the general
Judgment! And where else can we find these solemn Scenes opened, which are so
terrible to the impenitent, and comforting to all that truly fear God?

4. That Holiness the Scripture inculcates, is an Argument of its divine
Original. The divine Oracles do not only recommend Holiness in Speech and
Practice, but in the inward Sentiments and Thoughts of the Soul; and that not
only by its Precepts, which are just and equal, but by Threatenings of the most
dreadful kind, and Promises of the most important Good; as well as by examples
of most unblemished Virtue and strictest Piety. The Words of Holy Scripture are
pure as Silver tried in a Furnace and purified seven Times. The most sublime
universal and perpetual Purity, is the golden Center to which all the Lines in
the Circumference of Scripture bend and terminate. And it ought to be observed,
that the sacred Scripture urges a Holiness, which springs from the noblest
Principle, viz. LOVE; and aims at the highest End, viz. The Glory of God;
whereas diverse of the Pagans have held a multiplicity of gods which is
impossible in the Nature of Things, and observed impure Rites in their
religious Worship, and allowed of Revenge and Self Murder! And all their
Motives to the Virtues they recommend, are of a selfish Nature. But the
Scripture allures us to the Love and Practice of Virtue and Goodness, from the
sublime and endearing Consideration of redeeming Love! I may add, that the
Pagan Moralists, viz. Socrates, Plato, Plutarch, Seneca, Tully, Aristotle, are
silent about Heart Purity, so far as I know, without which, a regular Life has
but a Show of Goodness. As to the Mohammedan Religion it may be observed, that
is was propagated among a barborous, rude and uncultivated People, and spread
no farther than the Force of the Sword carried it. It is evident that Mahomet,
the Author of the Alcoran, did nothing to prove himself to be a Prophet: What
Mysteries did he reveal? What Prophesies did he express? What Miracles did he
perform? How many Things in the Alcoran, are contradictory and ridiculous?
Besides its Precepts indulge Men's sensual Inclinations with Polygamy here, and
its Promises flatter Men's vain Hopes with the Proposal of a carnal Paradise
hereafter; a Paradise more fit for Swine, than reasonable and immortal Souls!
Well if the Scriptures be absolutely and comparatively Holy, and tend to make
us so above all other Writings, is it not an Argument of their divine Original?
Surely Satan, who is an impure Spirit, would not invent what is so prejudicial
to his Kingdom, nor the Wicked who are under his Influence: It cannot be
reasonably supposed, that they would, if they could, devise a System of
Doctrines and Laws which directly controls their corrupt Inclinations, and
dooms them to perpetual Misery for them! Nor can Angels or good Men be the
Authors of the Scriptures, because they would be guilty of frequent lying, in
ascribing to themselves and their Sayings a Divinity, which the Scriptures
frequently attribute to itself, therefore it must derive its Original from none
else but God!

The Necessity of some Divine Revelation has been before observed. And indeed
he that denies this, does not only deny the Christian and Jewish, but all
Religion in general, for all have alleged this as their Foundation; and
besides he must acknowledge, that the Almighty has left Man in a worse
Condition than the meanest Creature, to whom he has given sufficient Means, to
attain the highest End of their Beings: But sure this is incompatible with
infinite Wisdom and Goodness! If any should say, that Reason may suffice, I
answer no! It is corrupt, and therefore cannot be the Rule of Right, without a
Revelation. The absurd Opinions of many who have the Help of a Revelation,
shows the insufficiency of Reason without it, to be our Guide in religious
Matters; but if it be granted, that there is some Revelation, then surely it is
the Christian, for this alone bears the Character of Divinity; all the Rest
carry the manifest Tokens of Imposture upon them, as has been before observed.
But

5. That Harmony and Agreement which subsists between all the Parts of the
sacred Scriptures, is another Proof of their divine Authority. This blessed
Book, was Sixteen Hundred Years a writing; it was written by a great number of
Persons of various Conditions, in different Tongues, in different Ages, in
distant Places, and yet all the Parts whether Historical, Prophetical,
Perceptive, Promisory, Minatory, Typical, Doctrinal, sweetly harmonize and tend
to the same noble End! This could never be the Issue of human Contrivance; it
must needs be the Result of infinite Prescience, and divine Guidance! How often
do uninspir'd Men contradict themselves in their Writings, and how much more
would they contradict one another? If many Persons of inferior Seize, did
at various Times and Places write upon religious Subjects, considering their
natural Blindness in such Matters, and their lyableness to blunder, even in
reporting Matters of Fact; and indeed if the Penmen of the Scriptures had been
left to themselves, in the Composure, the Bible would have been but a Bundle of
Confusion and Contradiction, But

6. Another Argument for the divine Original of the Scriptures, may be taken
from the Penmen thereof; and here it may be asserted, that they were Men of
such blameless Lives, that their Enemies could not fix such Charges upon them
as might justly weaken the Credit of their Writings. It is likewise evident,
that they were Men of great Candor and Integrity, and that from their
discovering their own Faults, Moses Records his Backwardness to comply with the
divine Call of going to Egypt, his Infidelity, his Murmurings, ( Number. xi. 11,
15.) and Jeremy informs us, of his cursing the Day of his Birth, Jer. xx. David
makes mention of his Crime in the Matter of Uriah, (Psalm. li.) nay they do not
only mention their own Crimes, but those of their dearest Relations; which
carnal Policy would have inclined them to conceal; thus Moses mentions his
Brother Aaron's making the Golden-Calf. (Exodus xxxii 25.) They also acquaint
us, with the meaness of their Extraction, thus Amos tells us that he was among
the Herdsmen of Tekoah; the Evangelists inform us that they were Seafaring Men,
when called to be Disciples.

Neither were the Penmen of the Scriptures, designing Men, they sought not
their own Honor, as appears from what has been said, neither did they seek
their own Interest. Although Moses had the Burden of Government, yet he did not
affect the pomp of a King, neither did he advance his Family to that Wealth and
Honor which was in the Power of his Hand to confer! No, the Laws he made,
deprived his own Tribe of kingly Government, and the highest Honor of the
Priesthood he conferred on his Brothers Children, not his own! Its certain that
Instead of Honor and Profit, many of the Penmen of the Scriptures, exposed
themselves by their writing and preaching to great Contempt and Hardships!

Besides many of the Penmen of the Scriptures, were of such Inferior Abilities
that they were not able to form an Imposture and palm it on the World. And some
of them were Kings, and so above the sneaking Meannesses of Lying and Forgery!
And to conclude this Argument, I may farther observe that the very Writers of
the Scriptures appear to be under a Subjection to the Doctrines they delivered,
which argues them to be of a divine Original! But

7. The exact accomplishment of Prophesies, proves the Divinity of the
Scriptures; to foretell Events that depend upon arbitrary Causes, exceeds the
reach of a human Mind, and is the Prerogative of that God only, who is
panophthalmos, all eye and has no Succession in Duration; but there are many
Instances of this kind in Scripture, e. g. Moses and Joshua foretold the
Idolatrous Apostasy of Israel, ( Deuteronomy. xxxi. 29. Jos. xxiii 15.) which the Book
of Judges shows was accomplished. Isaiah and Jeremiah foretold the Babellonish
Captivity, with the Time of its Continuance, and the Deliverance from it by
Cyrus, which accordingly came to pass, as other Parts of the Old Testament do
witness. The Prophecy of a Reformation by Josiah, and his burning the Bones of
the Idolatrous Priests at Bethel, did exactly come to pass three Hundred Years
after. (1 Kings xiii. 2. 2 Kings xxiii, 15, 16.) And many Prophesies respecting
the Time and Manner of our SAVIOR'S coming, his Birth, Life, Miracles, and
Death, are punctually fulfilled. It was near two Thousand Years, before that
famous Prophisy, ( Genesis xlix. 10.) had its Accomplishment, Hircanus was the
last of the Tribe of Judah, who swayed the Scepter of Government over the
People of Israel, and this Man Herod a Stranger, an Idumean slew; and so cut
off the Line of Judah, and usurped the Government, as Josephus testifies; and
then did the MESSIAH come. An ingenious Writer glosseth excellently upon the
aforesaid Prophecy, in the following Manner. The Jewish Rabbis says he, do
not deny that by SHILOH is meant the MESSIAH; now at the Time of Jacob's
uttering these Words, there was little Probability that any of his Posterity
should have a Scepter, -- being poor, few, and in a strange Land; or if they
should thrive so as to become a Kingdom, why should Judah have the Government?
Seeing there were three elder Brothers, viz. Reuben, Simeon, and Levi; nor was
there any likelihood of this Prophecy's being accomplished when Moses set it
down in Writing, for then he himself who was of the Tribe of Levi was in the
actual Possession of the Government, and put into it by God himself, who
appointed for his successor Joshua, not of the Tribe of Judah, but of Ephraim,
whence we have a notable Evidence, of the Truth and Sincerity of this
Prediction: For had not Jacob really uttered it, we cannot imagine that Moses
would have put it in Writing, to the Disparagement of his own Tribe. Thus far
he.

We see with our Eyes the ingathering of the Gentiles, and Dispersion of the
Jews! But the Time would fail to relate the accomplishment of those numerous
Prophesies that respect our SAVIOR: I must therefore proceed to observe.

8. That God himself has attested the Divinity of the Scriptures by Miraculous
Works, and surely if we receive the Witness of Men, the Witness of God is
greater. A Miracle is an extraordinary divine Work, whereby something is
produced contrary to the common Course and fixed Laws of Nature! Now that many
such have been wrought by the Prophets, by CHRIST, and the Apostles, for the
Confirmation of the Divinity of their Mission and Doctrine, we have all the
Evidence that such past Facts will admit of, and more cannot be reasonably
desired. Elijah expressly appealed to God for the Determination of the
Controversy between him and the Priests of Baal, by a miraculous Work, and our
Lord appealed to the Miraculous Works he performed in Confirmation of his
Mission and Doctrine, as particularly in the Case of John Baptist's Disciples,
go and tell (...), said he, that the Blind receive their Sight, and the Lam^
walk, etc. We have Information by many credible and disinterested Witnessess,
that the Miracles which our Lord wrought, were many in Number, beneficent in
Kind, that they were wrought before Multitudes of Enemies, who, had there been
any fraud, would surely have detected it. They were wrought frequently in open
Day, and of this the Relators were Eye and Ear Witnesses. A Miracle is
certainly the broad Seal of Heaven, which could never be given to a forgery!
And therefore, as Dr. Owen observes, When any Doctrine which is in itself such
as becomes Holiness and Righteousness, is confirmed by a Miracle, there can no
greater Assurance be given even by God himself of its veracity! Could the
infernal Spirits imitate the miraculous Works which our Savior wrought? Is it
not utterly inconsistent with the divine Goodness to suffer them to use the
Seal of Heaven in seducing Mankind, without giving some evident Notices of the
Imposture, but this has never been done in this Case: The Turks do acknowledge
the Miracles of our Lord, and the Jews also; but the latter ascribe them, through
Malice, to the Power of Magic! But then, as our Savior justly observes, Satan
would be divided against Satan, and so his Kingdom could not stand! Satan would
do that which is contrary to his Interest, which is absurd! Irenius, who lived
in the second Century, affirms, That the the Dead were raised to Life, and
other Miracles wrought in his time, by laying on of Hands. And Tertulian, in
his Apology, has these Words, Let any one be brought before your Tribunal who
is apparently possessed with a Devil, that Spirit being commanded by any
Christian, shall confess himself to be a Devil. But to proceed,

Another Argument of the Divinity of the Scriptures, is their almost miraculous
Preservation for so long a tract of Time, notwithstanding the rage of numerous,
powerful and politic Opposers, while many other esteemed Composures, which
never met with such Opposition, have long since perished. Antiochus Epiphanes,
in the Days of the Maccabes, made diligent search for the Book of the Law, and
where ever he found it, burnt it, and threatened those that concealed it with
Death and Torture. And about the Year of CHRIST 300, the Emperor Dioclesian
being determined to root Christianity out of the World, used the same
Barbarities to destroy the Scriptures. But the gracious God has preserved them
to this Day, maugre the combined rage of Hell, and Earth! yea to preserve them
whole and entire, so that those to whom they were committed, have not been
suffered to corrupt them, although they fell into Opinions inconsistent with
them, they have therefore fled to unwritten Traditions as the Patron of their
erroneous Opinions. The Jews to their Talmud and Cabala, which, they say, Moses
delivered by Word of Mouth. And the Papists to oral Traditions, which they say
were delivered by St. Peter. But I proceed to observe,

That the early Success of the Gospel notwithstanding of all the Opposition and
Contempt which was made against it, and cast upon it, gives aditional Force to
what has been before offered. What less then Omnipotence could make such self
denying Doctrines, preached by illiterate Men, become victorious over the Pride
and Prejudice of multitudes of diverse Nations, and that without the Arts of
Persuasion or Influence of civil Power?

And indeed that divine Energy that does frequently attend the Holy Scriptures,
is a pregnant Argument of their divine Authority. By these the Minds of Men are
enlightened, their Consciences alarmed, their Hearts comforted and renewed,
having their general Bias turned toward God, and Heavenly Objects, and their
Lives reformed! These Effects which have appeared in Millions of Men, do
surpass the Force of Nature, and must therefore be ascribed to an omnipotent
Cause. And is it consistent with the Wisdom and Holiness of God to use a
forgery to produce such noble Effects, and thereby to confirm an imposture? no
surely! most certainly the Almighty uses Instruments adapted to the Effects
produced. Tuly justly complains, That the Pagan Moralists, wanted Authority to
enforce their Sentiments and Precepts, and that they were rather for
Ostentation then Practice.

And indeed the general Tendency and Scope of the sacred Scripture, being to
exalt God and abase the Creature, is no inconsiderable Argument of its divine
Original. Had Men been the Contrivers, they would have framed a Scheme more
agreeable to their corrupt Inclinations! They would have represented it as an
easy Matter to be saved, and that the Creature is not so beholden to the
Almighty for his Happiness as the Scriptures signify.

Likewise the constant Testimony both of the Jewish and Christian Church, to
the Truth of the Scriptures, serves to confirm and illustrate our present
Argument. Here let it be considered, that the Truth of Christianity depends
much upon certain Facts, such as the Miracles which CHRIST wrought, and his
Resurrection from the Dead. These the Apostles were eye Witnesses of, and had
there been any fallacy in them, could have easily discovered it; for the
Connection we observe in their Writings, proves that they had the regular
exercise of their Reason. Now how can it be supposed, that Men in their Senses
would constantly assert what they knew to be false, and that in the face of
Danger, when they had no Prospect of Honor or Interest by so doing? But on the
Contrary, of Reproach, Poverty and Pain, and at last Seal it with their Blood!
To which let me add, the constant Testimony of Millions of Men ever since, many
of whom suffered great Hardships, yea and Death itself, rather than they would
deny the Truth of the Scriptures!

Besides some learned Men observe, That diverse Matters of Fact recorded in
Scripture, are also acknowledged by Heathen Historians, e. g. The Creation of
the World, by Ovid in his Metamorphosis. The long Lives of the Patriarchs, by
Manetho. The Flood, by Berosus. Noah, by Herodotus, under the Name of Janus.
The Destruction of Sodom, by Pliny and Justin. Circumcision, by Herodotus,
Strabo, Diodorus, Siculus, and Tacitus. Isreal's departure out of Egypt, by the
ancient Record of the Egyptians, Phenicians, Caldeans, and Grecians. Mention is
made of Solomon, by Dionisius Casius. Of the Slaughter of Senacherib, by
Herodotus. The famous Roman Historian Tacitus, in his Annals, speaking of
Nero's Persecuting the Christians, under pretense of their burning the City of
Rome, says expressly, That the Author of that Name or Sect, was CHRIST, who when
Tiberius was Emperor, was put to Death by Pontius Pilate, the then Procurator
of Judea. The Appearance of the Star is mentioned by Calcidius. Herod's
Slaughter of the Children, by Marcrobius. The Eclipse of the Sun at our Lord's
Crucifixion, by Dionisius the Areopagite. Tertulian, in his Apology, appeals to
the Roman Records for the certainty of it. And Josephus in his History, gives
Testimony to the Miracles of our Savior.

Once more, if the Scriptures were not of divine Authority, wherefore do wicked
Men rage so much against them? and why are we assailed with so many Temptations
from Satan to doubt and object when we apply ourselves to the serious Study of
them? Would Satan so much oppose them above all other Books, did they not come
from God and tend to destroy his Kingdom? No surely!

But notwithstanding of all that has been said in order to give us full
Satisfaction, there is a necessity of the internal Testimony of the holy
Spirit, whereby Persons are made to feel the Power of the Scriptures, forming
holy Dispositions and sweet Sensations in them, answerable thereunto, and
thereby enabling them to believe its divine Authority, and hence it is said,
that those who believe have the Witness in themselves.

But I proceed to speak, and that but briefly, of the 2d. General Head, which
was to discourse upon the Use of the Scripture.

And here I may summarily observe, that the sacred Scriptures are the perfect
and only Rule of our Faith and Practice. Hence in our Text they are said to
make the Man of God perfect and thoroughly furnished to every good Work; and
hence they are called a Light to our Feet and a Lamp to our Paths, and
expressly, a Rule, Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace
be upon them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. From this we must not
swerve to the right or left Hand. Isa. viii. 20. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Light in them.

And indeed the holy Scriptures, have only the Nature and Property's of a Rule,
which are these following, 1st. a Rule ought to be prescribed by God alone.
Mat. xv. 9. A Religious Rule cannot be prescribed by another than him to whom
the Persons ruled belong. And indeed the Sublimity of the matter which such
Rules concern, sufficiently manifest, that they cannot be well made by
Creatures.

2dly, A Rule ought to be received and Public, otherwise how shall it
determine Controversies? And thus it is in respect of the Scriptures, they have
been prescribed by the public Authority of God himself, and received by the
common Consent of the Christian Church, as has been before proved; and hence
the Church is called the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1. Tim. iii. 15.

3dly, A Rule ought to be clear and plain, otherwise how can we know what we
have to believe and do? And so are the Scriptures, especially in the
Explication of such Things, as are of absolute necessity to Salvation. And
hence they are called a Light, and said not to be hid from us, Dut. xxx. 11.
Where we meet with Obscurity, this arises from the Sublimity of the Things
treated of, or the Weakness of our understanding rather than from the
Scriptures themselves.

4thly, A Rule ought to be perfect and adequate, or equal to the Thing ruled,
so that it need never to be augmented or diminished in the least, otherwise it
will be unfit to measure its Object. Such is the Holy Scripture, there is
nothing to be believed or done, but what it contains and prescribes. Now the
Perfection of the Scriptures is twofold, viz. integral or Systematical, and
Essential, the first consists in its full Number of Books, which is now
complete and the Cannon Sealed, ( Rev. xxii. 18.19.) the latter respects the
Doctrine contained in those Books; and this most certainly is complete, as our
Text asserts, and many other Places. And hence we are bound to the Scripture
alone as our Guide, by the strictest Injunctions. ( Deuteronomy. xvii. 18. Isa. viii.
20.) And forbid to add to it or detract from it, under the severest Penalty's!
( Deuteronomy. iv. 2. Rev. xxii. 18.19.) And informed that we shall be at last judged
by it. John xii. 42. And Reason will inform us, that it must be perfect, seeing
that it is the first Principle, and last Explication of our Faith. 2 Pet. i.
20, 21. If it were not so, true and perfect Conclusions could not be drawn from
it, for the Effect cannot be better then its Cause. The sacred Scripture has
all its essential Parts, viz. Matter and Form, and all its integral, viz. Law
and Gospel, and is therefore Perfect.

5thly. A Rule ought to be constant and imoveable, evermore and every where
like to itself, otherwise how can any certain Measure be ruled by it, and such
is the Holy Scripture, 2 Pet, i. 19. We have a more sure Word of Prophesy,
(bebaioteron propheticon logon.)

Now the aforesaid Characters cannot be justly ascrb'd to any thing else, that
is obtruded for a Rule either by Jews, Papists, Turks, Pagans, Deists, Quakers,
Antimonians: The Jewish Talmud and Cabula are private Things, destitute of
divine Authority, full of Absurdities, Falsehoods and Impieties against God and
Man, as Gallatinus and Sextus Senensis have made evident. The oral Tradition of
the Papists is of the same Stamp, they are extremely uncertain, for while some
of the Fathers assert a particular Tradition to be Apostolical, others of them
deny it. They are also contrary to the Written Word, and many of them changed
according to the Circumstances of Times, Places, and Persons. The Turkish
Alcoran is also utterly destitute of the aforesaid Characters; the Author of it
was a Monster of Lust, having eleven Wives at one Time, besides Concubines, a
base Adulterer and a cruel Robber, as Andreas Maurus in his Treatise against
them, makes evident; and he was also an encourager of Robbery in his followers,
as appears from the 19 and 71 Surat of the Alcoran, and in many Things it
contradicts the Scriptures. The Pagan Moralists are likewise absurd and
contradictory in many Things, as I have observed before. Neither can Reason be
our Rule, as the Deists and Socinians dream; because it is obscure and
imperfect, (1 Cor. ii. 14.) And the absurd and contrary Sentiments of those who
had no other Guide, is a sufficient Confirmation of this. Besides, some Things
in Religion are Sublime and Mysterious, and so transcend the reach of Reason;
yet they are not contrary to it: But though on the one Hand, we disclaim the
Socinian Opinion, in making Reason the supreme Rule of Faith and Practice; yet
on the other we equally detest the Foolry of Enthusiasts, who reject it
altogether in the Affairs of Religion. Surely Religion is a reasonable Service;
Reason may and ought to be humbly used, in order to understand the meaning of
the Rule God has given us. The Quakers notion, of the Spirit without the Word
to be be our Rule, is a dangerous ignis fatuous, which may lead Men any where.
Neither is the pretended new Nature and Love of the Antinomians and Moravians,
while they reject the Blessed Law of God and slight the Old Testament, a whit
safer Guide then will with the Wisp! Christ has not come to destroy the Law as
these Men pretend; neither does Faith make void the Law!

If it be enquired, whether the Old Testament be abrogated, or less necessary
to be read, and less useful than the New? It may be observed, that the
Manichean Heretics, and some Ana-Baptists rejected it altogether, the Former
as proceeding from a bad Principle and the latter because we are said not to be
under the Law, but under Grace; confounding the Law, considered as a Covenant
of Works, and the old Testament together, though Believers are not under the
Curse of the Law, yet by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, and the Law is Holy,
Just and Good. The Heretical Socinians imagine also, that the Religion of the
New Testament, differs essentially from that of the Old, and therefore that the
Old is not necessary to be read. The enthusiastical Moravians do also slight
the Old Testament, and do endeavor to invalidate all Arguments drawn from
thence. On the Contrary the reformed Churches, believe that the divine
Authority of both Testaments is the same and that therefore the Old is
necessary and proffitable to be read as well as the New: Their Reasons are
these, 1st. The Books of the Old as well as the New are divinely inspired, this
our Text confirms; and therefore both are of infallible Truth and Authority.

2dly, Because the Old as well as the New was given for a 'Rule of Faith and
Practice to the Church, Psa. cxlvii 19.20.

3dly. We no where read in the New Testament, that 'the Old was abolished. But

4thly, On the Contrary it is confirmed by the Precept and Practice of CHRIST.
( Joh. 5.39. Luke 24.17.) He directs us to the Old Testament, ( Luke xvi. 29.)
and confuted his Adversaries by it. ( Mat. iv. 7.) And the same was done by the
Apostles Peter and Paul. (Acts iii. 20. Acts xviii. 28.)

5thly, The whole Doctrine of the New, is contained in the Old. The Apostle
Paul pros^ss'd, that he preached nothing besides what the Prophets and Moses
did say should come. ( Acts xxvi. 22.) The Bereans were commended for examining
the Doctrine of the New by the Old, ( Acts xvii. 11.) All the Prophets are said
to give Witness to Christ, Luke xxiv. 27.

6thly, The Old Testament is said to be the Foundation of Faith, and of the
Christian Church, ( Ephesians. ii. 20. Acts xxiv. 14.) So that such as slight the
Old Testament, endeavor to overthrow the Foundation of the Christian Religion:
For the New is confirmed by the Old, and is a Fulfillment of the prophetical and
typical Part of it.

I proceed to a Word of Improvement. If the Scriptures be of divine Authority,
then let us love them with a sincere Love from the Heart, with a superlative
Love above any Thing else; they should be sweeter to our Taste than Honey from
the Comb, and more precious than Gold, with a constant Love, as it happens in
Hunger and Thirst. (Psa. i. 2.) with a universal Love extending it self to the
Law and its Threats, as well as to the Gospel and its Promises, the Psalmist
gloried in this, O how love I thy Law, it is my Meditation all the Day. Our
Love, should be effectual exciting us to gratitude to God for so excellent a
benefit, which we should express with Words and Actions. Let us fear the
threatenings, and if Gracious, depend upon the Promises, and whatever our State
be, let us conform to the Precepts of the divine Word; if we have no Grace,
this is the Way to obtain it, and if we have, to increase it. Let us read the
Scriptures with Care, and meditate frequently on them. We may be excited to the
aforesaid Love, by considering the Perfections of their Author, the Excellency
of the Doctrines contained in them, with their Tendency and manifold Use, They
are the Wisdom and Power of God to Salvation. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.

SERMON IIII.
PSALM xiv. 1. The Fool has said in his Heart there is no God.


THE Knowledge of the divine Existence is the Foundation of all Religion,
without this we cannot come to God, and sincerely seek his Favor; wherefore it
appears by the Law of Contraries, that the denial of a Supreme Being must needs
be the fatal Source of all Impiety and Perfidy. And this the Psalmist confirms
Psalm 10.4. The Wicked through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek after
God: God is not in all his Thoughts.

The Evidences of a supreme Being, are so many and manifest, that it must needs
be an Instance of the greatest folly and impiety to call it in Question: And
yet this our Text informs us is the Practice of some, whose Character and
Course we have therein a Description of, the Fool. This ignominious Epithet or
Character is frequently and justly assigned to wicked Men in Scripture; for the
Contraries of true Wisdom realy belong to them, as appears thus, Wisdom directs
to an End in the full Enjoyment of which we are completely Happy, as well as to
Means that directly tend thereto, and excites to the Improvement of the
aforesaid Means in their proper Season; whereas ungodly Persons either propose
to themselves an End which cannot yield complete Satisfaction, namely some
earthly Entertainment; or if they propose the Enjoyment of God in a future
World as their End; they pursue contrary Measures to attain it, viz. Sin and
Impiety, and postpone the earnest Use of proper Means to secure an Intetest in
the divine favor, until the golden Seasons of divine Grace are elapsed, It is
certainly a property of true Wisdom, to exert principal Care and Labor to
secure the most valuable and enduring Good, and to avert the greatest Evil:
Whereas impenitent Transgressors on the Contrary, bend their principal Labor
and Solicitude in quest of Trifles, which are of no Importance and Duration;
while in the mean Time they are supinely and profusely Negligent of immence and
immortal Good, and thereby expose themselves to interminable Misery, and
intolerable Vengeance! But this methinks is one of the most astonishing
Instances of the folly of Impenitents, which our Text records, namely, their
questioning the Existence of a supreme Being, the Fool has said in his Heart:
This Expression seems to denote rather a Desire that there was no God, than a
Belief that there is none. When Persons go on in a course of crimson Impiety,
as it is said of the Fool in our Text, they are corrupt, they have done
abominable Works. Then they are disposed to Question the Existence of an
avenging Judge, that so they may Sin without Control or Reluctance: Doubtless
some refactory Transgressors incessantly labor entirely to extinguish the
native Notices of a supreme Being in their Minds, that so they may give a
lawless unbounded loose to their sensitive Appetites, without the uneasy allay
of a future Judgment.

In discoursing on this Text I purpose 1st. To prove the Being of a God by some
Arguments. And

II. To expose the Atheists folly in Questioning it.

And 1st. Methinks the Subordination of Causes which we behold, and their
Succession, manifestly point to a first Cause; there has been for some
standing of Time, and there yet is, a succession of Creatures in the World: Now
these Creatures cannot make themselves, for that which is not, cannot act:
Nothing cannot be the Cause of something. To suppose a Creature could produce
itself, involves a manifest Absurdity in it, viz. That it is, and is not at the
same Time, and that it acts before it exists, which is impossible: As it
produces it must be, for nothing cannot act; and as it is produced, it must not
be, and as these Creatures cannot make themselves, so neither can they make
each other, for this Reason, because to create Something out of Nothing, is a
Work that requires infinite Strength. (the distance between nothing and
something being infinite) Now no Creature has this Property of Almightyness,
therefore it cannot act contrary to the fixed Laws of Nature in Creating: All
that a Creature can do is only, in a natural Way, to give particular Forms to
fit Materials, but the Matter itself he cannot produce. If the Creature could
make himself, then it would follow, by a parity of Reason, that he could
preserve himself, for the latter is no greater than the former. But manifold
Experience proves the latter to be false, and therefore the former is so from
which this proceeds.

But farther, upon the supposition of the Creatures making himself and others,
it may be inquired, why he has made himself and those of the same Species, so
Indigent and Dependant on other Creatures for Support? Likewise how it comes to
pass that he knows so little of himself and others? Surely he that makes Things
must needs Understand them: From all which it appears, that Man could not make
himself and other Creatures.

But to bring this Argument respecting the Succession of Creatures, to a
Crisis, it may be observed, that one or other of these four Particulars
respecting it will hold good viz. Either that the Succession is Infinite, or
that the same Thing produces it self, or that there is a Circulation of Causes,
viz. That A should be the Cause of B, B of C, C of D, and D of A again, or some
first Being who proceeds from none, whom we call GOD, there is not a fifth. Now
the Three first Particulars cannot be admitted without Contradiction, as for
Example, an infinite Subordination or Succession of Causes, 1st. infers that
while that continues nothing can exist, than which nothing can be more false:
Now the Justness of the aforesaid Consequence appears thus, viz. nothing can
exist except by its next Cause, which produces the Effect; But if an infinite
Number of Causes must preceed the next Cause, that next Cause would never
exist, for there is no end to Infinity, and then it would follow, that
therefore nothing now exists, which is absurd, and then 2dly That which is
infinite would be rendered more, inasmuch as to the supposed infinity of Causes
we see daily new ones added, and thus there would be an infinite which was not
Infinite, which is absurd; and further 3dly That order of prior and posterior
which is in succession would be destitute of a first, from which all Flux or
Motion in its own Nature exists; where there is not a first there cannot be a
second or third, neither can there be a second or third, where there is not a
first; and hence there would be a Succession, which is not a Succession; which
is absurd: Therefore an infinite Succession can by no Means be allowed; neither
can it be admitted without the greatest Absurdity, that a Creature can produce
it self for the Reasons aforesaid. If an Atheist should object and say, that
according to our Opinion God is of himself, we answer, it is true, He is of
himself, yet he has not produced himself, He is of himself negatively, inasmuch
as he is produced by no other; but he is not of himself positively, so as to
produce himself; and if the aforesaid Circulation of Causes were admitted, then
the same Creature would indirectly and mediately produce himself, inasmuch as A
by B, C, and D, would be the Cause of himself. If the Atheist against the
aforesaid Reasonings objects, that we do not see the Sun, Moon, and Stars to be
produced by others, to this it may be replied, that although we perceive not by
our Senses that those have been produced, nevertheless by reason we may
certainly infer this, and that from the following Topic, viz. We observe all
these Things to be finite, and seeing that nothing can limit itself and its own
Perfection, it is necessary that it should derive its Being and Limitations
therein from another. But more particularly, A

2d. Argument to prove the Being of God is this, viz. The World is created,
therefore God exists: Here we suppose what no Atheist will deny, viz. That the
World exists, well then this World that now exists has either produced itself,
or has been from Eternity, not produced or is produced by another, and that
either of somewhat pre-existing, or of Nothing: If the latter holds, it is
created, for Creation is but a Production of Something out of Nothing. Now to
enforce this Argument let us briefly consider its Parts, and 1. that the World
did not produce it self appears from what has been before observed: For then it
would be and not be at the same Time, which is impossible from the Nature of
Things. And 2dly that it did not exist from Eternity, the following Particulars
demonstrate

1st. Eternity is an Infinity, which a finite World is incapable of: If the
Atheist affirms the World to be infinite, he may be easily confuted from the
Parts of the World, which are either infinite or finite; if they be said to be
infinite, then there are many Infinites and by Consequece none, which is
absurd; each Part would have all the Perfection of the Parts joined with it, or
not: If yea, then they would not be different, but one and the same, which our
Eyes beholding the Parts of the World prove to be false, if nay, then it would
not be infinite, but finite, and if the Parts of the World, be finite how can
it self be infinite, can finite Causes produce an infinite Effect? No surely!
that is contrary to the Nature and Reason of Things.

2. If the World existed from Eternity, then an infinite Number of Years, which
Eternity implies, must necessarily have preceeded this Day, and seeing that
Number could never have been complete, by consequence this Day could never
succeed, but we see it does succeed; And

3. From the Supposition of the Worlds Eternity it would follow, that something
can be added to what is infinite, and therefore that there is an infinite which
is not infinite, which is Ridiculous! For is not Eternity an infinite Duration,
and yet according to the aforesaid Hypothesis, Years, Months and Days are added
to it; from which it follows, that infinite can be more than infinite, inasmuch
as the World which was before one Thousand Years agone infinite in Duration, is
now older, therefore it cannot be that the World should exist from Eternity.

4. The Corruptibility of the Parts of the World, proves that it is not
eternal, for what exists externally exists of it self, and so exists
necessarily, and thus is not liable to Corruption. That which borrows its Being
of no other needs not and so depends not upon any other for the Continuation of
its existence, for that no other can destroy. But we see the Case is
contrariwise with the Parts of the World, and therefore it is not eternal. It
must necessarily be acknowledged says Lucretius, that the World had a
Beginning, otherwise those Things which are in their own Nature corruptible,
had never been able from all Eternity, to have held out against those forcible
and violent Assaults, which in an infinite Duration must have happened. I add,
without the superintendance of an Almighty Being.

5. If the World was eternal, How comes it to pass, says Lucretius, that the
Poets speak of nothing before the Trojan and Theban Wars? Was there nothing
memorable done in infinite Ages worthy to communicated to Posterity, or could
they find no Ways in that vast Space, to effect this till of late? How
improbable are these Things? It is certain that diverse profitable Inventions
have been of late Years found out, such as Printing, the Gun, the Virtue of the
Loadstone, and diverse other Particulars; what should be the Reason that no
Genius in infinite Ages should luckily hit upon these before, if the World was
Eternal? Had not Men the same Incitements to seek after such Inventions before
as now? And to say that Men of late Ages have more Wit than a supposed infinite
Number of Predecessors, is too great and groundless a Compliment upon the
present Generation, and some few that have preceeded it. But a

3d. Argument is this, The World is preserved to this Day, therefore God
exists: For what is the Conservation of the World, but a continued Creation?
with this Difference only, that the one includes a newness of existing, which
the other excludes. If the Atheist should deny that the World is preserved, and
say, that it endures only, as we say our God endures, without another Support:
In answer to which we say, that it endures indeed but by Preservation, and that
because it was produced by another, as has been before proved: And therefore
the Difference between the Duration of God and the World is very vast; God is
simply of himself, and therefore the First, and so an independent Being, who
needs not, and cannot receive Support from any other: Whereas the World is from
another, and therefore must be preserved by him to whom it owes its Original.
The World must be either preserved by it self or by another; not by it self,
that which could not give to it self a Being, cannot preserve the Being it has
received from another; and therefore it must be preserved by another, and who
can this other be, but he who gave it its Existence? But if it was any other
Thing that without doubt would be a Part of the World, and thus a Part would
preserve the whole which is absurd!

Surely that which preserves a Part must needs preserve the whole; moreover
seeing there are in the World diverse Parts which are not only of a different
kind, but contrary to each other, such as Fire and Water, etc. which do contend
against one another with all their Strength, what could keep them from
destroying each other, but the Power of their Almighty Former? A

4th. Argument for the Existence of a God may be drawn from the Government of
the World. Here we presuppose what no Atheist will deny, viz. that the World
consists of various Parts, not only different but contrary, and many of them
irrational, which nevertheless harmoniously concur to promote their own
particular Perfection, and the general Good of the whole Universe, and that
without their Design, and contrary to their Nature, of Necessity therefore they
must needs be governed, either by themselves or another, not by themselves, for
many of them want Reason and cannot be their own Guides, therefore it must be
by another, and who is he that is fit for such a spacious and important
Province, but an omnipresent, omnicient, omnipotent and infinitely wise Being?
When we behold the various Wheels of a Watch mutually helping on one Design, by
their contrary Motions which they know not, we presently conclude, that some
Workman has been there, and has formed the Wheels and adjusted them to their
proper Distances, and by a Spring has put the Whole in Motion. If an Atheist
should say, that the former Order results from the peculiar Nature of the
Parts, we may easily reply and say, but from whence is that Nature, Wisdom and
Order? When we behold the Harmony and Subserviency of the several Parts of the
Creation to each other, we may justly use the Psalmist's Exclamation, and say,
How manifold are thy Works O God, in Wisdom have thou made them all! The Sun
enlightens and warms the Earth, which else would be but a melancholy and barren
Place. The pregnant Clouds shed their balmy Dews and gentle Drops, which
prepare the Earth to produce its Fruits, which would be marred if the Water
descended from the Clouds in Torrents, which it naturally tends to! And what
less than Omnipotence, can support those vast Cisterns of Water, I mean the
Clouds, without any Stronger Prop than the thin Air? Surely if they were left
to their natural Gravity only, they would soon innundate the World with a
second Deluge! Dr. Bates observes respecting the Situation of the Sun, That if
it was nearer the Earth it would scorch its Surface by too near an Approach,
and if farther off, it would be oppressed by such a multiplicity of cold moist
Vapors as would obstruct its Fruitfulness. Its also observable, that the Sun
by its exhaling Virtue, supplies from the Sea and moist Places of the Earth the
empty Bottles of the visible Heavens, that thus by this constant Circulation,
the Earth being refreshed, the Meads may laugh, the Fields be adorned with a
grateful Verdure; and indeed the Winds are no less remarkable for their
manifold Usefulness, in carrying the ponderous Clouds to their Places, Vessels
to their Ports, and in refreshing the Earth and the various Animals that live
on its Surface, this serves as a Fan to assuage the summers sultry Heat!

And does not the natural Instinct of acting in a different Manner, which we
behold in various Animals, give further Light and Force to this Argument? e. g.
The more fierce and formidable, such as the Lion, Bear, etc. who could easily
devour Men, fly from them, and inhabit Desert Places of their own accord, while
the more useful Animals such as the Horse, the Ox, etc. being ignorant of their
Strength to resist, are tame and easily submit themselves to the Rule of weaker
Men. With what surprising Sagacity does the Bird build her Nest, the Spider
frame its Web, the Be form its numerous Repositories to receive and preserve
the Sweets which with much Diligence he extracts from the opening Flowers? With
what prudent careful Providence, does the Ant lay up her Winter-Store before
its approach? And likewise the Squirrels, and yet these Creatures act without
Reason or Design, must it not then necessarily follow, that there is a divine
Government.

But methinks it still illustrates this Argument, when we consider that the
Wants of all Creatures are supplied: Creatures can no more provide for
themselves than they could make themselves, and who is equal to this Task, but
an all sufficient infinite Being? If there was no Providence, how could this be
effected? And can there be a Providence without a God? Is it not owing to this
all governing Providence, that the weakest Schemes are sometimes crowned with
Success, and the best concerted prove abortive? Is not the Wisdom of the Wise
sometimes destroyed, and the Understanding of the Prudent brought to naught?
Surely the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong! Surely
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South;
but God is the Judge, he puts down one and sets up another!

How amazing is the Conduct of Providence, in implanting in all Animals,
rational and irrational, a natural Care for the Provision of their Young Ones,
which even the most Savage sort do surprisingly manifest? and do they not
generally bring forth their Young in the Spring? A Season when they are most
likely to be provided with Food for their Support! To what else than a divine
Providence can we ascribe the Provision of the Breast, the Udder with its Milk
for their Sustenation? with their natural Instinct without Instruction, to seek
Nourishment that Way? And it should not be passed over with Silence and
Negligence, that those Things which are absolutely necessary for the Support of
Man's Life are common, and may be attained by the poorer Sort by Labor and
Industry, while curious Dainties, fit for the Support of Luxury, are costly and
beyond their Reach.

Is it the Effect of Chance that some of the Beasts of the Field have Weapons
for their Defense? And that others have a natural Swiftness to fly from Danger,
and that there be Caverns provided for their Security? Is it mere Chance that
the Earth is stored with a variety of Medicines and Man endued with a Capacity
to use them for his Cure?

If the Sea, as some say, be higher than the Earth, what is it that puts
Boundaries to its proud Surges and prevents a second Inundation, but divine
Providence? And what but this keeps the Elements about us, and Humors within
us in a due Temperature? What but this that restrains the Wrath of our Enemies
and preserves us from Ruin? If Hurtful Insects were not destoy'd by each other,
or by the Cold Season of the Year, would not they by their Numbers devour the
Fruits of the Earth and destroy us? Now what can we ascribe this Prevention to,
but a superintendant Providence?

5. Another Argument for the divine Existence may be drawn from the visible
Heavens, which do declare the Glory of God. With what inimitable Pomp and
stately Magnificence does the azure Canopy sparkle forth its various and
amazing Glories! The Motion of the Heavenly Luminaries is so regular and
steady, that an Astronomer may tell for a Hundred Years to come their Eclipses
to a Minute! But from whence does this Order this Law proceed, but from some
infinitely Wise and Almighty Legislator?

6. Another Argument may be derived from both the Parts of the Compound Man. And

1st. From the Body. How curious and beautiful is its Structure? Infinitely
exceeding all Works of Art! Surely we are fearfully and wonderfully made! While
the Brutal Herds have a prone and grovelling Aspect, the Countenance of Man is
erect, to contemplate the Heavens, where his Creator has his chief Seat of
Residence! To signify as it were, where his chief delight should be fixed, and
that he should as much exceed the lower Creation in the nobleness of his
Sentiments and Affections, as he does in the natural form of his Aspect! This
the Poet expresses elegantly, Os homini Sublime dedit, celumq tueri,
Jussit et erectos, ad Sydera tollere vultus.


The surprising variety of Features in the small compass of the Face, where all
the Parts are the same, manifests the infinite Wisdom of the Architect! Without
this we cannot know each other: And thus all the social Offices on which human
Happiness depends, must forever expire and terminate! The rudest Barbarities
and Impieties must ensue, and Men degenerate into a Herd of Beasts!

How excellent are all the Parts of the human Body fitted, by their Form and
Situation for Beauty, and all the Uses designed by an intelligent Mind? The
misplacing of any Part, would make it as Monstrous as Useles! Galen justly
observed, That if a Person studied an hundred Years to place any Part of the
human Body in a different Situation, that it could not be done without marring
its Beauty and Service. But there are some Parts of this Structure, which
especialy challenge our Admiration! The Brain in its mazy Labyrinths, which is
the Seat of the Nerves and spring of Motion, who can enough admire or
sufficiently explain! The Eye with its various Coats, Humors and optic Nerve,
by which our Sight is formed. The Ear, with its Tymponum or Drum, on which the
disturbed Particles of Air vibrate and Cause a diversity of Sounds. The quick
and constant Circulation of the Blood by the Diastole and Systole of the Heart,
through certain large Veins or openings and shuttings of it, Causes Pulsation
and preserves the natural Heat! When this grand Wheel is broken at the Cistern,
the Stomach ceases to digest its Food, the whole Body grows cold and livid, and
all the Offices of Nature fail. How different is that natural Heat which the
Circulation of the Blood promotes from all others? Fire will gradually consume
itself, and all others which only have acquired Heat, will soon grow Cold;
whereas the former is preserved many Years without Wasting the Parts of the
Body; and least the Heart should be over heated by its continual Motion, which
would be prejudicial to the whole frame, to preserve a due Temperature, does
not the Lungs serve as a Fan to cool and refrigerate it?

And do not the Union of the Body with the Soul, a Being of a different Nature,
deserve our Wonder, and manifestly point to an infinitely Wise and Almighty
Being as its Author? And thus I am led to speak of the other Particular before
mentioned, or the other Part of the compound Man, and indeed the most noble,
viz. the Soul, whose excellent Powers and Capacities, if we do attentively
survey, we shall be obliged to conclude, that it is God that has formed the
Spirit of Man within him. How raised and noble a Faculty is the Human Mind,
which can form Ideas of Things above its own Nature? It reflects on Things
past, and this incites either our Pleasure or Regret. It aims at the Prospect
of Things to come, and thus it alarms our Fears or swells our Hopes! It beholds
the Connection between Causes and their Effects, Premises and their Conclusion:
It discerns the moral Beauty and excellency of Virtue and Religion!

The Will, through the Aids of divine Grace, can choose what is Good and refuse
what is Evil. The Soul by its Reasonings evidently appears to be an Immaterial,
and therefore an immortal Substance; for it is impossible from the nature of
Things, that mere Matter, however modified and put in Motion, can produce
rational Reflections: And if so, then it must be formed by an All-wise and
Almighty Being who is God.

The Soul, by Reason of its spiritual and rational Nature, is capable of moral
Government and Religion, it desires after God and indeed can be only Happy in
the Enjoyment of him. And the immense and boundless desires of the Soul
evidently argue the reality of a Supreme Being: All the Enjoyments of Sense, in
their greatest Affluence and Variety, do not satisfy the cravings of our vast
Desires! We still reach after a more immense and adequate Good! Then either
there must be an infinite Being, in whose Embraces we may attain the complete
Happiness we in vain seek elsewhere, or else Nature has done something in vain,
contrary to Aristotle's just Maxim: And thus the most noble Creature of this
lower World would be made in its primitive Constitution more miserable than the
Brute-Creation, which is very absurd.

7. Another Argument to prove the Being of a God, may be the exact
Accomplishment of certain Prophesies concerning future contingent Events: This
the Mind of Man cannot perceive without the Assistance of Divine Revelation:
It Is true we may judge that necessary Causes will produce Effects according to
their Nature, but respecting Arbitrary, we cannot determine. Now that several
such Prophesies have come to pass, the Scriptures assert, which ought to pass
for a credible History, till the Atheist proves the Contrary.

8. The Miraculous Works that have been wrought, prove the Being of a God; for
who but he can give check to the course of Nature, and control it is fixed Laws
and Order? And that such have been wrought is not only evident from the
Scriptures, but Profane Writings. So that he must needs be a Sceptick, and
deny all human Testimony that denies this Fact! But to proceed,

9. The Testimony of Conscience proves the Being of a God. Are not Men
sometimes terrified with the Dread of Punishment, because of those Evils which
no human Eye has seen them Commit, and which no human Law takes cognizance of?
and these uneasinesses they are not able totally to extinguish by all the Arts
of Diversion they can invent! Neither can any worldly Grandeur exempt
therefrom, witness Nero and Caligula. And on the Contrary what a sweet Calm
possesses pious Bosooms in the Way of Duty? which make them fearless of evil
Tidings! add to this, that the universal Consent of all ages gives Testimony to
the divine Existence. Tully and diverse others assert, That there is no Nation
so barbarous but what has acknowledged a Deity. Some indeed were very gross in
their Idolatry, worshipping Leeks and Onions, as Juvenal in his Satyrs observes.
Now although those unhappy Nations were miserably mistaken as to the Object of
Worship, yet their unanimous concurrence in paying divine Adoration to
something, shows their acknowledgment of a Deity.

If it be Objected, That History informs us of some speculative Atheists that
have been, and of some Countries in Africa and America that have no religious
Worship.

Answ. The Number of such who have been recond speculative Atheists has been
very small, besides by the fear they have sometimes discovered, they have
plainly intimated, that they rather wished there was no God, than believed
there was none; and supposing they did, it will not weaken the Argument:
Because some are born Fools will it follow that Reason is not natural to Man?
As to the other Particulars, the Facts are not sufficiently attested, those
that have asserted them have not had familiarity enough with the Indians to
know their Notions of a Deity: But supposing some should so far degenerate into
Brutes, as to lay aside the Use of their Reason in this Point, it cannot
conclude against the Majority who act rationally, and argue from the Principles
of Reason they are endowed with, the Existence of a Deity!

If it be objected, that God is not because he is not seen.

Answ. This is sordid: Then the Soul is not, because it is not seen, and thus
these Men are Brutes in their own Account.

If it be again objected, That the Wicked are prosperous and the Righteous
afflicted.

Answ. What then, is not God a Sovereign, may not he do what he will with his
own? But if it be further considered, that outward Prosperity does not prevent
inward Terror, and that good Men are made better by Afflictions, that divine
Joy is consistent with them, and that there will be a future Judgment, the
Objection evanishes.

But some do further Object, That the Notion of a God is a piece of State
Policy, invented for the Benefit of Civil Government, propagated by Tradition,
and supported by Fear.

Ans. But who was the Man, or set of Men, that invented this, and when and
where did they live? Or when was the World without all Belief of a Deity? Here
the Atheist is nonplust! If the great Men of the Earth had invented the Notion
of a God, is it reasonable to suppose that they themselves would be subject to
the Terrors of it, as others have been? And if the Belief of a God was a human
Invention, how comes it to be so universally received, and that without the
Methods of Force? And why was the Imposture never discovered in so long a Tract
of Time?

It is likewise unreasonable to suppose that the Belief of a Deity has been
propagated only by Tradition, for it is bottomed on the highest Reason, has
universally obtained, and continued in all the Changes of Time and Revolutions
of Nations; whereas Notions received with implicit Faith by Tradition, are not
grounded on Reason; are not universally received, but liable to change and
mutation!

It Is likewise equally absurd to suppose, that the Fear of Punishment should
give rise to the Belief of a Deity: For why should Men be afraid of Punishment
for secret-Crimes, if there was no God to punish? Surely their Fear supposes a
God, and is the Effect of this Persuasion. And how then can the Effect produce
its Cause? Not to add that the primary Notion we have of God is, that he is a
good and lovely Being. The fearful Apprehensions of his Vengeance are but
secondary and the Fruit of Guilt,

What has been observed shows us the folly of Atheism, both Speculative and
Practical! But this appears more particularly in the instances following; how
ridiculous is the Epicurian Account of the Original of the World, viz. That
this beautiful Structure should spring from the fortuitous Concourse of Atoms
in an immense Space! It is as likely, as Tully observes, That all the Materials
of a magnificent Edifice should of their own accord meet and unite together.
How long (says a learned Man) might a Person jumble a set of Letters together,
or fling them on the Ground, before they would fall into an exact Poem; yea or
so much as make a good Discourse in Prose? The speculative Atheist likewise
shows his folly in requiring upon the one side, more evidence for Things than
they are capable of! He asks mathematical Demonstration in moral and religious
Matters, which can only be proved by moral Arguments and credible Testimony;
their Nature admiting no other kind of Proof: But on the other side he labors
to believe by implicit Faith, against Reason and Argument, that the Belief of a
God has been only propogated by Tradition, but cannot Account for his Notion.

Again the Atheist's folly appears in this, That he pretends to know certainly
what no Man can be certain of, viz. that there is no God. If he is not certain,
how foolish is it to deny and despise such a Being as God is! But how from the
nature of Things can a Man be certain of a mere Negative, unless it implies a
Contradiction, which the Being of a God does not. To profess certainty here, is
in other Words, to pretend to the Knowledge of all Things that are or can be;
which is foolishly arrogant with a Witness.

Further, there is this great Contradiction in the denial of a God, viz. He
asserts that to be impossible which yet he must grant to be possible. For if
there is no God already, it is impossible now there should be One, because
Eternity is essential to the Idea of a God. And yet the Atheist must grant it
possible that there should be such a Being, who has all possible Perfection,
whom we call GOD.

Again, as Atheism deprives a Man of Happiness in the next World, so it robs
him of Comfort in this. For as it is incontestably evident, that Man cannot be
his own Happiness, he cannot satisfy his own Desires or ward off the Evils he
is environed with; so his principal Support amidst the numerous Disquietudes of
Life, is Hopes of Protection and Happiness from this Supreme Being. This
Atheism cuts entirely off, and so shuts up the chiefest Spring of Support and
Sweetness.

Once more, the Atheist shows his folly in contending against the devout Man in
this Instance, upon unequal grounds, for he ventures his everlasting Interests;
whereas the religious Man ventures only the loss of his Lust and some short
lived inconveniences. He is better in all Respects without his Lusts, they are
but a disease which mar the the true Comfort of Life; and as for other
inconveniences, the Peace of his Mind and Expectation of future Happiness will
enable him to comport with them comfortably, so that he is at least upon a par
with the Atheist as to the comforts of this Life: And after Death he is as well
of as the Atheist if there be no God, but if there be a God he is infinitely
better of. If the Arguments for and against the Being of a God were equal, yet
the Danger is so unequal that Prudence would incline us to choose the
Affirmative, and make that the Measure of Life.

I need not Mention how destructive atheistical Principles are to all the
Interests of Society. They open the Floodgates of Injustice and Profaneness
and incite Men to sin without Control! As there are many Evils prejudicial to
Society, which no human Laws can sufficiently provide against. If the
Restraints of Religion be removed, we lie open to a thousand Wrongs and
Insults, especially where the Transgressor has hopes of secresy; and therefore
while the Atheist suggests that the Belief of a God is a Trick of the State, he
implicitly acknowledges, to the Honor of Religion, that it is necessary to the
Government of Mankind. And without Government, Reason will inform us, that the
wildest Barbarities would be committed, and Scenes of Blood and Desolation
opened!

But is not the practical Atheist still a greater Fool than the Speculative, if
possible, who pretends to believe a God and yet lives as if there was none!
Such Persons bid defiance to Reason and Conscience in Matters of the greatest
Consequence. By their Lives they labor to confute their Faith, and rush into
Damnation with their Eyes open!

Let us therefore Brethren be entreated to labor to get a more full Persuasion
and deep Sense of the Existence of a God upon our Minds, and of the Account
which we must quickly render to him of our present Stewardship. To this End let
us think on the Arguments that have been offered. Let us oppose the Temptations
of Satan to the contrary. Let us behold these three great Leaves of the Volumn
of Creation, viz. the Heavens, Earth and Sea with their Contents, and consider,
their immensity and admirable Structure!

Let us look into the sacred Oracles, every Page of which proclaims a God, by
reading of which Junius was convinced of his Atheism. Let us look up to God by
Prayer. Let us carefully avoid whatsoever tends to Atheism. Among others, let
us avoid these evil Principles, 1st. That a Man may be saved in his Religion be
it what it will: This the Apostle speaks against Ephesians. iv. 14, 15. That we be
not henceforth ^ossed about with every Wind of Doctrine, and the Prophet Micah
iv. 5. And 2dly. That the divine Providence does not watch over every Thing,
yea even the most minute, and especially all the Actions of Men, punishing the
Evil and rewarding the Good. And 3dly. That the Soul is not immortal.

And as we should avoid corrupt Principles, so likewise evil Practices, which
tend to blind the Mind and harden the Heart and provoke the Almighty to give up
Persons to be deluded by the Devil: The Law of Sin, which is strengthened by the
Practice of it, inclines Persons to hate the Law of God, and by Consequence the
Lawgiver, and hence they are inclined to question, dispute and deny his Being,
from all which may the good Lord deliver us all. Amen.

SERMON V.
EXODUS, iii. 13, 14. And Moses said unto God, behold, when I come unto the
Children of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your Fathers has sent
me unto you; and they shall say to me, what is his Name? What shall I say unto
them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: And he said, thus shall thou say unto
the Children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you.


IN these Words, we have in Account of three Things, 1. Moses's undertaking an
Embassy to Egypt: Behold when I come unto the Children of Israel, and shall say
unto them, the God of Your Fathers has sent me unto you. Though Moses was
sensible, of his unworthiness of the Honor of such an Embassy, and of his
inequality to the Task: He was well aware that he was not, Par negotio, yet
being called of God, he ventures, and well he might, modest Beginnings are good
Presages.

2dly. We have an Account of a Difficulty that Moses starts, namely this, and
they shall say to me what is his Name? They will enquire, either from Unbelief
to pose me, they will be scrupulous, and apt to cavil, and bid me produce my
Commission; or they will enquire out of carnal Curiosity, respecting the Divine
Essence, for a Name that may represent it, or they will enquire for
Information, doubtless they are grown ignorant by their hard Bondage, want of
Teachers, and loss of Sabaoths, and need to be told the first Principles of
Religion. Now Moses was anxious to know what he should answer. All that
undertake any important Task, should consider the Difficulties before Hand, and
endeavor to get suitable Instruction to manage in them. Thus did Moses. But

3dly. We have an Account in our Text, of the Removal of this Difficulty; and
God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM; and he said, thus shall thou say unto the
Children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you. This explains his Name Jehovah,
and signifies 1. That God is incomprehensible. Hereby bold and curious
Enquiry's after God's Being and essential Name are censured. And in effect God
says, ask not after my Name, seeing it is wonderful, Jud. xiii. Do we ask
what is God? Let it suffice us to know, that he is what he is, what he ever
was, and ever will be, That he is faithful and true to all his Promises, and
not a Man that he should lie. But 2. The aforesaid Name signifies, that God is
Self existing and independent, he has his Being of himself, and has no
Dependence upon any other. This the best of Creatures cannot ascribe to itself,
for it is by Grace that it is, what it is. 3. God's Eternity is also hereby
signified, for the Words may be thus translated I shall be what I AM, and
indeed God's Eternity follows necessarily from his Self-existence. He that has
borrowed his Being from no other can never cease to be; for what is able to
destroy his Existence? And 4. The Immutability of God, is also signified by the
aforesaid Words, I AM, THAT I AM. I shall be what I am; I shall be, what I
shall be, or I am what I shall be. God is the same Yesterday to Day and for
ever. In discoursing upon this Subject, I shall first speak of the Names of
God, And,

II. Of the particular Attributes, which are signified by that Name assumed by
the Almighty in our Text. And,

1. I am to consider the Names of God. It is by the Names and Attributes of
God, that we come to an imperfect Knowledge of his Essence or Being, indeed the
Design of Names, is to give us some Idea of the Things they are imposed upon,
they declare their Natures and peculiar Property's, whereby they differ from
others, which may be more justly applied to the Names of God than to any other,
because they have been devised not by ignorant Creatures, but by an infinitely
wise God, who only knows himself perfectly.

It is true, the Essence of God being incomprehensible, cannot be fully
represented by any Name, and hence is Solomon's Query, Prove. xxx. 4. What is
his Name, and what is his Sons Name if thou can tell?

And inasmuch as God is a most singular Being, by his Nature most distinct from
all others; therefore he needs not an appelative Name, whereby Species in the
same Kind are distinguished; or a Proper Name, by which individuals of the same
Species are distinguished. Nevertheless in Love and Condescension to our
Weakness, he is pleased to ascribe Names to himself, that so we may be the
better enabled to distinguish him from Creatures and false Gods, and attain
clearer Notions of his Being and Perfections.

Now the Name of God in Scripture, Sometimes signifies 1. Himself, ( Ps. v.
11.) 2. sometimes all that respects God, e. g. his Attributes, (Ex. xv. 3.) his
Commands, (Deuteronomy. xviii. 19.) his Worship, (Act. xxi. 13.) yea CHRIST himself,
who does not only carry the Name of God in him, but brings us to the Knowledge
of God the Father, (Ex. xxiii. 19. John v. 24.) but 3. It more properly denotes
those Words, by which the Essence of God, or something like it is represented.

Farther the Names of God, are either Essential or Personal. The Essential are
such as these, Jehovah, Theos: The personal Elohim, Father, Son, Spirit. Again
the essential Names of God are either proper or figurative; the latter are
ascribed to God, either metonimically, thus he is said to be our Help, Light,
Strength, or metaphorically, when he is called our Sun and Shield.

The only proper and incommunicable Name of God is Jehovah, by this he will be
known to all Generations, and the Glory of this, he will not give to any
Creature, the Meaning of which has been before explained, in speaking upon the
Words I AM.

The Name Elohim is plural, from which some argue a Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead. Some think it is compounded of Words, that signify Strong, and has
swore because God having made Men by his Strength, binds them to his Worship as
it were by an Oath.

The most usual Name of God, in the New Testament is Theos, which is said to
refer to Elohim in the Old, and to express its Meaning. This Word is derived of
Verbs, which signify to behold and dispose, because God beholds and disposes of
all Things according to his own good Pleasure.

Here it may be observed, that all the Names of God, besides Jehovah, though in
strict propriety, they belong to the Almighty only, yet improperly, and by way
of Analogy or Resemblance, they are ascribed to Creatures.

What has been said upon this Head may excite us to beware of profaning the
Names of God either in our Hearts by Ignorance, or Forgetfulness, or by our
Lips by a rash and irreverent use of them, or by our Lives through impiety. The
great God, has said, that he will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in
vain! Those that name the Name of God, ought to depart from all Iniquity.

On the contrary, we should declare and profess God's Name call, upon it, fear
and reverence it, and confide in it. Acts ix. 14. 2 Timothy ii. 19. Joel ii. 32.
Pro. xviii. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous run to it
and are safe!

But I proceed to the 2d. general Head, which was to discourse, upon those
particular Attributes of God, which are signified by the Name I AM or Jehovah.
Here more generally it may be observed, that the Attributes of God are so
called, because we ascribe them to him! They are the essential Property's of
God, by which we attain some Knowledge of his Being: or in other Words, they
are that one infinite Perfection of God, which through the Weakness and
Finiteness of our Understandings, we conceive by various Acts, as it were by
Parts, just as when we would see the whole Horizon, which is but one, we use
various Acts of seeing, looking to the East, West, North, South, until we see
the whole! All the divine Attributes are in God, but one pure and simple Act.
It is impossible that that Being, who is absolutely the first, should be
composed of different Things for this would suppose a Composer prior to the
First, which is impossible! Neither can an infinite Being consist of different
Things: For these Things must be either infinite or finite. Many infinites
imply a Contradiction, neither can many finite Causes produce an infinite
Effect: Neither can an immutable and incorruptible Being consist of different
Things, for where one Thing is compounded with another it may be separated from
it, and thus Change and Corruption would ensue!

Some Divines do distinguish the Attributes of God, into those that are
communicable and incommunicable. The communicable Attributes of God are such as
we find some Shadow of in intelligent Beings; of this Kind, are his Holiness,
Justice, Goodness, Truth. We find something like these in Creatures, though with
vast Disproportion! in God they are infinitely, but in Creatures in a limited
and finite Manner.

But the incommunicable Attributes of God, are such as we find no Shadow of in
Creatures. Of this Kind are his Independency, Eternity, Immutability and
Incomprehensibility. These show how infinitely distant God is from all
Creatures in respect of Dignity and Excellency, and how he is opposed to every
Imperfection in them.

Now to assist our Conception of the divine Attributes, these Things following
may be observed.

1. That seeing all the Attributes of God constitute but one simple Act, as has
been before observed, therefore no Degrees of Inequality are to be admitted
among them, inwardly, and on God's Part, all and singular of them import
infinite Perfection, which admits not of more or less, notwithstanding it may
be, that outwardly one Attribute may extend itself to more Objects than
another, in which Sense the Understanding may be said to be greater than the
Will. Or it may act with more Intenseness upon one Object than another, in
which Sense God loves the Elect more than the Reprobate. And,

2. Much less can any Contrariety be admitted among them, if any such Thing
seems to appear between Mercy and vindicative Justice, this is altogether in
the Object, about which the uniform Perfection of God, because of its own
Infinity, is occupied various Ways, or it is to be ascribed to our different
Ways of conceiving of the divine Perfection. And,

3. When we think upon the Divine Attributes we must remove far from them, all
that Imperfection, which cleaves to such like Properties in Creatures, and
conceive that the remaining Perfection is attended with the highest Eminence in
God.

4. All the divine Attributes do truly belong to God, he is not only in respect
of our Thought, but in Regard of the Condition of his own Nature, wise, good,
just. And they belong to him not in the concrete only as they do to Creatures,
but in the Abstract. He is not only wise, just, good, but Wisdom, Justice,
Goodness. In Creatures they are secondarily, by way of Quality superaded to
their Being, but in him they are primarily without Derivation, and therefore
his very Being it self. But here, before I proceed to a more particular
Consideration of the divine Attributes, I shall offer a Word of Improvement,
from what has been said.

Methinks the general Theory of divine Perfections serves to strengthen our
Faith exceedingly, in respect of the Trinity: Seeing that the incommunicable
Attributes of God which coinceede with the divine Essence, are not only
ascribed to the Father, but to the Son and Holy Spirit.

And with what Firmness and Freedom may we trust in God, and approach to his
Throne of Grace seeing there is such a Concourse of Perfections in him, viz. of
Wisdom, Power, Goodness, etc. of which every one is infinite, eternal, and
immutable!

What powerful Incitements do the divine Attributes Minister to our Praise,
Reverence, and Obedience, of and to the Sacred Trinity? And how happy is that
People who have such a great and glorious God for their Portion and
Inheritance? Well might the Psalmist say, Blessed is that People whose God is
the Lord, Psalm. xxxiii. 12. When God is ours then all his Attributes are ours,
and engaged to promote our Benefit ( Romans viii. 31.) And his immutability
assures us, that he will remain ours to all Eternity, ( Mal. iii. 6.) His Truth
is inviolable, and therefore we may with unshaken Confidence, rest on his
Promises, which cannot fail! His Love and Goodness may calm us in all
Adversity, because they will cause it to issue in our Benefit. His Wisdom and
Power enable him to do for us all that we need, and his Mercy inclines him to
forgive our Sins, and to exert the other Attributes of his Nature in our Behalf.

But I proceed to a more particular Consideration, of these Attributes of God
which are signified by the Name I AM, the first of which is his
Incomprehensibility.

The Essence of God as it is in itself, is inaccessible to our Understandings.
The Israelites enquire of Moses, and Moses of God, Concerning a Name which
might represent his Essence, and while the Almighty answers, I AM THAT I AM,
reproving the Folly of the Question, what does it signify, but that his Essence
is incomprehensible, and therefore inexpressible! The same Thing which Zophar
teaches his Friend, in plainer Terms. Job. xi. 7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching
find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection? It is as high
as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper than Hell, what can thou know? The
Measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea! And hence
he is said to dwell in Light inaccessible, which no Mortal Eye has seen nor
can see. 1 Timothy vi. 16. neither with the Eyes of the Body, or of the Mind; and
hence he is called the invisible God, 1 Timothy i. 17. Therefore the Almighty
denied to Moses a Sight of his Face, while in the mean Time he showed him his
back Parts. By all our Contemplations we rather know what the Essence of God is
not than what it is. Now the Reasons of the Point under our present
Consideration, are these following, viz. 1. The Being of God is infinite and
therefore cannot be comprehended by a finite Mind. 2. The Divine Essence is a
most pure and simple Act, void of all Composition, and therefore cannot be
positively conceived of; and hence the Apostle calls Jehovah, not a Substance
shining in the Concrete, but Light in the Abstract; and therefore he is not,
nor cannot be seen. 3. The Being of God is most simply one, by which it is so
different from all Creatures, that it agrees with them in nothing; and
therefore no Idea of the divine Essence can be borrowed from them. And how then
can a proper Definition thereof be formed by us.

But it may be objected against what has been said under this Head, that the
Scriptures informs us, that God has been seen by many of the Saints,
particularly by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Isaiah, and others, Job was
persuaded that with the same Eyes he should see God, and the Apostle Paul
informs us, 1 Cor. xiii. 12. that here we see darkly, but then, meaning in
Heaven, we shall see Face to Face. The aforesaid Places are to be understood
either of a symbolical Vision, not of the Essence, but of the Operations of
God, under certain Signs, or of the more perfect Knowledge of God, which will
be attained in the Paradise of God; which in its Perfection shall imitate Sight
or Knowledge by it, yea exceed it; but they do not infer the Vision of his
Essence.

But that the Meaning of what has been offered, may be the better understood;
it is to be observed that our Discourse is not concerning God, but the Essence
of God as it is conceived distinct from his Attributes, or as it is conceived,
as something subtracted or as the first Being, which the Attributes perfect.
And 2. our Discourse is not concerning the Essence of God that it is, for that
is many Ways evident; but what it is in itself, and not in the Attributes. This
our Minds can have no apprehensive or comprehensive Knowledge of, for the
Reasons before mentioned. And indeed in this Respect we cannot know the Essence
of Angels, or of our own Souls?

Is the Divine Essence incomprehensiible, then 1. this should repress carnal
Curiosity which appears in Enquiries about Things too high for us, and
inaccessible to us, and about Things we need not to know for Ostentations sake,
or some other mean End, or in bold Sayings about what we understand not; as for
Example, when Persons say that the Divine Essence is but a Thought as the
Cartesians, such are wise above what is written, 1. This vain Curiosity is
forbidden by God himself, Ex. iii. 4, 5. God called unto Moses and said, draw
not nigh hither. Ex. xix. 21. And the Lord said unto Moses go down charge the
People, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish.
2. It is a Piece of foolish Pride to pretend to grasp Infinity. 3. For looking
into the Ark, Fifty Thousand and Threescore and Ten Men of the Bothshemites
were slain 1 Samuel vi. 19.

2. We should be excited to labor to be modest, while we think or speak about
the Being or Essentials of God, this Modesty should be expressed in the
following Particulars, 1. Before we meditate on those Things, we should implore
the divine Direction and Illumination, according to David's Example, Ps. cxix.
18. Open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous Things out of thy Law. 2.
We should be possessed with pious Fear and Solicitude while we are occupy'd
about such Things, in Imitation of Abram, who spoke to God with the deepest
Reverence, ( Genesis xxxi. 3.) Neither should we speak, without consulting the
divine Oracles, in Imitation of Moses in our Text, they shall say unto me, what
is his Name, and what shall I say unto them? In Imitation of Agure (Prove. xxx.
2, 3.) We should confess, that we are more brutish than any Men, and have not
attained the Knowledge of the Holy! After the Example of the Angels we should
as it were cover our Faces; this Modesty God himself requires, Levit. x. 3. I
will be sanctified in them, that come nigh me. And indeed the Nature of the
Thing demands it, that a poor Worm while he is occupy'd about God and divine
Things, should study Modesty. If Moses out of Reverence to the Place whereon he
stood, because it was holy must pull off his Shoes! How much more than should
we express Reverence for God himself with whom we have to do. And indeed the
Judgments of God that have been inflicted upon those who have treated divine
Things with Irreverence, should excite us to Modesty. But who were these? I
answer, Korah, Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up by the Earth alive, Number.
xvi. 31, 32. Uzzah was struck dead, for touching the Ark 2 Samuel vi. 7. many of
the Bethshemites were slain for looking into it. 1 Samuel vi. 19. And King Uzziah
was smitten with Leprosy, for meddling with the Priests Office in offering
Sacrifice. 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 16.20. It may be some help to our exercising the
aforesaid divine Virtue, if we compare the Majesty of God with our Vileness,
and seriously consider the Infinite distance of God and divine Things, from our
weak Understandings! As also how easy and dangerous it is for us to mistake in
Matters of so great Moment? Job xlii. 7. And it was so that after the Lord had
spoken these Words unto Job, the Lord said unto Eliphaz the Temanite, my Wrath
is kin^ed against thee, and against thy two Friends, for ye have not spoken of
me the Thing that is right, as my Servant Job has.

But I proceed to consider the 2. Attribute of God, which is signified by the
Words I AM, viz. his Self-Existence or Independancy. The Almighty by those
Words, informs Moses that he was absolutely in and of himself, not positively,
as though he had produced himself, but negatively, because his Being and
Perfections were derived of no other; or in other Words, the Almighty by the
aforesaid Expression declares himself, to be absolutely the first Being, and
entirely independent of any other prior Cause, either Efficient by whom he
should be; or material of whom he should be, or formal by whom he should be,
what he is; or final to whom as an End he should be directed. All Creatures
live and move, and have their Beings in and from God, but it is his peculiar
Glory, to derive his Being from none.

From the Firstness, Aseity, Self-Existence, and Independance of the Divine
Essence or Being, naturally and necessarily follows, the Independance of all
his Attributes e.g.

1. His Goodness is independent, he vouchsafes Benefits upon whom, and when he
pleases, his mere Sovereignty alone determines not only the Objects and Time of
conferring his Kindnesses, but also the Kind, Measure and Duration of them. He
has Mercy upon whom he will have Mercy, nothing without himself can influence,
far less constrain him: For this would argue Imperfection and Dependence.

2. His Holiness is independent, he hates Sin, not for any Reasons without
himself, but because of the eternal Contrariety of his Nature thereto.

3. His Power is likewise independent, as he has derived it from none, so he
depends upon none in the Exercise thereof. And therefore cannot be controlled by
Creatures in his providential Proceedings. He does what he pleases in the
Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and who can stay his
Hand, or say to him what do thou?

4. The Wisdom of God is independent, his Wisdom is not in him, as a Quality
added to his Being, as it is in Creatures, but it is himself, he receives not
his Ideas from Objects without himself, as Creatures do, in which respect they
are dependant on them; but the Knowledge of God was infinite, before any
Creature had a Being. Hence the Royal Prophet enquires with Beauty and
Emphasis? Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, with whom took he Council,
and who instructed him in the Path of Judgment? Isa. xl. 13, 14.

The Scriptures give Testimony to the Self-Existence and Independency of God,
Rev. i. 8. I am the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending says the
Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. The same is
repeated in the Book of the Revelations frequently. And Reason also confirms
the aforesaid Truth. Seeing it is absurd to suppose, that any Thing should be
the Cause of itself, for then it must be and not be at the same Time; and
seeing that an infinite Succession of Causes is impossible, for then the next
Cause which produces the Effect, would not subsist, because there is no End to
Infinity: There must of necessity be some first self-existing Being, which we
call God. Now from this Firstness or Self-Existence of God; proceed his Unity,
Immutability, Infinity and Simplicity. And 1. his Unity. What is absolutely the
first Being, must needs be one; for if more such be imagined, neither will be
absolutely the first, because it does not preceed the other. 2. Immutability;
If he is changed, he is changed by another, and that other must be before him,
but what can be before him that is absolutely the First? 3. His Infinity.
Whatsoever is limited, is limited by another, for nothing can limit itself,
and its own Perfection, and that other must be before it, but what can be
before him who is absolutely the first? 4. His Simplicity. Whatsoever is
composed, is composed by one prior to itself; but what can be before the First?
Again the Independance of God, appears evidently from his producing all Things
by his Power. Such Things as he has made must needs depend upon his Power and
Pleasure for their Being and Support, now if they depend on him, how can it be
that he should depend on them? To suppose the Cause and Effect to be mutually
dependant on each other, is to suppose they are mutually derived from each
other, which is impossible! Once more, if God be infinitely above the noblest
Creatures, then he cannot depend on them, for dependence argues inferiority.
Now that God is above all created Beings, is most manifest. The Nations are but
as the Drop of a Bucket, as the small Dust of the Balance, yea as nothing and
less then nothing and Vanity, as the Royal Prophet observes, with noble Pomp of
Diction. Is God independent, then 1st. Hence we may learn the Sin and Folly of
ascribing this divine Attribute to dependant Creatures! On the Contrary let us
conclude that all our Springs are in God, from him all our Blessings flow; he
is the only Source of our Happiness, the Foundation of our Hope, the Author and
finisher of our Faith. And

2dly. Our inability to lay the Almighty under any Obligation by our Services,
seeing he is independent, and so completely Happy in himself, who has first
given to him, says the Apostle Paul and it shall be recompensed to him again!
for of him and through him and to him are all Things. Our Goodness extends not to
him, says the Psalmist, can a Man be profitable unto God, says Eliphaz, as he
that is Wise may be profitable to himself, or is it any gain to him that thou
make thy Ways perfect? Joh xxii. 23.

3dly, We may hence learn the Sinfullness and Danger of opposing God's
Sovereignty, either 1st. Openly by wishing it abolished, ( Psalm. 14. 1, and 10,
4.) Or 2dly interpretatively, when Men in the Business of Predestination,
believe that the Grace of God is suspended upon foreseen Faith and Good Works.
Such Persons do deprive God of his absolute Sovereignty, and ascribe an
Independance to the Creatures Will; and thus they jumble Heaven and Earth
together. Or 3dly practically in the following Instances, 1st. When Persons
limit God, Psa, lxxviii 41. Prescribing to him the Time, Manner, and Means, of
Deliverance, or in a greater or lesser Degree distrust his Word and Power.
Numb. xi. 21, 23. And 2dly, When Persons by Disobedience dispute the divine
Dominion, and struggle with him for Independency, after the example of Pharoh,
( Exo. v. 2.) and other ungodly Persons. ( Job. xxi. 14.) And 3dly, when Men
will not acquiess in the Decrees and Providence of God, but murmur against
him, ( Romans ix. 20.) All those Sorts of Persons, I have now mentioned do
endeavor though in different Degrees and Modes, to destroy the Essence of God,
which consists in absolute Independance, and therefore are Atheists, or at
least partake in an awful degree of Atheism. All such shall find God to be
such, as they would not have him to be, except they repent he shall be to them
a severe Judge, a consuming Fire, as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps. They shall
find him to be such as Pharoh, the Atheist of old, found him. Jer. 16. ult.
Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to
know mine Hand and my might, and they shall know that my Name is the Lord. But,

4thly, From hence we may learn the comfortable State of those who have a
covenant Interest in God. Amidst all the Difficulties of this Present Life, do
they want the Goods of Fortune, Honor, Wealth, Relations? Are they covered
with Reproach, and counted the ofscourings of the World? Do they want the
necessary supports of Life, and are their dear Relations Dead? Do they want the
Goods of the Body, Health, Peace, Liberty? Are are plaug'd with Enemies,
Persecutors, and task Masters? Do they want the Goods of the Mind, viz.
necessary Wisdom, spiritual Light, and Comfort? And do their Enemies sometimes
lead them Captive? What can in such Cases and in all others of the like Nature,
more effectually support and comfort us, then to think, 1st, That God is. By
which Argument the Almighty comforted the Israelites in our Text. And Asaph
himself, Psa. lxxiii. 25.26. Whom have I in Heaven but he? and there is none
upon Earth that I desire besides thee. My Flesh and my Heart fails: But God
is the Strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever.

And 2dly, That God is eminently all being, he is omnicient and perfectly knows
our wants, he is omnipotent, and can easily supply them, in his Hand is Power
and Might. He is infinitely Gracious and Merciful, and so will not finally
forsake his poor People, but is inclined to relieve them. He is All-sufficient,
possessing every Thing that serves to supply his Peoples Necessitys, and remove
their Miseries! He is a Sun and Shield, a hiding Place from the Wind, etc.

And 3dly. That God is not only to himself, but to us All in All, the Author of
our Beings and Fountain of every of our Blessings!

4thly. That he is a Self-Existing, and by consequence an Independent and
Eternal God! whose Help does not depend on Creatures or Instruments, and whose
Love will never change in any vicisitude of Circumstance, or Succession of
Duration. I AM THAT I AM, I shall be THAT I AM. From the aforesaid
Considerations spring sweet Support and Solace in every immergent, in case we
do but close heartily with God in Covenant, by which he may become our God.
Jer. xxxi. 33.

But in the last Place. By what has been before observed, we should be exhorted
to perform the following Duties 1st, We should put our Trust in God, and him
alone, seeing that he is that one I AM, by his Essence, who by his sovereign
and almighty Beck, can command Light to spring out of Darkness, Order out of
Confusion, and call the Things that are not as though they were! Cursed is the
Man that trusts in Man or makes Flesh his Arm, whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, who is crushed before the Moth, who changes with the Wind, and is
lighter than Vanity! The great I AM is only worthy of our entire Confidence,
his Immensity and Almightiness are only equal to our vast Desires: His
Independent Excellency is only worthy of our supreme Love; and his Eternity is
only parallel to our interminable Duration. He, he, will never fail the
believing Expectation of his People! 2dly. Let us deny our Wisdom, Will and
Power, and say with our dear Lord, thy Will be done and not mine: Being always
mindful that God only is independent and the first mover of all. 3dly. Let us
humble ourselves before the great I AM, whose Prerogative it is alone to be
absolutely; in Comparison of whom we poor dependent Worms are not, are nothing,
and less than nothing, as a drop of the Bucket compared with the vast Ocean,
and as a little Dust in the Balance compared with the whole Globe of the Earth!
4. We should receive the Word of God, and Ministers of it, with due Reverence
and Respect. For this End Moses, in our Text, was furnished with Credentials,
go to the People of Israel and tell them, that I AM has sent me unto you.
Those that despise the faithful Ministers of CHRIST, despise through them their
Master, and must expect to meet with their Reward in this or the next Life,
except they Repent! No Employment on Earth is attended with more Difficulty,
and yet more poorly Rewarded in this Life, than the Ministerial Office! Many
think their Tongues are their own, and that they may scourge them with false
Invectives as they list; and many, who seem to make Conscience of their other
Debts, think they are at Liberty to wrong them and rob them of their promised
Maintainace, and act accordingly. But

5thly, and finally. Let us be excited to glorify God on Account of his
Independency, in Heart, Lip and Life. Let us bow before the Sovereign God, and
submit ourselves to his equitable Government and unerring Disposals, with the
greatest Readiness and humblest Reverence! Let us extol Jehovah the absolute
Lord of the whole Universe, with cheerful Acclamations, incessant and
harmonious Hosanna's on the Account of this very venerable Jewel of his Crown!
In this Way we may expect to be owned by the Independent Sovereign of Heaven
and Earth here, and accepted by him hereafter at the grand and important Advent
of the Son of God, when universal Nature dissolving in Agony and Confusion,
shall open the most amazing and tremendous Scene!

SERMON VI.
EXODUS, iii. 14. And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: And he said, thus
shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you.


IN Discoursing on this Text you may remember, that in the preceding Sermon
after an Explication of it and more general Observations upon the divine
Attributes, I proceeded to speak upon two particulars, namely, the
Incomprehensibility and Independency of God, which I apprehended were included
in it. And moreover made mention of two others, which I am now to discourse
upon, viz. the Eternity and Immutability of God. In speaking upon the Eternity
of God, I shall endeavor to explain, confirm and Improve this great Truth. And

1st. The Word Eternity sometimes signifies, a long space of Time that has
both a Beginning and End. Thus he that served to the Year of Jubilee, is said
to serve for ever, Ex. xxi. 6. And so the Ceremonial Laws are said to be
forever, Number. x. 8. 2dly. Sometimes it signifies a Duration, which has a
Beginning but no End. Thus it is with the Angels and our own Souls. And 3dly.
Sometimes it signifies a Duration without Beginning or End, which is applicable
to God only, and distinguished from the other Significations by redoubling of
the Words thus, forever and ever, from everlasting to everlasting.

Various Descriptions are given by different Divines of Eternity. That is
properly Eternal ( says Petavius) which never had a Beginning nor never can
cease to be. Eternity ( say Drexilius, Barlow, and Prideaux) is an ever present
Duration, it is one perpetual Day, which passes not into what is past or
future. That is Eternal ( says Zanchy) which wanting Beginning and Ending is
still the same. Eternity ( says Boethius) is a full and perfect Possession of
interminable or everlasting Life together and at once.

But the most easy and intelligible Description thereof is this, viz. that it
is an imcommunicable Perfection or Property of the Deity, whereby his Duration
is without Beginning, Succession and End.

And 1st. That the Duration of the Almighty was without Beginning, is evident
both from Scripture and Reason, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 27. The eternal God is thy
Refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms! Psalm. xciii. 2. Thy Throne is
established of Old, thou art from Everlasting. And hence the People of God are
said to be chosen before the Foundation of the World. And Reason also confirms
the same Truth, as follows, 1st. If God created all Things in the Beginning of
Time, than he himself was before it, and so by consequence from Eternity. Time
being in its Nature a successive Duration, taking its rise from a certain Point
or Moment, which is termed a Beginning: The Duration which was before it must
be Eternal, unless we suppose Time to begin before it did begin, which is a
Contradiction. But God did create all Things in the Beginning, as both
Scripture and Reason assure us, Ergo.

2dly. The Eternity of God may be inferred from the Perfection of his Nature.
His Duration is Perfect, and therefore Infinite; for to begin to exist is an
Imperfection, on which Account Creatures are said to be but of Yesterday, which
is a diminutive Character. If God was not from Eternity, what he is, he would
not be God, because God is a most perfect Being, i. e. who has all Perfection
which is or can be: Now that which is destitute of Existence, is destitute of
all that Perfection which is in Existence; yea he would be distitute of Essence
also, for Essence and Existence are in God one and the same.

3dly. If God was not from Eternity then Nothing would exist. For if the First
does not exist, a Second or a Third cannot, as appears from the Subordination
of Causes.

4thly. If God was not from Eternity, there was a Time when he was not, and
than he would not be now. For either he must produce himself before he was, and
so be and not be at the same Time, or be produced by another, who by
Consequence must be before the First; both which are equally absurd: For it is
essential to God to be absolutely the first Being and Self-existent.

5thly. Seeing that the Almighty gave Being to all Creatures, which is implied
in their being such, it will necessarily follow, that he could not receive his
Being from them, and so must needs be from Eternity. And

2dly. As the Duration of God is from Eternity, so it is without Succession.
Years and Days cannot properly be ascribed to him, no Times have passed over
him, he enjoys himself in an everlasting now! It cannot be properly said, he
was, but that he is, and hence is his Name I AM. One Day is therefore with him
as a Thousand Years, and a Thousand Years as one Day. There can be no
Succession in the Duration of the Almighty, for the following Reasons,

1st. Because it is Infinite. Now what is Infinite cannot be measured by
successive Parts and Periods, for it has none.

2dly. The Duration of God is unchangeable, and therefore it has no
Succession. This the Psalmist confirms Psalm. cii. 27. Thou art the same and thy
Years shall have no End. Now that which has Succession, is not the same, for
every Moment adds something to it which it had not before.

But 3dly, As the Almighty has no beginning or Succession in Duration, thus he
is likewise without End. Hence it is said, that he lives for ever and ever,
and that his Years shall have no End, Rev. iv. 9, 10. Psa. cii. 27. The
following Arguments tend to establish this Truth, viz.

1st. God is a most simple Being, void of all Composition, and therefore can
never have an End from any necessity of Nature, there being no Tendency
therein, to a Disolution. It is true, compounded Beings because of their
various Parts, are liable to a Disolution, which arises from the contrariety of
those Parts of which they are constituted, which tends to destroy each other,
and so to dissolve the Compound; but the Almighty has no Parts.

2dly. The Self-Existence of God, which has been before proved, shows that as
he could not begin to be, so neither can he cease to be. For as Johovah has
derived his Being from none, so he depends upon none for its continuance. And
seeing all Creatures owe their original to him, he has no equal, much less
superior, who can deprive him of his Existence!

3dly. Neither can the Almighty Desire or Will his own Destruction, for that is
contrary to the Nature and Reason of Things. No wise Being possessed of
complete Happiness, can Will the loss thereof, because Happiness is the proper
Object of desire! Now a Destruction of the Being, would necessarily destroy the
Happiness possessed by it; and therefore it cannot be desired by God. Well
then, if the Almighty cannot cease to be from any necessity of Nature, or by
the Will of another, or by any Act of his own, he must needs exist to Eternity.
And

4thly. Eternity is peculiar to God: Though some Creatures be Everlasting, as
Angels and the Souls of Men, yet they had a Beginning, have Succession in their
Duration, and depend for its Continuance upon the Power and Will of God! and
therefore their Duration is not necessary and independent. Whereas on the
Contrary the Duration of God, as has been observed had no Beginning, has no
Succession, and neither shall have, nor can have an End.

But because Contraries serve to illustrate each other, let me observe somewhat
concerning the Nature of Time: This is as some observe, the measure of the
Creatures Duration. It has no distinct Being of its own, but is an Adjunct or
Quality that belongs to Creatures, which has these three ingredients in it,
namely, 1st. A Beginning; that which once was not, must needs begin to be, if
it exists at all: Thus at the Creation of the World, we read of the Beginning of
Time, which shows that Creatures are the Offspring of it, and measured by it.
Time gives date to their Existence.

2dly. Time has Succession, it is not all at once, but flows by Degrees, it
stands not, but is still in Motion, it consists of diverse Parts or Moments,
which are in a continual Flux, succeeding each other constantly, by these we
calculate the Space or Term of a Creatures Existence.

3dly. Time has also an End or Period, and this is respecting the Creature,
when it ceases to be. The aforesaid Particulars give Room for our
distinguishing Time into that which is past, present, and to come. Time past is
all the Space or Duration, which the Creature has run through from its first
Existence to the present Point or Minute. Time present is the Moment of
Existence, which is now in being. Time to come, is that which remains of the
Creatures appointed Duration, until it expires. Now it is impossible to make
those different Periods of Time to subsist at once. Whereas on the contrary
Eternity, as has been observed, is a perpetual Now, having no Beginning,
Succession or End.

That we may have some Idea of the Eternity of God, it will not be improper to
represent to ourselves, certain temporal Spaces, and by those to compass the
divine Duration, as we cannot conceive of the divine Immensity or Omnipresence,
without the Spaces of Place, so neither can we conceive of his Eternity without
the Spaces of Time, but we should be cautious in the mean Time, that we do not
conceive these different Spaces to be real Beings, otherwise we shall conceive
of many Eternals. And 2dly. That as in the Spaces of Place, we admit not of
Extention, or of the Dimensions of Length and Breadth, so in the Spaces of
Time, we admit not of Succession, or a Flux of Moments.

The Schoolmen truly describe Eternity, to be an interminable, indivisible, and
independent Duration. It is interminable, because it wants Beginning and End.
Indivisible, because it has no Succession of Moments. Independent, because it
has no Imperfection or Change, nor any Possibility thereof.

It is certain that the Almighty exists with all the Periods of Time, viz.
past, present and future, immovable and unmoved, which the Ancients did in
some sort shadow forth by a Circle, whose Center remained unmoved,
notwithstanding of various Agitations in the Circumference. And the following
Similitude may be used to the same End, viz. Of a Man sitting by the Bank of a
River, he sees only the Water that is present, not that which is past, or that
which is to come, but when he is lifted up on high, he sees the whole River in
its Spring, and Course, and Outlet, and it is present with him. Hence it
appears, that in God there is nothing past, present, or to come, for these are
but the Aspects of Time, upon Creatures. Eternity admits of no Divisions, all
Things are present before God at once. Things move in respect of themselves,
but not in respect of God: He sees them all at once, both past, present and to
come. And though he is before, and in, and after all Time, for he has made it,
yet it causes no Alteration in him, because he is no Subject of Time, and has
no Dependence upon it. And for this Reason God cannot wax old, Time has no
Relation to him, it cannot be the Measure of his Existence, because it is
Eternal. And therefore when in Scripture, he is called the Ancient of Days, it
is only after the Manner of Men, to suit the Weakness of our Conception, which
cannot form an Idea of Eternity, but under the Notion of an Infinite Space of
Time.

But the noblest Creatures, even the Angels, had a Beginning, once they were
not. They have likewise a Succession, being finite, they cannot possibly
possess an Eternal now: And therefore their Duration must be progressive. And
though they have no Tendency to Mortality in their Natures, yet are they
dependant on their Creators Pleasure, who can speak them to nothing by the Word
of his Power in a Moment. But an Objection may be offered against what has been
before asserted, namely this, is not the Creation of the World past, with God,
when he made it in Six Days. Ans. God's Acts are Twofold. 1st. Immanent
terminated in himself. ( Ephesians. i. 9.) Those have no Succession, the Almighty
did not devise one Thing after another. 2dly Transient, in and upon the
Creature, such as Creation, Providence, Vocation, etc. And here we must
distinguish between the Act it self, and the Work produced by it. Gods Act in
creating is the Act of his Will, that such a Creature should exist in Time, but
if we consider the Work itself produced, so the Creatures have a Being one
after another.

Is God Eternal? Then this shows, 1st. The Vanity and Frailty of all Creatures,
who are different from God, they are the Offspring of Time, but he is the
Father of Eternity. They are of Yesterday and may soon cease to be, but He, and
He only, is from Everlasting to Everlasting! What if they should subsist a
Thousand Years, this Space compared with Eternity is but as a Day, nay not so
much, for between a Thousand Years and a Day, there is some Proportion, but
between a Thousand Years and Eternity there is none! Yea if we consider the
Duration of Creatures absolutely, without respect to Eternity, seeing it
consists of a continual Succession, they subsist but for a Moment: For the Time
past ceases to be, and the Time to come has not begun to be, and what then
remains, but the present Moment? How foolish is it therefore, for such as we
are to be Proud, or to promise our selves any thing stable, any durable
Satisfaction, from any fleeting Creature Enjoyment, whether of of Honor,
Profit or Pleasure? And how vain to set our Hearts upon that which is not? And
on the Contrary how prudent is it for us to fix our supreme Love upon an
Eternal God, and him alone, that he may be our Habitation in all Generations?
And,

2dly. This Subject affords great Comfort to all that are truly Religious,
amidst all the Sorrows that spring from the fluctuating and uncertain State of
Creature Enjoyments. Do our dear Friends and Relations die, and are our Goods
snatched from us by Force or Fraud, or otherwise removed? Well this is our
Comfort, that God lives, that he will remain forever and will never fail. Does
Sin terrify us with its Agravations, Behold the Mercy of God endures for ever,
Psalm. ciii. 17. Are we in spiritual Desertion, behold God is Eternal, and his
Love is like himself! Whom he loves, he loves to the End! For a small Moment
have I forsaken thee, but with great Mercy will I gather thee! In a little
Wrath I hid my Face from thee; but with everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy
on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, Isa. live. 7, 8. If under the Terrors of
Death, how sweet is it to meditate on the Eternity of God, who makes Death the
Way to his Peoples enjoying eternal Life! And whatever other Difficulty we are
under, how sweet is it to think, that these light Afflictions, which are but
for a Moment, do work for us an exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. In the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting Strength, and from him we shall receive everlasting
Love and Salvation! And surely this is an over Balance for all the Miseries of
Life! But

3dly This Subject opens a Scene of Terror to unbelieving impenitent Sinners!
God's Being is eternal, and so he will ever live to punish you. He is the
living God, the everlasting King, at his Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the
Nations shall not be able to abide his Indignation! Psalm. xc. 11. His Power is
eternal, and thus he will be always able to make you inexpressibly miserable,
his Justice, Holiness, Truth and Wrath, which incline him to exercise his Power
against you, are eternal! Who knows the Power of thine Anger, says the
Psalmist, According to thy Fear so is thy Wrath, xc. 11. It is a fearful Thing
to fall into the Hands of the living or eternal God! Heb. x. 31. Besides Sin,
without a Pardon through a Mediator, is Eternal! The Sinner is likewise Eternal!
The Prison of Hell Eternal! The Fire of Hell kindled by the Breath of God like
a River of Brimstone Eternal! The Punishment of Loss, viz. the Privation of an
infinite Good Eternal! The Punishment of Sense, viz. the Worm of Conscience
Eternal! And all this for the momentary Enjoyment of Sin. Should not all these
Things incline us. to avoid and detest Sin, and likewise to bewail it, and seek
a Remedy in him who has brought in everlasting Righteousness?

In fine, the Eternity of God sweetly invites to glorify God on account of this
divine Perfection, by high Thoughts of God, and humble Acknowledgments of this
adorable Excellency, as well as by earnest seeking of God, and placing our
Happiness in him alone, and not in the fleeting Entertainments of Time. O let
us believe, study, and live to Eternity! 2 Cor. iv. 18. While we look not at
the Things which are seen, but at the Things which are not seen: For the Things
which are seen are Temporal, but the Things which are not seen are Eternal! Let
us most firmly believe the Eternity of the divine Being and Attributes, as well
as of a future State of Rewards and Punishments, which will much influence our
whole Life to Virtue and Goodness! Let us daily spend a little Time in
meditating on Eternity, that we may apprehend somewhat of its awful Nature, and
inexpressible Moment to us, either in our Salvation or Damnation, and finally
let us live to Eternity, let us think of it, speak of it, intend it, and labor
for it, above any Thing else. Let us work, and suffer, and pray for a happy
Eternity. This, this is only worthy of our supreme Affections and vigorous
Pursuits. If we are risen with CHRIST, let us set our Affections on the Things
above.

But I proceed to discourse upon the 4th divine Attribute, which I observed was
included, in the Words I AM, viz. The Immutability of God. In treating upon
which, I shall I. prove this Truth, that God is immutable, II. Explain it. III.
Answer some Objections IV. Improve the Whole. And


1st. The Scripture proves this many Ways, 1st. By removing all Shadow of
Change from God. Jam. i. 17. with whom there is no Change or Shadow of turning.
The Original Words (parallage and tropes aposciasma) here used, are a Metaphor
borrowed from the Sun, which as Astronomers say, has its Paralaxes or various
Aspects. It appears otherways at its rising in the East, from what it does at
its setting in the West, it likewise appears differently at Mid Day, it has
also various Changes, sometimes it shines, and some times its clouded with an
Eclipse. It likewise changes its Place moving from East to West, from one
Tropic to another, sometimes it draws nearer to us, and some Times goes
farther from us, causing a longer Shadow, but the Apostle assures us, that the
uncreated Father of Light has none of these Alterations. And

2dly. Sometimes the Scriptures remove from God those Things that imply a
Change. e. g. Repentance Number. xxiii. 19. God is not a Man that he should lie,
neither the Son of Man that he should repent. 1 Samuel xv. 29. And also the
Strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent, for he is not a Man that he should
repent.

3dly. Sometimes it asserts his immutability expressly, Psalm. cii. 27. But thou
art the same, and thy Years shall have no End. Some of the ancient Fathers have
spoken well upon this Head, particularly these following viz. Proclus in a
Sermon concerning Faith says, That the Deity remains Superior to all
Mutability. Change is a Passion of a fluent Nature, but Immutability is proper
to an Eternal Nature that is always the same. Hillarie in his Book concerning
the Trinity says I think not that God is changeable. Neither Vice, Amendment,
Progress, or Loss, happens to the Eternal, but what he is he always is.
Augustine in the Preface of his fourth Book concerning the Trinity says, that
the divine Essence, has nothing mutable, either in his Eternity, Verity or
Will.

And right Reason likewise gives its suffrage to the immutability of God, as
appears by the following Considerations, viz.

1st. God is a most simple Being, and therefore cannot be changed: For Change,
being an altering Vicissitude, would destroy his Being entirely, when that
which is most simple is changed, nothing remains of what it was before, and
thus it is destroyed entirely. Thus you see, it is Atheism to ascribe Change to
the Almighty.

2dly. God is a most perfect, yea infinitely perfect Being, and therefore
cannot be changed, because to that which is perfect, no Good can be added. If
God be changed, it must be either into a worse or better State, or into a
Condition equal to what he was before. But he cannot be changed into a worse
State, for then he would be imperfect after the Change, and so no God. Nor into
a better, for then he would be imperfect before the Change and so no God. Nor
can he pass into an equal State to what he was before, for this implies an
equal Proportion of Loss and Gain, and thus there would be more infinitely
perfect Beings than one, and so more Gods, which is impossible, and blasphemous
to imagine.

3dly. Seeing the Almighty is absolutely the first Being, he cannot be changed,
for whatsoever is changed, is changed by one prior to itself, but this in
respect of God is impossible, for none can be before the First.

4thly. Seeing the Almighty is incorruptible, he cannot be changed: For what is
a Change of the best Being, else but a Corruption of it?

5thly. God is infinite and therefore cannot be changed by adding any Thing to
him or diminishing any Thing from him; for if he were capable of Addition, he
must be finite before the Change; and if of Diminution, he must be finite after
it, and so neither Ways the true God. For as Infinity is an essential Character
of God, so this is incapable of more or less: For then there would be an
Infinite which was more than Infinite, and so an Infinite which is not
Infinite; which is ridiculous! But I proceed to the

2d. Proposed, which was to explain the Nature of God's Immutability. And here
it may be observed, that God's immutability may be thus described, viz. That it
is an essential Perfection of the divine Nature, whereby the Almighty is
without all possibility of any Kind of Change. In order to explain this
Description, let the following particulars be considered.

1st. That when we call God's immutability a Perfection, we suppose his
Goodness and Excellency, otherwise it would be no Perfection; but the Contrary
to be immutable in Sin and Misery is the highest pitch of both, which is the
doleful Case of damned Angels and damned Souls!

2dly. Immutability, in strict propriety, belongs only to God. Hence it is
said, that he only has Immortality, 1. Tim vi. 16. His immutability is
underiv'd and independent, whereas the immutability of all Creatures is
dependent because derived. It is borrowed from the Power and mere Pleasure of
God, and therefore, its Duration is entirely and perpetually Subject thereto!
The visible Heavens of all inanimate Beings seem to be the most free from
Corruption, and even these are liable to it. Psalm cii. 25.26. Of Old thou thou
have laid the Foundations of the Earth and the Heavens are the Work of thy
Hands, they shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea all of them shall wax old
as a Garment. Yea the most noble Creatures in Heaven it self are subject to
change; the Angels are capable of new Additions to their Happiness, for new
Object may be offered to incite their Praise, and this tends to increase their
Felicity. The Angels doubtless know more now concerning the Mysteries of the
Gospel, than before the Incarnation of our Savior; hence they are said to
know, by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. iii. 10. and to desire to
look into these Things, 1 Pet. i. 11, 12. The Happiness of all Creatures admits
of Degrees, and so of Change, because they are finite: But God is Infinite and
so peculiarly immutable!

3dly. Creatures may be changed two Ways, either 1st. Outwardly, in respect of
Time and Place: Things that are the Offspring of Time, are subject to it and
changed by it outwardly, they grow older: They are likewise changed outwardly
when they move from Place to Place. 2dly. Creature are likewise liable to
change in respect of their Being and Faculties; but the Almighty is capable of
neither of these nor any other Change, as will appear by the following
Induction of particulars. And 1st. The Almighty is not changed in respect of
Place, because he is Immense and Infinite, and cannot be measured by Space. Nor
2dly. In respect of Time, because he is Eternal, and so no subject of Time, as
has been before observed. Nor 3dly. Can the Almighty be changed in respect of
Accidents, because they are not applicable to him, on account of the Simplicity
of his Being. Hence every Thing that is in God is himself, he is true, just,
wise, etc. by his Essence. Neither

4thly. Can the Almighty be changed in respect of his Essence. For this
supposed Change must be either effected by himself or another: not by himself,
because there is no tendency in his Nature to a Change, it being void of all
Composition! Neither can it be reasonably supposed that an infinitely Wise and
perfectly Happy Being would Will a Change in his own Happiness, seeing there is
no Necessity for such a change, were it possible. Neither can another change
the divine Essence, seeing that all are inferior to God; for he that changes
another must be superior to him whom he changes. Nor 5thly. Is the Almighty
changed in his Perfections or Faculties which are indeed in him the same with
his Essence, although in our manner of conceiving of them they are distinguished,
to which God is pleased to accommodate himself in his Word, by assuming to
himself an Understanding, Will, Affections, all which being himself are by
consequence immutable. And

1st. God is Immutable in his Understanding. A Change of Sentiments implies
Weakness; to increase in Knowledge supposes Ignorance, and to decline in
Knowledge is to return to a state of Ignorance, both which are equally
inconsistent with the Perfection of the divine Mind!

The Knowledge of God is not derived from outward Objects, as that of Creatures
is, and so is not dependent on them, and by consequence not altered by their
Changes.

Again, the Knowledge of Creatures is something distinct, from the Faculty
receiving, and so may be increased or diminished: But in God it is himself or
his Being, it is no other than God knowing: And therefore if this were changed,
the Being of God must be changed also, which is impossible.

The sacred Scriptures assure us, that God's Understanding is Infinite, Psalm.
cxlvii. 5. And if so, it must be unchangable, for what is Infinite admits of no
degrees. More it cannot be, for Nothing can be greater than Infinite; nor less,
for than it would not be Infinite. God knows all Things in Eternity in himself
with one glance. Hence he is called the only wise God, 1 Timothy i. 17. and that
all his Works are known to him from the beginning of the World, Act. xv. 18.

2dly. God is unchangeable in his Will, although his Will is free, it is
nevertheless Constant and Eternal. He is in one Mind and who can turn him,
says Job Chap. 23.13. and elsewhere, though there be many devises in Man's
Heart, yet the Council of the Lord that shall stand. Now the Truth of this will
farther appear, if we consider the following Particulars, viz.

1st. If the Will and Purpose of God were changable, than the State of the best
Men would be rendered exceeding precarious and miserable; for then the special
Gifts of God vouchsafed at one Time, might be removed at another, and then the
Condition of the most Devout would be as perilous as that of Rope-Dancers, who
are every Moment in danger of breaking their Necks. But the sacred. Scriptures
assure us, that the Gifts and Calling of God are without Repentance, Romans xi.
29. And

2dly. If the Will of God were not unchangable, than he would neither be the
Object of Trust or Fear; for then, from the mutability of his Nature, both his
Promises and Threats might be reversed, and so the former would not merit our
Confidence, nor the latter our Dread! And thus Hope and Fear, the great Springs
of Religion, would be destroyed.

3dly. Inasmuch as the Will of God is really himself, and is distinguished from
his Essence only in our Conception, (modaly) then if his Will was changed, it
would follow necessarily, that himself was changed, which cannot be, for the
Reasons before mentioned. And,

4thly. Seeing that the Almighty Wills and Purposes with infinite Wisdom and
Council, upon a sure and unalterable Foundation, whatsoever shall come to pass,
it cannot be that his Will should Change. But to make this more Plain and
Evident, let me offer the following induction of Particulars to prove that none
of those Things that induce Men to change their Purposes, can be applied to
God. And,

1st. Sometimes Men are compelled to change their Purposes by the Threats of
Superiors, or by some other measure of coertion: But none is God's equal, much
less his superior, and therefore no constraint can be laid upon him! Isa. xiv.
27. For the Lord of Hosts has purposed and who shall disanul it? And his Hand
is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? Psalm. cxv. 3. But our God is in
the Heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased.

2dly, Sometimes Men change their Purposes for want of Power to compass them,
this has rendered many well concerted Schemes abortive! But the Designs of God
cannot be marred through Impotency, because he is infinite in Strength.

3dly, Men sometimes alter their Purposes, because something unforeseen and
unexpected happens, which gives such a turn to the Scene of Affairs, as makes
an Alteration necessary. But to ascribe this to God, is to destroy his
Happiness and the infinity of his Knowledge; and so by Consequence to deny him
to be God.

4thly, Men change their Purposes sometimes through a natural Fickleness and
Instability, which makes them in a little space of Time for and against a
Thing, and proceeds partly from Ignorance, and partly from the moveableness of
their Affections; none of which can de ascribed to God, he being immutable in
his Nature, must be so also in his Purpose or Will.

5thly. Men change their Purposes in promising, and not fulfilling what they
promise, from the Corruption of their Nature: But God is invioably Holy, and
therefore cannot Change in this respect.

6thly. Men sometimes change their Purposes because they were rashly made,
without a thorough Knowledge of Things and due Consideration upon them: But
neither of these can be ascribed to God, for as he is Infinite in Knowledge, so
he Works all Things after the Council of his Will, as the Apostle observes,
Ephesians. i. 11. But I proceed to the

3. Proposed, which was to answer some Objections. And 1st. The Pelagians,
Semipelagians, Jesuits, Arminians and Remonstrants, object, That by the
aforesaid Immutability our Free Will would be destroyed.

Answ. No! By no Means, because the freedom of our Will consists in a freedom
from Force or Co-action, and faculty of acting by Council or with rational
Complacency, and not in any independent indifferency to contraries, which is
not hurt by the Immutability of God, but rather established. For God has
purposed that every Agent shall act according to his Kind. Natural Agents
necessarily (ad ultimum sui posse) to the extent of their Power; thus Fire
burns, and Water wets as much as they can. And rational Agents, voluntarily or
freely. If Liberty consisted in indifferency to contraries, then God himself,
Angels and glorified Saints, would be deprived of it, for they have an eternal
contrariety to Sin, and an eternal propensity to Holiness! And to suppose
Creatures independent in Willing or Acting, is to suppose them to be Gods,
because then they would not be under the Government of the Almighty. A Creature
may as well exist of itself as act of itself. Second Causes must needs depend
on the first in Being and Acting, for in him we live, move and have our Being.
And as Divines justly observe, (operari Sequitur esse) Action follows the Kind
of the Being it proceeds from. Independent Action follows an independent Being;
and dependent Action, a dependent one, otherwise the Effect would exceed the
Virtue of the producing Cause, which is absurd! A

2d. Objection is this, That by the aforesaid Immutability, God himself would
not have a free Will, because according to it, he could not alter a conceived
Resolve.

Ans. God Almighty Wills, what he Wills, of rational Complacency, and therefore
Wills it freely. He acts according to his Nature, and therefore freely. To
suppose that God cannot Act freely without crossing his Nature, is to destroy
the Happiness and Simplicity of God, and so by consequence his very Being, and
to assert, that Liberty consists in constraint, which is a Contradiction. A

3d. Objection is, God threatens some Things which come not to pass, as in the
Cases of Hezekiah and Nineveh, (2. Kings xx. i. Jonah iii. 4.)

Ans. God dispenses his absolute Purposes to his Creatures by conditional
Promises and Threatenings; and though the Conditions of Faith and Repentance be
not always expressed, yet they are implied. Jer. xviii. 7, 8. If I speak
concerning a Nation to destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will Repent of the Evil I though it to do unto
them.

Objection 4. God is said to repent.

Ans. It Is else where said, that he is not a Man that he should repent, i. e.
He cannot repent as Men do by changing his Purpose, and in being sorry for what
he has done. All that looks like Repentance in God, is an Alteration of the
Course of his Providence toward his Creatures, and this is a change of the
Work, not of the Workman, and its only on this Account that Repentance is
ascribed to God.

Objection 5. God Wills and makes mutable Things.

Ans. He does so, but after an immutable Manner, even as by his Eternity, which
is destitute of all Succession, he directs successive and mutable Things. Its
true the Revelation of God's Will may be changed, whereby that may be rendered
a Duty at one Time which is not at another, as appears from the Ceremonial Law:
But these Changes being before determined by God, make no Alteration in his
Will, as Aquinas observes, It Is one Thing to change the Will and another to
Will a Change. As St. Augustine says, The Change is in us, not in God, as
Houses and Trees seem to move to those that are in a Ship, but the Ship moves
and they stand firm.

Objection 6. The second Person of the Trinity was made Man in Time, which he
was not before, and so was changed.

I answer with Wendeline, He assumed the human Nature, but was not changed into
it, and this was but according to an Act of his Will from Eternity, and
therefore he was not changed, for all positive change is by suffering.

Objection 7. God is said to suffer Death. Act. xx. 28.

Ans. He did suffer it, but not in himself, but in the assumed human Nature,
and so is not changed.

Objection 8. God created the World in Time, which he did not from Eternity.

Ans. He did so, but by that Power which is Eternal and Immutable. Creation is
nothing else but an Act of God's Will from Eternity that the World should exist
in Time. Here the Creature is altered, but not the Will of God. Neither does
any Thing accrue to God by the Creation but a mere Relation, which infers no
change in him!

Object. 9. What God Wills is not always done.

Ans. Yes, what he Wills is done, but in the Manner he Wills. If he Wills only
by commanding that the Thing Commanded be our Duty, then that is done: If he
Wills by decreeing that any Thing should exist, then it does exist.

Object. 10. God loves some Men whom he before hated, viz. the Elect that are
called, and therefore he is changed.

Ans. Rational Affections are but Acts of the Will or its Postures to an
Object, and these are ever the same in God. Love or Hatred, as they are
Passions, cannot be properly ascribed to God, for such would destroy his
Happiness, Simplicity and Perfection, and therefore they intend no more but his
Purpose to confer Benefits upon his Creatures in Time, or to punish them
together with the Execution thereof, which is no more than an Act of his Will
from Eternity, together with his Providence pursuant thereto in Time: Or they
intend that Persons who were before exposed to the Curse of the Law, are now
according to God's eternal Purpose delivered therefrom, which makes a Change in
the Creatures State but not in God.

Object. 11. The Scriptures represent the Almighty as having Complacency in his
People.

Ans. Its true; but this shows only the Creatures conformity to God's Nature,
and therefore signifies a Change in it, but not in him. The Sun which was
troublesome to sore Eyes, is pleasant to them, being healed: Here the Sun is
not changed, but the Eyes.

Object. 12. If God be immutable, then what signifies Prayer, or the Use of any
other Means?

Answ. The Design of Prayer, is not to move God, but our selves, to express our
Allegiance to him, and get Preparation for the Mercies he offers. Moreover it
may be observed, that Prayer is a mean in the Use of which God is wont to
confer Mercy. Now he immutably Wills the Mean, as well as the End. But I
proceed to the Improvement. Now from what has been said, we may learn, 1st. The
Vanity and Emptiness of all Creatures, God alone is immutable, every thing
under the Sun besides him, is frail and fleeting, and has no abiding! The
World is a roling Wheel, and every thing in it, is subject to change and
mutation; yea even those Things, that seem most Specious and Stable, are in a
continual Whirle-pool of Change, viz. Nobles, Princes, Kings common Wealths,
Kingdoms and Empires: Both Scripture and History inform us, of the
Catastrophes, or Desolations, every of those is Subject to! Riches make to
themselves Wings oftentimes and fly away; Honor is but an instable blast,
often times conferred with as little Judgment as it is removed; and Pleasure
has no stability: As for the Love of Friends, it often changes with the Wind:
How foolish is it therefore to over love or confide in such changeing Shadows
of Good? God is the only Object worthy of our Love and Confidence! Let us
therefore use these Things as though we used them not, with due Weanedness and
Moderation, and acquiess in the immutable God only. And

2dly. Hence we learn the great ground of the Saints Perseverance. Is it any
Thing in them, or any Thing resolved or done by them? No, they are but
Creatures, their Grace might fail, as appears from the fall of the Angels, and
of our first Parents, and their Resolutions might alter; but the immutability
of God cannot. And this is the Ground of the Saints Perseverance. Mal. 3.6. I
am the Lord: I change not, therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed. God
has fixed his everlasting Love upon them, he has made an everlasting Covenant
with them, and given his unchangeable Promise to them, that he will never leave
them, and will he, can he go back, and suffer his Faithfulness to fail? No, its
impossible.

3dly, Hence we may learn, the awful Case of the finally impenitent. That God
is unchangable, who has threatened to curse and destroy them, and this they
must everlastingly endure. After the Day of his Mercy expires, he will be
inexorable to all the Cries and Importunities of the Wicked; their dreadful
Doom shall never be reversed; their intolerable and inexpressible Plagues,
shall be immutable and eternal! God is in every respect Immutable, viz. in his
Essence, in his Attributes of Justice, Wrath, and Hatred against Sin and
Sinners; in his Threatenings as well as in the Execution of them, which shall
have no Remission in Degree, and know no End! O, should not these solemn
Considerations frighten Impenitents from Sin and Security, to God and Goodness!

4thly, Hence we learn also the great Ground Believers have to trust and
rejoice in God in every Immergent. God is the only Object worthy of our Trust,
for he always remains the same, and will never fail them. He is the immovable
Rock, the unshaken Foundation upon which his Church is Built; against which the
Gates of Hell shall never prevail. When we are perplexed with a Sight and Sense
of our own Treachery and Weakness, compared with the Strength and Policy of our
Enemies, or with a view of the many Vicissitudes, Wars, Confusions, Calamities,
Disceases, and Deaths, which mankind are involved in and exposed to. What is a
sweeter Support than to think God is a Rock, whose Foundation stands sure; the
Lord knows who are his: That his saving Gifts are without Repentance, and that
Jehovah in the midst of those Changes, will be unmoved to his own, and present
with them by his Strengh, that they may not be moved, that he will remain
Immutable in his Love and Grace, in his Purpose and Promises, which are so many
and so great! And why then may we not with the pious Prophet triumphing say,
Although the Fig Tree shall not Blosom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the
Labor of the Olive shall fail, And the Field shall yield no Meat, the Flock
shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls; yet I
will rejoice in the Lord and joy in the God of my Salvation! What though all
beneath the Sun, were in a tumultuous Uproar: Our Rock Jehovah is unmoved, and
therefore let us trust and joy in him!

But in the last Place, let us be exhorted to glorify the incorruptible and
immutable God by our Thoughts, Speech and Practice. Let us think highly, and
speak reverently of this venerable Attribute of God, least with the Gentile
Philosophers, while we profess our selves to be wise, we become Fools, and
change the Glory of the incorruptible God! But especially let us glorify God in
life by avoiding all inconstancy in our pious Purposes and Promises made in the
Covenant entered into at our Baptism, and renewed at the Lords Supper: And O let
us not be unstable in our Profession of CHRIST'S Truth! Or in love to him, or
in the Practice of Piety! For by Levity and Inconstancy we contradict the
Example of the immutable God, in imitation of whom our Perfection consists. Let
us therefore be Steadfast in all the Duties we owe to God and Man: And
particularly let us be immovable in our adhering to the Truths of God, which
are the Ground of all rational Religion. Without this, nothing remains but
Confusion, Enthusiasm and Nonsense! O Let us not he as Children tossed about
with every Wind of Doctrine, through the Craft and Juggling of those that lie in
wait to deceive! O let us beware of Wolves in Sheeps clothing! This is a Time
of great Danger, the Moravian Foxes are trying with all subtilty to destroy the
tender Grapes: Let us be as impregnable Rocks against those Deceivers: It Is
Perseverance Crowns all, if we be ashamed of CHRIST'S Truths in this adulterous
Generation, of us will he be ashamed at last when he comes in his own and his
Fathers Glory to judge the World: How will dastardly Fugitives from the Camp of
CHRIST Tremble and be Confounded, when they behold the incarnate God, the
Sovereign Lord and supreme Judge of Quick and Dead, seated on his Sapphire
Throne, environed with Miriads of Angels aray'd in all the Pomp of God, bearing
all the Ensigns of the most sparkling and astonishing Majesty, the most blazing
and aw^l Glory!

SERMON VII.
JOHN, iv. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth.


THESE Words are Part of our Lord's Answer to the Woman of Samaria, concerning
what she had said respecting worshipping God upon a particular Mountain, by
which our Savior informs her, and us by her, that the Ceremonial and Typical
Sanctity or Holiness of Places, which obtained under the Jewish Dispensation,
is now under the New Testament removed; and that sincere Service or Worship, is
accepted of by God every where, without any respect had to the Place where it
is performed.

Now the Text we are considering contains three Things, 1st. A general
Description of God, viz. that he is a Spirit. God is called a Spirit, 1st.
negatively, because he is not a Body, 2dly. Analogically, because there are
many Excellency's in spiritual Substances, which do more shadow forth the
Divine Nature, than any Bodily Thing can. As Dr. Ames observes in his Medulla.
3dly. God is called a Spirit properly and eminently, inasmuch as he is most
remote from all manner of Composition. And although Angels and the Souls of Men,
have a kind of Simplicity, yet the Almighty infinitely exceeds them therein:
For whatsoever is affirmed of God, which is communicable to Creatures, the same
must be understood to be in him, in a more excellent and singular Manner, and
in an infinitely greater Degree. The third Person of the Trinity is not only
called a Spirit, hypostatically, and by Way of Apropriation, because of his
Procession from the Father and the Son by a certain ineffable Breathing, but
also every Person of the sacred Trinity, is called Spirit, essentially, because
they all have the same immaterial Essence.

But 2dly. We have in the Text before us, a Description of that Worship which
is only acceptable to God, and this consists of two Parts, Spirit and Truth.
1st. We must worship God in Spirit, i. e. Our Worship must proceed from our
Spirit, or inward Parts. Psalm. li. 6. Behold thou desire Truth in the Inward
Parts Romans i. 9. For God is my Witness whom I serve with my Spirit, in the
Gospel of his Son. That Worship which consists only in Profession and
Externals, is far from being spiritual. And 2dly. We must worship God in Truth,
not feignedly by Hypocrisy, but in the Sincerity of our Heart, with the
unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth. 1 Cor. v. 8. Not typically by Shadows
and Ceremonies, being in Bondage to Places and Times: For the Law, the
ceremonial Law, was given by Moses but Grace and Truth came by JESUS CHRIST.
John i. 17. And 3dly. we have in our Text the Necessity of the aforesaid
Worship represented, must worship him, etc. Because God is a Spirit, therefore
he is delighted with the Spirit and spiritual Things, these are agreeable to
his Nature: As also because God rejects the ceremonial Shadows under the New
Testament, and now especially requires that spiritual Worship, which was
prefigured by them.

In discoursing upon this Text, I shall in the I. Place offer somewhat to
confirm this Truth, viz. That God is a Spirit. II. Show the Analogy or
Resemblance, between the Almighty and created Spirits. III. The unlikness
between them, IV. Open the Nature of that spiritual Worship, which we ought to
perform to God. And V. Proceed to some Improvement. And


1st. That God is a Spirit, appears from both the Old and New Testament, Judge.
iii. 10. And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, Ezekiel. xi. 24. 2 Cor. iii.
17. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is
Liberty. And Reason assures us likewise, that God is a Spirit.

1st. Because a Spirit is the best, highest and purest Nature, it many Ways
exceeds a Body, now God being the most perfect and excellent Existence, must
needs be a Spirit.

2dly. That God is a Spirit, may be justly inferred from his Infinity, which
cannot consist of finite Parts as Bodies do. Besides,

3dly. Bodies are dependant upon their Members, and corruptible because
compounded; but these Things cannot consist with the independancy, simplicity
and incorruptibility of the Supreme Being. But the

2d. General Head of Discourse, was to show the Analogy or Resemblance, between
the Almighty God and created Spirits And

1st. Spirits are impalpable, they cannot be felt, they are inaccessible to our
Senses, which require a Bodily Object. The Reason is this, that which is felt,
must be more gross than our Animal Spirits, which feel it. But Angelical
Substances are much finer than our sensitive Spirits, which are made of the
Coarse Elements, and therefore cannot be felt by them. Here our LORD convinced
his Disciples by this Argument of Sense, that he was no Spirit. Luke xxiv. 39.
Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my Self, handle me and see, for a
Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as ye see me have. And God himself is much more
impalpable. And hence the Apostle Paul observes in his Epistle to Timothy, vi.
16. That the Lord of Lords only has Immortality, dwelling in the Light, which
no Man can approach unto. Though we live and move in God, and have our Being from
him, yet we are insensible of his essential Presence.

2dly Spirits are invisible Substances, 1st. They are Substances not Accidents,
for Accidents are but Qualities cleaving to a Substance, which are therefore
variable and Dependant, as for Example, Whitness in the Wall: Whereas Spirits
are Existences by themselves, and God who is the Father of Spirits, Exists of
himself absolutely, 2dly. Spirits are invisible, as well as intangible, and the
Reason is, because what is seen, must be grosser than the Medium of Air, through
which we see, and grosser than the Animal Spirits by which we see; but
Angelical Substances are finer than both, and therefore invisible to us.
Neither does their assuming in Ancient Times human Bodies, or some gross Matter
in the Form of them, and appearing to Abram and others, in the least contradict
this: For it was the Body assumed that was seen, and not they. And how much
more is God himself invisible, who infinitely exceeds all created Spirits, in
sublime Excellency. Hence he is called the King, Immortal, Eternal, Invisible.
1 Timothy i. 17. And that he dwells in the Light, which no Man can approach unto,
which no Man has seen or can see. 1 Timothy vi. 16. And hence it is, that the
Almighty is said to dwell in secret. Mat. vi. 6.

3dly. Spirits are in their Nature Immortal, having nothing in their
Constitution tending to change or Corruption, because they consist not of
various Parts, as Bodies do, which may be disunited; and thus have their Form
altered. Neither are Spirits, because of the Subtilty and fineness of their
Nature, so liable to Impressions by inferior Beings, as Bodies are, but still
they are subject to the Control of him, who gave them Being. But God himself
is absolutely incorruptible. Mal. iii. 6. I am the Lord, I change not.

4thly. Spirits are the most perfect and excellent Beings. The Souls of Men and
Angels, are much more noble than Bodies, and all Beings purely Material, and
how infinitely does the blessed God exceed the sublimest Seraphims, in
Excellency and Perfection?

5thly. Spirits are the strongest of created Beings, hence they are called
Principallties and Powers and said to excel in Strength. Psa. ciii. 20. Bless
ye the Lord his Angels, that excel in Strength. And hence the Weakness of Flesh
is opposed to Spirit. Isa. xxxi. 3. And is not Jehovah wise in Heart, and
mighty in Strength? Who has hardened him self against God and prospered? The
combined Strength of all the Angels, together with the whole Posse of created
Beings, is no more in Comparison of the Power of God, than a Drop to the great
Ocean, or a little Dust in the Balance with the whole Earth. The Almighty
takes up the Isles as a very little Thing, and all Nations before him are as
Nothing, and they are counted to him less than Nothing, and Vanity Isa. xl. 15,
17.

6thly. Spirits are the most nimble in their Motions, and unwearied in their
Actings, of all created Beings. One of them is said fly from the third Heaven
to the Earth in a few Hours ( Dan. xxi. 22.) Now seeing God himself is a pure
Act, must he not of Consequence, be the most agile and active of all Beings,
hence he is figuratively represented by the Psalmist, to ride upon a Cherubim,
and fly upon the Wings of the Wind, Ps. xviii. 10. And hence Isaiah observes,
that the Creator of the Ends of the Earth faints not, neither is weary. Isa.
xl. 28.

7thly. Spirits are endowed with Understandings and Wills, and are capable of
putting forth Actions agreeable thereto, which Beings purely Material, have no
Capacity for. e. g. The Sun though it be a Beautiful Creature, because material,
is not capable of Though It or moral Action, both which Angels and the Souls of Men
can exert. And has not God himself an Understanding that is Infinite, and a
Will which no created Power can control?

But though there be some likeness between God and the Creatures in some Things,
yet it must be still remembered, that he infinitely transcends their noblest
Excellency's and in many Things is unlike them Psalm. cxlviii. 13. Let them
Praise the Name of the Lord, for his Name alone is excellent, and his Glory is
above the Earth and Heaven. This leads to the

3d. General Head which was to show the Dissimulitude or Unlikeness been God
and created Spirits, even of the highest order, which appears in the following
Instances, viz.

1st. The Excellencies of created Spirits are derived from him to whom they owe
their Beings, who is therefore styled the Father of Spirits, and the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh, Heb. xii. 9. But as the Almighty had no Beginning of
Existence, consequently his Perfections must be underiv'd and Eternal.

2dly. The Excellencies of created Spirits, are but comparative, viz. that they
excel the best of material Beings in their Nature and Properties, whereas the
Blessed God excells both material and immaterial.

3dly. The Beings and Excellencies of created Spirits are limited, their being
Creatures proves them to be finite. He that made them must needs give Bounds to
their Beings, so that they cannot fill all Places at once. And Infinite
Excellency's cannot be possessed by any Thing that is in its Nature finite. But
as the Being of God is self-existent, and therefore unlimited, so his
Perfections are infinite.

4thly. The Excellencies of created Spirits are dependant and alterable,
because derived from another, they must depend on him who formed them. Angels
themselves, who are the noblest of created Spirits, inasmuch as they once were
not, are capable of returning to their former Nonentity: They are also capable
of the Impressions of Happiness and Misery; some of them have fallen from their
original State of Holiness and Happiness; but none of these Things are
applicable to God, he is far from the Shadow of Change, an independent God. Who
though he is happy, can neither be made happy or miserable. He only has
immortality.

5thly. Angels are under the Dominion of God, they must needs owe Subjection
and Homage to him, who gave them their Existence. And this their very Name
Angel or Messenger imports. But it is the unalienable and incommunicable
Prerogative of Jehovah alone to be supreme and above all Control.

But I proceed to the 4th general Head which was to open the Nature of that
spiritual Worship, which we ought to perform to that God, who is a Spirit, etc.

1st. It imply's spiritual Principles, viz. Experimental Knowledge of God and
our Selves, such as affects and humbles us, and makes us judge our selves, with
holy Paul, to be less than the Least of all Saints. Without Knowledge, says
Solomon, the Mind cannot be good. And Indeed we cannot love rationally without
some Knowledge of the Object we love.

2dly. Another Principle of spiritual Worship, is Love, transcendent Love to
God in CHRIST, because of his unparalled and inexpressible Excellency,
whereby we choose God as the only Portion of our Souls, and his Worship as our
most agreeable Entertainment. ( Jos. xxiv. 15.)

3dly. Another Principle of spiritual Worship is Faith in the eternal God,
Father, Son and Spirit, even such Faith as renews the Heart, and reforms the
Practice: For he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of those that unfeignedly seek him, But

2dly. Spiritual Worship implies a spiritual End, not our own Credit or worldly
Interest, with the Pharisees of Old; but God's Glory, and in Subordination
thereto, our own and our Neighbors Spiritual Good and Edification. This is to
serve God with our Spirits, as the Apostle Paul expresses it ( Romans i. 9.) If
we should refer all our natural and cicil Actions to the Glory of God, how much
more our Religious? Whether in eating or drinking, or whatsoever we do we
should do it all to the Glory of God. See Col. iii. 22, 23. Not with Eye
Service, such as Men Pleasers, but in singleness o^ Heart fearing God. And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord and not unto Men.

3dly. Spiritual Worship, implies a spiritual Rule, not the Customs of the Age
we live in, or the Inventions or Traditions of Men, but the written Word of
God, this is sufficient to make the Man of God Perfect, and thoroughly
furnished to every good Work. To those that walk according to this Rule, Peace
be on them and on Israel of God. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. Isa. viii.
20. As God only knows what Worship will be acceptable to him, so he only has a
Right to prescribe Acts of Worship, being the Creator and Lord of all, and
therefore when Men add to the divine Institutions, as they abridge their fellow
Creatures of the Liberty God has graciously given them, so they usurp the
divine Prerogative, and injuriously reflect upon the Wisdom and Fidelity of the
great Legislator. Our Lord charged the Pharisees, with vain Worship because
they taught for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

4thly. Spiritual Worship, implies a spiritual Manner of Performance, And this
is when the Heart joins with the outward Man in God's Service, when we do it
out of Choice. ( Josh. vxiv. 15.) When we long for an absent God, Ps. xlii. 1.
When we heartily lament his Absence, with Job. O that I knew where I could find
him! When we rejoice in his Presence! ( Phil. iii. 3.) When under a Sense of
our Inability to perform Duty aright, without the Help of the Spirit through
CHRIST, and our Unworthiness of that Help, we rely upon the Lord JESUS for
Strength. Thus the Spouse is said to come out of the Wilderness, leaning on her
Beloved. But I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject. And

1st. From the spirituality of God, or from his Being a Spirit, we may infer
his Simplicity. A Spirit, as all acknowledge, is an immaterial Being, and
therefore a simple one. If it be objected, that Angels and the Souls of Men are
called Spirits in Scripture, and yet they are not altogether simple. Ans. They
are so only in a diminitive Sense, by Way of analogy, because they come nearest
of all to the Spirituality of God. But God himself is most properly and
perfectly a Spirit. The Holy Scriptures teach this Simplicity of God, so often
as it represents him not in compounded or in concrete Terms, but in simple and
abstract ones. e. g. When he is therein called Love. 1 John iv. 8. He that
Loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. 2dly. God is called Life. 1 John
v. 20. This is the the God and eternal Life. 3dly He is said to be Light in
which there is no Darkness at all, 1 John i. 5. i. e. His Godhead has nothing
of a different kind, which is not pure Godhead.

And indeed the Simplicity of God, follows necessarily from many other of God's
Perfections. e. g. 1st. From his Self-Existence, by which he is absolutely the
first Being, if by Composition there were different Things in God, then there
would be many first Things, of which none would be absolutely the first,
because not before the Parts joined with it: Moreover if God were compounded,
there must be one to compound him, who must exist before the first, which is
impossible. And 2dly, The Simplicity of God follows from his Independency: For
on the contrary, what is compounded cannot be Independent, for then the whole
depends upon the composing Parts, and the Union of those Parts depends upon the
Composer. 3dly, God is immutable and therefore a simple Being, for whatsoever
is compounded, is liable to be disolv'd into the Parts of which the Composition
is made, and thus it is changeable. 4thly. The Eternity of God proves him to be
a simple Being, for whatsoever has had a Beginning may have an End! To this we
may farther add, his Infinity and Perfections. And 1st. If God be Infinite, as
the Scriptures asserts when it informs us, That he fills the Heaven and Earth,
and that the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, than he is a simple Being:
For whatsoever is compounded is finite, the Parts composing must needs be
finite, because they are less than the Whole. And it is impossible for a Number
of finite Parts to produce Infinity. 2dly. If God be a most Perfect Being as
the Scripture asserts Mat. v. 48. Be Perfect as your Heavenly Father is
Perfect, then he is a simple one. Because not only all Men acknowledge that it
is more Perfect to be Wisdom itself, than to be Wise, to be Goodness it self,
than to be Good: But also the Notion of a Part involves a manifold
Imperfection, inasmuch as it has not the Perfection of the Whole, and
pre-requires a Composer.

Now the Simplicity of God is a divine Property whereby he is void of all
Composition, Mixture and Division, being all Essence, so that whatsoever is in
God, is God. The Almighty by his Simplicity is free from all Kinds of
Composition, by which different Things unite. As particularly,

1st. From a Composition of quantitative or bulky Parts which belongs to
Bodies; but God is a Spirit, as has been already made evident.

2dly, Of essential Parts, such as Matter and Form, these belong only to
Bodies, but God is immaterial.

3dly, Of Substance and Accident. Seeing that all Accidents are judged more
imperfect than the Substances to which they belong, and are liable to change,
as Whiteness in the Wall, they are therefore inconsistent with the divine
Perfection.

4thly. Of Essence and Existence, seeing that Existence is but an Act of the
Essence, and nothing different from it, which might infer a Composition.

4thly. Of Genus and Difference, which every Species contains: God is a Being
above Being, in nothing he agrees with others, but in all Things he differs
from all. But on the Contrary, every Creature is subject to Composition, and
consequently to Division. All Things which are created, are made by joining
together into one, more Things than one, and so they consist of diverse Things.
Some have a more gross Composition of Parts, both Essential and Integral. As a
Man, of Soul and Body; and the Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones. Some have a
finer Composition, e. g. an Angel is compounded of Substance and Accidents that
cleave thereto. His Substance or Essence, his Faculties and Qualities are
different Things. His Life is one Thing; his Will, Power, Wisdom, Agility, or
Nimbleness other Things. And the same may be said of his Goodness, which the
Scriptures inform us, some Angels have lost and yet retain their Beings. And
thus the Soul of Man and all other Creatures are made up of many Things joined
together.

But God is absolutely Simple, without Parts or Accidents; his Essence and
Attributes are all one Thing in him, though differently conceived of by us! But
here let it be carefully observed, that Simplicity, as it is opposed to Wisdom,
which is sometimes the Sense of the Word in Scripture ( Pro. i. 22.) cannot
without the greatest Blasphemy be ascribed to God. It is therefore Simplicity
only, as it is opposed to Mixture and Composition, that is to be ascribed to
God. That is properly called Simple (says Zanchy) which is not composed of
different Things. And by how much the less any Thing is compounded, so much the
more Simple it is, and is called. But

2dly. Is God a Spirit? Then we should frame no resemblance of him in our
Thoughts as though he were a material Being or had a Body! And far less should we
form Pictures and Images of God, either for Decency or Devotion. It is Folly
with a Witness to pretend to draw the Lineaments or Form of an immaterial and
invisible Being. And indeed it is an idolatrous Practice, which the Almighty
strictly cautioned the People of Israel against, Deuteronomy. vi. 12, 15, 16. And the
Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of the Fire, ye heard the Voice of the
Words but saw no similitude; take therefore good Heed unto yourselves, for ye
saw no manner of Similitude in Horeb, lest ye corrupt yourselves and make you a
graven Image, the Similitude of any Figure, the likeness of Male or Female. But

3dly. Is God a Spirit? Then he is the most suitable Good to our Souls, which
are Spirits. As he is a spiritual Being, he suits their Nature and can
communicate himself to them, And as he is All-sufficient, he can fully satisfy
their most extensive Desires. But on the Contrary, though earthly Entertainments
may gratify our sensual Appeties, yet, because of their gross and elementary
Nature, they cannot satisfy, and do not suit our Souls, neither in respect of
their Nature and Dignity, or their Desires and Duration. It was therefore
exceeding foolish in the rich Man to say to his Soul, in respect of such
Things, that it had much Goods laid up for many Years. Such Entertainments can
no more satisfy the anxious Soul, than Husks, Gravel-Stones, or the East Wind
can satisfy the cravings of our Stomach! And it is with great Justice that the
Scriptures ascribe such ignominious Epithets to all earthly Good, to signify in
the strongest Terms its insufficiency to content the Mind.

4thly. Is God a Spirit? This shows us then the ne-necessity of Spiritual
Worship. This indeed is plainly expressed in our Text. Such a Worship is
suitable to the Nature of God, and will be only accepted by him. The justness
of this inference some of the Pagans discovered by the Dint of Natures Light.
Cato speaks excellently about it in his Disticks, in the following Manner.

Sideus estanimus nobis ut carmina dicunt.
Hic tibi precipue sit pura mente colendus, i. e.
If God is a Spirit, as the Poets inform us, then our chief Care, should be to
worship him with a pure Mind.

And seeing this spiritual Worship is the Touchstone of true Christianity, we
should be hereby enduced to examine ourselves with all Speed and Seriousness,
whether we perform it or not, and that by an impartial and deliberate
Application of what has been said concerning it, in the doctrinal Part of this
Discourse. Now if upon Trial we find the aforesaid Characters of spiritual
Worship in us, we may and ought to rejoice in Christ Jesus, notwithstanding our
many defects, because we are complete in him. Sincere Intentions are accepted
for Performances, especially when an opportunity for Action does not present it
self. Thus it was in David's Case, although he did not actually build the Temple,
yet because he honestly purposed to do it, the Almighty looked upon it as done.

But such as are destitute of the aforesaid Characters who worship God who is a
Spirit, without Spirit; who draw near to God with their Lips, while their
Hearts are far from him; who rest in a dead Form of Devotion; who content
themselves with bodily Exercise, which profits little, and in the mean Time
with their Minds serve themselves, all such are in a doleful Case, their
specious Worship being destitute of Spirit and Soul, is dead, and stinks before
God as a dead Corpse that is putrified does in our Nostrils! Such Services
Jehovah casts as Dung upon their Faces, Mal. 23. Such in the Judgment of God
are Hypocrites, and such he pronounces a Woe upon, Mat. xxiii. 25, 26. Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye make clean the out side of the Cup
and Platter, but within they are full of Extortion and Excess.

5thly, Is God a Spirit? Then let us purify our Spirits or Hearts more and more
from all spiritual Wickedness, and devote them to God. Now the Desires or lusts
of the Mind, which War against it, and ought to be purged away, are these, viz.
Ignorance, spiritual Blindness, Pride, Infidelity, Hypocrisy. We should be
enduced to oppose spiritual Evils by the following Considerations, 1st. Because
they make us most like the Devils, who are spiritual Wickednesses.

2dly. Because Sin is strongest in the Spirit, as its Fountain.

3dly, Because God who is a Spirit, as he is pleased with spiritual Services,
so he is principally offended with spiritual Abominations! Besides, those Evils
are especially contrary to the Perfection of the spiritual Law of God. Now we
should endeavor to purge our Hearts from the aforesaid Evils, by Watchfulness
in opposing the first evil Motions, by meditating on the divine Word, by
repeated Acts of Faith upon CHRIST, and by earnest Prayer. And we should be
incited to give our Hearts and our Spirits to God by considering 1st. That he
requires it, my Son give me thine Heart.

2dly, He has the best Right to it, for he has made it, he is the Father of
Spirits.

3dly, He best deserves it also in Point of Gratitude, on Account of his
preserving, providing, and redeeming Love.

4thly, It ought to be given to him also in point of Interest, for he can only
satisfy it with suitable and enduring Good! Let us there commit our Spirits
into his Hands, that he may justify them by the Blood and Obedience of his Son,
and sanctify them by his Spirit, and at last receive them into his Kingdom.

Is God a simple Being? Then let us glorify him upon the Account of this
Attribute, by which he is so much exalted above all changeable and Compounded
Beings! and let us with simplicity entirely depend upon him in all adversity!
He is Light to direct us, Power to support us, Love to refresh us, yea he is
our Life and Salvation! His simplicity makes him an Object worthy of Trust and
Confidence, for he will not deceive the Expectations of the Poor. And should
not we Endeavor to imitate the Simplicity of God in Heart and Conversation?
Let us serve God, not with a double Heart, as Hypocrites, who look two contrary
Ways; but with Simplicity, which includes these Things in it, viz. Purity,
Sincerity, and Constancy. 1st. With Purity of Heart, Hence our Savior
pronounces a blessing upon those who are pure in Heart, i. e. Who love, long
for, and labor after Holiness in Heart, and do not habitually indulge the
Contrary!

2dly, Sincerity, and that is when a Person by one direct Line, aims at God's
glory in the general Course of all their Actions, Natural, Civil, and
especially Religious. Hence our Lord informs us, that if our Eye be single our
whole Body is full of Light, Mat. vi. 22. And

3dly, That this pure and sincere Heart contends toward its Mark, with a
Constant and as much as may be uniform Endeavor, the want of which makes
Persons instable in all their Ways, Jam. i. 8. And we should also be simple in
Conversation, after the Example of the Apostles, avoiding all Deceit, Falsehood
and Guile, 2 Cor. i. 12. This is our rejoicing even the Testimony of our
Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom we
have had our Conversation in the World. We should be excited hereto by the
following Motives, 1st. Because hereby we imitate God in his primary
Perfection, which is the greatest Excellency of the reasonable Creature. 2dly.
Such are Blessed by our Lord ( Mat. v. 8.) 3dly. Simplicity is the Foundation
of Constancy, as a double Mind is of Inconstancy. 4thly. The double Minded are
abhorred by God, and must, so continuing, expect perpetual ruin. ( Psa. xii.)

SERMON VIII.
PSALMS cxlv. 3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his
Greatness is unsearchable.


THIS Text represents to us the Infinity of God's Essence or Being, and the
Necessity of Honoring him on this Account. And 1st. we have a Representation
of the Infinity of the divine Being, more generally in these Words, great is
the Lord or Jehovah. Here God, denominated by his Essence, is said to be great:
For the Name Jehovah intends his Essence or Being, that thus we might know his
Essence is Infinite. The Word great must either refer to Quantity or Quality,
if to Quantity, then either to Number or Magnitude; in respect of Number God is
one, but so one, as eminently to include yea exceed all! In respect of
Magnitude, God is great without Quantity, as he is good without Quality, i. e.
As his Goodness is not any Thing added to his Being, as it is in Creatures; but
is the same with it, so his Greatness does not consist in the Bulk or
Dimensions of Bodies, such as Height, Depth, Breadth, etc.

But if the Word great, be applied to Quality, then it denotes the Excellency
of a Thing or Person, together with an eminent Degree of that Excellency. And
thus it is with God, he exceeds all others in Excellency; but we have in the
Words of our Text, a more Particular Description of the Infinity of the divine
Being, in these Words. And his Greatness is unsearchable, or as the Words are
interpreted by others, has no End, as that which is finite may be searched, so
on the contrary that which is unsearchable must needs be Infinite, Job. 5.9.
Which does great Things and unsearchable, mavelous Things without Number.
Romans xi. 33. O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God, how unsearchable ar^ his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! Which
is emphatically expressed by comparative Terms, whereby God is said to be
greater than all other Gods. 2 Chronicles. ii. 5. And the House which I build is
great, for great is our God above all Gods. Psalm. cxxxv. 5. For I know that the
Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all Gods. i. e. Not only above
Emperors, Kings, Princes and Magistrates, who are called Gods, because they
bear some Image of the divine Sovereignty, by their Superiority and Power of
Government; but also above all false Gods, who are great in the Opinion of
their Worshippers. The Number of which in the Time of Hesiod, was above Thirty
Thousand, to every of which was assigned some peculiar Perfection; without
doubt then, he who is greater than all those must needs be infinite, and ought
to be praised as such; which is the 2d. Particular our Text contains. Great is
the Lord and greatly to be praised. God should be greatly honored by our
Minds, and highly extolled by our Lips and Lives. He should be praised in the
superlative Degree, more than any, more than all, because he is greater and
more excellent than all, in his Being and Perfections. In discoursing upon this
Text, I shall I. Endeavor to prove that God is infinite in his Essence. II.
Labor to explain the Nature thereof, And III. Speak of his Immensity or
Omnipresence, which results therefrom, and so proceed to the Improvement. And


1st. The Scriptures assert the Infinity of God's Essence, not only in those
Places already mentioned, but also in these following viz. Job xxxvi. 26.
Behold God is great, and we know him not, neither can the Number of his Years
be searched out, Job. xi. 7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God, can
thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection, it is high as Heaven, what can
thou do, deeper than Hell what can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer
than the Earth, and broader than the Sea. And Reason also confirms the same
Truth, as appears by the following Particulars, viz.

1st. If God's Being and Perfections are incomprehensible, as has been proved
in this, and in a preceding Sermon, then certainly they are infinite. The
great Reason why Men and Angels cannot grasp the Knowledge of the divine Being
is, because it is too vast an Object for their finite Capacities to compass.

2dly. There is nothing in Creatures that argues an End or Defect, either in
their Being, Power, Presence, or Duration; for which they are called finite,
which is not very alien or remote from God, and therefore he is Infinite.

3dly. He created the World out of nothing, which required infinite Power,
because of an infinite Distance which was to be overcome, between nothing and
something.

4thly. Seeing the highest Perfection, is necessarily included in the Notion of
a God, and this the Scriptures confirm, by calling him the most High, Psalm.
xviii. 13. Then his Being and Attributes are Infinite: For something higher and
more excellent than finite may be conceived, viz. something that is Infinite.
And

5thly. Seeing he is absolutely the first Being he must of Necessity be
Infinite, for thus there can be none before him, to limit his Being and
Perfections. If his Being had any Bounds, it could not be absolute. The Reason
why Creatures are finite is, because they are made by another, who has
circumscribed their Beings within certain Limits. Now that God is absolutely
the first Being, existing of himself, has been already proved in a preceding
Sermon.

6thly. Forasmuch as all the various Perfections of Creatures, both Angelical
and Human in Heaven and Earth, are borrowed from God. He who is the unexhausted
Fountain, from which they all flow, must be Immense and Infinite: For surely
the Giver must be greater than the Receiver. Hence is that notable Scripture.
Romans xi. 35, 36. Who has first given to him and it shall be recompensed unto
him again, for of him, and through him, and to him are all Things. I proceed to
consider the

2d. Proposed which was to explain the Nature of God's Infinity, especially in
his Essence; which may be thus described, viz. That it is an incommunicable
Property of Jehovah, whereby he is without all Bounds and Limitations in his
Being and Perfections. The Infinity of God may be said to respect, either his
Attributes or his Being; as it respects his Attributes, thus his Justice,
Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Grace, Mercy, and Duration, are said to be Infinite in
Scripture, that is without Bounds, Limits, or End. As it respects his Being, it
signifies that it neither is, or can be bounded, neither outwardly by an
encompassing Body, as material Things are, nor inwardly, by proper Limits, as
created Spirits. All Creatures both Human and Angelical, as well as others are
bounded by their Essences, the Form acting upon the Matter limits it within its
own Confines. But God is unlimited, and cannot be searched out to Perfection.
Job. xi. 7. And indeed this is applicable to all that can be said of him! Hence
says the Psalmist his understanding is infinite. And indeed infinity is the
peculiar Glory of God, whereby he is distinguished from and far advanced above
all secondary Beings.

God is infinite not according to the Etimology of the Word, which respects an
End only, for he is without Beginning and End. Zanchy observes, That a Thing is
called privativly Infinite, which indeed has not an End, but can have it. This
is applicable to the noblest Creatures even to Angels and the Souls of Men.

And 2dly. That that is negatively infinite, which neither has nor can have any
End. In this Sense God only is infinite, yet when we say that God is negatively
infinite, a positive Perfection is thereby intended. Infinity (says Gomarus)
is an absolute property of the Essence of God, which is not limited or
circumscribed by any Terms, or Bounds of Cause or Measure. To explain this, let
it be observed, that every Creature has a fourfold Limitation, viz. Of the
Kind of Being, Degrees of Being, of Time and Place.

And. 1st. Creatures are limited as to their Kinds of Being, some are of one
Kind, and some of another some are simple, some compounded, some have Bodies,
some not, some have Life, some none, some have Sense some none. The great
Creator has fixed them in their several Kinds and Orders, that so the whole
Frame of Things may be beautified with variety. But God himself is not limited
to any kind of Being. He has in himself all Kinds, not subjectively, but
eminently.

2dly. Creatures are limited to Degrees of Being and Goodness, or Excellency,
some have higher and some lower Degrees, but the Being of God is absolute
perfect and infinite and so beyond all Degrees and Measures; and thus are all
his Attributes which spring from his Being, and only differ there from in our
Manner of conceiving.

3dly Creatures are limited as to Time or Duration they have a Beginning either
with or in Time, and a Succession in Duration, and either have or may have an
End. But God is Eternal an Everlasting Now, without Beginning, Succession, or
End.

4thly. Creatures are limited as to Place, they are included in a Place, and
cannot be every where at once, but God is Immense and Omnipresent. And thus I
am led to speak upon the

3d, Proposed, viz. the Immensity and Omnipresence of God. These Words
represent the same Thing after a different Manner. Infinity, as it cannot be
measured by Place, or any other Dimensions of Length, Breadth, Depth, Height,
is called Immensity. As it exsists with every Creature, it is called
Omnipresence; and as it co-exists every where, it is called Ubiquity. This
Attribute of God may be thus described, viz. That it is the Infinity of the
divine. Essence, as that exists with all Space. By Space, we are to understand
nothing more than where a Creature does or may exist, and therefore it is two
Fold, viz. 1st. either a vacuum or void, where a Creature can exist, or a Place
where it actually does exist. Therefore Space is properly no Being, much less a
Body, for then when a Body is in a Place, one Body would be in another. Neither
is it the same with a Body which is contained in a Place, for when a Body is
removed the Place containing remain's. Neither are Breadth and Length, and
other such like Dimensions, properly in Space; but in the Bodies which are or
may be contained therein. Now the Almighty is not extended together with Space,
or diffused through it, for these Things only belong to Bodies. Jehovah being
without Matter or Parts, must be without Extension; and having no Matter he can
have no Form, which belongs to Matter, and gives it the Dimensions of Weadth
and Length, etc. The Almighty only exists together with all Space, not by
Multiplication of himself, for he is one; nor by Division by Parts, being
partly in Heaven and partly on Earth, for he is most Simple and cannot be
divided: Neither can the Almighty be circumscribed or bounded by Space, because
he is a Spirit; or limited to a certain Place, because he is Infinite. God
exists with all Space by filling of it. Jer. xxiii. 24. Do not I fill Heaven
and Earth, says the Lord. The Almighty indeed does not fill Space as Bodies
do, because his Being there does not exclude the Creature: Whereas two Bodies
cannot occupy the same Place in the same Instant of Time. But Jehovah fills all
Places in the following respects.

1st. So as not to be included in any Place or encompassed, for then he must be
finite: But the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him. And

2dly, So as not to be excluded out of any Place; and hence it is said, Act.
xvii. 27. That he is not far from every one of us. Even the Heathens, by the
Light of Nature, could say, Jovis omnia plena; all Things are full of Jupiter.

3dly, So as to be without Motion from Place to Place: And therefore, when the
Scriptures speak of his descending from Heaven to Earth, his riding on a
Cherub, and on the Wings of the Wind, it is only a form of Speech accommodated
to our weak Way of conceiving of God and divine Things, importing some special
Manifestation of God in his Works of Providence. And

4thly, So as to be beyond all Place; for what is Place but the Limit of
created Beings? It must therefore be finite how vast soever it be, and
therefore cannot contain the infinite God.

The Holy Scriptures assert in strong Terms, the Omnipresence of God, Psa.
cxxxix. from the 7th to the 10th Verses, Whether shall I go from thy Spirit, or
whither shall I flee from thy Presence? If I assend up into Heaven, thou art
there, If I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there. If I take the Wings of
the Morning and dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea, even there shall thy
Hand lead me, and thy right Hand shall hold me. Act. xvii. 28. For in him we
live and move and have our Being. And indeed the Omnipresence of God
necessarily follows from his Infinity, which we have before considered: For
what is Infinite in Essence, cannot be restricted to any Place. It is
contradictory to suppose that that which is boundless, should be bounded; it is
just in other Words to say, that that which has no limits, nor possibly can
have them, yet that it has them; which is absurd!

Besides, to be restrained by any to a Place, is as inconsistent with the
Independency of God, as Motion from Place to Place is with his immutability or
unchangableness!

It likewise follows from the Almightyness of God, that he can Work every
where, which could not be if he were limited to any Place.

And how can we suppose, that a perfect Being, who is possessed with all
Perfection, can want that of Omnipresence, without a manifest Contradiction?
And that the various Perfections of God admit of no Degrees or Measures,
follows necessarily from his Simplicity. Compounded Beings admit of Degrees and
Dimensions, but such as are Simple, have none: Sweet Things have their Degrees,
but Sweetness itself is above all Degrees!

But before I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject, I would have it
observed, that although the Immensity and Omnipresence of God, does in the first
place, concern his Essence, yet that it does also respect his Knowledge, his
Operations, his Providence, by his Essence. Hence all Things are said to be
naked and open unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. iv. 13. And
hence God is said to uphold all Things by the Word of his Power, Heb. i. 3. Now
in respect of God's Operations, he is said to be variously present with
Creatures.

1st In Heaven, he is present by his Glory: There he makes his divine Majesty
and Glory, peculiarly manifest to the equal Admiration and Delight of Saints
and Angels! Hence that blessed Place is called the Throne of God, Isa. lxvi. 1.
And his dwelling Place, 2 Chronicles. vi. 21.

2d. On Earth, God is present by his Grace, enlightening, adopting, sanctifying
and comforting his People; hence the Spirit is promised for these Ends, Joh.
xvi. 8.9.

3d. In Hell, God is present by his Justice, Psa. cxxxix. 8. If I make my Bed
in Hell, lo thou art there: There in that awful Vault of Horror and Misery, are
dreadful display's of divine Vengeance upon damned Angels and damned Souls,
without Intermission and without End! I might also observe that the Almighty is
present after an inexpressible Manner, with the human Nature of CHRIST, by the
Hypostatical Union, Col. ii. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. God was also present with the Prophets after an extraordinary
Manner, by Wisdom and Revelation 1 Pet. i. 11. And so with the Apostles, by
whom he wrought diverse Miracles; and the Almighty may be said to be in a
general Way present with all the Works of his Hands, supporting all Creatures
by his Power, and Governing all their Motions by his Providence to his own
Glory, and his Peoples Good. I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject. And,

1st. The serious Consideration of the Greatness and Infinity of God, compared
with the Nothingness of Mankind, may justly make us ashamed of our Pride, and
humble us before him! With what becoming abasedness did Abram of old speak to
God upon this Account, Genesis xviii. 27. Behold now I have taken upon me to speak
to the Lord, who am but Dust and Ashes! And do not the Angels, those Nobles of
the Court of Heaven, for the very same Reason vail their Faces before him, Isa.
vi. God is Infinite in his Being and all his Attributes; and what are we but
Shadows, Worms, Locusts, drops in the Bucket, a little Dust in the Balance, yea
as Nothing and less than Nothing. For what Proportion is there between what is
finite and infinity? How justly may we therefore use the Psalmists Exclamation,
Psalm. viii. 4. What is Man that thou art mindful of him?

2dly, The Consideration of the Infinity of God, should incline us to Modesty
in our Thoughts of divine Mysteries, such as the sacred Trinity, the
hypostatical Union of two Natures in the Person of Christ, and any other
Difficulties we meet with in Scripture, to which our weak Understandings are
not equal. In this Case it would be of excellent Use, humbly to call to Mind
the Words of our Text, Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, his
Greatness is unsearchable. As well as the saying of Zophar, Job xi. Can thou
by searching find out God, can thou know the Almighty to Perfection, it is
higher than Heaven, what can thou do?

In respect of these Things we must use the Apostle's admiring Exclamation,
Romans xi. 33. O! the Depth of the Riches, of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God,
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

3dly, Is Jehovah infinite in his Being and Attributes. Then how worthy is he
of our highest Love, entirest Confidence, and freest Choice? As Excellency is
the proper Object of Love, so by Consequence an Infinity of it must needs
^emerit our dearest and most supreme Respects! And how safely may we repose our
whole Trust in a Being, who is infinite and immutable in Wisdom, Power and
Goodness? Who would not then make choice of so glorious a Being, for his
Portion and Inheritance? For surely as the Psalmist observes, Happy is the
People who are in such a Case, yea Happy is that People whose God is the Lord,
Psa. cxliv. ult. The Excellency's of poor Creatures are variable and limited,
and while here, stained with many Defects and Blemishes, they often deceive our
Expectation! Hence the Person is cursed who trusts in Man, or makes Flesh
his Arm! Sometimes they cannot, and sometimes they will not help us in
extremity. Let us therefore disclaim all Dependence on them, all immoderate
Love to them, and make the infinite Jehovah the only Foundation of our
Religious Trust, the only Object of our transcendent Respect and Love! But

4thly. Is Jehovah great? Then he is greatly to be praised, this is the
Psalmist's inference in our Text. If it be proper to make Panegyricks or
commendatory Orations in the Praise of temporal Princes, on the Account of
their Greatness, how much more so must it be to praise the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords! He, and He only, is absolutely great! Great of himself,
independently Great, invariably Great: As his Greatness depends upon none, so
it is Subject to no Alteration: Likewise the Almighty is comparetivly and
superlatively Great: Great above all Gods, yea infinitely and inexpessibly
Great; Great without Bounds, and beyond all Expression and Conception. Whereas
the greatness of the most puissant Monarchs on Earth, is derived, dependent,
variable, and finite. Now we should Praise the great God, 1st. In our Hearts,
by thinking great Things of him, yea the greatest, seeing Jehovah transcends
the highest flight of an Angels Thought; by a great Esteem of him above all
others and of his Presence, Love, Promises, Worship. By a great and insatiable
Desire after a Sense of his Love, and conformity to his Nature, as well as
after the Manifestation of his Glory and the Promotion of his Kingdom, Psalm.
lxxxiv. 1, 2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs,
yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord, and my Flesh cries out for the
living God! And farther we should Praise God in our Hearts, by Delight and
Complacency in him, and in all his Ways of dealing toward us, as well as by
expecting to receive great Things from a great God! How condescending and
amazing is that Place of Scripture mentioned by the Royal Prophet Isa. xlv. 11.
Thus says the Lord the Holy one of Israel, ask me of things to come concerning
my Sons, and concerning the Work of my Hands, command ye me. Jehovah delights
to manifest the dazzling Glory of his Greatness and Infinity, in compassing
great Salvation for his People! And therefore as we may freely ask great
Mercy's from God, so we may safely expect them! For who can control
Omnipotence, or set bounds to Infinity? and therefore when in our thoughts, we
Question his Almightiness, we turn back from God and tempt him, and limit the
holy one of Israel, ( Psalm. 78.41.)

2dly, We should praise God with our Lips, by declaring among others with a
loud Voice, his infinite Greatness and Excellency, and exciting others to do
the same, ( Psalm. ciii. 8, 20, 21.) And,

3dly, We should praise the great God by our Lives; by a profound Reverence of
his Majesty, and fear of offending him, even in the smallest Things, by an
earnest Endeavor to obey and please him, and by an infinite desire, and steady
Care to enjoy him here and forever! But,

5thly, Is Jehovah Infinite? Then we may hence learn the dangerous Case of
those who slight God; but who are they, and what is their Misery?

Answ. 1st. All such as say in the Pride of their Hearts with Pharaoh, who is
the Lord that I should obey him? Ex. ii. Or like those whom Job speaks of, Job
xxi. 14. They say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the Knowledge of
thy Ways; what is the Almighty that we should serve him?

2dly, All such as abuse the Kindness and Long-suffering of God. Romans ii. 4, 5.
Or despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance, not knowing that
the Goodness of God leads to repentance, etc.

3dly, Those slight Jehovah, who slight his Ambassadors, ( Luke x. 16.) And

4thly, These who prefer any Thing in this World before him, 2 Timothy iii. 4.
Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God. How dreadful is the Case of all
such, seeing they have an infinite God against them? How can they endure his
infinite Wrath, and which Way can they escape it? Not by Craft, for he is
infinite in Wisdom and Knowledge; not by Might, for he is infinite in Power.
When he but touches the Mountains they smoke, yea the Hills tremble at his
Presence! Not by Flight, for he is every where Present. If they take the Wings
of the Morning and fly to the utmost Ends of the Earth, if they ascend the Top
of Carmel or descend into the Deeps of the Ocean, yet they cannot escape the
Cognizance of God's Eye, or the reach of his Arm! He is wise in Heart and
mighty in Strength, who has hardened himself against him and prospered?

6thly. We should be excited by the consideration of God's infinite Greatness,
to be bold and magnanimous in the Service of God, particularly in undertaking
great Labors for God, and in encountering great Difficulties and Dangers in
the Way of Duty, seeing that God will be to us at last, as to Abram of old, an
exceeding great reward. And farther we should express magnanimity in a generous
Contempt of all worldly Gain and Grandeur, when compared with God and his
Service. And in a frequent Meditation upon, and vigorous Prosecution of divine
and heavenly Objects! We are the Sons of a great Prince, born to a great
Inheritance, and we are redeemed by a great Price, no less than the Blood of
the Son of God: Seeing that the great God is our Shield and Buckler, let us
despise the Threats of Worms, that are crushed before the Moth! But

7thly. Is God Immense, and every where Present? Tthis opens a Scene of sweet
Consolation to God's People in every Danger and Difficulty, because he is
present with them, not only with his Essence, but by his Grace. What then though
they should walk through the Valley and shadow of Death, yet they need fear no
Evil, for God is with them, and his Rod and Staff shall comfort them!
Particularly if they are in Solitude, Banishment, in Prison, under Persecution,
the Power of Deceases, or any other Calamity. How sweet is it to think that God
is at their right Hand, yea as a Wall of Fire about them! And therefore it may
be said to them as Julius Caesar spoke to the Ship-Master in the Time of a
Storm, " Trust to fortune, said he, for Julius is in the Ship." And as
Alexander to a Soldier, While I am present, said he, fear the Arms of no
Adversary, though you yourselves be unarmed. And as Augustine, What Man should
thou fear who art placed in the Bosom of God, This is well expressed in the
following Stanza.

Sic ubi Christus adest, nobis vel aranea murus.
Sic ubi Christus abest, vel murus aranea fiet.
i. e. When CHRIST is present, Cobwebs as Walls we see.
But when he is absent, Walls as Cobwebs be!
O! how refreshing is it to think that God is not only with his People, present
by his Essence, but present by his Wisdom, Power and Providence! to conduct,
support, protect and revive them in every Difficulty, and to sanctify them to
them. How careful should we be therefore, that this great omnipresent God,
should be ours in the Covenant of his Grace, by embracing the Mediator of the
Covenant by a living Faith, and living to him that died for us. We may be
separated from our earthly Friends very far, but God is every where: He was
with Daniel in the Den of Lions; with Jonah in the Water; with the three
Children in the Fire; with Paul and Silas in Prison, and with John in the
Retirements of Patmos! If we live humbly and watchfully, no human Art or
Violence can separate him from our Embraces! Well might the Psalmist say of
him, that he is a present Help in the Time of Trouble.

8thly, Is God Omnipresent? Then his Eye is continually upon us, in our most
retired Recesses. This Consideration should excite us to detest and avoid all
secret Sins, because a holy God, a just Judge, and righteous Avenger of Sin
continually beholds us! and is present with us in our most obscure Retreats!
The Darkness bides not from him, but the Night shines as the Day. Hence the
Lord himself commanded the Israelites to remove every filthy Thing out of their
Camp, because he walked in the midst thereof least he should turn away from
them, Deuteronomy. xxiii. 14. The atheistical Imagination that God is far off, and
takes no Cognizance of human Actions, is the fatal Source of Sin and Security!
Hence some are induced to commit those Evils in Secret, which they dare not
do, in the Presence of the meanest Witness, not considering that Conscience is
as a Thousand Witnesses, and that God is infinitely greater than our Hearts,
and knows all things, 1 John iii. 20. A Sense of God's Omnipresence and
Omniscience, is a most excellent Defensative against secret Impiety, it was by
this, that gallant and virtuous Joseph, warded off the formidable Assault of
his lacivious Mistress, Genesis xxxix. 9. How can I do this great Wickedness, and
Sin against God? And by this Job repelled Temptations to Idolatry, Job xxxi.
26, 27, 28. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in
Brightness, and my Heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my
Hand, this also were an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge; for I should have
denied the God that is above. The following Council of a Pagan is worthy of
Remark, " Turpe quod acturus te sine test, i. e. If thou art about to do any
Thing Base or Ignoble, be afraid of your self, though there be no Witness. It was
likewise a noble Answer of a Christian to a heathen Philosopher, who being
asked where his God was, replied, Let me first understand from you where he is
not. But,

9thly, Is God Immense and Omnipresent? Then we should be hereby excited to
secret Duty, and all manner of Sincerity. The Lord is every where Present with
us, For God is all Eye, and continually beholds us; he is all Ear and
incessantly hears us, as Augustine observes. He bottles all our Tears, and
records all our secret Sighs and Groans, none of our Wrestlings will be lost!
For that God who now sees in Secret, will by and by reward openly. Surely
Solitariness should neither embolden us to Sin, or hinder us from Duty. Mr.
Leigh in his Body of Divinity, tells the following Story of two religious Men,
who took two contrary Courses with two lend Women in order to reclaim them, The
one came to one of the Women as desirous of her Company, so it might be with
secresy, and when she had brought him to a close Room that none could pry into,
then he told her that all the Bolts and Bars which were, could not keep God
out. The other desired to accompany with the other Woman openly in the Street,
which when she rejected as a mad request, he told her it was better to do it
before the Eyes of a multitude than of God.

In fine let us be exhorted to labor to walk sincerely with God evermore, and
every where as present with us; in Imitation of Enoch, Genesis v. 24. And Enoch
walked with God: Of Noah Genesis vi. 9. Noah was a just Man and perfect in his
Generations, and Noah walked with God: Of Abram, Genesis 17.1. This the Holy
Scriptures many Ways require, when it urges us not only to walk with God, but
to walk before him, after him in his Name, and by his Spirit. Let us therefore
obandon all Hypocrisy, walk with Fear and Reverence as under the Eye of God; on
the one Hand abstaining-from every Evil, because of a present God; and on the
other Hand embracing every opportunity to do present Good, without delay and
without disguise, not with Eye Service as Men pleasers, but in singleness of
Heart fearing God, that we may have the Testimony of our Consciences here, and
be accepted of by the great Omnipresent and Omniscient God hereafter; which may
God grant for CHRIST'S sake.

SERMON IX.
ROMANS xi. 33, 34. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge
of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out.

For who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor.


THIS Text contains an admiring Exclamation, respecting the transcendent
Knowledge and Wisdom of God, more especially apparent in the Business of
Redemption and Predestination, in which we may observe three Things viz. 1st.
The Person exclaiming, Paul an Apostle, yea one of the most eminent of that
Order. A Person of a piercing Genius, and polite Learning, bred at the Feet of
Gamaliel, a Person of great Advances in Grace and divine Knowledge, a Person
peculiarly famous for unwearied and extensive Labors to promote the Good of
Mankind, and moreover one whom the Almighty was pleased to inspire after an
extraordinary Manner, to communicate the Knowledge of himself in his Son to a
lost World! Yet here we may behold this excellent Person mazed and non-plus'd,
and that in a Matter belonging to his own Province, a Matter which he made the
subject of his careful Enquiries! This leads to a 2d. Particular in the
Exclamation, viz. The Particle O! which is the Manner of it. This represents
the Strength and vehemence of the Apostles pious Passion, in this and in the
two preceding Chapters, he had spoken of many profound Mysteries, and answered
many critical Questions. But here he makes a Pause, and falls into an
Admiration of God, in respect of his Wisdom and Knowledge! He seems like a Man
who wades in deep Waters, till he looses Ground, and then cries out, O the
Depth! And so proceeds no farther. Mr. Pool in his Synopsis justly observes,
That the Words of our Text are an Epilogue or Conclusion of the whole
preceding Disputation, by which he teaches that he had aduced some Reasons of
Election and Reprobation, but that he neither knew them nor had taught them
perfectly. As if he had said I have expounded these Things as I could; but I am
swallowed up in the Abyss of the Councils of God, which cannot be searched to
Perfection, but must be adored. Now the

3d. Particular in the Exclamation, or Outcry is the Matter of it viz. The
Depth and Unsearchableness of the Riches of God's Wisdom and Knowledge, in his
Judgments and Ways. By the Judgments of God, the Context leads us to
understand, his Decrees and Purposes! And by his Ways, the Execution of them in
General, and more especially that Instance thereof which appeared in the
Rejection of the Jews, and calling in of the Gentiles to their Privileges. The
Apostle declares concerning both, that they are Unsearchable i. e. they cannot
be fully understood, and perfectly found out by any Creature, however
intelligent he be, especially in this World It Is a Metaphor ( says Pool in his
Annotations) taken from Hounds, who have no Scent of the Game which they
pursue. Nor can Men trace the Lord, or find out the Reason of his Providential
Actings and therefore should forbear censuring them. Though great Wisdom and
Knowledge attend the divine Purposes and Providence, yet it is such a Depth,
as cannot be sounded thoroughly by the Line of human Reason. And this the
Apostle assures us of in the Text, which is under our present Consideration. O
the Depth! The Wisdom and Knowledge of God exceed all Dimensions, as Zophar
elegantly observes, Job xi. 8, 9. It is higher than Heaven, deeper than Hell,
longer than the Earth and broader than the Sea! The Word Riches signifies an
excess of Wealth, by which a Person has more than he needs. And therefore here
it intimates the exceeding Abundance, and transcendent Eminence and Affluence
of the divine Wisdom and Knowledge, which we we can neither speak or think
highly enough of! Although God's Wisdom and Knowledge be one and the same in
himself, yet in our Manner of conceiving of them they are distinguished: For
Knowledge is merely speculative, and beholds Things simply as they are; but
Wisdom disposes them in a certain order to some valuable End.

From the Text thus explained, two Propositions offer themselves to our
Consideration, viz. 1st. That the Knowledge of God is deep, unsearchable and
Infinite. And 2dly. That the Wisdom of God is so also I return to the 1st.
Proposition which was as before described. Although Knowledge be put after Wisdom
in our Text, (perhaps by the Figure called hysteron proteron) yet in the Order
of Nature it seems to be before it: For we first behold Things, before we
dispose them in any Order to a certain End. Now in discoursing upon this
Subject, I shall labor to prosecute the following Order.

I. Prove the Infinity of the divine Knowledge. II. Show the Kinds thereof.
III. Speak of the Properties of God's Knowledge. IV. Point to its various
Objects, and lastly improve the whole. And
1st. The sacred Scriptures fully assert this Truth, Ps. cxxxix. 9, 10. If I
take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the utermost Parts of the Sea, even
there shall thy Right Hand lead me. 1 Samuel ii. 3. The Lord is a God of
Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed. Pro. v. 21. The Ways of a Man are
before the Lord and he pondereth all his Paths. Pro. xv. 3. The Eyes of the
Lord are in every Place, beholding the Evil and the Good. Job xxxiv. 21, 22.
For his Eyes are upon the Ways of Men, and he sees all their Goings. There is
no Darkness nor Shadow of Death, where the Workers of Iniquity may hide
themselves. Heb. iv. 13. Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in
his Sight, but all Things are naked and opened unto the Eyes of him, with whom
we have to do.

And right Reason assures us of the same Truth. For

1st. Seeing to know and understand is an Excellency involving no Imperfection
in it, it cannot without a Contradiction, be denied to an infinitely perfect
being. And

2dly. How can the supreme Being be without Knowledge, seeing he is the
Fountain and Original of all that Knowledge, which intelligent Beings possess?
It is in his Light, that they see Light. Shall not he that planted the Eye see,
and he that formed the Ear hear? And without Knowledge what would the Almighty
be but an Idol of whom it is said, Ps. cxv. 6, 7. That they have Eyes and see
not, Ears and hear not. But thus to imagine of God, is the basest Blasphemy!
Now the infinite Extent of the divine Knowledge, is evident from the following
Considerations, viz.

1st. Because it is the same with his Being, which his Simplicity assures us
of. Now the Being of God has been proved to be infinite in a preceding Sermon,
and therefore his Knowledge must needs be so, which coincides with it. And

2dly. Seeing God has given Being to all Things at First, it cannot without a
Contradiction be supposed, that he should be ignorant of the Effects of his own
Power. Must not a Workman know his Work? Besides

3dly. As Jehovah by his Almightiness has brought the whole Universe out of
Nothing into Being, so he continually supports the same, otherwise it would
immediatley return to its primitive Nonentity or Nothingness: For it is in him
we live move and have our Being. As we could not at first begin to exist
without God, so neither can we subsist a Moment, or think, or speak, or act
without him, who is the great Source of Being and Spring of Motion! And

4thly. As God upholds every Thing by his Power, so he governs. All by his
sovereign wise and unerring Providence in the best Manner, and to the noblest
End. viz. His own Glory. Surely then the End and Means conducing thereto, must
be known by him; and indeed if the Kingdom of God did not rule over all, as the
Scriptures assert, all Nature would be in Confusion, the discordant Elements
would immediately break their present Harmony, and jumble into the wildest
Chaos, and consequently dissolve in a tumultuous and extensive Ruin! The
Innocense, the Lives, the Goods of intelligent Creatures would instantly be
made an easy Prey to rapacious Lusts and resistless Violence! The whole Globe
would groan with a melancholy Train of successive Tragedies, and soon be tinged
with a crimson Flood!

5thly. Seeing the Almighty has fixed a Deputy in our Bosoms, I mean
Conscience, whose Business it is to observe and register our whole Behavior,
whose company we cannot shun, whose Cognizance we cannot escape! How much more
then must the Almighty be acquainted with all our Ways? For he is greater than
our Hearts, and knows all Things, as the Apostle John observes. Again

6thly. Methinks the Consideration of the general Judgment, gives additional
Evidence to the aforesaid Truth, for how can Jehovah judge all, unless he knows
all? The Apostle assures us, Romans ii. 16. That God will bring every Work into
Judgment, with every secret Thing, whether it be Good or whether it be Evil.
Yea, History both sacred and profane inform us, of God's bringing to public
Light crimson Evils, before veiled with the Curtains of obscurest Secresy! But
I proceed to the 2d. proposed, which was to speak of the Kinds of divine
Knowledge. And here I may observe, that as it respects Creatures, it is two
fold, viz. Either intuitive, or approbative, or as others phrase it, general or
special. Now God's general Knowledge, or his Knowledge of Intuition is that
Property of the Almighty, whereby he only knows, or beholds all Things. In this
Sense it is said Acts xv. 18. That known unto God are all his Works from the
Beginning of the World. And

2dly. God's approbative or special Knowledge, is that divine Perfection,
whereby Jehovah knows so, as to approve of, and delight in what he knows! Hence
our Lord, Mat. vii. 22. commands the Wicked to depart from him, and tells them
that he never knew them, that is so as to approve of them. But I pass on to the

3d. Proposed, which was to speak of the Properties of God's Knowledge. And

1st. The Knowledge of God is most Simple, inasmuch as he beholds at once all
Things in himself, without the Use of any of those Methods, whereby human
Knowledge is acquired, viz. The Composition of Things of the same Kind, the
Separation of Things of a different Kind, the comparing of one Thing with
another, and the inferring of one Thing from onother. Hereby the human Mind
proceeds gradually in a Way of reasoning, from the Knowledge of Things more
known, to the Knowledge of Things less known, but it is the Weakness of our
Understandings, that renders those Measures necessary, and therefore they
cannot consist with the Perfection of the supreme Being. If a Succession in
Duration be an Imperfection, as was proved in a preceding Sermon concerning
the Eternity of God, a Succession in Knowledge must be so likewise: For as it
necessarily infers Increase of Knowledge by Observation and Experience, so it
as evidently supposes preceding Ignorance, which to ascribe to the Almighty is
detestable Blasphemy. And

2dly. The Knowledge of God is Independent, because it is not in him as an
Accident, Quality, or Idea, different and separable from his Essence, as it is
in Creatures: For then he would be compounded of different Things, as Creatures
are, and so might in Time cease to be. No, his Simplicity assures us, as I
observed before, that his Knowledge is the very same with his Essence, it is no
other than God knowing, and therefore must needs be independent. That the
Essence of God is independent, has been already proved in a preceding Sermon.
But to proceed

3dly. The Knowledge of God is Eternal, inasmuch as he neither begins, or
ceases to know, as the Things known by him begin or cease to be in themselves.
The Reason of which is, because he knows all Things by his own Essence or
eternal Purposes, and not by receiving Species, or Images, or Ideas from
Objects without himself, as Creatures do. Here observe that two Things are
required to constitute the Knowledge of Creatures, viz. 1st. The Images or
Ideas of Things. And 2dly. the Speculation of them, which implies the receiving
of those Ideas through the outward Senses by the Fancy and Contemplation of them
being received, which consists partly in the Comparison of a Composition,
Division, Affirmation, or Negation; and partly in Deductions, or Reasonings,
whereby we proceed from Things more known to Things less known. The Method of
human Knowledge is by comparing, compounding, dividing and substracting the
Images of Things received; as also by considering their Connection and
Dependence, and infering one Thing from another. But the Ideas of God are not
borrowed from outward Objects? For if so, Creatures must exist, before the
divine Knowledge; and then it would be temporary and finite, this cannot be
without the Destruction of the divine Essence. Two Things indeed are necessary
to the divine Knowledge in our Apprehension distinct. viz. The Presence of
Ideas and the Perception of them, so that it may be thus described to be a
perfect Intuition of himself or his own Ideas, but without any receiving of
them from without, and without any Comparison, Composition, Division, or
Inferences, as was observed before, respecting the Knowledge of Creatures, for
all such Things, do manifesty involve Imperfection. Amesius in his Medulla
says, That the Idea of God, is no other than his very Essence, as it is
understood by him to be imitable, in the Creature, or so that the Image of that
Perfection, may after some sort be expressed in Creatures. The Idea in a Man,
is derived from the Things themselves, and therefore the Things must first
exist in themselves, then they approach our Senses, and from thence to our
Understanding, where they constitute some Idea to direct a following Operation;
but the Idea of the Almighty is the Model or Pattern, which first exists,
according to which, Things in Time are exactly formed, which Idea as it is
absoloutely considered in Relation to God, is but one, because it is his
Essence; but as it is considered respectively, it is manifold, because it
denotes many respects to the Creatures, so that the Idea of one Creature, is
not the Idea of another. Thus it appears that Things are known by God as they
are, and that there is a Connection and Dependence among the divine Ideas.
Whence springs the Order of Prior and Posterior, which we observe in
Predestination and Providence? It is doubtless on the Account of the
Manifoldness of the divine Idea, in the former Sense, that his Knowledge
receives various Names; in respect of the Truth of Things, it is called
Knowledge, in respect of its Extent, it is called Omniscience, in respect of
Past Things it is called Remembrance. (Psalm. xxv. 6, 7.) In respect of present
Things Sight. (Heb. iv. 13.) In respect of future Things Foreknowledge. (Romans
viii. 29.) In respect of the divine ordering of Things to a good End, it is
called Wisdom, in respect of the Knowledge of the most fit and proper Seasons
for all Things, it is called Prudence. But

4thly. The Knowledge of God is immutable, he knows not one Thing more than
another, neither does he know Things more now than formerly, or more formerly
than now; because he beholds all Things in his immutable Essence or Purposes,
and in his Eternity, by which he exists without any Succession in Duration,
altogether unmoved in all the different Periods of Time.

5thly. The Knowledge of God is Infinite perfect and distinct, he knows all
Things without Suspicion of Ignorance or Error. His Knowledge is distinct and
particular, not confused and general. Hence it is said, that when he had
finished the Works of Creation, that he saw every Thing, and behold it was very
good, that is, suited to answer the End intended for them, agreeable to the
Idea or Plan respecting them, which was from Everlasting in his own Mind.
Besides the Knowledge of God is certain and infallible, without any Hesitation
or Possibility of Mistake: And therefore exceedingly differs from the Knowledge
of Creatures, who can but guess and conjecture at Things to come, according to
the present Appearances, and probable Tendency of Things. This last Property of
the divine Knowledge naturally leads to the 4th proposed, which was to point to
the various Objects of the Knowledge of God, the Consideration of which will be
a farther Confirmation of it is infinite Extent, by an Induction of Particulars.
And

1st. God knows himself and his own infinite Mind. viz. What he has done, can
do, or will do. Romans xi. 34. For who has known the Mind of the Lord, and who
has been his Counselor, or who has first given to him? Here it is supposed,
that though Creatures know not the Mind of God, yet he does himself, and of
himself, without Assistance from others. Seeing it is an Excellency in an
intelligent Creature to know himself, though but in an imperfect Degree,
therefore self Knowledge in the highest degree of Eminence, must be ascribed to
the Almighty, who is infinitely perfect, and if so, then the Almighty must
needs know all Things, because they are included in his Power and Purpose.

2dly. God knows all Things possible. As the Power of God is unlimited, he
certainly can do infinitely more than he does, or will do. This extent of his
Power he must needs know, because he knows himself, the Almighty can do all
Things that do not involve a Contradiction, e. g. He could create, if he
pleased, Millions of Worlds, and Millions of more Orders of Creatures in them
than there be in this! We our selves, as free Agents, can do more than we do,
and as intelligent Agents we know the Instances wherein: And how much more must
this be ascribed to God, who is infinite in Power, and calls the Things that
are not as though they were? When David enquired of God 1 Samuel xxiii. 12. Will
Saul come down, and will the Men of Keilah deliver me up? The Almighty answered
they will. Which signifies that the Almighty knew they would, except they had
been prevented by his Providence. This Knowledge of Things possible, is called
by Zanchy and others The Science of simple Intelligence.

3dly. The Almighty knows all Things that have been, are, or shall be. This is
called the Science of Vision, which respects the Existence of Things, And

1st. The Almighty knows all Things past, for they were once present, nay they
may be said, in propriety of Speech, to be now present to God, because he has
no Succession in Duration, one Day is with him as a Thousand Years, and a
Thousand Years as one Day. To suppose that the Almighty forgets any Thing, is
in other Words to say that his Knowledge is less perfect than it was, which
cannot consist with infinite Perfection. And

2dly. God knows all Things present, which the Reasons before offered to prove
the Infinity of his Knowledge sufficiently confirm. Seeing all Things depend
upon his Power and Providence, they must be known by him, for his Knowledge and
Power cannot be separated.

3dly. God likewise knows all things future, or to come, whether they are
produced by a necessary Cause, such as Fire or Water; or a voluntary Cause,
such as Men who act by rational Complacency, or a contingent Cause, which by
its Nature, or in it Self, is not determined to this or that Effect. The many
Prophesies of the Prophets concerning Events, many Ages before they came to
pass, sufficiently confirm this Truth. It was well observed by Tertullian
against Marcion, That the fore Knowledge of God, has as many Witnesses, as he
has made Prophets. Was not Judas's betraying our Lord an Effect of a voluntary
or free Cause? And yet this was prophesied of. ( John vi. ult. Acts iv. 28.) Of
the like nature was Isreal's Oppression in Egypt, and yet this was foretold Four
Hundred Years before it came to pass. ( Genesis xv. 13.) Was not Joseph's
Advancement a contingent and very improbable Event, and yet it was made known
several Years before it came to pass by his Dream. ( Genesis xxxvii. 5.) What
could be more contingent than Ahab's Death by a Random-shot, and yet this was
foretold before he entered the Field of Battle. 1 Kings xxii. 17, 34. Things are
said to be contingent and accidental, because they happen or come to pass
unexpectedly to us, without our Design or Knowledge, and because the Causes
that produce them, are not in themselves necessarily determined to produce such
an Effect; but nothing can come to pass without Jehovah's Cognizance, and
Purpose. And hence the Scriptures inform us, that the most minute Events, fall
within the Care and Compass of his Providence, which extends it self to the
most inconsiderable Creatures, a Sparrow cannot fall to the Ground, without our
Fathers Permission, and the very Hairs of our Head are numbered. Mat. x. 29,
30. The Time would fail, if I should relate all the Prophesies mentioned
respecting CHRIST. I shall therefore rather choose to observe, in Addition to
what has been said, that Almighty God knows all that concerns intelligent
Beings in particular, as may appear by the following Instances, viz.

1st. He knows all their Actions Ps. cxix. 168. For all my Ways are before
thee. There is no Darkness or Shadow of Death, where the Workers of Iniquity
may hide themselves.

2dly. He knows all our Words, Psalm. cxxxix. 4. For there is not a Word in my
Tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether.

3dly. He knows our Hearts, this he claims as his peculiar Prerogative, Rev.
ii. 23. And all the Churches shall know that I am he that searches the Reigns
and Hearts. He knows the Thoughts of the Heart: Hence he is said to know them
afar off, i. e. From Eternity, as Divines generally interpret; and hence he is
likewise said to tell unto Man his Thoughts, Amos iv. 13. He knows the
Imagination of the Thoughts of the Heart. Genesis vi. 5. And God saw that the
Wickedness of Man was great on the Earth, and that every Imagination of the
Thoughts of his Heart was only Evil continually. By the Imagination of the
Thoughts, we may understand Thoughts in their Embryo not fully formed. He knows
the Intention of the Heart, Heb. iv. 12. And is a discerner of the Thoughts and
Intents of the Heart. He knows the Bent of the Heart, Hos. 11.7. And my People
are bent to Backsliding from me, though they called them to the most high,
none at all would exalt him. And the Knowledge God has of what has been
mentioned, and of every thing else, is certain and evident. Hence Zanchy
pertinently observes. That Knowledge by the Understanding, is either Opinion,
Faith or Science. Opinion, says he, is neither a certain or evident Knowledge,
but so assents to the affirmative or negative Part that it Doubts concerning
the other. Faith, says he, is a certain, but not evident Knowledge! (Heb. xi.
1.) but Science is both a certain and evident Knowledge, this therefore upon
both Accounts is truly and properly ascribed to God.

But against what has been offered in Confirmation of the Infinite and
universal Extent of Gods Knowledge, the Pelagians and Socinians object, 1st.
That God is said to be grieved, Genesis vi. 6, 7. That he expected good Grapes of
his Vine, Isa. v. 2. That he tried the Faith and Obedience of Abraham, and in
respect of it said, now I know that thou fear God. Genesis xxii. 12. To this we
answer, with Athanasius, That those and such like Places of Scripture, are
spoken after the Manner of Men, but should be understood so as to consist with
the divine Perfection. They are designed to repent the exceeding Contrariety of
Evil to the Purity of the divine Nature, and the Agreeableness of what is Good
thereto.

Object. 2. It is said concerning the inhuman Barbarities which the People of
Judah committed in the Valley of Hinnom, that it came not into the Heart of
God,, Jer. vii. 31.

Answ. The whole Verse considered together explains itself: There we have these
Words, which I commanded them not: So that the meaning of the Scripture appears
to be no more than this, that it never came into the Almighty's Heart to
command or approve of the Wickedness of Israel, in sacrificing their Children
to Moloch.

Object. 3. Future Contingencies have no determined Certainty.

Answ. It Is true they have not in themselves, but they have in the Decree of
God, who does all Things after the Council of his own Will, Ephesians. i. 11. But I
proceed to the Improvement. And

1st. The Consideration of God's Omniscience should deter us from secret Sins.
Impenitent Transgressors are apt to speak in the Language of Eliphaz, How does
God know? Can he judge through the thick Cloud? Thick Clouds are a covering to
him, that he sees not, and he walks in the Circuit of Heaven. But it is vain
for Men to encourage themselves thus in sinning by hopes of Secresy; For there
is no Darkness or shadow of Death where the Workers of Iniquity may hide
themselves. The Darkness is as the Light to God, and the Night shines as the
Day. As Augustine observes, "Jehovah is all Eye," he not only beholds secret
Impieties with just Indignation, but records them in order to the last
Judgment. Then will be made manifest the hidden Councils of Sinners Hearts:
Then shall they be exposed to all that Shame and Misery, which their disguised
Impieties deserve! And

2dly. The Consideration of God's Omniscience should powerfully incite us to
secret Duties, seeing our heavenly Father who sees in secret will reward
openly, Mat. vi. 4. Hypocrites love much outward Show and Ostentation, as the
Pharisees of old, who made Broad their Philacteries. -- But truly pious Souls
incline to screne much of their Devotion from others Observance, by a Vail of
Modesty. How comfortably does our Lord speak to his Church in her Retirements.
Cant. ii. 14. O my Dove, that art in the Clifts of the Rock, in the secret
Places of the Stairs, let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice; for
sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is comely,

3dly. This Subject also invites us to be sincere both in our secret and
public Duties, and in all manner of Conversation after David's Example, 1 Chronicles. xxv. 17. I know also my God that thou tryest the Heart, and have
Pleasure in Uprightness. Seeing that the most retired Recesses of our Souls are
open to the All-penetrating Eye of God, let us watch our Hearts diligently and
chiefly labor to approve our selves to him, who principally requires the
Heart, without which all outward Service is but a specious Kind of Mockry. And

4thly. The Consideration of the divine Omniscience should make us ashamed of
our Ignorance; surely we are but of Yesterday, and know nothing comparatively.
What Reason have we to lament with Agur, that we are as brute Beasts before
God, and have not attained to the Knowledge of the Holy? If we have a little
Knowledge, let us beware that we be not puffed up with it; for the highest
acquired Seize in Knowledge here, are as nothing compared with what we
are Ignorant of; and less than nothing when compared with the infinite Abyss of
divine Knowledge. If we have received any Thing from God, why should we boast
as though we had not received it, especially considering that by those Talents we
are more deeply indebted to God as Stewards under him, who must give an
Account. And,

5thly. Is God Omniscient? Then if we are sincere, we may hope and rejoice in
him in every Difficulty, whether Personal or Public! Are we reproached by our
fellow Creatures? What then? Let us speakin the Apostle's Language, 2 Cor. i.
12. For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, we have had our Conversation in the World, and more abundantly to
you-wards. Are we in Poverty and Want? our heavenly Father knows that we need
Support. (Mat. vi. 31.) Are we persecuted? our Father beholds the Mischief and
the Spite, and will requite it with his Hand, as the Psalmist expresses it. Are
we in Desertion, and ready to say that God has forgotten us? How supporting is
it in such a Case to think upon that sweet Passage, Isa. xlix. 15. Can a Woman
forget her sucking Child? And that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy ii. 19. The Lord
knows who are his. What though we be environed with Trouble, so that we cannot
see the smallest Passage open for an Escape; yet God knows how to deliver his
People: He can with the Temptation, send a Door of Deliverance! And what though
the poor Church be covered with Clouds and Darkness, and every way encompassed
with Enemies and Distresses, so that a human Understanding is quite nonplus'd
and cannot see how Relief should come? Then it is comfortable to think that all
Things are open to the Eye of God, and that he who sits in Heaven, derides the
Councils of his Enemies, ( Psalm. ii.) and will bring them to Naught in his own
Time, and that no Weapon formed against Zion shall prosper.

In fine let us glorify God on the Account of his Knowledge, and cry out with
the Apostle in our Text, O the Depth of the Knowledge of God! And let us labor
to imitate this divine Perfection, lest we be as Brutes, in whom there is no
Understanding, ( Psalm. xxxii. 9) without divine Knowledge the Mind cannot be
Good, as Solomon observes. It was a pertinent Observation of Bishop Beveridge,
in his Thoughts on Religion, That as God would not accept of blind Sacrifices
under the Law, so neither will be of blind Services under the Gospel. Religion
is a Reasonable Service and therefore it must be attended with Knowledge ( Romans
xii. 1.) The Almighty complains by the Prophet, that his People were destroyed
for lack of Knowledge. Hos. iv. 6. Hence the Almighty promises to send Pastors
after his own Heart, which should feed the People with Knowledge and
Understanding Jer. iii. 15. Hence the Priests Lips are said to preserve
Knowledge. But on the contrary its said of the Pharisees, that they took away
the Key of Knowledge, Luk xi. 52. And that the Ignorant and Instable wrest the
Scriptures to their own Destruction. Therefore let us earnestly seek the
Knowledge of God in the use of all proper Means, for this is the Foundation of
all reasonable Religion.

SERMON X.
ROMANS xi. 33, O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out.


YOU may remember that in the preceding Discourse, after an Explication of the
Text, I observed these two Propositions from it, viz. That the Knowledge of God
was Deep, Unsearchable, and Infinite. And 2dly, That the Wisdom of God was so
also. The first of which has been already discoursed upon; the 2d, therefore
comes now to be considered. In Relation to which it will be necessary to speak
upon these four Particulars following, viz.

I. The Nature of the divine Wisdom. II. It Is Kinds. III. It Is Properties or
Qualities. IV. Its Displays. And lastly improve the whole. And.
1st. The divine Wisdom may be thus described, viz. That it is that pecular
Virtue or Perfection of the divine Mind, whereby the Almighty knows by what
Methods he can best compass and illustrate his own Glory in all his Works,
whether of Creation, Redemption, o^ Providence. There is a twofold Act of
Wisdom, and both eminent in God. The first is Knowledge in the Nature of
Things, which is called Science. The 2d. is Knowledge how to order and dispose
of Things in the best Manner, and to the best End, which is called Prudence.
Though Wisdom necessarily suppose. Knowledge, yet it contains more than
Knowledge; for there may be but little Wisdom where there is much Knowledge,
though there can be no Wisdom without Knowledge! Knowledge, as Dr. Ridgely well
observes, is as it were the Eye of the Soul, whereby it apprehends or sees
Things in a true Light, and so it is opposed to Ignorance, or not knowing
Things; but Wisdom is that whereby the Soul is directed in the skilful
Management of Things, or in ordering them for the best. And this is opposed not
so much to Ignorance or Error of Judgment, as to Folly, or Error in Conduct,
which is a defect of Wisdom. In Wisdom therefore there are these four
Ingredients, viz. 1st. A fixing upon the noblest End.

2dly, A Choice of the best Means, viz. Such as directly conduce to attain the
End designed.

3dly, An alloting of the fittest Season for the Use of the aforesaid Means,
together with the Observation thereof.

4thly, A. Foresight of, and Provision against all such Occurences, as may mar
our Attainment of the End proposed, or offer Occasion for uneasy Sensations, on
the Account of Mismanagement! Now every of the aforesaid Ingredients are truly
applicable to Jehovah: For 1st. he has fixed upon the best End in all his
Works, viz. His own Glory. Hence it is said that he made all Things for
himself, Pro. xvi. 4. But here it may be enquired, what is the Glory of God?
And how does it appear to be the best End?

Answ. The Glory of God may be thus described, viz. That is the Brightness of
his infinite Eminence known and manifested. But how does this appear to be the
best End?

Answ. As God himself is the best Being, the Manifestation of himself, must by
Consequence be the most excellent and noble End! And what is this but his
declarative Glory? Seeing that Creatures are derived from him as their
producing Cause, it is but reasonable that they should be referred to him, or
his Glory as their End. Hence says the Apostle, for of him, and through him, and
to him are all Things! But seeing that God is of himself, he can have no other
final Cause but himself. If he had any other Supreme End but his own Glory, he
would aim ultimately at something below himself, which is absurd, and depend
on something besides himself, which is impossible. From what has been said it
is evident, that the first Character or Ingredient of Wisdom, viz. a fixing
upon the noblest End, is justly applicable to Almighty God. I proceed to the

2d. Which was the Choice of the best Means directly conducing to attain the
End designed. Now that this is applicable to God, will appear by the following
Particulars. 1st. Jehovah has made his Glory manifest or visible, by engraving
large and legible Characters thereof in his Word and Works, in both which we
may easiy discern many Footsteps or Signatures of his adorable Attributes! Now
without this Manifestation, however Infinite and Transcendent, the essential
Emminence or Perfection of God might be, yet it would not be perceived or
celebrated by Creatures. And,

2dly, God has made intelligent Creatures capable through his Assistance and
Influence to perceive, acknowledge, and honor his Excellency and Glory,
manifested as aforesaid. Though irrational and inanimate Creatures may
objectively glorify God. In this respect it is said that the Heavens and Earth
do show forth God's Glory, i. e. They offer Occasion to inteligent Beings to
magnify God's Name, by showing the Power and other Perfections of God apparent
in their Production. Romans 1.20. For the invisible Things of him, from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the Things that are
made, even his eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without Excuse. Yet
none but intelligent Creatures can actively and with Design, Glorify God. And

3dly, Because some are either so Stupid or Negligent, that they cannot or will
not, in a way of reasoning, infer his Perfections from his Works; therefore the
Almighty has implanted a Monitor in Men's Bosoms to inform them of their Duty,
and represent the Danger of Neglect in the most convincing Manner. Hence it is
said that the Heathens not having the Law, i. e. The moral Law written, were a
Law unto themselves: Their Consciences in the mean Time accusing or excusing
one another. And

4thly, To add Light and Force to the Instructions and Admonitions of
Conscience, and to enlarge our views of his Attributes, more obscurely
represented by his Works! Jehovah has added his Word, which he has magnified
above all his Name. But to proceed, the

3d, Ingredient of Wisdom is likewse applicable to the Almighty, for he has
appointed to every thing its Time and Season, and made them beautiful therein:
All his Ways are Judgment, calculated in every of their Circumstances with the
deepest Penetration! ( Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4.) And

4thly, He has guarded against all adverse Occurrences, by his eternal and
unalterable Purposes; his Almighty power and sovereign Providence, which
preside over all Events: So that the Wrath of Man shall be constrained to
praise him. He will in the Issue get himself Glory from all his Creatures,
either in an objective, Active, or pasive Way. His Mercy or Justice will have a
Tribute of Honor from all the intelligent Creation, either in their Salvation
or Damnation! But I proceed to the

2d. Proposed, which was to speak of the Kinds of divine Wisdom: Now the Wisdom
of God is twofold, viz. Essential and Personal, the personal Wisdom of God is
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, he is called the Wisdom of God, by way of Appropriation,
on Account of his mediatorial Office: Because herein the divine Wisdom has been
most marvelously manifested, In him, as Mediator for his Peoples Benefit, are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. ii. 3. The essential Wisdom
of God is what is Common to all the Persons of the sacred Trinity, and is the
Subject of our present Discourse. I pass on therefore to the

3d. Proposed, which was to mention the Properties or Qualities of divine
Wisdom. And

1st. It is Infinite as our Text asserts, O the Depth of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding
out! It must of necessity be Infinite, because it is himself.

2dly. Original Wisdom, of this the Royal Prophet speaks in bold and noble
Strains, Isa. xl. 12, 13. Who has measured the Waters in the Hollow of his
Hand, and meted out the Heavens with a Span, and comprehended the Dust of the
Earth in a Measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a
Balance? Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor
has taught him? He is the great Fountain from which all created Beings derive
their Streams; yea he is wisdom it self in the Abstract, which his Simplicity
proves! And

3dly. He is universal Wisdom, John xxi. 17. Lord thou know all Things, thou
know that I Love thee. And

4thly. He is unerring and infallible Wisdom; this then is the Message which we
have heard of him, and declare unto you that God is Light, and in him is no
Darkness at all.

5thly. He is immutable Wisdom, and hence he is called the Father of Lights,
with whom there is no Variableness nor Shadow of turning.

6thly. He is incommunicable or unparalled Wisdom, and hence he is called the
only Wise God, Romans xvi. 27. He is likewise said to be wonderful in Council,
and excellent in Working, Isa. xxviii. 29. There is indeed some faint Shadow of
the divine Wisdom in Creatures, but the essential Wisdom of God cannot be
communicated. The Wisdom of all Creatures put together, is but as a single Drop
compared with the immense Ocean, of Wisdom in God. But the

4th. Proposed comes now to be considered, which was to speak of the Displays
of God's Wisdom in his Works. And

1st. The Wisdom of God appears with much Beauty, in the Works of Creation: How
noble is the Harmony that subsists among the numerous Parts of this vast
Machine, notwithstanding of the discordant Elements of which they are formed?
How amiable and amazing is the Order of Subserviency among its Parts, together
with their general Tendency to promote the Good of the whole Frame? Hos. ii.
21, 22. I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and they shall
hear the Earth. And the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel. The regular and steady Motion of the heavenly
Bodies, together with their Situation and Influence upon the Earth; as well as
the Support, Conveyance, and dissolving of the Clouds in Rain and Dews so
necessarily to refresh and render Fruitful the parched Surface of this lower
World; manifest the Depth of divine Wisdom, and justly challange our
Admiration. Job. xxxviii. 31, 32, 33, 44. Can thou bind the sweet influences
of Pleiades, or loose the Bands of Orion? Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in
his Season, or can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons? Know thou the
Ordinances of Heaven? Can thou set the Dominion thereof in the Earth? Can
thou lift up thy Voice to the Clouds, that abundance of Waters may cover thee?
How curious is the Structure of that little World the Body of Man, in respect
of the Form, Number, and Situation of its Parts, both for Beauty and Service?
Of this the Psalmist admiring says, I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
marvelous are thy Works, and that my Soul knows right well. The Heathen
Annatomist (says Mr. Willard) read a God in it, and was, transported to sing
his Praise. Is it not admirable that among that vast Variety of Parts, which
compose the World, that not one is Defective, not one Superfluous, or
Redundant, even the smallest Insect loudly proclaims the Wisdom of it is Former?
For what less than infinite Wisdom could comprize all the Springs and Organs of
Life, Sense, and Motion in so small a Compass? How justly may we Use the
Prophet Jeremiah's, and the Psalmists Language? He has made the Earth by his
Power, he has established the World by his Wisdom, and strech'd out the
Heavens by his Discretion. Lord how manifold are thy Works, in Wisdom have thou
made them all. And

2dly. Is not the Wisdom of God displayed in the Work of Redemption most
gloriously, even to the just Astonishment of Men and Angels? Hence the Apostle
calls it the manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. iii. 10. (polupocilos Sophia) This
the Angels desire to look into! Divine Wisdom has found out a Way to satisfy
divine Justice, which was wronged by the Creatures revolt from God, through the
Sufferings of a Mediator in their Room; a Way to magnify the Law, and make it
honorable by the perfect Obedience of the Son of God in the Transgressors
Place: Hereby both the Precept and Penalty of the Law are fully answered, and a
Door opened for the Manifestation of rich, pure and glorious Grace, in the
Remission and Salvation of fallen Mankind, without infringing upon the Rights
of Justice, Truth and Holiness: Surely such a Devise as this, would have
nonplus'd all the Creation. What less than infinite Wisdom could bring the
greatest Glory to God, and the greatest Good to Mankind out of the greatest
Evil, viz. Sin? Both which are directly contrary to the Nature of it! And this
indeed is the true State of the Case; for as it is certain that Believers are
now upon a more sure Foundation, respecting their Happiness, than our first
Parents were before the Fall; because their Stock is now in the Hands of the
Mediator, which was before in their own, so we cannot see how the Grace and
Mercy of God could have had such marvelous and bright Displays, had not Sin
been in the World! Thus out of the Eater divine Wisdom has brought forth Meat,
and out of the Strong, Sweetness. It might be here likewise observed, that the
deferring of the Messiah coming in the Flesh for a long Space of Time, is no
inconsiderable Discovery of divine Wisdom: For hereby Room was given for the
Trial and Exercise of the Faith and Patience of God's People, in depending on
his Word, and waiting for the Accomplishment thereof; for thus was Jehovah
glorified, Heb. xi. 13. These all died in Faith, not having received the
Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth. And indeed the Time of our Lords coming was most seasonable; for then
the Darkness of Impiety most dreadfully prevailed, and real Religion
languish'd, and had almost totally expired. It was proper therefore that then
the Day spring from on High should visit a benighted World, and the Sun of
Righteousness arise upon them to turn away Ungodliness from Jacob!

3dly. The Wisdom of God is also wonderfully displayed in his Works of
Prividence! in Relation to the World in general, and to his Church and People
in particular.

The insensible Parts of the Creation are conducted by divine Providence to an
End which they know not. The Sun observes his stated Periods of rising and
setting, and runs his wonted Round to enlighten and animate this lower Globe,
and the Stars with exact Order atten'd their several Motions, many irrational
Animals act with a Discretion, like that of intelligent Beings, Jer. viii. 7.
The Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed Times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the Time of their coming. The Ant by prudent
industry, lays up her Winter Store before it is Approach!

What else than a wise and watchful Providence keeps the whole System of Things
in its proper Situation, so that the Elements do not break Loose and destroy
each other? And what but this bounds the Wrath of savage Men, and makes it turn
to the divine Praise? But more particularly in Relation to the Church of God,
how marvelously has the Wisdom of God appeared in his Providence?

In the Time of the Patriarchs, while Men lived a long Space, God was pleased
to instruct his People by immediate Revelation and Tradition; but when the
Lives of Men were much contracted, and there was Danger, on that Account of the
Corruption of Tradition, it pleased God to communicate his Mind and Will to his
People by Writing; which is a Method less liable to the aforesaid
Inconvenience. Moreover in the written Word, the Almighty instructed his Church
gradually in the Knowledge of the Gospel, first more obscurely by Types and
Shadows; and afterward more plainly by a clearer Revelation: Thus the Almighty
treated them like Children, as they were able to bear it!

And doubtless the harder and more costly Services required, under the Jewish
Economy, tended to make Men long for, and more eagerly embrace an easier
Dispensation!

But the Wisdom of God in his Providence toward his Church, has appeared in
nothing more eminently than in baffling the Contrivances and Attempts of her
Enemies, and in turning them to her Advantage! A noble Instance of this we read
of in the Book of Ester, when Haman had cruelly devised the utter Ruin of the
Jewish Church and Nation, and had brought his malicious Plot almost to the
fatal Period of Execution! How admirably was it frustrated, and the Tables
turned in his own overthrow? While poor Mordecai, the Mark of his ambitious
Rage, was honored and protected, and the Church established! The Incident that
led to this surprising Revolution of Affairs, was truly astonishing, viz. The
King's Restlessness one Night, and reading in the Book of the Chronicles of
Mordecai's Services to the Kingdom!

And indeed in all Ages it has pleased the all-wise God to make Persecution of
Service to his Church, so that there is good Ground for that ancient and common
Proverb, that The Blood of the Martyrs, is the seed of the Church: But in
Particular the Persecution at Jerusalem is a memorable Instance of this Kind,
for the Christians being thereby dispersed, were Means of spreading the Gospel
far and wide! And did not Israel's Oppression in Egypt, prepare the Way for
their happy Deliverance, by making them more desirous after it, and more ready
to embrace the Call of God, in abandoning their Captivity?

And that I may say many Things in one, was not Satan and his Instruments
overshot, in their own Bow, in respect of the Crucifiction of Christ? What they
designed for Evil, has not God's Wisdom turned to the greatest Good? By Death,
Life is brought to Believers, by the bitterest Pain, the sweetest Pleasure, and
by the basest Ignominy, the highest Honor!

An immemorial Instance of the Wisdom of God, in his Providence in compassing a
noble End, by contrary Means, we have respecting Joseph his being sold to the
Ishmalites, and imprisoned in Egypt, were Occasions introductory to his exalted
Dominion over that Nation; and this the Occasion of his Father's Family coming
and residing there, and so of the fulfillment of the Prophesies, respecting
Isreal's abode in Egypt, and Deliverance out of it, in after Time. The Wheels of
Providence are full of Eyes. It may be truly said of them, that (Non ceco
impetu volvunter rote.) the Wheels of Providence are not governed by blind
Chance. But the Time will not serve to relate any more Instances. I therefore
proceed to the Improvement of this Subject And

1st. The Consideration of the divine Wisdom should excite us to Modesty in our
Meditations upon the Difficulties which we sometimes meet with in God's Word
and Works! Though the Mysteries of Faith do not contradict human Reason, yet they
in some Instances transcend its Reach! And there be sometimes obscure Texts in
the Providence of God too difficult for us to solve. The Almighty walks
sometimes in the great Deep, and his Footsteps are not known, he makes Darkness
his Pavilion, and hides the Face of his Throne! In this Case let us consider,
that the Foolishness of God is wiser than Men, and cry out with the Apostle in
our Text, O the Depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out? Let us beware of
calling the divine Wisdom to the Bar of our Reason, with the Socinians, 1 Cor.
iii. 18. If any Man among you seems to be wise in this World, let him become
a Fool that he may be wise. Not a Fool really, with Enthusiasts, who reject all
use of Reason in Religion, but a Fool in his own Eyes, i. e. Let him be humble
under a Sense of his Folly and Weakness, and reject all Dependence upon his own
Understanding. And

2dly. This Subject learns us the Reasonableness of Contentment in every change
of Circumstance, seeing the Infinitely wise God knows best what is best for us.
If we were left to our own Choice, we should certainly ruin ourselves, with
what calm Confidence should we then commit our Way to God, that he may bring it
to pass. And

3dly. The Wisdom of God offers Food for our Faith, and Comfort to our Souls
under the darkest Appearances of divine Providence respecting the Church. We
are sure that he is the Ruler, and that he rules in Wisdom, nothing happens
besides his Purpose, or without his Providence. He can make the most contrary
Things promote his Kingdoms Good, as was observed before, and he has promised
that he will do so. ( Romans viii. 28.) And elsewhere he has said, that no Weapon
formed against Zion, shall prosper. Then let us resign our Wisdom and Wills to
God, let us believingly commit the Affairs of God's Kingdom into the Mediators
Hands, and expect the fulfillment of his Word.

4thly. Is God's Wisdom displayed in his Word and Works? Then let us meditate
on them, with more frequency and Care, and ascribe to God the Glory of that
Wisdom which appears in them, in the Sentiments of our Minds, by the Speeches
of our Lips, and the Actions of our Lives. It is a just Observation of the
Psalmist, That the Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all those that
have Pleasure therein.

5thly. Is God Infinite in Wisdom? Then 1st. Let us ask Wisdom of him who
gives to all Men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given us. Jam.
i. 5. And 2dly. Let us according to our Measure imitate the divine Wisdom.

1st. By fixing upon an End, in the Enjoyment of which we may be completely
happy, viz. God's Glory and the Enjoyment of him. And

2dly. By the Choice of proper Means tending to that End, such as Faith,
Repentance and Holiness, as God is Holy, so those that expect to enjoy him,
must be like him.

3dly. By improving the present Seasons, in the use of the aforesaid Means.
This is the Command of God, 2 Cor. vi. 1, 2. We then as Workers together with
him, beseech you also that ye receive not the Grace of God in vain. (For he
says, I have heard thee in a Time accepted, and in the Day of Salvation have I
succored thee: Behold, now is the accepted Time; behold now is the Day of
Salvation.)

To this we should be excited likewise, by considering the Shortness and
Uncertainty of our Time and its Opportunities, together with the vast Moment
that depends upon the Improvement thereof. And

4thly. We should guard against every Appearance of Evil, that tends to
obstruct us in the Pursuit of our chief End. The very contrary to the aforesaid
Particulars, constitutes the Folly of the ungodly World. They either fix upon
some Enjoyment here as their chief End, or if they pretend a higher End, take
contrary Measures to attain it. They neglect the present Seasons of Mercy, with
the Fool they have a Price in their Hand, but no Heart to it. They likewise
rush into Places of Temptation, and so are easily ensnared, and sell their
Salvation for a Thing of Naught.

SERMON XI.
GENESIS, xvii. 1. And when Abram was Ninety Years old and Nine, the Lord
appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me,
and be thou perfect.


IN the Words of our Text, we have a Summary of the Gracious Covenant, God was
pleased to make with Abram of old, containing these two Things following, which
deserve our Notice, viz.

1st. What God's Covenant People may expect him to be to them, in these Words,
I am the Almighty God. (Elshadai) This is the Name of God, ( says Mr. Henery in
his Annotations) that is mostly used throughout the Book of Job, at least
thirty Times in the Discourses of that Book, in which Jehovah is used but once.
This Name (as Mr. Poole in his Synopsis, and other learned Men observe)
signifies the Strength and Sufficiency of God, It speaks (says Henery) the
Almighty Power of God, either as an Avenger, or as a Benefactor, but it should
be especially taken in the Latter Sense. as Drusius and others observe. In
which it signifies God's Self-Sufficiency, and All Sufficiency. He is able to
perform all that he has said, respecting his People, he has enough in
himself, and of himself, for himself and for them; he has all Things, and
needs nothing to complete his own Perfection and Blessedness, and is able to
confer on us a Happiness, as large as our Desires, and as lasting as our Souls.
And therefore this Word, seems to be better rendered in the old English Version,
than in the present: For there it is thus expressed. I am God all sufficient.
But

2dly. The Words of our Text inform us, what God expects or requires his People
to be to him. And this is expressed in two Particulars, viz. Walking before
him, and in being perfect. Walk before me. This Word by a Metaphor intends
Men's Lives and Actions, ( Ps. i. 1.) Because there is some Analogy or
Resemblance between them, and a natural Way. Before me, i. e. Under a continual
Sense of my Presence and Cognizance, as a Servant before his Lord. And be thou
perfect. Simmachus renders the Word perfect, blameless, but according to the
most of Interpreters, it signifies, Sincerity or Freedom from Deceit and Guile;
and in this Sense it is ascribed to Abram, Noah, David and Job. (Genesis vi. 9.
Ps. xviii. 23. Job i. 1.) That is perfect in the Apostle Paul's Judgment, which
has all its Parts, though it be not perfect in Degrees. 2 Timothy iii. 17. That the
Man of God, may be perfect thoroughly furnished to all good Works. And such as
are more advanced in Knowledge and Holiness than others, are called perfect
comparatively. Phil. iii. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus
minded. God Almighty therefore does not covenant with Abram, for an entire
Perfection of Degrees, as the Papists dream, who are herein followed by the
whole Tribe of Enthusiasts; but he requires a Perfection of Parts, or
Sincerity. viz. That he should endeavor to conform his Practice, to all Parts
of the divine Law, without Guile or reserve. I know no Religion (said excellent
Mr. Matthew Henery) but Sincerity.

In discoursing upon this Text I shall speak upon the three following Heads,
viz.

I. The Sufficiency of God. II. Walking before him. III. Sincerity.
And then apply the whole. The

1st. General Head of Discourse is God's Sufficiency, or All Sufficiency, which
may be thus described, viz. That it is a Perfection of the divine Nature
whereby Johovah has enough in himself, for himself, and for his People in
every respect. This results from his Infinity in particular, as well as from
his other Attributes in general, because he existed not by the Will of another,
therefore he is independent and infinite in his Essence and in all his
Attributes and Being, so he must be consequently perfect and all sufficient. As
his Simplicity assures us, that he can admit nothing of another Kind, to
perfect his Being, so his Eternity informs us, that he was happy in himself,
when there was none besides him. And seeing all the Excellencies of Creatures
are derived from him, he must possess the same eminently in himself, otherwise
he could not confer them upon others. Hence is that Beautiful Passage of the
Psalmist, Ps. xxxvi. 10. With thee is the Fountain of Life, and in thy Light
shall we see Light. Theophilact glosseth pertinently upon this Place of
Scripture in the following Manner. As the Sun (says he) is alway^ beheld full,
and never lessened as the Moon, so God always exists perfect, full of Wisdom,
Power, Immortallity and all other good Things. And the Scriptures assert
elsewhere, that God is perfect, Mat. v. 48. Perfect in Wisdom, Power,
Beneficence, and that he needs Council or Help of none. Job. xxii. 2, 3 Romans
xi. 34, 35.

But that the aforesaid Description of God's Sufficiency may be the better
understood, let the following Particulars be considered.

1st. That the general Nature of this Attribute is Fullness, or enough of
Excellency and Good. This is a Perfection opposed to Emptiness and Defect, and
is attended with the following Properties. viz.

1st. It is an underiv'd Fullness Romans xi. 35, 36. Who has first given to him,
and it shall be recompensed to him again, for of him, and through him, and to
him are all Things.

2dly. It is an independent Fullness: He has no Dependence upon Creatures,
neither can he receive any Good or Excellency from them, because they have
derived their All from him. Now a Circulation of Causes and Effects is in the
nature of Things impossible. Our Goodness extends not to him, neither is it any
Gain to the Almighty that we are righteous, says Job. Who has made thee to
differ from another, says the Apostle Paul? And what have thou that thou
did not receive? It was a noble saying of the Pagan Lucretius, respecting the
divine Nature.

Ipsa suis valens opibus non indiga Nostri. Which may be thus Englished.

Jehovah's Wealth, does fully him suffice,
Nor needs he, of his Creatures, a supply.
3dly. It is a complete and perfect Fullness, and that in three respects, viz.
In regard of the Kinds, Degrees and Duration of all possible Excellency and
Good. And 1st. the Fullness of God is Perfect in respect of the Kinds of
Excellency, for the Almighty has in him, not only all those Excellencies, the
Shadow of which is in created Beings, such as Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice,
Goodness, Truth. But he has also such Excellency's in his Nature as there are
no Footsteps or resemblance of in Creatures, e. g. Simplicity, Immutability,
Infinity, Incomprehensibility, and Self-existence. Which are therefore termed
by some Divines incommunicable Attributes! And

2dly. The Fullness of God is complete and perfect in Degree, because Infinite.
The Excellencies of the noblest Creatures are limited and finite; but those of
Jehovah are without Bounds. The Almighty Possesses all the Excellencies of
created Beings in a more sublime and exalted Degree, than can possibly be
attained by them, because of their finite Natures. But

3dly. The Fullness of God is complete and perfect in respect of Duration, the
Excellencies of Creatures are Qualities distinct from, and added to their
Beings, and may be therefore separated and extinguished, while their Beings are
preserved, as appears by the doleful Apostasy of the Angels and our first
Parents. If their Beings themselves, because derived and dependant, may be
destroyed, how much more the good Properties that cleave thereto? But the
Fullness of God is the very same with his Being, and therefore inseparable and
eternal! He and he only is, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, and Truth. But to proceed

4thly. The Fullness of God is Invariable, equally incapable of Addition or
Diminution, he can receive nothing from without, because he is already
Infinite, and to that nothing can be added. And from whom should he receive any
Addition, it must be from Creatures if at all; but they can give him nothing
but what is his own, nothing but what they received from him, Acts xvii. 25.
Neither is he worshipped with Men's Hands, as though he needed any Thing, seeing
he gives to all Life, and Breath, and all Things! And as the Fullness of God
cannot be increased, so neither can it be impaired by the sordid Violence of
Creatures! For as our Goodness does not extend to God to benefit him, so
neither can our Impieties do him any real Injury, Job xxxv. 6, 7, 8, If thou
sinnest, what do thou against him? Or if thy Transgressions be multiplied,
what do thou unto him? If thou be Righteous what give thou him? Or what
receives he of thine Hand? Thy Wickedness may hurt a Man, as thou art, and thy
Righteousness may profit the Son of Man!

5thly. The Fullness of God is Overflowing and Immense: He has more than enough
for all created Beings, the Riches and Affluence thereof, not only exceeds all
their Necessities, but even their Thoughts and Desires! Ephesians. iii. 20. Now unto
him who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think.
Psalm. xxxvi. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thy
House, and thou shall make them drink of the River of thy Pleasures.

6thly. The Fullness of God is Everflowing and Inexhaustable: The Cisterns of
created Good may be drawn dry; but God is a Fountain that cannot be exhausted:
He is the Alpha, and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending from Everlasting to
Everlasting, God. When Millions have drank of this Fountain the Streams are
never the Less.

But the special Nature of Gods Sufficiency appears in these two Particulars
following, viz. 1st. In that Jehovah has enough in himself for himself, or his
own Happiness; In this respect he is called Self-Sufficient. That God is Happy,
appears from the Character of Blessed frequently ascribed to him in Scripture.
What is Happiness but the Enjoyment of a sufficient Degree of Good, suited to
the Nature of the Being that enjoys it? Now it is certain the Almighty has
this, for he neither needs, desires, or can receive more than he has.
Dependant Creatures need a foreign Support to sustain their borrowed Beings;
but he is independent and has Life of himself, ( Joh. v. 26) And therefore
needs them not, neither does he desire more Happiness then he has; for than he
would be imperfect and so no God. Before the Worlds Foundations were laid he
had Complaisance in his own Glory and Perfection; neither did he make Creatures
to increase his own Happiness, but of mere good Pleasure: And as for Creatures
acknowledging of his Excellency with Honor, it adds no more thereto than
commending the Sun adds to its Luster, or praising a Fountain would increase
its Streams, neither can the Almighty possibly receive any more Happiness than
he has because of his Infinity. To confirm and illustrate what has been now
observed let the following Places of Scripture be considered, Ps. l. 9, 13. I
will take no Bullock out of thy House, nor He-Goats out of thy Fold: For every
Beast of the Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. If I were
Hungry I would not tell thee, for the World is mine and the Fullness thereof.
And

2dly. The Almighty has enough for all his Creatures to make them completely
Happy: I am the Almighty God. Mr. Pool in his Synopsis observes The Original
Word is derived of a Root that signifies a Breast, because he nourishes all,
for the same Reason the Heathens represented their Diana, Isis and Ceres after
the same Manner. The Ability of God to make all his Creatures Happy, is justly
termed by Divines, his All Sufficiency, and this in Relation to good People is
set forth by several significant Emblems or Similitudes. Hence he is called a
Sun (Psa. lxxxiv. 12.) As the Sun dissipates the Gloom of Night by his
enlightening and warming Rays, and thereby sheds a Gladness over the Face of
Things; thus the Almighty refreshes his Peoples Hearts. The Lord is likewise
called his Peoples Shield, Psa. lxxxiv. They are exposed in this tumultuous
Scene to a thick Succession of Dangers and Conflicts; but the Almighty protects
them as by a Shield, He covers their Head in the Day of Battle. He that
dwells in the secret Place of the most High, shall abide under the Shadow of
the Almighty. The Almighty is called his Peoples Rock, Strength and Deliverer.
He bestows all Manner of spiritual and temporal Good upon them, ( Ephesians. i. 3.)
He abundantly recompenses all their Services and Sufferings for him; and hence
he is called an exceeding great Reward, Genesis xv. i. Phil. iv. 19. My God shall
supply all your Need, according to his Riches in Glory by JESUS CHRIST.
Particularly

1st. There is enough in God to supply his Peoples Wants here: Enough 1st for
Protection, Zech. ii. 5. For I, says the Lord, will be a Wall of Fire unto
her, round about, and will be the Glory in the midst of her. Zech. ix. 12. Turn
ye to the strong Hold, ye Prisoners of Hope. Psa. lxiii. 7. Because thou have
been my Help therefore in the Shadow of thy Wings will I rejoice: Hence the
Lord bids his People, not to fear for I am with thee, be not dismayed for I am
thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee
with the right Hand of my Righteousness, -- Fear not thou Worm Jacob, and ye
Men of Israel, I will help thee says the Lord, Isa. xli. 10 -- 14. And does
not Jehovah promise, that no Evil shall come nigh their dwelling, Psa. xci. And
was it not in Confidence of this Almighty Protection that the triumphant
Psalmist says, Psalm. xlvi. and elsewhere, That though Mountains were tossed into
the midst of the Sea, and ten Thousand rose up against him, he would not be
afraid. But

2dly. There is enough in God for Provision, Psa. xxiii. The Lord is my
Shepherd I shall not want. Hence the Almighty graciously promises to make his
Peoples Bread and Water sure.

3dly. Enough for Honor, Psa. iii. 3. But thou O Lord art a shield for me, my
Glory and the lifter up of mine Head. God is the Fountain and Original of all
true Honor.

4thly. Enough for Pleasures, for his loving Kindness, is as Marrow and Fatness
that yields a rational and substantial Delight, yea he is far better than Life
itself, Job xxii. 26. For then shall thou have thy Delight in the Almighty, and
shall lift up thy Face unto God.

5thly. Enough for Guidance, Psa. xxxii. 8. I will instruct thee and teach thee
in the Way which thou shall go, I will guide thee with mine Eye. Is not Jehovah
Wisdom itself, and wonderful in Council, as well as excellent in Working? (Isa.
xxviii. 29.)

6thly. Enough for Sanctification, for with him is the Residue of the Spirit.
Enough for Society, 1 John i. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we
unto you, that ye also may have Fellowship with us: And truly our Fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son JESUS CHRIST. Enough for Example, Ephe. v. 1.
Be ye therefore Followers of God as dear Children. Enough for Reward, Genesis xv.
1. Fear not Abram, I am thy Shield, and exceeding great Reward. But

2dly. There is enough in God to satisfy the Desires of his People here and
hereafter, Jer. 31.14. And I will Satiate the Soul of the Priests with Fatness,
and my People shall be satisfied with my Goodness, says the Lord. Psa. xvii.
ult. As for me I will behold thy Face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied
when I awake with thy Likeness. Jehovah makes over himself in Covenant to his
People as All-sufficient, thus he did to Abram in our Text. Hence it is said,
Psalm. xxxiv. That though the young Lions may suffer Hunger, yet those that fear
the Lord shall not lack any Good. Hos. xiv. 5, 6, 7. I will be as the Dew unto
Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his Root as Lebanon. His
Branches shall spread, and his Beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell
as Lebanon. They that dwell under his Shadow, shall revive as the Corn, and
grow as the Vine. The Scent thereof shall be as the Wine of Lebanon. The People
of Israel in the Wilderness had neither Bread nor Water, Provision nor
Protection, yet having an all sufficient God they wanted none of those Things,
Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 26, -- 28. There is none like the God of Jeshurun who rides upon
the Heaven in thy Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky: The eternal God is
thy Refuge and Underneath are the Everlasting Arms. -- Israel then shall dwell
in safety alone, the Fountain of Jacob shall be upon a Land of Corn and Wine,
also his Heavens shall drop down Dew. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto
thee O People saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy Help, and who is the Sword
of thy Excellency. But I proceed to the

2d. General Head, which was to discourse upon the Nature of walking before
God, which may be thus described, viz. That it is a friendly Conversation with
God: Now this is expressed by different Phrases in Scripture, sometimes it is
called a walking before God, as in the Text, to signify the Sense that we
should always have of God's Presence upon our Minds. Sometimes a walking after
God to import our Need of imitating his Example, and of accommodating ourselves
to his various Dealings with us, whether Comfortable or Afflictive, ( Deuteronomy.
xiii. 4.) Some times it is called a walking with God, thus it is said of Enoch,
that he walked with God; this Phrase especially intends that sweet Familiarity
which passes between God and holy Souls. Sometimes it is called a Walking in
the Name of God, (Mica. iv. 5.) to signify that in all our religious Practice,
we should have the divine Prescription for our Rule, and the divine Glory for
our Mark. Sometimes a Walking in the Spirit, (Gal. v. 16.) importing the Sense
we should always have of our Need of the Guidance and Assistance of the Holy
Ghost to the Performance of acceptable Service, as well as our entire
Dependence thereupon. But more particularly

Walking before or with God, supposes and implies these Things following, viz,

1st. Reconciliation to God by accepting the Mediator through Faith: For how
shall two walk together except they be agreed?

2dly. It supposes spiritual Life, infused by Regeneration, for a dead Man
cannot walk.

3dly. It supposes the Exercise of Life or Grace, by the quickening Operations
of the Holy Spirit. A Man cannot walk that is asleep. I will run the Ways of
thy Commandments said the Psalmist, when thou have enlarged my Heart.

4thly. It supposes a Way in which, and this is twofold viz. either of God's
Commands, or of his Providence, we must obey the Former and accommodate our
selves to the Latter, i. e. When the Almighty frowns by Afflictions, we must
mourn, and when he smiles by Comforts communicated we must rejoice. And

5thly. It supposes an End to which, and this ought to be ever the same with
what Jehovah intends, viz. The Manifestation of his Glory; and in Subordination
thereto our own and our Neighbors Happiness. Whether in eating or drinking or
whatsoever we do, we should do it all to the Glory of God. But

2dly. Walking before or with God implies these following Particulars, viz.

1st. Faith, he that walks with God, as well as comes to him, must believe that
he is. In walking with God, Faith is necessary in three Respects. 1st. As an
Eye to behold the great Prophet of the Church, the Guide of our Way, without
whose Command we must not move a Foot, in imitation of the Israelites in the
Desert who stopped when the Pillar of a Cloud and of Fire did not go before
them. 2dly. As a Conduit to convey Provision and Refreshment in our Journey,
without which we must needs travel slowly and heavily. 3dly. As a Hand to help
us to lay hold of, and lean upon the dear Redeemer in our Walking. Hence it is
with Admiration observed concerning the Church, Cant. viii. 5. Who is this that
comes out of the Wilderness leaning upon the Beloved. Except we rely upon the
Strength of God, we cannot walk with him. But

2dly. Walking before God, implies Fear, our Minds should be continually
possessed with an awful Reverence of God's Majesty, as remembering the infinite
Distance between him and us, in point of Dignity. Likewise we should be ever
afraid of offending God, and humbly jealous of our own Hearts. Hence we are bid
to serve God acceptably with Reverence and Godly Fear. Heb. xii. 28, 29. And
hence is that divine Expostulation. Mal. i. 6. If I be a Master where is my
Fear? And

3dly. It implies Love to God, and Familiarity with him thereby. Such as behold
by Faith the Amiableness of the divine Majesty, and taste his Love, love him
again with a supreme and transcendent respect! As Fear balances Love so Love
sweetens Fear. Fear without Love would be a painful Passion ( as Dr. Bates
justly observes) and Love without Fear would degenerate into an effeminate
Fondness. Now that Familiarity which subsists between God and Believers by
Love, contains in it these Things following, 1st. mutal Visits, as God visits
his People by his Grace, so they visit him with Repentance, Prayers and Tears.
( Jam. iv. 2.) Mutual Embraces, (Cant. i. 2, 3.) A mutual Communication of
Secrets. God opens secret Things to them. Hence the Secret of the Lord is said
to be with those that fear him, ( Ps. xxv. 14.) And the People of God on the
other Hand, come to him, as a Father, and sob after him Abba Father, and open
to him all their Hearts. ( Ps. xlii. 4.) A mutual Desire of Union and
Cohabitation. Hence CHRIST accosts his Bride in the following Strains. Come
with me from Lebanon my Sister my Spouse, look from the Top of Amana, from the
Top of Shenir and Hermon from the Lions Dens and from the Mountains of
Leopards. And the Spouse on the other Hand says, Come LORD JESUS come quickly;
I desire to he dissolved and to be with CHRIST which is far better. 5thly. A
friendly Consultation for Advice and Direction. Hence the dear Redeemer is
called his Peoples Counselor, because he leads them by his Council, (Isa. ix.
6.) But

4thly. Walking before or with God implies Pains and Labor, natural Walking,
to which this alludes, is not without them, especially if it be for a
considerable Space. And hence we are bid to strive to enter in at the strait
Gate, and work out our Salvation with fear and trembling.

5thly. It implies Progress, those that walk in a natural Road make Progress,
and thus those that walk with God grow more humble, more weaned from this
World, and more resigned to God's Will, and it is doubtless in general their
chief Desire, and endeavor to grow in Grace, and when they find not thus, it
is their principal Grief.

6thly It implies Perseverance, for walking is not a single Act, but a Course
and Series of them, a continuance in our religious Diligence, until we come to
the End of our Race, it is those only who persevere to the End, that shall be
saved. We should run so as to obtain. But I proceed to the

3d. General Head of Discourse, viz. Sincerity, which may be thus described,
viz. That it is a divine Virtue, whereby we really are, what we seem to be.
Here an appearance of Goodness is supposed, and these Things following are
intended, which constitute Sincerity, viz.

1st. That a Person labors to avoid all mixture of Corruption and evil
Intention; this is by our Lord called a single Eye, and when Persons have this,
then their whole Bodies are full of Light, i. e. they are in a gracious and
comfortable State.

2dly. When Persons habitually labor not only outwardly, but chiefly inwardly,
to be Holy contrary to the Practice of the Pharisees, who cleansed the outside
of the Cup and Platter while the Inside was neglected. And

3dly. When Men endeavor to be Holy, not only before Men, but chiefly before
God, Colos. iii. 22. Not with Eye Service as Men Pleasers, but with singleness
of Heart fearing God.

4thly. When Men do not habitually neglect known Duty, and expect not their
Reward from Men, but from God, thus it is said of Zachariah and Elizabeth, That
they walked in all the Commandments of God blameless. It is likewise recorded
of Moses, (Heb. xi. 27.) That by Faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath
of the King, for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.

Now Sincerity is twofold, viz. Moral or Spiritual. Moral is that which springs
from Nature, polished by a religious Education, together with restraining
Grace; and principally aims at our own Interest. Such an Integrity had the
Pagan Abimelech, and although this be not saving, yet it is the Way to obtain
Mercy, and is of great Use in civil Society. It were to be wished that more
meant as they spoke than do: But spiritual Sincerity follows after Conversion,
and aims chiefly at the Glory of God, above all. And it is either Imperfect, or
Perfect. The Former is when, for the most Part Uprightness has the Ascendant,
though attended with Struggle and Combat. The Latter is when we are entirely free
from all corrupt Intention, which is the Privilege of the Country, and not of
the Way, when that which is Perfect is come, then that which is in Part shall
be done away.

But it will not be improper to add to what has been said, the following Marks
of Sincerity, viz. 1st. If we do not cover and hide our Sins, but confess them
and forsake them. 2dly. If we avoid all appearance of Evil, both as to
Principle and Practice. 3dly. If in Prosperity, as well as in Adversity, we
cleave inviolably to the Truths and Duties of Religion. 4thly. If in the
Absence as well as Presence of Spectators, we endeavor to be Holy. 5thly. If
we have the Light of God's Word, and are willing to have our States and Actions
tried the reby. 6thly. If we are sensible of, and bewail the Remains of
Hypocrisy that are in us, as the poor Man that cried Lord, I believe, help my
Unbelief. But I proceed to the Application of this Discourse. And

1st. What has been said concerning God's Sufficiency, serves to inform us, how
great the Portion of every Believer is. It exceeds in Worth and Dignity,
Millions of Worlds. The Lord himself is the Portion of their Inheritance and of
their Cup! Their Lines have fallen to them in pleasant Places, they have a
goodly Heritage! In having God they have more than all besides him, yea
infinitely more. If the greatest Princes should bring all their Treasures,
(says Bishop Hopkins) the poorest Christian can produce a Portion, that will
beggar them all. Justly then may the Church glory in him, Lam. iii. 24. The
Lord is my Portion says my Soul, therefore will I hope in him! This is my
Beloved, and this is my Friend! O Daughters of Jerusalem.

2dly. The All Sufficiency of God, may convince us of the In-sufficiency and
Vanity of all Creatures, Ecles. i. 1. Vanity of Vanities says the Preacher,
Vanity of Vanities all is Vanity! If God only be absolutely Perfect and
All-Sufficient, then every Creature is of it self imperfect, and vain, because
of itself it has no Perfection, by which it can suffice itself or others, Jer.
ii. 13. They are all broken Cisterns that can hold no Water! And if the
Creature had any Sufficiency, it could be of no Service, unless applied and
excited by the first mover: If the Case be so, why should we dote upon them, or
confide in them? Or why should we fear them, or immoderately bewail the loss of
them! And

3dly. We may hence learn the Folly of such, who forsake God for the Creature.
Jer. ii. 13. My People have committed two Evils, they have forsaken the
Fountain of living Waters, and hewn out to themselves Cisterns, broken
Cisterns, that can hold no Water! Surely such as pursue lying Vanities, forsake
their own Mercies! And this they must expect, as their Reward, to be
disappointed in their Expectations, to be snared in the Work of their own Hands
and at last to lie down in Sorrow! But

4thly. The All Sufficiency of God ministers strong Consolation, to all that
are sincere, and walk with God. Now whether we be indeed such, we may know by
comparing our selves diligently and impartially with what has been before
observed, on these Heads. What though we cannot suffice ourselves, and what though
all the World cannot suffice us, this is no great Wonder: For the Soul of Man is
endowed with an insatiable Desire: Well, but there is an All-Sufficient God,
who can suffice both himself and us! And this is, or should be, all our
Salvation, and all our Desire. The Consideration of God's All Sufficiency may
be a sweet Support to us in all Manner of Distresses, whether of Mind, Body or
Estate. Whether of Spiritual or Temporal Enemies, God is our Sun, our Shield
and Buckler, who suffices himself, and therefore can much more satisfy us, who
need not so great Perfection. This Almighty God has made many and gracious
Promises, that he will be every where and evermore present with his People, and
especially in the Mount of Difficulty! Of whom then, or of what should we be
afraid? What is the Want that All Sufficiency cannot supply, what is the
Strait, that All Sufficiency cannot surmount? David took encouragement from
this Attribute, when he was in sore Distress at Ziglag, when the Town was
sacked, his Wives taken Captive, and himself like to be stoned to Death (1 Samuel
xxx. 6.) And it was this that encouraged Abram against all human Probability,
to expect the Fulfillment of the divine Promise, concerning a numerous
Posterity. ( Heb. xi. 19.) And

5thly. The aforesaid Subject, serves to reprove all those, who practically
deny the All Sufficiency of God; which is done 1st. By the Profane, who having
abandoned the Almighty, serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures ( Mal. 3.14.) 2dly.
Secret Hypocrites, who though they abound in outward Acts of Obedience, yet will
not give to God their whole Hearts, and that for this Reason, because there be
some Things which they look upon as necessary and profitable which they don't
expect from God, and them they are resolved to have from Creatures either Right
or Wrong. ( Hos. ii. 4, 5.) And 3dly. Even the Regenerate themselves are liable
to this Evil, of denying practically, the All Sufficiency of God. Now this is
done in the following Instances.

1st. When we use unlawful or deceitful Measures to attain what we think we
cannot get from God by lawful ones. An Example of this Kind we have in Jacob,
respecting the Birthright. And

2dly. When we use unlawful Methods to escape imminent Dangers. Thus David
feigned himself mad before King Achish, and Abram and Isaac denied their Wives
for fear they should be slain on their Account. And

3dly. When we inordinately love Creatures, and imagine something to be in them
which is not in God, on this Account Covetousness is called Idolatry. ( Ephesians. v.
5.)

4thly. When we vainly confide in Creatures, and promise ourselves something
from them, which we suppose the Almighty either cannot or will not confer. (
Ps. lxii. 9, 10.)

5thly. When we murmur at our present Condition, and desire it to be otherwise
than God has allotted it! This Discontent was the Occasion both of the fall of
the Angels and our first Parents.

6thly. When we distrust God's Power, Promises, or Providence, with Moses, Number.
xi. 13, 14. Whence should I have Flesh to give unto all this People? With David
1 Samuel xxvii. 1. Who said in his Heart, that he should one Day perish by the
Hand of Saul. With Sarah, Genesis xviii. 12. Who when she was told that she should
have a Child in old Age, laughed through distrust, which was displeasing to
God, because it reflected upon his All Sufficiency v. 13, 14. And the Lord said
unto Abram, wherefore did Sarah laugh, is any Thing too hard for the Lord? With
Gideon, who though he had the express Command of God to war with the Midianites,
and a promise of Victory over them, yet hesitating says, Judge. vi. 15. O Lord
wherewith shall I save them, for my Family is poor in Manasseh; and therefore
he asked a Sign And

7thly. When we decline great Services, being thereto called by God, on account
of pretended Unfitness, -- With Moses; Ex. iii. 11. And Moses said unto God,
who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh? -- And bring forth the Children of
Israel out of Egypt. And with Jeremiah, who being called to public Service,
for God, excused himself thus, behold I cannot speak for I am a Child. Now the
aforesaid practical Denial of Gods All Sufficiency involves in it Idolatry, and
some degree of Apostasy; for thereby we turn from him to them, and expect from
them, what we suppose is not in him; as this Evil obstructs the Course of God's
Favor to us, so it exposes us to the dreadful Judgments of God. Hence it is
said, that JESUS could do no mighty Works among a certain People, because of
their Unbelief. And hence we read (2 Kings vii. 17.) of a Lord who would not
believe Elisha's Prophesies of Plenty in Samaria, and was trodden to Death in
the Press! And was not Moses and Aaron upon this Account deprived of the
Possession of Canaan? (Number. xx. 12.)

Now from the Consideration of God's All Sufficiency, we should be exhorted to
the following Duties, viz.

1st. To glorify God on this Account, with all our Souls, seeing that this is
the Foundation of all his Glory and Majesty. If we should glorify God, because
of every of his Attributes, how much more on the Account, of this which
comprises them all. And

2dly. To enter into Covenant with him, by accepting of CHRIST, the Angel of
the Covenant by a living Faith, Who is the Way to his Father, in whom we have
Boldness of access with Confidence by the Faith of him. In him all the Promises
are Yea and Amen. And thus the All Sufficiency of God will be ours, and without
this it will profit us nothing; but on the contrary be engaged against us. This
Duty of Covenanting with God, our Text and Context points to. I am the Almighty
God, walk before me and be thou perfect: and I will make my Covenant between me
and thee. And

3dly. We should be exhorted to Contentedness with our Lot, and to Beneficence
toward others, in Imitation of the All Sufficiency of God, in which our chief
Excellency consists.

4thly. We should love the All-Sufficient God above all, pursue after him with
the strongest Desire, and rest in him with the sweetest Complacency! seeing he
is enough for us, and infinitely more than so in all respects! Ps. xviii. 1, 2,
3. I will love thee O Lord my Srength, my Rock, my Fortress and my Deliverer,
my Buckler and the Horn of my Salvation.

5thly. We should put our entire Confidence in him, because he alone is All in
All, Light to the Mind, Goodness to the Will, Order to the Affections, Gladness
to the Heart, and Joy to the whole Soul, and Beauty and Immortality to the Body.

6thly. We should hope in this All-Sufficient God in all Adversity, whether
personal or public, what though Clouds and Darkness hang over the Horizon of the
visible Church, and the Hand of Pride scatters her Assemblies, and stains her
Glory, yet we must not faint or fear, seeing she has an All-Sufficient
Protector. Surely she is built upon a stable Rock, against which the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail. God in his own Time will make Edom desolate, and
Jerusalem a praise in the Earth. And

7thly, While we compare our Emptiness with the Almighty's Fullness we should
be humbled in the Dust, and say with Eliphaz, Job iv. 17, 19. Shall Mortal Man
be more just than God, shall a Man be more pure than his Maker, behold he put
no Trust in his Servants, and his Angels he charged with Folly, how much less
on them who dwell in Houses of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, who are
crushed before the Moth! It is a noble saying of Gregory That our Righteousness
brought to the Trial of Justice, is Unrighteousness. and that (says he) which
shine in the Opinion of the Worker, is loathsome in the Sight of the Judge. And
should we not obey diligently and worship reverently that All-Sufficient God,
who will be to us an exceeding great Reward Genesis xv. 1. and especially Let us
be entreated to walk with God, or before him, as our Text directs; to which we
should be moved by considering, 1st. The Dignity of this Practice, what can be
more Honorable than to be the Friend of the King of Kings, and daily to
converse with him. If the Face of Moses so shined with Beauty and Majesty after
he had been some Time on the Mount with God, that the Israelites could not
behold him, how much more the Soul that walks continually with God? 2dly. As
this is the most Honorable, so it is the most Pleasant Way of Walking: Hereby
the Soul is satisfied with a suitable and All-sufficient Good, and pleased with
the noble prospect of enduring felicity! Here the Good is agreeable to the
Nature of the Soul, and equal to its vast Desires and most distant Hopes! 3dly.
This is the most profitable Way of Walking, for hereby an easy access is
obtained to the King's Ear, which is the most important Privilege, for surely
he will not deny his Friends requests! 4thly. This is likewise the most safe
Way. For he that dwells in the Secret of the most High, shall abide under the
Shadow of the Almighty! From God, who is the best of Friends, we may expect
not only Pity and Help in Adversity, but a sure Defense! For as he is Love
itself, so his All Sufficiency has all Creatures at it is Beck and Control. And
5thly. It is a plain Way, Isa. xxxv. 8. And an high Way shall be there, -- it
shall be called the Way of Holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it; but it
shall be for those, the Way faring Men, though Fools shall not err therein; but
the Ways of Sin are Crooked and Intricate.

Finally, dear Brethren, let us be exhorted to be sincere in Heart, Speech and
Practice, Walk before me and be thou perfect. Sincerity is the Quintessence the
Life, the Soul of all Virtue and Goodness! Without this neither our Persons or
Services can find acceptance! From this, under God, springs our Peace, Joy and
Security, and every other Blessing. Now may the All-sufficient God enable us to
walk before him, and to be Sincere, that so we may be approved of by him here,
and admitted into his Kingdom hereafter, through the exceeding Riches of divine
Grace in JESUS CHRIST our Lord, to whom with the Father and Blessed Spirit, be
eternal Glory ascribed by Men and Angels. Amen, Amen.

SERMON XII.
JEREMIAH xxxii. 17. Ah Lord God, behold, thou have made the Heavens and the
Earth by thy great Power, and stretched out Arm, and there is nothing too hard
for thee.


WE have in these Words, the beginning of the Prophet Jeremiah's Prayer, the
Occasion of which was the Discoveries which Jehovah had made to him of his
Purpose, to pull down the Nation, by putting it under the Jurisdiction of the
Babylonish King. The pious Prophet was imprisoned for declaring this Truth,
agreeable to the divine Direction, the City was in the mean Time besieged by
Nebucadnezar's Army: A dismal Cloud covered the whole Face of Affairs! The poor
Prophet being a faithful Intercessor for that People, was exceedingly
distressed to behold the impending Stroke, the approaching Ruin of his beloved
Nation, he therefore knowing God to be infinite in Power and Mercy, takes his
Flight to him in the aforesaid gloomy and perplexed State of Things, and puts
up an intercessory Supplication for them; which begins with a Recognition of
God's infinite Power, made manifest in his Formation of the Heaven and Earth:
These vast Bodies being produced by a Word, and in a Moment, are incontestible
Demonstrations of an Almighty Cause or Efficient. God himself used this
Instance, Chap. xxvii. 5. to confirm his Peoples Faith in his Ability, to do
what he pleased. It is probable that the Prophet makes Mention of God's
Omnipotence in the Instances before related, and farther expounds upon it by
saying, That nothing was too hard for him, (in the beginning of his Prayer)
with a Threefold Design, 1st. To affect his own Heart with an awful Sense of
the divine Majesty. And 2dly. To support his Faith in expecting the Mercies he
prayed for. And 3dly. As an Argument to excite, as it were, Omnipotence to
exert it self in the Deliverance of Israel from the threatened Destruction. God
is a present Help in Trouble, yea and a powerful one, nothing is two hard for
him, that does not imply some Weakness or Contradiction. It is therefore our
wisest Course, in Imitation of the Prophet Jeremiah's Example, to make speedy
and affectionate Supplication to him in all distressing Imergents, either
respecting our selves or the Church of God! The Particle Ah! in the beginning
of our Text, denotes the Depth and Vehemence of the Prophets mournful Passion!
And indeed our very Bowels should bleed for poor Zions Tragedies, and our Lips
move in the Prophets Strains; for Jerusalems sake I will not hold my Peace, and
for Zion's sake I will not be Silent, until the Righteousness thereof go forth
as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. But to return:
The Text I have read, considered abstractly, presents to our Meditations the
Power of God. in discoursing upon which I shall consider its Nature, Kinds,
Properties and Effects, and then apply it. And

1st. God's Power may be thus described, viz. That it is his essential Property
whereby he can do all Things. Thus excellent Mr. Vincent explains it. Or in
other Words thus, That it is that divine Virtue, whereby Jehovah does what he
Wills, and has ability to do what he Wills not. And hence it appears, that the
Power of God is twofold, viz. Absolute and Ordinate. The absolute Power of God,
is that whereby he can do all Things that are possible, even such Things as
never came to pass, of this mention is made, Matt. iii. 9. God is able of these
Stones to raise up Children unto Abram: This, according to our Conception,
preceeds the Will of God, and coinceeds with the All Sufficiency of his
Essence. Ephesians. iii. 20. Romans xi. 23. And they also if they bide not still in
unbelief, shall be graffed in, for God is able to graff them in again.

2dly. The ordinate Power of God, is that whereby Jehovah effects what he
Pleases; and therefore follows his Will, Psa. cxxxv. 6. Whatsoever the Lord
pleased that did he in Heaven and Earth, in the Seas and all deep Places. God's
ordinate Power relates to his Efficiency, or to the Effects which he has, does
or shall produce. It is not realy different from the former, but the former
considered as limited by the divine Decree, which certainly fixes the
Boundaries between what is merely possible, and what is Future. Hence it is
said that our Lord could not do many Miracles, in his native Country, because
of their Unbelief, and that the Almighty could not destroy Sodom till Lot was
out of it. The Power of God was bounded or limited by his Purpose, which he
could not counteract. Neither is it any Imperfection in the Almighty, that he
cannot contradict his own Nature; but on the Contrary, it is the highest
Perfection!

Nor are we to suppose, that Power belongs to God as distinguished from Act;
for then he would be at one Time idle, and at another employed in Labor, and
so suffer a Change. No! the Almighty is a most pure Act. The aforesaid
Distinction is only ascribed to God on the Account of Creatures, because they
undergo an Operation of God in Time, which before they did not undergo, e. g.
when Men are warmed by the Sun now, who were before cold, the Change is not in
the Sun, but in them.

It should likewise be considered, that the aforesaid Distinction of God's
Power into absolute and ordinate, is only in respect of our Conception; for in
God himself it is most Simple, and therefore but one, because it is his Essence.

But I proceed to consider the Properties of God's Power, which was the third
general Head. And

1st. The Power of God is Infinite, and that in three respects, viz. The Agent,
Objects, Effects. The Agent God is Infinite in his Being, and with this his
Power coinceeds, or is the same. The Objects are likewise innumerable, which
can be produced by him, and therefore Infinite, in some Sense. And as Wendeline
well observes, God never produces an Effect so Excellent, but he can produce a
more Excellent. The sacred Scriptures confirm the Infinity of God's Power,
various Ways, 1st. Symbolically and Figuratively, when it ascribes to him a
strong Hand, a stretched out Arm, 1 Chro. xxix. 12. In thine Hand is Power and
Might. Our Text ascribes to God, a stretched out Arm, and intimates, that
thereby the Heaven and Earth were made. 2dly. Negatively, when it denies any
Thing to be Difficult to him. Genesis xviii. 14. Is any Thing too hard for the
Lord. At the Time appointed will I return unto thee, according to the Time of
Life, and Sarah shall have a Son. Agreeable hereto are the Words of our Text,
and there is Nothing too hard for thee. 3dly. Effectively, when it ascribes the
greatest Effects to God's Power, such as the Productions of the Heavens and
Earth, as the Text we are considering does, Ah Lord God! behold thou have made
the Heavens and the Earth by thy great Power! And likewise when it witnesses
that God can do all Things. Luke xviii. 27. And he said the Things that are
impossible with Men, are possible with God. 4thly. Affirmatively, when it
ascribes great Power to him, as in the Words of our Text, and expressly calls
him the Almighty. (Rev. i. 8.) It is observed by some, that God's Almightiness,
or infinite Power, is asserted no less than Seventy Times in Scripture. Yea, no
less than Thirty one Times in one Book, viz. Job.

And does not Reason likewise establish the same Truth? For seeing Power is a
Perfection, how can it be denied to him who is infinitely Perfect. And
forasmuch as Creatures derive all the Power they possess from God, as the first
Cause, then surely he himself must possess eminently and infinitely what he
communicates to others! Neither was there any before him, to limit this, or any
other of his Attributes, and therefore it is Infinite. If God were not Infinite
in Power, his Determinations would be precarious and trifling, like those of
his Creatures: And his Promises and Threatenings in rewarding or punishing,
would neither deserve our Trust or Fear: For then he could not say as he does,
Isa. xlvi. 11. I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass, I have purposed
it, I will also do it. And

2dly. The Power of God is independent, he can Work by Means, without Means,
and contrary to Means. 1 Samuel xiv. 6. There is no restraint to the Lord, to
Work by many or by few. Dan. iv. 34, 35. And all the Inhabitants of the Earth
are reputed as nothing, and he does according to his Will in the Armies of
Heaven and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his Hand, or
say unto him, what do thou? The Pleasure of God, (as Mr. Flavel observes) is
the only Rule according to which divine Power exerts itself in the World.

But the Power of God is 3dly, Unparalled: Jehovah not only equals, but
infinitely exceeds all created Beings in Strengh, Job xl. 9. Have thou an Arm
like God, or can thou Thunder with a Voice like him. Men are wont to show
their Strength by their Arms; and hence Arms are metaphorically ascribed to
God. And even those Things that are weak in us, when ascribed to him exceed the
combined Force of the whole Creation. How weak is one of our Fingers, yet God
is said by his Finger to cast out Devils! Luke xi. 20. Yea by his Finger, to
make the Heavens. Our Words, our Breath, our Frowns, are trifling! But by a
Word God made a World! Psalm. xxxiii. 9. He spoke and it was done, he commanded
and it stood fast! The Almighty smites the Earth with the Rod of his Mouth, and
with the Breath of his Lips he slays the Wicked, and they perish at the Rebuke
of his Countenance. Psalm. lxxx. 16. So that, as the Apostle observes, the
Weakness of God is stronger than Man. 1 Cor i.

4thly The Power of God is irresistible and supreme, the whole Posse of Men and
Angels, were there Millions more than there be, if their Strength was united
cannot withstand Omnipotence! Job xxiii. 13. But he is in one Mind and who can
turn him, and what his Soul desires even that he does. The Almighty
challenges the whole Creation to obstruct his Providence, or defeat his
Councils! Isa. xliii. 13. I will work and who shall let it. Isa. xiv. 27. For
the Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanul it, and his Hand is
stretched out, and who shall turn it back? All Human Power is derived from the
Power of God, and is therefore dependant on it, and limited by it. It was God
that gave Nebuchadnezzar that proud and potent Prince his Kingdom and his Power
( Dan. ii. 37.) It is the Power of God that restrains the Wrath of Men and Rage
of Devils, and keeps them within proper Limits, otherwise they would destroy
all before them. Ps. lxxvi. 10. And the remainder of Wrath shall thou restrain.
Rev. iii. 10. Satan shall cast some of you into Prison and ye shall have
Tribulation Ten Days. The Devil if he had his full Scope, would have cast them
some where else, viz. into the Grave or Hell; and if they must go to Prison, he
would have it Ten Years, yea their whole Lives. The Angels whether Good or Bad,
are powerful Beings, and hence called Principalities and Powers; one of them is
able to vanquish all the Strength of Flesh and Blood; yet are they subject to
the Control of Omnipotence. And

5thly. The Power of God is incomprehensible, it not only exceeds human Power,
and human Probability, but surpasses the Words and Thoughts of Men. The Power
of God reaches the very Heart, which he turns as Streams in the South to answer
his own eternal Purposes, i. e. suddenly. The Lord stills the Noise of the Sea,
the Noise of the Waves, and theri Tumult of the People Ps. lxv. 7. How soon did
Jehovah turn the Heart of Angry Esau, into kind Respect? When all human Help
fails, and there is none shut up or left, then does the Lord exert his
Omnipotence, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen! Genesis xxii. 14. i. e. In
extreme Distress when all human Probability of Relief expires, then the Power
of God appears! And who is able to paint in human Language, the Infiniteness of
the Strength of God, or form Ideas in his Mind equal to it; not one? ( Ephesians.
iii. 20.) God is able to do exceeding abundantly above what we are able to ask
or think. The feeble Flight of our most exalted Thought falls infinitely short
of the vast extent of the divine Power. Hence is that famous Passage in
Isaiah's Prophesy (lv. 8, 9.) As far as the Heavens are above the Earth, so are
my Thoughts above your Thoughts, and my Ways higher than your Ways. The Lord
often exceeds his Creatures Hopes, both in Temporals and Spirituals. I had not
Thought to see thy Face said Jacob to Joseph, and lo God has showed me thy
Seed. Genesis xlviii. 11. The Debtor only desired Patience, and the Creditor
forgave the Debt. ( Mat. xviii. 26, 27.) The Prodigal desired but the State of
a Servant, but lo he is treated as a Son, with the greatest Respect! His
ungrateful Carriage is not so much as once mentioned, the fatted Calf is killed
for his Entertainment, his Ears are delighted with musical Symphonies, while
Shoes are brought for his Feet, a Ring for his Finger, and the best Robe for
his Back. But

6thly. The Power of God, is a just and rightful Power. Power and Right in
Creatures, are often separated, they do that which they have no Right or
Authority to do; but in God they are one and the same, what he can do, he has a
Right to do, and what he has a Right to do, he can do. This Right is founded
upon the Transcendant Eminence, and infinitely superior excellency of his
Godhead; as well as upon his creating, preserving, providing and Redeeming
Goodness. On these Accounts he has a right to Rule over the Work of his Hands
according to his sovereign Pleasure; and to dispense his Gifts upon whom, when,
and i^ what manner he pleases: For he is our Potter, and we but Clay in his
Hands, which he may make to Honor or Dishonor, as seems good in his Eyes. And

7thly. The Power of God is Eternal, Romans i. 20. For the invisible Things of
him, from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
Things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. Albeit God from
Eternity, did not produce Effects without himself, nevertheless he possessed
Power from Eternity, by which, when he pleased he created the World; and by
this he could have created the World from Eternity, if the World could have
existed from Eternity! And as God's Power was from Eternity, so it will
continue to it. Hence it is said Isa. xl. 28. That the Creator of the Ends of
the Earth faints not, neither is weary, and that his Arm is not shortened.
Isa. lix. 1. This the Church uses as an Argument, in petitioning for
Deliverance. Is. li. 9, 10. Awake, awake, put on Strength O Arm of the Lord,
awake as in the Ancient Days, in the Generations of old, art thou not he that
cut Rahab in Pieces, and wounded the Dragon? But I hasten to the

4th General Head, which was to discourse upon the Effects of divine Power. And
1st. The Power of God is conspicuous in the Creation of the World, what
Almightiness was necessary to produce the vast Expanse over our Head^, and this
Massy ponderous and prodigious Globe we tread upon, and that by a Word and in a
Moment, out of no pre-existing Matter? And afterward out of the rude and
indigested Chaos, to form the various Ranks of Beings, which both the Heavens
and Earth contain, and to Beautify them with such Endowments as proclaim their
Creators Glory! The very noblest Creature within the wide compass of the
Universe, cannot produce the smallest Particle, of Matter out of Nothing; much
less endow the various Species of Being, with those Capacities in which they
excel each other; No! To the Production of these Things, infinite Strength must
concur. Thus the Things that are made are a plain and sensible Demonstration of
the eternal Power, and Godhead of their Former.

2dly. The Almightiness of God is no less visible in the Works of Providence,
viz. in supporting the stately Fabric of the Universe, and in directing all
the Beings it contains, in their various Motions, so as to answer his own
eternal Purposes. Many surprising and improbable Events and Revolutions are
brought to pass, which nothing but divine Power could Effect. By the Course of
Providence we often see that Scripture verified, that the Battle is not to the
Strong nor the Race to the Swift.

The Almighty Power of God is marvelously apparent in the Preservation of the
Christian Church, who comparatively are small in Number, and for the most Part
weak, in respect of Power and Policy, amidst numerous, politic, potent and
malicious Opposers: And that for so long a Tract of Time, against all the
malignant Efforts of Hell and Earth! How does the Glory of divine Power appear
in preserving a few Sheep, amidst vast herds of cruel Wolves, in preserving the
burning Bush from being consumed with the devouring Flames, with which it is
encompassed. And

3dly. The infinite Power of God is likewise discovered in Works of divine
Grace.

1st. The exceeding Greatness of God's Power and mighty working of it must be
exerted to form Faith in any Heart, (Ephesians. i. 19.) Nothing but Almighty
Strength can overcome the strong Man armed, and pluck Sinners out of his Snare.
And

2dly. The same Power is necessary to preserve Grace, after it is formed, from
Being quite destroyed by the unwearied Assaults of Enemies, both inward and
outward. Hence God's People are said to be preserved by the Power of God, through
Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. i. 5. The Preservation of divine Grace, as Bishop
Hopkins observes, I^ like the Preservation of a spark of Fire upon the Ocean,
amidst turbulent Waves, and boisterous Blasts.

The Almighty Power of God was made manifest, and his Arm revealed, in the
early Propagation of the Gospel, through a great Part of the World, and that in a
little Time, by illiterate Men! That a System of Doctrines, contrary to Men's
corrupt Inclinations, and not recommended by the Arts of Persuasion, or
Inflence of civil Power, or any View of Honor or Advantage in this World,
should be cordially embraced by Multitudes in the politest Nations, and adhered
to, in defiance of all Kinds of Ignominy and Suffering even to Death, cannot be
reasonably accounted for, otherwise than by ascribing it to Almighty Power!

Neither does it in the least derogate from the Greateness of God's Power, that
he cannot do such Things as are imperfect and contradictory. Here observe,

1st. God cannot Lie or Sin in any respect, ( Heb. vi. 18.) or change his Mind;
these Things are not the Object of Power, but the Effects of Weakness; and
therefore it is God's Glory to be incapable of them! Nor 2dly. Can the Almighty
do those Things that imply a Contradiction, or are impossible in the Nature of
Things. God cannot make a Contradiction true, for this would overthrow the very
Nature of Things, and so destroy his own Wisdom therein Aparent! He cannot make
a Creature equal to himself, for then it would not be a Creature: God indeed
can do what is impossible to Nature. i. e. he can exceed its stated Bounds and
Limits, as appears by the miraculous Works he has wrought: But he cannot do
what is impossible in Nature. Now that is impossible in Nature which involves a
Contradiction, either on the Part of God, when the Work implies an
Imperfection, in a most perfect Worker, or on the Part of Things, when they
overthrow themselves. Now both this Kind of Contradiction is impossible to God,
because it would infer that God should deny himself (2 Timothy ii. 13) or that he
should say, that he is not God. A Contradiction seeing it cannot be, a Being
cannot be a Work of Power, or the Object of Power. But I proceed to the
Improvement of this Subject. And

1st. The Power of God speaks Terror to all impenitent Transgressors! What do
these by their Presumptious Iniquities, but as it were enter the List with
Jehovah, and bid Defiance to Omnipotence! This Eliphaz, the Temanite, expresses
in beautiful Language, Job. xv. 25, 26. For he stretches out his Hand against
God, and strengthens himself against the Almighty. He runs upon him, even
on his Neck, upon the thick Bosses of his Bucklers. But shall Briars and Thorns
contend with the devouring Flames? How unequal is the Combat? Do we provoke the
Lord to Jealousy? Are we Stronger then he? Have thou an Arm like God? Or can
thou thunder with a Voice like him? Who when he touches the Mountains they
Smoke, yea the Hills tremble at his Presence! At his Reproof the Pillars of
Heaven shake, the Perpetual Hills do bow, and the everlasting Mountains are
scattered! Who is able to Screne your guilty Souls from the wrathful Strokes of
the Arm of Omnipotence? Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for from the Hills,
and from the multitude of Mountains. God is Wise in Heart, and Mighty in
Strength: Who has hardened himself against him, and has prospered? Job. ix. 4.
When they shall say, Peace and Safety, sudden Destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a Woman with Child, and they shall not Escape, 1. These. v. 3.

How will ye be able to bear the Weight of Jehovah's angry Arm, the Reach of
which ye cannot avoid. Is it not a fearful Thing to fall into the Hand of the
living God? Can thine Heart Endure, or thy Hands be Strong in the Day that God
deals with you? Surely he will magnify his Power in your Destruction, Romans ix.
22. What if God, willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known,
endured with much Long-suffering, the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction?
Now consider this, ye that forget God, least he tear you in Pieces, and there
be none to deliver. Psa. l. 22. God will meat you as a Lion, or a Bear bereaved
of her Whelps, and will rend the Caul from your Heart! He will break you with
Breach upon Breach, and run upon you like a Giant, he will cry, yea roar, he
shall prevail against his Enemies! But

2dly. The Power of God speaks Comfort to all penitent Believers in all their
Troubles, of whatsoever Nature they be. Are you encompassed with many Enemies
and Dangers, well God's Power is your Sanctuary, which is able to Protect you
against the most formidable Foes, if God is for you, who shall be against you?
The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous run to it, and are safe!
What though your Enemies be many and Mighty, one God is an overmatch for them
all, Men and Devils can go no farther then the Length of their Chain: They can
have no Power against us, except it be given them from above, as our Lord
observed to proud Pilate, when he boasted that he had Power to crucify or
release him, ( John xix. 10.) The Power of God can soon put a Hook in their
Jaws, and lead them by a Way they came not. When our Heart and our Strength
fails, God is the Strength of our Heart and our Portion forever. How reviving
is that Word of God by the Prophet, Isa. xli. 10. Fear thou not for I am with
thee, be not dismayed for I am thy God; I will strengthen thee, yea I will help
thee, yea I will uphold thee, by the right Hand of my Righteousness. Though we be
reduced exceeding Low and have none on Earth to help us, God alone can deliver
us, Isa. lix. 16. He wondered that there was no Intercessor, therefore his Hand
brought Salvation unto him, and his Righteousness sustained him. The King of
Zion can command Deliverance for Jacob, and turn his Captivity suddenly as
Streams in the South! Though God's People, as to outward Appearance, be in a
hopeless Case, as it were buried in their Graves: Divine Power can soon cause a
Resurrection! Ezekiel. xxxvii. 12. For the Eyes of the Lord run to and fro through
the Earth to show himself Strong in behalf of them, whose Heart is Perfect
toward him, 2 Chronicles. xvi. 9. God keeps his Vineyard, Night and Day, least any
hurt it, (Isa. xxvii. 3.) Those Things may revive us, both in respect of our
own, and the Churches Troubles! Are we almost discouraged because of the Power
of our inward Enemies? Let us remember that God's Grace is sufficient for us,
and that his Strength is made perfect in Weakness, (2 Cor. xii. 9.) Turn ye
therefore to your Strong Hold ye Prisoners of Hope; for as Calvin observes,
"There is Defense enough in one God!" But

3dly. The Consideration of God's Power should invite us to trust in God, in
every Difficulty, even when human Succors fail, we should glorify God with
Abram, by hopeing against Hope, i. e. against the present Appearances of
Things, when we have the Word of a God to hope upon. Trust in the Lord forever,
for in Jehovah is everlasting Strength. Isa. xxvi. 4. At what Time soever we
are afraid, let us determine with the Psalmist, to trust in God, it grievs the
Almighty when his People question his Omnipotence, as appears from the Instance
of Moses (Number. xi. 21, 22, 23) And as we should beware of questioning God's
Power, in a Way of Duty which is a practical Denial of it. So we should with
equal Care avoid presuming upon it in a neglect thereof: For this is also a
Denial of it, because for all these Things God will be inquired of the House of
Israel.

4th. Has God a rightful Power over us, then let us submit ourselves to his
Government, and devote ourselves to his Glory and Service, and that freely,
unreservedly, steadfastly and faithfully. We are his, on all Accounts, his
Workmanship, the Clay his Fingers have from'd, the Price of his Son's Blood;
the Monuments of his providential Care, Kindness, and Forbearance; we are his
People by Profession, and outward Dedication, and shall we break through all
these Ties, to rebel against him, and ruin our own Souls, God forbid! Besides
if we will not submit to his equitable Government, we must expect to feel his
Almighty Vengeance: For as Agustine observes, God is of immense Power, and
therefore, there is no Place in which one can hide himself, nor Time when one
can fly, nor Power by which he can resist. Therefore let us resign ourselves
and our All to our rightful Lord, intending his Glory in all our Actions, of
every kind, that whether living or dying, we may be the Lords, Romans xiv. 7. Let
us beware of the vilest Sacrilege, and render to God the Things that are Gods.

5thly. Let us acknowledge readily the absolute Power and Sovereignty of God
over us. Particularly that God cannot be our Debtor, on any other Account,
except by his own gracious Promise, for our Goodness extends not to him, we are
his Possession and Property; and therefore whatsoever he purposes concerning
us, or does to us, he does us no Wrong, for he is our Potter, and we the Clay
he has formed. This Consideration should make us more patient in Adversity and
more thankful for Prosperity. And

6thly. Let us glorify God on Account of his Power and Kingdom, which rules
over all. Let us inwardly admire the vast extent of his Right, and Strength,
the largeness of his Kingdom, and the Power of its Administration! And let us
extol it openly! Rev. xv. 3. And they sung the Song of Moses the Servant of
God, the Song of the Lamb, saying, great and marvelous are thy Works, O Lord
God Almighty, just and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints! And finally let
us imitate the independent Power of God, by submitting to God only in Matters
of Conscience. Let us stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ by his Blood,
has made us free. Gal. v. 1. Only being careful that we don't abuse it, or use
it with offense. Let us be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might,
that we may be able to do all Things, through Christ strengthening us. O let us
dwell in the Secret of the most High, that we may be constantly kept under the
Shadow of the Almighty; and be preserved by his Power, through Faith unto
Salvation, which may God grant for CHRIST sake, Amen, Amen.

SERMON XIII.
LEVITICUS xix. 2. Speak unto all the Congregation of the Children of Israel
and say unto them, ye shall be Holy: For I the Lord your God am Holy.


MOSES is enjoined by Jehovah in the first Verse of this Chapter, and also in
that out of which our Text is taken, to deliver the summary of divine Laws to
all the Congregation of the Children of Israel. Moses must make known God's
Statutes, and proclaim them through the Camp, that so every one might hear and
know his Duty, in order to practice the same. And hence we may learn, that the
Devotion which springs from Ignorance, that that Religion which commends it,
cannot be of God; because it is directly contrary to the Method which God has
taken with his reasonable Creatures, respecting the Affairs of Religion, in all
the Ages of the Church, both under the Jewish and Gospel Dispensations! Now the
Words of our Text contain two Things observable, viz. A Command, and a Reason
enforcing it. And

1st. There is a Command, ye shall be Holy, The Word Holy, says Pool in his
Synopsis upon the Place, and other learned Men, properly signifies to separate,
i. e. from a Common to a Religious Use And hence the Temple and Tabernacle and
many Things in both, were called Holy: And likewise the whole People of Israel,
and many other Things, which it is needless to mention: The Word here
signifies, not only a Sepation from all the Defilements before mentioned; as
Mr. Pool observes, both in his Synopsis, and Annotations; but also an inward
Aversion to all I^urity and Sin, together with a habitual Devotedness to all
moral Purity. Israel's being distinguished from all other People, by peculiar
Laws, was to teach them the necessity of a real Separation from the World and
the Flesh, and of an entire Devotedness to God; and this is likewise the Law of
Christ, 1 Pet. i. 15.16. But as he who has called you is Holy, so be ye Holy
in all manner of Conversation; because it is written, be ye Holy, for I am
Holy. We are the Followers of the Holy JESUS, and therefore must, according to
our Capacity, be consecrated to God's Honor, and conformed to his Nature and
Will, ye shall be Holy; the Words are not a Prophesy or Promise, but a Precept,
importing as much as this, be ye Holy. 1 Pet. i. 15. Or ye must be Holy. It is
as if God had said, ye must take Care and Pains, to have the Habits or
Principles of Holiness, implanted in your Hearts, and to exercise and express
the same, in all your Speech and Practice! But

2dly. We have the Reason enforcing this Command, and that is twofold, viz. The
Nature of God and his Relation to them, for I the Lord your God am Holy. And
1st. God in his Nature is Holy, yea Holiness itself, the Fountain, Idea, and
Pattern of all Holiness. ( Isa. lxiii. 15. Ezekiel. xx. 12.) It is therefore every
Way reasonable, that we should seek Holiness of him, and conform ourselves to
his Example, seeing it is in itself Reasonable and Noble, and without it we can
have no Complacence in him here, or Enjoyment of him hereafter. ( Heb. xii.
14.) But

2dly. The Almighty in this Text, incites the People of Israel to Holiness on
Accout of the covenant Relation which subsisted between them: For I the Lord
your God am Holy, as if God had said, I have chosen you before others, and
given myself to you to be your God by Way of special Interest, and covenant
Property; and ye have chosen me, and devoted yourselves to me as your Guide,
your God, your Governor, your Portion, and your All! And therefore you are
bound by the Ties of Gratitude, and by covenant Engagements, to obey my
Precepts, and conform your selves to my Nature ^n Holiness!

The Subject that offers it self to our present Meditations, from the Text,
which I have been laboring to explain, is that venerable Attribute of the
divine Nature, viz. Holiness: This is very frequently ascribed to God in the
sacred Scriptures, thus he is called the Holy one, Isa. xl. 25. Likewise the
Holy one of Israel, above 30 Times, Isa. xli. 20. He is called the Holy one of
Jacob, Isa. xxix. 23. The most Holy, or Holy of Holies, Dan. ix. 24. He is
called thrice Holy, Isa. vi. 3. -- Rev. iv. 8. Or the Character of Holiness is
three Times repeated. Holiness is ascribed to all the Persons of the Trinity,
the Father is called the Holy one of Israel: The Son is called the most Holy,
^an. ix 24. The Spirit is called the Spirt of Holiness, and the Holy Spirit,
Romans i. 4. And indeed right Reason assures ^s, that God is Holy: For 1st. If we
were not Holy, how could he be the Author of that Holiness, which is in his
People? ( John i. 19.)

2dly. Without Holiness he could not carry himself decently, or as it is fit
and proper to himself; and so by Consequence, he could not behave himself
suitable to his Creatures, not govern them Holily and Well. If a King do not
duly regard himself in his Royal Authority, he can never duly govern his
Subjects. And

3dly. Without Holiness he could not be perfect in any Attribute: For as Mr.
Scudder observes, Holiness is the Beauty of all God 's Attributes, without
which his Wisdom would be Sub^ty; his Justice, Cruelty; his Sovereignty,
Tyrany, his Mercy foolish Pity.

In considering this divine Perfection, I would I. Enquire concerning its
Nature. II. Show its Properties. III. Represent it is Manifestations or
Discoveries.


And lastly proceed to some practical Uses.

1st. Then seeing the Holiness of God, as it is in him, is so Sublime and
Transcendent, that it is inaccessible to our weak and finite Minds; it will be
necessary, first to behold it in its Emblem, or Effects, and from that to
proceed to the producing Cause, or Prototype. Now the Image or Effect of the
Holiness of God, is that Holiness, which Jehovah is pleased to form in
intelligent Beings or Creatures. Holiness therefore in its general Nature, may
be thus described, viz. That it is the moral Goodness of a reasonable Being. To
understand which, let it be observed, that Goodness is twofold, viz. Physical
and Moral, Physical Goodness is likewise twofold, viz. either of Being or Use;
a Thing may be called Good physically or naturally either when its being is
desirable, or when it serves to answer the End designed for it. In both these
Resects, all the inanimate and irrational Parts of the Creation are called Good
by God himself, the best Judge of Things. Genesis i. ult. And God saw every Thing
that he had made and behold it was very Good! But moral Goodness, is that which
is adorned, with such Manners, as become a God! and this is peculiar to
reasonable Creatures. Now the Holiness of Creatures is threefold, viz.
Relative, Fedral, and Real, 1st. Relative, is that whereby Times and Places,
and other Things are called holy, because they relate to a Holy God, and are
appropriated by him, being separated from a Common, and dedicated to a
Religious Use by his Authority, which they have a Tendency to promote. In this
Sense the Sabbath, the Temple, and many Things in it, were called Holy. 2dly
Federal Holiness, is that whereby Persons are separated from the World, to be
God's peculiar People, in order to the Study of Holiness, when they profess
this, and by their Profession are in the Judgment of a reasonable Charity,
looked upon as Saints or Holy Persons. Deuteronomy. vii. 6. For thou art a Holy People
unto the Lord thy God, the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special People
unto himself, above all People that are on the Face of the Earth. Number. xv. 40.
That ye may remember, and do all my Commandments and be Holy unto your God. In
this respect the Whole Nation of Israel, were of old Holy to God ( Ex. xix. 6.)
They are therefore called a Holy Nation. (1 Pet. ii. 9. Number. xvi. 3.) And
Scores of Times the whole Nation of Israel are called God's People in
Scripture. Ex. iii. 10. That thou may bring forth my People the Children of
Israel out of Egypt. In this Respect the Children of believing Parents are
Holy. (1 Cor. vii. 14.) But 3dly. Real Holiness, consists in the Exercise and
Growth of good Habits or pious Dispositions infused, and is therefore twofold,
viz. Habitual and actual. Habitual, consists in the inward Purity of the Will
and Affections, whereby we are inclined to live to God; or it consists, in the
Infusion of a Constellation, or Train of Graces, into the Soul, which turns its
inward and general Bent into a spiritual and Heavenly Channel! By this the Soul
of Man, is in some Sort conformed to the Nature of God; Actual Holiness
consists in the Exercise of the aforesaid divine Habits, especially in our
Speech and Practice, whereby, through God's gracious Concurrence, they are
increased. Hereby the Life is conformed to God's Will and Law: From what has
been observed, it appears, therefore that Holiness contains the four following
Ingredients, or Particulars. viz. 1st. A Separation from a common or profane
Use, in which Sense, Paul the Apostle, is said to be separated to the Gospel of
God. Romans i. 1. And the Lord JESUS as Mediator, is said to be sanctified. John
x. 36. And 2dly. A Dedication to a divine or religious Use, whereby we
deliberately, unreservedly, and resolutely devote ourselves and our all to the
Divine Glory and Service. ( Romans xii. 1. 2 Cor. viii. 5.) First they gave their
own selves to the Lord. -- And 3dly. It contains a Representation, of the
Divine Holiness, the Heart resembling the Purity of the divine Nature, and the
Life the Purity of the Divine Law. And 4thly. Holiness includes a Detestation
of, and Flight from all Impurity. Ps. xcvii. 10. Ye that love the Lord hate
Evil.

From the aforesaid Image, or Emblem of Holiness in Creatures, we may gather
this Description, of the Holiness of God! viz. That it is his Moral Excellency,
whereby he is separated from every thing common or profane, hereby he is
inclind to seek himself, and his Glory above all. (Pro. xvi. 4. Ephesians. i. 11.)
and is conformed exactly to that Holiness which is expressed in the Moral Law
in his Thoughts, Words and Deeds. And hence he often in his Word invites Men to
an Imitation of his Holiness. (1 Pet. i. 15, 16.) As God's Power is opposed to
all natural Weakness, and his Wisdom to Folly, so his Holiness is opposed to
all moral Blemishes, or Imperfections, which we call Sin. Hab. i. 13.

Holiness is a Disposition, to seek the most excellent End, in the highest
Degree, and to refer all to it. The best Good, certainly deserves to be the
last End! Now Jehovah being himself, the best Good, infinitely superior in
Excellency, to all Creatures, he must therefore consequently be his own last
End! Hence is that of the Prophet. Isa. xlii. 8. I am the Lord, that is my
Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, nor my Praise to Graven Images.
And it appears farther to be reasonable, that God should seek himself as his
own last End, because he is Self-existent, and from no other! This Devotedness
therefore of the Almighty to seek his own Glory, as his chief End, appears to
be a very considerable Branch of the Holiness of God. But for Creatures, who
are but an inferior Good, and borrow their Beings from another to make
themselves, or any thing that concerns them as such, their last End, is a great
Instance of Impiety: The very nature of Sin seems to consist in this, viz. A
Deviation or wandering in our Views, Designs or Affections from God's Glory, to
some other End, as Chief and Supreme. Seeing that all Things are from God, as a
creating or producing Cause, and through him also as a supporting Cause,
therefore all ought to be directed to him, as a final Cause. ( Romans xi. 36.)
The Holiness of God seems to be the Harmony of his Attributes, as they are
opposed to Sin! and therefore it is called the Beauty of the Lord! Ps. xxvii. 4.
One Thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the House of the Lord, to behold the Beauty of the Lord. -- Holiness seems
to put a Luster upon the other Perfections of the divine Nature, without which,
they would be inglorious* because impure!

Now the Holiness of God, is either essential or declarative. The essential
Holiness of God is nothing else but the transcendant and incomprehensible
Eminence of the divine Nature or Being, or his Purity and Glory. And hence he
is said to be glorious in Holiness. (Ex. xv. 11.) The declarative Holiness of
God consists in the Displays of the Former in God's Word and Works, they are
distinguished only in our manner of Conception, and not in God. And thus I am
led to discourse upon the

2d. Proposed, which was to show the Properties of God's Holiness. Now the
essential Holiness of God, has the following Properties, viz.

1st. It is original Holiness, it is the Source of all those Stremes of
Holiness which appear in Creatures: It is the Substance and Prototype, their's
but the Shadow and Copy borrowed from it! Jehovah has received it from none,
but created Beings derive all theirs from this, Romans xi. 35 -- Who has first
given to him?

2dly. It is simple Holiness, i. e. It is the very Being of God, and not any
Thing added to it: Hence God is said to swear by his Holiness, Psalm. lxxxix 35.
Whereas Holiness in Creatures is not their Nature, or Being, but some
Disposition or Quality added to it, and therefore separable from it; and hence
they are only called Holy, but not Holiness: This last Term speaks an Abstract,
simple and uncompounded Being! And

3dly. It is eternal Holiness, and this it must needs be, seeing it is the same
with his Essence; which has been before proved to be eternal, in a proceeding
Sermon. As it is impossible in the Nature of Things, that ever God should begin
to be, so it is equally impossible that ever he should be without Holiness,
which is his Beauty and Glory, for then he would be no God; but a Being of a
contrary Character. Now as the Holiness of God had no Beginning, so by
Consequence it can have no End! Whereas on the Contrary the Beings of all
Creatures, beginning with Time, or commencing in it, are Temporary; and their
Holiness, which could not exist before their Beings, must be of the like Kind:
As it had a Beginning so it may have an End.

4thly. Immutable Holiness: It is liable to no Change or Alteration, for the
Reason aforesaid, viz. Because it is himself: And hence it is said, Rev. xv. 4.
That God only is Holy, i. e. He is holy so as none else besides him is; the
Moral Excellencies of Creatures are liable to manifold Change, yea they may be
entirely Lost; witness the Apostasy of the Angels, and the fatal Fall of our
first Parents. Hereby the Crown has fallen from our Heads, and we have come
Short of the Glory of God!

5thly. Transcendent Holiness, above all Degrees: It being absolutely Perfect,
can receive no increase: The Holiness of all created Beings amassed together,
would be but as a Drop compared with the Infinite Ocean of Purity in God: But
the Holiness of all Creatures is certainly Gradual on Earth, and possibly so in
Heaven; for if the Saints and Angels increase in Knowledge, why may they not in
Love, and other good Dispositions! Hence God is said to Charge his Angels with
Folly, and that the Heavens are not clean in his Sight; by which, (by a
Metonimy,) we may understand the Inhabitants of Heaven, whose Holiness when
compared with God, may be called Impurity!

6thly, It is Infinite Holiness, it is without all Bounds, and is therefore
termed Light and Love it self. (1 John i. 5. and iv. 8.)

Whereas the Angels, who seem to be the Purest of created Spirits, vail their
Faces in the immediate Presence of God, as being ashamed of their comparative
Deformity; while they behold that radiant Beauty and burnished Glory which
appears with surprising Blaze and venerable Majesty in the Holiness of God! But

2dly. The declarative Holiness of God has the following Properties, viz. It is
1st. Perfect, without the least Defect: Hence we are bid to be the Sons of God
without Rebuke, Phil. ii. 15. It is sincere without Deceit; for God is not a
Man, that he should Lie, or the Son of Man that he should Repent.

2dly. It is Exemplary: And hence we are bid to immitate him, to be Holy as he
is Holy; to be Merciful as he is Merciful: This demonstrates its superior
Eminence; for the common Ma^im is just, that that which is the First and Best
in every Kind, is the Rule and Measure of the Rest! (Primum et Optimum in
unoquoque genere, est regula, and mensura ceterorum.)

3dly. Universal: As God's Holiness is diffused through all his Attributes within
himself, so it appears in his Word, and all his Works without, and that free
from the least Intermission or Variation; the Truth of which will appear under
the next general Head of Discourse, viz. The

3d. Proposed, which was to represent the Manifestations or Discoveries of
God's Holiness: And here we may justly observe, with the Psalmist in General,
That God is Holy in all his Works, (Psalm. cxlv. 17.) But it is peculiarly
Apparent in those following, viz.

1st. In his eternal Decrees respecting his People: God has therein from
everlasting, purposed and secured upon a strong and impregnable Foundation, the
Holiness of the Elect, and hence it is said, Ephesians. i. 4. That he has chosen
us in him, before the Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy and
without Blame before him! 2 These. ii. 13, Because God has, from the beginning,
chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit! And

2dly. The Holiness of God, appears in the Creation of Man, in making him after
his own Image in Righteousness and Holiness, (Ephesians. iv. 25.) Though Man has
since found out many Inventions to his Shame and Loss; yet, as Solomon
observes, he was made at first upright! A perfect and universal Rectitude
crowned the human Nature in its primitive State, together with a freedom of
Will and Power to persevere therein! God's Foreknowledge and Purpose did not
bereave Man of his Liberty of acting, or lay him under a natural Necessity of
sinning; for if so, then God would be the Author of Sin; which is blasphemous
to Imagine! And was it not the Design of God in making the irrational and
inanimate Parts of the Creation, that thereby intelligent Beings might be
excited to admire and adore the Perfections of their Former, and conform to him?

3dly. The Holiness of God appears in his Works of Providence, especially in
his prescribing to intelligent Creatures a Law to direct them in his Service,
and in enforceing that Law by proper Sanctions of the most desirable Rewards
and formidable Punishments! Hereby representing before them the unspeakable
Advantages of his sincere Service, as well as on the Contrary, the dreadful
Consequences of a Neglect thereof! And has not Almighty God by his Providence,
in some signal Instances, manifested his holy Displeasure against Sin, by
executing upon Transgressors, the Threatenings annexed to the Violation of his
Law? As the Psalmist observes, Psalm. ix. 16. The Lord is known by the Judgments
which he executes: The Wicked is snared in the Work of his own Hands! It is
true, Judgment is not always speedily executed, and therefore the Hearts of the
Sons of Men are fully set in them to do Evil! And the Reason is, because the
present State of Things, is a Time of Probation, and not of Recompense; which
shows the Necessity of a future Judgment, when a righteous God shall render
Vengeance and Recompense! However both Scripture and History inform us, of some
dreadful Displays of divine Severity, against obstinate Transgressors, that the
World may know there is a God who detests their Impieties! And

4thly. Has not the Holiness of God had a most surprising Display in the Work
of Redemption? Rather then Sin should pass unpunished, did not the Almighty
Father punish it in his own Son? His only begotten and eternally beloved Son!
Did not his Sword awake against the Man that was his Companion? The darling of
his Soul! And did he not afflict him with all the Waves of his intolerable
Vengeance, which was due for the Sins of the elect World? Our dearest Lord trod
the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath alone! -- The Chastisement of our Peace was
laid upon him, that through his Stripes we might be healed. Our Redeemer under
the Agonies of Desertion for our Sins, referrs to the Holiness of God therein
made manifest, Psalm. xxii. 3. But thou art Holy O thou that Inhabitest the
Praises of Israel! And

5thly. God's Holiness appears in his Works of divine Grace, whereby he
prepares his People here, for the Enjoyment of Himself hereafter. Hence
effectual Calling, is termed a Holy Calling. 2 Timothy i. 9. And we are said to be
called, not unto Uncleaness, but unto Holiness. 1 These. iv. 7. And what is
Regeneration, and Sanctification, but the renewing of the Image of God's
Holiness in Man? And what is Glorification,? Does it not in a degree consist in
the perfecting of the aforesaid Image in the Redeemed? Then that which is in
part shall be done away, Then shall our Lord present to himself, a Church holy
and glorious, without Spot and Blemish. Ephesians. v. 27. Again

2dly. God discovers his Holiness in his Word, every Page of which proclaims
his Purity, and hence it is called Holy; by his Truth contained therein, we are
sanctified or made Holy. (John xvii. 17.) The Words of the Lord are pure Words,
as Silver tried in a Furnace of Earth, purified seven Times. Ps. xii. 6. The
Law of God is holy, and the Commandment just and Good. Romans vii. 12. And no
Wonder, for it is the Image of the divine Purity, a Transcript of the divine
Nature, as far as it is imitable; hence it is likned to a Glass. Jam. i. In
this we behold God and ourselves, For by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. The
Law of God, says the Psalmist, is perfect, converting the Soul. Ps. xix. 7. The
Gospel is Holy, and hence it is called, a holy Covenant. (Luke i. 72.) The
great Design of it, is to promote Holiness, by laying Men under more endearing
and ingenuous Engagements thereto. And

3dly. God does not only discover his Holiness in his Works and Word; but also
in his Worship; hence the Ordinances of Worship, viz. The Sacraments are called
Holy, because they tend to promote Holiness, and likewise the Time and Place of
Worship, are called Holy. God is said to hallow the Sabbath (Ex. xx. 11.) The
Temple of old was called Holy, and Holiness is said to become God's House
forever. (Ps. xciii. v.) On this Account it is said to be the Place, where
God's Honor dwells. ( Ps. xxvi. 8.) The Ministers, and Attendants of Worship,
are called Holy. Aaron was to wear on the Front of his Mitre, a Plate of Gold,
with this Motto engraven on it, viz. Holiness to the Lord. Ex. xxviii. 36. The
Angels, those Attendants of Worship, are called holy. Luke ix. 26. And is not
Holiness the great Design, and Tendency of Religious Worship? And Hence is that
Word of God to Moses and Aaron, Ex. x. 3. I will be sanctified in them, that
come nigh me. But it is Time to proceed to some practical Uses. And

1st. If God be Holy, as has been proved, then we may hence learn, that he
cannot be the Author of Sin, which is so contrary to his Nature, or of any
Doctrines that tend to promote it. Now the following Doctrines of the Papists,
Antinomians, and Enthusiasts are of this Sort, and therefore should be rejected
with Abhorrence, viz.

1st. The Doctrine of Indulgencies, or Pardons for Sin. This was opposed by
Swinglius in Helvetia, and by Luther in Germany, in the Year 1516. and being
defended by Pope Leo, became the Occasion of the Reformation.

2dly. The Popish Distinction of Sins into Venial and Mortal. The Former they
say do not deserve eternal Punishment, contrary to Scripture, ( Romans vi. 23.)

To those I might add their gainful Doctrine of Purgatory. And likewise their
holding with the Pharisees of old, that the Law respects only outward Acts:
Whereas the inward Principle from which those flow, is more corrupt than any
Act that proceeds from it. As the aforesaid Doctrines are most absurd in
themselves: For how can it be supposed with any Appearance of Reason, that any
can forgive Sins, but that God against whom they are committed? I say as they
are absurd in themselves, so they have a manifest Tendency to promote impiety,
and therefore are not of God.

To the Former Catalogue, may be added some Antinomian Doctrines, which are not
less unreasonable and perilous, viz. Justification from Eternity, or from the
Time of Christ's Death. That the Law is no Rule of Life to Believers; that
there is no need of Repentance under the Gospel; that Faith consists in such an
Assurance, as is succeeded by no Doubts; That there is no preparative (of
order) that goes before Faith. Those Doctrines open a Door to all Impiety. They
directly tend to make Christ a Minister of Sin, and his Gospel an Instrument of
Iniquity; and therefore cannot be from God. It is an Instance of the vilest
Ingratitude, to draw from the Doctrine of free Forgiveness, an Argument against
Repentance!

And indeed the Arminian Doctrine of Universal Redemtion, has an awful Tendency
to make Men secure in Sin. Of the like Nature is the Doctrine of all
Enthusiasts, in opposing the stated Performance of Religious Duty. This,
whatever false Guises is put upon it, tends to wear off the Sense of God and
divine Things, and to prepare Men for Delusions in Principle and Iniquity in
Practice. And

2dly. From what has been said, in the Explicatory Part of this Discourse, we
should be induced to examine ourselves, in order to know whether we be truly
Holy or not? Which we may know by an impartial comparing of ourselves, with
what has been already delivered on this Subject, to which I shall add the
following Characters of true Holiness, which duly considered may assist the
Examination of ourselves. And

1st. True Holiness is Sincere, it Eyes God more than Man, and aims at his
Glory above all, in the general Course of Action. And herein it is like the
Holiness of God himself, inasmuch as it aims at the same End with him. ( Mat.
vi. 1, -- 6. 1 Cor. x. 31.)

2dly. It is internal chiefly, as it begins in the Mind and Heart, so it takes
more Care of that, than the Outside. ( Ps. li. 6.) directly contrary to this
were the Pharisees of old in their Practice. ( Mat. xxiii. 23.)

3dly. It is Evangelical, proceeding chiefly from that Faith in CHRIST, which
is of the Operation of God, and works by Love. As God's People receive
Strength from CHRIST to perform Acts of Holiness, by a believing Dependence on
him, so they are constrained or influenced by Love to him, to labor to be
Holy. And their Seize and Labors in Religion, are attended with a humble
Sense of their own Imperfection. Not as though I had already attained, said holy
Paul, or were already perfect, but I press forward. And

4th. True Holiness is Universal, and that both in regard of the Subject in
which it is placed, and the Object about which it is exercised. The whole Soul
in all its Powers is in some Measure renewed, the Mind is enlightened, the Will
bowed, the Affections in their general Bent, and in the highest degree are
turned toward God. And both Soul and Body separated from the habitually
governing Love of the World, and willingly devoted to God, together with all we
possess, not reserving to ourselves any Thing with Ananias, and Saphira, and
the young Pharisee. ( Romans xii. 12. 1 Th^s. v. 23.) Some derive the Word Holy
(hagios) from a Letter and a Word which signify to be void of Earth. Now as the
Subject is universally altered, in respect of the whole Number of its Parts, so
is the Object universal also. True Holiness includes in it, an Aversion not
only to this or that impurity, with the Pharisees, but to all with every
Appearance thereof. ( Tit. xi. 12. Jud. 23.) And likewise an Inclination to,
and endeavor after every good Work. Job. xiii. 18.

5thly True Holiness is continual, it endures to the End, such as have it, aim
at, and labor for Growth in Goodness, and when they find not satisfactory
Signs thereof, are grieved!

Now all such who upon Examination find in themselves, the preceding
Characters of Holiness, may take Comfort to their Souls, whatever Circumstances
of Discouragement they may be in, from within or from without. And that for the
following Reasons. 1st. Because it is not the Measure, but Truth of Grace that
evidences our Sanctification. 2dly. Because our imperfect Holiness, is accepted
through Christ, in whom we are complete. He is made of God to us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. 3dly. He that has begun a good
Work in us, has promised to carry it on, to the Day of the Lord JESUS. God is
Holy and the Fountain of all Holiness. God has promised to take away the Stony
Heart, and give us a Heart of Flesh, to give us a new Heart and a new Spirit,
and that he will cause us to walk in his Statutes. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25, 27. 4thly.
What though we at Times are afflicted with our Corruptions, it is no more than
the Saints of God have been before us! Woe is me, says Isaiah, for I am a Man
of polluted Lips. Isa. vi. 5. Yea this is the Language of the Church. Is. lxiv.
6. But we are all as an unclean Thing and all our Righteousnesses, are as
filthy Rags, and we all do fade as a Leaf, and our Iniquities, like the Wind
have taken us away. The Psalmist complains of the same Disease, and yet Hopes.
Ps. lxv. 3. Iniquities prevail against me, as for our Transgressions, thou
shall purge them away. And thus did the Apostle Paul. Romans vii. 24. Who shall
deliver me from this Body of Sin and Death? But God will blot out our
Iniquities, as a thick Cloud, and will remember our Sins no more, Is. xl. 22.
CHRIST has given himself for his Church, that he might sanctify it, by the
washing of Water through the Word. Ephesians. v. 25, 26. And let us comfort ourselves
with this, in all our Troubles, that he who now sanctify's us, will by and by
glorify us, ( Romans viii. 30.)

But on the contrary all such as want the aforesaid Characters, are in a
doleful Case! In the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. Such, so
continuing, can have no Communion with a Holy God here, nor enjoy him
hereafter. (1 John i. 6. -- Heb. xi. 14.) And especially how dismal is the
Case, how impious the Course, of those who murmur at strictness in Religion,
and deride Holiness. What do these in Effect, but rise up in Arms against God
himself, while they practically deny his Holiness. The Language of their
Practice is, that they would cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from among
them. They would, if they could, destroy the divine Being; but by their
impotent Malice, they will but secure and heighten their own Ruin. But I
proceed to a Use of Exhortation. From the Consideration of Gods Holiness, we
should be exhorted, 1st. To glorify God on the Account of this divine Attribute
after the Example of the Holy Angels. Isa. vi. 3. -- 2dly. Let us seek the
Principles of Sanctification from God, in the earnest Use of all appointed
Means, paticularly by Meditation on its Excellency, and Necessity, by Prayer,
reading and hearing the Word of God, and conversing with pious People. And
3dly. Let us exercise those Principles, in all Holiness of Conversation. Now we
should be excited to Holiness, by the following Motives. 1st. God is Holy, yea
Holiness itself, and Wills our Sanctification. 2dly. Holiness is his principal
and universal Perfection, and therefore by the Study of Holiness we resemble
God in his chief Excellency. 3dly. He who is Holy, is the Lord, or Jehovah, and
so able to compensate the Labors we use to be like him. 4thly. He is our God,
and so has given himself to us, and we ourselves to him in Covenant, and
therefore we are bound to be Holy, both by Gratitude for his undeserved Love,
and by our own Promise. 5thly. Holiness is exceeding excellent, it exalts and
enobles our reasonable Nature, by conforming it to the Divine. 6thly. It is as
necessary as excellent, in a twofold respect viz. Both of Command, and Mean. As
God enjoins it by his sovereign Authority so it appears to be of absolute
Necessity, from the very Nature of Things. For without Conformity to God, we
can have no complacence in him, and so no Communion with him, either in this or
a future World. And without Communion with God, there can be no Enjoyment of
God. See Heb. xii. 14. 7thly. It is pleasant. Solomon justly observed, That
Wisdoms Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths Peace. Hereby
Fellowship with God is attained, which is the most sweet Entertainment; and our
Hope of Glory confirmed, which is the most supporting Prospect. 8thly.
Profitable. (Jer. ii. 31) Surely in serving God there is great Reward. Farther
what is the great Design of our eternal Election, next to the Glory of God, but
that we should be Holy. Ephesians. i. And is not this the Scope of our Saviors
Death, and of the Office of the Holy Spirit? Did not our Lord die to purchase
to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works? And to what Purpose, is our
effectual Calling, but that we should be holy in all manner of Conversation? As
a holy Conversation is pleasing to God, ( Prove. xi. 20.) so it has a noble
Tendency, to promote his Kingdom among Men: Whereas the contrary dishonours
God's Name, grieves the Hearts of the Godly, and hardens the Hearts of the
Wicked. Is not the Design of all the Parts of God's Word, whither Doctrinal,
Historical, Preceptive, Promisory, Minatory, as well of the various
Dispensations of Providence we meet with, to promote Holiness? And are not all
these lost to us, if this be not obtained, Afflictions and Comforts are lost*
Yea and the Ordinances, are also lost to us. Our Profession and Prayers, yea
and the Eyes of God, Men and Angels that are upon us, oblige us to be Holy. In
this Way we may expect that God will be our Sun and Shield, and will give us
Grace and Glory. Amen.

SERMON XIV.
DEUTERONOMY, xxxii. 4. He is the Rock, his Work is Perfect: For all his Ways
are Judgment: A God of Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and Right is he.


MOSES introduces his Song in this Chapter with the most solemn and commanding
Magnificence, and yet with the softest Charms of Language! He summones the
Attention of the inanimate Creation partly to reprove the Stupidity of Israel,
and partly to bear Witness to the Truth of what he was about to deliver to them
in the following Song, either for their Instruction or Warning, as well as to
witness to the Justice and Equity of the divine Proceedings against that
unhappy Nation! Give Ear O Heavens and I will speak, and hear O Earth the Words
of my Mouth!

In the 2d Verse the devout Penman of this Song, wishes that the Instructions
contained in it, may be refreshing to and effectual upon his beloved Nation, as
the Rain and Dew upon the Earth, my Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, my Speech
shall distill as the Dew. -- These Words may be considered as a Prayer of Moses,
as if he had said, O! That it might do so; thus Bishop Patrick understands the
Words. In the next Verse he signifies his Intention to make known the Glory of
God, and therefore excites them to ascribe Greatness to him; which Intention he
performs in the Words of our Text, wherein we have a Representation of the
divine Glory and Greatness apparent in the Perfection of his Works, and equity
of his Government, in a Variety of Particulars, viz. 1st. He is called a Rock,
to signify the Stability of his Nature, the Firmness of his Councils, the
immutability of his Promises, and Almightiness of his Power! In all which
Respects he is a secure Shelter and unshaken Foundation for our Resort and
Confidence.

2dly. His Work is Perfect, His Work of Creation was so, all that he made in
its original Constitution was very Good; his Works of Redemption and Providence
shall be be so when the Mystery of God is finished. God's Works are true, and
cannot be blamed, says Ainsworth upon the Place, God never recalls his
Councils, but perfects them. God's Work is called Perfect, because he has
fulfilled what he promised to the Fathers.

3dly. All his Ways are Judgment, i. e. says Henery, the Ends of his Ways are
all Righteous, and he is Wise in the Choice of the Means in order to those
Ends, By God's Ways, we are to understand all Gods Providential Administrations
toward intelligent Creatures, and by Judgment, Prudence, and Justice, (Hos.
xiv. 9.)

4thly. He is a God of Truth, i. e. as Mr. Pool observes in his Synopsis,
Faithful in his Promises; whose Word we may depend upon, for he cannot Lie.

5thly. Without Iniquity, he is perfectly Free from all moral Blemish and
Defect. He deceives none that confides in him, and wrongs none that apply for
Justice, and is hard upon none that cast themselves upon his Mercy.

6thly. Just and Right is he: God is Holy and Equal in his Distributions; as he
is just in himself, so he is just in all his Dealings with Mankind, none can
with Reason accuse him of Insincerity, Unrighteousness, or Levity.

Now that Attribute or Perfection of God which is principally represented in
our Text, by a beautiful variety of Expressions, is his Justice; this therefore
is the Subject of our present Meditations. That God is just, the Scripture
proves many Ways, particularly 1st. Metaphorically and Figuratively, when he is
therein called a consuming, Fire, an angry Lion, a Man of War. (Deuteronomy. iv. 24.
Isa. xxxviii. 13.)

2dly. Affectively, by attributing to him Zeal, Anger, Jealousy, Fury. (Number.
xi. 10. Exo. xx. 5. xxxii. 10.) The aforesaid Affections suppose Justice in
Creatures, and though they be Passions in them, they are in God but an Act of
immutable Justice.

3dly. Effectively, by showing that he renders to every one according to his
Works. (1 Samuel xxvi. 23.)

4thly. Negatively, by removing from him all Injustice, and Iniquity, all
respect of Persons; and in a Word all the Causes and Effects of Injustice.
(Job. viii. 3.) Does God pervert Judgment, or does the Almighty pervert
Justice? (Dan. ix. 14. Romans iii. 4.).

5thly. Possitively, by affirming and extolling his Justice by calling him a
Revenger, Holy, Right. (Jer, xii. 1.) Ps. xi. 7. For the Righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, his Countenance does behold the Upright. To these we may add the
Words of our Text, then which nothing can be more Full and Express, He is a
Rock, his Work is Perfect, for all his Ways are Judgment: A God of Truth, and
without Iniquity, Just and Right is he: And also that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
cxix. 137. Righteous art thou O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments.

And does not Reason comfirm the same Truth? For 1st. If God be not Just,
whence is there any Justice? Either there would be no Justice at all, or if
there was any it would not proceed from God! Or if it did, it must proceed from
one who had none; each of which Particulars is absurd. Besides

2dly. Inasmuch as the Lord is Governor of the whole Universe, he would
degenerate into a Tyrant, if he was not Just. And

3dly. Seeing Jehovah is judge of all the Earth, how could he judge a right
without being just himself? Neither can it be otherwise but that God should be
just, seeing he is absolutely Perfect: All confess Justice to be an Excellency,
involving no imperfection in it, and therefore it cannot be wanting to that
Being, who is absolutely and infinitely Perfect!

In discoursing upon this divine Attribute of God's Justice, I purpose to
consider its Nature, Kinds, Properties, Displays, and in the 5th Place to
Answer some Objections, and then proceed to the Improvement. And

1st. Justice in its general Nature may be said to be an Agreement with Right
and Rule: It is opposed to Crookedness and Obliquity, by which any Thing
declines from its proper Rule. Crookedness in Morals is the same with Sin;
which the Apostle John calls a Transgression of the Law. 1 John iii. 4. Or as
the original Word, Anomia, may be rendered a Being without the Law, or a
wandering from the Law. Justice does therefore coincide with Rectitude or
Uprightness, Ecle. vii. 29. Lo this only I have found that God has made Man
Upright: -- So that Justice includes two Things in it especially, viz. Right,
and an Agreement with that Right, 1st. I say it includes Right or that which
belongs to every one, Luke xx. 25. Render therefore unto Caesar the Things that
are Caesar 's, and unto God the Things that are God's. Romans i. 32. Knowing the
Judgment of God that they that do such Things are worthy of Death. -- It is
from this Right that the very Name of Justice is derived. And

2dly. It includes an Agreement with this Right; and in this the Form of
Justice consists: And the Contrary to this viz. A Disagreement from Right,
constitutes the Form of Injustice. From this general Description it is evident
that Justice admits of no Degrees, for a Thing either agrees with the Rule of
Right or not; if the Former, it is Just, if the Latter, it is Unjust.

Undoubtedly the Justice of God, as well as of Creatures consists in an
Agreement with Right, but with this difference, that the Creatures have their
Rule of Right prescribed by another; whereas the divine Nature is a Rule of
Right to the Almighty. But let me pass to the

2d. Proposed, which was to speak of the Kinds of Justice:

And here it may be observed that Justice may be considered under a threefold
View, viz. As relating to God's Will, Word, and Deeds. And 1st. Justice, as it
relates to the Will of God, is thus described by Wendeline, viz. That it is
that whereby God is just in himself and without himself gives to every one
their own by a constant Will. Justice in Man, says Mr. Leigh, is a settled
Will, to do Right in every Thing to every Person. Thus God has a settled Will
to do Right, shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? This constant Will
of God, to render to every one his own, Coincides with the divine Essence, and
may be called his essential Justice, and is no other but the essential
Rectitude of his Nature. And that Justice of God, which respects his Words and
Deeds, may be called his declarative or relative Justice; because it is a
Manifestation of the Former, and respects the Transactions of God with
Creatures.

But 2dly. The Justice of God, as it relates to his Words, is called, Truth,
Faithfulness and Constancy; because it agrees with the Rectitude of his Nature
to speak so and no otherwise. Faithfulness may be well called Justice; because
it is a doing Justice to his Word.

3dly. The Justice of God, as it respects his Deeds, is twofold, viz. Of
Dominion and Jurisdiction. And 1st. God's Justice of Dominion, or, as some
Divines term it, his disposing Justice, is that whereby Jehovah, as the sole
Monarch and supreme Lord of all, disposes and governs every Thing in a just
Order; and in Particular he disposes his own Actions, according to the Rule of
Equity, requiring and prohibiting nothing but what is fit for intelligent
Creatures, in right Reason to do and forbear. In a Word this Justice of
Dominion consists in governing reasonable Creatures, agreeable to the original
Rectitude of their Natures.

2dly. God's Justice of Jurisdiction, consists in prescribing to reasonable
Creatures their proper due, and in governing them accordingly: And this the
Almighty does by three Things, 1st. By prescribing Laws, which are Rules
tending to direct Mankind in their Duty to God and Man, agreeable to his own
Sanctity, attended with Rewards and Punishments. Jam. iv. 12. There is one
Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy.

2dly. By establishing his Laws by proper Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments
promised and threatened. ( Deuteronomy. xxx. 15.) Now the Sanction consists in Promises
and Threatenings. And

3dly. By fulfilling the Sanction, and that both as to the Reward and
Punishment, the former is called Remunerative, and the latter Vindictive. And
1st. The Remunerative Justice of God, is a most ready Will to perform Gods
Promises. as Wendline observes. When God rewards the Obedience of his Creatures
with a free Reward, proceeding from his own pure and abounding Goodness, not
for any Worth or Condignity in his Peoples Works, as the Papists vainly Dream;
but for the Sake of his gracious Promise, by which he makes himself a Debtor to
them, Romans ii. 6.7, 8. Who will render to every Man according to his Deeds; to
them who by patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor and
Immortality, eternal Life: But to them that are Contentious and do not obey the
Truth, Indignation and Wrath. Luke xvii. 10. When we have done all that is
commanded, we must say, that we are unprofitable Servants, we have done that
which was (but) our Duty to do. Romans xi. 35, 36. Or who has first given to
him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? For of him, and through him, and
to him are all Things. Although there be no intrinsic Worth in Man's Obedience,
to merit the Glory or Reward promised, yet God having promised it to the
Creature, and having a Right and Power to confer it, it is just and right in
him to perform his own Word. And certainly he would wrong his Truth if he did
not. When Happiness in Scripture is represented as a reward, it is only to
encourage or excite to Obedience, by showing the inseparable Connection between
Grace wrought in us, and Glory conferred upon us: It cannot intend any merit in
our Works; for if we ourselves be less then the least of God's Mercies, then
the best Actions put forth by us must be so: For as Doctor Ridgly observes, The
Action cannot have more Honor ascribed to it then the Agent. Being God's
Creatures we have derived all from him, and consequently can offer him no more
than his own. And Being corrupt Criminals, our Services are Defective, and so
cannot merit Good at the Hand of God; nay on the Contrary, for our
Transgressions we merit his Wrath. And therefore in respect of us, the Reward
of Happiness is wholly Gracious; but indeed in Respect of Christ, who has fully
answered the Demands of Law for his People, by his Obedience and Suffering, and
thereby according to the Covenant Transaction between his Father and him,
completely purchased for them everlasting Life, it may be called an Act of
divine Justice. Hence it is said Romans ii. 26. That he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. But

2dly, The Vindictive Justice of God, is the Almighty's Will, to execute the
Threatenings of his Law upon Transgressors, by punishing or inflicting on them
Evils of suffering equal to their Crimes: This is called Wrath, Hatred, Revenge
and Judgment. It is likewise termed God's visiting Iniquity, (Jer. 5.9.) His
setting his Face against a Person, (Lev. xvii. 10.) Its called the Fire of
God's Jealousy, and those that are exposed to it, are said to fall into the
Hands of the living God. Some Divines use the Terms of rewarding and Revenging
Justice, instead of Remunerative and Vindictive.

But here I would have it observed, that there is a less proper Sense in which
the Word Punishment is used in Scripture. Thus when God corrects his People
with his Rod, this is often called Punishment. (Psalm. lxxxix. 30, 33). And
hence they are said to bear the Indignation of the Lord, because they have
sinned against him. Mic. vii. 9. These Afflictions are called Punishments,
because occasioned by Sin, and afflictive to Sense: But they are not inflicted
by God as a Judge, with any Demand of Satisfaction, for that was made by
CHRIST, for those that believe in him; and surely it is contrary to the Nature
of divine Justice, to require a double Satisfaction for the same Crimes! No!
the Afflictions of God's People spring from his Fatherly Love to them, and are
sent either to prevent or correct sinful Disorders. By these the Almighty
humbles his People, by showing them the Desert of their Impieties; and by these
he brings them nearer to himself, and deadens them more to a vain World, and
all it is varnished but empty Entertainments! Afflictions are the Medicines
which the great Physician Uses to cure his People's manifold Disorders.

But that what has been said, concerning the Nature of divine Justice, may be
farther explained and illustrated, let these Things following be considered.
1st. That Justice among Men is Twofold, viz. Either Commutative or
Distributive. Commutative, respects Trade and Bargains among equals, and
consists in observing the Rules of Equity and Right therein. Distributive, is
that which is exercised by a Superior toward his Inferiors, and consists in
the Conformity of their Administrations to rule and law, and therefore
comprizes these four Things in it, viz. 1st. A Law to which the Acts of
Government should be conformed. A Law, says Maresius, Est faciendorum and
fugiendorum norma, sub Ratione praemii et Paenae. i. e. It is the Rule of
Things to be done and avoided, on Consideration of a Reward or Punishment. All
Justice and especially Distributive, has respect to a Law; this is the
Foundation on which it is Built, and Rule according to which it must be squared
and accommodated.

Now the Law that is the Ground and Foundation of Justice among Men, must have
the following Characters, viz. 1st. It must be bottomed upon natural Equity,
upon the Nature, Relation and Reason of Things: Otherwise it will be a crooked
Rule, and so unworthy of Observation. No human Authority can alter the
intrinsic Goodness and Badness of Things; and therefore bad Laws (in a moral
Sense) are but a recommending and enforcing Iniquity by human Authority. And
2dly. The Law must be enacted by competent Power and Authority; because
Legislation, as well as the Execution thereof, are Acts of Government, which
those that exercise should have a Right so to do, either originally or by
Delegation: The Contrary to which tends to open a Scene of Confusion and Blood.
And hence it is well observed by some, that however just any Act of Government
be in itself, yet it is unjust for those to meddle with it that have no Right
thereto, e. g. For a Judge to condemn one Guilty of a Capital Crime to Death is
Just; but for a private Person divested of Authority to do it, is Murder!

And 3dly. The Law must be promulgated that it may be known; for where there is
no Law there is no Transgression, Romans iv. 15. But the

2d. Particular that Civil Justice, or Justice among Men includes, is
Conformity to the Law in all Administrations. When a Judge does this, in all
his Enquiries and Examinations respecting Cases brought before him, he does his
Duty, and otherways he perverts the Ways of Judgment. It is this Kind of
Justice among Men, that is an Emblem or Shadow of the Justice of God, and
therefore I have so long discoursed upon it! But to show the Similitude, let me
add a few Words more, and enquire what is God's Declarative or Relative
Justice, but his Conformity to the Law, he has given his Creatures in his
Transactions with them. Here observe. 1st. That the Law which God gave to Man
to direct him in his Service is grounded on natural Equity, or the nature and
reason of Things; which appears by the Harmony of its Precepts among
themselves, and their direct Tendency to promote the Glory of God, and make the
Creature happy in his Service. The Contraries to which tend to dishonor God,
debase our intelligent Nature, and destroy our Happiness. The moral Law is but
a Transcript of the divine Nature as far as it is imitable. And hence is the
Apostles just commendatory Encomium concerning it. Romans vii. 12. Wherefore the
Law is Holy, and the Commandment Holy; and just and Good. And 2dly. That God
had Authority to enact Laws, appears evidently from his creating all. As his
infinite and eternal Excellency makes him worthy of absolute Sovereignty and
Dominion, so his producing all by his Almightiness, gives him an irrefragable
Right thereto. Human Power is derived, delegated and limited, but his is
Original and Absolute. And 3dly. Almighty God having anex'd the Sanction of
Rewards and Punishments to the Law he has given his Creatures: His Truth stands
engaged to execute the same upon suitable Objects; which is likewise necessary
to answer the Design of Government. This Execution therefore of the Sanction of
the Law, or conformity thereto, in the Dealings of God with his Creatures, is
his declarative Justice, and with this even all his Acts of Sovereignty do
really harmonize; which appears by considering,

3dly. The Properties of divine Justice, which are these following, viz.

1st. Divine Justice is impartial, with him is no Respect of Persons in
Judgment. 2 Cor. v. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
CHRIST, that every one may receive the Things done in his Body, according to
that he has done whether it be Good or Bad. Justice will nor spare for the
sake of the Multitude, Greatness, or Nearness of the Guilty. Did not Sodom and
Gomorha perish by Fire, and was not the whole Antidiluvian World drowned with
Water? And what vast Multitudes of People may we suppose did the aforesaid
Cities, together with Zeboim and Adma contain? And how much more the whole
World before the Flood; and yet all were destroyed by a sudden and terrible
Stroke of divine Justice. And when the Angels, those Spirits of excelling
Dignity, sinned, did not divine Justice cast them into an Abyss of Woe? And
does it not still confine them in Chains of Darkness, to the Judgment of the
great Day? When Adam our federal Head, had transgressed the Covenant, was he
not banished from that Paradise of Pleasure he before possessed, and kept out
of it by a flaming Sword. Divine Justice scatters Kings as Snow in Salmon; and
before its adverse Edge their pompous Armies flee apace! (Ps. lxviii. 12, 14.)
And were not Moses and David though so near and dear to God punished with awful
Severity? Hence is that solemn and Soul affecting Saying of the Prophet, Amos
iii. 1, 2. Hear this Word that the Lord has spoken against you, O Children of
Israel! -- You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I
will punish you, for all your Iniquities. But divine Justice is

2dly. Universal, so that not one Sin can escape severe Punishment, either in
the Sinner or Surety. Gal. iii. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in
all Things, that are written in the Book of the Law to do them.

3dly. Divine Justice is inexorable, no Importunities can alter its Course.
When once a Sinners Season of Mercy expires, Jehovah refuses to be entreated.
Ezekiel. xiv. 18, 20. Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, As I live says the
Lord God, they shall deliver neither Son or Daughter, they shall but deliver
their own Souls by their Righteousness. This is twice repeated in that Chapter
to show the Infallible Certainty, and unspeakable Importance of the Truth
delivered. The Almighty cannot be corrupted or bribed. But that which farther
confirms this awful Truth, is the

4th. Proposed. viz. The Displays of divine Justice; and here to be as brief as
I can, I shall only mention two Instances thereof. The First of which, was the
Sufferings our LORD endured, when he stood in a Sinners Room and Place: How
unspeakable were the Tortures he endured in his sacred Body, every Part of
which was put to exquisite Pain! Deep Furrows were made in his sacred Back by
cruel Scourges, and his beauteous Face exposed to contemptuous Blows, yea to
Shame and Spitting, by the insulting Herd, his venerable Temples were pierced
by Thorns, his Side and Heart by a Spear, the whole Weight of his Body, hung
upon a few Sinewy and sensible Parts in his Crucifixion, and his Name was
treated with the greatest Ignominy and Scorn. But as Mr. Flavel justly
observes, The Soul of our Lord's Sufferings was his Sufferings in his Soul.
When he who knew no Sin, was made Sin for us. His Soul was made an Offering for
Sin, his Soul became sorrowful even unto Death. How unconceiveable must be the
Anguish, which our LORD endured in his Soul, when at one Instant of Time, that
whole Weight of Distress and Pain, which was due to divine Justice, for all the
Sins of the elect World was laid upon it? And in the mean Time deserted by the
Father in respect of his comfortable Presence. This pressed a Bloody Shower
from all the Pores of our LORD'S Body in the Garden of Gethsemane. This
extorted that Heart-rending Outcry on the Cross, Eloi, Eloi, lama Sabachthani?
My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? No wonder the Earths Foundations
trembled, and the Dead awoke out of their long and silent Slumbers, and the Sun
himself, that glorious Orb of Light and Beauty, put on a funeral Robe of
Darkness and Obscurity, to testify their Surprise and Sorrow on so awful an
Occasion, and to complete the Train of Mourners. But!

2dly. The vindictive Justice of God, has a dreadful Display in the Torments of
the Damned, who are punished with everlasting Destruction, from the Presence of
the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. As the Damned are deprived of all
the Honors and Comforts of the Heavenly Paradise. As they are burnt in a Lake
of Fire, which is kindled by the Breath of God, as by a River of Brimstone! So
their intolorable Tortures by God's inflamed Jealousy, by their own guilty
Consciences, by wicked Men and Devils, will know no Intermission and no End.
The smoke of their Torments ascends up for ever and ever. But I hasten to the

5th. Proposed, which was to answer some Objections offered against the Justice
of God. And

1st. It is objected by the Socinians, that according to our Doctrine God,
punished the Innocent in the Room of the Guilty, namely our Savior in the
Place of Sinners.

Ans. Though our Savior was personally innocent, yet he was with his own
Consent, and by his Fathers Imputation, guilty. And hence he is said to be made
Sin for us, he willingly became the Sinners Surety, and so assumed their Guilt,
in order to satisfy for it, and save them from Ruin, and to a willing Person
who had a Right to dispose of his own Life, especially seeing so ^aluable an
End was answered by it, as the Salvation of Sinners, no Injury was done, by his
Father in putting him to Death.

2dly. It is Objected that God sometimes punishes the Sins of the Parents in
their Children. Ex. xx. 5.

Ans. God never punishes the Sins of the Parents in innocent Children. As to
the Sin of Adam he being the federal Head, or covenant Representative of his
whole Offspring, they sinned in him. Hos. vi. 7. But they like Adam (as the
Words should be rendered) have transgressed the Covenant. Romans v. 12. Wherefore
as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed
upon all Men, for that all have sinned ( i. e. in Adam) And as to the Sins of
private Parents, they are not punished in Children, unless they be propense to
them, or imitate them.

3dly. It is objected that God is a Respecter of Persons in the Affair of
Predestination, by dispensing unequal Things to those that were in an equal
State, choosing one, and rejecting another, without any Reason but his own
Pleasure.

Ans. To respect Persons, is when in Matters of Judgment, equal Things
according to Law and Right are due to several Persons, and yet we dispense
unequal: But this is not the Case with the Almighty. Who has given to him,
says the Apostle, and it shall be repaid, for of him are all Things. Romans
xi. 36. As to God's Grace, he owes it to no Creature as such. He is Lord of his
own Treasures, and may do with his own what he pleases. Romans ix. 18, 21. And
therefore such as Favor the Objection, do but reply against God, as the
Apostle there observes. Predestination is but an immanent Act of God, which
produces nothing without himself, and consequently dispenses neither Good nor
Evil, though it be the Pattern according to which his Providence dispenses all
Things in Time. But if we consider God's Providence, which dispenses Salvation
and Damnation, that does not confer unequal Things upon those that are equal.
But it confers unequal Things upon those that are unequal, viz. Believers and
Unbelievers. For CHRIST's Sake Salvation to the Former, and for Sins Sake,
Damnation to the Latter. If a Prince of a Number of Rebels, who all according
to Law deserve Death, purposes and passes an Act of Pardon upon some to show
his Clemency, and lets the Law take place upon others to show his Justice,
where is the Wrong? And that is the Case, for God in his Purposes looked upon
Men as fallen, and meriting his Displeasure, he might have left the whole Race
to perish for their Sins with the Devils, who after their Fall had never an
offer of Mercy. And because Jehovah has chosen some, when he might have
condemned all, shall our Eye be Evil because God is Good?

4thly. It is objected that God suffers the Wicked to prosper, and the Pious to
be afflicted and oppressed.

Ans. This World is a Time of Probation, and not of Recompense. The Scales will
turn at the Conclusion of this short Scene, this transient Drama! Besides the
Miseries of God's People are necessary Physic to cure their Maladies, to which
End they are sanctified by the Spirit of God. Romans viii. 29. They are also at
Times sweetened with the Love of CHRIST, and shall soon expire, and then an
everlasting Sabbatism shall commence. Whereas on the contrary, the abused
Prosperity of the Wicked, tends but to secure and increase their Destruction.
But it is Time to proceed to the Improvement. And

1st. This Subject speaks Terror, to all Ungodly and Christless Sinners of
every Kind. How deplorable is their Case, Who must drink of the Wine of the
Wrath of the Almighty, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his
Indignation? O! Let the Secure and Impenitent Transgressor, think on the
following Particulars, 1st. That God upon the Account of his Justice and
Judgments, is called the Great and dreadful God, Dan. ix. 4. likewise mighty
and terrible. Deuteronomy. vii. 22. With God, says Job, is terrible Majesty, Job.
xxxvii. 22. 2dly. That the Wages of every Sin is Death, and that you have been
guilty of a prodigious Multitude, attended with awful Agravations: Sins against
Light and Love, against Law and Gospel, Mercy, and Judgments, your Iniquities
for Number rival the Stars, and for Agravation are red as Crimson. And 3dly.
That the Justice of God will not, cannot pass by one of them, except ye repent;
but will surely Proportion Pains equal to all their Number and Heinousness. For
as has been observed, it is impartial, universal, inexorable. And now seeing
every Imagination of the Thoughts of your Hearts have been since your Birth
till now, only evil continually, and all your Words and Actions evil. For a
corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit, neither can he that is in the Flesh
please God. How dreadful must that Wrath be which is proportioned to them all?

Surely it is 1st. Incomprehensible Wrath; the most fearful Imagination cannot
fully represent it by its most gloomy Ideas, Psa. xc. 11. Who knows the Power
of thine Anger, even according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. 2dly. It Is
unavoidable Wrath. If we take the morning Wings and flee to the utmost Ends of
the Earth, lo there God's allseeing Eye will discern us, and his righteous Arm
arrest us. If we assend the Top of Carmel, or descend into the Deeps of the
Ocean, or seek to conceal ourselves with the Curtains of obscurity, darkness
and retirement! Even then our Persons and Purposes will be open to the all
penetrating Eye of God! For the Darkness is as the Light to him, and the Night
shines as the Day! Sinners ye cannot escape by Policy, for God is Infinite in
Wisdom; nor by Power, for he is Infinite in Strength, as Job observes, ix. 4.
He is Wise in Heart and Mighty in Strength, who has hardened himself against
God and prospered? Nor can ye escape by Flight, for Jehovah is Omnipresent.
3dly. It is eternal Wrath, (Mat. xxv. ult.) It will continue as long as God
endures, never, never, never shall it know a Period! O this gives it a dreadful
and heart rending Accent! And 4thly. It is intolerable Wrath. If the Redeemer,
who was personally Innocent and supported by the Godhead, cried so dolorously
under this Wrath: How can your Hands be strong or your Hearts endure, when a
Jealous God deals with you, and pours out the Vials of his unmixed Wrath upon
you, who are full of real and crimson Guilt, and shall have none to succor
you! And do you think that that just God, who spared not his own beloved Son,
when he but stood in Sinners Place, but smote him dead by the Sword of his
Justice, and made all the Waves of his Almighty Vengeance beat upon him, and
roll over him, will spare you who are covered all over with real and Scarlet
Guilt? No! Friends, be not deceived, God is not mocked, that which a Man sows
that shall he also reap; he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption! The Intollerableness of the divine Wrath, Anger and Hatred, as well
as its terribleness, is represented in Scripture by a variety of bold and
dreadful Images of thought! I shall mention a few of them, and in the Name of
the great God, charge the ungodly to think upon them. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 22, 23. For
a Fire is kindled in my Anger, and shall burn to the lowest Hell, and shall
consume the Earth with her increase, and set on Fire the Foundations of the
Mountains. I will heap Mischiefs upon them, I will spend my Arrows upon them.
Job. ix. 5, 6, 7. Which removes the Mountains and they know it not, which
overturneth them in his Anger. Which shakes the Earth out of her Place, and
the Pillars thereof Tremble. Which commands the Sun and it rises not, and
seals up the Stars. Psa. xi. 6. Upon the Wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire
and Brimstone, and a horrible Tempest, this shall be the Portion of their Cup.
Elsewhere Jehovah threatens to wound the hairy Scalp of the Wicked, and to tear
them in Pieces when there shall be none to deliver them. That he will tear and
go away (Hos. v. 14.) That he will be to them as a Lion and as a Leopard, and
meet them as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps, devour them like a Lion, and rent
the Caul of their Heart, Hos. xiii 8. And with what Magnificence and Grandeur
of Diction, does the Prophet Nahum speak upon this solemn Subject? Nahum 1. 2,
-- 7. God is Jealous, and the Lord Revengeth; the Lord revengeth, and is
Furious. The Lord will take Vengeance on his Adversaries; and he reserveth
Wrath for his Enemies. -- And will not at all acquit the Wicked, the Lord has
his Way in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, and the Clouds are the Dust of his
Feet. He rebukes the Sea and makes it Dry, and dries up all the Rivers.
Bashan languisheth, and Carmel and the Flower of Lebanon languisheth. The
Mountains quake at him, and the Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his
Presence; yea the World and all that dwell therein. Who can stand before his
Indignation, and who can abide in the Fierceness of his Anger? His Fury is
poured out like Fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him!

Now as the Consideration of God's Justice and Wrath, Ministers Terror to all
the ungodly in General, so especially and particularly to these following. viz.
1st. Epicures, who indulge a sensual Security, and put the Evil Day far from
them. Surely such treasure up to themselves Wrath, against the Day of Wrath,
and the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God! Surely the Day of the Lord
will be to them, as the Prophet expresses it, cruel with Wrath and fierce
Anger! (Isa. xiii. 9.) And 2dly. All unjust Persons who are guilty of Fraud in
Contracts and Dealings with Men, or respecting of Persons in Judgment (Jer.
xxii. 13) Woe to him that builds his House by Unrighteousness, and his
Chambers by Wrong. -- Psalm lxxxii. 2, 5. 3dly. All Hypocrites, such as are
unjust to God and their own Souls, they cover their inward Injustice with an
outward show of Piety, such are an Abomination to God, and may expect to be cut
asunder by the Sword of divine Justice, (Mat. 24. ult.) 4thly. All Murmerers,
who call in Question the Justice of God in his Judgments, and kick with the
Heel against the most High, under Frowns of Providence. For this the whole
Congregation of Israel fell in the Wilderness, and never saw Cannaan, two
excepted. ( Number. xiv. 27, -- 30.) Now the Use that I would advise poor
graceless Sinners of every Age and Order, to make of the Justice of God, is to
be excited by it to fly to Christ for Security and Defense. He is a hiding
Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Storm, (Isa. 23.) He was made Sin
for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. In him God the
Father has declared his Righteousness, ( Romans iii. 25.) And him he is willing
to make Righteousness to such as accept of him. (1. Cor. i. 30.) Well seeing
divine Justice must be satisfied for the Wrong done by our Offenses, either by
us or a surety in our Place, or else we must perish eternally: Then seeing we
ourselves cannot satisfy, because we are poor, imperfect and finite Creatures,
let us hasten to Christ and receive him by Faith, as the Gospel offers him,
that so we may be justified by Faith, and securely rest on and rejoice in that
JESUS, who has fulfiled the Righteousness of the Law for his People. ( Romans
viii. 3.) But

2dly. This Subject speaks Comfort to all Believers in every of their Troubles:
For from this they may see that they are afflicted less then their Iniquities
deserve, that a Fathers Love is the Spring of them, who chastens them, least
they should be condemned with the World: And particularly we may draw Comfort
from this Subject, under Calumnies and Wrongs, when we think that we have a
Witness in Heaven, a just Judge there, who will u^old us in a good Cause, and
reward us according to our ^ghteousness, and make it sooner or later to shine
forth as the Light, and our Judgment as the Noon Day, Psalm. xxxvii. 6. yea in
Troubles of Conscience God's Justice yields Support, when we consider that it
was once satisfied by our Lord, and that it is contrary to its Nature to
require a double Satisfaction. Hence is the Apostles Query, Romans viii. 34, Who
is he that condemns, it is CHRIST that dyed.

But there are these following Duties, which from the Consideration of divine
Justice, we should be exhorted to perform, viz.

1st. That we beware of depending upon our own Righteousness, upon the one Hand
with the Pharisee, (Luke xviii. 11.) And of the Neglect of Duty on the other
with the Slugard, whose Hands refuse to labor; for without Holiness no Man
shall see the Lord. Heb. xii. 14. 2dly. Let us walk with humble Reverence and
Child-like fear before the Righteous God, as with a consuming Fire, avoiding
every Appearance of Evil, and continually in all our religious Service, eyeing
JESUS the Mediator and Intercessor, who is only able to cover their Defects,
and render them acceptable to his Father by his abundant Righteousness. In whom
alone we are complete and safe from every impending Storm: For when in him, the
flaming Sword of divine Justice, which before kept us out of Paradise, guards
and assists our Entrance into it! And

3dly. Let us glorify God on the Account of his Justice of every Kind, whether
Essential or Declarative, Governing, Judicatory, Legislative, Remunerative, or
Vindictive; for transcendent Beauty shines therein. Let us say with the
Psalmist, Ps. lxxxix. 24. Justice and Judgment are the Habitation of thy
Throne. And with Paul, Romans xi. 33. O the Depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God, his Judgments are unsearchable, and his Ways past finding
out! Such is the Strictness of divine Justice in all his Proceedings, that it
is compared to Mountains and to the Abyss, Ps. xxxvi. 6. Thy Righteousness is
as the great Mountains thy Judgments are a great Deep. And let us join with the
Inhabitants of Heaven in celebrating the Justice of God, Rev. xix 1.2. And
after these Things I heard a great Voice of much People, in Heaven, saying
Haleluja, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God,
for true and Righteous are his Judgments.

In fine, Let us labor to imitate the Justice and Righteousness of God, by
seeking the Righteousness of CHRIST to our Justification, in the manner before
expressed. Also by seeking the Inherent Righteousness which it pleased God at
first to implant in our Natures by Creation ( Ecles. vii. 29.) which we have
lost by Sin. I say let us fervently and frequently cry to God by humble
Supplications, in the Name of CHRIST, that he would be pleased to implant or
infuse into our Souls, by Regeneration, the Habits or Principles of that
Righteousness: And having the same implanted, let us exercise them in our whole
Practice, 1st. Toward God, by rendering to him his Due, viz. our selves, and
all that Honor, Love, Trust and Service which he requires in his Word. And
2dly. Toward our Neighbor, In all Matters of Government, Judgment and
Commerce, ruling without Oppression, judging without respect of Persons, and
dealing without Fraud, Falsehood or Imposition. And 3dly. Toward ourselves, in
a right Improvement of the Seasons of Mercy, thereby securing our Salvation.
And also in not sufferring ourselves to be wronged in our temporal Interest. A
great Part of the Image of God and Beauty of Religion, consists in Justice; and
as the Blessing of God rests upon such here, so they shall receive from the
just Judge of Heaven and Earth, a Crown of Righteousness hereafter, which shall
never fade away. That this may be the Happy Lot of us all, may God grant for
CHRIST Sake. Amen.

SERMON XV.
HOSEA. iii. 5. And shall fear the Lord, and his Goodness, in the latter Days.


AFTER the Prophet had in the Preceding Verses, represented the bad Characters
of the People of Israel, under the Similitude of an adulterous Wife, as well as
the low Condition, they should be reduced to on this Account, by their
Captivity and other Instances of God's controversy with them: He in the Words
of our Text, prophesies of a blessed Reformation; that should be wrought upon
them in the latter Days.

By the latter Days we are to understand the Days of the Messiah, or the Time
of the Gospel Dispensation, and probably the latter Part of this Time: Then we
are told, that the Jews should reverence God, because of his Goodness. We must
admire and adore the Goodness of God, as Moses did when this Name was
proclaimed. ( Ex. xxxiv. 6.) And fear the Guilt of unkind Returns. The
Consideration of God's Goodness, should make us afraid of offending him, which
so grossly violates the Laws of Gratitude. And hence the Psalmist observes, that
there is Forgiveness with God, that he may be feared. Ps. cxxx. 4. This
Prophesy had its Accomplishment in the early Times of the Gospel, when through
the Blessing of God, upon the Ministry of the Apostles, great Numbers both of
Jews and Gentiles were brought to believe in JESUS. And hereby to fear God,
because of his Goodness, more especially apparent in the Redemption of Mankind,
by the Sufferings and Obedience of the Son of God the spiritual David! But some
do probably (at least) expect a farther Accomplishment of this Prophesy, in
Time coming, agreeable to the Words of the Apostle, When the Fullness of the
Gentiles is brought in, then all Israel shall be saved.

In discoursing upon this Text, I shall I. Speak upon the Goodness of God, And
II. Upon the Fear of God. And then proceed to the Improvement.


That God is truly and supreamly Good, the sacred Scriptures Testify various
Ways, viz. 1st. Effectively, when it asserts that all the Works of God are
good. Genesis i. 31. And God saw every Thing that he had made and behold it was
very good.

2dly. Figuratively, when it commemorates and commends the Riches of his
Goodness. ( Romans ii. 4.)

3dly. Negatively, When it denies that there is any Evil in him. Ps. xcii. 15.
He is my Rock and there is no Unrighteousness in him. (Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4.)

4thly. Affirmatively, by expressly, asserting his Goodness. Ps. xxv. 8. Good
and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners in the Way.

And Reason likewise confirms the same Truth, by asserting 1st. That God is a
Being, and therefore Good: For Being and Good are concertible Terms among
Philosophers: Yea that he is the first and chief Being, and therefore the first
and chief Good. And 2dly. By asserting that God is perfect, and therefore
desirable and communicative, in which the Sum of Goodness consists. Besides as
God is the Author of all that Good that is in Creatures, (for none of them has
his Goodness of himself.) So he contains all the Kinds of Good in him, viz.
Pleasant, profitable, honest. In respect of pleasant Good, the Psalmist bids us
taste and see that he is good, Ps. xxxiv. And he tells us that in his Presence
is fullness of Joy, and at his Right Hand Pleasures for ever more, Ps. xvi. 11.
In respect of profitable Good, he diffuses his Kindness among his Creatures,
and in possessing him we possess all besides him, and more than all! In respect
of honest Good, God is by his Sanctity the original Rule and Pattern, of all
that Holiness that is in Creatures. Hence says Augustine God only is
immutably Good, he only is the Good of all Good, he only is the Cause of all
Goodness, to all that are Good. There would be no communicable good Things
(said he) if there was not an incommunicable Good. And therefore God is Good in
three Respects, viz. 1st. By his Essence, that is originally, the Foundation of
Goodness, whereas Creatures are only good by Participation, as Streams running
from the Fountain. 2dly. God is good by Efficiency, inasmuch as he only can
communicate Good independently, whereas Creatures only so far as they are
assisted by his Power, and excited by his Influence. 3dly. God is good by
Existence, inasmuch as he only is a Good necessarily existing, whereas all
Creatures are but contingently good, and exist by the mere Will and Pleasure of
God. This Truth the Gentile Philosophers acknowledged. There is no good Mind
without God, says Seneca. Virtue is not in us by Nature, but by divine
Providence, says Plato. The Jews were likewise of the same Sentiment. Hence
Philo, one is good meaning God, who was wont to be called by them one without
Addition.

In discoursing upon this Attribute of divine Goodness, I shall enquire into
its Nature, Kinds and Properties, and consider the Force of some Objections
against it, and then proceed to the Improvement, after some brief Hints
premised, respecting the other general Head of Discourse, viz. The Fear of God,
And

1st. Good according to Aristotle's Definition, is that which all desire. But it
is more accurately defined by others, thus, viz. That it is that which for the
Perfection of its Nature deserves to be desired, and is communicative of
itself. So that three Things are included in it viz. 1st. An essential
Excellency or Perfection, for which it merits Desire and pursuit. 2dly. A
Faculty of communicating this Perfectition to others, on this Account its
called profitable. And 3dly. The Relation of both the Former to the Appetite or
Desire, on which Account it is called desirable. And hence some learned Men
observe that Good is threefold, viz. Metaphysical, Physical, Ethical. Or in
more plain Terms, it may be called a Good of Being, Use and Manners. And 1st.
Metaphysical Good, or the Good of Being, is that Perfection, which is
communicated to every Being by its Cause, or it is that Excellency which every
Being obtains, as it is a Being: For which it may be desired. This has no Evil
opposed to it, and only serves to show the Pre-eminence of Existence, to
Nonexistence, or Being to no Being. 2dly. Physical Good, or the Good of Use,
is that Perfection or Excellency, by which any being designed for another's
Use, is fitted for it, whether the Use be General or Particular! Every Creature
in its original Constitution was fitted for this twofold Use, it not only
served to complete and adorn the whole System of Things, but also for Food, or
Medicine, or some of the Uses of human Life: And in this Sense all Things at
their Creation were called Good; and to this Kind of Good is opposed,
whatsoever is Un^it, Unprofitable, or Hurtful. 3d. Ethical or moral Good, or
the Good of Manners, consists in the Rectitude of a reasonable Creature, or in
its Conformity to Rule and Law; and to this Vice and Sin is opposed: And hence
we call a holy Man, a good Man: and on the Contrary one who goes on in a Course
of Sinning a Bad-Man.

Having offered these few Hints concerning the General Nature of Good, I
proceed to observe more particularly concerning the divine Goodness, that it is
no other then his Perfection, by which he can communicate himself, and for
which he deserves and ought to be desired, and therefore it includes these
three following Particulars in it, namely 1st. His infinite Perfection, which
appears to us from all his Attributes, by which he is sufficient for himself,
and his Creatures, and that to infinite Blessedness. ( Genesis xvii. 1.) By this
he is good in himself, yea Goodness itself. ( Psa. xxv. 8.) And free from every
Evil. ( Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4.) And 2dly. A Faculty to communicate himself when and
how he pleases: Hence he is called Good and Beneficient, (Psa. cxix. 68.) Thou
art Good and do Good, teach me thy Statutes. 3dly. A Relation or
Suitableness, which arises from the two former Particulars mentioned, for which
the Almighty deserves to be sought after, and desired by all intelligent
Beings, with the utmost Intenseness and Vehemence. Ps. lxiii. 1.2. O God thou
art my God, early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee. -- To see thy
Power and thy Glory as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. But I proceed to
consider the

2d. Proposed, viz. The Kinds of divine Goodness. And here it may be observed,
that the Goodness of God is Twofold, viz. Imanent, and Transient, or Essential
and Relative. Now God's Imanent or essential Goodness, is no other then his
perfect Essence or Being. Whereas the transient Goodness of God, consists in
the Manifestation of the Former to, or in created Beings, and is Threefold
viz, Universal, Common and Special. And 1st. The Universal transient Goodness
of God, is that whereby he creates, supports, governs, and beautifies all
Creatures, Psa. cxlvii. 8.9. Sing unto the Lord with Thanksgiving, who ^oereth
the Heaven with Clouds, who prepares Rain for the Earth, who makes Grass to
grow upon the Mountains. He gives to the Beast his Food, and to the young
Ravens which Cry. Psa. xxxvi. 6, 7. O Lord thou preservest Man and Beast, how
excellent is thy loving Kindness O God! Therefore the Children of Men put their
Trust under the Shadow of thy Wings. 2dly. God's Common Goodness consists in
conferring common Benefits upon the Children of Men without Distinction,
whether they be Elect or Reprobates: And hence God is called the Savior of all
Men, especially of those that believe. (1 Timothy iv. 10. See also Romans ii. 4.)
And 3dly. The special Goodness of God consists in dispensing saving Gifts upon
the Elect. Ephesians, i. 3, 4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST who has Blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Places in
Christ, according as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the
World, that we should be Holy, and without Blame before him in Love. And hence
we read in Scripture of the Faith of God's Elect, and the Things that do
accompany Salvation. The

3d. Proposed comes next to be considered, which was to discourse upon the
Properties of divine Goodness: Now the imanent, or essential Goodness of God,
has the following Properties, viz. 1st. It is Great, Nehe. ix. 25. So they did
Eat and became Fat, and delighted themselves in thy great Goodness. Whereas the
Goodness of Creatures, is but as the Drop of a Bucket, Isa. xl. 15. 2dly. The
Goodness of God is Unlimited and Infinite, equally incapable of Addition, as of
Diminution, transcending the utmost Verge of our Speech or Thought! Whereas the
Goodness of all Creatures is finite and limited. And hence the Love of CHRIST
is said to pass Knowledge, and he is said to be able to do abundantly above all
that we ask or think. Ephesians. iii, 19.20. Psa. lvii. 10. For thy Mercy is great
unto the Heavens, and thy Truth unto the Clouds. 3dly. The imanent Goodness of
God is without Beginning, Succession and End: Whereas the Goodness of Creatures
as it has a Beginning, so it has Succession in Duration, and either has or
can have an End. 1 Chronicles. xvi. 34. O give thanks to the Lord, for he is Good,
for his Mercy endures forever! 4thly. The imanent Goodness of God is most
Simple, without any Mixture of Imperfection or Defect, it is pure Goodness
without the least Alay: And hence he is said to be Light, in which there is no
Darkness at all, 1 John i. 5. Whereas in Creatures there is no Goodness without
Imperfection, at least Comparative. 5thly. The Goodness of God is Independent,
because it is his Being, and hence he is called the Fountain of Life, Psa.
xxxvi. 9. Whereas the Goodness of Creatures is something added to their Being,
and so accidental and separable. God is Good originally by his own Goodness;
whereas all Creatures are good by Participation: They have but a derived
Dependant, and precarious Goodness: They themselves are like to Vanity, whose
Days are as a Shadow, that passes away, Ps. cxliv. 4. And how can their
Goodness. which is but a quality superaded to their Beings, be more Stable then
they on whom it depends? But

2dly. The Transient Goodness of God which is the Cause of all that Goodness
which exists in Creatures, may be said to have the following Properties, viz.
1st. It is Efficient, inasmuch as every Creature receives its Goodness
therefrom. Jam. i. 17. Every good Gift, and every perfect Donation, is from
above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no Variableness
or Shadow of turning. 2dly. The transient Goodness of God, is exemplary; as it
is the Fountain from which all created Goodness flows, so it is the Pattern
according to which it is to be regulated: And hence we are bid to be Merciful
as our heavenly Father is Merciful. Jehovah represents his infinite Perfection
as it were by Parts in his Works; as reasonable Creatures bear its Image, Genesis
i. 26. So even the irrational Creation carry more obscure Footsteps, as it
were, thereof! 3dly. The transient Goodness of God is Final, Pro. x. vi 4 The
Lord has made all Things for himself, says Solomon. Of him, and through him, and
to him are all Things, says the Apostle, Romans xi. 36. All created Beings do
either Labor after God, or are directed to his Glory passively. But I pass on
to the

4th. General Head, which was to consider some Objections against this
Attribute. And 1st. It is objected, that God has said he will show himself
froward with the Froward Ps. xviii. 26. Ans. the Scope of the Place is only to
signify that God will accommodate his Righteous judgments, to the perverse
Practices of obstinate Transgressors. He will proportion Pains to their
Presumptuous Impieties, and thus wherein they dealt proudly he will be above
them.

2dly. It is objected, that God is not desired by all, nay that many labor to
banish the Thoughts of him out of their Minds. Ans. It is true, but the Reason
why he is not sought after by all intelligent Beings, is not any want of
Goodness in him, but the Blindness of Creatures, whereby they discern not his
Transcendent Amiableness, or their Guilt, whereby they fear and shun him, as
Criminals an avenging Judge! A

3d, Objection is this, That God does not impart his Goodness to all, to
Reprobates; whereas Goodness is communicative of itself.

Ans. He does communicate his Goodness to all, but freely, according to his own
good Pleasure, in respect of the kind and degree of Good. He is Lord of his own
Treasures, and may do with them what he pleases, without being accountable to
any. For as the Apostle Paul observes, Who has first given to him, and it
shall be recompensed to him again? God is so far Good to all, that he supports,
preserves and nourishes them so long as they continue, and confers upon them
whatever they enjoy, and that without their demerit. But he is by his Essence
Good, and therefore cannot but be averse to evil, and those that are under the
Government of it: And therefore cannot have Fellowship with them, while they
continue such. But it is time to consider the

2d General Head of Discourse, viz. the Fear of God. Which may be thus
described, viz. That it is a Reverence of God, arising from a View of his
Attributes, and a Sense of his Love, disposing us to honorable Sentiments of
Jehovah in our Minds, as well as to express the same by our Lips, and
especially by the course of our Practice, to do those Things that we know are
pleasing to him, and carefully to avoid the contrary. Here observe,

1st. That there can be no true Fear of God without the Knowledge of him. And
this Knowledge must be experimental and practical, such as is formed in us by
the Holy Spirit's special Concurrence, with the use of proper Means. Such as
proceeds from Faith in God through a Mediator, and has influence upon the Mind
and Life! When we have a believing View of the infinite Excellency of the
supreme Being by Faith, then, and not before, we are inclined to entertain high
and becoming Thoughts of God, and to express the same in our Speech and
Behavior. And

2dly. It should be observed, that Love is another Principle of the true Fear
of God. Our Love to God proceeds partly from a view of his Excellency, and
partly from a Sense of his Love to us. Hence the Apostle John observes, that we
love him, because he loved us first. Now a transcendent Love to God, sweetly
constrains us, by the ingenuous Bonds of Gratitude, to fear God because of his
Goodness, as our Text asserts. But particularly in the

3d Place it may be observed, that there be two ingredients in the aforesaid
Reverence of God, viz. a fear to offend him by any Sin, and a (...) to please
him by every Duty; on which Account the whole Worship of God is sometimes in
Scripture signified by the fear of God. Hence it is said of Job, that he ^eared
God, and eschewed Evil.

Now the fear of God is twofold, viz. either Servile o^ Filial. The Servile
Fear of God, is when we are afraid to offend God, chiefly because of the
Punishment consequent upon it. And this, when it is attended with some Hope of
Mercy, is profitable, as a preparative of Order to Conversion, but when
accompanied with Despair, it is hurtful. But a filial fear arises from Love,
and sweetly allures us to serve God, and makes us afraid of his Anger as
ingenuous Children. The Characters of this Kind of Fear, are these following.
1st. It makes those that have it Conscientious in the general Course of their
Practice, to avoid every Evil, secret as well as open, small as well as great,
fashionable and creditable Evils, as well as those that are more scandalous!
Yea to avoid the very Appearance of Evil, and to seek the Mortification of Sin
in the Heart; and all this from a hatred of Sin, chiefly because of its vile
Nature, and contrariety to God. 2dly. It makes those that have it, painful in
the Performance of good Works, and careful that they be done in a right Manner,
viz. from a right Principle, Love; to a right End, God's Glory; and by a right
Rule, the Word of God, as well as with fervor and affection! Besides it makes
Persons that have it, to long after, and labor for a Perfection of Holiness:
From pursuing which they will not be detered by the Fear or Hope of any
Creature, or of any Evil! 3dly. Those that fear God make mention of his Name
and Attributes with religious Reverence, and read his Word with pious
Solicitude. 4thly. The Fear of God is not a transient Pang or sudden flash of
Devotion, but a fixed good Temper of Mind, a habitual Devotedness to God and
his Service, which runs through the general Course of our Affections and Actions.

I proceed to the Improvement.

1st. From the Goodness of God, we may learn the Evil of Sin, which, (...) its
Nature directly opposes infinite Goodness; and, as far as it can, labors to
dethrone the Almighty, and therefore it was called by the Ancients Deicide. For
Sin, poor Creatures are deserted by the Almighty, who is the chief Good, and
that to all Eternity. ( Mat. xxv. 41.) It is Sin that robs the Soul of the good
Image of God, with which it was at first adorned, and renders it evil and
indisposed to any good. It is Sin that inclines those that are under its
Government, to prefer the imaginary Goodness of the Creature, to the true and
infinite Goodness of the Creator! It is by Sin, that we requite the chief good
from whom all ou^ good is derived, with Evil! Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6. Do ye thus
requite the Lord O foolish People and unwise! Is he not thy Father that has
bought thee, has he not made thee, and established thee? By Sin Men slight the
Treasures of divine Goodness, and Treasure thereby to themselves Wrath against
the Day of Wrath! (Romans ii. 4.) Should not therefore the Consideration of
divine Goodness, induce or lead us to Repent of Sins past, and to hate and shun
every future Evil, and to seek a remedy against it in CHRIST JESUS, in whom
alone the special Goodness of God is displayed to fallen Mankind. Psalm. ii. 12.
Kiss the Son least he be Angry and ye perish from the Way.

2dly. The Consideration of God's Goodness, offers Matter of Support to the
People of God, in all their Calamities; and arms them against Poverty, and the
Fear of Death itself. For God by his Goodness will be our Portion and
Inheritance. ( Ps. xvi. 5.6.) He will supply out of his inexaustible Treasures,
all our Wants. Mat. vi. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all other Things shall be added unto you. And though we walk
through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, God's Rod and Staff shall comfort us.
I am neither ashamed to live or afraid to die (said Ambrose of old,) because we
have a good Lord. Nec pudet vivere, nec piget mori, quia bonum habemus Dominum.
What though we be environed by many and powerful Enemies, God, by his Goodness
will be to us a strong Tower, a Shield and Buckler, Ps. xviii. If we are
afflicted in Body or Mind, he will heal our Diseases, and forgive our
Trespasses, for his Goodness Sake! Ps. ciii. 3. Are we weak in opposing Sin, or
under spiritual Desertion, his Grace is sufficient for us, and his Power is
made perfect in Weakness. The Lord is gracious and merciful, slow to Anger and
plenteous in Mercy, he will not always chide, nor keep his Anger forever. Ps.
ciii. 8, 9. See Isa. live. 7, 8. For a small Moment I have forsaken thee, but
with great Mercy will I gather thee, in a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee
for a Moment, but with everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says
the Lord thy Redeemer. All our Afflictions shall surely work together for our
Good (Romans viii. 28.) If we do but seek Relief in him alone, and put our Trust
in him. Lam. iii. 25. The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the Soul
that seeks him.

3dly. The Consideration of God's Goodness should invite our Love, seeing it is
the proper Object of Esteem and Respect. If we regard small Rays and Drops of
the Divine Goodness in Creatures, how much more should we regard the Sun itself
and love with all our Souls that infinite and unexhausted Fountain of Goodness
that is in God. Love, says Anselm, the one Good, in whom are all Good Things,
and it shall suffice thee. Now our Love to the good God should express itself,
in longing after Union to, communion with, and the Enjoyment of God in this and
the next Life, as well as in acquiescing in his Goodness, as in our All, and
only Good, not desiring the Almighty to be in any Respect otherwise than he is.
Ps. lxxiii. 25. Whom have in I Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides thee. Our Love should likewise dispose us to devote all
our good to God, and employ it for him, as well as to remove all moral Evil
from his Sight, that so he may make all his Goodness pass before us. (2 Cor.
viii. 5. Isa. i. 16. Ex. xxxiii. 19.) And seeing Jehovah is truly Good, our
Love to him should be sincere, not in Speech and Carriage only, but in Heart,
Love out of a pure Heart and Faith unfeigned, Love in Deed and in Truth, as the
Apostle John expresses it. For nothing but this will avail us at last; and
seeing God is the only Good, superlatively, independently, immutably and
efficiently Good. Therefore we should neglect and contemn every other Good, so
far as it stands in Competition with him. Cant. viii. 7. Many Waters cannot
quench Love, neither can the Floods drown it. If a Man would give all the
Substance of his House for Love, it would be utterly contemned. And we must
love the superlative Good superlatively, or in the highest degree, with all our
Soul and Strengh, above any Thing in Heaven or Earth, because Jehovah is the
chief Good infinitely transcending every other Good. And should not we love him
independently, i. e. for himself alone, and not for any Thing else chiefly,
forasmuch as he is an independent Good, who has made all Things for himself.
Moreover should not that good Being, be loved constantly with an invariable and
unfailing Affection; who is himself far from the Shadow of Change? And should
not our Love to Jehovah be operative and effectual, not in Word and Tongue
only, but in Deed and Truth? Seeing he is a good Communicative of himself to
his Creatures! Now in order to obtain such a Love to God, as has been hinted,
it would be of special Service, to meditate frequently upon the Goodness of
God, which fills the Earth and reaches up to Heaven, which appears with
wonderful Luster in the Works of Creation, Redemption and Provividence? Is not
the Misers Love to Gold enflamed by a frequent viewing of it? And let us dear
Brethren humbly pray, and earnestly labor to be more and more firmly fixed, in
the believing Persuasion of God's infinite Goodness; that so CHRIST may dwell
in our Hearts by Faith, that being rooted and grounded in Love, we may be able
to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and
Height, and to know the Love of CHRIST, which passes Knowledge, that we may be
filled with the Fullness of God. Ephesians. iii. 17, -- 19. But

4thly The Meditation of God's Goodness, should invite us to seek all good in
God, who is all sufficient, a Sun and Shield to his People, yea an exceeding
great Reward! A Fountain of Life in whose Light we enjoy Light. From him every
good Donation descends, and he it is that blesses us, with all Spiritual
Blessings in CHRIST. Therefore if we want a profitable Good, the necessary
Supports of Life, let us ask it of God, who has a Sovereign Empire and absolute
Control, over all second Causes. He hears the Heavens, and they hear the
Earth, and the Earth the Corn and Wine, and the Corn and Wine bear Jezreel.
Hos. ii. Surely it is in God we live, and move and are. Do we need pleasant
Good, is it not Jehovah, who through his Goodness, fills our Hearts with Food and
Gladness? Gives us all Things richly to enjoy, and crowns us with his Goodness
and tender Mercy. Ps. ciii. Do we need Honest and saving Good, Faith, Hope,
Charity, etc. Is not God the Father of Lights, from whom every good Gift is
derived? Let us not therefore dear Brethren, turn to empty Creatures, and make
to ourselves Cisterns that can hold no Water, and say, who shall show us any
Good? But to the living God, and from him let us labor to derive all the Good
we need for Life and Godliness, by Faith in the Mediator, in whom all the
Promises are Yea and Amen, and likewise by earnest Prayer and humble Reverence
as well as by a sweet Complacence in, or contentedness with the Good, that God
is pleased to dispense to us, by the Course of his unerring Providence. In
God's Goodness our Happiness is to be only sought: For indeed it can be only
found therein. Here we may behold our objective Happiness, or that Good that
makes us happy: Not a created Good as some Philosophers of old, have vainly
dreamed. No! But an uncreated, independent and infinite Good, who as a Shield
can turn away all Evil from us, and as a Sun can communicate all Good to us.
And here we may likewise behold our Formal Happiness, which consists in Union
to, Communion with, and the Enjoyment of this chief and infinite Good. Hence
the Psalmist pronounces that People blessed whose God is the Lord. (Psalm.
xxxiii. 12.) And how sweetly does devout Heman triumph, on this Account, Psa.
lxxii. 25. Who have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee. The chief Good has certainly the chief Dignity and
Excellency, and therefore deserves the first Place in our Thoughts, Desires and
Labors. And is not securing of Happiness the great Design Life, next to the
Glory of God, after which there is in all a natural Desire. Now is it not
evident from the very Nature of Things, that that cannot be found in any
created Good? Because it is gross and limited, and so unequal to the Nature and
Desires of the Soul. Surely therefore all the Lines of Life, that do not tend
to God as their Center are crooked, and besides the Mark. Let us then turn our
Eyes and Hearts from Creatures to the great and good God, and seek for Rest and
Happiness in him alone; his Goodness can only yield the solid Satisfaction we
in vain seek and expect elsewhere.

5thly. The infinite Goodness of God, affords Occasion of glorifying him after
the Example of many of his most eminent Servants, particularly of David, Psa.
cvi. 1. Praise ye the Lord, O give Thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for
his Mercy endures forever. Of Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, who with their Sons and
Brethren, by Cymbals, and Trumpets, and other Instruments of Music, sounded
forth the Praises of the divine Goodness. 2 Chronicles. v. 12, 13. And it came to
pass as the Trumpeters and Singers were as one, to make one Sound to be heard
in praising and thanking the Lord, and when they lift up their Voice with the
Trumpets and Cymbals, and praised the Lord saying, for he is good for his Mercy
endures for ever; that then the House was filled with a Cloud, even the House
of the Lord. And is there not Reason why we should praise God for his Goodness,
when we consider that it is a Property, whereby he especially communicates and
commends himself to Creatures, a Property which most nearly touches us, and
therefore should constrain us to grateful Emotions. Hence says Augustine,
Seeing that God is Good. and has made all Things Good, and seeing that he who
made all Things, is infinitely better than the Things which he made, you will
not be ^le to say better of him, then that he is Good. To the same effect
speaks Bernard thus, As there is not a Moment in which we enjoy not God's
Goodness; so let there be no Moment in which we do not remember God as present.
Is not the Praises of God for his Goodness the sweetest Employment of the
Saints in Heaven or Earth? Says Augustine I am seized with Sweetness while I
think upon the good God. -- If therefore we Praise any other Thing, we
therefore Praise it because it is Good; there can be no greater, better or
firmer Cause of Praising God, than because he is Good. Now in order to glorify
God, it is necessary that we know his Goodness, in its Nature, Kinds, Degrees,
Effects. And likewise that we taste, behold and admire the same! that so what
we feel in our Hearts, we may express with our Lips, in the Psalmists Language.
Psalm. ciii. 2. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits!

But in the next Place, let me entreat you, my dear Brethren, to imitate the
Goodness of God. The Psalmist gives us a summary of the divine Goodness, Psalm.
cxix 68. Thou art Good and do Good, i. e. Good by an intrinsic and imanent
Perfection, in which respect God is lovely and loved by himself, as well as
communicative of himself, and so to be desired by all. Besides he does Good, he
distributes his Goodness among Creatures both Good and Evil, though in a
different Manner and Degree. Now let us endeavor to imitate this noble
Example. 1st. By being Good, i. e. fit for the use to which we were created;
and what was that Use, but to know, love and glorify our Creator here, in order
to enjoy him eternally! And what does fitness for it consist in, but in the
Image of God, after which Man was at first created, viz. The Wisdom of the
Understanding, the Holiness and Righteousness of the Will, and Harmony of the
Affections! ( Ephesians. iv. 24) Now this Image of God or original Righteousness
being lost, by our Violation of the Covenant of Works, we are thereby rendered
unprofitable Servants, unfit for our Use, and so altogether Evil. And therefore
before we can imitate God aright, we must obtain, by Regeneration, the Image of
God, which we have lost by Sin. And being Regenerated we must more and more
abandon Evil, and learn to do Well, by progressive Sanctification. 2dly. After
we are made Good, we must endeavor to do Good, agreeable to the Design or Use
of our Creation. Toward God, by fearing of him, trusting in him, by Love and
Obedience: Toward our Neighbor, by diffusing our Goodness upon all, Good and
Bad, Friends and Enemies, but not in a like Degree: By this Imitation of the
divine Goodness, we shall show ourselves to be the genuine Children of our
Father which is in Heaven: By this we shall have a certain Argument within
ourselves, of our Restoration to the divine Image: And by this we shall
resemble the blessed God in his most perfect Property, and so be made Partakers
of the divine Nature! By this we shall glorify Jehovah's Name, and many Ways
promote his Kingdom: And by this, through the gracious Promise of God, our
Comforts will be increased in this Life, and the Degree of our Happiness in
that to come.

What was said before concerning the Fear of God, should excite you my dear
Brethren, to examine yourselves impartially thereby: for thus you will know
your present State toward God, whether it be good or bad, which ye cannot but
know is of great importance, both to your Comfort and Safety.

I must beseech you, Sirs, as a Messenger of God, and command you in his Name
and by his Authority, to fear Jehovah. To this ye may be excited by the
following Motives, 1st. It is equal and Reasonable: If Reverence and Fear
belongs to any, surely much more to the greatest and best of Beings! 2dly. It
is Safe. He that fears God need f^ none else! 3dly. It is proffitable: This is
the Beginning of saving Wisdom, as Solomon observes, and the Root and Spring of
all Virtue and Goodness. To this the Promises of God are made, and to such his
Mercy and Goodness is extended! 4thly. It is generous and grateful. His
Goodness must induce us to fear walking unworthy of it, if we are not lost to
all Sense of Gratitude! Now the Means that are helpful to the aforesaid
Disposition are these, 1st. A frequent Meditation upon the Majesty and Goodness
of God. 2dly. Upon our Corruption and propensity to Sin against him. 3dly. Upon
the Baseness of the Nature of Sin, and its dreadful Consequences! 4thly. Upon
the Omniscience, Omnipresence, Power and Justice of God, as an avenger of Sin.
O may it please Almighty God to fulfill in us all the precious Promises our
Text contains, that we may so fear the Lord and his Goodness in the latter
Days: That having served our Generation according to the Will of God, during
the Space appointed for our Residence in this Vale of Sorrow, we may be at last
translated to that Kingdom of Peace, of Love, of Light, of Purity, of Rest,
where divine Goodness appears in all its native Majesty, in all its
inexpressible Beauty, without an intercepting Glass, that so we may be forever
with the Lord. Amen, Amen.

SERMON XVI.
EXODUS xxxiv. 6. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord,
the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Long-sufferring.


IN the preceding Verses we are informed, that the Lord commanded Moses to hew
out two Tables of Stone, like to the first, which were broken, and to come to
Mount Sinai with them the next Morning. Moses readily obeyed the divine
Injunction, and had a gracious interview of God. No sooner had he reached the
Top, the summit of Sinai's Mount, but the Lord descended in a Cloud, and
proclaimed his Name! The Cloud was doubtless some sensible Symbol or Token of
the divine Presence! Probably Jehovah made a Cloud his Pavilion in order to
affect Moses with with an awful Reverence of his Majesty and Glory, and to let
him know, that though somewhat of God was revealed to him, yet that much more was
concealed from him! But from the whole we may learn this profitable Lesson,
viz. That it is only in the Way of Obedience that we can reasonably expect the
Intimations of God's gracious Presence! In the Words of our Text it is more
particularly observed, that the Lord proclaimed his Name: Doubtless this
Repetition is to signify to us, the great Importance of the Thing spoken. Now
in the Proclamation two Things may be taken Notice of, viz. the Manner and
Matter of it. And 1st. As to the Manner or Time, it was while the Lord passed
by before him. The Apprehensions we have of God in this World are short and
transient, full and fixed Views are reserved for a future State. But 2dly. The
Matter of the Proclamation contains a Representation both of the Greatness and
Goodness of God. And 1st. We have an Account of the Greatness of God in these
Words, The Lord, the Lord God. As God has his Being of himself, and is the
Fountain of Being to all Creatures, so he is a Strong God, the great Original
of all Power. This Declaration of God's Self-Existence and Almightiness, is
prefixed before the Display of his Goodness, to excite a Fear and Reverence of
God's Majesty, and thereby to deter from an abuse of his Mercy. In the 2d
Place, we have an Account of God's Goodness, in three noble Instances, namely,
of Mercy, Grace and Long-Sufferring. As God's Greatness is mentioned to incite
Fear, and prevent the abuse of his Goodness: so is his Goodness displayed to
incite Hope, which is the Spring of Action, and to allay the Terror of his
Greatness! The first Manifestation of divine Goodness here expressed is Mercy;
he is Merciful, this speaks his compassionate Tenderness over poor miserable
Creatures, like that of a Father to his Children. This is put first, because it
is the first Wheel in all the Instances of God's good Will to fallen Man, whose
Misery makes him an Object of Pity, Jud. x. 16. 2dly. He is Gracious: This
speaks the Freeness of God's Goodness to his Creatures, and that it is
vouchsafed entirely because of his own good Pleasure, and not for the Sake of
any Thing in them. It is opposed to the Payment of a Price ( Exo. xxi. 11.) as
well as to Justice and Merit. ( Psalm xxxv. 7, 19. 1 Samuel xix. 5.) 3dly. He is
Long-suffering, this speaks the slowness of Jehovah to anger, and his deferring
the Execution of deserved Vengeance upon Transgressors. Thus God waits to be
Gracious to us, and wants to be exalted that he may have Mercy upon us! The
Almighty now performed what he had but a little time before promised to Moses.
Ex. xxiii. 18 And he said, I beseech thee to show me thy Glory, and he said I
will make all my Goodness to pass before thee, and I will Proclaim the Name of
the Lord before thee, and will be Gracious to whom I will be Gracious, and will
show Mercy on whom I will show Mercy. By which we may see, that God's Goodness
is his Name and Glory! that by which he will be known by his intelligent
Creatures, as Men are by their Names, and that in which he Triumphs and has
Complacency! God had before made himself known to Moses in the Glory of his
Self-Existence and Self-Sufficiency, by the Name I AM THAT I AM; and now he
makes himself known by the Glory of his Mercy, Grace and Long-suffering.

Now that I may discourse distinctly upon those three Attributes of God, which
our Text contains, I shall begin with the first, which is his Mercy.

The Holy Scriptures frequently assert the Mercy of God. Thus he is called the
Father of Mercies, (2 Cor. i. 3.) He is likewise said to be abundant in Mercy,
(1 Pet. i. 3.) Rich in Mercy, (Ephesians. ii. 4.) Of tender Mercy, (Ps. xxv. 6.) to
have Bowels of Mercy, (Psa. xl. 11. Luke i. 78.) Seeing that Mercy among Men,
is among the Number of Virtues and Perfections, in which Persons of a more
generous Mind and Temper generally excel; it cannot with any shadow of Reason
be denied to God, who is not only infinitely Perfect in himself, but also the
Author of all that Good, that Creatures Possess! If any should object and say,
That Mercy is opposed to Justice, and therefore cannot be ascribed to God.

Ans. I deny it, it is not op^s'd to Justice, as the Verse following our Text
shows, keeping Mercy for Thousands, and yet will by no Means clear the Guilty.
God never shows Mercy contrary to Justice, as he never exercises Justice
contrary to Mercy; yea the Almighty seldom or never executes Justice without
some Preceding Expense of Mercy, and therefore by pitying the miserable, the
Lord does not contradict his Justice, but as it were exceed it. As if a
Creditor gave a Debtor a Hundred Pounds, who owes a Thousand. It is in this
Sense that the Apostle James observes, That Mercy rejoices against Judgment,
(Jam. ii. 13.) 2dly. Some do object, That Mercy cannot be ascribed to God,
because it implies a Sense of another Misery.

Ans. It is true, Mercy is not in God, as it is in Men, by Way of Quality or
Passion! For then his Simplicity and Happiness would be destroyed. However such
a Knowledge of the Misery of Creatures belongs to God, as inclines him to
relive them! This Anselm speaks pertinently upon in the following Manner, Thou
art Merciful O God according to us, and according to thee. -- When thou beholds
our Miseries we feel the Effect of Pity, but thou do not feel the Affection
of Pity!

In discoursing upon this divine Attribute of Mercy it will be necessary to
speak upon its Nature, Kinds and Properties. And

1st. Mercy, in respect of its Nature, may be thus described, viz. That it is
the Goodness of God, extended to the Miserable. Here good and bad Angels are
excluded. The Good because they are not miserable, and the Bad because they are
wholly given up to Justice, 2 Pet. ii. 4. But God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness
to be reserved unto Judgment. Or the Mercy of God may be thus described, viz.
That it is that Property of the Supreme Being whereby he is inclined to succor
his Creatures in Misery, together with its kind Effects upon them. Here observe
1st. That the special Object of Mercy, is the Creature in Misery, and thus it
is distinguished from other Attributes. Goodness considers it is Object as
Indigent, and so communicates needed Benefits; but Mercy considers its Object
as Miserable, because of Sin: And therefore though an Innocent Creature be the
Object of divine Goodness and Bounty, it is only a fallen and sinning Creature,
that is the proper Object of God's Mercy. Grace, is Mercy or Goodness freely
dispensed, and therefore it considers its Object, not only as Miserable, but
Unworthy! Whereas Long-suffering consists in the Suspension of merited
Vengeance, and the Communication of immerited Benefits! Thus you may see that
all these Attributes of the Deity, import the Communication of some Good to the
Creature, and are only distinguished in Relation to the Objects upon which they
are exercised! Misery is the Foil of Mercy, it can have no other Object; hence
it is said Jud. x. 16. That his Soul was grieved for the Misery of Israel!
Undoubtedly the Virtue of Mercy was in God from all Eternity, but there was no
Room or Occasion for its Displays, till the Creatures fatal Fall from God and
Misery consequent upon it, provided it an Object to be exercised upon. Man by
Sin robbed himself of his Beauty and Happiness, and exposed himself to all the
manifold Miseries of this and the next Life. All which are included in the
Sentence of Death annexed to the Breach of the first Covenant. As Man by Sin
had lost all Right to Happiness, and on the contrary, rendered himself liable
to all the Threats of the divine Law; so by this he likewise became altogether
unprofitable, (Romans iii. 12.) having lost all his original Power to glorify God
by active Obedience, and thus he had no ground from himself to expect the
divine favor.

2dly. Seeing the Misery of fallen Mankind is Twofold, viz. Of Sin and
Punishment, consequently the Operations of Mercy consist in affording suitable
Succors under these Maladies. In respect of Sin the Mercy of God succors in
the following Instances.

1st. In reconciling Sinners to himself, by the Blood of his only begotten Son
2 Cor. v. 18. For the Purchase of which Reconciliation, the eternal Father gave
his beloved Son to Shame Pain and Death. John iii. 16. And for the Application
thereof, he confers Faith upon the Elect, whereby they are enabled to accept of
and rely upon the blessed JESUS as Mediator and Reconciler. And

2dly. By renewing Sinners by his Spirit, hereby the Tyranny and Dominion of
Sin is broken, and the People of God enabled to overcome Sin, and triumph over
it. Romans vi. 12. Let not Sin reign in your Mortal Bodies, that ye should obey
it in the Lusts thereof. Romans vii. 25. I thank God through JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

In respect of Punishment, divine Mercy Succors in the following Manner.

1st. By bearing with the Sinner for a Time before Judgment is inflicted. Romans
ix. 22. What if God willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known,
endured with much long suffering, the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction.

2dly. By threatening Punishments against the Impenitent, in order to reclaim
them from their Trespasses. God warns before he wounds, and sends his Servants
to slay Sinners by his Word, before he slays them by his Sword.

3dly. By pointing to a Remedy, whereby the impending Stroke of divine Judgment
may be averted. Jer. xviii. 7, 8. At what Instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation, and concerning a Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced turn from their Evil, I will
repent of the Evil I thought to do unto them. If Sinners repent of the Evil of
Sin, God will avert the Evil of Judgment.

4thly. By inviting of, and expostulating with Sinners to accept of the Remedy
proposed. Isa. i. 18. Come now and let us reason together, though your Sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be as Wool. Jer. ii. 5. Thus says the Lord, what Iniquity have your
Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
Vanity and become vain?

5thly. By receiving into Favor those that comply with the Remedy, how great
soever their Trespasses have been, by forgiving their Sins, sanctifying and
sweetening their Sorrows, and supporting them under them by his Spirit, Love,
Power. Psalm. ciii. 3. Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, who heals all thy
Diseases. 2 Cor. xii. 9. And he said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee.
2 Cor. i. 3, 4. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the
Father of Mercies and the God of all Comfort, who comfort us in all our
Tribulation. And

6thly. Such as do not accept of the Remedy offered, after the Almighty has
suspended the Execution of Justice, until there be no Remedy. When he begins to
inflict deserved Judgment (in General,) he does it by Degrees, first he sends
lighter Calamities, and when those do not reclaim the Sinner, he sends heavier.
In the Day of God's rough Wind, He stays his East Wind. First Rods are tried,
and if those do not ^ail, Scorpions may be expected. Johovah does not all at
once, stir up all his Wrath. Psalm. lxxviii. 38. But the

2d. Proposed was to speak of the Kinds of Mercy. Now the Mercy of God, may be
said to be Twofold, viz. Either common or special. Common Mercy consists in
conferring without Distinction, upon the Children of Men, the Outward Comforts
and Conveniences of Life, and hence the Almighty is said to cause his Sun to
rise upon the Evil and the Good, and to send his rain upon the Just and the
Unjust. Mat. v. 45. But the special Mercy of God, consists in conferring upon
the Elect, such Things as do accompany Salvation, and that through Christ, in the
Channel of the New Covenant, Ephesians. i. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings, in
Heavenly Places in CHRIST. But I proceed to the

3d. Proposed, which was to discourse upon the Properties of divine Mercy. And

1st. It is eternal, Psalm. ciii. 17. The Mercy of God is from everlasting to
everlasting. It is repeated Twenty-six Times in one Psalm, that his Mercy
endures forever. Psalm. cxxxvi. And this may justly enhanse our Esteem of it,
and desire after it. Though God may hide his Face for a little Moment, yet with
everlasting loving Kindness will he return to his People. And

2dly. God's Mercy is great, and hence God is said to be plentious in Mercy,
Psalm. lxxxvi. 5. Rich in Mercy, Ephesians. ii. 4. And in Psalm. li. 1. We read of the
Multitude of his tender Mercies. And in (2 Samuel xxiv. 14.) his Mercies are
expressly said to be great. But methinks the greatness of God's Mercy appears
especially, by considering these two Things, viz. What is the Sinners Due
according to strict Justice, and the Mitigation thereof, which he enjoys in
this World. Surely the Wages of Sin is Death. Romans vi. 23. which includes all
the Miseries of this present Life, as well as the Pains of Hell hereafter. Now,
therefore every Mitigation of those Miseries, every Comfort the Sinner enjoys
is Mercy, it is what the Sinner has forfeited a Right to, it is what he
deserves not.

3dly. The Mercy of God is incomparable, Jer. iii. 1. They say if a Man put
away his Wife, and she go from him, and become another Man's, shall he return
unto her again? -- But thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return
unto me says the Lord! The Merciful God exceeds his Creatures both in giving
and forgiving. And

1st. In giving: Our Donations are often extorted from us, but he gives of his
own accord, without any incentive, but what is in his own Bosom. ( Isa. lxv. 1.)

2dly. We give but small Gifts, but he gives the greatest, viz. Himself, his
Son, his Spirit, his Kingdom. Joh. iii. 16.

3dly. We give to our Friends, but Jehovah confers many Donations on his
Enemies. ( Mat. v. 45.)

4thly. We are soon weary of giving, but so is not God, he is unwearied in his
Mercy (to the Penitent) he gives liberally and upraideth not, Jam. i. 5. And

2dly. The Merciful God exceeds his Creatures, in forgiving.

1st. Men are revengful to those that wrong them, but God is merciful and
gracious, long suffering, as our Text asserts. How remarkable to this Purpose
are these Words of the Prophet Hos. xi. 9. I will not execute the Fierceness of
mine Anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not Man.

2dly. Men are difficultly drawn to forgive, and cannot forgive often, God but
is ready to pardon Neh. ix.17. And do^s multiply Pardons.

3dly. Sometimes Men forgive when it is not in their Power to revenge
themselves, but Sinners are always under God's Control, and within the reach
of his Arm. But

4th. The Mercy of God is sure, and infallible, Isa. lv. 3. Incline your Ear,
and come unto me, hear and your Soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David. And hence it is, that the
Gifts and Calling of God are said to be without Repentance, and that the
Foundation of God stands sure. The Lord knows who are his. God's special
Mercy to his People is built upon the sure and invariable Foundation of his
Purposes and Promises, as well as the Satisfaction and Intercession of CHRIST.
And

5thly. God's Mercy is free Ephesians. i. 11. In whom also we have obtained an
Inheritance, being predestined according to the Purpose of him, who works
all Things after the Counsel of his own Will. Albeit the Virtue of Mercy
belongs to God, in respect of his Being, yet the Dispensation of it depends
entirely upon God's good Pleasure, and hence the Apostle Paul informs us, That
it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
Mercy and that he has Mercy upon whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he
hardens, Romans ix.

Now because when such Things as are really or seemingly contrary, are put
together, they illustrate each other. It may not be improper before I proceed
to the Improvement of this Subject to discourse upon the Severity of God in his
Judgments, which is seemingly opposed to his Mercy. Of this mention is made
Romans xi. 22. and in many other Places of Scripture; and of this there be many
Examples upon sacred Record, such as the Instances of the fallen Angels, our
first Parents, the old World, Pharaoh, the Egyptians, Korah, Dathan, Abiram,
Achan, Ananias, and Saphira, and many others. From which we may gather, that
God's Judgments which he exercises by his Severity, are no other than singular
Punishments inflicted for singular Offenses. The meritorious Cause of them, is
some agravated Iniquity, the Nature of which, is often pointed out by the
Punishment inflicted, which is not common but singular. Adonibezeck, who had
cut off the Thumbs and Great-Toes of Threescore and Ten Kings, was served so
himself. ( Judges i. 6, 7.) And hence Samuel says concerning Agag, That as
his Sword made Women Childless, so his Mother should be Childless among Women.
1 Samuel xv. 33. Hence the Lord elsewhere threatens, that those who shed the
Blood of others, should themselves have Blood to drink. Thus you see that the
Punishment does often resemble the Sin that procured it. Now the Judgments of
God, are of various Kinds, viz. Spiritual or Bodily, Private or Public.
Spiritual Judgments are such as these, viz. A Famine of the Word, Amos viii.
11, 12. Leaness of Soul and Backslidings. Rev. ii. 5. Errors in Judgment. 2
These. ii. 10, 11. And for this Cause, God shall send them strong Delusion, that
they should believe a Lie. Corporal Judgments are War, Pestilence, Famine,
Drowth and the like. Now the procuring Causes of public and epidemical
Judgments, are such as these following, viz. Ingratitude against God, Isa. i.
3. Contempt of his Word, Isa. xlii. 24. Who gave Jacob for a Spoil, and Israel
to the Robbers, did not the Lord, he aganst whom we have sinned,: For they
would not walk in his Ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law. Another
Cause of Judgments, is slighting of the Ministers of God. 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 16.
But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Word, and misused his
Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord arose against his People, til there was
no Remedy. Besides Pride and Idolatry are procuring Causes, of divine
Judgments. Isa. ii. 11. The lofty Looks of Man shall be humbled, and the
Haughtiness of Men shall be bro't down Jer. ii. 13, 14. Likewise the following
Evils against our Neighbor, are Causes of divine Judgments. viz Oppression of
the Poor Isa. iii. 14. The Lord will enter into Judgment with the Ancients of
his People, and the Princes thereof: For ye have eaten up the Vineyard, the
Spoil of the Poor is in your Houses 2dly. Wronging the Widow and Fatherless
Isa. i. 23. They judge not the Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the Widow
come before them. 3dly. Cheating the Labourer of his Hire. Jer. xxii. 13. Woe
unto him that builds his House by Unrighteousness, and his Chambers by Wrong,
that uses his Neighbors Service without Wages, and gives him not for his
Work. The Prophet Hosea mentions a Number of Causes together in the Fourth
Chap. of his Book, 1. and 2. verses. Hear the Word of the Lord ye Children of
Israel, for the Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land,
because there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land. By
swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and commiting Adultery, they
break out, and Blood touches Blood therefore shall the Land mourn. To the
aforesaid Causes of divine Judgments I may add, Covetousness and Hypocrisy.
Isa. v. 8, 13. Woe unto them that join House to House. -- Therefore my People
are gone into Captivity. Isa. x. 6. O Assyrian, the Rod of mine Anger -- I will
send him against a Hypocritical Nation. Here it may be observed, that Judgments
are not always sent, except the aforesaid Evils become general, and are
attended with Impudence, after various Warnings ( Jer. v. 1. Isa. iii. 9. Ps.
xcv. 10.11.) Now the Judgments of God are always just, and sometimes
unsearchable and wonderful: For sometimes he not only sends them on the
Ungodly, but upon his own People. Yea as the Apostle Peter observes. Judgment
begins at the House of God. The Lord threatened his People of old; that them
only he had known of all the Families of the Earth, and therefore he would
punish them for their Iniquities. Hence David tells us, that his Flesh trembled
for fear of God, and that he was afraid of God's Judgments. I may add, that the
End of God's Judgments, is the glory of God's Holiness, the Conversion and
Humiliation of some, and the hardening of others. Witness the Prodigal, Pharaoh
and others: But it is Time to proceed to the Improvement of this Subject. And

1st. We should be cautious of abusing God's Mercy, let us beware that we suck
not Poison out of that sweet Flower. To take encouragement to go on in Sin,
because of God's Mercy, is the vilest Instance of Ingratitude, and justly
expoposes to an agravated Condemnation, abused Mercy turns into enraged Fury
and Vengeance, Deuteronomy. xxix. 19. If he bless himself saying, I shall have Peace,
though I walk after the Imagination of my Heart, to add Drunkeness to Thirst. The
Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy, shall
smoke against that Man, and all the Curses that are written in this Book, shall
lie upon him.

2dly. The Mercy of God offers Encouragement and Support to the People of God
in all their Distresses, whether outward or inward! Are they afflicted with
outward Straits? The Merciful God who is their Shepherd, will not suffer them
to want, but make their Bread and Waters sure! He that hears and feeds the
Ravens, will surely hear and help his Children! Have they backsliden from God,
and are they laboring to be sorrowfully sensible hereof? Then may they
encourage themselves in this, that all God's Ways are Mercy and Truth, and that
the Mercy of Jehovah endures forever! He will begin and end with Mercy, and
such as are under the first Convictions of Sin, may take Encouragement from the
Mercy of God, which is great above the Heavens, and most freely dispensed upon
the vilest Creatures! Mercy considers not what one deserves, but what he needs!
God is more inclined to Mercy than Wrath; Justice and Judgment is his strange
Work, but Mercy is his Delight. Mic. vii. 18. It Is delightful to the Mother,
says Chrysostom, to have her Breasts drawn; so it is to God, to have the
Breasts of his Mercy drawn. The Almighty is slow to Anger, but ready to
forgive, Psalm. lxxxvi. 5. Let us therefore entertain honorable Thoughts of
God's Mercy, and trust in it forever, (Psalm. lii. 8.) What greater
Encouragement can there be to believe, than the Mercy of God. Mercy is one of
the most orient Pearls of the Crown of God; he reckons it his Glory to be
conferring Pardons upon penitent Transgressors! And therefore he invites poor
Sinners to come and lay hold on his Mercy, Rev. xxii. 17. Whosoever will, let
him come and take of the Water of Life freely! Mercy woo's Sinners in the most
importunate moving and condescending Strains. Isa. lv. 1. Ho every one that
thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money come ye, buy and
eat; come, buy Wine and Milk, without Money and without Price! And what Joy
does the Almighty express when Sinners accept of the Proposals of his Mercy,
when the Prodigal Son returned from his Wanderings how much did it please the
indulgent Father, who made a Feast to express his Joy on that Occasion?

We should be induced to enquire into the State of our Souls, in order to know
whether we have an Interest in the special Mercy of God or not! For it will be
miserable and ruining to us in the Issue, if we content ourselves with common
Mercies! Now we may be helped to determine this important Point, by an
Impartial comparing of ourselves with the following Particulars, viz. 1st. Such
who have an Interest in the special Mercy of God, have ^een (if of adult Age
when converted) made sensible of ^eir Misery without it, and their unworthiness
of it, with ^e Prodigal and Publican.

2dly. They have been stirred up to solicitous Enquiries ^ow they might obtain
an Interest therein, Act. ii. 37.

3dly. Such have deliberately and without Reserve con^nted to embrace CHRIST
JESUS (the Fountain of Mercy) (...) all his Offices and Relations, and resolved
to bear his Cross, and obey his Laws. ( Joh. i. 12.)

4thly. And in Consequence hereof they find the gene^al Bias of their
Affections going toward God and a ha^itual Carefulness to do the Things that
are pleasing to him. Now those who upon Examination find themselves desti^te of
the aforesaid Characters, should, in order to obtain Mercy, 1st. Think
seriously upon all the Kindnesses of Heaven toward them, together with their
innumerable Sins against those Mercies, and the Dangers to which they are
thereby exposed. 2dly Attend with Diligence upon the preached Word; for it is
by the Foolishness of preaching, that God saves those that believe. 3dly.
Bewail your Sins against the Mercies of God. Let the Goodness of God lead you
to Repentance. 4thly. Try to reform your Lives, Let the Wicked Man forsake his
Ways, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and turn unto God, for he will have
Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. And 5thly. Pray
earnestly and frequently to God for Mercy, in the Name of CHRIST with Fear and
Hope.

And let me exhort those that have obtained the special Mercy of God, to walk
worthy of it, 1st. Praise God for his Mercy in the Psalmist's Language, Psa.
ciii. 1. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
Name. Such as have been Monuments of Mercy should be Trumpets of Praise.

2dly. Love God. Mercy is a powerful Excitement to this, Psa. xviii. 1. I will
Love thee O Lord my Strength Surely that Heart is harder than Marble and
Adamant, which Mercy will not melt. I would hate my own Soul (says Austin) if
I did not find it loving God. We should love God for outward Comforts, but much
more for special and enduring Mercies.

3dly. Let us imitate the Mercy of God in showing Mercy to our fellow
Creatures, God is the Father of Mercy, show yourselves to be his Children, by
being like him. It was a just Observation of Ambrose, That the Sum of Religion
is to be rich in Works of Mercy. O let the Lamp of our Profession be filled
with the Oil of Mercy! And to this our dear Lord exhorts us, Mat. vi. 36. Be
merciful as your Father also is merciful.

But let the Despisers and Abusers of Mercy, who go on in a Course of any of
the Evils before mentioned, which procure the Judgments of God, be entreated to
repent and reform speedily, otherwise ye may expect the dreadful Effects of
divine Severity in some or all of the Instances thereof before expressed! By
your ungrateful Returns for Mercies received, You treasure up Wrath against the
Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Though God be
Gracious and Merciful, slow to Wrath, yet he will by no means clear the Guilty.

SERMON XVII.
EXODUS xxxiv. 6. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord,
the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Long-sufferring.


YOU may remember that in the preceding Sermon upon this Text, after the
Explanation of it, I discoursed upon the Mercy of God. The next divine
Attribute that comes now, according to the Order of our Text, to be considered,
is the Grace of God. The Lord is Merciful and Gracious.

There is Nothing more frequently mentioned in Scripture, than the Grace of
God. I shall mention but a few Passages, for if I should take Notice of all, I
must transcribe a great part of the Bible. Ephesians. i. 6. To the Praise of the
Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved. Psalm.
cxii. 14. He is Gracious and full of Compassion. 2 Cor. xiii. 14. The Grace of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the Love of God be with you all. In speaking upon
this Subject, I purpose, I. To explain its Nature. II. Show its Kinds. III.
Mention some Considerations, serving to manifest its Sovereignty and Glory. IV.
Consider what is realy and seemingly opposed there to, and then proceed to some
Improvement.


I return to consider the first proposed, which was to explain the Nature of
the Grace of God. Now the Word Grace signifies something that is free, as was
observed in the preceding Sermon, and it is taken two Ways, either for an
Attribute of God, which is in God, or for the Gif^ of God, which is from God.
In the first Sense the Grace of God signifies his free and sovereign
Benevolence, by which he peculiarly favors and does Good to his Creatures,
whence God is called Gracious as in our Text, i. e. Endowed with Grace. As from
his Goodness he is called Good, and from his Justice Just. The Gifts of God,
which are the Effects of the Grace that is in him, are metonimicaly called
Grace, especially such of them as are Peculiar and Special, i. e. Such as are
conferred upon some, rather than others. Hence some Divines observe, that the
Word Grace intends either 1st. The Grace freely Giving, (Matt^ xi. 26.) Which
they term (Gratiam gratis dantem,) (...) the free Favor of God, or the Grace
freely given, (which they call Gratiam gratis datam.) And this imports any Kind
of Benefit which the Almighty confers upon his Creatures, whether Good or Bad,
which makes them not in the least the more acceptable to God. Or thirdly the
Grace which makes acceptable, (which they term Gratiam gratu^ facientem) viz.
All the saving Gifts of God, Faith, Hope* Charity, by which we please him.

Now the Grace of God may be thus described viz. Tha^ is a Property of the
Deity, whereby he is inclined to dispens^ undeserved Kindnesses upon his
Creatures freely, and in a sovereign Way. The Dispensations of Grace have no
Dependence upon any Dignity, or Merit of Creatures upon whom Benefits are
conferred. ( Romans xi 6.) But the whole Reason thereof is the good Pleasure of
God's Will, ( Mat. xi. 26.) which respects all Creatures, even to the noblest
Angels. Whatever any of these enjoy, they have it of Grace, for who among all
created Beings, has first given to God, and it shall be reompensed to him again
Romans xi. 35. In the mean Time, these Things are more properly and peculiarly
ascribed to Grace, which are different from Nature. Nature and Grace should not
be confounded; such Things as by the kind Constitution of God, belong to every
Creature according to their different kinds, are not usually called Grace,
because, though they be undue, yet they belong to Nature. But to make this more
plain, let us consider the

2d. Proposed, which was to speak of the Kinds of Grace; and here it may be
observed, that Grace is Threefold, viz. Universal, common, and saving. And

1st. Universal Grace is that, whereby Jehovah dispenses natural Things upon
all his Creatures, and hence he is called the Savior of all Men. 1 Timothy iv.
10. And is said to preserve Man and Beast. Psa. xxxvi. 6. He causes his Sun to
rise upon the Fields of the Evil and the Good, and sends his Rain upon the Just
and Unjust: He gives to Man Life, Health, Strength, and all the Supports he
enjoys therein, all which being undeserved, may be called Grace; but according
to the Usage of Scripture and Antiquity, they seldom and less properly bear
that Name.

2dly. Common Grace consists in the Communication of moral good Things upon Men
promiscuously, whether they be good or bad, elect or not elect, such as natural
Wisdom and Prudence, and all the Train of moral Virtues, in which even some
Pagans have excelled. And to these we may add, all outward religious
Privileges and Means of Grace; together with those transient Effects which are
sometimes produced, by them upon the Unregenerate, such as some kind of
Illumination, and Stirrings of religious Affection. In a Word all those common
Operations of the Holy Spirit, which are not followed by a habitual and saving
Change, must be ascribed hereto. Of these mention is made Heb. vi. 4. 5, 6. and
also in the Parable of the Sower, Mat. xiii. 20, 21. But he that received the
Seed into Stony Places, the same is he that hears the Word, and anon with Joy
receives it, yet has he not Root in himself, but dureth for a while, for when
Tribulation or Persecution arises, because of the Word, by and by he is
offended. But

3dly. Saving Grace is that undue or undeserved Lve of God, whereby he confers
upon the Elect only, saving Benefits, of his own mere good Pleasure. Here
observe

1st. That it is Love, or the kind Inclination or Propension of God's Will to
communicate good to his Elect.

2dly. It is undue, undeserved Love. The Objects of this Love, considered as
Creatures, can merit no Good at the Hand of God, seeing they have received
their All from him, surely they cannot put the Almighty in their Debt, by
giving him what is his own; and considered as Sinners, who by their voluntary
Transgression, have fallen short of his Glory, they deserve his high and
dreadful Dispeasure.

3dly. It is distinguishing Love, manifested to the Elect in a sovereign Way,
according to the good Pleasure of God's Will. Ephesians. i. 9. That is given to one
which is denied to another, and only because it is God's Pleasure. Hence is
that Querry of one of CHRIST'S Disciples. John xiv. 22. Lord how is that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not to the World And does not our Lord
himself, thank his eternal Father for the Displays of his Sovereignty in this
Respect, Mat. xi. 25, 26. I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
because thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed them
unto Babes, even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight. It is but a
few, a Remnant of the fallen Race of Mankind, upon whom God is pleased to
vouchsafe, and in whom he is pleased to glorify, his special Grace Luke xiii.
24. Romans ix. 2, 7. Esaias cries also concerning Israel, though the Number of the
Children of Israel, be as the Sand of the Sea, a Remnant shall be saved.

4thly. It is efficacious Love, which confers saving Benefits, hence it is
called the Grace of God, which brings Salvation. Tit. ii. 11. And the
Blessings it vouchsafes, are termed Things that accompany Salvation Heb. vi. 9.
And hence the Psalmist prays, Ps. cvi. 4. Remember me O Lord, with the Favor
that thou bear unto thy People. O visit me with thy Salvaon! that I may see
the Good of thy Chosen, that I may rejoice in the Gladness of thy Nation, that
I may glory with thine Inheritance. And here it may be necessary to observe
particularly that divine Love confers freely upon the Elect, or Concerts, for
them the following important Benefits, viz.

1st. Election, this is free and gracious, without Faith or Works foreseen Romans
xi. 5. Even so then, at this present Time also, there is a Remnant according to
the Election of Grace. Ephesians. i. 5. Having predestined us, unto the Adoption
of Children, by JESUS CHRIST to himself according to the good Pleasure of his
Will. If it be by Grace it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace would be no
more Grace, and Works would be no more Works. Romans xi. 6. To the same Effect
the Apostle elsewhere observes That it is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows Mercy, Romans ix. 16. It is inconsistent
with the Independency and Immutability of God, to suppose that any Thing
without him, should alter or incline his Will.

2dly. Redemption is likewise of Free Grace. The contrivance of this Scheme of
Happiness, as well as the sending of the blessed Son of God to effect it, by
his Obedience and and Sufferings were mavelous Displays of the Fathers pure
Affection to a miserable World! 1 John vi. 10. Herein is Love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for
our Sins. And to what else than Free Grace, can we ascribe God the Father's
Acceptance, of the Suretyship of CHRIST in the Sinners Room and Place? Strict
Justice certainly demands personal Satisfaction; and does not the Love of
CHRIST pass Knowledge, in that he who is over all God blessed for ever came
into a State of the lowest Abasement, voluntarily to save worthless Dust from
perpetual Ruin? How sweetly does the Apostle Paul speak to this Effect? 2 Cor.
viii. 9. For ye know the Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST that though he was Rich,
yet for your Sakes he became Poor, that ye through his Poverty might be Rich.
Besides it may be here observed, that Redemption by the Satisfaction of CHRIST,
is frequently in Scripture restrained to a certain Number, who are called the
People of God, the Sheep of CHRIST, and such as were given to him by his Father
Mat. i. 21. John x. 15. xvii. 9.

Albeit the Blood of the Son of God be of infinite Value, and therefore the
Satisfaction made by it, may in this respect be said to be universal; yet
inasmuch as it was neither the Design of the Father, nor the Son, that it
should be spent for all, so as to be saved by it. It is therefore to be
referred to singular Grace. Moreover

3dly. The Application of Redemption in all it is Branches, is of Free Grace, as
may appear by the following Induction of Particulars, viz.

1st. Effectual Calling, is said to be according to God's Purpose. Romans viii.
29.

2dly. Faith is called the Gift of God, Ephesians. ii. 8. For by Grace are ye saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God.

3dly. Conversion is not of Flesh, or Blood nor of the Will of Man but of God.
None of these Graces which I have mentioned, are the Fruits of Free Will: For
we are not sufficient to think any Thing as of ourselves, but our sufficiency
is of God. 2 Cor. iii. 5. No they are all the Fruits of the Spirit. Gal. v. 22.
Who produces them not by moral Swasion like poor Creatures, but by an Almighty
creating Power, taking away the Stony Heart, and giving a Heart of Flesh. (1
Cor. iii. 5, 6. Ps. li. 10. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 27.) And

4thly. Justification, whereby an elect Sinner is freed from the Guilt of Sin,
and has a Right to eternal Happiness, is of free Grace. Romans iii. 24. Being
justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in CHRIST JESUS. It
is entirely without Works, Gal. ii. 16. Knowing that a Man is not justified by
the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of JESUS CHRIST, -- For by the Works of
the Law shall no Flesh be justified?

5thly. Our Adoption or Right to the important Privileges of Children, and
joint Heirship with CHRIST is also of pure Grace, Ephesians. i. 4, 6, Having
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by JESUS CHRIST to himself,
according to the good Pleasure of his Will, to the Praise of the Glory of his
Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved.

6thly. Our Salvation, in regard of the Right thereto, is of Grace. And hence
eternal Life is said to be the Gift of God, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord, Romans
vi. 23. And elsewhere we are said expressly to be saved by Grace, Ephesians. ii. 8.
In the mean Time it should be remembered, that good Works are the Way to the
Kingdom, though they be not the Cause of our reigning, as Barnard of old
observed. Though our Right to Happiness is of Grace, as was before observed, yet
the Almighty has by his gracious Constitution, so ordered the Matter, that
good Works are necessary to the Possession of it. ( Mat. xxv. 21, 34, 35.) I
proceed to the

3d. Proposed, which was to mention some Considerations serving to manifest the
Sovereignty and Glory of God's Grace. And 1st. Methinks the Glory of divine
Grace appears by considering the Author of it, who is a Being infinitely and
invariable Happy in himself, as well as essentially and eternally Glorious: And
so neither needs the Services of Creatures, nor can be benefited by them. Our
Goodness extends not to him, neither is it any Gain to the Almighty that we are
Righteous. To acknowledge God's Glory, adds no more to its Luster than speaking
well of the natural Sun adds to its Beauty.

It may be here also observed, that Jehovah would have had Millions of Angels
to celebrate his Praise and execute his Pleasure, although he had made his
Justice triumph in the Ruin of the whole human Race; which certainly he might
have done. Or he could have formed innumerable Creatures of a more noble Order,
than any of the Creation to celebrate the Glory of his Attributes, if it had so
pleased his Majesty: For he is Almighty in Power, has the residue of the
Spirit, and can raise up Children even out of the Stones to Abram. But

2dly. Let us consider the Object upon which this divine Grace is conferred,
and we shall find

1st. That it is Man, not Angels. Our Savior took not on him the Nature of
Angels, but the Seed of Abram; because he designed to save the one, and to
reserve those that fell of the other, in Chains under Darkness, unto the
Judgment of the great Day. What is Man but Dust and Ashes? A Worm that is
crushed before the Moth, altogether unworthy of the kind Notice of the great
and glorious God! How amazing is the distinguishing Grace of God in passing by
Creatures of a higher Order, and fixing his Love upon Man?

2dly. It is Sinners, upon whom divine Grace is conferred. Man by Creation was
but Dust, but by Sin he is become polluted Dust, and so Odious and Loathsome,
as well as Wretched and Miserable! And this doleful State he has wilfully
brought himself into, and wilfully continues in against all the Remonstrances
of Conscience, against all the kind Importunities of a condescending God and
Savior! Man by Sin has brought this twofold Misery upon himself, 1st. That he
deserves no Good. And 2dly. That he deserves all Evil! How can these deserve
Good at the Hand of God, whose Persons and Performances are covered with
Deformity and Pollution? Indeed we deserve not the least common Mercy, how much
less then can we merit special Benefits? Genesis xxxii. 10. I am not worthy of the
least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth which thou have showed unto thy
Servant! Men in a State of Nature are unprofitable Creatures, they are neither
prepared to receive Benefits, nor able to prepare themselves, seeing they are
dead in Sins and Trespasses. And by their multiplied Impieties they deserve the
divine Displeasure, and provoke him to inflict it. As they are Children of
Wrath by Nature, so they weary the Almighty by continued Iniquities in
Practice, ( Ephesians. ii. 3. Isa. xliii. 24.) And

3dly. The Persons to whom divine Grace is given, are Enemies to God, both in
their Minds and Lives, Romans viii. 7. The Carnal Mind is Enmity against God, for
it is not Subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be! Now Enmity imports
a high Degree of sixed and implacable Spite, O dreadful State! This inward
Enmity, unregenerate Sinners bewray by their Rebellion against God, in Practice
and cruel Confederacies with his declared Enemies Col. i. 21. And you that were
sometime allienated, and Enemies in your Mind by wicked Works, yet now has he
reconciled.

4thly. It is generally the poorer and meaner Sort of Men, that are favored
with divine Grace, while the Rich, Honorable, and Great are passed by. Many
who make a considerable Figure in the World by the Keeness of their natural and
acquired Endowments, and by the Splendour of their outward Circumstances, who
are entirely destitute of special Grace, while others who are Poor and despised
are favored therewith! This Subject the Apostle Paul discourses largely upon,
1 Cor. i. 26, -- 28. Not many Mighty, not many Noble are called, but God has
chosen the foolish Things of the World, to confound the Wise, and the Weak
Things of the World, to confound the Things that are Mighty; and base Things of
the World, and Things which are despi^d, has God chosen; yea Things that are
not, to bring to naught Things that are.

5thly. Many of those to whom divine Grace is given, were before Conversion
notorious Sinners, some Blasphemers, Persecutors, and Injurious: These Things
the Apostle Paul ascribes to himself, he shut up many of the Saints in Prison,
consented to their Death, Punished them in every Synagogue, compelled them to
Blaspheme, and being exceeding mad against them, he persecuted them to strange
Cities ( Act. xxvi. 10.11. 1 Timothy i. 13, 15.) Some, before Conversion, have
been Idolaters, as the Ephesians. Some Fornicators, Adulterers, Effeminate,
Abusers, of themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers,
Extortioners, such were some of the Corinthians, and yet they were washed,
sanctified and justified 1. Cor. vi. 9.11. O rich and glorious Grace! How
admirable is the Grace of God, in the Instance of Manasseh's Conversion? Who
though a Conjurer a Murderer, and one who despised God, and bid defiance to
Heaven in Prosperity, yet when in Adversity he humbled himself and made
Supplication to Jehovah, was graciously heard and accepted. (2 Chronicles. xxxiii.
9, 12, 13.) I shall only add the famous Instance of Mary Magdalen, who was a
notorious Sinner. This poor Woman loved much, because much was forgiven her;
her Heart was so melted with a Sense of divine Goodness, that she could wash
our Lords Feet with her Tears! ( Luke vii.)

3dly. The Glory of divine Grace appears not only from it is Author and Object,
but also from the Season in which it is vouchsafed. The Almighty bestows
Benefits upon his People, at such Seasons, when they are most suitable. In the
Mount of Difficulty and Distress, the Lord is seen, yea he is a very present
Help in Trouble. When Sinners have wearied themselves in the greatness of their
Way, and through a Series of Disappointments are brought to the last Extremity,
the blessed God manifests his Grace and Mercy! And thus when gracious Persons
are encircled with manifold Miseries, outward and inward, and their sorrowful
Hearts are ready to sink into Despondency, with a long continued oppressive
Weight of Woe, from which they can hardly see any way of Deliverance; they are
desolate and afflicted, their Hearts almost overwhelmed, then Jehovah sends
Deliverance! ( Psa. xxv. 16, 17.) And they are as those that dreamed. When the
compassionate Jehovah returns to his People, after their sinful Wanderings from
him. O! It makes them admire the pure and glorious Riches of divine Grace! And
truly the Lord teaches his People more and more of this Doctrine, namely, the
freeness of his Grace, while they are in the World. And

4thly The freeness of divine Grace appears likewise from the Manner in which
divine Benefits are conferred e. g. we contribute nothing to the Change wrought
upon us by Conversion. The natural Bias of our Wllls is against it, and this
Reluctance and Opposition remains, until it be overcome by the Almighty Power
of God, who is hence said to make his People a willing People in the Day of his
Power. Psalm. ciii. That Alteration of Dispositions which is implied in
Conversion, is not desired by the Sinner before it; though unregenerate Sinners
desire to be delivered from Misery, yet they do not desire to be delivered from
Sin the Cause of it! For that is as their right Eye, and right Arm! Well then
seeing those Benefits whereby the Soul is sanctified are undeserved, undesir'd,
yea opposed by the unconverted, surely then they must be freely vouchsafed. But

5thly, The Riches of divine Grace appear from the Nature of the Benefits
conferred; which are attended with these two following Properties, viz. Freedom
from the greatest Evils, and a Right to, and Possession of, the greatest Good.
Sinners while in a State of Unregeneracy are immersed in, and exposed to the
greatest Evils, both moral and penal. They are under the Dominion of Sin, and
all over ^ainted by it; and by Reason thereof they are exposed to the Curse and
Wrath of God, in this and the next World. They are in a Dungeon of Darkness and
Distress, in a Pit in which there is no Water! Bound and shackled with the
heavy Curse of God, void of Light and Beauty, and covered with the basest
Deformity! Now the Benefits of divine Grace, bring the Sinner from this Depth
of Woe, loose his Shakles, and release him out of Prison! Hereby he is freed
from the Guilt of Sin, through the Righteousness of CHRIST imputed to him, and
hereby he is freed from the Dominion of it, through the sanctifying Influences of
the Holy Spirit; and as he is thus freed frrom the greatest Evils by divine
Grace, so he is thereby entitled to, and made a Possessor of the greatest Good,
both Physical and moral, being made a Partaker of the divine Love, and
beautified with the Divine Image, viz. Holiness. By the former he is refreshed,
and by the latter adorned. And as he is under the unerring Conduct and Almighty
Protection of God here, so he is entitled to the perfect Enjoyment of God
hereafter; which is the greatest Good, that it is possible for a Creature to
receive. I proceed to the

4th. Proposed, which was to consider, what is really and seemingly opposed to
the Grace of God. Now the Things that are opposed really, are these two, viz,
Nature and Merit. And

1st. Nature. Hereby we are Children of Wrath, being dead in Trespasses and
Sins, Ephesians. ii, 1, 3. By Nature we have blind Minds, and stony Hearts, neither
discern the Things that be of God, nor are willing to be subject thereto, 1
Cor. ii. 14. The natural Man understands not the Things of the Spirit of God,
nither can he discern them, because they are spiritually discerned, Romans viii.
7. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God, it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. Nature in its present fallen and corrupted State, fights
against the Grace of God, as long as it can. And therefore the Citadel of Man's
Heart, must be taken by Storm, if the King of Glory takes Possession of it. And

2dly The Papal Doctrine of the Merits of Works, in the Business of
Justification, directly opposes the Grace of God: For Grace is undue and
undeserved Love, as was shown before Romans iii. 28. We conclude that a Man is
justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law. If it be of Works, it is no
more of Grace, otherwise Works would be no more Works, and Grace would be no
more Grace. But to proceed.

3dly. The Wrath of God is seemingly opposed to Grace. Now the Wrath of God is
no other, than his vindicative Justice, or Disposition to punish the Guilty;
which includes three Things in it.

1st. A Purpose of punishing the Transgressor, Romans i. 18. For the Wrath of God
is revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men,
who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.

2dly. It includes the Denunciation of the aforesaid Purpose by Threatenings Ps.
vii. 11, 12, 13. God is angry with the Wicked every Day, if he turn not he will
whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow and made it ready. He has also prepared
for him the Instrument of Death he ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors,

3dly. It includes the Execution of the Threatenings, by all Kinds of Revenge
and Judgments. Ephesians. v. 6. Let no Man deceive you, with vain Words, for
because these Things, comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of
Disobedience, i. e. Fruits and Effects of Wrath in divine Judgments. Sin wrongs
the Almighty by insulting his Sovereignty and Legislative Authority, by
contradicting his unspotted Holiness, and by slighting the Riches of his
Goodness. By Sin God is wronged, and robbed of that Tribute of Honor and
Service which is due to him, from all created Beings, by the strongest claims
of Right, viz. Creation, Preservation, Provision. And some are under the
additional Engagement of redeeming Love. It is Sin therefore, that stirs up the
divine Wrath, and because there be various Aggravations of Sin, therefore there
are various Degrees of Wrath excited thereby, and proportioned thereto. And
hence the Scriptures speaking after the manner of Men, make mention of God's
hot Displeasure, Fury, and Rage, Ps. vi. 1. Ezekiel. viii. 18. Therefore will I
also deal in Fury, mine Eye shall not spare, neither will I have Pity, and though
they ^ry in mine Ears, with a loud Voice, yet I will not hear them. ^b xl. 11.
Cast abroad the Rage of thy Wrath. These Expressions do not signify any Tumult
of Passion in God, for he is incapable of Passion, being simple, immutable, and
perfect! They serve therefore only to represent the great contrariety of the
Nature of God to Sin, as well as the more dreadful Effects of his Wrath upon
heinous Transgressors! But in the mean Time, it may be observed, that the Wrath
of God in every Instance of it is terrible, and irresistible; because it
proceeds from an infinite and Almighty God. And hence it is compared to a
burning Fire, and to a Whirlwind, that sweeps all before it. Zeph. i. And
except Repentance intervene, it will be continual and eternal.

Although the Doctrine of Free Grace has been abused into Licentiousness, by some
sordid Spirits, which the Apostle Paul mentions with great Abhorrence! Romans vi.
1, 2. Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may abound, God forbid! Yet it is
Design and Tendency is to promote the Contrary. And indeed nothing more
powerfully incites an ingenuous Mind to Holiness, than the Consideration of
God's free and distinguishing Grace. And here it is to be noted, that though
Almighty God, gives his Grace freely, that so no Creature should have Occasion
of boasting or glorying in his Presence. Yet ordinarily he vouchsafes it in the
Use of appointed Means; that so there may be no Umbrage for Negligence, but on
the Contrary, all that excitement to Duty, which can consist with the divine
Sovereignty! These Things are excellently represented in the xxxvith chap. of
Ezekiel. from the xxvith to the xxxviith verse there. Though the Almighty promises
to confer saving Benefits, yet he tells them, that for all these Things, he
will be enquired of by them. But (...) Time to offer a Word of improvement. And

1st. From what has been said we may learn, that all those Doctrines which
ascribe any Part of our Salvation, to our Endeavors, as meritorious Causes
thereof, are very derogatory to the Glory of God, and the Design of his Gospel;
which is to magnify the Exceeding Riches of God's Grace! Ephesians. i. Such who
seek after Righteousness as it were by the Works of the Law are not like to
attain it. Justification is not to be attained by a Dependence upon our
Endeavors, we must come to God as Beggars, and ask an Alms of Free Grace,
otherwise we shall be rejected.

2dly. We should examine ourselves whether we are Partakers of God's special
Grace, in the Instances before mentioned, of effectual Calling, Faith,
Justification, Conversion, Adoption; have we by these Things been brought to a
high prizing of CHRIST above all others, to a Child-like Familiarity with God,
to a habitual holy, humble, heavenly and loving Temper of Mind, and Course of
Behavior, if so, let us rejoice in CHRIST JESUS in all outward Distresses, let
us ever admire the Sovereign and distinguishing Grace of God; and give to God
the Glory of it in Heart, Speech, and Practice.

But such of you as have not found the aforesaid Experiences, rejoice not for
Joy, as other People, for ye have gone a whoring from God! Let your Laughter be
turned into Mourning and your Joy into Heaviness! Cry frequently and earnestly
to God, for sovereign saving Grace, and rest in no Duties or Ordinances short
of it.

Is the Grace of God free? Then the greatest Transgressors should not despair
of God's Mercy, though your Iniquities rival the Stars for Multitude, and in
their Agravations are red as Crimson and Scarlet, yet Free Grace can easily
blot them out, as a thick Cloud, and make them white as Snow! Therefore let
sensible Sinners, be encouraged to come to, and believe in the God of Grace:
For where Sin has abounded, there Grace has much more abounded. The greater
your Transgressions are, the greater Glory God will get to his Grace in
forgiving them! The Psalmist was aware of this, and therefore plead with God,
to pardon his Iniquities because they were exceeding great.

And methinks the Doctrine of Free Grace should powerfully induce us to
Humility, seeing that it is God only, who has made us to differ from others,
and that we have nothing but what we have received. We are his Debtors, for all
we have in Hand or Hope. The Nature of Grace supposes the Object, upon whom it
is vouchsafed, unworthy of it. A continued humbling Sense of this, would as
much conduce to our Benefit, as Ornament.

And seeing the good God is pleased to heap many undeserved Kindnesses freely
upon us, why should we not imitate his Grace, by conferring Benefits upon our
fellow Creatures, without any regard to Dignity, or Hopes of a reward from
them: By this we should glorify God and convince others that we are his
Children.

In fine, let me in the Name of the gracious God my Lord and Master, earnestly
beseech poor Sinners of every Order to hasten as for their Lives to that
Fountain of Grace that is in CHRIST. Think not to put the Almighty in your Debt
by your doings, for if Grace be not Free it is not Grace. Sinners abuse not the
Grace of God by Delays, and other Impieties, or expect his inflamed Wrath to
avenge the Ingratitude! Let the wicked Man forsake his Way, and the unrighteous
Man his thot's, and turn unto God and he will have Mercy on him, and to our God
for he will abundantly Pardon.

I add no more at present, may the Almighty and gracious God bless his Word,
that has been offered in his Name to our special and enduring Benefit. Amen.

SERMON XVIII.
EXODUS xxxiv. 6. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord,
the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering.


HAving in the preceding Sermon discoursed upon the Grace of God. The next
divine Attribute that offers it self to our present Meditations from the Text,
is the Patience and Long-suffering of God. And this the sacred Scriptures
frequently ascribe to him, Nahum i. 3. The Lord is slow to anger and great in
Power. Psa. ciii. 8. The Lord is Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger, and
plentious in Mercy. Isa. xxx. 18. And therefore will the Lord wait that he may
be Gracious unto you. --

In discoursing upon this divine Attribute of Patience, or Long-suffering, I
shall I. Speak of its Nature. II. Of its Riches. III. Of its Reasons. And IV.
Of its Consistency with vindicative Justice. And then proceed to the
Improvement. I return to the


1st. Proposed, which was to speak of the Nature of divine Patience. Here it
may be observed, that though Patience and Long-suffering in Creatures differ
realy, for the former seems only to signify our inability to punish an
Offender, and the latter our Unwillingness to do it, when in our Power, but in
God they are the same, and can be only distinguished, as to the Degree of
Duration or Continuance. Long-suffering is only a Suspension of Wrath for a
longer Time: This being the Case I shall not therefore treat of them
distinctly, but proc^d to observe, that the Patience of God may be thus
described, viz. That it is a Branch of his Mercy whereby he long defers
deserved Wrath, and moderates the Executions of it in this World toward guilty
Creatures. Here observe 1st. That the Object of God's Patience, is guilty
Creatures. An innocent Creature cannot be the Object of it, because avenging
Justice has no Demand upon him, he may be the Object of Goodness, but not of
Long-suffering and Forbearance: For Punishment cannot be said to be deferred
where it is not due. 2dly The Acts of Patience, are 1st. God's defering the
Execution of deserved Wrath for a Time: And this proceeds neither from the Want
of Power or Opportunity to punish Transgressors: For they are always under the
Cognizance of God's Eye, and within the Reach of his Arm. He can in an Instant
speak them to nothing by a Word, or strike them dead and damned at a Blow, when
and where he pleases! No, his Patience is the Fruit of his Goodness, or rather
as the Scripture Terms it, a Display of his Power. And hence he is said, to be
slow to Anger and great in Power, Nahum i. 3. and Romans ix. 22. God is said to
make his Power known in enduring with much Long-suffering, the Vessels of Wrath
fitted to Destruction. And hence some describe God's Patience, to be a Power of
defering the Execution of his Wrath. 2dly. Another Act of Patience consists in
the Moderation of Punishments when inflicted, so that they are not equal to the
desert of Sin. Psalm. ciii. 10. He has not dealt with us after our Sins nor
rewarded us according to our Iniquities. The Almighty stirs not up all his
Wrath at once, but punishes gradually. He stays his rough Wind in the Day of
his East Wind, and trys Rods before he sends Scorpions. But 3dly. The Place
were God exercises his Patience, is this World, which is a state of Probation
or Trial, whereas the next is a state of Rewards and Punishments. The Damned
cannot be said to be the Objects of God's Patience, because they endure the
Viols of God's Vengeance, in a degree proportioned to their demerit. And although
the Devils are not exposed to so great a Weight of Woe and Vengeance as they
will be after the general Judgment; which is intimated, by their being reserved
in chains under Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day. Jud. 6. As well as
by their Question to our Savior, Mat. viii. 29. Art thou come to torment us
before our Time? Yet this less degree of Punishment inflicted on them, has no
where in Scripture the Denomination of Patience: It remains therefore that Men
are the only Objects of it, and that while in this World. But

4thly. The Time wherein Patience is exercised, is generally a long Duration,
though not always: The just God makes quick Work with some, and lets his terrible
severity suddenly triumph in their ruin, as in the Case of Kora^ and his
Accomplices, Ananias and Saphira and others. But for the most Part Jehovah
suspends the falling Blow for a considerable Season, even till there be no
remedy! In civil Courts of Judicature, there is usually but a little Space
between the Sentence and Execution, and it is but Just it should be so. But
Jehovah mercifully waits, and is not speedy in coming out against the Sinner.
Eccles. viii. 11. Sentence against an evil Work is not spedily executed. The
Almighty expostulates the Case and uses a variety of Methods to reclaim
impenitent Transgressors, before he lets his Vengeance light upon them to
destroy them. This is well represented in the following Places of Scripture,
Jer. ii. 5. Thus says the Lord, what Iniquity have your Fathers found in me,
that they have gone so far from me, and have walked after Vanity and become
vain? Jer. viii. 6. I hearkened and ^eard, but they spoke not aright, no Man
repented him of his Wickedness, saying what have I done. Every one turned to
his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle! I proceed to consider the
Riches of divine Patience; which was the

2d. Proposed. Now the following Particulars serve as Foils to illustrate the
Greatness of God's Patience, in forbearing to execute his Vengeance upon
Transgressors. And

1st. Let it be considered, that God is Infinite and unspoted in Holiness, and
inflexible in his Justice, and therefore cannot but abhor Sin with an
unalterable and eternal Antipathy. And

2dly. How great is the Offense committed against God by every Sin? Seeing that
the Sinner hereby interpretatively, prefers Creatures, yea his Lusts before the
Blessed God! And therefore as much as in him lies, labors to dethrone the
Almighty. The exceeding contrariety of Sin to the untainted Purity of the
divine Nature, is set forth in strong Terms, accommodated to our Manner of
Conception in the following Places of Scripture, Amos ii. 13. Behold I am
pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of Sheaves. Ezekiel. vi. 9. I
am broken with their whorish Heart, which has departed from me!

3dly. The Heighnousness of some Sins above others, serve to heighten our
Conceptions of the divine Patience: All Iniquities are not equally aggravated,
some are of a slighter Tincture, and some of a crimson Hue; a deep a double
Dye, (Isa. i. 18.) And such are Sins against Light, Love, covenant Engagements,
and Rebukes of Providence; and more especially our slighting and neglecting of
the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Hereby the dearest Love is undervalu'd and the yearning
Bowels of the most compassionate pity spurned against; yea the precious Blood
of the adorable Imanuel trod under Foot, O astonishing monstrous Ingratitude!
And more amazing Patience, that forbears executing deserved Vengeance upon such
Transgressors! And

4thly. What a prodigious Number of Sins are committed every Moment, yea of the
vilest Kind? Surely innumerable Evils do compass us about, if the Tongue be a
World of Iniquity, as the Apostle James observes, (Jam. iii. 6.) what then
shall be said of all the Members together; which are as so many Fountains of
Impiety? Who then can understand his Errors? If the most Patient Man alive was
to behold at once the Multitude of Evils which God beholds together with their
Filthiness: Surely if it was in his Power the World would not stand many
Moments! And yet the All-knowing infinitely holy God forbears bringing Judgment
to the Plumet! I say forbears to sweep obstinate ungrateful Transgressors off
the Stage of Time into a deluge of endless Woe and Ruin, O astonishing
Patience! Patience worthy of a God, and which none but he can exercise! Though
Sinners as it were fly in the Face of Jehovah, run upon the thick Bosses of his
Bucklers, bid Defience to Omnipotence, basely trample upon his Authority and
his Love, and by every impious Art try to provoke a God to Arms, as if they
were stronger than he: Yet notwithstanding all this, Jehovah forbears to give
the fatal Blow, behold and be astonished ye Heavens and Earth at this! And

5thly. It adds Weight to this Argument, when we consider the Almightiness of
the God of Patience, how easily, speedily, and fully can he avenge all the
Affronts that are cast upon his Honor, all the Invasions that are made upon
the Rights of Heaven? It cost him but a Word to make the Heavens and Earth
exist, one Word of Jehovah would speak the Offender Dead, or make him cease to
be! The Lord has a Sovereign Empire over the whole Universe, when he speaks all
Nature trembles before him, the Thunder of his Power who can understand!
Consider this therefore ye that forget God, least he tear you in Pieces when
there shall be none to deliver. Ps. l. 22.

6thly. Moreover the many Measures which divine Mercy uses to reclaim the
Impenitent by the Word, Spirit Providence, in its prosperous and adverse
Aspects, may help us to admire the more at that Patience, which endures the
Abuse of all. 2 Cor. v. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for CHRIST, as though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you in CHRIST 'S stead, be ye reconciled to God!
And

7thly. We may add to what has been said, the inumerable Benefits which the
indulgent God without any Demerit oftentimes heaps upon the vilest
Transgressors. Ps. lxxiii. 12. Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the
World, they increase in Riches! Yea how Precious and Important is the Treasure
of Time which is conferred upon all? Besides many other Benefits which the
Season for this exercise would fail to innumerate! Respecting all which we may
accost the impenitent Sinner in the Language of Paul to the Romans xxiv. 5.
Despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance, not knowing that the
Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance.

8thly. The quick Dispatch that divine Justice has made with some, witness
Uzza, Nadab, Abihu, Achan, Herod, and diverse others, who perhaps all
Circumstances considered have not committed greater Evils than we, is a great
Illustration of God's Long-suffering toward us, Romans xi. 22. Behold the
Goodness and Severity of God on them which fell Severity; but toward thee,
Goodness, if thou continue in his Goodness, otherwise thou also shall't be cut
off!

9thly. Once more me thinks the Length of the Time that Patience has been
exercised toward us, is a pregnant Argument of the Greatness and Riches of it.
Has not Jehovah restrained the Execution of his Wrath, and waited to be
Gracious to some of us, this Twenty, Thirty, Forty, Fifty, or Sixty Years?
While in the mean Time we have been trampling upon his awful Authority, and
slighting the dear Carasses of his manifold Mercy, O amazing Patience! When the
Angels sinned, they were quickly cast down to Hell, and made Monuments of divine
Vengeance, and behold we who have been Transgressors from the Womb are yet
spared! Surely it had been nothing but an Act of Justice in God to have cast
every Soul of us into utter Darkness, many a Year agone: And yet we are alive,
and on this side the burning Lake, and have the Offers of Mercy and Salvation
made to us, O the unparalled Patience of God! O may his Long-suffering lead
us to Repentance, and be Salvation to us!

But that I may farther illustrate this Argument of the Riches of divine
Patience, it will not be a miss to add the following Displays thereof.

When our first Parents had revolted from their Duty and Allegiance to God, by
Transgressing the Covenant of Works, and we in them. Might not God in Justice
have made them and their Offspring immediately and eternally Miserable,
without any Hopes of a Retrieve? Yes surely! To what then can we ascribe the
Delay of Justice and Expense of Goodness to them and us, but to the divine
Long-suffering?

And after the fatal Shipwreck of our first Parents, when in succeeding Time
the Antidiluvian World had sunk into such dreadful Degeneracy, that all Flesh
had corrupted their Way; and the Almighty was hereby provoked to threaten a
Deludge of Judgment, as extensive as the moral Contagion that procured it: Yet
before it was inflicted, the God of Patience allowed them One Hundred and
Twenty Years warning, by Noah a preacher of Righteousness; during which Space
the Long-suffering of God waited on them. (1 Pet. iii. 20. 2 Pet. ii. 5.) And
had not the Church of the Jews great Experience of the Patience of God? Though
the Power and Love of God were marvelously manifested, in delivering that
People from the most oppressive Bondage in Egypt, as well as in preserving of
them, and providing for them in their Way to Canaan. The whole was effected by
the mighty Hand, and outstretched Arm of God, by a Series of most astonishing
Miracles! Yet after all, what Infidelity, Idolatry, Murmurings and
Perverseness, was that People so highly favored guilty of, and yet were not
destroyed? Hence the Almighty is said to suffer their Manners in the Wilderness
forty Years, Acts xiii. 18. And though their Idolatries afterward were
scandalous to the last degree, yet Patience was exercised, Deliverers many
Times raised up for them, and Judgments but slowly executed, and attended with
a mixture of Mercy: And even after they had bro't their crimson Impieties to
the most horid Crisis, by crucifiing the Son of God! A Prodigy of Wickedness,
which the Sun himself refused to behold! An Impiety at which the conscious
Earth trembled with Horror and Regret! Yet did divine Patience spare them for a
considerable space of Time, till they had the Offers of Life repeatedly made to
them by the primitive Preachers of the Gospel, as well as repeated Warnings of
their just and approaching Ruin! It was a matter of Forty Years after, that
unhappy and ungrateful Nation, had judged themselves unworthy of eternal Life,
by rejecting the Apostolical Warnings and Invitations before their Metropolis
was sacked, and themselves dispersed and almost wholly destroyed by the Sword
of Titus Vespasian.

But the Jewish Church and Nation, are not the only Sharers, of the rich
Expense of divine Patience. The Gentiles also though guilty of the most
infand^ous Iniquities, directly contrary to Natures Light, have had large
Experience thereof. And hence God is said, in Time past to suffer all Nations
to walk in their own Ways, and to give them Rain from Heaven, and fruitful
Seasons, filling their Hearts with Food and Gladness, Acts xiv. 16, 17. Yea and
it is no inconsiderable Instance of the Long-suffering of God, that it has been
extended to false Teachers, who have endeavored to seduce and corrupt the
Church of God. These likewise have had a Space given them to repent, though they
repented not, Rev. ii. 21. But to proceed,

Methinks the Methods of the divine Proceedings, even in inflicting of
Judgments upon Transgressors, if closely attended to, may assist our
Conceptions of the Riches of God's Patience.

Before Judgment is executed, the gracious God does generally give by his
Servants, plain and frequent Warning. And hence it is said, that he hewed the
People of Israel by his Prophets, and slew them by the Words of his Mouth. He
speaks once, yea twice, but Man perceives it not, that he may withdraw Man
from his purpose, and hide Pride from Man. Job. xxxiii. 14, 17.

And when Sinners slight the divine Warnings, obstinately refusing to be
reclaimed, and so render the inflicting of Judgment necessary to vindicate the
Honor of God's Government. Behold the long-suffering God uses a Gradation
herein, by sending a Succession of lesser Judgments, before more awful
Calamities are inflicted. And hence the Judgments of God are compared to the
Light that goes forth; that is the Morning Light, which by degrees increases
to a perfect Day, the Morning Sun gradually ascends to his Meridian Height, or
to the Vertex of the Horison ( Hos. ^i. 5.) Thus the Prophet Joel relates a
Series of divine Judgments, which were inflicted upon the People of Israel, (
Joel i. 4.) First the Palmer Worm, then the Locust, after that the Canker-Worm,
and then the Caterpiller devoured the Fruits of the Earth. And Amos observes
likewise, that God sent first a Famine, and afterward overthrew some of them
as Sodom and Gomorha, (Amos iv. 8, 11.)

The Almighty in executing of his Judgments, does generally moderate them, so
that they are not equal to the Demerit of Sin. Of this the Prophet Isaiah
speaks excellently, Isa. xxvii. 7, 8. Has he smitten him, as he smote those
that smote him, or is he slain according to the Slaughter, of them that are
slain by him? In Measure thou will debate with it: He s^yeth his rough Wind in
the Day of his East Wind.

And here it should be with Amazement observed, that when the Execution of
Judgment is rendered necessary, by the continued Impieties of unrelenting
Transgressors, the Almighty does this strange Work, with a kind of regret and
reluctance. Hosea. xi. 8, 9. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I
deliver thee Israel, How shall I make thee as Admah, how shall I set thee as
Zeboim, mine Heart is turned within me, and my Relentings are kindled together?
When our compassionate Redeemer, drew near to, and beheld the City of
Jerusalem, having in his view the desolating Calamities which were to ensue,
upon their ungrateful Refusal of his gracious and infinitely important
Proposals, he wept over it! saying, If thou had known, or as some render the
Words, O that thou had known, in this thy Day, the Things that concerned thy
Peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes Luke xix. 41 But it is Time to
consider the

3d. Proposed, which was to speak of the Reasons of God's Patience. And

1st. One Reason is, God's good and beneficent Nature, which is more prone to
Mercy than Judgment. The former is his Delight, but the latter is his strange
Work. And hence it is said Lam. iii. 33. That he afflicts not willingly, or
grives the Children of Men. Jer xxxi. 20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a
pleasant Child? For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still, therefore my Bowels a^ troubled for him. I will surely have Mercy upon
him says the Lord. God's Goodness and Long-suffering are doubtless eminent
Branches of his manifestative Glory: For when Moses desired a Sight thereof,
this Name was proclaimed. Ex. xxxiv. 6. The Lord, the Lord, merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness. And these the Almighty
claims as his peculiar Prerogatives, as appears by that famous Scripture, Hos
xi. 9. I will not execute the Fierceness of my Anger, for I am God and not Man.
Man is impatient and full of Resentment. It is a just Observation of Mr.
Bolton, That if any tender Hearted Man, should sit one Hour in the Throne of
God Almighty, and look down upon the Earth, as God does continually; and see
what Abominations are done in that Hour, he would undoubtedly in the next set
all the World on Fire. But the Lord is God and not Man, his Patience has no
Parallel among all created Beings.

2dly. Another Reason of divine Forbearance, is the Manifestation of God's
Glory. Jehovah is not only induced to Patience, by the Kindness of his Nature,
but likewise by the Glory of his Name. Isa. xlviii. 9, 11. For my Name sake
will I defer mine Anger, and for my Praise will I refrain from thee, that I ^ut
thee not off. For mine own Sake, even for mine own Sake will I do it. For how
should my Name be polluted, and I will not give my Glory to another. An Example
of this we have in Pharaoh, Ex. ix. 16. And in very Deed for this Cause have I
raised thee up, for to show in thee my Power, and that my Name may be declared
through out all the Earth. And

3dly. The Lord exercises Long-suffering because of his Promise made to pious
People, and their Offspring. Genesis xvii. 7. And I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations, for an
everlasting Covenant to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee.

4thly. Another Reason of God's Patience is, that some may be hereby induced to
repent of their evil Ways. Romans ii. 4. Or despisest thou the Riches of his
Goodness, Forbearance and Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God
leads thee to Repentance. And indeed Men are lost to all Sense of Humanity
and Gratitude, if the Consideration of God's Goodness and Long-suffering, does
not excite their Sorrows for their Offenses against him. Memorable are the
Words of the Apostle Peter upon this Subject. 2 Pet. iii. 9. The Lord is not
slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count Slackness, but is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance.

5thly. The Almighty forbears to execute Vengeance because of the Mixture of
good People with bad in this World, and from the Regard he bears to the Prayers
of the Former. Genesis xix. 21, 22. And he said unto him, see I have accepted thee
concerning this Thing also, that I will not overthrow this City; for the which
thou have spoken, Haste thee escape thither, for I cannot do any Thing till
thou become thither; therefore the City was called Zoar. The Holy Seed, i. e,
pious People, are the Substance, the Support of Places where they are. ( Isa.
vi. 13.) And hence it is said, Isa. xix. Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto
us a very small Remnant, we should have been as Sodom, -- and like unto Gomorah.

6thly. Another Reason of God's Patience, is to continue, and propagate his
Church in the World. Rev. vi. 10, 11. And they cried with a loud Voice saying,
how long O Lord Holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them
that dwell on the Earth? -- And it was said unto them, that they should rest,
yet for a little Season, until their fellow Servants and Brethren, -- should be
fulfilled, i. e. until their Number was completed. The Church could not be
continued from Age to Age, if God was speedy in the Execution of his Wrath.
Many of the Elect are doubtless in the Loins of impious Parents, who are spared
for their Sakes. Again

7thly. Patience is exercised, to render Sinners who continue in their
Impenitence inexcusable; and to vindicate the Justice of God in their final
Ruin. ( Romans ii. 1, 2, 4.) The long continuance, and rich Expense of divine
Patience toward impenitent Sinners, bereave them of all Apology in their own
Favor! This, this will make them wholly speechless, before the Judgment Bar of
the incarnate God! they will not be able to offer one Plea in their Defense. The

4th. Proposed comes now to be spoke upon, namely, the consistency of divine
Patience, with God's vindicative Justice, and this will appear by considering
the following Particulars.

1st As there is an equal necessity of glorifying the Attributes of Patience,
as of God's other Perfections, so there is no Time for this but in the present
World. Neither the Saved or Damned are Objects of Patience, the former need it
not, and the latter are past it. Then either it must be manifested here or not
at all; but there will be sufficient Room for the Terrible Displays of Justice
in another World.

2dly. Seeing that the Design of avenging Justice is either to manifest God's
Holiness, or to secure the Rights of his Sovereignty, then if both these can be
answered, notwithstanding the Exercise of Patience, there is surely a
Consistency and Harmony between them, and that this is the very Case appears
thus: God's Holiness is manifested in his Threatenings against Transgressors,
the Execution of which his Truth stands engaged to secure. The just Jehovah has
said, That he will rain upon Sinners Snares, Fire, and Brimstrone, and an
horrible Tempest, and this shall be the Portion of their Cup! For the Lord
loves Righteousness, Psa. xi. 6, 7. And though this be a Time of Probation, yet
in order to vindicate God's Holiness and Justice, there be some Executions of
Wrath. Hence the Lord is said to be known by the Judgments which he executes,
and that the wicked are snared in the Work of their own Hands.

Neither does a temporary Suspension of the full Executions of Justice, give
any Occasion to Sinners to insult the divine Sovereignty; nay, to ingenious
Minds, it is rather an Inducement to submit to the divine Government, seeing he
is so full of Clemency. Slow Proceedings in Judgment, and Reprieves granted to
Malefactors, are no Reproach; but an Honor to civil Governments; and why
should the same mild Measures be reckoned an Impeachment upon the Divine? But I
hasten to the Improvement of this Subject. And 1st. We may learn from it the
exceeding Preciousness of the Souls of Men. Our Lord, who is the best Judge of
the Worth of Things, esteems one of them worth more than the whole World, Mat.
xvi. 29. And this he has testified by the Price he has laid down for them,
which was no less than his own most precious Blood, (1. Pet. i. 19.) As well as
by the importunate Methods he uses in order to apply this Redemption, and
particularly by the Expense of his Patience in waiting to be Gracious to poor
Sinners. And why then should we not value our own Souls, and express this by
suitable Solicitude, and Labors to secure their Happiness? And

2dly. From the Patience of God we may learn this Lesson, that it is better for
us to be at the Mercy of God than of any Creature: Though Moses was meek above
all Men upon the Face of the Earth, yet the Impieties of the People of Israel
put him in a Rage against them, so that he accosted them in the following
Language at Meriba, You Rebels said he, must I draw Water for you out of the
Rock? The Prophet Jonah seemed to be more concerned about his Credit, than
about the Lives of the great City Niniv^h; yea he was displeased and very Angry
at the Kindness of God, in sparing that sinful Place upon their Reformation,
and acosted the Almighty in very undecent Language on this Occasion: yea he
resented the Kindness of God to that Place in such a Degree, that he chose
Death rather than Life on this Account! O strange and unaccountable Conduct! (
See Jona iv. 1.2.3.) But

2dly. Another Use that may be justly drawn from this Subject of divine
Patience, is of Encouragement to all Sinsick Souls; such should be induced
hereby to cast away their desp^nding Fears, and to come to JESUS CHRIST with
Hopes of obtaining Mercy. To this he invites them in a compassionate Manner,
Mat. xi. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy Laden, and I will
give you Rest: And surely our dear Lord will be as Good as his Word. The Enemy
of Souls labors to discourage awakned Sinners in their Motions to CHRIST by
many dreadful suggestions such as these following, viz. That they have
committed the unpardonable Sin; but how can that be while they bewail Sin and
seek Deliverance from it? Or by insinuating that the Season of Mercy is past,
and that God is so severe that he will have no Compassion on them. But these
are false Suggestions, how can the Day of Mercy be past when God is enlightening
the Mind and humbling the Heart by his gracious Influences? No! It is then a
special Season of Mercy, the Door of Hope is yet open, and the golden Scepter
of Pardon and Peace is held forth by the King of Glory. God is not waiting for
an Opportunity to destroy the Sinner, but for an Opportunity to exalt his
glorious Grace in showing them Salvation: Poor Sinners, ye are going to a God
of Mercy, Grace and Patience, a God who glories in the Freeness of his Love!
Surely if his Patience bore with you in your obstinate Course of unrelenting
Impieties, it will much more so when you are humbled under a Sense thereof:
Therefore be encouraged to attend with Hope upon the Means of Grace, and to
venture your guilty Souls by believing on an all-sufficient and compassionate
Redeemer, who is able to save to the uttermost all that come to the Father by
him, and who has himself assured us, that such as come he will by no Means cast
out. But I proceed

3dly. To a Use of Exhortation in the following Particulars And

1st. Dear Brethren, let us admire and adore the Patience of God toward
ourselves! And to this we may be justly excited by considering the Number,
Importance and Long-continuance of the Favors of God toward us, together with
the inumerable and heighnous Iniquities which we have presumptuously and
ungratefully committed against all the dear Obligations of divine Love! If God
should mark Iniquities who could stand before him? How justly therefore, and
how easily might the Almighty have made us Miserable, beyond a Remedy long
before now? And yet Jehovah's Patience waits. Sometimes Men defer the Execution
of their Anger, because they are not able to effect it: This was King David's
Case in suspending Joab's Punishment. The Sons of Zeruiah, as he himself
acknowledged, were too hard for him, they had got so great a Party of the
Nation upon their Side, that it was perilous to try to bring them speedily to
public Justice: But God is Almighty in Power, and easily able at any Time, in
an Instant, to subdue the most Proud and Potent of his Enemies. It may justly
melt our Hearts into Admiration and Gratitude, when we think how justly every
Soul of us here present might be this Moment enduring the Vengeance of eternal
Fire, past all Hopes of ever obtaining Mercy; and that yet notwithstanding of
all our crimson Provocations we are on this side Ruin, and have the Offers of
Salvation made to us. But in the

2d. Place let us beware that we abuse not the Patience of God by taking
Encouragement therefrom to persist in sinning against him. This alas is the
ungrateful Use which some make of this adorable Attribute, Ecles. viii. 11.
Because Sentence against an evil Work, is not speedily executed, therefore the
Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil. The Baseness of which
Ingratitude and Impiety, no Tongue can express, no Mind can conceive fully: And
surely the Punishment will be at last proportioned to it, except Repentance
intercept the Stroke of Justice! How shall ye escape who neglect so great
Salvation? It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorah in the Day of
Judgment than for you. Do not imagine Sinners that Forbearance is Payment. Be
not deceived, that which a Man sows that shall be also reap, he that sows to
the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption. Consider solemnly and speedily
those dreadful Words of God himself, Psalm. l. 21, 22. These Things have thou
done and I kept Silent, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy
self, but I will reprove thee and set them in Order before thine Eyes. Now
consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you in Pieces and there be none
to deliver! And how unjust, as well as ungrateful, is the Inference which some
impenitent Transgressors draw from the expense of divine Patience, viz. that
therefore there is no Providence which presides over human Affairs; and hence
they deride all Religion! The Apostle Peter long since prophesied of this herd
of hardened Mortals. (2 Pet. iii. 4.) But where is the Sense of this Cavil, for
will not Reason it self suggest, that there should be a Time of Probation
before that of Recompense?

But that I may come more closely to the Consciences of my Hearers, may I not
safely assert, that all you that neglect to improve the present Season of
Mercy, o^ to embrace the Lord JESUS CHRIST, are abusers of God's Patience! Dear
Friends, consider, that in so doing ye despise the Goodness and Long-suffering
of God, and likewise secure and aggravate your own Ruin. ( Romans ii. 4.) Hear
with Trembling what God said to his ancient People, Amos iii. 3. You only have
I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for all
you Iniquities! I hasten to the last Use, which is of Exhortation, which is
threefold: Methinks the Patience of God invites us to improve it, in Relation
to God, our Neighbors, and ourselves. And 1st. We should improve it in
Relation to our Behavior toward God, in a Patient enduring of his fatherly
Chastnings, which are so much to our Advantage, and so much less than our
demerit. We should likewise patiently wait for the Answer of our Prayers, as
well as for the Time of our Dissolution; for God has not said to the seed of
Jacob, that they should seek his Face in vain. The Time of our departure is
fixed, and cannot be reversed, let us therefore resolve with Job, to wait with
Patience till our Change come.

2dly. In Relation to Men. Let us bear Injuries and Reproaches from them with
Patience, without meditating Revenge, seeing the great God has so long bore
with worse Treatment from us! Let us patiently wait for the Conversion of
unconverted Friends and Relatives: God's Power is great, his Grace is free,
some he Converts at one Time and some at another! Jehovah waits and why should
not we with Patience and Hope.

3dly. In Relation to ourselves. O for God's sake let us improve the present
Season of divine Patience! Behold now is the accepted Time, behold now is the
Day of Salvation! Grieve the Spirit of God no more, and try his Patience no
longer; for surely if ye persist, divine Patience toward you will have its
Period, and then ye are undone forever. Think on these Words, Pro. i. 24, 25,
26. Because I called and ye refused, I stretched forth my Hand and no Man
regarded, therefore will I laugh at your Calamities, and mock when your fear
comes.

SERMON XIX.
PSALM xxxi. 5. Into thine Hand I commit my spirit: For thou have redeemed me O
Lord God of Truth.


THIS Psalm was composed either when David was in great Distress, or sometime
afterward in Remembrance of it, and of the Kindness and Truth of God, apparent
in delivering him therefrom. The Matter of the Psalm, which consists of Prayers
and Praises, of Hopes and Fears, seems to suggest what has been observed to be
Occasion of it is Composure; but we cannot certainly determine what those
Troubles were to which the Psalmist refers herein: Some learned Men,
particularly Muis from David Kimchi, whose Opinion Mr. Pool in his Synopsis
favors, do not improbably Conjecture, that it was composed when David fled
from Saul. After the Psalmist had, in the preceding Verses, mentioned some
Distress he was in, some disguised Contrivance which his Enemy's had secretly
formed to ensnare him, as well as spoken honorably of the divine Power in a
Variety of metaphorical Terms, and earnestly implored Guidance in Perplexity,
and Protection in Danger, he in confidence thereof, does in the Words of our
Text, calmly commend himself to the divine Care, being hereunto encouraged by
the Consideration of what God had done for him in difficulty heretofore, and
believing God was engaged to do the like for him in future Time. Into thine
Hand I commit my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth! So
that in these Words, we have two Things, viz. An Account of the Psalmist's Act,
together with the Reasons of it. And 1st. His Act was his committing his Spirit
into the Hands of God. By Spirit we are doubtless to understand his Soul, it
was in this Sense that our Lord used these Words upon the Cross. ( Luke xxxiii.
46.) By the Hand of God, we are to understand his Care and Custody, the
metaphorical Expression of Arm, when applied to God in Scripture, intends his
Strength, so that to be taken into the Hands of God in a Way of Mercy,
signifies a Person's Being covered with Almighty Protection! Committing
ourselves into the Hands of God, includes in it these three Things especially
viz. 1st. A rejecting all other Dependencies. 2dly. A firm Trust in God that he
can and will do all well for us. And 3dly. A voluntary Resignation of ourselves
entirely to his Care and Kindness. But

2dly. The Reasons of the Psalmist's Act are these, viz. 1st. The Remembrance
he had of God's Kindness to him formerly, in delivering him out of Troubles:
For thou have redeemed me. And 2dly. The Consideration of the Truth of God's
Nature and Word, O Lord God of Truth, as if he had said, thou have promised O
Lord, that thou will be present with thy People in Distress, and help them; and
surely thou will be as good as thy Word, for thou art the God of Truth. The
Remembrance of past Mercies and Deliverances, both Spiritual and Temporal is of
great Necessity in our Christian Course, both to excite our Gratitude to God,
and encourage our Trust in him. If we do not remember the Hill-Mizar, the
Peniels, the Pisgas, the Bokims that we have met with, how shall we love our
Benefactors and hope in him? And without Love and Hope how can we perform the
Duties required of us with Diligence? Encounter the Dangers we are environed
with, without Courage, or sustain the Difficulties we are exposed to, with
Patience? Was not our Lord offended with his Disciples that they so soon forgot
the Miracle about the Loaves? How peircing and upbraiding was the reproof of
CHRIST on this Occasion? O ye Fools and slow of Heart to believe, do ye not
remember the Miracle of the Loaves?

The Subject that I purpose to discourse upon from the Text, is, the Truth of
God. This Attribute of Truth, is frequently ascribed to God in Scripture. Hence
(1) He is expressly said to be True, Jer. x. 10. But the Lord is the True God
(2) It is likewise said, that he cannot lie or repent, 1 Samuel xv. 29. And also
the Strength of Israel will not ^e or repent, for he is not a Man that he
should repent. Particularly (3) In his Words, he is True yea Truth itself. Joh.
xvii. 17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. (4) In his Works,
thus all the Ways of the Lord are said to be Mercy and Truth, unto such as keep
his Covenant. Psalm. xxv. 10.

And it must needs be that God is True, if we consider the following
Particulars, 1st. If God were not true, there could be nothing True, or no
Truth; for how can there be a second Truth without a first? But there is such a
Thing as Truth, therefore God is true. It is equally absurd to suppose, either
that the Creature has any Virtue, which it has not derived from God the first
Cause of all Being and Goodness, or that it should derive it from one who had
it not. 2dly. All falsehood and deceit springs from some Imperfection, either
of Ignorance or perverse Intention. Men often mistake through Ignorance or
Inadvertency; they think of Things otherwise than they are, either through want
of a competent measure of Knowledge or through neglect of due Deliberation upon
Things, neither of which are compatible to that God who is infinite in Wisdom,
and Acts by Council.

Again Men deceive others of Purpose, through an evil Disposition of Nature, the
Root of which is in all the Posterity of Adam! But God is perfectly Pure and
Holy, entirely free from every corrupt Bias. And hence is that antithesis or
contrariety between the divine Nature, and the Human in its degenerate and
fallen State; which is mentioned Romans iii. 4. Yea let God be True, but every
Man a Liar; as it is written, that thou might be justified in thy sayings,
and might overcome when thou judge. When therefore God is said to deceive
the Prophet, Ezekiel. xiv. 9. It only signifies the Almighty's disappointing him
by the Course of his all-governing Providence, of the fond Expectations he had
from second Causes, and his suffering the Prophet to impose upon himself by
wrong Conjectures. Men may be influenced by the vicious Propensities of their
own Natures, or by the Instigations of Satan to deceive. But it is directly
contrary to, and incompatible with the infinite untainted and inviolable purity
of the divine Nature to be any Ways accessory to such abhored Impiety. It is
impossible for God to lie, as the Author to the Hebrews justly observes, ( Heb.
vi. 18.)

Men do not always adhere with constancy to their Purposes and Declarations,
either, 1st. Because they were rashly and precipitantly made, without a just
View of Things, and mature Deliberation upon them. Or 2dly. For want of Power
to put their Designs into Execution, or 3dly. Because of some unforeseen
Changes that are brought to pass by divine Providence, which put their Affairs
into a different Situation from what they were before; and from what they first
had in View. But neither of these Imperfections can be ascribed without
Blasphemy to God. As his Wisdom is unsearchable, so his Power is Infinite, and
his Happiness invariable and eternal. All Futurity is open to his all
penetrating Eye, and all Things possible are included within the Compass of his
Almightiness. He is of one Mind and who can turn him, and what his Soul
desires even that he does. Job xxiii. 13. No change of Affairs can be
produced besides his Purpose or without the Interposition of his sovereign
Providence, and therefore he cannot be thereby necessitated to change his
Purpose, or fall from his Declarations. And hence Philo well observes, That all
the Words of God are Oaths. i. e. most sacred and certain. And Fulgentius
says truly concerning the supreme Being, viz. That he is Truth without
Fallacy, Goodness without Malice, and Happiness without Misery. Pythagoras
being asked what made Men like to God, answered, cum vera loquntur i. e. when
they speak Things that are true.

In discoursing upon this Subject, I purpose to speak I. Upon the Kinds and
Nature of divine Truth. And II. To answer some Objections against it, and then
proceed to some Improvement And


1st. It may be observed, that Truth in its general Nature, consists in
Agreement, and is Threefold, viz. Physical, Logical, and Moral. Physical
Truth, consists in the Agreement, which subsists between the Appearence of a
Thing, and the Thing itself. This kind of Truth is by some termed essential,
and by others metaphysical.

2dly. Logical Truth is when we conceive of a Thing in our Minds, as it really
is in it self. As the Former is opposed to Paint, and all false Appearences, so
this is opposed to Error and Mistake in Judgment.

3dly. Moral Truth consists in speaking as we think, this is opposed to lying,
the Nature of which consists in going against the Mind, according to the old
and true Saying, mentire est contra mentem ire.

Now each of these Kinds of Truth, that I have mentioned belongs to God truly
and transcendently: For

1st. He has what appertains to true Godhead by his Essence without any
Disguise. John xvii. 3. This is eternal Life, to know thee the only tru^ God,
and JESUS CHRIST whom thou have sent. Jehovah has a real Subsistence, and
gives Being to all Creatures; whereas the false Gods of the Heathen, have
nothing divine, they only carry a deceitful Appearance, or obtain it in the
Minds of their Worshippers. They are only dumb Idols which have Eyes and see
not, Ears and hear not, neither speak they through their Threats! They are
nothing but Vanity and a Lie, They that make them are like to them, and so is
every one that trusts in them Psalm. cxv. 5, 8. And

2dly. The Mind of God exactly agrees with the Nature of Things, because he
beholds all Things in himself. Neither is there any Creature that is not
manifest in his Sight, but all Things are naked and open unto the Eye of him,
with whom we have to do. Heb. iv. 13.

3dly. The Declarations of God's Word exactly agree with the Conceptions of his
Mind, and Resolutions of his Will, in all the Parts thereof whether Historical,
Prophetical, Promisory, Minatory, Perceptive. Hence the Word of God is said to
be pure, Ps. cxix. 140. i. e. Its free from all Mixture of Deceit and Falsehood.
And hence it is likewise said to be tried, 2 Samuel xxii. 31. As for God his Way
is perfect the Word of the Lord is tried, he is a Buckler to all that trust in
him. Psalm xii. 6. The Words of the Lord are pure Words, as Silver tried in a
Furnace of Earth, purified seven-times. And

4thly. All the Works of God exactly agree with his Purpose and Declaration,
Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4. He is a Rock his Work is perfect for all his Ways are Judgment,
a God of Truth and without Iniquity just and right is he. And hence the
Almighty is said to be faithful, 1st. In the Works of Creation, 1 Pet. iv. 19.
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the Will of God commit the keeping
of their Souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 2dly. In the
Work of Redemption, Heb. ii. 17. Wherefore in all Things it behoved him to be
made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high
Priest. 3dly. The Almighty is faithful in the Works of Grace, and hence Grace
and Truth are said to come by JESUS CHRIST, John i. 17. 4thly. He is likewise
faithful in the Works of Providence, more especially in the Preservation of his
Church, Rev. xix. 11. And I saw Heaven opened, and behold a white Horse, and he
that sat on him was called faithful and true, and in Righteousness he does
judge and make War.

Now the Universal Truth of God, that has been mentioned, entirely excludes,
and is directly opposed to every Error in Judgment, as well as to all Falsehood,
and lying in Speech and to all Hypocrisy and Deceit in Practice. And therefore
Solomon justly observes, Prove. vi. 16, 17, 19. That six Things the Lord Hates,
yea that seven are an Abomination unto him! Among which he names a lying
Tongue, and a false Witness. Tit. i. 2 In hope of eternal Life which God that
cannot lie promised before the World began.

But in order to open the Nature of divine Truth more fully, I think it may be
thus described, viz. That it is that Property of the divine nature whereby the
Almighty constantly and inviolably adheres to his eternal Purpose both in his
Word and Works. When God is in Scripture called the true God, or the only true
God; these Phrases do not signify any distinct Perfection of the divine Nature,
but the whole Godhead, in Opposition to all that are called God's, but are not
so by nature. But when he is called the God of Truth, as in our Text, it
intends a particular Attribute or Perfection of Jehovah, even such as has but
now been described. Which Description that it may be the better understood, let
the following particulars be considered viz.

1st. That God has from everlasting purposed or determined to permit or effect
whatsoever comes to pass in Time. i. e. He has before all Time decred, to
permit the Evil that is done in Time, without which it could not come to pass,
except we deny the Omnipotence of God, which is blasphemous. And he has
likewise purposed to effect the Good, which cannot be brought to pass without
his Assistance and Influence. And hence we are told Acts xv. 18. That known
unto God are all his Works from the Beginning of the World. This Foreknowledge
necessarily supposes his Purpose, for what is not certainly determined, cannot
be certainly foreknown. But the Purpose of God, which is no other than an
imanent or eternal Act of his Will, respecting his Works of Efficiency, is more
expressly spoken of, Ephesians, i. 11. In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance
being Predestined according to the Purpose of him who works all Things after
the Council of his own Will. And as the Purpose of God is eternal, in respect
of its Rise and Orignal, so it is absolute and invariable in its Nature. The
Conditions of Things in the decree, are only therein considered as Means
determined to compass the End designed, Prove. xix. 21. There are many Devices
in Man's Heart, nevertheless the Council of the Lord that shall stand. Job
xxiii. 13. But he is in one Mind, and who can turn him, and what his Soul
desires even that he does.

2dly. God has been pleased to reveal some Part of his eternal Purpose in his
Word. I say some Part, because there are secret Things which are known only to
God. The Almighty has revealed as much of his Purpose in his Word, as his
Wisdom judged necessary for us to know.

Now the Revelation we have of God's Purpose in his Word, appears especially in
these Things following, viz.

1st. In the Hystorical Part of it, that contains a true and just Relation of
Matters of Fact, which have been brought to pass exactly agreeable to the
eternal Plan of the divine Purpose. And

2dly. In Prophesies of Things to come, many such are contained in Scripture,
both of a public and personal Nature. And how gloriously does the Truth of God
shine forth in the punctual accomplishment of many of them? Here I shall only
mention a few, in Relation to our Lord CHRIST. Jacob prophesied of the Time of
his Birth, viz. That it should be after the Scepter was departed from Judah.
Genesis xliv. 10. And thus it happened, for Herod who swayed the Scepter at that
Time, was of an Idumean Extraction. The Prophet Micah. foretold, that the Place
of his Birth should be Bethlehem. Mica v. 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephrata, out of
thee shall come forth, -- that is to be the Ruler in Israel, whose Goings forth
have been from of old, from Everlasting. And thus it came to pass. Mat. ii. 1.
Now when JESUS was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the Days of Herod the King.
Isaiah prophesied that his Parent should be a Virgin, Isa. vii. 14. Behold a
Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Imanuel. And this
the Event answered. ( Mat. i.) Zachariah prophesied of the humble Circumstances
of his Life, in the ixth Chapt. of his Book, and the 9th Verse. Rejoice greatly
O Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto
thee, He is is just and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and
upon a Colt the Foal of an Ass! And do not the Evangelists assure us, that this
was fulfilled to a Tittle? Isaiah graphically delineates his miraculous Works,
Isa. xxxv. 56. Then the Eyes of the blind shall be opened and the Ears of the
Deaf shall be unstopped, then shall the lame Man leap as a Heart, and the Tongue
shall sing. And these Things we are assured did come to pass by all that
Evidence of credible and harmonious Testimony, which the Nature of such past
Facts can admit of, and it is unreasonable surely to desire more! Daniel
foretells his Death in the ixth Chap. of his Book, and 26th Verse. The Messiah
shall be cut off, but not for himself. And the Psalmist David foretells the
Manner of it so particularly, as if he had stood at the Cross and beheld it.
Ps. xxii 16, -- 19. The Assembly of the Wicked have enclosed me, they pierced
my Hands and my Feet. I may tell all my Bones, they look and stare upon me,
they part my Garments among them, and cast Lots upon my Vesture. And is not the
Burial of our Lord in the Tomb of a rich Man spoken of by Isaiah? Isa. liii. 9.
And he made his Grave with the Wicked, and with the Rich in his Death. Which
was accordingly fulfilled. Mat. xvii. 59, 60. And does not the Psalmist
prophecy of his Resurrection, of which Jonah was a Type? Ps. lxviii. 18. Thou
have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity Captive, thou have received
Gifts for Men. Of the accomplishment of which, the Evangelist Luke informs us,
( Luke. xxiv. 51.) But I proceed

3dly. The Almighty reveals his eternal Purposes in his Word, by Precepts; by
these God shows to Man his Duty and the Way to obtain the divine Favor, in
which his Happiness consists; and this the Almighty purposed to do from
Eternity. And hence it is called the Council of God. Acts xx. 27.

4thly. The Almighty likewise reveals his Purpose in his Word by Threatenings
against his Enemies. These are as fiery Barriers about his Law, to preserve it
from Contempt and Insult! As his unspotted Holiness is delineated in the
Precepts of his Law, so his dreadful Justice is displayed in the Penalties
annexed to the Breach thereof, which render Jehovah most justly an Object of
Fear, as the Former of Love. Now the Threatenings of God's Word, are no other
than a Revelation of those Judgments, which God had determined from everlasting
to inflict, upon finally impenitent Transgressors Isa. xxx. ult. For Tophet is
ordained of old; for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large,
the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood. The Breath of the Lord like a Stream of
Brimstone does kindle it. And

5thly. God reveals his eternal Purpose in his Word, by Promises of Spiritual
and Temporal good Things to his People; which he sincerely makes, and
punctually performs; and on this Account, he is more especially called, the
faithful God, who keeps Covenant and Mercy with those that love him and keep
his Commandments, to a Thousand Generations. Deuteronomy. vii. 9. As the Threatenings
of God excite Fear, so his Promises encourage Trust and Hope. Though God is able
to make us happy, yet we have no Ground to expect his Goodness except it be
engaged to us by Promise: For the Almighty is under no natural Obligation, to
magnify his Mercy upon us. But when he is pleased to engage his Truth in our
Favor by promise, it renders the Blessings promised most certain; and so
ministers strong Consolation to all that fear God, so that they may reasonably
rejoice in Hope of eternal Life, whatever Difficulties, and threatening
Appearances seem to obstruct their attainment of it. Now the Promises of God
either respect Mankind in general, or the Church in particular, or truly pious
Persons in special. Some Benefits promised to Mankind in general are these,
viz. That the World shall be preserved to the second coming of our Lord, from
another Deluge by Water, the Sign of which is God's Bow in the Clouds. And
likewise that the stated and regular Course of Nature, in respect of Seed Time,
and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, Day and Night shall not cease. (
Genesis ix. 11.) The Promises made to the Church, respect its Protection,
Increase, and the divine Presence, in their Religious Assemblies. Thus the
Almighty has said, that no Weapon formed against Zion shall prosper, and that
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. He has also promised, that to
Shiloh or the Mesias should be the gathering of the People. i. e. the Gentiles.
Genesis xlix. 10. And that he would multiply them and they should not be small,
Jer. xxx. 19. And Jehovah has promised, that in all Places where he records his
Name, he will come to his People and bless them, Ex. xx. 24. The Almighty has
also made gracious Promises, suited to all the various Exigencies of his People
in particular, e. g. He has promised to guide them with his Eye and by his
Council, to support them by his Power and to refresh them by his Love, Ps.
xxxii. 8. Is. xli. 10. Fear thou not for I am with thee, be not dismayed for I
am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold
thee by the right Hand of my Righteousness. Is. lvii. 19. I create the Fruit of
the Lips, Peace, Peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near says,
the Lord and I will heal him. Moreover God has promised, that those who wait
upon him shall renew their Strength, Ps. lxxxiv. 7. Isa. xl. 31. and finally,
obtain eternal Life. John x. 28. I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall
never perish. Now every one of these Promises has been fulfilled, the World has
been freed from a second Deluge, the successive Vicisitudes of the Year are
continued, the Church preserved and propagated, and particular Believers
directed, supported and relieved. This leads me to* A

3d. Particular, which is this, viz. God's adhering to his Purpose, revealed in
his Word by his Works. I have already observed, that God has determined all
Things from Eternity, and that he has revealed this Purpose or Determination
in his Word, various Ways: I am now to show that God performs by his Works what
he has declared in his Word: As there is a Truth which consists in a
Conformity between the Heart and Tongue, which is called Sincerity: so their is
a Truth which consists in an Agreement between Words and Deeds, which is called
Fidelity or Faithfulness. The Almighty not only Purposes to do what he
declares, but he adheres to and pursues his Declaration with inviolable
Constancy. He does all Things that he has spoken, and exactly as he has
spoken: He does not in the least come short of his Word in his Works. Numb.
xxiii. 19. God is not a Man that he should lie, or the Son of Man that he
should repent: Has he said, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall
he not make it Good? How express and Noble is the Testimony of Moses upon this
Head? 1 King viii. 56. Blessed be the Lord that he has given rest unto his
People Israel, according to all that he has promised, there has not failed
one Word of all his good Promise which he promised by the Hand of Moses his
Servant. I have already shown how exactly the divine Prophesies and Promises
have been fulfilled: And I may here add, that Jehovah has often manifested and
magnified his Truth in the Execution of his Threatenings. And hence he is said
to be known, i. e. In the Glory of his Truth and Justice, by the Judgments
which he executes. All the Instances of divine Judgment upon the old World,
Sodom, Gomorha, Zeboim, and Adma, and upon the Children of Israel which we have
upon Record in Scripture, are so many Confirmations of the Truth of God. I
proceed to the

2d. Proposed, which was to answer some Objections against the Truth of God. And

1st. It is objected that CHRIST is said to die for the whole World. (Joh. i.
29.) How does this consist with the Truth of God, seeing that elsewhere, ( viz.
Romans ix. 22.) It is said that some are Vessels of Wrath.

Answ. The Word World, is taken either in a limited Sense, for the World of the
Elect. Thus CHRIST is said to take away the Sin of the World, John i. 29. Or in
a more large Sense, for both Elect and Reprobates. And thus 2dly. it may be
observed, that CHRIST dyed sufficiently for all, but not intentionally and
effectually, i. e. The Value of Christ's Blood was enough for all, but its
Virtue was only designed for, and is only applied to those that believe. Hence
God is said to be the Savior of all Men, especially of those that believe. A

2d. Object. is, that though God threatened our first Parents that in the Day they
eat of the forbidden Fruit they should surely dye; yet this threatening was not
executed, for Adam lived after this nine Hundred and thirty Years.

Answ. They did die the same Day in several Respects, viz. 1st. Legally, they
were dead in Law, they were condemned by the Law they broke, to a temporal and
eternal Death: And this in a forensick Sense is often called Death (See Romans
viii. 10.) The Body is dead because of Sin, i. e. It is exposed to Death, as a
Consequence of Sin, by Reason of the Sentence of the Law against Transgressor
not that it is actually dead. And 2dly our first Parent died Spiritually the
same Day: They immediately lost the divine Image, and that Blessed Consequence
of it, Communion with God. And hence they are said to come short of his Glory,
Romans iii. 23. And they may be said to die naturally the same Day, in some Sense
viz. Not only because they were under a Necessity of enduring, in after Times,
the Separation of the Soul from the Body, by Virtue of the Sentence of the Law
before mentioned, but also because, in all probability, the original crasis and
just temperature of Humors in their Bodies being broke, there was a direct
tendency in this judicial Disorder of their very Frame, to a Dissolution. A

3d. Object. is, That though Niniveh was threatened to be destroyed in forty Days;
yet the Threatening was not executed till forty Years after.

Answ. Possibly forty prophetical Days, which are Years, were intended, though
Jonah understood it not, and if so the Prophesy was exactly fulfilled: But in
my Opinion the following Answer is more satisfactory, viz. That there was a
Condition implied in, and annexed to the Threatening which was intended to be
published to the Ninivites; namely, that they should be destroyed in forty
Days, if they did not repent. It appears by the Ninivites humbling themselves
that they understood the Prophet in this Sense. For if the Threatening had been
absolute, the Use of Means would have been to no purpose, either by the People
or the Prophet: But we see that both did use Means, he preached, and they
humbled themselves, and therefore there was certainly a Condition annexed to
the Threatening: And thus the Objection evanishes.

Object. 4. The Pelagians, Papists, Socinians, Arminians, Remonstrants and
Lutherans say, that the Doctrine of the Calvinists, respecting the Decrees,
argues God to be Untrue and Insincere; because while they Teach, that God wills
the Salvation of all, that yet notwithstanding, he in in the mean Time wills
and decrees the Damnation of some: And that though God offers the Redeemer to
every one, and invites them by many Arguments to accept him; yet that he in the
mean Time does not will that they should believe, and repent, and be saved.

Answ. The Calvinist's on the Contrary do solemnly Protest in the Presence of
God, that they believe God to be True in every Thing, and that his Words do
answer exactly to, or agree with both the Things spoken of, and his own Mind,
and therefore that God always wills what he says he wills; but after that
Manner that he wills, i. e. If he declares that he wills an Event, then that
Event most certainly comes to Pass. If he declares that he wills that this or
that should be our Duty, i. e. That we should do or omit this or that, then it
certainly is our Duty, whether it be performed or not: To this Purpose they
distinguish the Will of God into Legislative and Decretive; the former they say
is that whereby he determines and wills only concerning Right and Rule, viz.
What we ought to do or omit; but determines nothing concerning the Event: The
latter is that whereby God wills and determines concerning the Event which
shall be; but does not at all concern Right and Rule respecting what should be.
Upon this Account they assert, that God wills many Things by his Legislative
Will which do not come to pass, e. g. Thus he willed that Pharaoh according to
Right, should let the People of Israel go, i. e. He willed that to be Pharoh's
Duty; but this he did not will decretively or according to Fact, or in Respect
of the Event; for if so the Almighty's Purpose was frustrate in that Pharaoh
did not let them go at the first Demand; but this is impossible, the Council of
God shall stand. Now from what has been said the following Answer may be given
to the Objection. viz. 1st. That God does not will the Death of a Sinner by a
legislative Will, in as much as he really wills that there should be a
Connection between the Conversion of the Sinner and his Salvation, and
therefore he sincerely invites every one to Conversion: And to such as are
converted he promises Life; tho he does not in the mean Time will decretively
to give to all Grace and Salvation. 2dly. The Calvinists acknowledge that God
wills all to be saved in the Sense of Austin; who by the Word All, understood
some of all Sorts, not every Individual: As in the Ark God is said to save all
the living Creatures; but every Bird and Beast was not saved, for many perished
in the Waters: But All, that is, some of every Kind, were saved; so God will
have all to be saved, that is some of all Nations. The Almighty wills Faith and
Repentance to be the Duty of All and Singular, but he does not will decretively
the Salvation of All and Singular, for then they would be saved: But the
Scriptures assure us, that but a few are saved. Salvation is offered according
to the Calvinistical System, only to those that believe and repent, and to them
it is given; and where then is the Insincerity? If they reply and say, that
such are invited to come to CHRIST, according to our Doctrine, who are decreed
to Destruction?

Answ. What then? seeing the Decree does not force or influence the Will. Are
not such invited to come to CHRIST according to their Scheme, whom God
foreknows shall Perish? Does not certain Foreknowledge fix the Event as much
as the Decree? Let them remove this Difficulty which crosses their own Scheme,
and they will answer their own Objection.

Object. 5. Some Promises made to the People of God, respecting temporal and
spiritual Blessings, are not performed; namely, such as respect Growth in
Grace, Comfort, Victory over Temptation, etc.

Answ. The Lord may sometimes delay the Performance of a Promise, but he will
not deny. God's Promise may lie a long Time, as Seed under Ground, but at last
it will spring up. The Vision is for an appointed Time, though it taries, wait
for it, it will come it will nottary i. e. beyond God's appointed Time. God
promised to deliver Israel from the Egyptian Bondage, but this Promise was Four
Hundred Years in Travail, before it brought forth the determined Event. God
promised to Abraham a numerous Offspring, but Twenty Years elapsed before he
had a Son, and then was commanded to slay him. How dark and dreadful was this
Providence! But notwithstanding of the Delays and contrary Appearances, the
Promise was accomplished in its appointed Season!

2dly. God may change his Promise, but he will not break it: He may turn a
Temporal Promise into a Spiritual. Ps. lxxxv. 12. The Lord shall give that
which is good. Though this be not fulfilled in a Temporal, yet if it be in a
Spiritual Sense, the Promise is made good, yea the Almighty may be said to be
herein better than his Word, when he gives that which is greater in Worth, though
not the same in Kind, which was expected.

3dly. There are no Promises of God, but what are made good in Kind in some
Instances. And this is a manifest Vindication of the divine Truth therein
engaged, seeing the Benefits promised are conferred on some. And

4thly. God never promises any Benefits in such a Manner as to infringe upon
the Rights of his Sovereignty. No, all Blessings are promised with this
Reserve, viz. That if God thinks it necessary for his Glory and their Good, he
will compass their Salvation another Way. The Almighty by spiritual Desertions
and Temptations, does try the Faith and Patience of his People, as well as
humble them, and make them prize CHRIST and his Comforts the more afterward.
And thus these Things, yea and their very Blunders are (contrary to their
natural Tendency) over ruled for their Good; which is more than an equivalent
for the Loss of divine Joy and Comfort for a Time. And therefore there is
hereby no Occasion given to reflect upon the Truth and Faithfulness of God. But

5thly. All the Promises of God shall be accomplished in the next World to the
greatest Advantage. The Joys of that glorious Paradise, will sufficiently
compensate our present momentary and medicinal Sorrows and Miseries. But it is
Time to proceed to the Improvement of this Subject. And

1st. We may learn from what has been said, the dangerous and dreadful Case of
all impenitent Sinners in general, and more particularly of such, who are
guilty (habitually) of Lying, Falsehood, Equivocation, and Deceit of any Kind.
As they hereby directly oppose the Nature and Law of the God of Truth, as well
as contradict the Genius of his People, who are Children that will not lie; so
they verge to the Temper of the Devil, the sworn Enemy of God, who was a Liar
and a Murderer from the Beginning, and abode not in the Truth, who is a Liar
and the Father of it. All such do exclude themselves from Communion with God,
in this Life, and the Enjoyment of him in the next; and devote themselves to a
dreadful and interminable Destruction, Rev. ii. 1, 27. And there shall in no
wise enter into it, any Thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works
Abomination, or makes a Lie. Ps. v. 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak
leasing, the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful Man. God is a God of
Truth, and therefore will execute his Threatenings upon the whole Tribe of
Impenitents. The Threatenings are a flying Roll against Transgressors, in which
is written nothing but Mourning, Lamentation and Woe. Jehovah has said, That
he will wound the hairy Scalp, of every one that goes on still in his
Trespasses, Ps. lxviii. 21. That he will judge Adulterers: That he beholds
Mischief and Spite, to requite it with his Hand, Heb. xiii. 3. Ps. x. 14. That
he will rain upon the Wicked Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible
Tempest, and that this shall be the Portion of their Cup, Ps. xi. 6. And he
will surely be as good as his Word. The Heavens and Earth may pass away, but
not a Word that God has spoken, shall pass without its accomplishment. Let not
therefore unconverted Sinners presume or harden themselves in their Impieties,
because Judgment is not speedily executed, for Delays are no Payment. Let them
not vainly conclude, that the Bitterness of Death is past, because their Houses
are safe from Fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them. Notwithstanding of all
this, they may assure themselves that the Wicked are reserved for the Day of
Destruction, they shall be brought forth to the Day of Wrath, Job xxi. 9.30.
Let any who expect Impunity in a Course of Rebellion against the great God,
seriously and speedily consider that dreadful Threatening. Deuteronomy. xxix. 19.20.
And it comes to pass, when he hears the Words of this Curse, that he bless
himself in his Heart, saying, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the
Imagination of mine Heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst. The Lord will not
spare him, but then the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against
that Man, and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall ly upon him
and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven. I shall only mention
one other Scripture, under this Use, and it is Ps. l. 20, 21, 22. Thou sit
and speak against thy Brother, thou slanderest thine own Mother's Son, these
Things have thou done, and I kept Silence, thou thought that I was
altogether such an one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine Eyes. Now consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you
in Pieces, when there shall be none to deliver. But

2dly. The Truth of God speaks much Comfort to his People under all their
Troubles. What though Jehovah hides his Face, yet let not Believers despond: For
he will surely return with everlasting Loving Kindness. His Faithfulness cannot
fail, he will ever be mindful of his Covenant. Ps. cxi. 5. The gracious God
has made many precious Promises of important Benefits, suited to all the
various Difficulties which his People labor under in this Life, some of which
have been already mentioned in this Sermon, every of which his Truth stands
engaged to secure. 1 These v. 24. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will
do it. Heb. vi. 18. That by two immutable Things, in which it was impossible
for God to lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to
lay hold on the Hope set before us, 1 Samuel xvi. 25. And also the Strength of
Israel will not lie or repent, for he is not a Man that he should repent. And
hence the Gifts of God are said to be without Repentance, and his Mercies are
called, the sure mercies of David. (Romans xi. 29. Acts xiii. 24. 2 Samuel xxiii.
5.) Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all Things, and sure. As if he had said, Though I fail much
in that Purity God requires, yet this is my Comfort, that God has made an
everlasting Covenant with me. Let us therefore be exhorted to the following
Duties, namely,

1st. Let us trust in God, and expect from him the Fulfillment of all his
Promises to the Church in general, and to ourselves in particular, (if we be
his) what though Clouds and Darkness cover her Horizon, yet the faithful God has
promised to be the Glory and Defense of Zion, and to make her a Praise in the
Earth. And what though ourselves are oppressed with, and sometimes led captive by
our Corruptions God has promised, to subdue our Iniquities, Mic. vii. 19. And
surely the Truth of God in his Promises is a sufficient Foundation for our
Faith. 2 Timothy ii. 13. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot
deny himself. He is abundant in Truth, Ex. xxxiv. 6. That is, he is so far from
coming short of his Word, that he will be better than his Word. We are not,
says Chrysostom, to belive our Senses so much as we are to believe the
Promises, for they may fail us, but the Promises cannot, being built upon the
Truth of God. And surely he that believes not, has made God a Liar: i e. He
implicitly charges lying upon the God of Truth. 1 John v. 10.

2dly. Let us commit ourselves to him in well doing, as unto a faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. iv. 19. Or as our Text expresses it, Let us commit our Spirit
into his Hand, for he has redeemed us. What though we be encompassed with
Distresses, let us trust, that he who has delivered, and does deliver, that he
will deliver us, 2 Cor. i. 10. That he who has begun a good Work in us, will
perform it, until the Day of JESUS CHRIST, Phil. i. 6. Let us avoiding all
distressing Anxiety about future Events, calmly and firmly rest upon the
Promises of a faithful God. And finally let us imitate the God of Truth, in
Speech and Practice, hereby we shall be conformed to the God of Truth, and
evidence our being living Members of the Church militant, which is the Pillar
and Ground of Truth. 1. Tim. iii. 15. As well as the certainty of our being at
last admitted into the Church Triumphant. (Psa. xv.) It is for a Lamentation
that many who profess Christianity, fall short of Turks and Indians, in respect
of Truth and Fidelity, and so give Ground for this doleful Distick. -- Multis
annis jam peractis, nulla fides est in pactis.
Mel in ore, verba lactis, fell in Cord, fraus in factis.
Which may be thus Englished.

For many Years, no Faith in Covenants I Have found;
Though Words be sweet, yet Hearts, yea Deeds with Gall and Fraud abound.
And surely there is nothing more dishonorable to God, and detrimental to the
Interests of Religion, than such Practices; therefore let every one that names
the Name of God depart from them.

SERMON XX.
DEUTERONOMY vi. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord,


THIS Book of Deuteronomy contains a Repetition of much of the History and Laws
which were mentioned in the three preceding Books, and therefore the Greek
Interpreters, have justly given it the Name Deuteronomy; which signifies the
second Law, or the second Edition of the Law. This Repetition Moses delivered a
little before his Death, not only by Writing, that it might be the better
preserved as a continual Memorial and Director in all Time coming, but also by
Word of Mouth, that it might have the greater Influence upon the People's
Affections for the Present. The Men of that Generation, to whom the Law was
first given, were all Dead, and a new Generation being sprung up in their
Place, it was necessary that it should be repeated to them by Moses, and
especially a little before his Departure from them, that it might make the
deeper Impression on them, and as they were just going to take Possession of
the promised Canaan, it was but necessary they should be told upon what Terms
they might expect to hold and enjoy that Land. To this End Moses tells them
what they were to believe and do, and among other Things of principal
Importance he recommends to their Attention, Assent and Consideration, in the
Words of our Text, that fundamental Article of Religion, viz. The divine Unity.
Here O Israel the Lord our God is one Lord. Here observe 1st. That the Truth
recommended, is the Unity of God. That Jehovah who is our God in Covenant, is
but one, one in his Essence, or Being, and the only Object of Religious
Worship, one in Opposition to many God's. 1 Cor. viii. 4, 5, 6, We know that an
Idol is nothing in the World, and there is none other God but one: For though
there be that are called God's, whether in Heaven or in Earth, as there be Gods
many, and Lords many, but to us there is but one God. It is certainly of the
last Importance to be rightly fixed, as to the Object of Worship; for if this
be not such as can make us Happy, our Faith and Practice want a proper
Foundation, and are therefore Vain. Although the Gentiles, by the Light of
Nature, have been led to acknowledge, that the proper Object of Worship must be
a God; yet how strangely have they been mistaken, confused and divided in their
Choice of him, by their vain Imaginations? They multiplied Deities, and sought
to God's that cannot save, they ascribed Deity to every Thing that did them
Good, viz. To the Sun, Moon, Stars, Rivers, Fountains, Elements, Brutes,
Vegetables. They had their City Gods their household Gods, garden Gods, Gods for
particular Callings, Diseases, Immergents, etc. of which Varro reckons three
Hundred, and Hesiod no less then thirty Thousand. Prudentius speaks truly of
the Practice of the Gentile World in this Matter, in the following Stanza.

Quick quid Humus, Pelagus, ceaelum mirabile Signant:
Id dixere Deos, Colles, Freta, Flumina, Flammas.
Which may be thus Englished, Whatee'r was wonderful the Heaven or Earth
contained.
That Gods they called, though Hills, or Floods, or Flames.


And Juvenal speaks much to the same Purpose in the following Lines, viz.

Porrum et cepe nefas violare et frangere morsu:
O sanctas gentes, quibus hec nascuntur in hortis numina! i. e.
The Onion-God's that in their Gardens grew;
They judged Profane to eat, and paid a Worship too.
O happy Nations that professed a Godhead purchased at so cheap a Cost. Now in
Opposition to the Politheism of the Gentiles, or to that Multiplicity of God's,
which they held. Moses in our Text recommends the Belief of the divine Unity,
or of the Oneness of God. This Verse the Jewish Church look upon to be one of
the choicest Portions of Scripture, they write it in their Philactery's, and
think themselves, not only obliged to say it at least twice a Day, but think
themselves very Happy in being so obliged, having this Saying among them,
Blessed are we who every Morning and Evening say, hear O Israel the Lord our
God is one Lord. This they have learned of an Ancient Tradition; and indeed
there is nothing in the Law which they think worthy of equal Reverence with
these Words, concerning them they triumph and glory in their Book of Prayers,
in the Manner before related, Blessed are we, etc. But rather Blessed are those
who duly consider, rightly improve, and firmly believe the Truth therein
recommended. And this is the

2d. Particular our Text contains. Here Moses not only summonses their
Attention, but demands their Assent to this Foundation Truth Hear, i. e. not
only with the Ears of your Body, but of your Mind: As if he had said, attend
to, consider, acknowledge, believe, retain and improve the Doctrine of God's
Unity as the Ground and Foundation of all Religion, But

3dly We have an Account of the Persons to whom the aforesaid Truth and Duty
are recommended, namely Israel, not Israelites in the Plural Number, but Israel
in the Singular, to signify that not only the Israelites in Common, but every
individual Israelite in Particular, should be careful to embrace and retain the
aforesaid Truth. The Word does not only intend the Carnal Israel, which Moses
brought out of Egypt into the Wilderness, and which Joshua introduced into
Canaan, which is its most usual Acceptance in Scripture, but that spiritual
Israel also, of which Paul speaks, (Romans xi. 21, 29.) The word Israel respects
the Church of both Testaments, to whom the Doctrine of the Unity of God is
recommended as a fundamental Article. It may be likewise observed that the
Manner of Moses's Recommendation is very solemn, as appears by the Note of
Obsecration he uses. O Israel! much Concern for divine Truth, and Zeal, and
Tenderness for the Peoples Welfare, is herein intimated.

In discoursing upon this divine Perfection, viz. The Unity or Oneness of God,
I would I. Endeavor to prove the Truth of it. II. Explain its Nature. III.
Improve it. And


1st. I am to prove the Truth of the divine Oneness. And here I may observe,
that the Scriptures assert this different Ways. 1st. By saying expressly that
God is One. Zec. xiv. 9. In that Day shall there be one Lord, and his Name One.
Psa. lxxxiii. 18. That Man may know that thou whose Name alone is Jehovah, art
the most High over all the Earth. Psa. lxxxvi. 10. For thou art great and do
wondrous Things, thou art Good alone. And 2dly By asserting that there is no
God besides him. Deuteronomy. iv. 35. Unto thee it was showed that thou might know
that the Lord he is God, and there is none else besides him, Isa. iv. 2. I am
the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my
Praise to graven Images. Isa. xliv. 8. Is there a God besides me? There is no
God, I know not any. Isa. xlv. 5. I am the Lord and there is none else, there
is no God besides me. And the 21st Verse, There is no God else besides me, a
just God and a Savior, there is none besides me.

Many of the Ancient Fathers have written largely in Confirmation of this
Important Truth against the Gentile Idolatries, particularly, Ignatius, Justin,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Nazianzen, Basil, Austin, Damascen yea some of the wiseest
of the Gentile Sages, have given their suffrage to the Doctrine of the divine
Unity. Socrates for ascerting this lost his Life by the Fury of the Athenians!
And Plato in one of his Letters to Dionysius, says thus, Hinc inquit disces,
scribam ego serio necne cum serio, ordior Epistolam, ab uno Deo, cum secus a
pluribus. i. e. By this (says he) You may know whether I write seriously or
not, when I write seriously. I begin my Epistle from one God; when otherwise,
from many. Likewise Sophocles has these Words, Unus revera Deus est, qui
oelum, fabrificavit et terram -- at nos mortales versutia decepti, statuimus
deorum imagines -- et his sacrificia, et vanos conventus tribuendo, hoc modo
nos pios esse reputamus. i. e. Truly there is one God who has made Heaven and
Earth; but we poor Mortals being deceived by the Craft of some, appoint Images
of the Gods, and by offering Sacrifices and vain Conventions to those, we
reckon ourselves pious. Both Lactantius and Cicero acknowledged that their Gods
were but Men, who formerly lived in in the World: They give an Account of their
Birth and Parentage, as well as of the Places where they lived, and Time when
they died; and inform us, how some of them obtained the Honor they supposed
they were advanced to after Death, viz. As the Reward of Virtue, or in
Commemoration of the Good, that they had done to the World in their Life,
either by the Invention of profitable Arts, Successes in Wars, or some other
kind of Service to their Country. It is true, among the Romans, some had the
Honor of an Apotheosis or being reckoned among the Number of the Gods, at the
Request of their surviving Friends. And this was done after the Time of Julius
Caesar by the Decree of the Senate, who at the same Time likewise appointed the
Rites of Worship that should be paid to them. And indeed some of the Emperors
of Rome were carried to that pi^ch of Vanity and Arogance, that they obliged
the Senate to deify them while they were alive. Aristotle discovers his Belief
of one supreme Deity, by several Passages in diverse Parts of his Works, to the
following Effect.

He asserts, That there is a God, who is the first Cause or Beginning of all
Things, and that he was from Eternity, or in the Beginning, and that Time took
its Rise from him, and that he is the Fountain of Life, and the best of Beings.
That he is Self-sufficient, the chief Good, and stands in no need of, or can
receive any Advantage from any, and that by him all Things consist.

Several of the Gentile Philosophers discover their Belief of the divine Unity,
by asserting, That there was one supreme God, superior to all others, whom they
call the Father of the God's and of Men. Him they call the Beginning, the End,
and Author of all Things, who was before, and is above all Things. Morneus,
brings Quotations of this Kind, from the Writings of Plotinus, Proclus,
Phorphery, Plutarch and others; from all which it appears that the wiser Sort
among the Pagans, acknowledged the Unity of the supreme Being. And therefore
that what they spoke or did in Opposition hereto, was only from a sordid
compliance with the prevailing Custom of their respective Countries, to prevent
Aspersions on their Characters, or Danger to their Persons. It is probable that
they paid only an inferior Kind of religious Worship to their Gods, like to
what the Papists give to their Saints. It is true, herein they were Idolaters;
but this they were induced to, in order to escape popular Odium. I am not here
laboring to extenuate the Pagan Idolatrys; but only to prove that a Number of
the more Judicious of them, were led by the Light of natural Reason to
acknowledge the Unity of God.

Now that natural Reason demonstrates this fundamental Article of Religion,
namely, the divine Unity, will more fully appear, by the following
Considerations, viz.

1st. Reason teaches us, that in the Subordination of Things, which we behold
in the World, we must proceed to some first Cause, which is of it self, and
absolutely the first, before which Nothing could exist, and with which Nothing
could exist of the same Nature: For then it would not be first. All Number
begins in a Unity, and to say there are two first Beings, is a Contradiction in
the very Nature of Things. The Multitude of second Beings proves that that
there is a first Being, otherwise they could not exist: For they cannot give
Being to themselves: Where there is no first, there is no Order, and where
there is no Order, there is no Goodness, except Confusion be so called, which
is absurd; and where there is no Goodness, there is nothing: For Being and
Goodness are convertible Terms. Now that Being which is first is chief in
respect of Dignity, and therefore he only is God, for Equality and Priority,
are inconsistent to the same Subject. The very Idea of a God, implies a
Supremacy in all possible Excellency.

That there is but one Being, who is without Beginning, and gave Being to all
others, appears thus. If there were more Gods, they must derive their Being
from him, and then they are a Part of his Creation, and consequently not Gods:
For God and the Creature are infinitely opposed to each other. Well then seeing
there is but one Self-existing independent Being, there can be but one God.

2dly. Reason proclaims that God is infinite in all Perfections and that
because he is not limited by a prior Cause, he must therefore posses all Being
and Goodness, either formally or eminently. Now the very Idea of God's Infinity
not only speaks his own Perfection to be boundless, but likewise that he bounds
and limits the Perfections of all others. And thus being limited they cannot
be infinite and so the Possessors thereof cannot be God.

And as infinite Perfection implies in it all Perfection, so it cannot be
divided among many, for then the Parts would be less than the whole, and so not
infinite: Upon this Supposition there would be no God at all, because infinite
Excellency is necessarily implied in the Idea of a God.

There is but one infinite Being and therefore but one God. Jer. xxiii. 24. Do
not I fill Heaven and Earth says the Lord. If there be one infinite Being
filling all Places at once, how can there be any Room for another Infinite to
subsist?

3dly. Reason demonstrates, that the first Being is. Almighty in Power, and
therefore there is no other God, that can hinder or withstand his Operations.
If they can, then he is not Omnipotent, and so not God? If they cannot then
they are not Omnipotent and so not God? If there were two Omnipotents, then we
may reasonably suppose that there would be a contest between them, that which
one would do, the other Power being equal, would oppose, and so all Things
would be brought into Confusion. But that constant and uniform Order which we
behold in the Government of the World, is a sufficient Confutation of this, and
Proof of the contrary, viz. That there is but one God. If there were more God's
than one, all of them must be said to be able to do all Things, and then the
same individual Power which is exerted by one must be exerted by all, which is
absurd and in the Nature of Things impossible.

4thly. Reason likewise teaches, that if there be more Gods than one, then
either they must be all equal to one another or unequal, if equal then none of
them can be the chief Good, because another is as good as he, and so none of
them can be God; because to be the chief Good is an essential Attribute of God,
which is by this supposed equality destroyed. If they are unequal then the
Inferior cannot be God, because he is imperfect and dependant. Supremacy is
doubtless an unalianable Prerogative of God, he is over all God blessed forever.

5thly. Absolute Sovereignty, and universal Dominion are essential to a God, he
being the Author and Original of all other Beings, has by consequence a Right
to give Laws to all, but is subject to no control himself, because he is
Self-existent and independent. Now if there were more God's than one, then
every one could not have absolute Sovereignty and universal Dominion: They
might command and forbid opposite Things, and so control the Power of each
other. The same Thing might therefore become both Sin and Duty, in respect of
the Subjects, because commanded by one and forbid by the other, and thus there
could be no certain Rule of Right, every Thing would be confused.

6thly. We may farther observe, that all the divine Attributes prove God to be
one. If none be God but he that has all those Attributes which Scripture and
Reason assign to God, then there can be but one. Although there be some faint
Emblem of some of God's Attributes in Creatures, as particularly of his
Holiness and Goodness, etc. yet Creatures have them not absolutely or in the
highest Degree, they may be Good, Holy, but cannot be Holiness and Goodness;
and thus the Attributes which are called communicable, can in their own Nature,
properly and absolutely, belong but to one. And as to God's incommunicable
Attributes, such as his immensity, etc. it is impossible they should be
multiplied, if there be two Immensity's, they must necessarily confine each
other, and so neither be immense. Once more

7thly. Seeing that God is the Creator of all, it is but just and right that he
should be the End of all, of him and through him, and therefore to him are all
Things. As the first Being must needs be the Best, and in this Sense deserves
to be the last End of all, so he has a just Claim of Right to it, having
produced all by his Power, and preserved and supported all by his Goodness; and
therefore the Creature is under a natural and indispensable Obligation to pay
this Debt of Homage to his Creator, Preserver and Benefactor, namely, to love
him with supreme Respect and to make his Glory his last End in all his Actions,
whether Natural, Civil or Religious, all which is utterly inconsistent with a
multiplicity of Gods: For we can give our highest Love but to one, and make his
Honor our highest Mark, which is the Natural Result of the Former.

In the mean Time it ought to be maintained, that these Things following do not
oppose the Unity of God, viz.

1st. A plurality of Names, seeing they signify no more but one God. Nor

2dly. A plurality of Attributes, seeing they do but represent the infinite
Perfection of the divine Nature, which is but one in it self, in a Way
accommodated to our weak and inadequate Conceptions, Nor

3dly. A Trinity of Persons, seeing that among the three Persons there is but
one Essence, and three Modes of subsisting; from which Results not three Gods,
but Three, who are one God. This leads me to the

2d. Proposed, which was to explain the Nature of the divine Oneness. And here
it may be observed that the Almighty is one.

1st. Not by a Unity of Subject and Accident, namely such as belongs to all
created Spirits, Angels and the Souls of Men. Nor

2dly. By a Unity of compounded Parts, in which Sense the Soul and Body
constitute one Man. Nor

3dly. By a Unity of Species, which admits more Individuals of the same Name
and Nature.

But possitively God is one by a singular Unity of Nature, which excludes all
Composition of every Kind: He is so one as to be undivided in himself, and
indivisible into more of the same Name and Nature, and therefore the Unity of
God is not an Arithmetical Unity which is the Beginning of Number, but it is an
essential and transcendent Unity, whereby God is one in his Nature: And hence
Basil says truly, Non unum inquit Deum numero sed Natura confitemur. i. e. We
confess not a God one in Number, but in Nature. And undoubtedly Oneness is
ascribed to God, in Opposition to the false God's of the Pagans, as has been
before observed, as well as in Contradistinction to all titular God's.

King's are called God's, because their Royal Scepter is an Emblem of his Power
and Authority; and Judges are likewise so called, because they are set in God's
Place to do Justice; but they are dying God's. Psa. lxxxii. 5.7. I said ye are
Gods; but ye shall dye like Men. I^ is in this Sense that the Apostle observes,
that there are God's many and Lord's many; but to us says he, there is but
one Lord. 1 Cor. viii. 5.6. But that the Unity of the divine Nature may be the
better apprehended, let it be farther observed.

1st. That the various Perfections of the Deity are not in him, as so many
Ingredients which constitute his Being together; for then each would have but a
partial Perfection, and there would be something in God less than God, which is
absurd. Nor,

2dly. Are the divine Perfections different from each other in him, as the
Parts and Properties of Creatures are, e. g. Wisdom in Men is realy different
from Justice. But the supreme Being has no Parts, and his Perfections are not
so distinguished as the qualities of Creatures; for if so, there would be as
many distinct infinite Beings in God, as there are Attributes. Nor

3dly. Are any of the divine Perfections accidental to him. No, they are all
his very Being. That is said to be accidental, which a Substance can subsist
without. But to suppose the Almighty bereaved of any one of his Attributes, is
to suppose him Imperfect, and so no God. Therefore

4thly. The divine Perfections are represented as many and distinct, because of
the different Objects which the divine Perfection fixes upon, and the different
Effects it produces in Creatures, as well as in condescension to their weak and
finite Minds, which can conceive of the divine Nature, but as it were by Parts.
But notwithstanding, it is evident from both Scripture and Reason, that the
divine Nature is Simple and Uncompounded, and that whatever is in God is God.
We should therefore be careful that while we compare the divine Perfections
with the faint Emblems thereof that be in Creatures, to assist our Conceptions
of them, that we do in the mean Time separate from them every Thing that argues
imperfection.

The Improvement of this Subject remains. And

1st. The Consideration of the Unity of the supreme Being may justly excite in
us an Abhorrence of all Idolatry, whether of a more crass or subtle Kind; for
by both the divine Unity is denied. The Polytheism of the Gentiles is but a
specious Sort of Atheism; they that Worship more than one God, do in Effect
worship no God at all; because they give him not that supreme undivided Respect
which is his due. 2 King xvii. 33.34. They feared the Lord, and served their
own God's, after the Manner of their Nations. -- They fear not the Lord. How
detestable therefore is the Idolatry of the Papists, who reverence with a
Religious Worship, Saints and Angels, yea Images and Relicts? What Reason have
we to bless God while we live, that we are delivered from that Egyptian
Bondage? And should not the Unity of God incline us to detest all spiritual
Idolatry, which consists in giving our Hearts to, trusting in, and serving of
diverse Lusts and Pleasures, viz. The Lust of the Eye, the Lust of Flesh, and
the Pride of Life. Some make a God of Pleasure, 2 Timothy iii. 4. Lovers of
Pleasures more than Lovers of God. Most certainly, whatever we love more than
God, we make a God: Others there be that make Money their God, they make Gold
their Hope, and say to the fine Gold, thou art my Confidence, Job. xxxi. 24.
Others make a God of their Belly. Philip iii. 19. Whose God is their Belly.
Clemens Alexandrinus writes of a Fish "That has its Heart in its Belly." This
Fish is a proper Emblem of Epicures, for their Heart may be said to be in their
Belly; they chiefly mind their Gratification of their sensual Apetite. This is
the Evil which God forbids in the first Command; and which, in some Respect,
seems to exceed in Baseness all the Rest which are forbid by the other
Precepts: Whatever we put in the Room of God, we may expect will prove a Devil
to us.

2dly. If there be but one God, their can be but one Religion, that is true in
the World: And hence the Apostle observes, Ephesians. iv. 5. That there is one
Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all. If there were many God's, there might be many
Religions, every God would be worshipped in his own Way: But it is unreasonable
to suppose that that God, who is one in his Being, should appoint several
Religions whereby he would be worshipped. The Reason of the Heathens different
Rites, was their adoring diverse God's, whom they supposed they must Worship in
a different Manner: Though there be many Ways to Hell, there is but one Road to
Heaven, and that is the Path of Faith and Holiness, without which no Man shall
enjoy God. It is as Dangerous to set up a Religion, fundamentaly False, as to
set up a false God; for indeed the one supposes the other. But

3dly. We should be excited to enquire, whether this one God be ours in a
Covenant Way? Without which we can reasonably take no Comfort in meditating
upon this, or any other of his Attributes. Now this we may know by the
following Particulars, viz.

1st. If we fear this one habitually more than all; because he is infinitely
Greater and Mightier than all. ( Mal. i. 6.)

2dly. If we desire him habitually more than all; because he is infinitely
better than all besides him ( Ps. lxxiii. 25.)

3dly. If we generally delight in him more than in all besides him, because his
loving Kindness exceeds all other Enjoyments, yea even the Sweets of Life
itself. ( Psa. iv. 6.7.)

4thly. If we trust and hope in him more than all (generally;) because he
excells all in Wisdom and Faithfulness, ( Joshua. xxiii. 14.)

5thly. If we from Love generally obey him before all; because he is infinitely
higher than all. The Sovereign Lord, the everlasting King, who sways the
Scepter over the whole Universe, ( Acts iv. 19.)

6thly. If we bewail the Absence of this one God more then all other Losses.
Ps. xlii. 5. Why art thou cast down O my Soul, why art thou disquieted within
me?

7thly. If increase of Conformity to him in Mind and Life be the principal
Object of our Desire, Care and Labor. Philipi. iii. 13.14. I press forwards
toward the Mark! If upon enquiry we find in ourselves the aforesaid
Characters, truly we have great Reason to rejoice, whatever outward Distresses
we endure; because in having one God for our Portion, we have more then all
besides him, infinitely more! His Wisdom is Unsearchable, his Power Infinite,
and his Goodness Incomprehensible! As his Wisdom can easily devise a Way for
his People's Deliverance in their most Perplexing Immergency's, so his Power is
able to effect it, Maugre all Opposition of Hell and Earth! And his Goodness as
well as Promise engages his Wisdom and Power in his Peoples behalf. Add to
this, that his Immutability secures their Safety upon an unalterable
Foundation! Surely then to use the Psalmist's Language, Blessed are the People
who are in such a Case; yea blessed is that People, whose God is the Lord! Well
then when our Minds are divided and distressed with a Variety of Fears and
Cares, arising from a View of the Wars, Debates, and Confusions in the State
and Church, as well as in Families and Neighbourhoods, let us bewail Sin, which
has introduced all this Confusion into the World, by breaking that Blessed
Unity which once subsisted between God and us, and thence ensued a Breach
between Man and Man, between Man and himself. And having lamented Sin, the
Source of Discord, let us give our whole Heart to one God, who is the Fountain
of Sweetness, Concord and Unity, and humbly rejoice in him as our All! And
earnestly ask of him, that according to the Tenor of his gracious Covenant, he
would be pleased to give to his People every where one Heart, that they may be
one as Jehovah is one, and his Name one. ( Ezekiel. xi. 19. Zecha. xiv. 9.)

But how doleful is the Case of all such who want the aforesaid Characters; as
they are without God so they are without Hope, Poor, Blind, Miserable and
Naked, (Ephesians. ii. 12. Rev. iii. 17.) without true Comfort, and without
Defense; in the Fullness of their Sufficiency they are in Want; yea all the
Perfections of God are engaged against them. ( Job ix. 4.) As those that have
God for their Portion are Happy in him, in Want of all other Things, so those
that want this Portion are Miserable in the Possession of all besides him.

Again from the Doctrine of God's Unity we may learn how Wicked the Practice of
such is, who when they have lost Goods seek to Wizards and familiar Spirits how
they may get their Goods again, this is expressly condemned by the Law of God. (
Deuteronomy. viii. xi.) There shall not be found any that consults with familiar
Spirits. 2 Kings. i. 6. Thus says the Lord, is it not because there is not a
God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of Baal-zebub, the God of Eckron.
Such who go to the Devil for Council, renounce the true God, and their
baptismal Dedication to him!

Is there but one God? What Reason then have we to be thankful that we have the
Means of knowing him, while Multitudes who are alike to us by Nature are
perishing for Lack of Vision? Our Lines have fallen to us in pleasant Places,
we have Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept! The Harbingers of God are
frequently proclaiming in our Ears, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord.

Is there but one God? Then let us, reduce our Affections from their vain
Wanderings, and divided Courses, after other Lords and Lovers, and fix them in a
united Chanel, and with intense Vehemence upon the Blessed God as their Center!
Let Jehovah be the Object of our highest Regard, and the Foundation of our
Trust and Confidence! Let us devote ourselves and our All to his Glory and
Service! Surely he has the best right to our Love and Obedience who is the
Author of our Beings! He best deserves them who is the Fountain of all our
Benefits, and he is best able to requite both, being infinite in Power and
Goodness! O let us endeavor to please the One great and glorious God, by
loving, believing, universal and steady Obedience! For this is the main Thing
we have to mind in this present World! This reflects Honor upon our
Profession, brings Comfort into our own Minds, and tends to establish the
Kingdom of CHRIST among Men.

And finally, Brethren, seeing there is but one God, let his People endeavor
to be One as God is one: Let us endeavor to be One in Judgment and One in
Affection: And hence the Apostle Paul exhorts the Corinthians, to be all of one
Mind, 1 Cor. i. 10. And it is said, Acts iv. 32. That the Multitude that
believed were of one Heart and one Soul. Nothing is more amiable in it self,
and serviceable to the Church of God, then for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity, Psalm. cxxxiii. 1. This is like Hermons Dew and the fragrant Ointment
poured on Aaron's Head! This Unity was what our Lord himself prayed for, John
xvii. 21. That they all may be One. Upon which Words Athanasius glosseth thus,
Even as (says he) the Father and the Son are One in Essence, so we by some
imperfect resemblance are made One while we behold him. One among ourselves, by
mutual concord of Mind and unity of Spirit. The Apostle Paul urges this Unity
by various arguments, Ephesians. iv. 4, 5, 6. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace. We are all one mystical Body, and every one of us
Members of it, among which what is more advantageous than Harmony? There is one
Spirit by whose Assistance we are baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. xii. 12, 13.
There is one Hope of our Calling, viz. eternal Glory and Happiness, Heb. xii.
22, 23. One Lord JESUS, one Faith in him, one Baptism, one God and Father of
all. Let us therefore carefully avoid all schismatical Doctrines and Practices,
which are so exceeding prejudicial to Religion. To this End let us Labor to be
of a humble, charitable and forgiving Temper, Charity hopes all Things, it
suffers long, is kind, and is not easily provoked. Let us earnestly pray to the
great God, that he would heal the Breaches of Zion, which are wide as the Sea,
and cause his People to be one as he is one. Amen. Amen.

SERMON XXI.
JEREMIAH x. 10. But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an
everlasting King: At his Wrath the Earth shall tremble and the Nations shall
not be able to abide his Indignation!


IT is probable that the Prophecy contained in this Chapter, was delivered
after the first Babylonish Captivity, because it has a double Reference; the
first Part respects those that were carried Captive; and the latter Part
respects those that remained in the Land of Palestine.

The Prophet in the Beginning of this Chapter, first Addresses those who were
carried Captive into the Idolatrous Country of the Caldeans, and seriously
cautions them against the Infection of it, verse 1, 2. Thus says the Lord,
learn not the Way of the Heathen. In the following Verses the Prophet exposes
the Vanity of the Pagan Idolatry, by showing that such sort of Gods were but
the Work of Men's Hands, and had neither Life nor Motion, he therefore advises
them in the 7th verse, to cleave to the God of Israel, against all Temptation
to the Contrary. This Advice he inforces in the Words of our Text, by
representing some of his Perfections, in Opposition to the Idols of the
Heathen, But the Lord is the true God. The God's of the Pagans are vanity and a
lie, counterfeit and imposture; but Jehovah is truly and really God, as well as
the God of Truth a God who cannot lie or deceive. He is the living God. The
Pagan Idols are dumb dead Things, that have neither Life, Breath or Motion: But
Jehovah is the living God, i. e. as Calvin justly explains, He himself is
endowed with Life, and is to others the Fountain of Life. Psalm. xxxvi. 9. It is
in him we live, and move and have our Being. Act. xvii. 28. God is Life it
self, has Life in himself, and is the Original of all that Life which Creatures
enjoy. And an everlasting King. He has a Right to rule, and has exercised
Dominion from everlasting, and will to everlasting; whereas the Idols of the
Heathens are but of Yesterday, and will soon cease to be. -- At his Wrath the
Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his
Indignation. The Prophet had observed in the 5th Verse of this Chapter, that
the Pagan Idols could do neither Evil or Good, they are poor impotent sorry
Shams, and Trifles of no Moment, unworthy of either Love or Fear! But on the
Contrary the Wrath of Jehovah is dreadful, at this the Earth trembles, his
Angry frown makes the Worlds Foundations shake and the Pillars of Heaven
tremble, and the Nations, were all their Strength united, are as unable to
resist his Almighty Indignation, as they are to endure it! Jehovah is the God
of Nature, the Fountain of Being and Power and therefore all Nature is at his
Dispose and Control, his Empire is Universal, Absolute, Eternal; The Lord
shall reign forever, thy God O Zion to all Generations!

The Subject I purpose to speak upon from this Text is the Life of God, he is
the living God. In discoursing upon which I design

I. To prove the Life of God. And

II. To explain its Nature.

And then proceed to the Improvement. And

1st. I am to prove that God lives. To this End it may be observed, that the
sacred Scriptures frequently ascribe Life to God, and assure us, that he is the
Author of Life to all that possess it: And hence he is called the living God.
(Isa. xxxvii. 17. Dan. vi 34. Psa. lxxxiv. 2. Mat. xvi. 16.) And in many other
Places which it is needless to mention. The Almighty is likewise said to be
Life it self. (Col. iii. 4. 1 John v. 20. And the Fountain of Life, Jer. ii.
13. Ps. xxxvi. 10.) In him we are said to live, move, and have our Being. (Act.
xvii. 28.) The Oath which the Fathers used, was the Lord lives, (Jer. v. 2.)
And Jehovah himself swears by nothing but by his Life and Holiness: This Oath
is used fourteen Times in the Prophesy of Ezekiel.

Moreover Life is not only attributed to God essentially, but personally to
each of the sacred Three, to God the Father, John v. 26. For as the Father has
Life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have Life in himself. To God
the Son, Joh. xiv. 19. Because I live ye shall live also. Hence he is called
the Prince of Life, and that not only because he has Life in himself, by the
Father as Mediator, but is also our Life, and possesses the Power of an endless
Life ( Joh. i. 4. Col. iii. 4. Heb. vii. 16.) Hence it is said of him, Rev. i.
17, 18. that he is the first and the last; that he lives and was dead, and
behold he is alive forevermore; and that he has the Keys of Hell and Death.
Though his human Nature suffered Death to purchase Life for his People, yet his
divine Nature cannot dye, but lives forever. Life is also attributed to God the
Holy Ghost 2. Cor. iii. 3. And hence he is called the Spirit of Life, Romans
viii. 2.

Reason likewise assures us of this Truth, that God lives, by the following
Considerations.

1st. It appears from the Effects of Life. God understands, wills, loves,
therefore he truly lives: These are the Effects of Life, and Effects
demonstrate the Being and Nature of their Cause; therefore Aristotle justly and
frequently concludes from this, That because God understands all Things, he
therefore lives a Blessed Life.

2dly. Those Things live, which move, and stir themselves. Now God does all
Things of himself, he is the First, and most perfect Cause of all, he is most
Active by his Essence, yea a simple Act, he knows, discerns, wills, works,
altogether of himself, and therefore must needs live.

3dly. Life is a certain Perfection, which involves no Imperfection in it. Thus
those Things that live are reckoned more perfect than such as do not, and
therefore it cannot with any Shadow of Reason be denied to a Being, that is
infinitely Perfect of, and in himself as Jehovah is.

4thly. God is the Fountain of Life to all living Creatures. ( Psa. xxxvi. 10.)
And this he could not be if he had not Life himself; for what one has not he
cannot give. Here observe 1st. That God is the Author of the Life of Nature;
and hence he is said to breath into Man's Nostrils the Breath of Life. (Genesis
ii. 7.) And in him we are said to live and move. (Act. xvii. 28.) And 2dly
Jehovah is the Author of the Life of Grace. Ephesians. ix. 10. Not of Works least
any Man should boast: For we are his Workmanship, created in CHRIST JESUS unto
good Works, -- 3dly. The Almighty is likewise the Author of the Life of Glory.
Romans vi. 23. For the Wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of God is eternal Life
through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Again

5thly. If God did not live, all the rest of his Attributes, and he himself,
would be Vain, and would not differ from the Idols of the Gentiles, who have
Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not; and no wonder for they are dead. What
would avail all the rest of God's Perfections without Life, seeing that without
that, they cannot Act? I proceed to the

2d. Proposed, which was to explain the Nature of the divine Life; which may be
thus described, viz. That it is an essential Property of the divine Nature,
whereby he is able to perform an infinite Variety of Action to a certain known
and valuable End, with Council and Complacency. Ephesians. i. 11. Who works all
Things after the Council of his own Will. That the aforesaid Description may be
the better understood, let the following Particulars be considered, viz.

1st. That the Life of God is his Nature, Being or very Essence; and therefore
he is called Life, as was observed and proved before: Whereas Creatures are
only living, their Life is but a certain Faculty of their Being, and therefore
different from it; but the Life of God co-inceeds with his Essence.

2dly. The divine Life consists in a Power of Action with Complacency: By a
Power of Action we intend to signify an Ability in God to produce more Effects
without himself then he does, and not that the Almighty is at any Time
Inactive. No, the Almighty is in continual Action, otherwise he would suffer a
Change which is impossible; and therefore divines generally and justly observe,
that the Almighty is a simple Act. This will farther appear by considering that
those Things are said to live, who act of themselves without being acted, or
moved either by second Causes, (in this sense Life belongs to Creatures) or
without any prior moving Cause at all, and so God himself Lives: The Life of
Creatures springs from some Composition, e.g. Natural Life from the Union of
the Soul with the Body, which being broke all Power of natural Action ceases:
Spiritual Life from the Union of the Soul to original Righteousness, which
being broken all Power of working Spiritually ceases. Romans viii. 8. Those that
are in the Flesh cannot please God. And eternal Life springs from a perfect
Union with God, as the chief Good; which being broken the Soul cannot enjoy
God, or rejoice in him.

Moreover their is a fourfold Life in Creatures, viz. Vegetative, Sensitive,
Rational, and Mixed. 1st. A Vegetative Life is that whereby Things are able to
do that which is requisite for acquiring and conserving the full Strength of
their Nature, and the Propogation of their Kind; this is the Life of Herbs.
2dly. A sensitive Life is that Faculty whereby Creatures are enabled to discern
Things that are hurtful to them, and Things that are good for them, and to shun
the one and seek the other; this is the Life of Beasts: These are imperfect
Kinds of Life which the meanest Beings enjoy, and therefore cannot be ascribed
to God. But 3dly. There is a more noble kind of Life called Rational, by which
the Possessor of it is enabled to act with Understanding and reasonable
Complacency. And 4thly there is a Mixed Life which results from the two first
Kinds of Life only, and this belongs to brute Animals, or from all the Three
and Exists in Men.

Now we must not conceive in God any such imperfect Thing as Growth or Sense,
for he is a simple, spiritual, imaterial and perfect Being. The most perfect
Kind of Life must therefore be ascribed to him, viz. Rational, whereby the
Being of God is conceived by us, as active Simply of itself; when in our Ideas
of God we adjoin Reason and Action, we have a just Notion of his Life.

It may be here farther observed, that a Man has four Kinds of Faculties in
the Exercise of which he lives, and Life in him is an Ability to exercise
them: He has an Understanding, Will, Affections, and a Power to move and work
outwardly; all these the Almighty ascribes to himself in his Word. But

3dly. Another Particular, considerable in the aforesaid Description of the
Life of God, was this, viz. His acting to some known and valuable End, this is
but a necessary Consequent of acting rationally; an intelligent Agent must have
some End in View, and such an End as is worthy of his Choice. Now the End that
God proposes both Scripture and Reason inform us, is his own Glory, or the
Manifestation of his divine Excellency. And hence Solomon observes, Pro. xvi.
4. That he made all Things for himself. This is certainly the most noble End,
because it most nearly relates the best of Beings; and therefore it must be
supposed to be the End which the Almighty has chiefly in View in all his
Actions, seeing he ever acts with unerring Council.

But though there be some Analogy between the Life of God and that of intelligent
Beings, as has been observed, yet they differ in many Things very widely, as
will appear by considering the following Properties of the divine Life, and
comparing them with the Properties of the Lives of Creatures. Now the Divine
Life is

1st. Essential, viz. His Nature or Being, as has been observed before, whereas
the Life of Creatures is but a separable Property, of their Beings, And

2dly. The Life of God is Necessary, this results unavoidably from the former
Property, if the Being of God exists necessarily of it self, as it certainly
does, as the Name Jehovah signifies, and truly without this he could not be
God, and if the divine Life is the same with it, (as has been observed) then it
must be Necessary also; and hence the Almighty is said to have Life in himself:
Whereas all Creatures have but a borrowed precarious and dependant Life
communicated to them by God who is the Source of Life.

3dly. The Life of God is Perfect, he has the full and perfect Possession of an
interminable Life at once, whereas the Life of Creatures is imperfect, growing
by the Addition of Days, Months and Years, our Life glides away in a continual
Flux and Succession of Moments; but the divine Life is an everlasting NOW,
without any Succession in Duration.

4thly. The Life of God is Infinite, without Beginning or End, hence he is said
only to have Immortality. (1 Timothy vi. 16.) The Immutability of the divine
Nature, as well as his Self-existence, show the impossibility of his suffering
a Change by Death. But on the contrary, the Life of all Creatures had a
Beginning, and in respect of the most of them, it will have an End. I proceed
to the Improvement of this Subject, And

1st the Subject that has been discoursed upon, offers Matter of Reproof to all
such who behave toward God, as if he were a dumb Idol, that neither saw, heard
or understood, or could reward or avenge what is done in the World, and who
therefore do not love, or fear, or worship him, as if he could neither do them
Good or Hurt, Zeph. i. 12. And in their Straits they are so full of Distrust
and Dejection as if they believed there was no God in Heaven who lived and saw
their Miseries, and was able to send them Succors suited to them! What can
such Persons expect who thus make an Idol of God? But that by the Executions of
his Wrath, he will make them know to their dreadful Cost, that he is the Lord.
Ezekiel. xxxv. 9. But to proceed

2dly. Let us examine ourselves, by proposing the following Questions, viz.

1st. Do we content ourselves with having a Name to live when we are dead? If
so our Case is dreaful! Or

2dly. Has the living God quickened us, when we were dead in Trespasses and
Sins? Epes. ii. 4, 5.

3dly. Does the supposed spiritual Life in us, produce Sense, Breath, Motion,
Warmth? Are we at Times sorrowfully sensible of the inward Disorders of our
Souls? Does our Unbelief and other Corruptions afflict us? And do we know what
the Absence of God means, as well as his Presence, by our own Experience; do we
breath after God in the General above all others? ( Ps. lxxiii. 25.) Is it our
chief Care and Study for the most Part to grow in Grace? And does our principal
Zeal and Warmth generally run in a religious Channel?

4thly. Do we generally labor to serve the living God in a living Way? i. e.
Not only with raised Affections, but approaching to him through CHRIST the new
and living Way, the Way, the Truth and the Life? Heb. x. 20.

5thly. Have we sorrow'd for the great Evil of forsaking the living God, the
Fountain of living Waters, and running to broken Cisterns? Jer. ii. 13. And do
we watch over our Unbelief, that we depart no more from him? Heb. iii. 12.

6thly. Is God the Foundation of our Hope and Trust, and nothing else besides
him? (1 Timothy vi. 17.)

To such as can answer in the Affirmative to the aforesaid Questions, (the
first excepted) this Subject ministers Comfort in every Distress, being
persuaded that our Redeemer lives, and that he is the Strength of our Life,
particularly (1st.) in the Difficulties of a Natural Life, if Sickness
threatens an End of it, if Poverty removes the Supports of Life, if Enemies
seek it, and lay Snares to destroy it, if the Fear of Death and Horror of
Putrefaction and Pain perplex us? What yields a sweeter Support, in those and
such like Cases, than to think that our God and Redeemer lives, yea that he is
Life it self, and the Fountain thereof: As he has given Life, so he can
preserve it in the midst of all Dangers, and against the Force of all Enemies,
yea he can restore it when lost, for he is the Resurrection and the Life! Again,

2dly. In the Difficulties of the spiritual Life, when we find ourselves cold
and dead, unfit for, and unable to perform the Duties of Religion, how
supporting and sweet is it to think that as the Father has Life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have Life in himself, that we might have Life in
him. 1 John iv. 9. Yea that he is our Life. Col. iii. 4. And

3dly. In the Difficulties of Eternal Life: When the Fear of Death and the Body
of Death pain us, so that we are obliged to sigh and say, who shall deliver us?
Men and Brethren what shall we do to inherit eternal Life? In this Case how
sweet is it to think that God lives, and is the great Source of Life; and
likewise that the Redeemer lives, and is our Life? Yea that to this End he was
given by his Father, that we should not perish but have eternal Life (To this
Purpose was his Death, that he might purchase Life for us) And also that the
Holy Spirit is a Spirit of Life who quickens? ( Joh. vi. 63.)

4thly. The Consideration of the infinite or immortal Life of God, may justly
humble us who carry our Breath, our Life, in our Nostrils, and are liable to
such a manifold Death, viz. Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, who may be
speedily deprived of Life by the meanest Infects, the most inconsiderable
Incidents, as both Scripture and History informs us, and who have brought
ourselves into this mortal State by Sin! 2 Samuel xiv. 14. For we must needs die,
and are as Water spilt on the Ground, which cannot be gathered up again. Psalm.
cxliv. 3.4. Lord what is Man that thou take Knowledge of him. Man is like to
Vanity, his Days are as a Shadow that passes away. Our Life is like a Flower
of the Grass, which flourishes in the Morning, but in the Evening is cut down
and withers, Psalm. xc. 5.6. What is our Life, says the Apostle James, but a
Vapor which appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. Man that is
born of a Woman, says Job, is of few Days and full of Trouble, he comes forth
like a Flower and is cut down, he flees also as a Shadow and continues not.
As Bernard observes, In these Words is described the shortness, certainty,
frailty and manifold Adversity of our Life. How much therefore may we be
humbled, when we compare our Life with the Life of God? What are we but Dust
and Ashes? And if our Life be so short and uncertain, how vain must all the
Enjoyments of Life be? Seeing they cannot be better to us than that on which
they depend! O therefore let us be weaned from the dying Things of Time and
Breath after Immortality! Let us earnestly seek it in the immortal God, that
when our Heart and Flesh fails, he may be the Strength of our Heart, and our
Portion for Ever!

5thly. The Consideration of the Life of God should excite us to glorify him in
Imitation of the heavenly Host. Rev. iv. 9.10. When those Beasts gave Glory and
Honor and Thanks to him, that sat on the Throne, who lives for ever and ever.
The Four and Twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and
worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne. I say we should glorify God, not only because he has Life, which is a
Primary Perfection of Mankind, but by the Help of which all their Faculties are
actuated, and without which they would be Vain: Thus the Life of God actuates
all his other Attributes, etc. But because he is Life it self, yea such a Life
as is Independent, Infinite, eternal Immutable, and the Author of all that Life
which every Creature enjoys: It Is on these Accounts that God does so often
glory of his Life, as well as swear by it, and thereby distinguish himself from
false God's who are but dead Idols.

And seeing that Jehovah is the original of our natural and spiritual Life, and
is to be so of our eternal likewise, to purchase which he gave his only
begotten Son to Death, let us ever retain a grateful Sense of this in our
Minds, and celebrate the Praises of God for it in Speech and Action!

Finally, The Consideration of the Life of God, should incline us to live to
him! Which consists principally in the following Particulars, viz. 1st. In
directing all our Actions, whether Natural, Civil or Religious, to his Glory,
as our highest Mark. 1 Cor. x. 31. Whether therefore ye Eat or Drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. 2dly. In conforming our Actions
according to his revealed Will. 1 Pet. iv. 2. That he no longer should live the
rest of his time in the Flesh, to the Lusts of Men, but to the Will of God.
3dly. It consists in living by the Power of God, i. e. when we being sensible
of our inability to do what is pleasing to God, depend upon his Assistance and
Influence. ( Gal ii. 19.20.) Now the Life of God affords a manifold Argument of
living to him. For 1st. Our God lives, and in his Life consists his chief
Perfection, and ours in Imitation of it. 2dly. He is the Author of our Life,
and therefore it is but reasonable it should be referred to him. 3dly. Our
Redeemer has Life in himself, is our Life, yea has died that we might live; not
to ourselves but to him that has dyed for us. 2 Cor v. 15. 4thly. The Holy
Spirit is a Spirit of Life, who quickens poor dead and stupid Sinners, by
Virtue of his Office. ( Joh. vi. 63.) O! therefore while we do live, let us
live to the living God, and labor to be fervent and and lively in his Service;
in this Way we may expect, in due Time, to be translated through divine Grace,
into a State of immortal Life and Glory. And such as are under the Power of
spiritual Death, which you may know by your being without spiritual Sense,
Breath and Motion, I exhort in the Language of Paul to the Ephesians, chap. v.
14. Awake thou that sleep, arise from the Dead and Christ shall give you
Light! What meanest thou O Sleeper! Arise call upon thy God if so be that he
will pity you that you perish not! While you are thus spiritually Dead, you
can have neither Communion with the living God here, nor enjoy him hereafter,
but are under his Curse and Wrath. The Law you have broken condemns you, Gal.
iii. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all Things that are written
in the Book of the Law to do them. The Gospel also which you believe not
likewise rejects you! Mark xvi. 12. Heaven is shut up against you, and Hell is
open to receive you! Your Services must needs be loathsome because they are
Dead! Poor, poor Sinners! ye are every Moment in Danger of everlasting Misery;
and how soon ye may be engulph'd in it ye know not! And will ye be easy and
unconcerned in such a sttate of extreme and inexpressible Danger? God forbid! O
think frequently and solemnly of your doleful Case and cry fervently and
unweariedly to the living God for spiritual Life, without which you must
eternally feel the Power of the second Death.

Poor Sinners! Are not the plain Signs of Spiritual Death upon you? For is not
your Eyes close shut? You have no affecting apprehension of your Disease and
Danger, nor of the Remedy a gracious God has provided for perishing Souls!

You hear not, to any purpose, the dreadful Thunders of the Divine Law, nor the
gentler Wispers of the Gospel of Grace and Salvation! And as you have Eyes and
see not, Ears and hear not the Things that belong to your Peace, so you have
Hearts and feel not! when the Heralds, the Harbingers of God denounce aloud
the dreadful Curses of Jehovah against you from Ebal's Mount! When we unvail
the Dismal Vault of Hell, and set it before you in all it is flaming Terrors,
yauning Wide to devour you! When we represent the Vengeance of Omnipotence
hanging over your Guilty Heads, as a gloomy Cloud, Pregnant with woe and Ruin,
every Moment ready to break upon you in a formidable resistless Torrent, and
drown you in Destruction! When we take the Sword of God and point it at your
Hearts, alas ye do not feel the Thrust, or grieve over your Misery! When we
bend the legal Bow and shoot at your Bosoms, the Arrows rebound as if they
struck on a Wall of Marble, and make no abidding Impression!

And when we speak in softer Strains of the humble Charms of divine Grace and
Love, and pronounce Blessings upon all believing Penitents from the Summit of
Geresim! Alas ye feel it not, but are as insensible as Stones, as dead Corpse!
As the former did not alarm your Fear, so neither does this incite your Love!
When we labor to open the inexpressible Beauties of JESUS, of Holiness, of
Paradise, and set them in their proper Light, alas ye are not affected! The
Condescension of the Son of God in assuming our Nature, under its present
ruinous Circumstances, his appearing in the Form of a Servant, who was God over
all blessed for ever, his becoming poor, that we might be made rich, in a Word
his being exposed to all the Instances of Hardship, Ignominy and Contempt in
Life, and at last to a most painful and shameful Death, is enough to affect any
who have the least Spark of Life! But what less than Almightiness can
effectually affect the Dead?

And are there not some among you, who find yourselves without Taste and Savor
of Spiritual Things, and content yourselves with a spiritless Form or Round of
religious Duty, without any Growth in Grace, you think you have got as much as
will do for Heaven, and are therefore satisfied? O! this is a plain Sign, that
you are stark blind, and stone dead.

Awake poor Sinners! in the Name of God out of your damnable Sleep, before your
Case be past all Remedy, there is no Hopes of your Conversion and Salvation,
while ye remain in this Sleep and Death; ye must be awakned or damned, it is
the Lost that CHRIST is only come to seek and save. The Whole need no
Physician, but the Sick. If you ask what you shall do to get awakened into this
Life? I answer, first try by Examination to get a thorough Knowledge of your
dead and damnable State: For if you fail in this, you are never like to be
deeply affected with the Miseries of your Condition: Ye should likewise think
often with the utmost Seriousness, upon Death, Judgment, and Hellfire, in all
the Forms of Terror, in which Scripture and Reason do represent them! Attend
diligently upon the Word Faithfully dispensed; for this is a principal Mean of
divine Appointment of bringing the Dead to Life. By the Foolishness of
Preaching God saves those that believe. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God. Cry frequently and vehemently to God for the awakening
Influencies of his Holy Spirit, and beware of quenching them by Sloth,
presumptuous Hopes, or sining against Light. Ye ungodly Sinners of every Age
and Order, I charge you in the Name of the living God, and adjure you by his
Authority, to awake, else you must be burnt for ever in the Flames of Hell!
Don't think that your dead Devotions, unperform'd Resolutions, ineffectual
Affections, or external Privileges, viz. Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, will
stand you instead when arraigned before the burning Bar of the dreadful God!
For neither Circumcision or Uncircumcision, avails any Thing but the
New Creature. You that are in the Flesh cannot please God by any Thing you do:
A corrupt Tree, as our Lord observes, cannot bring forth good Fruit.

Awake poor Sinners! for the Guilt of all your Sins lies like Mountains of Lead
upon your wretched Souls! And consider I beseech you, that all ye have been
doing since ye were born, is in some respect Sin, in a greater or lesser
Degree; ye have been going astray from the Womb like wild Asses Colts, and
every Imagination of the Tho'ts of your Hearts have been only Evil continually;
ye have been sinning against Light and Love, against Law and Gospel, against
Mercies and Judgments: Thus you may see that your Sins rival the Stars for
Multitude, and are red as Crimson in their Agravations; and you may assure
yourselves, that God's Justice will oblige him to Proportion your Pains
accordingly, O then! How Inexpressible and Exquisite must your eternal Tortures
be, if ye continue in this impenitent Security. Poor Sinners! Me thinks the
Songs, the Shouts, the harminious Hosanahs of all the Hosts of Heaven invite
you to awake, without which ye cannot be admitted into their honorable and
happy Society, and join in their delightful Anthems with greatful Accents,
besides the dolorous Groans and hideous Scrieks of damned Men, and damned
Angels, in the flaming Furnace of Tophet, may justly alarm you out of your
accursed Stupor: For after a few Moments, ye must roar with them, except ye
repent! Nothing but the abused Patience of God and the slender Thread of your
Life, keep you from plunging down into that flaming Lake, that burning Main!
And for what you know the Patience of God may expire toward you before the
next Mornings Light, and then you are undone! undone! undone forever! O if the
Thread of your Life breaks while you remain in this dead State, you are gone
past all Hopes forever, Dead and Damned at once, yea Damned to all Eternity!
And how many Accidents are you environed with? Are not many carried off
speedily and unexpectedly? And why may not this be your Case? I beseech you
Friends by all the Happiness of Heaven, by all the Torments of Hell, for the
Sake of God the Father, Son and Spirit, by all the Regard you owe to your
Deathless Souls, your Reason, your Conscience, as well as the Ambassadors of
CHRIST among you, that ye would awake. I beseech you as a Messenger of the
great God, as on my bended Knees, by the Groans, Tears, and Wounds of CHRIST,
that you would Awake. Yea I charge you by all the Curses of the Law, and
Blessings of the Gospel, that ye would Awake. My Friends, you are witnesses
against yourselves, that I have set Death and Life before you, O choose Life
that ye may live! Let the wicked Man forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man
his Thoughts, and turn to God and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God
for he will abundantly pardon! O Sirs! consider these Things, as ye will answer
it at the Tribunal of CHRIST at the last Day.

SERMON XXII.
I. JOHN v. 7. For there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and These three are One.


THE Doctrine of the Trinity, is undoubtedly of the highest Importance in
Christianity: For the whole Scheme of Redemption is built upon this fundamental
Point, namely, That God the Father did from all Eternity purpose to send his
only begotten Son into the World to assume human Nature that therein he might
satisfy divine Justice, by his Suffering and Obedience. That the Son of God in
the fullness of Time, did as Mediator, obey his Father's Injunctions, in
enduring that Weight of Wrath, which was due for the Sins of the Elect World,
and that it is the Office of the Holy Spirit to make effectual Application of
the Purchase of CHRIST to them. Now if the Distinction of Persons in the
Trinity be removed, these Things cannot be consistently supported: For it is
absurd to suppose, that the same Person should send himself, and satisfy
himself, etc. And thus the whole Fabric of Christianity in respect of its
grand Peculiars would sink, its Foundation being destroyed, and the Religion of
Nature take Place of revealed.

But though the Doctrine of the Trinity, be of the l^st. Importance in the
Christian System, yet it is incomprehensible! Neither should this be wondered
at, seeing there are diverse Things in Nature, which we cannot fully conceive of
or explain, such as the Reason of the Growth, and different Colors, as well as
Shapes of Vegetables, and of the various instincts of brute Animals. Not to
mention the Nature of our own Souls, their Union with our Bodies, and Way of
acting upon them. If Things that are of a finite Nature do thus poze and
nonpluss our weak Understandings, is it strange that the infinite Perfections
of the divine Nature should transcend the Comprehension of a finite Mind? The
Distance being so vast between the Object, and our Faculties.

Neither is it unreasonable to believe, what we have no equal or adequate Ideas
of, else we must believe in none of the divine Attributes: For every of those
surpass the highest Flight, the utmost Verge of a Creatures Thought. e. g.
Although natural Reason assures us, that there is a God, and that Self-existence
is necessarily included among the Number of his unalienable Perfections, yet
how imperfect is the Idea we form of it? We are likewise assured by the
clearest Dictates of unbias'd Reason, that God is immense without Extention,
and eternal without Succession in Duration. But what positive Image can our
Minds form of such Things? Are not our Thoughts swallowed up and lost in
Obscurity when we try to grasp such sublime and incomprehensible Objects? We
may be therefore truly said to believe more concerning God, than we do or can
comprehend; otherwise indeed, we do not believe the Being of a God at all: For
whatever our Understandings grasp, cannot, but like it self, be finite, and
whatever is finite is not God. That there are certain Perfections in God, both
Scripture and Reason inform us, but how these are in God, we cannot fully
conceive or express! No doubt Faith supposes some Idea or Knowledge of the
Object, but this Knowledge admits of various Degrees; sometimes it reaches no
farther than the Proof of the Existence of Things, together with some negative
Ideas or Apprehension of what they are not; and sometimes it extends to the
Manner of their Existence, and therefore it is so far from being absurd, that
it is necessary, for the Reason aforesaid, to believe that there is something
in God, which we cannot grasp.

Seeing then the Doctrine of the Trinity, is so important and intricate. It was
well observed by Austine of old respecting it, That in nothing Men are apt to
err more easily and dangerously. (In nihilo facilius, et periculosius erratur)
But how contrary to this, is the unreasonable Notion of some Moderns, who plead
for the innocence of Errors of the grosest Kind, at least of those that are
sincere Enquirers after Truth, who are notwithstanding far from it? As though
their Endeavors would entitle them to Happiness, without the Knowledge of
Fundamentals.

But surely, it is not the Sincerity of our Enquiries after important Truths,
but the Success thereof, that is to be regarded in this, as well as other Means
that are used to obtain so valuable an End, we may as well suppose, that
sincere Endeavors to obtain many of those Graces that accompany Salvation,
such as Faith, Love to God, and Evangelical Obedience, will supply or atone
for the Want of them, as assert that our insuccessful Enquiries after the great
Doctrines of Religion will excuse our Ignorance thereof, especially when we
consider that Blindness of Mind, as well as hardness of Heart, is included
among those spiritual Judgments, which are the Consequence of our fallen State.
And also that God displays the Sovereignty of his Grace, as much in leading the
Soul into all necessary Truth, as he does in any other Things that relate to
Salvation. However it is not our Business to determine, the final States of
Men, but rather to pray that the Ignorant and Erroneous may be brought to the
acknowledgment of the Truth.

In the mean Time we may truly say, that Errors in Doctrine, (especially when
they touch the Foundation of Religion) are very perilous, as well as Errors in
Practice. And hence we read of damnable Heresies. But how far Error in Opinion
may consist with a gracious State, we cannot precisely and peremtorily
determine. It is therefore extremely necessary, to attend with the utmost Care
and Caution to what the sacred Scriptures relate concerning the Trinity, and to
beware of giving a lawless Loose to our own Imaginations: For it is better, as
one well observes To be Ignorant of the Depths of it, than not to retain the
Limits of Truth concerning it. Melius est nescire Centrum, quam non tenere
circulum.

Now the Text I have chosen to discourse upon, gives us an excellent
Description of the important Point under our present Consideration in three
Particulars; for 1st. Here we have a Trinity of Persons asserted, mention is
made of Three, and a personal Action ascribed to them, namely, that of bearing
Witness; There are Three that bear Record in Heaven. Now the Matter of this
Witness or Testimony is, that JESUS is the Son of God, and the Messiah
promised, as appears from the 1st. 5th. and 9th. Verses of this Chapter, the
Manner rather than the Place of the Testimony, is signified by those Words, in
Heaven. The Sacred Three have and do bear Witness in a majestic and glorious
Way to the aforesaid Truth: Thus the Father testified of the Man JESUS, by an
immediate Voice from Heaven, at his Baptism, this is my beloved Son hear ye
him, the eternal Word owned it is personal Union with the assumed human Nature,
on the Mount of Transfiguration, by that divine Glory wherewith it was there
clothed. Joh. i. 14. And we beheld his Glory, the Glory, as of the only
Begotten of the Father full of Grace and Truth. And the Holy Spirit likewise
witnessed by desending visibly upon him like a Dove at his Baptism. And 2dly.
The Names of the sacred Three are expressed, viz. the Father, Word, and Spirit.
The first Person of the Trinity is called Father, to signify his eternal
Generation of the Son. The second Person is called the Word in our Text, and in
other Places of Scripture. ( See John. i. 1. 1 John i. 1.) To express not only
his Office in the Revelation of his Fathers Will to us, ( Mat. xi. 27.) but
also his ineffable Generation, as a Word is begotten in our Thoughts and is the
express Image of them. The Third Person of the Trinity is called Ghost or
Spirit to signify his Personal Property, which is to proceed from the Father
and the Son, the Manner of which seems to be shadowed forth by breathing; for
as much as the Word Spirit is derived of a Verb, which signifies to breath.
(pnewma a pneo spiro) Now the Blessed Spirit is called Holy, to signify what is
his peculiar Office in the divine Economy, respecting the Salvation of the
Elect which is to make them Holy by his efficacious Influences.

But before I proceed to discourse farther upon this Text, I think it necessary
to offer something concerning its divine Original. It is true several learned
Men acknowledge, that it is not found in diverse ancient Manuscrips, and
Versions drawn from them. But what then, it is found in many others, as Beza
observes, Jerome asserts in his Letter to Eusiochius, That it was contained in
all the Greek Copies of his Time, and complains that it was omitted through the
Negligence of the Latin Interpreters. Now it is certain that Jerome was one of
the most learned of the Fathers, in respect of the Languages and Church
History. What though this Text was omitted in Writings of the Fathers of the
fourth Centuary, it might be wanting in the Copies they consulted, and be in
others notwithstanding: But methinks it is enough to satisfy us in this Point,
that it is not only mentioned frequently by the Writers of succeeding Ages, but
also by some of the third Century, particularly by Cyprian and Tertulian.
Cyprian wrote before the Birth of Arius, in the third Century, and endured
Martyrdom in the Year 260: And it is certain that he had not such an
allegorical or mystical Turn of Mind, as Origin and some others, and therefore
his Testimony is the more to be depended upon. In his Epistle concerning the
Unity of the Church he has these Words, viz. The Lord says, that I, and the
Father are one; and again it is written, concerning the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and these Three are one. (dicit Dominus, ego et Pater unum Sumus, et
itrum de patre et filio. et spiritu sancto Scriptum est, et hi tres unum sunt.)
Now the most ancient Manuscript extant in the World, which some say is at
Alexandria, is not supposed by any to reach so far back as the third Century.
It is likewise thought by some learned Men, that Tertulian in his Book against
Praxeas, refers to this Text in these Words, which Three are one. (qui tres
unum sunt) To what has been said, I may add, that Mr. Pool observes in his
Synopsis, that Athanasius in his first Book to Theophilus and Idacius who
flourished in the Year 308 under Theodosius, produced this Place of Scripture
against the Arians. This Verse might be omitted in some Manuscrips through the
Carelessness of the Transcriber, but could not be added without an evil Design;
which it is unreasonable to suppose in this Case, because it could not be
answered by such an Addition, seeing the Trinity is elsewhere fully asserted,
as I shall afterward prove: It is therefore much more probable, that the
Arians have corrupted this Place of Scripture, than the Orthodox, seeing that
it so directly oversets their Heresy; whereas the opposite Doctrine is
sufficiently confirmed by other Places; and both Ambrose (de fide) and Socrates
in his ecclesiastical History, do witness, that the Arians were Guilty of this
Kind of Fraud; neither was it difficult for them to effect it, when some of
their Number, namely, Constantius and Valens, possessed the imperial Throne and
banished the Orthodox; and in the mean Time fixed Arian Bishops almost over the
whole Christian World. I might add, if it was necessary, that the Genuiness of
this Text might be defended from it is Conection with the preceding Verses, and
the Scope of the Place. But it is Time that I should proceed to propose a Method
of discoursing upon the Subject our Text contains, which shall be as follows,
viz.

I. I shall offer some Considerations serving to prove and explain a Trinity in
the Godhead.

II. I shall labor to prove, by diverse Arguments, their Unity therein, or that
each of the sacred Three is truly and properly God.

III. Answer the most important Objections.

And then proceed to the Improvement of the whole.

That there be Three in the Godhead the Scripture teaches so often as it makes
mention of more who are God, and this is done in all those Places wherein the
Almighty speaks of himself in the plural Number. ( See Genesis i. 26. and iii. 22.
and xi. 7.) Let us make Man, etc. Neither is the Cavil of the modern Jews,
respecting those Places of Scripture, of any Validity, viz. That God speaks to
the Angels, or to the Heaven or Earth, or Elements, and calls them to a
Partnership in the Creation, or that he speaks of himself alone after the
Manner of great Men: But how Ridiculous is it to suppose that Angels, or any
other Creature, should be called to any Fellowship in Creation, which is a Work
of Almighty Power, or that infinite Wisdom should be nonplus'd, and need
Council of Creatures! Neither does the Style of the Modern great ones suit the
Scriptures, or Custom of the eastern Nations; it was two late received by the
western World to determine this Point! It may be further observed, that the
aforesaid Phrase does not exactly agree with the Custom of the Moderns; for
they say not we Kings of England, or we George's, but we George the King.

Besides those Places of Scripture whereby Jehovah is distinguished from
Jehovah, do proclaim a Plurality of Persons in the Godhead ( See Genesis xix. 24.
Ex. xxxiv. 5. 2 Samuel xii. 24.25.) Surely Jehovah is not distinguished from
Jehovah by his Essence, seeing there is but one God; ( Deuteronomy. vi. 4.) or by
Accidents, for such do not belong to the Almighty, and therefore the
Distinction must be personal. A Trinity of Persons is likewise signified in
those Places of Scripture, where the Name of God is diverse Times repeated in
the same Sentence, which it would be Profane to suppose was Tautological. (
See Deuteronomy. vi. 4. Exo. iii. 15. Isa. vi. 3.) Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of
Hosts; but in the New Testament this Truth is more expressly asserted, Mat. iii.
16.17. And JESUS when he was Baptized, went up straitway out of the Water, (or
as the original Word Apo, is elsewhere justly rendered by the same Interpreters
from the Water) and lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit
of God desending like a Dove and lighting upon him, and lo a Voice from Heaven,
saying this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. This Place is so
express to the Point, that it was a common saying among the Ancient Fathers,
viz. Go to Jordan and you will see the Trinity, Mat. xxviii. 19. Go therefore
teach all Nations in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Surely we should not be baptized in the Name of one who is not God. 2 Cor.
xiii. 14. The Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all Amen. Here three distinct
Blessings are desired for the Corinthians, from the sacred Three in the
Godhead, namely, Love from the Father, Grace from the Son, and Communion from
the Holy Ghost. Now that those sacred Three are distinct Persons, appears by
the following Considerations, The Word Hypostasis, signifies as much as
Subsistence or Person, and this is expressly applied to the Father, of which the
Son is said to be the express Image, Heb. i. 3. And what can this intend but
that he is a Person also? Now by a a Parity of Reason the same must be likewise
said of the Holy Ghost: But seeing the Father's personallity is not disputed,
it will be only necessary to add somewhat concerning the Personality of the Son
and Holy Ghost. To this End it may be observed, that personal Characters are
ascribed to the second Person of the Trinity: Hence he is called a Son, which
denotes a distinct Person from the Father. He is likewise said to be sent into
the World by his Father; which cannot, without the greatest Impropriety, be
applied to a mere Relation or Quality: He is likewise called a Surety etc. And
three Offices are ascribed to him as such, by each of which he is called. It
may be also farther observed that some of the aforesaid Characters are never
ascribed to any of the other Persons of the Trinity; besides the Second, the
Father and Holy Spirt, are never called the Son, are never said to be made
flesh, or to become Sureties for perishing Transgressors: Not to add that the
personal Characters, He, Thy, Thou, are applied to the Son. Ps. cx. 7. He shall
drink of the Brook in the Way. Verse 3. Thy People shall he willing in the Day
of thy Power. V. 4. Thou art a Priest forever, after the Order of Melchizedeck.

But to proceed, it appears likewise, that the Holy Ghost is a divine Person
from the personal Properties ascribed to him in Scripture, thus he is said to
act by sovereign Pleasure. Act. xv. 18. it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to
us. He is also said to constitute Officers in the Church of God. Act. xx. 28.
Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the Flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you overseers. He is likewise said to instruct them. Mark
xiii. 11. To send them. Act. xiii, 4. To dwell in them. 1 Cor. vi. 19. See that
famous Place of Scripture, Joh. viii. 16.17.18. What though in the poetical Parts
of Scripture sometimes personal Characters are ascribed to Things which are not
Persons. It will not follow that many Hundreds of Places respecting the
Trinity, where no lofty Expression is used, should be taken without any
Necessity, without any Notice from the Context in the same Sense. Surely
fundamentals in Religion are plainly expressed, and not perpetually immured and
veiled in Tropes and Figures, and so rendered inaccessible to a vulgar
Understanding, otherwise we should be left to the greatest Uncertainty in the
most important and momentuous Points, notwithstanding of the Revelation given
us, which can hardly consist with the Divine Goodness. If personal Characters,
when applied to Men and Angels, are taken in a proper Sense, why should they
not when applied to the sacred Three, who though they have not distinct Beings,
yet have an Understanding and Will, and therefore are capable of Personality,
and indeed to take the aforesaid Places of Scripture, and all the rest that
relate to the Personallity of the Son and Holy Ghost in a figurative Sense,
manifestly tends to overthrow the Personallity of the Father, which is proved
by the same Method's.

But to make the Way more plain, for what may be afterward offered, it may be
here observed, that by the Word Trinity, we mean no more, than that the divine
Essence, which is one, is common to three Persons, namely, the Father, Son, and
Spirit, who are distinguished by three Manners of subsisting. Although the Word
Trinity is not expressly mentioned in Scripture, yet what is thereby signified,
is agreeable thereto, as appears from what has been, and what may be (God
willing) farther offered, and therefore its proper that the Term be retained,
until a better be found to supply the Room thereof. By Essence we understand
what the Scriptures term the Nature of God, (Phusis) Gal. vi. 8. the Form of
God (Morphe) Phil. ii. the Godhead (Theotes) Colos. ii. 9. In short the divine
Essence is that whereby God, is God: For that whereby any Thing is what it is,
is called its Essence. The Word Person or Subsistence (which is the same) is a
scriptural Term, Heb. i. 3. Our Text affirms that there are Three that bear
Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. Then there are
three Somethings in the Godhead, but what are they, not three distinct
Substances, or Essences, otherwise there would be unavoidably three Gods, which
is blasphemous to imagine; not three Accidents, for these belong not to God,
because of his Simplicity and Immutability, not three Relations, for these
cannot act or bear witness. What then can they be but Persons? If any don't
like this scriptural Name, let them produce a better if they can.

The Word Person, some describe to be a rational incommunicable Substance. And
others, an individual Subsistence of a rational Being. A Beast is an
individual, but without Reason, a Soul has Reason, but is not an individual;
and therefore neither of these can be a Person. Now every manner of Being makes
a distinct Person in God, because his Essence being indivisible must be in
every of them. An ingenious Writer represents a Person in the Trinity thus.
viz. That it is a spiritual infinite Agent, which must not be considered as
abstracted from, but as truly subsisting in the divine Nature, and as mutually,
eternally, and inseparably related to the other co-essential Persons in the
Godhead, from whom he is sufficiently and only distinguished by some Personal,
and as such incommunicable Properties. As this Description guards against the
Heresy of Sabellius on the one Hand, who imagined a divine Person to be but a
Quality or Accident. So it equally militates against the Heresy of the
Tritheists who dream that the Persons of the Trinity are three absolute Beings
that exist separately, and thus a Medium is opened, between two dangerous
Extremes. It is necessary to retain the Word Person respecting the Trinity, in
order to ward off the Sabellian Error, which is, that the Distinction among the
sacred Three is only nominal, and that there is but one Person; who because of
his different Operations, was sometimes called Father, sometimes Son, and
sometimes Holy Ghost. Yet in the mean Time, it must be observed, that there is
a wide Difference, between human and divine Persons, in the following Respects,
namely

1st. Human Persons proceed from each other in Time, but whatever outward Order
there be among the sacred Three, yet there can be no Firstness or Priority of
Nature, Time or Dignity among them, they must be all coequal and coeternal,
otherwise they could not be God.

2dly. Human Persons have their own proper Beings distinctly from each other,
and from every other Creature, but the Persons of the Trinity have all one and
the same Being or Essence. The Godhead of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is
the very same, otherwise there would be three Gods. Though one human Person is of
the same Species with another, or has a Nature like the rest of his own Order,
yet it is not the same individual Nature which another possesses, otherwise the
Faculties and Exercise thereof would be the very same in two Persons, which is
certainly false. But in respect of the Godhead, though each Person be distinct
from the other, yet each possesses the very same individual divine Nature,
otherwise each could not be said to be truly and really God.

3dly. Human Persons are separated from each other, one might be, though the
other should never exist: Created Beings are derived precarious and dependant,
whereas on the contrary, the Persons of the Trinity have an In-being in one
another, John xiv. 10. Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me? And undoubtedly they have a necessary Existence, and independent
Personality, otherwise each of them could not be infinitely perfect, and so not
God.

I shall here beg leave to mention Mr. Flavels Description of a Person of the
Trinity, which I think is as safe and intelligible, as any that I have met
with, which is this, viz. That it is the Godhead distinguished by personal
Properties, each Person having his distinct personal Properties. ( Heb. i. 3.)
To explain which let the following Particulars be considered. namely

1st. That all the sacred Three possess the same Godhead, and hence they are
said to be One in our Text; and elsewhere, that they are in each other, as has
been but now mentioned, they have a Communion in the same Essence: Forasmuch as
the divine Essence is Infinite, it can be communicated to more than one, and
hence they must needs have Commuion in the same essential Attributes, such as
Omnicience, Almightiness, Eternity, Self-existence. Whatever personal
Self-existence does peculiarly belong to the Father, (John v. 26.) Yet an
essential Self-Existence, must belong to all the sacred Three, that is, the Son
and Spirit must be of themselves, as well as the Father, otherwise they could
not be God, and from this Communion in Essence and Attributes, necessarily
results a Communion in religious Worship, which equally belongs to all. ( John
v. 23.)

2dly. The Godhead is distinguished, not divided, the divine Essence being
simple and infinite, is therefore indivisible into more of the same Kind, but
though it cannot be divided, yet it may be distinguished by personal Properties.

Now the Personal Property of the Father, is to beget the Son, Ps. ii. 7. I
will declare the Decree, the Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son this Day
have I begotten thee, Ephesians. i. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly
Places in CHRIST. Begetting is not an Essential Act, otherwise it would be
common to all, but we do not find that it is common to all, the Son is never
said in Scripture to beget the Father, or the Holy Ghost the Son; and therefore
the Act is Personal, on this Account although the Father cannot be called
properly the Fountain of the Deity, yet he is by some called the Original of
the Persons.

That the Generation of the Son was eternal, is evident from the following
Places of Scripture, Ephesians. iii. 14, 15. For this Cause I bow my Knees unto the
Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth
is named, Prove. viii. 22, 24. The Lord possessed me in the Beginning of his
Way, before his Works of Old. I was set up from Everlasting. -- Or ever the
Earth was, when there was no Depths I was brought forth, while as yet he had
not made the Earth. Mic. v. 2. Whose Goings forth have been from of Old, even
from Everlasting. See also Ps. ii. 7. The eternal Generation of the Son is
confirmed by the Titles given to him in Scripture, thus he is called absolutely
the Son of God (Mat. xvi. 16.) A Son begotten by God (Acts iv. 25, 26.) His own
Son. (Romans viii. 32.) The first begotten Son. (Heb. i. vi.) The only begotten
Son (John i. 14.) This eternal Generation some Godly and learned Divines say,
"consists in the Communication of the same Essence." John v. 26. And others, in
the Communication of Personality. Or in other Words, That the Person of the
Father, begat the Person of the Son from Everlasting, ineffably, but
undividedly. Although it is exceeding necessary inviolably to maintain the
eternal Generation of the Son, because it is asserted by Scripture and
Antiquity, and the Denial of it seems to have a bad Tendency to weaken our
Belief of the Doctrine of the Trinity, by opposing the personal Properties of
the Father and Son, which are the principal Ground of the Distinction between
those divine Persons. Yet we must confess with Justin, and a Cloud of other
Witnesses, that the Manner thereof is incomprehensible, and inexpressible. And
hence the Ancient Fathers were wont to say concerning it, That it was
incomprehensible, without the Vicissitude of Time, without Separation, and
without Change or Passion, either in the Father or Son. Prove. viii. 22, 23.
Mic. v. 2. Colos. i. 17. John i. 1. and xiv. 10, 11. Which they expressed in
the following Words, acataleptoos, achronoos, achoristoos, apathoos.

Now the Second Person of the Trinity, is only the Son of God, on the Account
of his eternal Generation, although his Sonship be manifested by his Incarnation,
Romans i. And hence he is called the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and express
Image of his Person, Heb. i. 3. Colos. i. 15. He is surely the Son of the
Father, in a Sense different from any mere Creature in Heaven or Earth,
otherwise he could not be called the only begotten Son of God, and equal to
God. Phil. ii. 6. And therefore it must be by eternal Generation: He had the
Character of a Son before he assumed human Nature. ( John iii. 16.) And
therefore that Assumption could not be the Cause of his Sonship, to suppose
that the Incarnation of our Lord, is the Cause of his Sonship, is to destroy
the Paternal Relation of the first Person to him: For thus the third Person
might be called his Father as well as the First; and as to the seeming
Absurdities that are objected, it may be in general replied, that those take
Place only in natural Generations, not supernatural.

But to proceed, the personal Property of the Son, is to be begotten by the
Father, Prove. viii. 24, 25. John i. 14. We beheld his Glory, the Glory, as of
the only begotten of the Father. Heb. i. 5. For unto which of the Angels said
he at any Time, thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee. As active
Generation is the Manner of the Fathers subsisting, so passive Generation is
the Manner of the Son's.

Again, the personal Property of the Holy Ghost is, to proceed from the Father
and the Son, John xiv. 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all Things. And chap. xv. 16.
But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me.

And thus it appears that the sacred Three are distinguished by their personal
Properties; and by the Order of subsisting, and acting consequent thereupon.

The personal Properties show that they are so distinguished, that one cannot
be the other. The Father cannot be the Son, or the Son the Father, Yet he that
has seen the Son, has seen the Father also. John xiv. 9. As to the Order of
their subsisting, the Father is the first Person, who subsists entirely of
himself, the Son the second Person, begotten by Father, the Spirit is the
Third, who proceeds from both the Father and Son. This Order should not be
inverted, though in the mean Time we must not conceive that there is any real
Priority, as to Nature, Time, or Dignity but of order only, in respect of their
Original. The Father considered as such, is first in order before his Son, but
the Manner of the Generation of the Son, and Procession of the Holy Ghost, is
to us, as has been before observed, incomprehensible! Hence is that of the
Prophet, Isa. liii 8. Who shall declare his Generation.

Again the Persons of the Trinity are distinguished, as was before hinted, by
their Order of acting, which is agreeable to that of their subsisting, the
Father works of himself, by the Son and Holy Ghost, the Son from the Father,
by the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit from the Father and Son, by himself,
John xvi. 13. Howheit when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all Truth, for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear,
that shall he speak. John v. 19. Then answered Jesus and said unto him, verily
verily I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the
Father do, for what Things soever he does, these also does he likewise.
Undoubtedly the Power of working is only one, and therefore common to all the
Three, but the Order and Object of working is different; and hence the first
Work, namely Creation, is ascribed to the First Person; and the second Work,
viz. Redemtion to the Second; and the Third Work, namely, Sanctification to the
third Person of the Trinity. This by many Divines is termed the Economy of the
Persons of the Godhead; which may be thus described, viz. That it is such an
Order of acting, as directly tends to manifest the personal Glory of the Father
Son and Spirit.

Though all the Works of God, are ascribed to every Person of the Trinity,
because all the divine Attributes equally belong to them, and therefore every
Work must be equally produced by them. Yet seeing there are distinct Persons in
the Godhead, it is but reasonable that their personal Glory should be
peculiarly Manifested. Now this the sacred Scripture Points to, by that
different Order of acting, which it ascribes to the sacred Three. Hence the
Work of our Salvation in respect of its Projection, is first assigned to the
Father, in regard of its Purchase to the Son, and in respect of its Application
to the Holy Ghost.

It is of the last necessity that under this Head, we carefully avoid
Sabellianism on the one Hand, which allows of no Distinction among the Persons
of the Trinity, but what is merely nominal, and asserts that one and the same
Person because of his different Operations, is sometimes called Father,
sometimes Son, and sometimes Holy Spirit, and on the other, that we with equal
Care avoid the Tritheism of Valentinus, who deemed that there were Three
eternal Spirits, unequal to each other, and different in Essence, and so by
consequence that there were three Gods: Some to avoid the Heresy of Sabellius,
have held that the Persons of the Trinity differ from each other really, but
that seeming to verge to Tritheism, others to avoid that extreme, have held
that they only differ modally, as one manner from another, but some thinking
that the modal Distinction, is too superficial and that it verges to
Sabellianism do observe, that the Distinction is real-Modal, this seems to
guard best against both Extremes. But if those scholastic Distinctions do not
satisfy, it will be enough to say, that the Persons of the Trinity differ as
Three, or that they are so distinguished, by personal Properties, that the one
cannot be the other.

Here I shall beg leave to cite the Words of famous Mr. How, in his Discourse
upon the Trinity, page 540 which run thus, Since therefore there is a Necessity
apprehended, of acknowledging three such Somewhats in the Godhead, both because
the Word of God, who best understands his own Nature, does speak of three in
it, so plainly, that without notorious Violence, it cannot be understood
otherwise, and because it affirms some Things of one, or other of them, which
it affirms not of the rest, it will therefore be necessary to admit a true
Distinction between them, otherwise they cannot be three, and safe to say, there
is so much, as is requisite to found the distinct Affirmations which we find in
God's Word concerning this or that apart from the other, otherwise we shall in
Effect deny what God affirms; and modest to confess, that how great the
Distinction is, with precise and particular Limitation, we do not know, nor
dare we enquire or determine; only that as it cannot be less then is sufficient
to sustain such distinct Predicates or Attributions, so it cannot be so great,
as to entrench upon the Unity of the Godhead. Thus far he

It may be here added, that the Persons of the Trinity are distinguished from
the Essence, as one from Three, or as that which is communicable from that
which is incommunicable. I proceed to the

2d. Proposed, which was to prove the Unity of the sacred Three, in the
Godhead. And these Three are One, One God equal in Power and Glory. There is no
need of spending Time in attempting to prove the Godhead of the Father, seeing
it is questioned by none but Atheists. I shall therefore proceed to prove the
Godhead of the Son; which appears from this, that all the Peculiars of Divinity
are ascribed to him, as is evident from the following Induction of Particulars,
viz.

1st. The Names of God are ascribed to him: Thus he is called God. Heb. i. 8.
But unto the Son he says, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, likewise the
mighty God. (Isa. ix. 6.) The True God. (1 John, v. 20.) God Blessed forever.
(Romans ix. 5.) The Lord of Glory. (1 Cor. ii. 8.) Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings. (Rev. xvii. 14.) The Name Jehovah appears to be the peculiar Name of
God. Ps. lxxxiii. 18. That thou whose Name alone is Jehovah, art the most high
over all the Earth. Exo. iii. 14 Thus shall thou say to the Children of Israel,
I AM ( or Jehovah) has sent me unto you; this is my Memorial unto all
Generations. Now that the Name Jehovah is ascribed to the second Person of the
Trinity, appears from the following Places of Scripture, viz. (Numb. xxi.
5.6.7.) There the People, after the awful Judgment of the fiery Serpents was
sent among them, confessed that they had sinned against the Lord, or Jehovah.
Now this Passage we find expressly applied to CHRIST by the Apostle in his
Epistle to the Corinthians. 1 Epist. x. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ as some
of them also tempted, and were destroyed of the Serpents, Isa. xl. 3. The Voice
of him that cries in the Wilderness, pepare the Way of the Lord, or Jehovah,
make strait in the Desert a high Way for our God. (See this applied to Christ,
Mat. iii. 3.11.) Another notable Place of Scripture to the same Purpose is,
Isa. vi. 1.2. Mine Eyes have seen the King the Lord, or Jehovah: This is
likewise applied to CHRIST, Joh. xii. 40.41. Our Lord likewise assumes the Name
Jehovah, as appears by his telling the Jews thus, before Abraham was, I AM;
many other Proofs might be brought, but what have been mentioned, if duly
considered, may, I hope, suffice. But

2dly. The Attributes of God are ascribed to CHRIST, as particularly,

(1.) Omniciency, John. xxi. 17. Lord thou know all Things. And elsewhere it
is said, that he knew from the Beginning who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him. John. vi. 64. and John ii. 24.25. It is said, JESUS did
not commit himself unto them, because he knew all Men, and needed not that any
should testify of Man, for he knew what was in Man. Besides, Rev. ii. 23. He is
said to search the Reins and Heart. Such Knowledge as this, is surely beyond
the Reach of Men and Angels.

(2.) Omnipotency is ascribed to CHRIST, Rev. i. 8. I am the Alpha and Omega,
the Beginning and Ending, says the Lord, which is, which was, which is to
come, the Almighty. Philip. iii. 21. Whereby he is able to subdue all Things to
himself: And hence he is called the mighty God, and said to uphold all Things
by his Power. (Is. xi. 6. Heb. i. 3.)

(3.) Eternity is ascribed to CHRIST: And hence he is called the Everlasting
Father. (Is. ix. 6.) And said to live for ever and ever. (Rev. x. 6.) And that
his goings forth have been from of Old, from Everlasting. (Mic. v. 2.)

(4.) Omnipresence is likewise ascribed to CHRIST. Mat. xviii. 20. Where two or
three are gathered together in my Name there am I in the midst of them; this is
a manifest Evidence of the Godhead of our Lord; for surely a Creature cannot
be in two Places at once. To imagine that the aforesaid Place of Scripture
intends only the Presence of our Lords Authority, is to suppose a Tautology in
the Words which is absurd; for to be gathered together in his Name, signifies
his Authority: surely it is but reasonable to take this Place of Scripture, in
the same Sense with that Parallel one, Exo. xx. 24. In all Places where I
record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee. See likewise
Matt. xxviii. ult. Lo I am with you always unto the End of the World.

(5.) Independency is ascribed to CHRIST. Rev. i. 8.17. I am Alpha and Omega,
the Beginning and Ending says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is
to come. Independency is likewise implied in the name Jehovah, which is given
to CHRIST; as has been proved before.

(6.) Equality with God is likewise ascribed to Christ: And hence it is said,
that he was in the form of God, and thought it no Robery to be equal with God.
Philip. ii. 5.6.7. For this Reason he is justly called the Fellow of God. Zec.
xiii. 7. And all that the Father has are said to be his. ( Joh. xvi. xv.)

(7.) Immutability in Essence is ascribed to our Lord. Ps. cii, 27, 28. But
thou art the same and thy Years shall have no End, the Children of thy Servants
shall continue, and their Seed shall be established before thee. Compared with
Heb. i. 12. As a Vesture thou shall fold them up, and they shall be changed,
but thou art the same, and thy Years shall not fail. And in a Word there is no
Attribute belongs to the Father, but what is also ascribed to the Son. Again

3dly the Works of God are ascribed to CHRIST, particularly,

(1.) The Work of Creation, Joh. i. 3. All Things were made by him, and without
him was not any Thing made that was made. Col. i. 16. For by him were all
Things created that are in Heaven and that are in Earth, visible and invisible.
Now Creation is certainly a Work which requires Almighty Strength, a Work which
none but a God can perform.

(2.) The Work of Providence is attributed to our Lord: And hence it is said,
that by him all Things consist, and are upheld by the Word of his Power. (Col.
i. 17. and Heb. i. 3.) These words of our Lord to the Jews John v. 17. are
applicable to the same Purpose, viz, My Father works hitherto, and I work.

(3.) Miraculous Works are ascribed to CHRIST, John. v. 21. For as the Father
raises up the Dead, and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he
will. An Instance of this we have John xi. 43, 44. Where we are told that our
Lord commanded Lazarus to come forth, after he had been four Days dead, and
that this was immediately obeyed, the dead came forth, bound Hand and Foot,
with grave Cloths. Our Lord likewise raised himself from the Dead. ( John x.
18.) Many other Instances might be produced, but I must not persist.

(4.) Works of Grace are in like Manner attributed to the Lord JESUS; such as,

(1.) Election, John xiii. 18, I speak not of you all, I know whom I have
chosen.

(2.) Justification, Isa. liii. 11. By his Knowledge shall my righteous Servant
justify many, Mat. ix. 6. But that ye may know that the Son of Man has Power
on Earth to forgive Sins.

(3.) Regeneration, Ephesians. ii. 1. And you has be quickened who were dead in
Trespasses and Sins. And hence CHRIST is said to be the Author and Finisher of
Faith.

(4.) Salvation, Mat. i. 21. And shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call
his name JESUS, for he shall save his People from their Sins. Hence he is
called the Captain of our Salvation; and we are told that in his Name alone
Happiness is to be had, Act. iv. 12. To what has been said under this Head, we
may add our Lords Mission of the Holy-Spirit, and Institution of sacred
Ordinances, Joh. xvi. 7. If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto
you, but if I depart I will send him unto you. Mat. xxviii. 18.19. All Power is
given unto me in Heaven and Earth. Go therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

4thly. The Worship due to God only is ascribed to CHRIST: And hence Men are
enjoined to honor the Son even as they honor the Father, Joh. v. 22.23.
Particularly

(1.) We are enjoined to adore him, Heb. i. 6. And when he brings in the
first Begotten into the World, he says, and let all the Angels of God worship
him. (1 Cor. i. 12.) Called to be Saints with all that in every Place, call
upon the Name of JESUS CHRIST our Lord, both theirs and ours.

(2.) We are bid to trust in him and obey him, John xiv. 1. Let not your Heart
be troubled, believe in God, believe also in me. Romans x. 11. For the Scripture
says Whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed. Hs. ii. 12. Kiss the
Son least he be Angry, and ye perish from the Way.

(3.) We are to be baptized in his Name, as well as in the Name of the Father.
Mat. xviii. 19.

Again I add, that our Lord did assert his Godhead in diverse Conferrences with
the Jews. (See John v. 16. to the 19th. Verse.) The Jews sought to slay him,
because he made himself equal with God. Now our Lord does not in Answer hereto
endeavor to clear himself of that Charge; which surely he would have done had
he not been God, otherwise he would be Guilty of the greatest Impiety. When the
People of Lystra attempted to worship Paul and Barnabas, they rent their
Clothes, and ran among them, crying out Sirs, why do ye these Things? We also
are Men of like Passions with you, Act. xiv. 14.15. But our Savior instead of
rejecting the Charge, notwithstanding of some Passages that respect his human
Nature, asserts his Divinity, by showing that he quickened whom he pleased, as
well as the Father; likewise that all Judgment was committed to him, and that
all Men should honor him as they honor the Father; that he had Life in
himself, and should raise the Dead at the last Day. At another Time, Joh. viii.
53. to 58. After the Jews had inquired, art thou greater than our Father
Abraham? -- He replied, your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my Day, and he saw
it and was glad. Then said the Jews unto him, thou art not yet fifty Years Old,
and have thou seen Abraham: To this our Lord answered, before Abraham was, I
AM! At this Time the Jews were enraged, and took up Stones to throw at him,
supposing that he had spoken Blasphemy, in preferring himself to Abraham, and
making himself equal to God. It is certain that being stoned to Death, was a
Penalty denounced by the judicial Law against Blasphemers; the aforesaid
Sentence of our Lord, seems to be Parallel with that of the Prophet, respecting
the the Eternity of God, viz. Isa. xliii. 13. Yea before the Day was, I AM he.

Another very memorable Conference we have, Mat. ix. from the 2d. to the 6th.
Verse. Our Lord declared to one sick of the Palsy, that his Sins were forgiven
him; on which Occasion the Scribes murmured, and charged him with Blasphemy.
JESUS knowing their Thoughts replied, wherefore think ye Evil in your Hearts?
For whether is it easier to say, thy Sins be forgiven thee, or to say arise and
walk; but that ye may know the Son of Man has Power on Earth to forgive Sins,
he says to the Person Sick of the Palsy, take up thy Bed, and go into thine
House. Proving by this Miracle his Divinity; which they opposed, and
consequently his Power to forgive Sins.

Though Miracles do not argue the Divinity of the Person that Works them from any
visible Circumstance contained in them; yet they effectualy prove it, in Case
this be the Thing contested, and an explicit Appeal be made to the divine
Power to confirm it by Miracles.

Our Lord had at the aforesaid Conference as good an Opportunity, and as loud a
Call as could be desired to disclaim all Pretense to Divinity, if the Case was
really so; but instead of this he asserts and proves his Godhead, maugre the
Jewish Rage, which Practice could not consist with Integrity if he were not God.

And now I shall proceed to offer a few practical Reflections, and so conclude
at present. And 1st. What has been said informs us of the following
Particulars, viz. 1st. Of the true Order and Manner of worshipping God, and that
is in the Son and by the Spirit, Joh. xvi. 23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my Name, he will give it you. Ephesians. vi. 18. Praying allways with all
Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit. Surely it is by the Son, we should come
to the Father in our Supplications, and hence CHRIST is called the Way, John
xix. 6. And we are said to have Boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood
of JESUS by a new or living Way, which he has consecrated for us, that is to
say his Flesh, Heb. x. 19, 20. Those are therefore to be suspected as Guilty of
the Heresy of Sabellius, who do not according to the Scriptures, ordinarily
come to the Father by the Son in their Prayers, but usually address the Son, as
though he were the Father, and do not give to each of the sacred Three, their
distinct personal Glory in their Acts of Devotion; but so frequently address
the Son, as if there were no other Person but he in the Trinity.

2dly, How Happy is the State of all regenerate Persons who have this three --
one God, in all his Glory and Excellency for their sure Portion here, ( Jer.
xxxi. 33.) and shall be continually delighted, with beholding the distinct
Benefits received from each of the sacred Three hereafter. Rev. i. 5. And from
JESUS CHRIST, the Faithful Witness unto him that loved us, and washed us from
our Sins in his Blood. And does it not increase their Felicity, that the
Charter of the Holy Scripture, by which the aforesaid Portion is made over, is
confirmed by the united Testimony of the sacred Trinity from Heaven, as our
Text informs us, There are Three that bear record in Heaven, and these Three
are One.

3dly. How much should our Souls be affected by thinking on the Fathers Love,
in giving his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins. Herein is Love, indeed
without Peer or Parallel, ( John iv. 10.) in that a Son was given for worthless
Rebels, to Shame, Misery and Death it self, of the most hideous Kind! A Son not
by Creation as the Angels, nor by Adoption as Believers, but by eternal
Generation. His own, beloved, dear, only begotten Son, in whom he was well
pleased. (Romans viii. 32. Mat. iii. 17. Col. i. 13. Joh. i. 14.18.) And that to
prevent the eternal Perishing of poor Sinners. ( Joh. iii. 16.)

And what shall we say of the Kindness of the Son of God, in stooping so low to
save guilty Worms from eternal Woe and Ruin; though he had the Form of God, yet
he willingly assumed the Form of a Servant, that we might be made the Sons of
God. He that had the Heavens for his Throne, was contented with a Manger for
his Cradle; though he was Rich he became Poor, that we through his Poverty might be
made Rich; was crowned with Thorns; endured the Death of the Cross, and was
laid in the Bosom of the Grave; that we might be crowned with immortal Glory,
delivered from the second Death, and embraced in the Bosom of Abraham, the
Bosom of God.

And how much should we be affected, likewise with the Kindness of the Holy
Spirit in enlightening our Minds, renewing and comforting our Hearts by his
divine Influences, without which we could have no special Benefit by the Death
of CHRIST, no Communion with God here; or Enjoyment of him in a future World.

But to proceed, me thinks the Consideration of the Divinity of the Son of God,
is one of the most pregnant and powerful Incentives possible to Admiration,
Love, Humility, and Obedience: How sublime the Theme? How surprising the
Thought that the eternal Father should give his coequal Son, the darling of
his Soul, out of the Embraces of his Bosom, to bleed a Victom on the accursed
Tree, to purchase Peace, Pardon and Life for worthless Rebels! O the amazing
Heights, the interminable Depths of this stupenduous dear Affection! This is
Love infinitely surpassing the narrow Bounds of human Thought or Language. Love
that none but a God is equal to! And how Strange, is it that the blessed God
should become incarnate, the Ancient of Days become an Infant of Time, the
Majesty of Heaven stoop to assume the Infirmities of Humanity! O my Brethren!
did not rest himself become weary to give the weary Rest? And the Fountain of
Consolation become a Man of Sorrows, to bring his People to unceasing Joys and
Triumphs!

When we contemplate upon the Dignity of the Person of the Son of God, together
with the Depth and Design of his Abasure, what can more powerfully constrain us
to Humility and Affection, both to God and Man! For therein we may behold the
great God desending from his Throne, to teach us those amiable Virtues by his
own Example, as well as the Excellency of universal Obedience to the divine
Law. The Godhead of CHRIST beautifies all the Instances of his Abasure with the
most transcendant Charms, unrivald Ornaments, and amiable Atractives! This is
the Object of our Adoration and religion Reverence; this fires our Affections,
and is the Foundation of our Hopes; this, this strikes the Springs of our
Ingenuity and Gratitude, and raises our admiring Thoughts into Ecstasy and
Ravishment! While we with Attention view the inutterable, unparalled, and
incomprehensible Prodigy of divine Affection in the Mediation of the Son of
God! But if with the Socinians and Arians we deny his proper Deity, our
Admiration ceases, our Love Languishes, and our Devotion dies for the Gift of a
mere Creature: And his Sufferings are inconsiderable Things, not worthy to be
once mentioned, in Comparison of the Gift, and Condescension of a God! The
Object of our Worship is removed; the Ground of our Hopes unhinged, and the
whole Scene of the Gospel destroyed at a Stroke. Dreadful Thought!

Let us therefore be entreated equally to love, honor, and obey each Person of
the sacred Trinity. Let all Men honor the Son, as they honor the Father, John
v. 23. Our Lord as Man obeyed his Father, and how much more should we. ( Joh.
iv. 34.) Let us also kiss the Son least he be Angry, and we perish from the
Way; and seeing the Spirit of God has made us. Job. xxxiii. 4. Why should not
he be adored by us.

But the Time being elapsed I must conclude, in the mean while ascribing all
Glory to the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinitiy; the Three in One, and One
in Three; the Father, Word and Spirit, let Men and Angels say Amen.

SERMON XXIII.
I JOHN v. 7. For there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost. And these Three are One.


THE Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity, is purely an Object of Faith. The
Line of Reason is too short to fathom this Mystery, and therefore where Reason
cannot wade, there Faith must swim, but though this sublime Foundation Doctrine,
be above Reason, yet it is not contrary to it. This I think the learned Mr.
How, has made evident in his Discourse upon the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead. In my last Discourse upon the Doctrine of the Trinity, you may
remember that I proposed the following Method, viz. I. I was to offer some
Considerations serving to confirm and explain it. II. I was to prove by diverse
Arguments, the Unity of the sacred Three, or that each of them is truly and
really God, And III. I proposed to answer the most important Objections, and
then proceed to the Improvement of the Whole.


The first general Head was discussed, and under the Second, I offered what
Arguments I judged sufficient to prove the Godhead of the Son. It remains now
that I prove the Godhead of the Holy Ghost.

This I think is evident not only from his Being numbered with divine Persons,
as one with them as our Text asserts; but also from this Consideration, that
all the Peculiars of Divinity are ascribed to him, as well as to the Father and
Son, which will be manifest by the following Induction of Particulars, namely

1st. Divine Names are ascribed to him, thus he is expressly called God, Act v.
3, 4. Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine Heart to lie to the Holy
Ghost, thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God. He is likewise called Lord:
Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is
Liberby, here it may be observed, that the Seventy Interpreters generally
render the Name Jehovah by that of Lord (Kurios) he is also called Jehovah as
appears by comparing Isa. vi. 8, 9. Also I heard the Voice of the Lord saying,
and who will go for us, then said I, here am I, send me, and he said go and
tell this People hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but
perceive not. Now it is plain, that it is the Lord or Jehovah that speaks in
this Place of Scripture, but this we find expressly applied to the Holy Ghost
Acts. xxviii. 25, 26. well spoke the Holy Ghost, by Esaias the Prophet unto our
Fathers, saying, go unto this People, and say, hearing ye shall hear, and shall
not understand, and seeing ye shall see and not perceive. The same Truth
appears by comparing Ex. xvii. 7. And he called the Name of the Place Massah
and Meribah because they tempted the Lord, or Jehovah, this we find applied to
the Holy Ghost, Heb. iii. 7, 8. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says -- harden
not your Hearts, as in the Provocation in the Day of Temptation in the
Wilderness, when your Fathers tempted me, proved me and saw my Works. More
Proofs of the Name Jehovah ascribed to the Holy Ghost, we have in the following
Places of Scripture, viz. Jer. xxxi. 31. compared with Heb. x. 15, 16. Levit.
xvi. 2 compared with Heb. ix. 78.

2dly. The Attributes of God are ascribed to the Holy Ghost, namely

1st. Omniciency, or all Knowledge 1 Cor. ii. 10. The Spirit searches all
Things, yea the deep Things of God. The Word searches, denotes the
Exquisiteness of his divine Knowledge Ps. cxxix. 23, 24.

2dly. Almightiness and independent Power, 1 Cor. xii. 4, 6, 11. Now there are
diversity of Gifts, but the same Spirit, but it is the same God which works
all in all, but all these works, that one and the self same Spirit, dividing
to every one severally as he will. Compare Luke xi. 20. with Mat. xii. 28. But
if I with the Finger of God cast out Devils, no doubt the Kingdom of God is
come among you, but if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom
of God is come unto you.

3dly. Eternity is likewise ascribed to the Holy Ghost, Heb. ix. 14. CHRIST
through the eternal Spirit, offered himself, without Spot to God. Again

4thly. Immensity is also ascribed to him, Psalm. cxxxix. 7.10. Whither shall I
go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy Presence. If I ascend up
into Heaven, thou art there, If I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there,
If I take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost Parts of the
Sea, even there shall thy Hand lead me, and thy Right Hand shall hold me.

3dly. Divine Operations are ascribed to the Holy Spirit, such as,

1st. Creation, Gen i. 2. The Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters.
By the Spirit of God, cannot be meant the Air or Wind, as some suppose: For
that was not created till the second Day, when God made the Firmament, the
aforesaid Place of Scripture is explained and illustrated, by Job. xxxiii. 4.
The Spirit of God has made me.

2dly. Miraculous Works are ascribed to the Holy Ghost, particularly the
raising of the dead, Romans viii. 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up
JESUS from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up CHRIST from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you, likewise
the Gift of healing, Tongues, and Prophesies, is attributed to the Holy Spirit,
1 Cor. xii. to the 11. Now there are diversity of Gifts, but the same Spirit,
differences of Administration, but the same Lord, -- diversitys of Operations,
but the same God which works all in all.

3dly. The Unction of our Lord by the Holy Ghost is another Argument of his
Divinity, compared Isai. lxi 1. with Luke iv. 18. The Spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good Tidings unto the Meek. The
Unction of our Lord, alludes to a Usage which obtained under the Jewish
Economy, namely, of anointing Kings, Prophets and Priests with Oil, to signify
their Authority and Fitness, to execute their several Offices, and therefore it
plainly signifies that our Lord was authorized, and qualified to perform the
mediatorial Work, by the Holy Ghost, which is no inconsiderable Argument of his
Deity.

4thly. The supernatural Works of Conviction, Conversion, Sanctification, and
Consolation are likewise ascribed to the Holy Ghost, John xvi. 8, 9. And when
he is come he will reprove the World of Sin, John iii. 5. Except a Man be born
of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. On the
Account of sanctifying Influence, he is called the Holy Spirit, and in respect
of his comforting Influence, the Comforter.

5thly. The Holy Spirit did likewise Commission Persons for the Ministry, and
in a sovereign Way order as to the Places where they are to exercise it. Which
is an unalianable Prerogative of the Crown of Heaven, and therefore an
incontestible Evidence of his Deity. See Act. xiii. 2. The Holy Ghost said,
separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the Work whereunto I have called them, Acts
xvi. 6, 7. They were forbidden of the Holy Ghost, to preach the Word in Asia,
they essayed to go into Bithinia, but the Spirit suffered them not.

4thly The Holy Ghost is the Object of religious Worship, and hence Believers
are said to be his Temples, 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17. Because they are devoted to his
Worship, and baptized in his Name, Mat. xxviii. 19. We are excited to worship
him, Ps. xcv. 6. compared with Heb. iii. 7, 9. And there is a Sin peculiarly
against the Holy Ghost, which is unpardonable, Mat. xii. 31, 32. Now it is
certain that religious Worship is due only to God, Mat. iv. 10. For it is
written thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. I
proceed to the

3d. Proposed which was to Answer some Objections. 1st. The Antitrinitarians
Object against the Godhead of our Lord JESUS thus, namely That the Son is said
to be less than the Father, John xiv. 28. and subject to him, 1 Cor. 15.28.

Answ. He is elsewhere said to be equal to God, to be in the Form of God, Phil.
ii. 6. And hence equal Honor with the Father is ascribed to him, ( John v.
23.) From whence we may easily infer, that the Son is less than the Father, and
yet equal to him in different Respects: He is equal to God the Father in regard
of his Essence, and less than him, not only in respect of his human Nature, but
likewise in regard of his mediatorial Office. By becoming the Sinners Surety,
he derived their Guilt upon him, and so became Subject to the Father as a
Debtor: He is likewise represented in Scripture as a Servant of God, on Account
of his Mediation; because he undertook it according to his Fathers Order, and
is to be considered in the whole of this as acting in Pursuance thereof, and
Subserviency thereto: To which some add, That he may be said to be less than
the Father, in respect of the Relation of Sonship, by which, in human Affairs,
the Son is said to be less than the Father, although, as to the Being of
Humanity, he be equal to him, yea, in Regard of Gifts, Wisdom, Goodness, etc.
above him.

Object. 2. "The Lord JESUS is frequently called Man, and the Son of Man in
Scripture.

Answ. It is true, but the Design thereof, is not to exclude his Godhead, which
has been already proved, but to signify its real inseparable and personal Union
to the human Nature: And hence it is said John i. 14. That the Word was made
Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, as the Glory of the only
begotten Son of God. And we are told 1 Timothy iii. 16. That God was manifest in
the Flesh. And elsewhere that God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made
under the Law, Gal. iv. 4.

Object. 3. "The Son calls the Father his God.

Answ. It is true he does so, but only on the Account of his human Nature.

Object. 4 The Father is only said to be our God, (1 Cor. viii. 6.) and
therefore the Son is not.

Answ. As the Text which calls the Lord JESUS our only Lord, does not exclude
the Father, so neither does this, which is parallel to it, exclude the Son: The
Scope of the Place mentioned in the Objection, is only to exclude false Gods
from a claim to Deity, and sovereign Dominion.

Object. 5. "The Father is called the only true God." Joh. xvii. 3.

Answ. The Son is elsewhere called the true God. 1 John v. 20. And we know that
the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may know him
that is True, and we are in him that is True, even in his Son JESUS CHRIST,
this is the true God and eternal Life. Now if he be the true God he can be but
one; neither is the Father alone exclusive of the Son, called the one true God,
in the forecited Scripture, but the Son is joined, that they may know thee the
only true God; to which is added, and whom thou have sent JESUS CHRIST, namely
to be the one true God.

Object. 6. CHRIST himself has said, that he is God as Magistrates are Gods,
Joh. x. 35. namely by Reason of Office, not of Essence.

Answ. CHRIST had said in the 30th verse of the same Chapter, I and the Father
are one: And hence the Jews charged him with Blasphemy; because by this he
declared himself to be God. Our Lord answers from the Lesser to the Greater to
this Effect, namely, If Magistrates on Account of their Office are called Gods,
how much more am I really so, who am sent by my Father, who do his Works, and
am in him, and he in me. Joh. x. 37, 38.

Object. 7. The Son is a made Lord, Heb. i. 4. Being made so much better than
the Angels, as he has obtained a more excellent Name than they. See likewise
to the same Purpose, Heb. iii. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed him;
and therefore CHRIST is made God.

Answ. To be Lord, and to be God, are not Terms of the same Import; there are
many Lords, who in the mean Time are not God's. Here it should be noted that a
twofold Dominion belongs to CHRIST, viz. Essential and Mediatorial; the First
belongs to him as God, and the Second as Mediator: In the first Respect he
cannot be made a Lord, and therefore its only in Regard of the Second that our
Savior is so called. As Mediator he is made Head over all Things to his
Church, which does not at all interfere with his Godhead, or essential
Government. ( See Ephesians. i. 22, Ephesians. iv. 15. Col. i. 18.)

Object. 8. Against the Argument for CHRIST'S Deity, drawn from his being the
Object of Religious Worship, it is alleged, That if God commands us to worship
a Creature, we must obey him, and that he has commanded us to worship the Son,
Heb. i. 6. He says let all the Angels of God worship him.

Answ. The Objection is grounded upon an impossible Supposition. God can no
more command us to worship a Creature, than he can forbid us to worship
himself; for hereby he should give his Glory to another, which cannot be; this
farther appears thus, viz. Addoration is a saying to a Person, who is the
Object thereof, Thou have divine Perfections, and to say this to a Creature is
contrary to Truth, and therefore cannot be commanded by God: And if we consider
Worship, as it is our addressing our selves to him, whom we worship in such a
Way as becomes a God. He cannot give us a Warrant so to do, for that would be
to divest himself of his Glory: and it would also disappoint our Expectations,
by putting us on trusting one that cannot save.

Object. 9. Some say that Honors, truly Divine, may be given to the Son, as
the Fathers Representative, which will terminate in the Father as an
Ambassador, who is considered as sustaining the Character of the Prince that
sends him is honored, as personating him whom he represents.

Answ. Whatever Difference is shown to an Ambassador, there is a Distinction
made in the Expression thereof between him and his Master, signifying, that he
is but a Subject, and if the Case was otherwise, the Prince would be justly
offended; neither is there any Foundation in the sacred Oracles to assert,
that, religious Worship is twofold, namely, Supreme and Subordinate, and that
the Latter does not terminate in the immediate Object thereof, but in another
whom this represents: When our Lord informs us, that he acted in his Fathers
Name, sought his Glory, and referred all the Honor shown him thereto. These
Forms of Expressions only signify, that as Man and Mediator, he is inferior to
his Father, and acts as such by a delegated Authority from him. ( Isa. xlii.
1.) But the Mediator considered as to his divine Nature, is coequal and
coeternal with his Father; as has been proved before.

Object. 10. CHRIST refused to have one of the divine Perfections ascribed to
him. Mat. xix. 17. Why call thou me Good, there is none good but one, that
is God.

Answ. Some do not improbably understand the Places of Scripture mentioned in
the Objection, as a Method which our Lord used to convince the young Man of the
Erroniousness of the Doctrines of the Pharisees, of which Sect he was: It is as
if our Lord had spoke to the following Effect, Seeing you will not own me to be
God, why call thou me Good? For there is none originally, essentially and
absolutely Good but he: Either first acknowledge me to be a divine Person, or
else do not ascribe divine Honor to me; for then by Consequence thou might
as well ascribe them to any mere Creature.

It may be farther observed, that what our Lord says respecting the Oneness of
God in the forecited Place of Scripture, should be understood in the same Sense
with those Places which deny a Plurality of Gods. The Terms one, only, do not
except the Son from the same Godhead with the Father, as appears from the
following Places of Scripture. Mat. xi. 27. No One knows the Son but the
Father, nor any one the Father save the Son. It would be absurd to infer from
the aforesaid Place of Scripture, that neither the Son or the Father know
themselves.

Mr. Pool observes in his Synopsis that there is another reading of the
aforesaid Text of great Antiquity, namely this, Why does thou ask me concerning
Good, and observes, that Beza and Grotius read it thus, as well as the vulgar
latin Version, and three most ancient and correct Copies, together with the
Hebrew Version of Mathews Gospel, with which Origin, Chrysostom and Austin
agree in many Things. But if we take the Words agreeable to the Copies now in
Use, they do not import any absolute Rejection of the Character of Good, for
this our Lord elsewhere ascribes to himself. Joh. x. 14, 15, 28. I am the good
Shepherd, I lay down my Life for the Sheep; and give unto them eternal Life.

I shall now proceed to answer some Objections against the Godhead of the
Holy Ghost. And

1st. "It is objected that he prays for the coming of CHRIST to Judgment. (
Rev. xxii. 17.)

Answ. Most certainly the Holy-Spirit prays efficiently in Believers, he
excites Desires in them after CHRIST'S second coming; but he prays not formally
in himself: Or there is perhaps a Figure called Hendiadis in the Place of
Scripture mentioned in the Objection, whereby but one Thing is signified by
those two Words, Spirit and Bride, namely the spiritual Bride, or Bride having
spiritual Dispositions.

Object. 2. The Spirit is represented as the Gift of God, ( Luke xi. 13.) and
therefore he is not the Giver.

Answ. The Consequence does not hold Good universally, as appears thus. A
Person may give himself to another, as God in the Covenant of Grace gives
himself to his own, when by a gracious Act of his Will he becomes their God,
Shield, and exceeding great Reward, Genesis xv. 1. Besides it may be likewise
observed, that in several Places of Scripture the Gifts, and Graces of the
Holy Ghost, and especially the extraordinary Gifts are thus termed. See Acts x.
44, 45. The Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word. Act. xix. 2. We
have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. John vii. 39. The
Holy Ghost was not given, because JESUS was not yet glorified.

Object. 3. The Holy Ghost is said to be sent, John xvi. 7. And therefore he
serves, and so is not God.

Answ. The Consequence of serving does not follow from the Premises
universally, neither can it be true in the present Case, that he should serve
to whom all the divine Attributes belong. All those Places of Scripture, which
seem to represent the Holy Ghost as inferior to the Father and Son, may be
understood as signifying a Subserviency of the Works of the Spirit, which are
metanomically termed himself, to the Works of the Father and Son, which imports
no Inferiority of Persons.

Object. 4. It is alleged that the Holy-Spirit changes Place, and so is not
God, Luke iii. 21, 22. The Holy Ghost descended like a dove upon him. --

Answ. The Blessed Spirit changes not Place really, but symbollically, as God
the Father does. Genesis xviii. 21. I will go down. The outward Symbols or Tokens
of God's Presence, may move from Place to Place; but his Being is Omnipresent,
and is infinitely beyond the Bounds of the Creation.

Object. 5. It is alleged that the Holy-Spirit has a Will distinct from the
Will of God, because he is said to interceed for the Saints, according to the
Will of God. (Romans viii. 27.)

Answ. The Manner of the Spirits interceeding, is represented in the preceding
Verse which is this, He stirs up in God's People by his efficiency, Groanings
that cannot be uttered. The Words cata, theon, or according to God, seem only
to import, that the Spirit helps pious People to pray as it becomes, or in that
Manner God requires. Here is no Difference asserted between Gods Will and his,
in which the Force of the Objection lies.

Object. 6. It is said of the Holy-Spirit, John. xvi. 13.14. That he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. -- For he
shall receive of mine, and show it unto you.

Ans. The aforesaid Text does not argue that the Spirit has all the Ideas of
Things impressed on his Mind, which he communicates, as Creatures have; for
this would contradict what is elsewhere said concerning him, viz. That he
knows the deep Things of God: But probably it intends this, that the Holy
Spirit would communicate no other Doctrines, than what Christ had before
revealed in the Gospel; besides the aforesaid Phrases seem to signify that the
Order of the Holy-Spirits acting, is agreeable to the Order of his subsisting,
namely, that as he proceeds from the Father and the Son, so he acts from them,
but without any Imperfection or Dependence in respect of his Essence,
Existence, or Action.

But I may add, that it is objected against the Doctrine of the Trinity in
general, namely, That it is contrary to Reason, and therefore ought not to be
believed.

Answ. That it is above Reason we confess, but that it is contrary to it we
deny. Now a Doctrine may be truly said, to be contrary to Reason, when it
contradicts some of the first Principles of reasoning, which are self Evident,
and universally acknowledged, such as that a Thing can be, and not be at the
same Time, that the whole is greater than a Part, etc. A Doctrine cannot be
truly called Unreasonable, merely because it opposes unjust Deductions from
first Principles; but we know not that the Article of the Trinity contradicts
any of those first Principles before mentioned, or others Parallel to them.

It is alleged that this is an Instance of Contradiction which some suggest,
namely, That while we assert that there is but one God; in the mean Time we
say, that there are three Persons in the Godhead, and that each of these is God.

Answ. But herein there is no Contradiction, because we say not that the sacred
Three are distinct Gods; the Distinction respects their Personality, and not
their Godhead: And when we say there are three Almighties we mean not that
these Perfections are distinct, but the very same in them all. Neither is the
Consequence valid from human to divine Personality, i. e. because human Persons
are distinct Beings, that therefore the Divine must be so. If indeed the divine
Personality were finite, like that of the Creature, then it might be reasonably
required that a finite Mind should account for it; but since it is not so, it
must therefore be incomprehensible, and thus our not being able to Grasp it
should be no Bar to our Belief of it. Surely seeing Almighty God knows best the
Manner of his own Existence, it is but reasonable we should believe the Account
which he has given of it, in that Revelation which bears the Characters of a
divine Original.

But I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject. And

1st What has been said serves to inform us, of the unhappy Case of all
Antitrinitarians, whether Jews, Turks, Arians, or Socinians, when our Lord had
proved his coequality with his Father, ( John v.) by showing that he was one
with him, and did the same Works. He therefore justly infers, that he that
honors not the Son honors not the Father. See v. 23. The same Truth is
elsewhere asserted. (1 John ii. 23.) Hence Paul concludes the Gentiles who were
without CHRIST to be Atheists. (Ephesians. ii. 12.) And is not he an Atheist who
denis religious Worship to him who is the true God. ( Romans i. 21.) And on the
other Hand is he not an Idolater who offers religious Worship to one whom he
believes not to be God. What Hope can we have of the Remission of Sins, without
Satisfaction be made for Sin, equal to its Demerit, which must be Infinite;
because Sin is objectively so, being committed against a Being of infinite
Perfection? Now is it not utterly impossible for a mere Creature, who is
necessarily finite, to perform this infinite Task. To suppose Sin may be
pardoned without equal Satisfaction, is to confront the rectoral Justice of God
as well as his Truth, which stands engaged to issue the Threats of the first
Covenant upon the Transgressors thereof, either upon themselves personally, or
upon a Surety in their Room and Place: And without Pardon what can ensue but
utter and irreparable Ruin? And what Ground have we to expect the Regeneration
of Men who are dead in Sins and Trespasses, without the Intervention of the
Almighty Energy of the Holy-Spirit? And can this be exerted by one who is not
God? And pray what is Religion without well grounded Hopes of the Remission of
Sins, and Regeneration, but Presumption, Formality, and Desperation? From all
which it evidently appears, that the denial of the Godhead of the Son and
Holy-Spirit, as well as of the Father, saps the very Foundations of the
Christian Religion, and exceedingly endangers the Salvation of Men's Souls.

Mr. Vincent in his judicious Explanation, of The Assemblies shorter Catechism,
page 33. in answer to this Question, namely, What should we judge of them that
deny that there are three distinct Persons in the Godhead? Says,

Answ. We ought to judge them to be Blasphemers, because they speak against the
ever glorious God, who has set sorth himself, in this Distinction in the Holy
Scriptures. 2dly. To be damnable Heretics! This Doctrine of the Distinction of
Persons, in the Unity of Essence being a fundamental Truth denied of old by the
Sabellians, Arians, Photinians, and of late by the Socinians, who were against
the Godhead of Christ the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, amongst whom the Quakers
are also to be numbered, who deny this Distinction.

2dly. The Doctrine of the Trinity shows the Sufficiency of the Almighty to
secure the Happiness of fallen Creatures, while each Person assumes his
peculiar Task to this End. The First decrees it, the Second purchases it, and
the Third applys and confers it. It is true indeed that every saving Benefit we
receive, is common to all the sacred Three, and therefore we find the same
Benefits expressly ascribed to them all complexly, and to each respectively, (
Rev. i. 4.5. John vi. 45. Mat. xxiii. 10. John xiv. 26.) Every Benefit belongs
to each Person of the sacred Trinity, after his own peculiar Manner, namely, to
the Father by Original Authority, and hence they are assigned to his good
Pleasure, ( Mat. xi. 25, 26.) To the Son they belong of Right and of Merit,
inasmuch as he has purchased them by his Blood, that of his Fullness we might
receive Grace for Grace, (John i. 16.) To the Holy Ghost they belong, by the
immediate Efficacy of Application. Romans viii. 11.

3dly. The Doctrine of the Trinity should invite us to the following Duties,
namely,

1st. To endeavor after a distinct Knowledge of this important Point, without
which we cannot worship God aright. Religious Worship is certainly due to all
the sacred Three, as appears from what has been already said before, and unless
we know this, how can we perform it, and how can we expect Fellowship with the
Father, and with the Son JESUS CHRIST, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, (1
John i. 3. 1 Cor. xiii.) except we know that there be such Persons? What can be
of more Moment to us, than to be strengthened in our Persuasion of the divine
Original of the Holy Scriptures? And to this End is not our Knowledge of the
Three that bear Record in Heaven peculiarly serviceable? Surely to know the
only true God and JESUS CHRIST whom he has sent is Life eternal John xviii. 3.
And if any Man have not the Spirit of CHRIST, he is none of his, Romans viii. 9.

2dly. We should glorify the sacred Trinity in Imitation of the seraphick
Doxology, Isa. vi. 3. Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the Heavens and
Earth are full of the Majesty of his Glory. Because therein shines forth the
unspeakable Happiness of the supreme Being, apparent in the endeared
Fellowship, mutual Knowledge and Complacence of the sacred Three, ( Prove. viii.
30. Mat. iii. 17.) Therein is likewise conspicuous the infinite Perfection of
Jehovah: For thus the Attributes of Three Persons unite in one Essence common
to all, and are we not hereby taught, how the Father, Son and Spirit do
mutually glorify each other, ( John xvii. 4, 5, 22.)

But the Consideration of the Part which each Person of the sacred Trinity
performs in compassing of our Salvation, should especially invite our grateful
Hosanna's, together with that of the divine Goodness in revealing this Mystery
to us, which has been hid from Ages. (2 Cor. vii. 10.)

3dly. Let us seek with all earnestness, Communion with the sacred Trinity,
seeing that this is an attainable and most important Privilege, (2 Cor. i. 4.)
in this is our chief Excellency, our greatest Happiness and Security. (1 John
ii. 2.) And hence the Priest of old was required to bless the People, after the
Trinity was distinctly mentioned, ( Number. vi. 23, 24, 25.) No Comfort on Earth
is equal to that of Fellowship with the Father, Son, and Spirit. Now to obtain
this Communion, we must forsake Sin, which alienates us from God, and by a
living Faith accept the Redeemer, that being thereby united to him, we may
through him obtain Communion with the Father, and Holy Spirit. He will pray the
Father for us, and he will give us another Comforter, that he may abide with us
forever, even the Spirit of Truth. (John xiv. 16, 17.) And having obtained
Communion let us perform.

4thly. The Offices we owe to the sacred Trinity, such as Worship and
Obedience, being baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, let
us keep our Covenant Engagements. We should expect every salutary Blessing from
all the Persons of the Trinity, seeing they all by Council and Office, equally
conspire to promote our Happiness. ( Number. vi. 24, 27.) Having observed the
Order of conferring every Benefit, which is from the Father by the Son and
Spirit. ( Ephesians. ii. 18.) In the mean Time we should ask the Benefit peculiar
to each Person, according to the divine Economy, particularly of him, namely,
Love from the Father, Grace from the Son, and Communion from the Spirit. And on
the other Hand, let us faithfully render that oeconomical Duty we owe to each
Person, namely, to the Father Reverence, to the Son Faith and Love, and to the
Holy Spirit, Obedience. And in all our Prayers and Praises, let us after the
Example of the primitive Church make distinct mention of all the Persons of the
Trinity; that so their personal Glory may be suitably manifested by us.

Finally that blessed Unity and Love, which subsists among the sacred Three,
invite our Imitation, let us therefoe keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond
of Peace, because hereby we shall in our Measure, in some Sort resemble the
sacred Trinity. John xvii. 21. That they all may be One, as thou Father art in
me and I in thee; in this our greatest Glory consists, John xvii. And the Glory
which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are.
Without Endeavors after Union to, and loving Communion with such whom, from
their Principles and Practice, we have Reason to think are the Saints of God,
how can we expect Communion with the sacred Trinity, or to be one in them. In a
Word, the Beauty, Strength, Increase and Comfort of religious Societies, depend
upon their Union and Love, hereby they evidence to the World that they are
Disciples of CHRIST indeed, let us be therefore Followers of God as dear
Children, and walk in Love, as CHRIST also has loved us, and given himself for
us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling Savor. Now to God
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the sacred and venerable Three One, who bear
Witness from Heaven, to the divine Original of that Religion we profess, be all
Glory ascribed by Men and Angels, throughout all Eternity. Amen and Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 7 line 8 read Weight. Ibid l. 18 read cupido. p. 24 l. 27 read are. p. 52
l. 1 read Passages. p. 65 l. 8 read untainted p. 71 l. 26 read Scripture. Ibid
l. 27 read Attributes. p. 72 l. 7 read show. p. 98 l. 1 read excellently. Ibid
l. 13 read Tynpanum. Ibid. l. 31 read does. p. 161 l. 4 read either. p. 169 l.
1 add, in material Beings. p. 176 l. 19 read Salvations. p. 184 l. 14 ^aele we.
p. 225 l. 23 read this. p. 232 l 31 read Shines. p. 241 l. 19 read the Tumult.
p. 247 read meet. p. 269 l. 15 read whether. p. 328 l. 28 read that it is. p.
340 l. 13 read Instruments. Ibid l. 17 read because of these Things. p 348 l.
24 read Defiance. p. 356 l. 32 read Attribute. p. 365 l. 2 read Benefactor. p.
370 l. 8 read decreed. p. 388 l. 28 read Men. p. 389 l. 30 dele in. p: 397 l. 7
read Polytheism. p. 436 l ^ read Economy. p. 452 l. 12 read compare. l. 32
read were. p. 455 l. 23 a made. Some lesser Errata have been of purpose
omitted, which its hoped the judicious Reader will Correct.

CONTENTS.
SERMON I. 1 COR. x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the Glory of God. (page 3) SERMON. II. The same Text. (page 29)
SERMON III. 2 TIMOTHY iii. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God,
and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness. That the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Good Works. (page 61) SERMON. IV. PSALM xiv. 1. The Fool has said in his
Heart there is no God. (page 86) SERMON V. EXODUS iii. 13, 14. And Moses said
unto God, behold, when I come unto the Chidren of Israel, and shall say unto
them, the God of your Fathers has sent me unto you; and they shall say to me,
what is his Name? What shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I AM
THAT I AM: And he said, thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM
has sent me unto you. (page 107) SERMON VI. EXODUS iii. 14. And God said unto
Moses, I AM THAT I AM: And he said thus shall thou say unto the Children of
Israel, I AM has sent me unto you. (page 125) SERMON VII. JOHN iv. 24. God is
a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.
(page 149) SERMON VIII. PSALM. cxlv. 3. Great is the Lord and greatly to be
praised, and his Greatness is unsearchable. (page 165) SERMON IX. ROMANS xi. 33,
34. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments and his Ways past finding out. For who has
known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor. (page 182) SERMON
X. ROMANS x. 33. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out. (page
199) SERMON XI. GENESIS xvii. 1. And when Abram was Ninety Years old and Nine, the
Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before
me, and be thou perfect. (page 213) SERMON XII. JEREM. xxxii. 17. Ab Lord God,
behold, thou have made the Heavens and the Earth by thy great Power, and
stretched out Arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee. (page 235) SERMON
XIII. LEVIT. xix. 2. Speak unto all the Congregation of the Children of Israel
and say unto them, ye shall be Holy: For I the Lord your God am Holy. (page
251) SERMON XIV. DEUTERONOMY. xxxii. 4. He is the Rock, his Work is Perfect: For all
his Ways are Judgment: A God of Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and right is
he. (page 270) SERMON XV. HOSEA. iii. 5. And shall fear the Lord, and his
Goodness, in the latter Days (page 292) SERMON XVI. EXODUS xxxiv. 6. And the
Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and
gracious, Long-suffering. (page 311) SERMON XVII. The same Text. (page 327)
SERMON XVIII. The same Text. (page 344) SERMON XIX. PSALM xxxi. 5. Into thine
Hand I commit my Spirit: For thou have redeemed me O Lord God of Truth. (page
363) SERMON XX. DEUTERONOMY. vi. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. (page
385) SERMON XXI. JEREM. x. 10. But the Lord is the true God, and an everlasting
King: At his Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able
to abide his Indignation! (page 403) SERMON XXII. 1 JOHN v. 7. For there are
Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and
these Three are One. (page 420) SERMON XXIII. The same Text. (page 449)

