ANSWER To the FIRST and SECOND PART of an Anonymous Pamphlet, ENTITLED,
Observations upon the Conduct and Behavior of a certain Sect usually
distinguished by the Name of METHODISTS. IN TWO LETTERS TO THE RIGHT REVEREND
The BISHOP of LONDON, And the other the Right Reverend the BISHOPS concerned in
the Publication thereof.

The TWO PARTS of the OBSERVATIONS herein answered, are prefixed.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A.B. Late of PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXFORD.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, near the Prison.
1744.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
AS the Ministers of JESUS CHRIST are set for the Defense of the Gospel, they
are often obliged like the Builders of the Temple in Nehemiah's Time, to hold a
Sword in one Hand and a Truel in the other -- This I have found and do find
true by Experience, and though I desire at all Times to write of nothing but
JESUS CHRIST and him crucified, yet in some Cases I am constrained to answer
for my self, least by my being altogether silent, the Hands of many should be
weakened, and their Hearts become sad -- This was one Reason why I thought it
my Duty to answer the Right Reverend the Bishops; and that the Reader may see
the whole of the Controversy, I have prefixed those Parts of the Observations
which I have answered -- I have also made some Alterations in the Answer to the
First Part because I was not willing to strive about Words -- There is a Third
Part which I have begun to Answer, but cannot yet have Leisure to finish -- May
GOD give this his Blessing, and give all a Heart who wish well to Zion, to pray
for the Unworthy Author, but their

Affectionate Brother and willing Servant in the Kingdom and Patience of JESUS
CHRIST, George Whitefield.
BOSTON, Jan. 10. 1744, 5.
OBSERVATIONS UPON THE CONDUCT and BEHAVIOR. OF A Certain Sect, Usually
distinguished by the Name of METHODISTS.

OBSERVATIONS Upon the Conduct and Behavior of a certain Sect, usually
distinguished by the Name of METHODISTS.
IT does not appear, that any of the Preachers among the Methodists have
qualified themselves and the Places of their Assembling, according to the Act
of Toleration; which Act warrants separate Assemblies for the Worship of God,
that before were unlawful.

The unbounded Licentiousness in holding Assemblies for Divine Worship, both as
to Persons and Places, which had prevailed for some Years before the
Restoration, and of which our Histories are full; was a sufficient Warning to
the Legislature, to have a watchful Eye over that Spirit, which had caused so
much Confusion in the Kingdom; and particularly in the public Worship of God.
And the Methods taken from Time to Time to keep-under that Spirit, and to
prevent and suppress all such irregular Assemblies, are a plain Evidence, that
the Government, in those Days, saw the mischievous Consequences of them, and
the Necessity of putting early and effectual Restraints upon them. And though,
at the Revolution, the Wisdom of the Nation, for some Ease to scrupulous
Consciences in the Exercise of Religion (as the Words of the Act are) granted
an Exemption from the Penalties of former Laws, both to Preachers and People;
yet it is plain, that they saw the mischievous Consequences of granting that
Indulgence, without such Conditions and Limitations, as would be a Security to
the Established Government and Religion, against the Advantages it might
otherwise give to the Enemies of both.

And therefore the Act of Toleration provides, as to the People, that none
shall have the Benefit of it, but such as will take the Oaths to the
Government, and subscribe the Declaration against Popery (30 Car. II, c. 1;)
and as to the Preachers, it obliges them, not only to take the said Oaths and
subscribe the Declaration, but also to subscribe the Thirty-nine Articles of
Religion; those excepted, which relate to Ceremonies, Homilies, the
C^nsecra^^^^ of Bishops, and Infant Baptism.

II. But now, this new Sect of Methodists have broken-thro' all these
Provisions and Restraints; neither regarding the Penalties of the Laws which
stand in full Force against them, nor embracing the Protection which the Act of
Toleration might give them in Case they complied with the Conditions of it. And
if this be not an open Defiance of Government, it is hard to say what is.

They began with Evening-Meetings at private Houses; but they have been going
on, for some Time, to open and appoint public Places of Religious Worship,
with the same Freedom, as if they were warranted by the Act of Toleration. And,
not content with that, they have had the Boldness to preach in the Fields and
other open Places, and by public Advertisements to invite the Rabble to be
their Hearers; notwithstanding an express Declaration in a Statute (22 Car. II.
c. 1.) against assembling in a FIELD, by Name. And how big with Mischief that
Practice in particular is, may be abundantly seen in the past and present
Accounts of it in a neighboring Nation; and may be sensibly felt in our own,
when it will be too late to remedy it, if not attended to in Time.

III. It must be confessed, that in most other Steps which the Methodists take,
the Act of Toleration would be a Security against the Penalties of former Laws,
if they would but qualify themselves according to the Direction of it; but in
the Case of Field-preaching, it is conceived that it would not secure them. For
that Act not only requires the Qualifications of Oaths and Subscriptions as
above, but also provides, That no Congregation or Assembly for Religious
Worship shall be there^y permitted ^r allowed, until the PLACE of such Meeting
shall be certified to the Bishop of the Diocese, or to the Archdeacon of the
Archdeaconry, or to the Justices of the Peace at their General or Quarter
Sessions.

And it would be a strange Construction to give any other Meaning to the Word
PLACE in that Clause of the Act, than a particular House opened for Religious
Worship, and a fixed Place to be repaired-to by a Congregation of Dissenters;
in which Sense it has been universally understood. And indeed the Act of
Toleration itself plainly leads to this Meaning, when it forbids any Assembly
of Persons, dissenting from the Church of England, to be had in any PLACE for
Religious Worship, with the Doors locked, barred, or bolted. Nor has it been
known, that a Dissenting Teacher of any Denomination whatever, has thought
himself warranted, under the Act of Toleration, to preach in Fie^^s, or Streets.

IV. But notwithstanding such open Inroads upon the National Constitution;
these Teachers and their Followe^ affect to be thought Members of the National
Church, and do accordingly join in Communion with it; though in a Manner that
is very irregular* and contrary to the Directions laid down in the Rubric
before the Communion-Service; which is established by the Act of Uniformity.
This Rubric directs, as follows:

So many as intend to be Partakers of the Holy Communion, shall signify their
Names to the Curate, at least some Time the Day before.

And if any of those be an open and notorious evil Liver, or have done any
Wrong to his Neighbors by Word o^ Deed, so that the Congregation is thereby
offended; the Curate, having Knowledge thereof, shall call him and advertise
him, that in any wise he presume not to come to the Lord's Table, until he has
openly declared himself to have truly repented, and amended his former naughty
Life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which before were
offended: and that he has recompensed the Parties to whom he has done Wrong,
or at least declare himself to be in full Purpose so to do, as soon as he
conveniently may.

The same Order shall the Curate use with those betwixt whom he perceives
Malice and Hatred to reign; not suffering them to be Partakers of the Lord's
Table, until he know them to be reconciled.

It is plain, by the whole Tenor of this Rubric, that by the Word Curate, is
meant the proper Minister who h^s the Cure of Souls (according to the usual
Meaning of the Word throughout the Book of Commom-Prayer,) or some other
officiating under him; and that by Neighbors, and those whom he is to forbid
to come to the Lord's Table till they amend their Lives, and till they be
reconciled, are meant his Parishioners, overs whom he is placed as their Guide
and Instructor, and, as such, is supposed to have Knowledge of their Behavior,
and a Right to interpose in their Spiritual Concerns.

Upon the like Considerations of the Fitness and Reasonableness of every one's
receiving the Holy Sacrament with his own Parishioners, and from the Hands of
his own Minister, the 28th Canon of our Church requires the Churchwardens, to
mark whether any Strangers come often and commonly from other Parishes to their
Church, and to show the Minister of them; lest perhaps they may be admitted to
the Lord's Table among others; which they shall forbid, and remit such home to
their own Parish-Churches and Ministers, there to receive the Communion with
the rest ^f their Neighbors.

And these general Rules, both in the Rubric and Canon, as they are founded
upon Reasons evidently good and wise in themselves; so are they, in their
Effect and Operation, when duly observed, the best and surest Means of
preserving Order and Regularity in the public Administration of Divine
Offic^s, and of av^iding all that (...) which they were d^signed to p^^vent. At
the same Time, ^t must be admitted, that th^se good ^nds may be suff^ciently
answered, and the Rules said to be duly (...), though Allowance b^ made to such
reasonab^^ (...) as evidently arise from the Nature and Circumstances of
Persons and Things. But though such Exceptions are always admitted in the
Construction and Application of General Rules* nothing thing can justify either
a wilful Neglect, or an open Contempt, of the Rules themselves.

V. But now these wholesome Rules are not only broken-thro', but notoriously
despised by the new Sect of Methodists; who, leaving their own Parish-Churches
where they are known, come from several Quarters, in very great Numbers, to
receive the Communion at other Churches, where they are not known; and between
whom and the Minister there is no Manner of Relation.

This is a Practice which may justly be complained of by the Ministers of the
Churches to which they resort in that irregular Manner; as it puts such
Ministers under the Difficulty, either of rejecting great Numbers as unknown to
them, or administering the Sacrament to great Numbers, of whom they have no
Knowledge.

VI. I know but one Thing that can be pleaded in Behalf of this Practice: by
such, I mean, of them as desire to receive the Communion every Lord's Day; and
that is, That there is not a weekly Communion in their own Parish Church. But
may not this End be attained in a more quiet and inoffensive Way, though not
strictly regular, if particular Persons, who are so disposed should repair
privately to the Church nearest to their own where the Sacrament is administered
every Lord's Day* having first signified their Names to the Minister, as the
Rubric directs? Which, surely, no Person can scruple to do, who professes
himself a Member of the Church of England, and who, as such, is obliged to come
up, at least as near as may be, to the Rules which it prescribes. But in this
Way, our Methodists would not have the vain Pleasure of appearing together in a
Body and as a distinct Sect. And this Suggestion, that there may be in that
Part of their Conduct some Mixture of Vanity, will appear to be neither unjust
nor uncharitable, if it be considered, that though in the Churches of London
and Westminster there is usually a Sacrament on the first Sunday of every
Month, I doubt it will be found, that however that may lessen, it d^es not
hinder the Resort, on that Day, to the Churches where they have usually
appeared in a Body on other Days.

It appears from the foregoing Observations, that the Leaders of these People
would act a far more consistent and uniform Part, if they would either r^n^unce
C^mmunion with the Established Church, or oblige themselves and their Followers
to have a great Regard to the Rules and Orders of it.

VII. Besides our (...), there is another S^^t sprung up and known by the Style
and (...) ^f M^RAVIANS. The Heads of them have been (...) Time from Moravia, a
Country in Germany of that (...) several ^f ^ur Methodists have gone in Person,
to (...) perfectly with the Principles and Practices of that People. It is not
easy to come at a certain Knowledge of their Tenets; but in their Teachings,
they are said to rest the Whole of Religion upon the single Point of BELIEVING,
and to disclaim the Moral Law as no Part of the Christian Dispensation. They
are also said to decry all In Fact, several of those who perform the Offices of
Prayer and Preaching in their Assemblies, are common Mechanics.
human Qualifications for the Ministry, and all human Helps and Preparations
toward the Conversion and Conviction of a Sinner; so that they should seem to
resolve all into the immediate Teachings and Workings of the Spirit. However,
my present Concern is not with their Principles, but with that which is more
certain, I mean their Proceedings; particularly, their setting up public
Places of Assembly, with as much Openness as those of our Dissenters, which are
set up under the Act of Toleration. At first, their Numbers were
inconsiderable; but having been joined by many of our own Methodists, (by some
of their Clergy, and by many more of their Laity, who have forsaken their first
Leaders,) they are grown into a considerable Body, and, both in City and
Country, are multiplying Bands and Societies in the Moravian Way. Which
uncommon Zeal in their Leaders to carry on this Work, may probably proceed from
a strange Notion they have got, That (in the Words of one of them) our Savior
is, NOW, about gathering his Sheep out of all Nations, out of all Professions,
out of all Parties, out of all National Churches; into little Flocks which he
governs with his Word and Spirit.' See Part III. Qu. 3.
A Notion, which must be considered by all sober and uninfected Minds, as
merely Enthusiastical; and it will be great Blindness in their Followers, if
they do not call upon them for Proofs from the Gospel, or from a well attested
Revelation made to themselves, of what our Savior, as they pretend, is now
about to do, and of their Commission to be the authorized Doers of it.

There is indeed, a special Proviso in the Act of Uniformity, ' That the
Penalties of that Act shall not extend to the Foreigners or Aliens of the
Reformed Churches, allowed, or to be allowed, by the King's Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, in England. But do the Methodists who join them, consider that
themselves are not Foreigners and Aliens? Or, do the real Moravians consider,
that they hold, for o^ght appears, open Assemblies contrary to the said Law, or
rather in Defiance of it? Or, being Foreigners, do they so far mistake our
Constitution, as to think that this is a Country in which Religious Assemblies
of every Kind may be set up at Pleasure without any Regard to the
Qualifications and Conditions upon which the Laws have allowed them?

The Country most noted for an Indulgence to Religious Persuasions and
Assemblies, is HOLLAND; but even there they are put under proper Restraints and
Regulations; such as the State has thought fit, for its own Security. The
Account that Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE gives of it, in his Observations upon the
United Provinces, in this. After he has observed that the Exercise of the
Popish Religion is alone excepted from the common Protection of their Laws, he
adds, 'That, of all other Religions, every Man enjoys the fre^ Exercise in his
own Chamber, or his own House, unquestioned and unespied. And if the Followers
of any Sect grow so numerous in any Place, that they affect a public
Congregation, and are content to purchase a Place of Assembly, and to bear the
Charge of a Pastoral Teacher, etc. they go, and By the foregoing Clause in the
Act of Uniformity, the Application here in England is to be to the Crown; and
the Moravians can best tell, whether they have made any such Application, and
been favored with such Allowance as the Act requires. Hitherto, nothing of
this has been made appear; and till they make it appear, the Presumption must
be, that they have no such Allowance.
propose their Desire to the Magistrates of the Place where they reside, who
inform themselves of their Opinions, and Manners of Worship. And if they find
nothing in either, destructive to Civil Society, or prejudicial to the
Constitutions of their State, they easily allow it. But with the Condition,
That one or more Commissi^^ers shall be appointed, who shall have free
Admission at all their Meetings, and shall be both the Observers and Witnesses
of all that is acted or preached among them.

To conclude this first Part.
VIII. It is easily foreseen, that this and every other Complaint against the
Irregularities of these People, and especially those of our Methodists, will be
censured by them as a Discouragement to Piety and Devotion, and particularly to
a Religious Observation of the Lord's Day. But this Slander is effectually
confuted, by looking back to the State of the several Religious Societies in
London and Westminster, for many Years past; which has been this. The
particular Members of each Society, having attended the public Duties of the
Day together with their Neighbors, as the Laws of Church and State direct,
have also (by private Agreements among themselves) their Evening Meetings, to
employ the Remainder of the Day in serious Conversation, and in Reading good
Books, etc. And these Societies, having behaved with Modesty and Decency, and
without any Violation of public Order and Regularity, have received no
Discouragements, but, on the contrary, have been countenanced and encouraged by
the Bishops and Clergy. And this, God be thanked, still continues to be the
Case of many of those Societies, and the Members of them; as many I mean, as
have not been unhappily misled into the late Extravagancies, but can be content
to provide for mutual Edification and Improvement in a private inoffensive Way,
as their Predecessors did.

PART II.
BESIDES the many Irregularities which are justly charged upon these Itinerant
Preachers, as Violations of the Laws of Church and State; it may be proper to
enquire, Whether the Doctrins they teach, and those Lengths they run, beyond
what is practiced among our Religious Societies, or in any other Christian
Church; be a Service or a Disservice to Religion? To which Purpose, the
following Queries are submitted to Consideration.

Query 1. WHETHER Notions in Religion may not be heightened to such Extremes,
as to lead some into a Disregard of Religion itself, through Despair of
attaining such exalted Heights? And whether others, who have imbibed those
Notions, may not be led by them into a Disregard and Disesteem of the common
Duties and Offices of Life; to such a Degree at least, as is inconsistent with
that Attention to them, and that Diligence in them, which Providence has made
necessary to the well-being of private Families and public Societies, and
which Christianity does not only require in all Stations and in all Conditions,
but declares at the same Time, ( Col. 3.22. Ephesians. v.6.) that the Performance
even of the lowest Offices in Life, as unto God, (whose Providence has placed
People in their several Stations,) is truly a Serving of Christ, and will not
fail of its Reward in the next World?

Qu. 2. Whether the Enemy of Mankind may not find his Account in their carrying
Christianity, which was designed for a Rule to all Stations and all Conditions;
to such Heights as make it fairly practicable by a very few in Comparison, or
rather by none?

Qu. 3. Whether, in particular, the carrying the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone to such a Height, as not to allow, that a careful and sincere
Observance of Moral Duties is so much as a Condition of our Acceptance with
God, and of our being justified in his Sight; Whether this, I say, does not
naturally lead People to a Disregard of those Duties, and a low Esteem of them;
or rather to think them no Part of the Christian Religion? The Words of the
pious and judicious Mr. CHILLINGWORTH are very material to this Purpose. ' For
my Part, says he, I do heartily wish, that by public Authority it were so
ordered, that no Man should ever preach or print this Doctrine, 'That Faith
alone justifies.' unless he joins this together with it, That universal
Obedience is neccessary to Salvation.' Chap. VII. Part I. Sect. 32.


Qu. 4. Whether a due and regular Attendance on the public Offices of
Religion, paid by good Men in a serious and composed Way, does not better
answer the true Ends of Devotion, and is not a better Evidence of the
Cooperation of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden Mr. Whitfield's Journal VI.
p. 36. -- VII. p. 57, 69, 75. Mr, Wesley's Journal III. Page 26, 41, 45, 59,
64, 95.
Agonies, Mr. Whitfield's Journal VII. page 74. Mr. Wesley's Journal III. page
40, 44, 50, 62, 79, 83, 92, 93, 94.
Roarings and Screamings, Page 41, 43, 50, 58, 61, 93.
Tremblings. Mr. Whitfield's Journal VII. page 12, 60. Mr. Wesley's Journal
III. page 41, 43, 46, 50, 58, 59, 61, 64, 65, 83.
Droppings-down, Page 44, 50, 88, 90, 92, 93.
Ravings and Madnesses; into which their Hearers have been cast; according to
the Relations given of them in the Journals referred to?

Qu. 5. Whether those exalted Strains in Religion, and an Imagination of being
already in a State of Perfection, are not apt to lead Men to Spiritual Pride
and to a Contempt of their Fellow Christians; while they consider them as only
going-on in what they account the low and imperfect Way, ( i. e. as growing in
Grace and Goodness only by Degrees;) Even though it appear by the Lives of those
who are considered by them as in that low and imperfect Way, that they are
Persons who are gradually working out their Salvation, by their own honest
Endeavors, and through the ordinary Assistances of God's Grace; with a humble
Reliance upon the Merits of Christ for the Pardon of their Sins, and the
Acceptance of their sincere, though imperfect, Services?

Qu. 6. Whether the same exalted Strains and Notions do not tend to weaken the
natural and civil Relations among Men, by leading the Inferiors, into whose
Heads those Notions are infused, to a Disesteem of their Superiors; while they
consider them as in a much lower Dispensation than themselves; though those
Superiors are otherwise sober and good Men, and regular Attendants on the
Ordinances of Religion?

Qu. 7. Whether a gradual Improvement in Grace and Goodness, is not a better
Foundation of Comfort, and of an Assurance of a Gospel New Birth, than that
which is founded on the Doctrine of a Mr. Wesley's Journal II. p. 19, 20, 44. --
Journal III. P. 16, 49.
sudden and instantaneous Change; Which, if there be any such Thing, is not
easily ^istinguished from Fancy and Imagination; the Working whereof we may
well suppose to be more strong and powerful, while the Person considers himself
in the State of one who is admitted as a Candidate for such a Change, and is
taught in due Time to expect it?

Qu. 8. Whether, in a Christian Nation, where the Instruction and Edification
of the People is provided-for, by placing Ministers in certain Districts, to
whom the Care of the Souls within those Districts is regularly committed; It
can be for the Servic^ of Religion, that (...) Preachers run up and down from
Place to Place, and from County to County, drawing after them confused
Multitudes of People, and leading them into a Disesteem of their own Pastors,
as Mr. Whitefield, (Journal IV. p. 38.) addressing himself to his Brother
Teachers; says, 'O my dear Brethren, have Compassion on our dear Lord's Church,
which he has purchased with his own Blood. Suffer none of them to be as Sheep
having no Shepherd, or worse than none, those blind Leaders of the Blind, who
let them perish for lack of Knowledge, and are no better than Wolves in Sheeps
clothing. And, Journal V. p. 31. Though we are but few, and stand as it were
alone, like Elijah; and though they, like the Priests of Baal, are many in
Number; yet I doubt not but the Lord will appear for us as he did for that
Prophet, and make us more then Conquerors.' And Page 32. This Afternoon I was
carried out much in bearing my Testimony against the unchristian Princ^ples and
Practices of the Generality of our Clergy.
less willing or less able to instruct them in the Way of Salvation: An Evil,
which our Church has wisely provided against in the Ordination of a Priest, by
expressly limitting the Exercise of the Powers conferred upon him, of preaching
the Word of God, and administering the Holy Sacraments, Mr. Wesley (Journal III
p. 5^.) being asked, By what Authority he preached, replied, "By the Authority
^f Jesus Christ conveyed to me by the (new) Archbishop ^f Canterbury, when he
laid his Hands upon me, and said, Take thou Authority to preach the Gospel." In
this Reply, he thought fit, for a plain Reason, to leave out this latter Part
of the Commission; for that would have shown his Reader the Restraint and
Limitation under which the Exercise of the Power is granted. But in the same
Journal, p. 56. he declares, without Reserve, 'That he looks upon all the World
as his Parish,' and explains his Meaning as follows; "In whatever Part of it I
am, I judge it meet, right, and my bounden Duty, to declare unto all that are
willing to hear, the glad Tidings of Salvation. This is the Work which I know
God has called me to." Such also is the Language of Mr. Whitefield, (Journal
VII. p. 18, 62, 78.) As to an extraordinary Call, I claim none, otherwise than
the Apostle's Injunction, 'As we have Opportunity, let us do Good unto all
Men.' -- "God seems to show me, it is my Duty to Evangelife, and not to fix in
any particular place." -- "I am now free to Evangelife and go whithersoever the
Lord shall be pleased to call me."

Now, if this Call may be pleaded by Christians, on the Foot of that general
Injunction, without any other Evidences of an Apostolical Mission; what
Occasion had Mr. Wesley to have Recourse to the Plea of an Episcopal Mission?

It were well, if he and some others would remember what the same Apostle has
said (1 Cor. xiv.33.) God is not the Author of Confusion (or, as it is in the
Margin, not of TUMULT) but of Peace, as in all Churches of the Saints.


to the Congregation where he shall be lawfully appointed thereunto.

The Bishops, indeed, and also our two Universities, have Power to grant
Licenses to preach, of a larger Extent, to such Clergymen as they judge proper;
who, in Virtue thereof, may, if they choose, travel from Place to Place as
Itinerants. But then the Church has provided in that Case ( Can. 50.) That
neither ^^e Minister, Churchwardens, nor any other Officers of the Church,
shall suffer any Man to preach within their Churches and Chapels, but such as,
by showing their License to preach, shall appear unto them to be sufficiently
authorized thereunto.

The Practice of Licensing Itinerant Preachers was occasioned by the low
Talents of many Incumbents in the more early Days of the Reformation; whose
Abilities carried them no farther than to the Reading of Homilies. A Defect,
which has long been remedied by a liberal Education of sufficient Numbers of
Persons for the Ministry, who regularly perform the Office of Preaching, as
well as other Duties, in the Parishes committed to their Care. And if the
forementioned Defect did still continue, as, God be thanked, it does not; it
would be ill supplied by our modern Itinerants who make it their principal
Employ, wherever they go, to instill into the People a few favorite Tenets of
their own; and this, with such Diligence and Zeal, as if the Whole of
Christianity depended upon them, and all Efforts toward the true Christian
Life, without a Belief of those Tenets were vain and ineffectual.

Qu. 9. Whether it does not savor of Self-sufficiency and Presumption, when a
few young Heads, without any Color of a Divine Commission, set up their own
Schemes, as the great Standard of Christianity: And, How it can be reconciled
to Christian Humility, Prudence, or Charity, to indulge their own Notions to
such a Degree, as to perplex, unhinge, terrify, and distract the Minds of
Multitudes of People, who have lived from their Infancy under a Gospel
Ministry, and in the regular Exercise of a Gospel Worship; and all this, by
persuading them, that they have never yet heard the true This was the Language
with which they set out early -- I offered Jesus Christ freely to them,
Whitfield's 3d Journal, p. 47. -- I think, Wales is excellently well prepared
for the Gospel of Christ, ibid. p. 51. -- Received News of the wonderful
Progress of the Gospel in Yorkshire, under the Ministry of my dear Brother
Ingham, ibid. p. 52. -- I was refreshed by a great Packet of Letters, giving me
an Account of the Success of the Gospel, ibid. p. 73. A most comfortable Packet
of Letters, giving me an Account of the Success of the Gospel, ib. p. 78.

These Instances are taken from the Bishop of London's Fourth Pastoral Letter;
and the same Language has continued in the subsequent Journals, and in their
Letters.


Gospel, nor been instructed in the true Way of Salvation before; and that they
neither are, nor can be true Christians, but by adhering to their Doctrins and
Discipline, and embracing Christianity upon their Schemes, All the while, for
the Sake of those Schemes, and in Pursuance of them, violating the wholesome
Rules, which the Powers Spiritual and Temporal have wisely and piously
established, for the Preservation of Peace and Order in the Church.

Qu. 10. Whether it be for the Service of Religion, to discourage People from
reading Mr. Whitfield's Journal V. p. 19. It cannot be expressed how many
carnal Hearts were disturbed by my Testimony against Archbishop Tillotson. --
But before I have done, I do not despair of seeing People bring his Works, as
they once brought the Books of curious Arts, and burn them before all Men. --
Journal VII p. 2. The Man's Wife was a great Admirer of Archbishop Tillotson,
but having her Eyes now opened to discern Spiritual Things, can no longer take
up with such Husks, fit only for carnal, unawakened, unbelieving Reasoners, to
eat.
Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons, and the Mr. Whitfield's Letter from New
Brunswick, p. 6, 7. -- After having laid down his own Scheme, he adds, 'This,
the Author of the Whole Duty of Man was wholly ignorant of otherwise he would
not have laid such a Foundation. And if the Foundation be so bad, judge you
then how wretchedly weak the Superstructure must be.' -- He [the Person who
urged the Authority of that Book, to justify the Use of innocent Recreations]
is not the first, by Thousands, who has been miserably deceived by this Book;
and therefore I thought my self obliged to write this Letter. You may make what
Use you will of it. I care not if the Contents are published upon the
Housetop. -- There is no Hopes of bringing People to a right Knowledge of the
Gospel, till their favorite, though erroneous, Authors are discountenanced and
laid aside.
Whole Duty of Man; to whom our Methodists might have added many more of our
best Writers after the Restoration. For, all these (together with explaining
the whole Work of our Redemption by Christ) endeavored to turn the Mind of
People to the Practice of Moral Duties, and to cure them of that Ma^ness and
Enthusiasm into which the^ had been led by the Antinomian Doctrine^ and ot^^rs
of the like Tendency, during the Times of Anarchy and Confusion.

Qu. 11. Whether, the Frame of human Nature fairly considered, the Author of
the Whole Duty of Man did not do better Service to Religion, in laying down
Rules to keep Recreations of all Kinds within the Bounds of Innocence; than
they, who now censure him, and absolutely deny that Mr. Whitfield's Letter from
New Brunswick, p. 7, -- Journal V. p. 58, 59, 77, 78. -- Wesley's Journal II.
p. 13.
Recreations of any Kind, considered as such, are or can be innocent?

Qu. 12. Whether the strong Expressions which are found in their printed
Journals, of Many Passages of that and other Kinds, are cited out of Mr.
Whitfield's 1st, 2d, and 3d Journals, in the Bishop of London's Fourth Pastoral
Letter; those three being all that were then published. Such are these that
follow: -- Had much of the Presence of God with me, Journal I. p. 18. -- Had
much of God with me to Day, ibid. p. 28. -- The Kingdom of God is within me,
Journ. III. p. 4. -- My Opposers, would they but speak, cannot but confess that
God is with me of a Truth, ibid. p. 18.

But since the Publication of those three Journals, he has published four more;
and those more full of Enthusiasm, if possible, than the three first; as will
appear by the following Extracts.

I. Extraordinary Presences of God.
Journal IV.
P. 2. My Soul was so filled with God, that the Word came with very great Power
to all that heard me. P. 3. God is pleased to vouchsafe me great Measures of
his divine Presence. P. 13. The Divine Presence was amongst us.
Journal V.
P. 30. Several joining in Prayer, the Divine Presence was manifest among us.
Journal VI.
P. 47. Felt much of the Presence of God in my Heart. Ibid. I returned to my
Sloop with much of God's Presence.
Journal VII.
P. 5. Preached twice, with much of the Divine Presence. P. 12. Felt more than
common, of the Divine Presence in my Soul. P. ^^* The Power and Presence of the
Lord accompanied and followed me. P. 48. The Divine Presence was strong upon me
all the Evening. P. 63. Felt an especial Presence of God in my private Business,
II. Extraordinary Communications from God.
Journal IV.
P. 16. God was pleased to refresh me with fresh Communications from himself.
P. 31. Have had great Communications from God.
Journal V.
P. 22. I experience fresh Teachings and Communications from God's Holy Spirit.
Ibid. God has been pleased to vouchsafe me plentiful Communications from
himself.
Journal VII.
P. 2. Have had frequent Communications from above, both by way of Humiliation
and Exaltation. P. 19. The blessed Jesus was pleased sweetly to manifest
himself to my Soul. P. 23. Received fresh Emanations of Divine light break-in
upon and refreshing my Soul. P. 58. Divine Manifestations flowed-in so fast,
that my frail Tabernacle was scarce able to sustain them. P. 62. The Lord was
pleased to communicate himself to me freely. My Soul was filled with his
blessed Presence.
III. Extraordinary Emanations and Assistances of the Holy Spirit; particularly
in Preaching.
Journal IV.
P. 2. My Word, I believe, came with Demonstration of the Spirit. P. 4.
Preached with great Tower -- [This, the ordinary Language of the Journals.] P.
5. God gave me great Enlargement of Soul; and the Exhortation, which was long
and powerful, I believe, reached their Hearts. P. 12. God was pleased to give
me uncommon Freedom and Liberty in speaking. P. 14. I perceived a fresh Supply
of Spirits to be given me from above. P. 21. I never had such Power given me to
speak to the Scoffers. P. 23. My Body being weak, and God being pleased to
withdraw himself, I spoke with very little Power in the Morning; but in the
Afternoon God caused my Strength to return again, and I preached with much
Freedom and Power in the Evening -- And I was enabled to lift up my Voice like
a Trumpet, and to preach to about 20,000 Souls. P. 35. I prayed and preached
with greater Demonstration of the Spirit, than ever.
Journal V.
P. 23. Felt more of the Divine Assistance To day, than I have since I have
been abroad. P. 30. The Lord endowed me with Power from on High. My Heart was
enlarged and warmed with Divine Love. P. 34. The Holy Spirit sweetly gave me
Utterance. P. 38. I have not felt greater Freedom in preaching, and more Power
in Prayer, and a stronger Witness of the Spirit, since I came into America. P.
40. God was pleased to open my Mouth. P. 44. I began to speak as the Lord gave
me Utterance. Ibid. In the Midst of my Discourse, the Power of the Lord Jesus
came upon me. P. 46. God gave me, particularly toward the Close of my Sermon,
to speak with Divine Energy. P. 72. I was much carried out; I felt the Power of
God come upon me, and I spoke with Demonstration of the Spirit to the Hearer's
Souls.
Journal VI.
P. 23. Before I had done, the Power of the Lord came upon the Congregation,
the Holy Ghost overshadow'd them, and a gracious melting was visible in most
that heard. P. 25. I was ready to drop down -- But God was pleased so to revive
me, by Communications from himself, that I spoke with great Demonstration of
the Spirit and with Power. P. 27. In very great Weakness of Body. -- But,
before I had preached six Minutes, bodily and spiritual Strength was given me,
and the Lord was pleased to set his Seal to what he enabled me to deliver. P.
30. Toward the Conclusion of my Discourse, God's Spirit came upon the Preacher
and the People. P. 53. When we came to public Prayer, the Holy Ghost seemed to
come into the Congregation like a mighty rushing Wind, carrying all before it.
Journal VII.
P. 13. Finding the Power of the Lord come upon me, I began to speak to them of
the Things of God. P. 39. I preached with much Pemonstratiof the Spirit. P. 43,
56 -- The Spirit of the Lord came upon me, God gave me to wrestle with him for
my Friends. P. 46. The Holy Ghost enabled me to speak with a great deal of
Power. P. 50. The Power of the Lord was upon me; I spoke with much Weight and
Freedom. P. 53. The Spirit of the Lord came upon me, and enabled me to speak
with Vigor. P. 57. After I had begun, the Spirit of the Lord gave me Freedom,
till at length it came down like a mighty rushing Wind, and carried all before
it. P. 67. I felt the Holy Ghost come upon me at that Time, and never spoke on
that wise before.
*More Instances of such extraordinary Assistances; set down in the Bishop of
London' s 4th Pastoral Letter -- I spoke with the Demonstration of the Spirit,
Journal III. p. 8. -- Was filled with the Holy Ghost, which very much
strengthened my Body, and made my Feet like Hart's Feet, ibid. p. 13. --
Expounded with such Demonstration of the Spirit, as I never spoke with before,
ibid. p. 14. -- God has given me a double Portion of his Spirit indeed, ibid.
p* 15. -- Was told that my preaching was attended with uncommon Power, ibid. p.
16 -- I fear, I should quench the Spirit, did I not go on to speak as he gives
me Utterance, ibid. p. 17. -- God enabled me to speak with such irresistible
Power, that the Opposers were quite struck dumb and confounded, ibid. p. 24. --
Felt the Spirit of God working in me mightily, ibid. -- Blessed be God, I find
myself much refreshed in Spirit, and a new Supply of Strength given me. Thus
shall it be done to the Man whom God delights to honor, ibid. p 41. -- Had
extraordinary Power given me at the Society in Nicholas Street, ibid. p. 53.
Heard of one that received the Holy Ghost immediately upon my preaching Christ.
ibid. p. 72. -- I believe, few, if any, were able to resist the Power,
wherewith God enabled me to speak, ibid. p. 108. -- My Heart was full of God,
and I spoke as one having Authority, ibid.

IV. Special Directions from God.
Journal IV.
P. 30. Asked Counsel of God, and perceived an unusual Power and Warmth enter
into my Soul,
Journal V.
P. 23. In writing an Extempore Sermon -- The Holy Ghost brought many Things to
my Remembrance. P. 43. God was pleased to direct my Words.
Journal VII.
P. 49. The Morning I intended to go and preach at --. But God showed me To
day, it was inconsistent with my other Business upon many Accounts. P. 66. The
Lord gave me the Text I preached on just before the Meeting, directed me to a
Method as I was going up the Pulpit Stairs, and enabled me to discourse with an
uncommon Clearness, Freedom, and Power.
*More Instances of such immediate Directions from God; out of the Bishop of
London' s 4 th Pastoral Letter. -- This Day, I intended to stay on Board to
write Letters, but God being pleased to show me it was not his Will, I went on
Shore again. Journ. I. p. 3. -- I told the People that God called me, and I
must away. -- Intended to preach at Fort Simons, etc. but Lord, thou calledst
me elsewhere, Journal II. p. 9. -- God having showed me and my Friends, that it
was his Will I should return for a while to England, -- I preached my farewell
Sermon, ibid. p. 11.

Under this Head may also properly be placed, the Declarations of a special and
immediate Mission from God, (as they are found together in the said 4 th
Pastoral Letter:) -- Was soon convinced, that God has sent me hither of a
Truth, Journ. I. p. 5. -- The eternal Almighty I AM, has sent me, ibid. p. 32.
-- To preach the Gospel at Frederica also; for therefore am I sent. Journ. II.
p. 7. -- Lord, thou calledst me elsewhere, ibid. p. 9. -- This I know, what I
have spoken from God, will come to pass (lo it will come) and then shall
Scoffers and Despisers know, that a Minister of Christ has been amongst them,
ibid. p. 19. -- I must go into every Place and City, where I have been already;
for therefore am I sent, Journ. III. p. 20. -- Lord, open thou their Eyes, that
they may see that this is thy Doing, Journ. III. p.33.


extraordinary Presences of God directing and assisting them in a more
immediate Manner, do not need some Testimonies of a Divine Mission, to clear
them from the Charge of Enthusiasm?

Qu. 13. Whether the same Persons Mr. Whitefield' s Journal IV.
P. 16. The People were much rejoiced at the News of my Coming. Their Hearts
seemed to leap for Joy, and many Thanksgivings were rendered to God in my
Behalf. The Bell^ rang, unknown to me. P. 38. Many Tea^s were shed when I
talked of leaving them -- I could scarce get to the Coach for the People's
thronging me, to take me by the Hand, and give me a parting Blessing.
Journal V.
P. 6. When I said, Finally Brethren, farewell; Thousands immediately burst out
into strong Cryings and Tears. P. 47. They follow me, wherever I go, as they
used to do in London.
Journal VI.
P. 39. After I had taken my Leave, Oh how many came to my Lodgings, sorrowing
most of all that they were likely to see my Face no more for a long Season. P.
50. Many People stood without the Church-door, and I was enabled to speak with
such abundant Freedom and Power, that I cannot believe any one Hearer could
avoid being affected in some Degree or other. -- I saw the Word strike the
Hearers, like so many pointed Arrows. It came with Demonstration of the Spirit
indeed. Carnal Reasoning could not resist it.
Journal VII.
P. 5. People seemed to come from all Parts; and the Word, as I was told, came
with a convincing Power. P. 32. In every Part of the Congregation, Persons
might be seen under great Concern. P. 37. Wherever I go, People will follow me.
P. 41. Numbers, great Numbers, melted into Tears, when I talked of leaving
them. P. 44. The Word fell with much Weight indeed: It carried all before it.

OPEN and PUBLIC Boastings of his own extraordinary Labors in the Ministry,
and his uncommon Success in it, and of the vast Concourse of People with which
his Preaching is attended, and the distinguishing Respects he meets with on
that Account: Whether, I say, the publishing all this to the World, savours of
that Humility, Modesty and Self-denial, which becomes a Minister of the Gospel;
and especially one, who would be thought to carry on his Ministry under the
immediate Guidance of the Holy Spirit; whose peculiar Office it is, to season
the Heart with Humility, and to root out of it the Seeds of Pride and
Vainglory.

The END of PART II.
AN ANSWER To the FIRST PART of an Anonymous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, Observations
upon the Conduct and Behavior of a certain Sect usually distinguished by the
Name of METHODISTS. IN A LETTER TO THE RIGHT REVEREND THE BISHOP of LONDON, And
the other the Right Reverend the BISHOPS concerned in the Publication thereof.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A.B. Late of PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXFORD.

False Witnesses did rise up; they laid to my Charge Things that I knew not,
Psalm. xxxv.11. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street,
near the Prison. 1744.

A LETTER To the RIGHT REVEREND The Bishop of London, etc.
My Lords,
THE Apostle Peter exhorts us, to be ready to give an Answer to every one that
asks us a Reason of the Hope that is in us, with Meekness and Fear. And if
this is to be our Conduct toward every one, much more are we bound to behave
thus to those who are Overseers of the Church of God, and consequently are
invested with an Authority to require an Answer at our Hands.

A Desire of complying with this Apostolical Injunction, induced me, my Lords,
about five Weeks ago to publish an Whereas some anonymous Papers against the
People called Methodists in general, and myself and Friends in particular, have
been for some Weeks printed in a large Edition, and handed about and read in
the Religious Societies of the Cities of London and Westminster, and given into
the Hands of many private Persons, with strict Injunctions to lend them to no
one, nor let them go out of their Hands to any; and whereas, after having
accidentally had the hasty Perusal of them, I find many Queries of great
Importance concerning me, and my Conduct, contained therein; and as it appears
that one Paper has little or no Connection with another, and a Copy, when
applied for, was refused me, and I know not how soon I may embark for Georgia;
I am therefore obliged hereby to desire a speedy open Publication of the
aforesaid Papers, in order that a candid, impartial Answer may be made thereto
by me, London, Jan. 26, 1743-4. GEORGE WHITEFIELD.


Advertisement, wherein I desired an open Publication of several anonymous
Papers, entitled, Observations upon the Conduct and Behavior of a certain
Sect, usually distinguished by the Name of Methodists. -- Papers which, upon
Enquiry, I found had been printed some considerable Time, had been read in the
Societies of London and Westminster, and handed about in a private Manner to
particular Friends, with strict Orders to part with them to no one. -- What
could be the meaning of such a Procedure, I know not. -- But this I know,
however such a clandestine way of acting, may savor of the Wisdom of the
Serpent, it does not bespeak that Harmlesness of the Dove, which our Savior in
an especial Manner recommends to his Ministers.

Who the real Author of these Papers may be, I am not yet able for a Certainty
to find out. -- But I had Reason to believe, that my Lord of London was
concerned in composing or revising them. -- That I might not be mistaken, after
the Publication of the Advertisement, I wrote his Lordship a Letter My Lord,
Land. Feb. 1. 1743.
Simplicity becomes the Followers of Jesus Christ, and therefore I think it my
Duty to trouble your Lordship with these few Lines. I suppose your Lordship has
seen the Advertisement published by me, about four Days ago, concerning some
anonymous Papers, which have been handed about the Societies for some
considerable Time. As I think it my Duty to answer them, I should be glad to be
informed whether the Report be true, that your Lordship composed them, that I
may the better know to whom I may direct my Answer. A Sight also of one of the
Copies, if in your Lordship's keeping, would much oblige,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most obliged, Dutiful Son and Servant, GEORGE
WHITEFIELD.
P. S. The Bearer will bring your Lordship's Answer; or if your Lordship please
to favor me with a Line, be pleased to direct for me, to be left with Mr. J.
Syms, etc.





, wherein I desired to know, whether his Lordship was the Author of this Paper
or not, and also desired a Copy. -- His Lordship was pleased to send Word by my
Friend, who carried the Letter, that I should hear from him. -- Hitherto his
Lordship has not favored me with an Answer. -- Only some Time ago, one Mr.
Owen, a Printer, in Amen-Corner, Paternoster Row, who is Printer to my Lord of
London, left a Letter SIR, Feb. 3. 1743.
My Name is Owen. I am a Printer in Amen-Corner; and I waited upon you to let
you know, that I have had Orders from several of the Bishops, to print for
their Use, such Numbers of the Observations upon the Conduct and Behavior of
the Methodists, (with some few Additions) as they have respectively bespoken.
And I will not fail to wait upon you with one Copy, as soon as the Impression
is finished.

I am, Sir, your most obedient, etc.



for me, wherein he informed me, that he had Orders from SEVERAL OF THE BISHOPS
to print the Observations en the Conduct and Behavior of the Methodists (WITH
SOME FEW ADDITIONS) for their use; and when the Impression was finished, I
should have a Copy. -- Why my Lord of London, or the several other Bishops
concerned, should conceal their Names, or why a Copy should be denied me, so
long after the Papers had been printed, I leave the World to judge. I cannot
think such a way of Proceeding can gain your Lordships any Credit from the
Public, or any Thanks from the other Bishops who have not interested
themselves in this Affair, and who, I believe, are more noble, than to
countenance the Publication of any such Performance.

It is a weighty Thing with me, my Lords, to have Insinuations made, or Queries
put concerning me, in respect to my Practice and Doctrine, in such a Public
Manner, by Persons that are placed at the Head of the Church. -- It is true,
your Lordships have not put these Queries in your own Names; but as the Author
has concealed his, and these Papers are printed by your Lordships Orders, you
have thereby adopted them for your own; consequently, I am put under a
Necessity of directing this Letter as I have done. And I can assure your
Lordships, that with great Deference to the Dignity of your Office, after
earnest Prayer, with I trust some Degree of Humility, and unfeigned Simplicity
of Heart, I now sit down to perform my Promise, viz. to give a Candid and
Impartial Answer to the forementioned Papers, which were sent me last Week,
(collected into a Pamphlet) by Mr. Owen; I suppose, according to your Lordships
Order.

I never yet was, and hope never shall be so far left to lean to my own
Understanding, as to fancy myself infallible. -- Young as I am, I know too much
of the Devices of Satan, and the desperate Wickedness and Deceitfulness of my
own Heart, not to be sensible, that I am a Man of like Passions with others,
and consequently may have sometimes mistaken Nature for Grace, Imagination for
Revelation, and the Fire of my own Temper, for the pure and sacred Flame of
holy Zeal, which comes from God's Alter. -- If therefore, upon perusing the
Pamphlet, I find that I have been blameable in any Respect (as in all
Probability I may) I will not only confess it, but return hearty Thanks both to
the Compiler and your Lordships, though unknown.

Indeed it is but of little Consequence to the Merits of the Cause to know who
the Author is. -- Only thus much may be said, your Lordships yourselves being
Judges, it is not quite fair to give Stabs in the Dark; and it is some
Satisfaction to the Person attacked, to know who, and what, his Antagonists
are, that he may know the better how to deal with them -- But since that cannot
be granted, it may be more to the Purpose, to consider the Matters contained in
the Pamphlet, and to answer for myself, so far as I am concerned.

It is entitled, Observations upon the Conduct and Behavior of a certain Sect,
usually distinguished by the Name of Methodists. -- I think the Title ought
rather to run thus -- Misrepresentations of the Conduct and PRINCIPLES, of some
orthodox, well-meaning Ministers and Members of the Church of England, and
Loyal Subjects to his Majesty King George, FALSELY TERMED A SECT, and usually
distinguished, OUT OF CONTEMPT, by the Name of Methodists. This Title, my
Lords, would just answer the Contents. -- For the Principles as well as Conduct
of the Methodists are struck at, and greatly misrepresented in this Pamphlet.
-- And the Methodists are no Sect, no Separatists from the established Church,
neither do they call People from her Communion. -- Besides the Author ought to
have added, A New Edition, with several Alterat^ons, Additions and Corrections;
for otherwise the World is made to believe, that this is the self-same
Composition which was handed about some Months ago, and which I had a hasty
Reading of. -- Whereas there are several Things omitted, some Things added, and
diverse Alterations made in this New Edition, so that the Title Page is not only
injudicious, but false and scandalous.

And if the Title Page is so bad, I fear the Design and Scope of the Pamphlet
itself is much worse. -- For is it not to represent the Proceedings of the
Methodists as dangerous to the Church and State, in order to procure an Act of
Parliament against them, or oblige them to secure themselves by turning
Dissenters?

But is not such a Motion, at such a Season as this, both uncharitable and
unseasonable. -- Is not the Administration engaged enough already in other
Affairs, without troubling themselves with the Methodists? Or who would now
advise them to bring farther Guilt upon the Nation, by persecuting some of the
present Government's most hearty Friends? -- I say, my Lords, the present
Government's most hearty Friends. -- For though the Methodists (as the World
calls them) disagree in some Particulars, yet I dare venture to affirm, that to
a Man they all agree in this, viz. to love and honor the King. -- For my own
part, I profe^^ myself a zealous Friend to his present Majesty King George, and
the present Administration. -- Wherever I go, I think it my Duty to pray for
and preach up Obedience to him, and all that are set in Authority under him, in
the most explicit Manner. -- And I believe should it ever come to the Trial,
the poor despised Methodists who love his Majesty out of Principle, would
cleave close to him in the most imminent Danger, when others that adhere to
him, only for his Preferments, perhaps might not appear altogether so hearty.
-- My Lords, I have now been a Preacher above seven Years, and for these six
Years last past, have been called to act in a very public Way. -- Your
Lordships must have heard of the very great Numbers that have attended. Some
times several of the Nobility, and now and then even some of the Clergy have
been present. -- Did they ever hear me speak a disloyal Word? Are th^re not
Thousands can testify how fervently and frequently I pray for his Majesty King
George, his Royal Offspring, and the present Government? Yes, my Lords, they
can. -- And I trust through the Divine Assistance, I should be enabled to do so,
though surrounded with Popish Enemi^^ an^ in Danger of dying for it as soon as my
Prayer was ended. -- This, my Lords, as far as I am acquainted with them, is
the present Temper of me and my Friends. -- And may I not then appeal to your
L^^^ships, whether it be not the Interest of the Administration to encourage
such Persons, or at least to let them alone? Gallio on a like Occasion thought
it his Wisdom to act thus. -- For when the Jews made Insurrection with one
Accord against Paul, and brought him to the Judgment Seat, saying, this Fellow
persuadeth. Men to worship God contrary to ^he Law, he said unto the Jews, if
it were a matter of wrong or wicked Lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I
should bear with you, -- But if it be a question of Words and Names, and of
your Law, look ye to it, for I will be no Judge of such Matters, -- Nay, he was
so far from approving of their Motion, that he drove them from the
Judgment Seat.

My Lords, I know of no Law of the State that we have broken, and therefore we
have not incurred the Displeasure of the Civil Power. -- If your Lordships
apprehend that we are liable to Ecclesiastical Censures, we are ready to make a
proper Defense whenever called to it by our Ecclesiastical Superiors. -- As for
myself, your Lordships very well know that I am a Bachelor of Arts, have taken
the Oaths, subscribed to the Articles, and have been twice regularly ordained.
-- In this Character I have acted both at Home and Abroad, and know of no Law
of our Government which prohibits my preaching in any Field, Barn, Street or
Out-house whatsoever.

It is true one or two of my Friends, who preach as I do, were bred Dissenters,
had been licensed, and preached in licensed Places before my Acquaintance with
them, and one or two of the Houses where the Methodists meet, have, without my
Knowledge, been licensed since; and therefore the Author of the Pamphlet is
quite mistaken in his first Paragraph (as well as the Title Page and Design of
his Pamphlet) wherein he declares, that it does not appear that any of the
Preachers among the Methodists have qualified themselves and the Places of
their assembling, according to the Act of Toleration; which Act warrants
separate Assemblies for the Worship of God, that before were unlawful. -- I
wish the Author had taken a little more Care to inform himself before he
published the Pamphlet. -- He would not then have been guilty of so many
egregious Mistakes, or without Cause have condemned the Innocent, as he has
done. -- However, in the general, he is right. -- for, as yet, we see no
sufficient Reason to leave the Church of England, and turn Dissenters; --
neither will we do it till we are thrust out. When a Ship is leaky, prudent
Sailors, that value the Cargo, will not leave it to sink, but rather continue
in it so long as they can, to help pump out the water. -- I leave the Author,
my Lords, to make the Application.

But whether the Methodists are Churchmen or Dissenters, the Acts of King
Charles II. referred to, Page 3. Parag. 1. and Page 4. Parag. 2. make nothing
against them, neither do they prove the Methodists to be Violaters of the
Statute Law by their being Field-Preachers. And what the Author so peremptorily
affirms, Page 4. Parag. 3. is directly false -- For he says, that it has not
been known, that a dissenting Teacher of any Denomination whatever, has thought
himself warranted, under the Act of Toleration, to preach in Fields or Streets.
-- It may not, indeed, be known to the Author; but I know, my Lords, two of the
most eminent among the dissenting Ministers, who have thought themselves
warranted, if not by the Act of Toleration, yet by the Laws of the Land, to
preach out of Doors; and accordingly, when the House would not contain the
People, have preached in a Field or Orchard, and near the common Highway. -- My
Lords, I have been perusing all the Acts of King Charles II. wherein the Word
Field is mentioned, and find they are intended to suppress seditious
Conventicles, for prohibiting further, and more proper speedy Remedies against
the growing and dangerous Practices or seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal
Persons, who, under Pretense of tender Consciences, have, or may, at their
Meetings contrive Insurrections (as late Experience has shown) These, my
Lords, are the Preambles of the Acts. -- These are the only Field Meetings I
can find that are prohibited. -- And how, my Lords, can such Acts be applied to
the Methodists? Does not such an Application imply a Charge against the
Methodists, as though they were seditious Sectaries, disloyal Persons, who, under
Pretense of tender Consciences, have, or may contrive Insurrections. Has any
late Experience, my Lords, shown this? No, my Lords, and I hope no future
Experience ever will. -- How then can your Lordships, with a safe Conscience,
encourage such a Pamphlet, or bespeak any Number of Mr. Owen, in order, as may
be supposed, that they may be dispersed among your Lordship's Clergy? Well
might the Author conceal his Name. -- It comes into public like a Child dropped
that no body cares to own. And indeed, who can be blamed for disowning such a
Libel? -- For how, my Lords, does it appear by these Acts, what the Author so
confidently asserts, Page 4. Parag. 2. that this new Sect of Methodists have
broken through all these Provisions and Restraints, neither regarding the
Penalties of the Laws, which stand in full Force against them, nor embracing
the Protection which the Act of Toleration might give them, in case they
complied with the Conditions of it; -- How can he immediately add, and if this
be not an open Defiance to Government, it is hard to say what is? -- May I not
more justly say, if this be not an open Defamation, and open Defiance of all
Rules of Charity, it is hard to say what is? Might he not as well tax the
Methodists with Treason? -- Father, forgive him! -- Lord Jesus lay not this Sin
to his Charge!

Though the Reign, my Lords, of King Charles II. wherein the Acts before referred
to were made, was not the most mild and moderate in religious Matters, yet your
Lordships very well know the famous Trial of M^^e and Penn; how after the Jury
had been confined so long, they brought them in guilty only of speaking in
Grace Church Street. -- And if Quakers met with so much Lenity under the Reign
of King Charles, what Liberty of preaching in Fields and elsewhere may not the
loyal Ministers and Members of the Church of England, nay, Protestant
Dissenting Teachers also, expect under the more gentle and moderate Reign of
his present Majesty King George, who, as I have been informed, has declared "
there shall be no Persecution in his Days." -- May the Crown long flourish on
his Royal Head, and a Popish Pretender never be permitted to sit upon the
English Throne! To this I believe all the Methodists will heartily say, Amen,
and Amen.

That the Methodists, in general, are Members of the established Church, the
Author of the Pamphlet himself confesses. -- For, Page 4. Parag. 4. after he
has, without Proof, charged them with making open Inroads upon the National
Constitution; he adds, that these Teachers and their Followers affect to be
thought Members of the National Church. -- And his following Words prove that
they not only affect it, but are Members of the established Church in reality.
-- For, says he, and do accordingly join in Communion with it. -- And it
appears, Parag. 6, that some of the Methodists communicate every Lord's Day. --
What better Proof can they give of their being Members of the Church of
England? It would be well if all her Members gave a like Proof. -- But then,
says our Author, Page 4. Parag. 4. they do it in a Manner that is very
irregular, and contrary to the Directions laid down in the Rubric before the
Communion, which is established by the Act of Uniformity. -- This Rubric, says
he, directs as follows. Page 4. Parag. 4. So many as intend to be Partakers of
the holy Communion, shall signify their Names to the Curate, at least, some
time the Day before. -- And, for not doing this, the new Sect of Methodists,
Parag. 5. Page 6. is charged not only with breaking through, but "notoriously
despising these wholesome Rules." -- But how unjust is such a Charge? When I
read it, it put me in mind of what the poor persecuted Officers of the Children
of Israel said to Pharaoh, Exodus v.15, 16. Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy
Servants? There is no Straw given unto thy Servants. They say unto us, Make
Brick, and behold thy Servants are beaten, but the Fault is in thy own People.
-- For, my Lords, is it not the Business of the Clergy to see this Rubric put
in Execution? And the Duty of the Churchwardens, according to the 28th Canon,
quoted by our Author, Page 5. Parag. 4. to mark whether any Strangers come
^^ten, and commonly from other Parishes to their Churches, and to show the
Ministers of them. -- But, my Lords, where is this Rubric or Canon observed or
insisted on by the Ministers or Church Wardens through England, Ireland, Wales,
or his Majesty's Town of Berwick upon Tweed, except now and then when they
entertain a Grudge against some particular Methodists? These, my Lords, would
rejoice to see, that Ministers and Churchwardens would do their Duty in this
Particular. -- For many of them have been so offended by the Clergy's
promiscuously and carelessly admitting all Sorts of People to the Communion,
that if it had not been for me, they would have left the Church only upon this
Account. -- We would therefore humbly recommend it to your Lordships, that you,
and the rest of the Right Reverend the Bishops, would insist upon Curates and
Churchwardens putting this, and all other such wholesome Laws and Rubricks, in
Execution. -- That which is holy would not then be given unto Dogs, nor so many
open and notorious Evil-Livers take the sacred Symbols of our Lord's most
blessed Body and Blood into their unhallowed Hands and Mouths. The Methodists
wish your Lordships Prosperity in this much-wish'd-for, though long-neglected
Part of Reformation in the Name of the Lord.

At the same time, my Lords, I would not say any thing that might any way
encourage Disorders; neither would I persuade the Methodists to leave their own
Parish Churches when the Sacrament is administered there. On the contrary, I
would have them take the Author's Advice, Page 6. Parag. 6. If particular
Persons are disposed to receive Weekly, when the Sacrament is not administered
at their own Parish Church, to repair privately to the Church nearest their
own, where the Sacrament is administered every Lord's Day, having first
signified their Names to the Minister, as the Rubric directs. -- This, I
believe, they will readily comply with. -- For I cannot think with this Author
(in the same Paragraph,) that the Reason of their coming in such Numbers is,
that they may have the vain Pleasure of appearing together in a Body, and as a
distinct Sect. -- We would rather, according the Rules of that Charity which
hops all things for the best, believe that they come together in such
Companies to animate and encourage one another. -- Dr. Horneck, I remember, in
his Account of the primitive Christians, remarks, that "where you saw one
Christian, you might generally see more." And is it not delightful, my Lords,
to behold a Communion Table crowded? Do not such as complain of it discover
something of the Spirit of those Pharisees, who were angry when so many People
brought their Sick to be healed by our Lord Jesus on the Sabbath Day? For I
cannot think the Ministers complain of this only on account of their being
hereby put under the Difficulty ( Parag. 5. Page 6.) either of rejecting great
Numbers as unknown to them, or administering the Sacrament to great Numbers, of
whom they have no Knowledge, because it is too too notorious that Hundreds
receive the blessed Sacrament, both in London and other Places, where there are
no Methodists, whom the Minister knows little or nothing at all about, takes no
pains to enquire after. Oh that the Author's mentioning this may be a means of
stirring up the Clergy to approve themselves good Shepherds by seeking, as much
as in them lies, to know the State of all that come to the holy Communion!

This, as well as the other Objections against the Methodists, are so trivial,
and the Acts referred to as discountenancing their Field-preaching so
impertinent, that the Author, without the least Degree of a prophetic Spirit,
might easily foresee, Parag. 8. Page 8. that this, and every other SUCH
Complaint against the Methodists, would be censured not only by them, (but by
every impartial Person) as a Discouragement to Piety and Devotion, and
particularly a religious Observation of the Lord's Day. -- Nay, my Lords, he
might have foreseen that it would be censured as a wicked, false and
ill-designing Libel. -- For is it not wicked to represent innocent and loyal
Persons, as open Defiers of Government, Page 4. Parag. 2. and making open
Inroads upon the National Constitution ( Parag. 4.) without bringing any real
Proofs of either?

I am not, my Lords, of the Author's Opinion, Parag. 8. Page 8. that this
Slander (of his being a Libeller) is effectually confuted by looking back to
the State of the several Religious Societies of London and Westminster for many
Years past. -- This will only serve to increase every unprejudiced Person's
Censure of this Performance, and more effectually, without the least Degree of
Slander, prove it a notorious Libel. -- For wherein do the Methodists Societies
transgress the Laws of Church or State any more than the Societies in London
and Westminster? -- Do the particular Members of each Society ( Parag. 8. Page
8.) attend the public Duties of the Day together with their Neighbors, as the
Laws of Church and State direct? Do not the Members of the Methodists Societies
the same? Have the Members of the religious Societies in London and Westminster
(as the Author mentions in the same Paragraph) also (by private Agreements
among themselves) their Evening Meetings, to employ the Remainder of the Day in
serious Conversation, and in reading good Books, etc. Have not the Members of
the Methodists Societies Liberty to enter into a like private Agreement among
themselves? Have the Members of the London Societies behaved with Modesty and
Decency, wi^^out any Violation of public Order and Regularity? So have ours,
my Lords, as all must confess who have been present when our Societies met.

And therefore, my Lords, if these London Societies, as our Author says, Parag.
8. Page 8. have received no Discouragements, but, on the contrary, have been
countenanced and encouraged by the Bishops and Clergy, why do not the
Methodists meet with the same Treatment? Are they not as loyal Subjects? If the
one read a Prayer, may not the other pray extempore? Does any Law of God or Man
forbid it? If the one meet in a Vestry, or private House, may not the other
meet in a Foundery or Tabernacle? Are not your Lordships therefore reduced to
this Dilemma, either to encourage both or neither? or at least give the World
better Reasons than the Author of this Pamphlet has, why your Lordships should
countenance and encourage the one, and so strenuously discountenance and
discourage the other.

For my own part, my Lords, I know of no Reason why they are discountenanced,
except this, viz. The Methodists Societies ( as they are called) are more for
the Power of Godliness than those other Societies of London and Westminster. --
I assure your Lordships, I have not been altogether a Stranger to these
Societies. -- I used to meet with some of them frequently, and have more than
once preached their Quarterly Sermon at Bow-Church. -- Some who before had only
the Form of Godliness, our Savior was since pleased to call effectually by his
Grace. -- But when they began to talk feelingly and experimentally of the
New Birth, free Justification and the Indwelling of the Spirit of God in
Believers Hearts, they were soon looked upon as Righteous overmuch, and
accordingly were cast out by their self-righteous Brethren. -- These were the
late Extravagancies, my Lords, into which the Author (just at the Conclusion of
his first Part) says, that some have been unhappily misled; and this, my Lords,
was the first Rise of the Societies which the Methodists now frequent. -- Oh,
that He and all that oppose them had been misled into the like Extravagancies!
I mean a real Experience of the New Birth, and the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ imputed and applied to their Souls by Faith through the Operation of the
Eternal Spirit! For without this they cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
-- These things, my Lords, the first Members of the Religious Societies in
London and Westminster were no Strangers to. -- Nay, their being misled into
what the Author calls the Methodists late Extravagancies, was the Rise of their
Societies, as well as ours; and they met for the very same Ends, and I believe
in the very same Spirit as the Methodists now do. -- For a Proof of this, I
would refer the Author to Dr. Woodward's Account of the Rise and Progress of
the religious Societies in the City of London, etc. -- My Lords, I have been
reading over his second Chapter, and in reading it could scarce refrain
weeping, when I considered how blind the Author of this Pamphlet must be, not
to discern that the first religious Societies answered as to their Spirit,
Experience, and Ends of meeting to the Methodists Societies, as Face answers to
Face in the Water. -- Let him not therefore mention the Predecessors of the
present London Societies (the last Words of the first Part) as though that
would strengthen his Cause. -- Indeed, my Lords, it weakens it much. -- For was
it possible for these Predecessors to rise from the dead, and examine our
Principles and Practices, and those of the present religious Societies of
London and Westminster, I believe they would utterly disown them, and turn
Methodists too.

And why, my Lords, should the Author be so averse to Field-preaching? Has not
our Savior given a Sanction to this Way of preaching? Was not the best Sermon
that was ever preached delivered on a Mount? Did not our Glorious Emanuel
(after he was thrust out of the Synagog^^s) preach from a Ship, in a
Wilderness, etc? Did not the Apostles after his Ascension, preach in Schools,
Public Markets, and such like Places of Resort and Concourse? And can we copy
after better Examples? If it be said "that the World was then Heathen," I
answer, and am persuaded your Lordships will agree with me in this, that there
are Thousands and Ten Thousands in his Majesty's Dominions, as ignorant of true
and undefiled Religion, as ever the Heathens were? And are not Persons who dare
venture out, and show such poor Souls the way to Heaven, real Friends both to
Church and State? And why then, my Lords, should the Civil Power be applied to
in order to quell and suppress them? Or a Pamphlet encouraged by several of the
Right Reverend the Bishops, which is manifestly calculated for that Purpose? I
would humbly ask your Lordships, whether it would not be more becoming your
Lordships Characters, to put your Clergy on preaching against Revelling,
Cock-fighting, and such like, than to move the Government against those, who
out of Love to God and precious Souls put their Lives in their Hand and preach
unto such Revellers, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus?
What if the Methodists, by Public Advertisements do invite the Rabble? (as our
Author is pleased to write Page 4. Paragraph 2.) Is not the same done by other
Clergy, and even by your Lordships, when you preach Charity Sermons? But, my
Lords, what does the Author mean by the Rabble? I suppose the common People. --
If so, these are they who always heard the Blessed Jesus gladly. -- It was
chiefly the Poor, my Lords, the OLOS, the Turba, the Mob, the Multitude, these
People who the Scribes and Pharisees, said knew not the Law, and were accursed;
these were they that were evangelized, had the Gospel preached unto them, and
received the Spirit of God's dear Son. -- Not many Mighty, not many Noble are
called, says the Apostle. Indocti rapiunt coelum, dum nos cum doctrina
descendimus in Gehennam, says one of the Fathers. -- And therefore, my Lords,
supposing we do advertise the Rabble, and none but such make up our Auditories
(which is quite false) if this be the Methodist's Shame, they may glory in it.
-- For these Rabble, my Lords, have precious and immortal Souls, for which the
dear Redeemer shed his precious Blood, as well as the Great and Rich. -- These,
my Lords, are the Publicans and Harlots that enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
whilst Self-righteous formal Professors reject it. To show such poor Sinners
the way to God, to preach to them the Power of Christ's Resurrection, and to
pluck them as Firebrands out of the Burning, the Methodists Preachers go out
into the Highways and Hedges, -- If this is to be vile, by the Help of my God,
I shall be more vile; neither count I my Life dear unto myself, so that I may
finish my Course with Joy, and be made instrumental in turning any of this
Rabble to Righteousness. -- And more especially do I think it my Duty to invite
and preach to this Rabble in all Places, where Providence shall send me, at
this Season, that I may warn them against the dreadful Effects of Popish
Principles, and exhort them to exert their utmost Endeavors to keep out a
Popish Pretender from ever sitting upon the English Throne. -- In acting thus,
I humbly apprehend, I can do most service to the Cause of the Blessed Jesus,
his present Majesty King George, my Fellow Subjects, and the Government under
which I live. -- And, however, such kind of Preachers may be every where spoken
against now, yet I doubt not but at the great decisive Day they will be
received with a Euge Bone, and shine as Stars in the Firmament for ever and
ever; whilst those who have only divined for Hire, have fed themselves and not
the Flock, and lorded it over God's Heritage, perhaps, may pay dear for their
Preferment, and rise to everlasting Contempt -- Pardon me, my Lords, for
expressing myself here with some Degree of Warmth. -- I must own it gives me
Concern, to see some of the Clergy strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel, and
attempt to (...) the Mote out of our Eyes, before they have pulled the Beam out
of their own. -- Is it not ridiculous, my Lords, even in the Eyes of worldly
Men, and does it not render the Author of this Pamphlet, justly liable to
Contempt, to charge the Methodists with breaking Canons and Rubricks, which is
really not their Faults, when at the same time he knows that the Generality of
the Clergy so notoriously break both Canons and Rubricks, and that too in the
most important Articles, such as not CATECHIZING PLURALITIES, NON-RESIDENCE,
etc. every Day themselves? -- With what Face can he do it? Is not this like
Nero's setting Rom^ on Fire, and then charging it upon the Christians? May not
Physician heal thyself, be immediately retorted on him?

But I have done. -- I would not bring a railing Accusation against any. --
Neither would I, my Lords, when giving a Reason of the Hope that is in me, do
(...) any otherways than with Meekness and Fe^r. -- I would therefore now
proceed to answer the other Parts of the Pamphlet; but I shall reserve that for
another Letter, which, God willing, shall be published in a short Time. -- In
the mean while, I humbly recommend this to the Divine Blessing and your
Lordships Considerations, and beg leave to subscribe myself, my Lords,

Your Lordships most obedient Son and Servant, GEORGE WHITEFIELD
London, March 10, (...).
AN ANSWER To the SECOND PART of an Anonymous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, Observations
upon the Conduct and Behavior of a certain Sect usually distinguished by the
Name of METHODISTS. IN A Second LETTER TO THE RIGHT REVEREND The BISHOP of
LONDON, And the other the Right Reverend the BISHOPS concerned in the
Publication thereof.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. Late of PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXFORD.

My Heart's Desire and Prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved --
For I bear them Record, that they have a Zeal for God, but not according to
Knowledge. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
Righteousness of God. Romans 10.1, 2, 3. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and
FOUL in Queen Street, near the Prison. 1744.

On board the Willmington, Capt, Darling, bound from Plymouth to Piscataqua in
New England, August 25th. 1744.
A LETTER To the RIGHT REVEREND The Bishop of London, etc.
My Lords,
I Troubled your Lordships with a Letter some Time ago -- I now proceed
according to my Promise at the close of that, to answer the remainder of the
Anonymous Pamphlet entitled, Observations upon the Conduct and Behavior of a
certain Sect usually distinguished by the Name of Methodists. -- The Author
opens the second Part with this Preface -- Besides the many Irregularities
which are justly charged upon these Itinerant Preachers as Violations of the
Laws of Church and State; it may be proper to enquire, whether the Doctrines
they teach, or those Lengths they run, beyond what is practiced among our
religious Societies, or in any other Christian Church; be a Service or a
Disservice to Religion? To which purpose, the following Queries are submitted
to Consideration -- It is here taken for granted that the Methodists (termed by
our Author either out of Contempt, or by way of Periphrasis) these Itinerant
Preachers are justly charged with many Irregularities, which amount to
Violations of the Laws of Church and State. But how has the Author proved, what
He here takes for granted? I humbly apprehend not at all -- For has it not
appeared in my Answer to the first Part of his Observations, that neither the
Act of Toleration nor that of Charles IId any way affects the Methodists, as
being Loyal Subjects to His Majesty King George, and Members of the Church of
England? How then have they been justly charged with Violations of the Laws of
the State? And has it not been equally made to appear that the Irregularity the
Author says the Methodists have been guilty of, in coming to other parish
Churches to receive the Sacrament, is owing to the Negligence of your
Lordship's Clergy and Churchwardens? How then have they been justly charged
with Violations of the Laws of the Church? But may we not suppose by his
speaking seemingly so contemptuously of these Itinerant Preachers, that
Itinerant preaching itself, is one of these many Irregularities and Violatio^s
of the Laws of the Church at least, if not of the State, which according to
this Author are justly charged upon these Itinerant Preachers? His eighth
Query, page 11th (which for Method Sake I would here beg leave to make some
Remarks upon) bespeaks as much -- For He therein submits it to the
Consideration of the public Whether; in a Christian Nation, where the
Instruction and Edification of the People is provided for, by placing Ministers
in certain Districts, to whom the Care of the Souls within those Districts is
regularly committed; It can be for the Service of Religion, that Itinerant
Preachers run up and down from Place to Place and from County to County,
drawing after them confused Multitudes of People? An Evil which our Church has
wisely provided against, says our Author, in the Ordination of a Priest, by
expressly limiting the Exercise of the Powers conferred upon him, of preaching
the Word of God, and administering the Holy Sacraments, to the Congregation
where He shall be lawfully appointed thereunto -- Here indeed is a heinous
Irregularity charged upon these Itinerant Preachers, even a Violation of the
Commission given them when they were ordained Priests; -- But with what
Justice, I would refer to your Lordships Consideration -- For if, the
Commission given us when Ordained Priests, absolutely prohibits us to preach
any where besides in the Congregation where we shall be lawfully appointed
thereunto, will it not prove too much? And has not the Author in endeavoring
to reproach us, unwarily reproached your Lordships also? -- For are not your
Lordships then equally irregular, equally Violators of the Laws of the Church
whenever You preach (though it be never so seldom) out of your Lordships
respective Diocesses? And does not this commission thus strictly taken,
absolutely forbid any Presbyters whatsoever preaching any where besides in
their own particular Congregations? And if so, are not all Ministers that
exchange Pulpits equally irregular, at least as rea^ly Violators of their
Ordination Commission as these Itinerant Preachers?

Our Author in the following Paragraph under the forementioned Query tells us,
that the Bishops indeed and also our two Universities have power to grant
Licenses to preach, of a larger extent, to such Clergymen as as they judge
proper; who, in virtue thereof may, if they choose, travel from place to place
as Itinerants -- But then the Church has provided in that Case ( Can. 50) That
neither the Minister, Church Wardens, nor any other Officers of the Church
shall suffer any Man to preach within the Churches and Chapels, but such as by
showing their License to preach, shall appear unto them to be sufficiently
Authorized thereunto unto -- What these Licenses for Itinerant preaching are to
which the Author here refers is not certain -- Does He not seem to mean the
Common Licenses which Your Lordships give the Clergy, when they take upon them
Holy Orders? Are not these the Licenses which the Churchwardens examine? And
what is the end of these Licenses? Was it ever heard before that they were to
qualify persons to be Itinerant Preachers? Is not the plain end of them to
satisfy the Churchwardens that the persons that offer their Service have had a
regular Ordination and are sufficiently Authorized to preach? And does not the
Author know that these Licenses now are little regarded? Do not our Letters of
Orders answer the same end to all intents and purposes? Were they not judged
sufficient at our first setting out into the Ministry? And after all, what is
it that the Ministers and Churchwardens can do to persons that have not these
Licenses? Why they are not to suffer them to preach within their Churches and
Chapels? But have they any power, my Lords, to hinder them from preaching
without their Churches or Chapels? No, blessed be God their power is limited
within, Hitherto can they go, and no further -- And therefore supposing these
Itinerant Preachers though they have no Licenses, do not preach within any
Churches or Chapels without the Ministers or Churchwardens consent, how are
they justly charged with Violating a Law of the Church, though they should preach
without doors to as great Multitudes as shall be inclined to hear them?

He proceeds in the 3d paragraph under this 8th Query to write thus the
practice of licensing Itinerant Preachers was occasioned by the low talents of
many Incumbents in the more early days of the Reformation? whose Abilities
carried them no farther than to the reading of Homilies, a defect which has
long been remedied by a Liberal Education of sufficient Numbers of Persons for
the Ministry, who regularly perform the Office of Preaching, as well as other
Duties, in the Parishes committed to their Care. And if the forementioned
Defect did still continue, as God be thanked, it does not; it would be ill
supplied by our Modern Itinerants, who make it their p^incipal employ where
ever they go, to instill into the People a few favorite tenets of their own;
and this, with such Diligence and Zeal as if the whole of Christianity depended
upon them, and all Efforts toward the true Christian Life, without a Belief of
those Tenets, were vain and ineffectual.

But my Lords, what can this Author mean by writing thus? For supposing the
Practice of Itinerant preaching was primarily occasioned by the low Talents of
many Incumbents in the more early Days of the Reformation, does it therefore
follow, that there can be no other just Cause assigned for Itinerant preaching
now? What if the Generality of the present many Incumbents depart from the good
old Doctrines that were preached in the more early Days of the Reformation, and
notwithstanding their liberal Education, make no other Use of their Learning
but to explain away the Articles and Homilies to which they have subscribed in
the grammatical and literal Sense? Is it not necessary in order to keep up the
Doctrines, and thereby the real Dignity of the Church, that either the Clergy
thus degenerated, should be obliged to read the Homilies as formerly, and to
preach consistently therewith, or that those who do hold the Doctrines of the
Reformation, should go about from Place to Place, and from County to County,
nay from Pole to Pole, if their Sphere of Action extended so far, to direct
poor Souls that are everywhere ready to perish for lack of Knowledge, into the
right Way which leads unto Life? That this is the Case between the
established Clergy and these Itinerant Preachers will appear presently; and how
then can this Author charge them with making it their principal Employ,
wherever they go, to instill into the People a few favorite Tenets of their
own? Has the Author follo^ed them wherever they have preached, that he asserts
this so confidently concerning them? Is it not to be wished that he had at
least taken Care to have been better informed? For then he would have saved
himself from the Guilt of a notorious Slander. For is it not evident to all
that hear them, that the favorite Tenets the Itinerant Preachers make it their
principal Employ to instill into People's Minds wherever they go, are the Great
Doctrines of the Reformation, Homilies and Articles of the Church? Such as
Man's bringing into the World with him a Corruption which renders him liable to
God's Wrath and eternal Damnation -- That the Condition of Man after the Fall
of Adam, is such that he cannot turn and prepare himself, by his own natural
Strength and good Works to Faith and calling upon God -- That we are accounted
righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
by Faith, and not for our own Works or Deservings -- That they are to be
accursed, that presume to say, that every Man shall be saved by the Law or Sect
which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his Life according to that
Law, and the Light of Nature -- These, my Lords, are some of the favorite
Tenets of these Itinerant Preachers -- Their others are like unto them -- Can
these, my Lords, be properly called their Own? Or ought it not to be the
principal Employ of every true Minister wherever he goes, to instill such
T^nets, and that too with the utmost Diligence and Zeal into the People's
Minds? Does not a great Part of Christianity depend on them? And are not all
Pretensions to a true Christian Life, without a Belief of these Tenets, vain
and ineffectual? May not these Itinerant Preachers therefore complain unto your
Lordships of this anonymous Author as Mephibosheth complained to David of
treacherous Z^ba? Doubtless he has (...) them -- And wherefore does he speak
so contemptuously (...) Is it not an amiable and honorable Character? And may
I not take the Freedom of acquainting your Lordships, that if all the Right
Reverend the Bishops did their Duty, (especially my Lord of London, whose
Diocese is of such a vast Extent) they would all of them long since have
commenced Itinerant Preachers too?

But to return to an Examination of the other Part of the Author's Preface --
After he has taken it for granted, that many Irregularities are justly charged
upon these Itinerant Preachers as Violations of the Laws of Church and State,
He adds, it may be proper to enquire, whether the Doctrines they teach, and
those Lengths they run beyond what is practiced among our Religious Societies,
or in any other Christian Church, be a Service or Disservice to Religion. The
Religious Societies or any other Christian Church? What? Does our Author make
the Religious Societies a Church? This is going further than the Methodists,
whom he is pleased to style only a Sect? But if the Religious Societies, my
Lords, be a Church, may it not be proper to enquire how their Doctrines or
Practices came to be set up as a Rule and Standard for others to go by, so that
Persons doing Service or Disservice to Religion must be judged of according as
they deviate from or adhere to the Religious Societies either in Doctrine or
Practice? Or supposing the Religious Societies were to be a Standard for others
to go by, was it not incumbent on the Author to give the public a short
Summary and Account of their Doctrines and Practices? For otherwise how can the
World possibly judge whether the Methodists do deviate from them, or if so,
whether they do thereby Service or Disservice to Religion? Indeed this Author
has told us in his first Part how the Religious Societies behave on Sundays,
but he has no where acquainted us with the Principles they hold, or how they
behave on other Days. -- And till he does I will venture to affirm, that unless
these Itinerants teach other Doctrines than the present Religious Societies
generally hold, and run greater Lengths in Christianity than the Generality of
them it is to be feared now run, they will be in great Danger of never arriving
at the Mark for the Prize of their High-Calling in Christ Jesus their Lord. --

I have been the more particular, my Lord, in the Examination of the Preface,
because the Author by annexing these Words, To which Purpose the following
Queries are submitted to Consideration, seems to lay it down as the Groundwork
and Foundation of all the subsequent Queries. -- And if the Foundation be so
weak and sandy, how slight and superficial must the Superstructure be?

I suppose your Lordships will readily grant that it is the bounden Duty of
every regular and fair Writer (especially when he is charging others with
Irregularities as Violations of the Laws of Church and State) to take Care that
he does not violate the Laws of Christian Charity -- Or if he puts Queries to
the Public concerning any Persons, ought he not to take heed that those
Queries are founded upon Truth, and that the Charges therein exhibited against
them are really matter of fact? But our Author has notoriously neglected this
fundamental Rule, and thereby not only cast a lasting Blot and Odium upon his
own Character, if his Name was known, but also done real Hurt to the Cause he
would defend -- The Query already examined concerning Itinerant preaching,
wherein he has charged the Methodists with instilling into People a few
favorite Tenets of their own, sufficiently Demonstrates this -- But this is
not all, several of the other Queries now coming under Consideration are by no
means founded upon Truth, and contain Charges against these Itinerants, whereby
they are as much wronged and unjustly vilified as ever Stephen was when the
Jews suborned Men which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous Words against
Moses and against God, this holy Place and the Law.

To prove this we need only examine the two Queries which immediately follow
the Preface --

Query 1st. Whether Notions in Religion may not be heightened to such Extremes
as to lead some into a Disregard of Religion itself through Despair of
attaining such exalted Heights? And whether others, Who have imbibed those
Notions, may not be led by them into a Disregard and Disesteem of the common
Duties and Offices of Life, to such a Degree at least as is inconsistent with
that Attention to them and that Diligence in them, which Providence has made
necessary to the Well-being of private Families, and public Societies, and
which Christianity does not only require in all Stations and in all Conditions,
but declares at the same time ( Col. 3.22. Ephesians. 5.6.) that the performance
even of the low^^t Offices in Life, as unto God ( Whose Providence has placed
People in the^r several Stations) is truly Serving Christ and will not fail of
its Reward in the next World.

Query 2. Whether the Enemy of Mankind may not find his Account in their
carrying Christianity, which was designed for a Rule to all Stations and all
Conditions; to such Heights as make it fairly practicable by a very few in
Comparison, or rather by none?

His 5th and 6th Queries, Page the 10th, are like unto them -- The^ run thus,
Whether those exalted Strains in Religion, and an Imagination of being already
in a State of Perfection, are not apt to lead Men to Spiritual Pride and to a
Contempt of their Fellow Christians; while they consider them as only going-on
in what they account the low and imperfect Way, ( i. e. as growing in Grace and
Goodness only by Degrees,) And again, Whether the same exalted Strains and
Notions do not tend to weaken the natural and civil Relations among Men, by
leading the Inferiors, into whose Heads those Notions are infused, to a
Disesteem of their Superiors; while they consider them as in a much lower
Dispensation than themselves; though those Superiors are otherwise sober and
good Men, and regular Attendants on the Ordinances of Religion?

Here again it is supposed that these Itinerant Preachers either imagine
themselves to be in a State of Perfection, or at least teach others to imagine
that they are -- And that the Consequences of this is a weakening the natural
and civil Relations among Men by leading them to a Disesteem of their
Fellow Christians, and Superiors who are supposed to be in a lower Dispensation
than themselves?

Heavy Charges my Lords, these are indeed! -- But what Evidence does our Author
produce to prove them? Why really none at all -- For here is no Quotation at
the Bottom of either of these Queries from any of their Writings, so that we
cannot tell whether they are levelled against these Itinerate Preachers in
general or any one of them in parcular -- And therefore the Prebend of St.
Paul's who has been pleased to reply to my first Letter in Vindication of this
Author, has done wrong in affirming, as far as I can recollect, that under each
Query there is some Quotation either from my Journals or other Writings,
whereon it is founded -- But there is no such Thing under these Four wherein
such heavy Charges are included -- And therefore may I not argue, as the Author
does upon another Occasion in his first Part, Page 8th, 'till some Proof does
appear the Presumption must be that he has none?

In the mean while I dare challenge this Author, and the whole World to produce
any Passage out of my Writings wherein I have taught any other Christianity
than what through the Aids of the Blessed Spirit is practicable by all Persons
in all Conditions; or that I ever preached otherwise than that the Performance
even of the lowest Offices of Life as unto God whose Providence has placed
People in their several Stations, is truly a serving of Christ and will not
fail of its Reward (though not of Debt yet of Grace) in the next World. Neither
did I ever imagine that I had attained, or was already perfect, or taught
Persons to imagine that they were so: No, I expect to carry a Body of Sin and
Death about with me as long as I live, and confess from my inmost Soul, that I
am the chief of Sinners, and less than the least of all Saints: I am so far
from thinking an Imagination that we are already in a State of Perfection, is
only apt to lead Men into spiritual Pride, that I condemn it as the very
Quintescence and highest Degree of it. -- And the more we are conformed to the
Divine Image, the more I strict believe we shall be in keeping up our natural
and civil Relations among Men, in giving all Honor to whom Honor is due, and
in Lowliness of Mind esteeming each other better than ourselves. And if so, my
Lords, may not the Author for thus charging these Itinerants in general without
Distinction be justly styled a L^beller? And how will he undertake to prove
that any one of these Itinerant Preachers in particular carries Christianity to
any greater Height than he himself does Query 13th, Page 16, where in speaking
of the Holy Spirit, he has these Words, whose peculiar Office it is, to season
the Heart with Humility, and to root out of it the Seeds (what is that but the
very Inbeing?) of Pride and vain Glory.

Is he not very irregular in writing thus at Random; nay, does he not hereby
himself openly violate the Laws both of Church and State?

It Is true, our Author would appear an Advocate for both, but does not his
third Query, page 9th plainly prove him a real Friend to neither; especially
the latter? He there (asks, whether in particular, the carrying the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone to such a height, as not to allow, that a careful
sincere Observance of moral Duties is so much as a Condition of our Acceptance
with God, and of our being justified in his Sight; Whether this I say, does not
naturally lead People to a disregard of those Duties, and a low esteem of them;
or rather to think them no Part of the Christian Religion; It is plain from
hence, that one of these Extremes to which these Itinerants exalt Christianity,
and whereby its queried, whether they do Service or Disservice to Religion is
their carrying the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone to such a Height,
as not to allow that a careful and sincere observance of moral Duties is so
much as a Condition of our Acceptance with God, and of our being justified in
his Sight. Our Author it seems is for another Way of Salvation, viz. Query 5th,
page 10th, viz, for Men's gradually working out their own Salvation, by their
own honest Endeavors, and through the ordinary Assistances of God's Grace; with
a humble Reliance upon the Merits of Christ for the Pardon of their Sins and
the Acceptance of their Sincere, though imperfect Services This is our common
Divinity -- This is what my Lord of London in his last pastoral Letter against
Luke warmness and Enthusiasm, exhorted his Clergy to preach -- But how contrary
is all this to the Articles, and homilies of our Church? For what says the 11th
Article? We are accounted righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works or Deservings --
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only is a most wholesome Doctrine and
very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification

And if both the Article and Homily of the Church of England expressly declare
that we are justified before (or in the Sight of) God, by faith, and faith
only, how can a careful and sincere Observance of moral duties be a Condition,
my Lords, of our Acceptance with God, and of our being justified in his Sight?
And if the Doctrine of being justified by Faith only be a wholesome Doctrine,
and very full of comfort, how can this Author in the latter Part of this Query
now before us, enquire, whether preaching this Doctrine, does not naturally
lead People to a Disregard of those, viz. moral Duties, and a low Esteem of
them; or rather to think them no Part of the Christian Religion? Does he
consider that in writing thus, he directly symbolizes with the Infidel, Romans
6.1. who is introduced after the Apostle had been insisting at large on this
Doctrine of Justification by Faith only as speaking like our Author, " shall we
sin then that grace may abound -- "? The Apostle immediately rejects the Motion
with a me genoito and so reply these Itinerants, my Lords, God forbid -- For
what says the 12th, Article of our Church,; Albeit that Good Works, which are
the Fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification, cannot put away Sins, and
endure the Severity of God's Judgment; yet are they pleasing and acceptable to
God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, in
so much that by them a lively Faith, may be as evidently known, as a Tree
discerned by the Fruit? And do we then by preaching the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith only, naturally lead People to a disregard of moral
Duties and a low Esteem of them, much less to think them ^o part of the
Christian Religion? Do we not rather establish them, by laying a Foundation
whereon, true moral Duties can only be built so as to be acceptable in the
Sight of God? For what says our 13th Article? Works done before the Grace of
Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, for as much
as they spring not of Faith, in Jesus Christ, neither do they make Men meet to
receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say) deserve Grace of Congruity; yea
rather for that they are not done as God has willed and commanded them to be
done, we doubt not but they have the Nature of Sin.

To this Query our Author annexes the following Observation -- The Words of the
pious and judicious Mr. Chillingworth are very material to this Purpose For my
part, says he, I do heartily wish that by public Authority it were so ordered,
that no Man, should ever preach or print this Doctrine, that Faith alone,
justifies, unless he joins this together with it, That universal Obedience is
necessary to Salvation -- What Piety and Judgment Mr. Chillingworth might be
remarkable for I ^^ow not -- But if by universal Obedience being necessary to
Salvation, He means what our Auther does (or otherwise this Quotation is
nothing to the Purpose) Justification in the Sight of God, then Mr.
Chillingworth's writing after this Manner is a Specimen neither of his Piety or
Judgment -- Because the quite contrary Doctrine is contained in our Articles
and established by public Authority -- So that to wish for Justification by
Faith alone to be put down by public Authority, what is it in Effect but to
wish for the utter Subversion of the grand Doctrine of the Reformation? Perhaps
it may not be impertinent or a vain Repetition, if I here beg leave to
transcribe a Passage (which I lately printed in my Answer to the Prebend of St.
Paul's) out of the Honeycomb of Free Justification, written by one Mr. Eaton,
A. M. of Trinity College in Cambridge, printed at London in the year 1642.
"Free Justification, says he, was first enjoined to be diligently taught for
the Reformation of the Church, by King Henry 8th, but was by King Edward 6th.
and Queen Elizabeth principally established by Parliament, and singled out from
all the rest of the Established Articles of Religion; and reduced into Sermons
and Homilies to be (after the Peoples Sight of their lost Estate, and woeful
Misery by Sin) principally taught, and chiefly known and understood of all the
Subjects and Commons of the Land for these four Causes --

1st Because it is the only immediate Cause and Means of our Peace with God --
For being justified by Faith we have Peace with God, Romans 5.1. and our
Assurance of free Salvation by Jesus Christ, and is therefore called the
Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. For whom God justifies, them be also
glorifieth, Romans 8.30.

2. Because it is the chiefest Cause and Means to discover and suppress the
Romish Antichrist, Popery etc. and all other Superstitions, Sects, Errors, and
Schisms out of the Land; and to establish Unity, Peace, and Concord in Matters
of Religion, and of Assurance of free Salvation, and makes every Man to keep in
a lawful Vocation, and to do it profitably in Love, Gal. 5.13.

4. To direct Ministers orthopodein to go with a right Foot to the Truth of the
Gospel, Gal. 2.14. In sound Preaching, and pure declaring of the Word of God,
by a true Faith of free Justification, because (says the established Doctrine
of our Church) sincere Preachers ever were, and ever shall be but a few; and
their preaching of God's Word most sincere in the Beginning, by Process of Time
waxes less and less pure, and after is corrupt, and last of all quite laid
down, and left off; because free Justification is a Doctrine hardly learned in
a Church, and soon lost again, Gal. 1.6. And yet is the true Strength,
Happiness, and Safety of the whole Land, Isa. 62.1 -- 6.

Hereupon the fifth Part of the Sermon against Disobedience and Rebellion,
established by Queen Elizabeth, teaches the Commons, that such Bishops or
Ecclesiastical Persons, as by Pride and ambitious Rule, do by Terms of Error,
Schism, or Heresy, hinder this main Light of God's Word from the People, are
the chiefest Traitors in the Land: And the sixth and last Part largely
teaches, that such Subjects and Commons to whom through Ignorance of God's
Word, this Light of Righteousness, and this Sun of Understanding does not
shine, although they may brag, as did sometimes the Jewish Clergy and People,
that they cannot lack Knowledge, yet are such by their blind, dead Faith,
Traitors to God, Traitors to their King, Traitors to their own Souls and
Bodies, and Traitors to the whole Land and Country.

Thus far Mr. Eaton -- And whether He or Mr. Chillingworth wrote with most
Piety and Judgment on this Head, I leave to the Author's Consideration -- And
at the same Time appeal to your Lordships, whether the Methodists by preaching
up the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone carry Christianity to an
Extreme? Or, whether or not this Author by making moral Duties a Condition of
our Acceptance with God, and of our being justified in his Sight is not himself
guilty of an Irregularity which amounts to a Violation of the Laws both of
Church and State?

May not this also, my Lords, serve as an Answer to our Author's 10th Query,
Page 12th. viz. Whether it be for the Service of Religion, to discourage People
from reading Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons and the whole Duty of Man; to whom
our Methodists might have added many more of our best Writers after the
Restoration. For, all these (together with explaining the whole Work of our
Redemption by Christ) endeavored to turn the Minds of People to the Practice
of Moral Duties, and to cure them of that Madness and Enthusiasm into which
they had been led by the Antinomian Doctrines and others of the like Tendency,
during the Times of Anarchy and Confusion? Undoubtedly yes -- For are they not
both wrong in their Foundation? The latter indeed lays no Foundation by
justifying Faith at all, (and therefore may be more properly termed half the
Duty of Man) and the former, like our Author, contrary to the Laws of Church
and State, makes good Works a Condition of our Acceptance with God, and of our
being justified in his Sight -- And though I might have spared my borrowed
Comparison of putting the Archbishop on a Level with Mahomet, (for which I ask
the public Pardon, though perhaps even this Confession may be turned to my
Reproach) yet I can by no Means agree with our Author in this same Query, Page
13th, that either his Grace, or the Author of the whole Duty of Man, explained
the whole Work of our Redemption by Christ -- For how can that be possibly done
without explaining the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone? And therefore
whatever good the Archbishop, and many other of our best Writers after the
Restoration (as this Author styles them) might design by endeavoring to turn
the Minds of People to the Practice of moral Duties, and to cure them of that
Madness and Enthusiasm into which, they had been led by the Antinomian
Doctrines and others of the like Tendency, during the Times of Anarchy and
Confusion, may I not appeal to your Lordships, whether that of the Poet be not
too applicable to his Grace the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, and Writers of
that Stamp, viz.

Indicit in Syllam, cupiens vitare Charibdin? For is there no Way, my Lords, of
turning People's Minds to the Practice of moral Duties without turning their
Minds from the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, without which moral
Duties cannot be acceptable to God at all? What is this, my Lords, but Pharaoh
like, to command God's Israel to make Brick without giving them Straw? And
supposing it be true, that the People before the Restoration had been led into
Madness and Enthusiasm, by Antinomian Doctrines, was there no other Way, my
Lords, of curing them of this Madness, but by preaching down the most
fundamental Article of the Church of England, and so by preaching up the
Doctrine of Justification in the Sight of God partly by Works and partly by
Faith, bring them half Way to the Church of Rome? Do not these Itinerants, my
Lords, by laying down Faith as the Foundation, and building the Superstructure
of universal Obedience as the Fruit of it thereon, keep a proper Medium, and
take the most effectual Method of preserving People from Antinomianism on the
one Hand, or Madness and Enthusiasm, Anarchy and Confusion on the other? And is
not this, my Lords, the constant Tenor of their Sermons? Do they not first
labor to bring People to a real Faith in Christ as the Lord their
Righteousness, and then exhort those that believe, to be careful to maintain
and show forth their Faith, by a constant uniform Performance of all manner of
good Works?

How disingenuous then is this Author's 9th Query, Page 12th. Whether it does
not savor of Self-sufficiency and Presumption, when a few young Heads, without
any Color of a Divine Commission, set up their own Schemes, as the great
Standard of Christianity: And, How can it be reconciled to Christian Humility,
Prudence, or Charity, to indulge their own Notions to such a Degree, as to
perplex, unhinge, terrify, and distract the Minds of Multitudes of People, who
have lived from their Infancy under a Gospel Ministry, and in the regular
Exercise of a Gospel Worship; and all this, by persuading them, that they have
never yet heard the true Gospel, nor been instructed in the true Way of
Salvation before; and tha^ they neither are, nor can be true Christians, but by
adhering to their Doctrins and Discipline, and embracing Christianity upon their
Schemes. All the while, for the Sake of those Schemes, and in Pursuance of
them, violating the wholesome Rules, which the Powers Spiritual and Temporal
have wisely and piously established, for the Preservation of Peace and Order in
the Church.

Here he charges these Itinerants (though without Proof, as he had done in the
proceeding one) with setting up their own Schemes, as the great Standard of
Christianity, and with telling People that they neither are or can be true
Christians, but by adhering to their Doctrines and Discipline, and embracing
Christianity upon their Schemes. Is not this Calumny all over? For where has
this Author made it appear that the Methodists preach contrary to the Articles
of the established Church? Or how does he or can he prove, that they affirm
that People neither are or can be true Christians without adhering to their
Discipline? Where are any Quotations to this Purpose in his Observations? Is
not this, my Lords, all gratis dictum? And therefore to use some of his own
Words, Does it not savor of Self-sufficiency and Presumption, and can it be
reconciled to Christian Humility, Prudence, or Charity to indulge his Prejudice
against any Person's living to such a Degree, as to lay Things to their Charge
which they never thought of or said? For do not these Itinerants freely
converse with Persons of all Communions? Have I not in particular communicated
wi^h the Church of Scotland, and preached among the Churches in New England? Do
not the Generality of the Clergy cry out against me as a Latitudinarian, and
look upon me for so doing as the bigoted Jews did on Peter for going into the
uncircumcised Gentiles, though I say as he did, can any Man forbid me to converse
with and communicate with those who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
Are not these notorious Matters of fact? And how then can this Author
insinuate, that these Itinerants tell People that they neither are or can be
Christians without adhering to their Discipline?

But further, How scornfully does he speak of these Itinerants? He styles them
a few young Heads -- And how unwarily has he thereby showed his Ignorance of
the lively Oracles of God? For has he never read what David says, Psalm. 8.2.
Out of the Mouths of Babes an Sucklings has thou ordained Strength, because of
thine Enemies, that thou might still the Enemy and Avenger? Or that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. But God has chosen the foolish Things of this World
to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak Things of this World to
confound the Things which are mighty; and base Things of the World, and Things
which are despised, has God chosen, yea and Things that are not, to bring to
naught Things which are? How presumptuously does he also tax these few young
Heads in this same Query with acting without any Color of a Divine Commission?
For have not several of these young Heads received a Commission from Your
Lordships? And does not the Success they have met with, as also their being
strengthened to stem and surmount such a Torrent of Opposition afford some
Color at least, that they have acted by a Divine Commission indeed? For how
could a few young Heads, my Lords, or any Men whatsoever do such Things unless
God was with them?

But our Author it seems looks upon what they call Success in a different
Light, and therefore in this 9th Query further asks, How it can be reconciled
to Christian Humility, Prudence, or Charity, to indulge their own Notions to
such a Degree, as to perplex, unhinge, terrify and distract the Minds of
Multitudes of People, who have lived from their Infancy under a Gospel
Ministry, and in the regular Exercise of a Gospel Worship; and all this, by
persuading them, that they have never yet heard the true Gospel, nor been
instructed in the true Way of Salvation before. To prove this particular Part
of the Query, He refers to Passages which my Lord of London was pleased to
extract out of my third Journal some Years ago such as, I offered Jesus Christ
freely to them -- I think Wales is excellently well prepared for the Gospel of
Christ -- Received News of the wonderful Progress of the Gospel in Yorkshire
under the Ministry of my dear Brother Ingham -- Iwas refreshed by a great
Packet of Letters, giving me an Account of the success of the Gospel -- Amost
comfortable Packet of Letters, giving me an Account of the Success of the
Gospel -- But how does all these Passages, my Lords, put altogether afford the
least Shadow of a Proof of what this Author here lays to these Itinerants
Charge? Or how can offering Christ freely and hearing and writing of the
Success of the Gospel, be interpreted as perplexing, unhinging, and terrifying
and distracting the Minds of Multitudes of People etc? Is not this, my Lords,
like the other Proofs he brings against these Itinerants in some other
Respects? And may I not venture to affirm now whatever I did some Years ago,
that if the Right Reverend the Bishops and Reverend the Clergy hold the same
Principles with this anonymous Author, then the Generality of the poor People
of England, however regular they may have been from their Infancy in the
Exercise of a Gospel Worship, never yet lived under a Gospel Ministry, have
never yet heard the true Gospel, or been instructed in the true Way of
Salvation -- For how can that be, when the fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel,
I mean Justification by Faith alone in the Sight of God, must then be
necessarily every where preached down? Does not Luther call this Articulus
stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae? And is there any Thing, my Lords, so very
irreconcilable to Christian Humility, Prudence or Charity, for a few young
Heads, who do hold this Doctrine, seeing those who seem Pillars and are the
aged Heads of the Church are so much out of Order, to venture out and preach
this Doctrine to as great Multitudes of People as will give them the Hearing?
And supposing some of these Multitudes should be unhinged, terrified,
distracted or disturbed a little, is it not better they should be thus unhinged
from off their false Foundation here, than by building upon their own Works,
and going about to establish a Righteousness of their own, endanger their
eternal Salvation hereafter?

The distracting People's Minds to such a Degree as to occasion sudden
Roarirgs, Agonies, Screamings, Tremblings, Dropping-down, Ravings and such
like, is by no Means the great End proposed by these Itinerants pr^^ching, much
(...) was it ever urged bv them as an essential Mark of (...) Spirit of God --
And therefore, my Lords, is not our Author very unfair in stating his 4th
Query, Page 10th, as he has done, viz. Whether a due and regular Attendance on
the public Offices of Religion, paid by good Men in a serious and composed
Way, does not better answer the true Ends of Devotion, and is not a better
Evidence of the Cooperation of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden Agonies,
Roarings and Screamings, Tremblings, Droppings-down, Ravings and Madnesses:
into which their Hearers have been cast; according to the Relations given of
them in the Journals referred to? Would one not imagine by this Query that
these Itinerants laid down such Things as Screamings, Tremblings, etc. as
essential Marks of the Co-Operations of the Holy Spirit? But can any such Thing
be proved? Are they not looked upon by these Itinerants themselves as
extraordinary Things, proceeding generally from Soul-distress, and sometimes it
may be from the Agency of the evil-Spirit, who labors to drive poor Souls into
Despair? Does not this appear from the Relation given of them in one of the
Journals referred to? Are there not many Relations of the Cooperation of the
Spirit in the same Journal where no such bodily Effects are so much as hinted
at? And does not this give ground to suspect that The due and regular
Attendance on the public Offices of Religion, paid by (what our Author calls)
good Men in a serious and composed Way, is little better than a dead formal
Attendance on outward Ordinances, which a Man may continue in all his
Lifetime, and be all the while far from the Kingdom of God? Did ever any one
before hear this urged as an Evidence of the Cooperation of the Spirit? Or
would any one think that the Author of the Observations ever read the Relations
that are given of the Conversion of several in the Holy Scriptures? For may we
not suppose, my Lords, that many were cast into sudden Agonies, and Screamings,
Acts 2.37. when they were pricked to the Heart, and said unto Peter and the
rest of the Apostles, Me^ and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Or what
would this Author think of the Conversion of the Jailer, Acts 10.29, 30, who
SPRANG IN, and came TREMBLING and FELL DOWN before Paul and Silas; and brought
them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Or what would he think of
Paul who trembling, astonished, Acts. 9.6, said, Lord, what will thou have me
to do,? and was afterward, verse 9th, three Days without Sight, and neither
did eat nor drink? Is it not to be feared, that if this Author had set upon the
Bench, and heard this Apostle give an Account of his own Conversion, he would
have joined with Festus in crying out with a loud Voice, Paul much Learning
has made thee mad? And are not all these Things and whatever else is recorded
in the Book of God written for our Learning? Is not God the same Yesterday, to
Day, for ever? And may he not now as well as formerly reveal his Arm and
display his Power in bringing Sinners home to himself as suddenly and
instantaneously as in the firfs planting of the Gospel Church?

But it seems by Query 7th; page 10th, that our Author doubts whether there be
any such Thing as a sudden and instantaneous Change. For he there enquires
Whether a gradual Improvement in Grace and Goodness, is not a better Foundation
of Comfort, and of an Assurance of a Gospel New Birth, than that which is
founded on the Doctrine of a sudden and instantaneus Change; Which, if there be
any such Thing, is not easily distinguished from Fancy and Imagination; the
Workings whereof we may well suppose to be more strong and powerful, while the
Person considers himself in the State of one who is admitted as a Candidate for
such a Change, and is taught in due Time to expect it? Here it is to be
observe;d, that after telling of a sudden and instantaneous Change, he adds, if
there be any such Thing -- What, my Lords,? Does this Author profess himself an
Advocate for the Church of England, and yet say "If there be any such Thing as
a sudden instantaneous Change?" Does he not hereby lay an Ax to the very Root
of the Baptismal Office? For if the Child be actually regenerated by the Holy
Ghost, when the Minister sprinkles Water upon it in the Name of the blessed
Trinity, does it not follow, that ^f any Change at all be wrought in the Child
at that Time, it must be sudden and Instantaneous? And does he then say, " If
there be any such Thing? -- And do your Lordships assent thereto? With what
Reason then are these Itinerants upbraided for talking of a sudden
instantaneous Change, upon which the very Essence of Baptismal Regeneration,
that Diana of the present Clergy, entirely depends?

Besides, with what Confidence or Rules of fair Reasoning can he here enquire
Whether a gradual Improvement in Grace and Goodness, is not a better Foundation
of Comfort, and of an Assurance of a Gospel New Birth, than that which is
founded on the Doctrine of a sudden and instantaneous Change; which, if there
be any such Thing, is not easily distinguished from Fancy and Imagination; the
working whereof we may well suppose to be more STRONG and powerful, while the
Person considers himself in the State of one who is admitted as a Candidate for
such a Change, and is taught in due Time to expect it?

However unintelligible the latter Part of this Query may be, does not the
former Part of it seem to imply that these Itinerants found the Assurance of
the Gospel New Birth on this sudden and instantaneous Change wrought on their
Hearers under their Sermons exclusive of a gradual Improvement in Grace and
Goodness afterward? But is not this mere Slander? For however they may humbly
hope that Sinners when deeply impressed may be suddenly and effectually wrought
upon, yet how can it be proved that they reckon them real Converts, till they
see them bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, in doing justly, loving Mercy
and walking humbly with their God? Or if this was not the Case, does not the
Author himself if he holds Baptismal Regeneration, found his Comfort on the
Dotrine of a sudden and instantaneous Change? And do not the greatest part of
the poor Souls now in England go on secure that they shall be eternally happy
and yet have no better Foundation of Comfort, and Assurance of a Gospel
New Birth than that which is founded on the Doctrine of a sudden and
instantaneous Change wrought upon them in Baptism?

Is not our Author my Lords also in this Query guilty of another egregious
mistake? For the Foundation of Comfort which these Itinerants lay and depend on
is the complete and all sufficient Righteousness of Jesus, and the New Birth or
change wrought in the Heart is by them looked upon only as an Evidence that the
Persons thus changed, have indeed got a Foundation on this Rock of Ages, and
consequently a sure and certain Hope of a Resurrection to eternal Life -- And
is not all this, my Lords, easily distinguished from Fancy and Imagination? And
does not our Author lead People to a wrong Foundation for Comfort, by directing
them to look for it from a gradual Improvement in Grace and Goodness? For what
says the Apostle? 1 Cor. 3.11. Other Foundation can no Man lay than that is
laid, which is Christ Jesus, -- who (as he speaks in the first Chapter of the
same Epistle, Ver. 30.) is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption?

This Foundation as well as this sudden and instantaneous Change, whether
wrought in or after Baptism, our Author, it is to be feared, is too great a
Stranger to -- At least he gives too great Evidence that he has made but little
Improvement in Grace and Goodness, for he asks in his 11th Query, Page 13th,
Whether the Frame of humane Nature fairly considered, the Author of the Whole
Duty of Man, did not do better Service to Religion, in laying down Rules to
keep Recreations of all Kinds within the Bounds of Innocence; than they who now
censure him, and absolutely deny that Recreations of any Kind, considered as
such are or can be innocent?

What Rules the Author of the Whole Duty of Man may have laid down to keep
Recreations of all Kinds within the Bounds of Innocence, it may be needless
here to enquire -- Is it not sufficient, my Lords, to mention that the holy
Scriptures (wherein the whole Duty of Man and that too in respect both to Faith
and Practice is fully and really taught) lay down one golden universal Rule for
Recreations and every Thing else, viz. that Whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do, we must do all to the Glory of God? Whatever Recreations,
People take to the Glory of God, these Itinerants, my Lords, think are quite
allowable -- But if they are made Use of merely for Self-pleasing, and not to
God's Glory; and to fit us for his Service, they do affirm, that all such
Recreations neither are or can be innocent -- And if the Author of the Whole
Duty of Man, or any other Author whatsoever has set any other Bounds or fixed
any other Rule, however fairly he may have considered the Frame of humane
Nature, is it not evident, that he has not fairly considered the Frame and
Nature of true Christianity? For does not that, my Lords, turn our whole Lives
into one continued Sacrifice to God? And if we fairly consider the Frame of
humane Nature how weak and frail it is, and how easily diverted from pursuing
our one great End, are not those the greatest Friends to Religion who caution
People against leading themselves into Temptations, or making Use of any
Recreation that may put them out of a spiritual Frame and unfit them for the
Service of God? Is this going any further than the Apostle did, who so strictly
cautions Christians not to grieve the Spirit of GOD whereby they are sealed to
the Day of Redemption?

Our Author under this Head has referred to a Passage out of one of my
Journals, wherein I gave an Account of my being in some polite Company at
Maryland who were disposed to Cards, and also a Passage out of my Letter from
New-Brunswick, occasioned, if I mistake not, by meeting a Man who thought it
allowable to play at Cards in the Christmas Holy Days, from the Liberty given
him by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man -- And will our Author allow playing
at Cards to be a lawful Recreation for a Christian? Is this one of the
Recreations of all Kinds which may be kept within the Bounds of Innocence? Is
it not a kind of casting Lots? Has it not the Appearance of Evil? Is it not
therefore forbidden in the Scriptures? Or if he will not hear the Scriptures
will he not hear the Church? And what says the 75th Canon? No Ecclesiastical
Person shall at any Time, other than for their honest Necessities, resort to
any Taverns or (...), neither shall they board or lodge in any such Places.
Further (...), they shall not give themselves to any base or servile Labor, or
to Drinking or Riot, spending their Time idly by Day or by Night, playing at
Dice, Cards or Tables, or any other unlawful Game: But at all Times convenient,
they shall hear or read somewhat of the holy Scriptures, or shall occupy
themselves with some other honest Study or Exercise, always doing the Things
which shall appertain to Honesty, and endeavoring to profit the Church of God,
having always in Mind that they ought to excel all others in Purity of Life,
and should be Examples to the People to live well and christianly, under Pain
of ecclesiastical Censures to be inflicted with Severity, according to the
Qualities of their Offenses. An excellent Canon this! And may I not argue from
it thus? Either this Canon is founded upon the Word of God, or it is not -- If
it be not, why is it not abrogated? If it be, why is it not put in Practice?
Why do the Clergy encourage frequenting of Taverns, Alehouses and Gaming by
their own Example? Are not such Practices in this Canon supposed to be quite
contrary to the Purity of Life, and Excellency of Example which may be justly
required from them? And if such Things are unseemly in a Clergyman, are they
not in a Degree equally unseemly in Laymen whose Privilege as well as Duty it
is to be holy in all manner of Conversation and Godliness, and who are
universally commanded to shine as Lights in the World amidst a crooked and
perverse Generation?

My Lords, might it not reasonably have been hoped that your Lordships were too
well acquainted with real and inward Religion, to think that a Soul born of
God, and made Partaker of a Divine Nature can stoop so low, and act so unlike
itself as to seek for Recreation in Gaming? Does not the glorious and plenteous
Redemption, that great, inexpressibly great and present Salvation, which the
Great High Priest and Apostle of our Profession has purchased for us by
shedding his dear Heart's Blood, and whereby we are redeemed from this present
evil Worlds, set us above such triflng Things as these, supposing they were not
directly sinful? Are not Christians Kings and Priests unto God? And is it not
as much beneath the Dignity of their Heaven-born Spirits to stoop to so low an
Amusement as Gaming of any kind, as ever it was beneath the Dignity of the
Roman Emperor to spend his Time in the Royal Amusement of catching Flies? --
Does not our Author therefore, my Lords, by writing thus strike at the very
Vitals of Religion, and prove too plainly that he is a Stranger to that Power
of the dear Redeemer's Resurrection? Need we therefore wonder at his 12th
Query, Page 12th, which immediately follows the foregoing one? wherein he
enquires, Whether the strong Expressions which are found in their printed
Journals, of extraordinary Presences of God directing and assisting them (...)
a more immediate Manner, do not need some Testimonies of a divine Mission, to
clear them from the Charge of Enthusiasm? Under this Query our Author has also
mentioned several Passages of my Journals extracted by my Lord of London, in
his last pastoral Letter against Luke warmness and Enthusiasm, and has also
been at great Pains to extract many more out of my four last Journals which
have been printed since, and which according to our Author, are more full of
Enthusiasm, if possible, than the three first? -- But does not this Author
forget that I answered his Lordship's Letter, and in that proved, that his
Lordship was mistaken in his Definition of Enthusiasm; and that according to
his Definition I was no Enthusiast? Did I not also prove, that the Propositions
on which his Lordship's Quotations were founded were false? Has his Lordship or
any one for him been pleased to make any Reply to that Answer? Not as I have
heard of -- And therefore was it not incumbent upon this Author, my Lords, to
have disproved or invalidated my Answer to his Lordship's Letter before he
could honorably mention the Passages referred to therein to prove me an
Enthusiast? But passing by this with other many Irregularities which are justly
charged upon this Anonymous Author, if he asks whether the strong Expressions
which are found in their (I suppose he would have said his) printed Journals,
for I find under this Query no Journals referred to but mine, of extraordinary
Presences of God directing and assisting them in a more immediate Manner, do
not need some Testimonies of a Divine Mission, to clear them from the Charge of
Enthusiasm? I would ask this Author again, what Testimonies he would have? Can
he bring any Proof against the Matters of Fact recorded in these Journals* Or
will he venture to affirm that I did not feel the Divine Presence in an
extraordinary Manner, that is more at one Time than another? Or that I have not
been directed in a more immediate Manner, at certain Times when waiting upon
God? Were not such like Queries put by the Heathens to the primitive
Christians? And was not their Answer, Monstrare nequeo, sentio tantum? I would
further ask, what this Author means by a Divine Mission? Did not my Lord of
Gloucester (for I must again repeat it) give me (...) Apostolical one when he
said, "Receive thou the Holy Ghost by the Imposition of our Hands?" And can it
be Enthusiasm, or is there any Thing extraordinary in saying, that I felt more
of the Influences of this Holy Ghost, and was assisted in a more immediate
Manner in my Administrations at one Time than another? Or is it not more
extraordinary (only indeed that it has been a good while too too common) that
the Right Reverend the Bishops should take upon them to confer the Holy Ghost,
and the Reverend the Clergy, profess they are inwardly moved by it, and yet
charge every Expression they meet with, wherein his blessed Influences are
spoke of as felt and experienced, with being downwright Enthusiasm? But what
shall we say? The natural Man discerns not the Things of the Spirit, they are
Foolishness unto him, neither can he understand them, because they are
spiritually discerned -- What if some of the Expressions, my Lords, in the
Journals are strong? Does that prove them Enthusiastical? Or what if feeling
the Presence of God and being directed in a more immediate Manner be something
extraordinary to our Author, does it therefore follow that it is so to others?
Or is this Author like minded with the Right Reverend the Bishop and the
Reverend the Clergy of the Diocese of Litchfield and Coventry, who reckon the
Indwelling, and inward Witnessing of, as also praying and preaching by the
Spirit among the karismata the miraculous Gifts conferred on the primitive
Church, and which have long since ceased? If so, no Wonder that the Expressions
referred to are strong and extraordinary to him -- But my Lords, may I not beg
Leave to tell this Author that these Itinerant Preachers have not so learnt
Christ? No, they believe that Jesus is the same Yesterday, to Day and for ever
-- And that he is faithful who has said to his Apostles, and in them to all
succeeding truly Christian Ministers, Lo, I am with you always even to the End
of the World -- Consequently they believe the Comforter will abide with them
for ever, witnessing with their Spirits that they are Children of God, leading
them by a diligent Search of the holy Scriptures into all Truth, guiding them
together with the Word, the Voice of Friends and Providence in all
Circumstances by his Counsel, giving them Utterance when called to speak to the
People from God, and helping their Infirmities, and assisting them in Prayer
when called to speak to God for the People -- Inwardly moved by this Spirit,
and not any Hopes of human Grandeur or Preferment, these Itinerants, my Lords,
first took on them the Administration of the Church, and his blessed Influences
they have from Time to Time happily experienced, as Thousands whose Eyes have
been opened to discern spiritual Things can testify. And being without Cause
denied the Use of their Brethrens Pulpits, and having obtained Help from God,
they continue to this Day witnessing both to small and great the grand
Doctrines of the Reformation, Justification by Faith alone in the imputed
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the Necessity of the Indwelling of the
Spirit in order to be made meet to be Partakers of the heavenly Inheritance
among all them that are sanctified -- In doing thus they know of no wholesome
Rules, wisely and piously established "by the Powers Spiritual and Temporal",
Query 9th, Page 12th, which they have violated, or should they be commanded by
the whole Bench of Bishops to speak no more of this Doctrine -- they have an
Answer ready We cannot but speak the things that we know -- We take this to be
an ungodly Admonition, and therefore whether it be right in the Sight of God to
obey Man rather than God judge ye -- And though for so doing they should be
mobbed, as they frequently have been, and though God be not the Author of
Confusion or Tumult, as our Author would have it Page 12th, yet they know of
one who was mobbed himself upon a like Account, and commanded Timothy to
approve himself a Minister of God in Tumults. -- Being sensible of the
Indolence and Unorthodoxy of the Generality of the Clergy, they think they are
sufficiently warranted by the Example of the Prophets of the Old and Jesus
Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament, (whatsoever our Author may say
Query 8th. Page 11.) to bear a faithful Testimony against them. And being
called by the Providence of God abroad, after their unworthy Labors had been
blessed at Home, they have judged it meet, right and their bounden Duty from
Time to Time to publish Accounts of what God had done for their own and other
People's Souls -- Which though despised by some, and esteemed Enthusiastical by
others, have been owned to the Instruction and Edification of Thousands -- But
whether this may be properly called open and public Boasting, unbecoming the
Modesty and Self-denial of a Minister of the Gospel, especially one who would
be though it to carry on his Ministry under the immediate Guidance of the blessed
Spirit, (as our Author intimates in his last Query of this 2d Part;) or whether
they were wrote with a single Eye to the Redeemer's Glory, they are willing to
leave to the Determination of that God, to whom all Hearts are open, all
Desires known, and from whom no Secrets are hid -- I could here enlarge -- But
having detained your Lordships too long already, I choose to refer what I have
further to say on these Heads to a Third Letter, which God willing shall be
sent another Opportunity, in Answer to the last Part of this Author's Queries,
by, my Lords,

Your Lordships most obedient Son and Servant, GEORGE WHITEFIELD.

ERRATA.
Second Part. Page 9. Line 7. from the Bottom, for strict r. exact -- P. 13. l.
last r. Incidit in Syllam, qui vult vitare Charibdin?


