Mr. Byles's SERMON, ON The Glorious Rest of HEAVEN.

THE Glorious Rest OF HEAVEN.

A SERMON At the Thursday-Lecture in BOSTON, Jan. 3. 1744, 5.

By Mr. BYLES.

Published at the Request of many of the Hearers.

Matthew. xvii. 4. They said -- It is good for us to be here. --

BOSTON: Printed by B. GREEN and Comp. for D. GOOKIN, over against the Old
South Meeting House. 1745.

THE Glorious Rest OF HEAVEN.
ISAIAH XI. x. -- His Rest shall be glorious.


THE Prophecy of Isaiah, is one of the most sublime and noble Pieces of the Old
Testament, whether we consider the Force of Thought, the Magnificence of the
Descriptions, or the Majesty and Importance of the Subjects with which they
abound. Among the latter of these, viz. the Subjects, there are none that show
with a diviner Brightness, or cast a more radiant Luster through the Book, than
those which concern the Advent of the Messiah, and the illustrious Transactions
that should attend it. This is a Theme that the Prophet delights to dwell upon,
and introduces throughout the whole of his lofty Predictions.

The Chapter before us is of this Kind, in which the inspired Man gives us the
Character of the Messiah, and describes his powerful and happy Kingdom. This is
done with an Eloquence and Beauty peculiar to himself. At the 10th Verse, our
Savior is described as lifted up as an Ensign, and the Gentiles seeking to
him, while he thus purchases a Rest for them. And in that Day there shall be a
Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the People; to it shall the
Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be glorious. That is, the Messiah, who is the
Root of Jesse, shall by his being lifted up on his Cross, obtain a blessed Rest
for his chosen People; among whom shall be the Gentiles, who shall seek to him
for it. The Dispensation he brings is a Rest compared with the Yoke of Jewish
Ceremonies. It brings with it a Rest of Mind, an Heart fixed trusting in the
Lord. There is also a glorious Rest for the Church upon Earth in the latter
Day: The new Earth, wherein shall dwell Righteousness. And there is beyond and
above all, the Rest that remains for the People of God, in the heavenly World.

The Text that is under our Consideration, includes in it, all the Rests that
the blessed Jesus bestows on true Believers, whether in this World, or the
World to come; for Time, or for Eternity; to the Soul, or to the Body. However,
we will, if you please, confine it to the Rest after this Life, in the heavenly
World. That Rest will be glorious without dispute; and the Words contain a very
just Description of it. It is called a Rest, which is a negative Description;
and excludes all manner of Uneasiness or Disturbance. It is called a glorious
Rest; which is a positive Description, and implies all possible and real
Blessedness. And it is called His Rest, that is, Christ's Rest, inasmuch as he
is the Owner of it: For the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath. The
Doctrine that the Words present us with, is this,

DOCTRINE. The Rest of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he has laid up in the
heavenly World for his People, will be a glorious Rest.
There are three Propositions contained in the Doctrine.

I. There is a Rest laid up for the People of God, in the heavenly World. II.
This Rest will be a glorious Rest. III. That it is the Rest of our Lord Jesus
Christ; he is the Owner of it.
I. There is a Rest laid up for the People of God, in the heavenly World.

In speaking to this Head, I shall show, what the Rest is not, what it is, and
endeavor at a Scripture Proof of it, as I go along.

It may here be premised then, That by this Rest, We are not to understand an
idle Cessation from all Employment. The holy Souls in the heavenly World, do
not spend their Eternity in a drowsy Indolence. They are not wasting those
golden Ages in a supine Negligence and Idleness. No, in this Sense, they are
never unactive, but we read of them, Rev. iv. 8. They rest not Day nor Night,
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come.
That is, they are never idle, but always diligent in glorifying and admiring
the Perfections of God. Not one Hour of their happy Duration rolls unuseful
away; not one Moment is lost to them in that endless Succession of Ages.

But as a positive Answer, we shall say, that the Inhabitants of the Paradise
above, rest from all painful Labors. Though they do not cease from acting, yet
their Industry is not labourious and difficult to them. It is true, they are
constantly taken up with the Business of Heaven, but it is no longer arduous
and uneasy. They perform the most exalted Services, with the closest
Application, and without Intermission; and at the same Time enjoy the serenest
Tranquillity, and Composure of Mind. The Works of former Years, when they lived
upon our Earth, are now no longer able to perplex and molest them. No longer
will they strive to enter in at the strait Gate, when they are already
possessed of the Happiness of the Kingdom. No more will they give Diligence to
make their Calling and Election sure; when their Faith is turned into Vision,
and their Hope concluded in Enjoyment. Never will they again weary and tire
themselves in the Exercises of Religion, or the Duties of their secular
Employments; but will inhabit a Quietness and Peace, without the least
Molestation or Disturbance. Heb. iv. 10. He that is entered into his Rest, has
ceased from his own Works, as God did from his. Nay, they are gone to the
Reward of their past Actions, and have their Labors crowned with an ample
Retribution and Recompense. Rev. xiv. 13. I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying
unto me, Write, Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth:
Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works
do follow them.

Again, the blessed Spirits of the Just in Heaven, rest from all Sorrow and
Affliction. In this World, all Men meet with Griefs and Woes, and every Child
of Adam is born to Trouble as the Sparks fly upward.

And as all Men in general are subject to the unhappy Incidents of humane Life;
so the pious Man in particular is peculiarly obnoxious to many supernumerary
Trials, which a Stranger to true Piety intermeddles not with. Persecutions and
Abuses from a degenerate World, are no small Part of the Pains that encompass
him. He has an Awe of that Eternity upon his Mind, which the secure Sinner
never suffers to give him an uneasy Reflection. He is grieved at the Withdraw
of God from him, and when his Savior hides his Face he is troubled; while the
unregenerate Wretch goes quietly on, and glides smoothly to the End of his
Journey, unruffled with such Cares, and entirely ignorant of every Fear and
Concern of such a Nature. In a Word, the good Man through much Tribulation enters
into the Kingdom of God, besides the Sorrows common to all Men in this present
evil World.

This is the Condition of the Children of God here, but in the heavenly World,
they are removed at an infinite Distance from every uneasy Thought; and they
leave all the Anguish of their temporal Life behind them, when they enter that
Place of Rest. And not only do good Men when they die, go to a World where
there is no more Affliction, but they receive a Reward for the former Anxieties
that they have met with, and have born with a decent Resignation and Patience.
That Beatitude is fully accomplished unto them, Psalm. xciv. 12, 13. Blessed is
the Man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law: That
thou may give him Rest from the Days of Adversity. And agreeable to this is
that magnificent Description of the Paradise of God, in Rev. vii. from the 9th
Verse, where the Apostle John gives us an Account of a glorious Vision he had
of it. And he tells us expressly, that the happy Inhabitants of it came out of
great Tribulation, Verse 14. And he concludes the sublime Narration, Rev. vii.
16, 17. They shall Hunger no more, neither Thirst any more, neither shall the
Sun light on them, nor any Heat. -- And God shall wipe away all Tears from
their Eyes. And in the same beautiful Manner, is the new Jerusalem represented,
Rev. xxi. 4. And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; and there shall
be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more
Pain; for the former Things are passed away. Thus do the blessed Spirits in
Heaven, rest from all Sorrow, and every afflictive Evil.

Again, The Spirits of just Men made perfect, rest from Sin, and are entirely
freed from the Guilt and Power of that Worst of all Evils.

In this World, the best of Men are full of Imperfection and Sin; and have
Cause to go Mourning all the Day, because of the Oppression of that great
Enemy. The holy Paul himself, under a sad Conviction of it, cries out, Romans
vii. 24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this
Death. Thus that blessed Apostle complains of the Tyranny of original Sin. And
even in the most sincere and devout Frames of his Mind, when he was engaging in
the solemnest Exercises of Religion, he laments it, that he was still infested
by his innate Corruptions, verse 11. When I would do Good, Evil is present with
me. And thus it is with every good Man, while he lives in this World of Sin and
Misery.

But in the heavenly World, there is no more Sin. Rev. xxi. 17. There shall in
no wise enter into it any Thing that defiles, or works Abomination. There is
no Guilt in those pure and deathless Regions, to blast the Beauty of the Place,
or cast a Gloom over the immortal Day that crowns it. Not one Action performed
in that Mountain of Holiness, has the least Mixture of Sin to stain or sully
it: Not one idle Word intrudes it self into the ravishing Hallelujahs that
incessantly echo there: Nay, not so much as one vain Thought pollutes or
discomposes the Minds of the Saints in those spotless Realms of Felicity.

We might add here, That the Spirits in Paradise, are not only entirely free
from Sin, but they are also at Rest from every Temptation to Sin. They have no
Lusts within to solicit them; no ensnaring Trifles from without to allure and
seduce them. The Devil, their grand Adversary, cannot come at them, to use his
Fraud and Subtilty, when once they are removed to that sinless Kingdom: Nor can
his fiery Darts reach to those glorious Heights that they are advanced to, in
those lofty Abodes. Though the pious Soul, while it is linked to the Body, is
hurried and buffeted with a numberless Variety of Suggestions from Satan; yet,
no sooner has it entered into those everlasting Doors, but it has an eternal
Deliverance from them; it shall never be distracted with one of them more. The
dying Believer may say to Sin, and Satan, and all his Temptations, as our
Savior said to the Jews, John vii. 33, 34. Yet a little while and I am with
you, and then I go to him that sent me, -- and whither I go, ye cannot come. In
this Manner may the pious Man sing in the last Moments of his Life: His failing
Pulse, and decreasing Breath, may inspire a new Delight into his Soul; and he
may kindle with a heavenly Transport, at the Approaches of his own Mortality.

Thus we have seen what that Rest is, that the Children of God have prepared
for them, beyond the Confines of the Grave. We have shown that they have a
Dismission from all painful Labor, from all afflictive Evil, from all Sin, and
from every Temptation. We come now to the second Thing in the Doctrine.

II. The Rest that is laid up for gracious Souls in another World, will be a
glorious Rest. This will appear if we consider the following Particulars.

1. The Place of Heaven is a glorious Place. Where this glorious and divine
Place is, perhaps may not absolutely be determined; nor will it be safe and
decent for us to assign any determinate Space in the Fields of Immensity, as
the Spot where the Souls of good Men are made happy, when they leave this
World. Whether we suppose that these dazzling Courts of Immortality lie within
the Limits of the blew Sky, that eludes the Penetration of our Sight; and to be
disposed somewhere in that Firmament of Luminaries; or whether we imagine that
happy City to spread it self beyond the Circumference of our Creation; yet be
it where it will, it is a Place of inconceivable Splendour and Majesty.

The very Heathen had a Notion of the Glory and Beauty of those Regions to
which good Men were carried after their Death; and they used to be very gay and
ornamental in their Descriptions of it. They speak of it in their Writings as
having all the Charms of Art and Nature to furnish and set it off. They tell us
the Fields are in perpetual Verdure; the Hills are forever crowned with
Flowers; and the Trees at one Time blossom and bear Fruit: While the Meads are
refreshed with an innumerable Variety of cool and flowing Springs. Thus the
heathen World used to dress their Paradise, and paint it with all the
Luxuriance of a lively Imagination. But how vastly short are these
Representations to those which we find made use of in the holy Writings, that
give us a Prospect of the heavenly World?

If we consider what the sacred Scriptures relate concerning the Receptacle of
the departed Spirits of the Saints, we shall find sufficient to convince us of
the Truth of this. It is called a House of many Mansions. John xiv. 2. A
Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor.
v. i. A City which has Foundations, whose Builder and whose Maker is God, Heb.
xi. 10. But the most sublime and finished Description of it, we have in the xxi
st. Chapter of the Revelations, in which the holy City blazes in its greatest
Strength and Perfection. It is there built up after a most exquisite Manner,
and sparkles with Gold and Jewels. The Apostle speaks of it, as shining without
the Aid of the Sun; as adorned with every Glory and Splendour: And indeed the
Pomp and Riches of that City, is carried as far as our Imaginations can reach,
in the Word of God; and the Rest is glorious, because the Place of it is
glorious.

2. The Company of Heaven is glorious Company. Heb. xii. 22, 23, 24. But ye are
come to Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly and
Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of
the new Covenant. There is something very beautiful and natural in this divine
Rapture of the Apostle, that expresses more of the noble Transport he was in,
than one would at first imagine. He is so taken up with the Theme, that he
quite forgets the little Niceties of Method and Order, and produces the Images
as they come to his Mind, without a strict Regularity of Arangement. He is
ravished with the Thoughts of his Subject, and is born away with the Current of
Joy and Delight, that pours down upon him in his Contemplations. He begins his
Description with the innumerable Company of Angels: Then he takes the whole
Host of Heaven together, and calls them, the general Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn: Next he rises to the great God himself, and adores him as Judge of
all: Then descends and tells of the Spirits of just Men made perfect: Lastly,
he again soars away, and sings of Jesus the Mediator. Thus the blessed Apostle
is so full of the Matter, that he is hurried along with a holy Violence; and
gives a more strong and sublime Account of that glorious Company, by an artless
and rapid Run of Thoughts, than if he had observed the most scrupulous and
exact Order of Disposition.

And surely the Rest that is filled with such divine Company, must be a
glorious Rest; and it is certainly no little Satisfaction that they afford one
to another. What big Delight will it be, to go to that World, where we shall
see all the truly great and good Men that ever have lived upon Earth! When
Peter, and James, and John, saw Moses and Elias, at the Transfiguration of our
Lord, how were they overpowered with the Extacy of the Vision? Mark ix. 5. And
Peter said, Master, it is good for us to be here: And let us make three
Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. If the Sight
of one or two glorified Saints upon Earth, could cause the Hearts of the
Apostles to beat with such a solemn Delight, what will be the Satisfaction to
go to the numerous Assembly of Heaven, and see that dazzling Company all glitter
together.

But then, if the Sight of the holy Souls, will administer such Joy, surely the
beholding such a radiant innumerable Company of Angels, must fill us with a
proportionable Gladness and Felicity. In the heavenly World, we shall have a
View of those very Angels that we read of in the Scriptures, as descending on
the Earth, with Messages from God, and for the Service of his Children. There
we shall behold the Angel, that swift as Lightning, slew Senacharib's Army in
one Night. There we shall see those Convoys that rolled the Prophet Elijah up
the Skies in a fiery Chariot. Gabriel, who clapped his Wings, and shot away like
a Ray of Light with the News of our Saviors Birth, will there attend upon the
Throne of the blessed Jesus: While Michael, who drove down the rebel Angels
thunderstruck from the Battlements of Heaven, into the deep Abyss of
Damnation, will there move along through the Ranks of Seraphim, with the Port and
Aspect of the Warrior Archangel. The Sight of such glorious Company as this,
will be a blessed and ravishing Sight indeed.

But O where shall we find Words to express the Beatifick Vision of Christ? How
ravishing, and glorious, and unutterable will that blessed Lord appear, who is
the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; and
in whom dwells the Fullness of the Godhead bodily! When the Apostle Paul
looked upon Death in this Light, as only the Messenger that would call him to
his dear Lord Jesus, how does he even pant, with an holy Impatience, for the
pale Monarch to come on. No more is he afraid of that King of Terrors; no more
does he shrink back at his Approaches. He looks upon the Face of his Christ,
and forgets the Horrors of Death: His Sting is blunted, his Darts broken; and
that grim Tyrant of the Grave wears the Aspect of an Angel. 2 Cor. v. 6, 8.
Wherefore we are always confident, knowing that while we are at Home in the
Body, we are absent from the Lord. -- We are confident, I say, and willing
rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord. Phil. i.
23. -- Having a Desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is by far better.
Now if the Faith of going to Jesus, can inspire such a Courage and Joy into the
Mind of the good Man, and banish the Shades from the Vale of Death; surely the
immediate Sight of that Glory will be transporting beyond Conception.

And indeed it is no little Part of the Happiness of Heaven, that there we shall
behold the Lord Jesus Christ, unveiled, in the full Bloom of heavenly Glory.
This adds a Force and a Rapture to John's Description of it, in the xxist and
xxiid Chapters of the Revelations, And I saw no Temple therein: For the Lord
God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. And the City had no need of
the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: For the Glory of God did lighten
it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. -- And there shall be no more Curse, but
the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his Servants shall serve
him. And they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads. And
there shall be no Night there, and they need no Candle, neither Light of the
Sun, for the Lord God gives them Light, and they shall reign for ever and
ever. Thus divinely glorious is the Company of Heaven: Holy Souls departed;
Holy Angels, and God revealed in the Face of the holy Jesus, all conspire to
adorn the Kingdom, and spread a Felicity over the whole Place.

3. The Employment of Heaven is glorious Employment. As the Company is so
excellent and illustrious, so no less is the Conversation with which they
gratify and entertain one another, in those delightful Habitations. Doubtless
those happy Spirits will discourse together, on the Actions of their past
Lives; the Blessings they were favored with, the Miseries they are escaped
from; and Glory that they now possess. Those that knew one another upon Earth,
will be much better acquainted there; and where any have been instrumental in
forwarding and helping on one another in their Way to Heaven, they will be
mutual Joys to one another when they meet there. How blessed and pleasing an
Intercourse must it be, for Friends to congratulate the Arrival of Friends, to
that holy World; to talk over the Prayers they have perhaps formerly made
together; the pious Conversation they have carried on upon Earth; and the
serious Religion they promoted in each other's Minds, by their Word, and their
Examples. It will certainly be no little Satisfaction, for them there to renew
to one another, the Thoughts and Discourses they once entertained concerning
the Glory and Happiness of the Kingdom where they will then reign. They will
say one to another, How dark and obscure were our Conceptions of this Felicity!
How low and mean the Talk we formerly had about it! How inadequate and trifling
the most exalted Strokes of our mortal Discourses to these sublime Enjoyments!

And as the Conversation we shall have with those which we were familiar with
on Earth, will be so pleasant and happy, so no less will that delight us, which
we shall have with those who have gone to Heaven before us. To mix in the
divine and sinless Companies there, to hear the improving Expressions of their
Tongues, and attend to the soft Persuasion that sits upon their Lips, this will
be a very noble Entertainment. How glad shall we be, to hear Paul give us an
Account of his Conversion with his own Mouth; or Noah himself be the Relator of
the Flood which bore him up in his Ark, over the Tops of the Mountains! To hear
Moses, in an improved Sublimity of Style, tell of the Wonders of the Creation,
and relate the Pomp and Terror of Mount Sinai, when its Summit blazed with Fire
unto the midst of Heaven; and the black Smoke arose like the Smoke of a
Furnace, and rolled away through the Air; while the Voice of the Trumpet echoed
louder and louder, and the whole Mountain shook to its Foundations. And will
not JESUS himself tell us of his own Love, and Sufferings for us, in Words
which it is not lawful or possible for a Man to utter. These noble Themes will
without Doubt, employ much of the Conversation of Heaven; and gratify and
enlarge the Minds of the glorified Saints.

They will there also consider the several Works of God, and admire the
surprising Displays of the Godhead in them. The Creation throughout its vast
Extent, will be a Field on which they will expatiate, and ascribe due Praises
to the infinite Contriver and Author of so astonishing a Piece of Workmanship.
Rev. iv. 10, 11. The four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on
the Throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their
Crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory,
Honor, and Power, for thou have created all Things, and for thy Pleasure they
are, and were created. To trace the Mazes of Providence, with exalted Strains
of Rapture and Devotion, will be another Exercise of the heavenly World. The
supreme Lord who manages the Wheels full of Eyes, will be adored as his
wondrous Works to the Children of Men, come to have the Clouds taken off, and
appear in all their Harmony and Beauty.

In some Descriptions that the holy Writings give us of Heaven, we find the
glorified Spirits celebrating the Praises of God, for his Judgments on Earth.
Thus the Destruction of Antichrist tunes their Harps, Rev. xix. 1, -- 6. And
after these Things I heard a great Voice of much People in Heaven, saying,
Alleluia, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God;
for true and righteous are his Judgments, for he has judged the great Whore,
which did corrupt the Air with her Fornication, and has avenged the Blood of
his Servants at her Hand. And again they said Alleluia, and her Smoke rose up
for ever and ever. And the four and twenty Elders, and the four Beasts fell
down and worshipped God that sat on the Throne, saying, Amen, Alleluia. And a
Voice came out of the Throne: saying, Praise our God all ye his Servants, and
ye that fear him, both small and great. And I heard as it were the Voice of a
great Multitude, and as the Voice of many Waters, and as the Voice of mighty
Thundrings; saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God omnipotent reigns. To be sure
in the heavenly World, the Wonders of our Redemption, will be the Subject of
the highest Delight and Praise. We shall there be swallowed up with the
Contemplation of that mysterious and unsearchable Production. Rev. v. 8, 9. The
four living Creatures, and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb,
having every one of them Harps, and golden Vials full of Odours, which are the
Prayers of Saints. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take
the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: For thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation.

The last Thing we shall take Notice of under this Head, shall be, That one
principal Part of the heavenly Blessedness will consist in the beholding of
GOD. This will be no small Article of the Employment and Felicity of the Saints
in Glory; but will improve and brighten every other Delight. Not that we are to
suppose it possible to have a Sight of the divine Essence it self; but such a
Consciousness of his Presence, and such Communications from him, as may in some
Sense be esteemed Sight; and this is what is called the beatifick Vision. It is
in this Sense that those Texts of the holy Scriptures are to be understood,
that speak of beholding the Face of God, and seeing him as he is. The Eye of
the Understanding, has a View of the glorious God, and grasps in as much of the
glorious Prospect, as it can possibly wish. Thus divine and happy are the
Exercises of the heavenly World.

5. The Progression and Increase of that celestial Blessedness, will add
perpetually to its transcendant Glory. The Saints do not immediately upon their
Entrance into Paradise, shoot up to the highest Point of Felicity and
Blessedness, but go on continually making new Aquisitions in Knowledge, and
enlarging their Capacities for Happiness. This may be proved by plain and
evident Arguments; and particularly from the Make and Constitution of the
humane Soul. The Mind of Man is like a Fire, which spreads and increases as it
finds Materials to feed and supply it. So that though the Spirit of a Believer,
as soon as it arrives to those Realms of Tranquillity, receives as much Joy and
Blessedness as it is then capable of, yet it is not happy in so great a Degree,
as it will be afterward, because it will then be able to support, and bear up
under, a larger Proportion of Glory. When the Soul of a good Man has enjoyed
the Felicity of Heaven for some long Period of Duration, every Faculty will be
widen'd, and many additional Advantages will necessarily arise, as the Soul
spreads it self into more ample Capacities. Though the Spirit of the Believer is
made perfect in Holiness and Glory, as soon as it leaves the Body, yet it does
not arrive to those greater Degrees of Perfection, that it will still go on to
acquire, as it sinks further into the Depths of Eternity. The Memory will then
be an inexhaustible Magazine of Delight, as they pass onward through the vast
Variety of Satisfactions that they meet with in the heavenly World: And they
will be able to look back, and reflect with renewed Joy upon that wonderful
Train of Pleasures, which has extended it self in such a beautiful Order, and
to so immense a Distance. And to think over such a mighty Round of Years, and
renew in our Minds all the pleasing Scenes of Felicity, which passed in a gay
Succession before us, in so great a Space of Duration, must needs be an
Happiness which will be unspeakably great; and impossible to be enjoyed at our
first Entrance into Glory.

But to dismiss a Speculation so abstracted, we may here take Notice of two
Steps of Progression, which every one will allow at first Sight, that the Souls
of good Men take in their glorious Happiness.

First, At their Death. They no sooner leave their dying Bodies, but they are
borne upon the Wings of holy Angels to the Paradise of God. A Flight of those
shining Spirits attend the Deathbed of the Saints, and immediately upon the
last Gasp, receive the departing Soul, and convoy it to the World of Glory. If
our Minds could but follow them as they fly along, what a wonderful Scene of
Delight would open to us? How does a Soul just freed from a Body of Sin and
Death, exult as it towers away, in the Midst of such bright Attendants? How do
the resplendent Angel-Guards sing round it, as they bear it through the Regions
of the Air, and the Either, to the Habitations of unfading Bliss and Triumph!
And when it enters the orient Gates of that City, what are the Acclamations and
Hallelujahs that congratulate its safe Arrival! Here it joins its Brethren of
the Skies, in their immortal Anthems of Rapture and Praise, in a joyful Hope
and Expectation of the Resurrection of the Dead at the last Day.

And this is a second Step of the Believer's Progression in Glory, which is
acknowledged by all, without Hesitation or Pause. When our Lord Jesus Christ
makes his second Appearing, the Dead in Christ shall arise, and those Souls who
have been many Ages happy in the Paradise of God, shall now attain to a more
complete and extensive Felicity at the Resurrection of their respective Bodies;
which will be glorified and adorned for the Habitation of so sinless Spirits.
It will without Dispute, be a most glorious Advancement in Blessedness, for the
raised Bodies of the Saints, to be again united to the Soul, and become more
intimate and inseparable Companions than ever they were before. How will the
ravished Soul of the good Man triumph, when he hears the Voice of the Son of
God, Arise ye Dead! How will his quickening Body rejoice, at the new Entry of
the Spirit into it! The whole Man will be swallowed up in an unknown Delight:
His Heart will leap with Transport in his Bosom, and beat Time to the sounding
Echo's of the last Trumpet. Thus when our Lord Jesus Christ shall come, to be
glorified in his Saints, and admired of all them that believe, the Language of
the holy Soul, as it flies down to the Grave that contains its Dust, will be,
Arise, O my Body, arise and shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee.

I might add to these two Steps in the Throne of Glory, a Third, viz. that
after the final Judgment, the deathless Bodies and Souls of the Children of
God, will in an indissoluble Union, ascend to the heavenly World, with new
Additions of Splendour, and Pomp, and Happiness. But, alas! What Words can bear
up under this Weight of Glory. What Conceptions are equal to this dazzling
Solemnity, and Magnificence. When the Judge of the World, rises from his last
Sentence on the Righteous and the Wicked, and returns to his Throne in the
Heavens, who can tell the Joys of the glorified Saints, and the Songs of
Thanksgiving that hang on their Lips? They will shout round his Chariot Wheels,
as they roll along, and all Heaven will resound with their Acclamations. Thus
will they enter the Place of their holy and glorious Abodes, and receive a
higher Degree of Blessedness, than ever they were before capable of imagining.

Thus we see there is a Progression of Blessedness enjoyed by the Saints in
Glory. At Death they are made perfect in Happiness; At the Resurrection they
arrive at an additional Felicity, by a Reunion to their glorified Bodies; At
their Ascension to the Mansions of Delights, after the Conclusion of the great
Day, they arrive at still higher and nobler Degrees of Perfection; and they
then go on adding Joy to Joy, and one Degree of Glory to another to
interminable Ages.

5. The Duration of the Rest remaining for the People of God in the heavenly
World, will be an inconceivable Addition to the Glory of it. And what is this
Duration but even Eternity it self? Had it been but a few Years, that the
glorified Saints were to enjoy the Blessedness of Heaven, yet even then it
would beyond Expression have surpassed all the Pleasures of this Earth. But
what an infinite Addition of Happiness is given to the transported Souls there,
by the Constancy and Lastingness of the Glory! What strange Delight does that
Reflection strike into the Mind of these Blessed? Eternity! How does it employ
their Thoughts, how does it even overwhelm and swallow up all their
Contemplations, in Delight and Wonder! It not only continues the Felicity
without Cessation, but it increases it every Moment. For when the Soul assures
it self, that the Happiness it enjoys shall endure forever, that very Thought
doubles every Delight which tolls in upon it; and gives a new and an unknown
Blessedness to every Pleasure of Heaven. Were the happy Spirits in Paradise to
know that their Joys were in some Period of Duration to be finished; and that
the they must leave their Glory, how would it damp their Felicity, and cast a
Veil and a Cloud upon all their Raptures? How distant soever the End might be,
it would methinks still be present to their Minds; and, like a Man possessed of
an invaluable Treasure, the very Fear of loosing it, would in a great Measure
obstruct the present Comfort it might otherwise afford. In a Word, Did the
blessed Saints know that the Time would arrive, in which he must part with all
his Happiness, the very Thought would blunt the fine Edge of his Delight; and
would spread a Gloom, never before confessed in those Realms of immortal Day.
Our Lord Jesus himself cried out at his Father's Withdraw from him. And in like
Manner, on the other Hand, the Meditation of the Eternity of the Enjoyments of
the heavenly World, infuses new Satisfaction in every Moment that rolls through
those golden Ages. It doubles every Pleasure they taste; and gives an
additional Splendour to every Gem in the Crown of Glory. Dan. xii. 3. They that
be wise, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn
many to Righteousness, as the Stars forever and ever.

Thus we have considered the heavenly Rest, and shown, in some Measure, how it
was glorious. That every Thing we could say of it, was to its Advantage and its
Honor. That the Place, the Company, the Employment, the Progression, and the
Duration, all unite their Beauties together, and conspire to set it off with
the utmost Pomp and Magnificence. But alas, how little a Portion is known of
it. To speak of the Glories of Heaven fully, who is sufficient for these
Things! What the Perfection of it will be, we know not now, we shall know
hereafter. Fitter are these Themes for the Hallelujahs of a Seraph, than the
faultring Tongue of a Mortal; better to be admired than described; to dwell
forever in an holy Meditation upon our Hearts, to influence every Action we
perform, and at last, to make our very Deaths the most delightful and ravishing
Moment of our Lives. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard; neither has the Heart
of Man ascended to conceive the Glory which God has prepared for them who love
him.

III. The third Thing was to have evinced, That the Rest of Heaven is Christ's
Rest: He is the Lord of that Sabbath. This we might have proved in several
Particulars, as, That he made it; That he is the Heir of it, and it is the Gift
of his Father to him: That he has bought it, and paid his own Blood the Price
for it: That he has ascended and taken Possession of it: That he has promised
it; and must surely therefore be its Owner. And finally, that he has actually
bestowed it upon many of his Saints already. But these Things I must at present
omit. I hasten to the Application.

And First, Is there a Rest to come, let us Labor Now. Our Text speaks of
something future, His Rest SHALL BE glorious: And what more forcible Motive can
there be for present Labor, than a succeeding Rest. Do we not see People about
us spending their Time, their Strength, and their Lives in the Labors and
Fatigues of this World, and all in Hopes to have their old Age easy, and in
their declining Years to set down and rest? And shall these earthly and
procrastinating Souls, be thus assiduous in scraping their Dirt together, in
the vain and empty Expectation of an idle Old Age: And shall the Christian do
no more to prepare himself for the Happiness of Heaven, the Rest that remains
for the People of God? What a Shame is it, that so trifling and transient a
Rest in this World, should have stronger Allurements than the eternal
Tranquillity of Paradise? Can the Christian bear the Thoughts of This: To be
thus outdone in Labor, upon so slender a Foundation, so trifling a Reward?

Let every Soul of us then receive the Exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. iv. 11.
Let us Labor therefore to enter into that Rest. And let every pious Soul in
particular, labor more earnestly, and assiduously, and give Diligence to make
our Calling and Election sure, and do with our Might what our Hands find to do,
as knowing that our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Inf. II. Is this Rest a glorious Rest, let us rejoice in the Hope of the Glory
of God. What is there that can rationally obstruct or diminish the Believer's
Joy, when he knows that this glorious Rest is laid up for him! Why do we not
long to be possessed of that everlasting Glory? Why are we not impatient for
our Translation to that better that diviner World of Bliss? Whence is it, that
the good Man can even content himself till Death invites him to his
Inheritance! But Oh! whence, that instead of Content he is so supinely
Indolent, and has such small and glimmering Notions of the Glory of that State!
Instead of the holy Flames of Desire, there is the heavy Smoke of Unbelief; and
while he should be aspiring on eager Wings up to that World, he is linked to
Earth; and grovels in the low and contemptible Enjoyments of Time and Sense!
The Exhortation to you is that in Micah ii. 10. Arise ye, and depart; for this
is not your Rest. Happy would it be, could we all look up to the heavenly
Glory, and see the glittering Preparations made for us there; and happy, could
we hear the Blessed there pronounce to us, 2 These. i. 6, 7. God shall render
Tribulation to them which trouble you. And to you who are troubled rest with
us. If we could look on this World, as full of Labor and Sorrow; and turn our
Eyes upon the World where God is, and where our blessed Jesus invites us to be,
and wish, and break out, O that I had Wings like a Dove! then would I fly away,
and be at Rest.

Inf. III. Does this Rest remain for the People of God, what will become of
those who are not his People? If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where will
the Ungodly and the Sinner appear? The Wicked are like the troubled Sea, when
it cannot Rest; whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. There is no Peace, no Rest,
says my God, to the Wicked, Isai. lvii. 20, 21. This is their State both in
this World and the World to come. In this World, they are still pursuing
imaginary Fantoms of Happiness, with constant Pains and Application; till at
last Death seizes them in the Midst of their eager Pursuits, and consigns them
over to the World of Fire and Torment.

It Is in this miserable Place, that Sleep flies their aching Eyelids; and Rest
and Ease are utter Strangers. Alas! What Hope of a peaceful Lodging in a Bed of
Flames? What Expectation of a quiet Abode in those dismal Regions of Sorrow! If
they cast their Eyes toward Heaven, they do but Curse God and look upwards.
They see the beauteous Realms of Hallelujah, and the Doors of the holy City
closed against them with everlasting Bars. They feel the kindling Torment
inflame their impious Tongues; and plead in vain for a Drop of Water. They hear
the Sentence thundered from the Mouth of the great God himself, He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still.
Their unsufferable Condition has a very awful Description, Rev. xiv. 10, 11.
They shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without
Mixture, into the Cup of his Indignation, and they shall be tormented with Fire
and Brimstone, in the Presence of the holy Angels, and in the Presence of the
Lamb: And the Smoke of their Torment ascends up forever and ever: And they
have NO REST Day nor Night. Darkness is indeed a Season for Rest; But though they
are banished into utter Darkness; into Blackness of Darkness forever; yet are
they ignorant of any Rest; they know no Cessation to their Despair and Anguish.
As their Flames give them no Light, their eternal Night affords them no Sleep.
They spend the gloomy Ages that roll over them in Lamentation and Woe: They
rore, loud as the Fires that wave about them; and are unquiet and restless as
they.

There is a dreadful Disparity between the Punishments of Damnation, and the
Glories of Heaven, and this will serve to show the Wretchedness of the Wicked
there. Is the Place of Heaven so blessed and divine, Hell is compared to a
Prison, to a bottomless Pit, to a Place of Torment, to a horrible Furnace, and
to a burning Oven. Isai. xxx. 33. The Lord has prepared Tophet of old, -- He
has made it deep and large: The Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, the Breath
of the Lord, like a Stream of Brimstone, does kindle it.

In like Manner, the Company of Hell also, what a hideous and infernal Company!
Nothing to converse with, but Devils and the Damned. Their Fellow-Sinners upon
the Earth, will be their Fellow Sufferers in Hell; and those who formerly were
Partners in Guilt, will now become Sharers in Torment. Satan who once tempted
them, and their Companions who hardened them in Sin, will add to their future
Misery, and blow up the Flames to a greater Vigor upon them. The Sentence that
will break upon them from the Mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that will
sweep them down to Perdition, will be that, Matthew. xxv. 41. Depart from me ye
Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Miserable
Souls! to be consumed from the Presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his
Power. To be banished from the blessed Company of Heaven, and of Jesus the
Glory of Heaven; while a Portion is assigned unto them with Hypocrites and
Unbelievers, where is Weeping, and Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, without
Remedy, without Measure, and without End. The unhappy Company is described,
Rev. xxi. 8. But the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and
Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolators, and all Liars, shall
have their Part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the
second Death.

Again, The Employment of Hell, what is it, but the keen Reflections of their
past Lives, and a future Eternity? What but bitter Outcries and Execrations,
while they curse one another, and blaspheme God? Instead of the Anthems of
Heaven, they pour out Groans, and Shrieks, and Ejulations. They gnaw their
Tongues for Pain; and howling supplies the Place of Hallelujah.

Again, The Pains of Hell have a horrible Progression: and as a Fire kindles by
Degrees, and at last Blazes with the largest Expansion, and the intensest Heat;
so it will be with the Flames of Hell. We see great Pains, the longer they
last, become the more intolerable. Where then will be the Sinner's Patience,
after Millions of Ages spent in those tremendous Agonies! How will his Memory,
Faithful Tormentor! look back into the past Periods of Despair, and renew all
the dreadful Lashes of that vast Duration. How will he essay to measure the
never-ending Succession to come, as the Line of preceding Miseries lengthens
out further and further. His Understanding will be a wider Affliction, as he
comes by the dire Experiment better to know the Power of almighty Anger. His
Affections, particularly that of Fear, will be a more stinging Anxiety, after
he has felt in some Sort, what he will hereafter expect to be more violent and
insupportable. His Will will grow more desperate and hardened, as he still uses
himself to unpardonable Blasphemies. Finally, His Imagination will grow more
unhappily capacious and artfull, to represent his Condition of past, present,
and to come, in the most lively and amazing Colors. But to draw on to a
Conclusion, in the last Place the Duration of the Torments of Hell, is, All
Eternity. What a boundless and overpowering Conception is here! The Miseries of
the Damned will last for ever. Never will those undone Souls be able to break
Prison; never will their Agonies cease, or the Wrath of God give over raging
against them. The Day of the Fierceness of almighty Anger being come, it will
remain, and the Indignation of God will rush down resistless and incessant upon
the guilty Rebels, and beat upon them in an eternal Tempest. Eternity! it adds
Weight to every Chain, Heat to every Coal, and Gloom to every Cloud in that
doleful Vault. It not only continues their Anguish without End, but increases
it every Moment. When they look forward into its unsearchable Mazes, and loose
themselves in the strange Extension, O the Lamentation! O the Despair! it is
impossible for us to form any equal Conception of it.

Inf. IV. And I have done, Is this Rest Christ's Rest, as I have hinted, O let
us all go to him for it. If we refuse to do this, we shall be miserable
forever. For there is no other Name given under Heaven, whereby we can be
saved. He is the mighty Savior. But how shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation. All Things else will fail us. We may wander among the Creatures,
like Noah's Dove along the Surface of the Flood, but like her shall find no
REST to the Sole of our Foot, till we return to this Ark. Genesis viii. 9. But if
we repair to him by an humble Faith, we shall there have Rest in the Day of
Trouble. The greatest Sinner of us all is Welcome here; and nothing but our
Unbelief can hinder our Acceptance with him. Our eternal Rest or Torment
depends then upon this one Thing, whether we are willing to give our selves to
Christ or no. If we believe on his Name, we shall have such Dispositions
infused into our own Souls, as will be a Heaven begun; and an Earnest of the
Rest to follow. If not, we shall not be qualified for it; nor can we enjoy it.
For without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, nor enter into the Rest of his
People. How foolish are those miserable Souls, who after so many Invitations to
accept of the Rest of Heaven, go away unresolved whether to strive for it or
no; refuse it, and despise it? Who can say but if you now think to put it off,
and delay your Endeavors after it, an angry God may for ever banish you from
it. Are you sure you shall ever have another Opportunity to sue for Mercy? Nay,
Death may strip you of all before Tomorrow. What is the Language of the holy
God upon such Procrastination? Heb. iii. 7, 8, 10, 11. Wherefore says the holy
Ghost, To day, if ye will hear his Voice harden not your Hearts. -- They do
always err in their Hearts, and they have not known my Ways. So I swear in my
Wrath, they shall not enter into my Rest. But to those who with penitent Eyes,
and awakened Souls enquire, What shall I do to be saved; to be delivered from
this Wrath to come, and obtain this glorious Rest? To those I answer (yet not
I, but the Lord JESUS CHRIST himself) in that most divine and affecting
Language, Matthew. xi. 28, 29. Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you Rest. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls. And will
you not echo to the dear Voice, Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul.

FINIS.

