A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Occasion, Process, and Issue Of a Late TRIAL At the
Assize held at Gloucester, March 3. 1743,4. between some of the People called
Methodists, Plaintiffs, and certain Persons of the Town of Minchin-Hampton, in
the said County, Defendants. In a LETTER to a FRIEND.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. late of Pembroke-College, Oxford.

Acts XIX. 35 -- 40. And when the town clerk had appeased the people, he said,
Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knows not how that the city of the
Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image which
fell down from Jupiter. Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against,
ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly. For ye have brought hither
these men, which are neither robbers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your
goddess. Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a
matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies; let them
implead one another. But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it
shall be determined in a lawful assembly. For we are in danger to be called in
question for this day's uprore, there being no cause whereby we may give an
account of this concourse.

LONDON, Printed 1744. BOSTON, Reprinted and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in
Queen Street, near the Prison. 1744.

A Brief ACCOUNT Of the Occasion, Process and Issue of a late TRIAL, etc.
LONDON, March 12, 1743,4.
My dear Friend,
ON Thursday Evening I came hither from the Gloucester Assizes, where I have
been engaged in a Trial between some of those who are called Methodists and
some violent Rioters. Perhaps this News may a little startle you, and put you
upon Enquiry (as it has done some others) How we came to go to Law with our
Adversaries, when it is our avowed Principle to suffer patiently for the
Truth's Sake? I will tell you, my dear Friend: -- Though perhaps there is nothing
in the World more abused than the Law, and there are very few that go to Law
out of a proper Principle; yet we hold, that there is a proper Use of it, and
the Law is good, when used lawfully. -- Whether or no we have used it lawfully
in the present Case, I shall leave my Friend to judge, after I have told him
the Motives that induced us to engage in it. -- The, Methodists, you know, are
everywhere accounted Enthusiasts, in the worst Sense of the Word; but though
they are accounted such, yet they would not be Enthusiasts in Reality. -- Now
we look upon it to be one Species of Enthusiasm, to expect to attain an End
without making use of proper Means. -- We also think, that Believers should be
very careful not to be fond of suffering Persecution, when they may avoid it,
by making Application to the High Powers. -- We are likewise of Opinion, that
good Christians will be good Subjects, and consequently it is their Duty, as
much as in them lies, to put a Stop to every thing, in a rightful Way, that may
prove destructive to the King or the Government under which they live. --
Christian Ministers in particular, we think, ought to consider the Weakness of
People's Grace, and, in Pity to precious Souls, do what they can to remove
every thing out of the Way, that may discourage or prevent poor People's
hearing the everlasting Gospel. -- These Considerations, my dear Friend, for
some time past, have led me to examine whether the Methodists in general (and I
myself in particular) have acted the Part of good Subjects and judicious
Christian Ministers, in so long neglecting to make an Application to the
superior Courts, and putting in Execution the wholesome Laws of the Land, in
order to prevent those many dreadful Outrages which have been committed against
us. -- I need not descend to particulars. -- Our Weekly History is full of
them; and before that came out, several of our Brethren, both in England and
Wales, have received much Damage from time to time, and been frequently in
great Hazard of their Lives. -- Wiltshire has been very remarkable for mobbing
and abusing the Methodists; and, for about ten Months last past, it has also
prevailed very much in Gloucestershire, especially at Hampton, where our Friend
Mr. Adams has a Dwelling House, and has been much blessed to many People. This
displeased the Grand Enemy of Souls, who stirred up many of the baser Sort,
privately encouraged by some of a higher Rank, to come from time to time, in
great Numbers, with a Lowbell and Horn, to beset the House, and beat and abuse
the People. -- About the beginning of July last their Opposition seemed to rise
to the highest. -- For several Days they assembled in great Bodies, broke the
Windows, and mobb'd the People to such a Degree, that many expected to be
murdered, and hid themselves in Holes and Corners, to avoid the Rage of their
Adversaries. Once, when I was there, they continued from Four in the Afternoon
till Midnight rioting, giving loud Huzzas, casting Dirt upon the Hearers, and
making Proclamations, That no Anabaptists, Presbyterians etc. should preach
there, upon Pain of being first put into a Skin-pit, and afterward into a
Brook. -- At another time they pulled one or two Women down the Stairs by the
Hair of their Heads. And on the 10th of July they came to the Number of near a
Hundred, in their usual Way, with a Low-bell and Horn, about Five in the
Afternoon, forced into Mr. Adam's House, and demanded him down the Stairs
whereon he was preaching, took him out of his House, and threw him into a
Skin-pit full of noisome Things and stagnated Water. -- One of our Friends,
named Williams, asking them, if they were not ashamed to serve an innocent Man
so? They put him into the same Pit twice, and afterward beat him, and dragged
him along the Kennel. Mr. Adams quietly returned home, and betook himself to
Prayer, and exhorted the People to rejoice in suffering for the Sake of the
Gospel. In about half an Hour they came to the House again, dragged him down
the Stairs, and led him away a Mile and a Half to a Place called Bourn-brook,
and then threw him in. A Stander-by, fearing he might be drowned, jumped in and
pulled him out; whereupon another of the Rioters immediately pushed him into
the Pool a second Time, and cut his Leg against a Stone, so that he went lame
for near a fortnight. -- Both the Constable and Justices were applied to, but
refused to act; and seemed rather to countenance the Mobbing, hoping thereby
Methodism (as they called it) would be put a Stop to, at least at Hampton. For
a Season they gained their End. -- There was no Preaching for some Time, the
People fearing to assemble on Account of the Violence of the Mob. -- Upon my
Return to Town I advised with my Friends what to do. -- We knew we wanted to
exercise no Revenge against the Rioters, and yet we thought it wrong that the
Gospel should be stopped by such Persons, when the Government under which we
lived countenanced no such thing; and also, that it was absurd to thank God for
wholesome Laws, if they were not to be made use of. We knew very well that an
Apostle had told us, that Magistrates were ordained for the Punishment of
Evildoers; and that they bear not the Sword in vain. -- We were also fearful
if any of our Brethren should be murdered by future Riotings (as in all
Probability they might) that we should be accessory to their Death if we
neglected to tie up the Rioters Hands, which was all we desired to do. --
Besides, we could not look upon this as allowed Persecution, since it was not
countenanced by the Laws of the Land, and we might have Redress from these
Rioters and inferior Magistrates by appealing to Caesar, whose real Friends and
loyal Subjects we judged ourselves not to be, if we suffered his Laws to be
publicly trampled under Foot by such notorious Rioting; and which, though begun
against the Methodists, might terminate in open Rebellion against King George.
-- For these and such like Reasons, we thought it our Duty to move for an
Information in the King's bench against five of the Ringleaders, and fixed upon
the Riot which they made on Sunday July 10. when they put Mr. Adams and
Williams into the Skin-pit and Brook. But before this was done, I wrote a
Letter to one whom they called Captain, desiring him to inform his Associates,
That if they would acknowledge their Fault, pay for curing a Boy's Arm, which
was broke the Night I was there, and mend the Windows of Mr. Adams's House, we
would readily pass all by; but if they persisted in their Resolutions to riot,
we thought it our Duty to prevent their doing, and others receiving further
Damage, by moving for an Information against them in the King's Bench. I also
sent a Copy of this Letter to a Minister of the Town, and to a Justice of the
Peace, with a Letter to each from myself: -- But all in vain. -- The Rioters
sent me a most insolent Answer, wrote me Word, they were in high-Spirits, and
were resolved there should be no more Preaching in Hampton. -- Finding them
irreclaimable, we moved the next Term for a Rule of Court in the King's Bench
to lodge an Information against five of the Ringleaders, for the Outrage
committed, Violence offered, and Damage done to Mr. Adams and Williams, on
Sunday July 10. -- The Rioters were apprized of it, appeared by their Council,
and prayed the Rule might be enlarged till the next Term. -- It was granted. In
the mean while they continued Mobbing, broke into Mr. Adams's House one
Saturday Night at Eleven o'Clock, when there was no Preaching, made those that
were in Bed get up, and searched the Oven, Cellar, and every Corner of the
House, to see whether they could find any Methodists. Some Time after, they
threw another young Man into a Mud-pit three Times successively, and abused the
People in a dreadful Manner. The next Term came on. -- We proved our
Accusations by twenty-six Affidavits; and the Defendants making no Reply, the
Rule was made absolute, and an Information filed against them. -- To this they
pleaded NOT GUILTY; and according to the Method in the Crown-Office, the Cause
was referred to the Assize held at Gloucester, March 3d. -- Thither I went, and
on Tuesday Morning last the Trial came on. It was given out by some, That the
Methodists were to lose the Cause, whether right or wrong. And I believe the
Defendants depended much on a Supposition that the Gentlemen and Jury would be
prejudiced against us. We were easy, knowing that our Savior had the Hearts of
all in his Hands. Being aware of the great Consequences of gaining or losing
this Trial, both in respect to us and the Nation, we kept a Day of Fasting and
Prayer through all the Societies both in England and Wales. Our Scotch Friends
also joined with us, and cheerfully committed our Cause into his Hands by whom
Kings reign and Princes decree Justice. We had about thirty Witnesses to prove
the Riot and Facts laid down in the Information. -- Our Council opened the
Cause (as I heard, being not present when the Trial begun) with much Solidity
and sound Reasoning: They showed, That Rioters were not to be Reformers; and
that his Majesty had no where put the Reins of Government into the Hands of
Mobbers, or made them Judge or Jury. -- One of them, in particular, with great
Gravity reminded the Gentlemen on the Jury of the Advice of Gamaliel, a Doctor
of the Law, recorded Acts v. 38, 39. Refrain from these Men, and let them
alone; for if this Council, or this Work be of Men, it will come to naught: But
if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God. Our Witnesses were then called. -- I came into Court when the
second Witness was examining. -- Mr. Adams and four more (three of which were
not called Methodists) so clearly proved both the Riot and the Facts laid to
the Charge of the Defendants, that the Judge was of Opinion there needed no
other Evidence. -- The Council for the Defendants then rose, and exerted a good
deal of Oratory, and I think said all that could well be said, to make the best
of a bad Matter. One urged, That we were Enthusiasts, and our Principles and
Practices had such a Tendency to infect and hurt the People, that it was right,
in his Opinion, for any private Person to stand up and put a Stop to us; and
whoever did so was a Friend to his Country. -- He strove to influence the Jury
by telling them, That if a Verdict was given against the Defendants, it would
cost them Two Hundred Pounds: -- That the Defendants Rioting was not
premeditated; but that coming to hear Mr. Adams, and being offended at his
Doctrine, a sudden Quarrel arose, and thereby the unhappy Men were led into the
present Fray, which he could have wished had not happened; but however, it did
not amount to a Riot, but only an Assault. Their other Council informed the
Jury, That they would undertake to prove that the Methodists began the Tumult
first. -- He was pleased also to mention me by Name, and acquainted the Court,
That Mr. Whitefield had been traveling from Common to Common, making the
People cry, and then picking their Pockets, under Pretense of collecting Money
for the Colony of Georgia; and knowing that Gloucestershire was a populous
Country, he at last came there. -- That he had now several Curates, of which
Mr. Adams was one, who in his Preaching had found Fault with the Proceedings of
the Clergy, and said if the People went to hear them, they would be damned. --
He added, that there had lately been such Mobbing in Staffordshire, that a
Regiment of Soldiers was sent down to suppress them; insinuating that the
Methodists were the Authors -- That we had now another Cause of a like Nature
depending in Wiltshire, and that we were not of that mild, pacifick Spirit, as
we would pretend to be. -- This, and much more to the same Purpose, though
foreign to the Matter in hand, pleased many of the Auditors, who expressed
their Satisfaction in hearing the Methodists in general, and me in particular,
thus lashed, by frequent laughing. -- The Eyes of all were upon me -- Our
Savior kept me quite easy. -- I thought of that verse of Horace, -- Hic murus
aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
Tertullus's accusing Paul came also to my Mind, and I looked upon myself as
highly honored in having such Things spoken against me falsely for Christ's
great Name's Sake. -- To prove what the Defendant's Council had insinuated,
they called up a young Man, who was own Brother to one of the Defendants, and
one of the Mob. -- He swore point blank, That Mr. Adams said, if People went to
Church they would be damned; and if they would come to him, he would carry them
to Jesus Christ. -- He swore also that the Pool in which Mr. Adams was thrown,
was no deeper than half way up his Legs. He said first that there were but
about ten of them that came to the House of Mr. Adams; and then he swore that
there were about threescore. -- He said there was a Low-Bell, and that one of
the Defendants did ask Mr. Adams to come down off the Stairs, but that none of
them went up to him, upon which Mr. Adams willingly obeyed, went with them
briskly along the Street, and, as he would have represented it, put himself
into the Skin-pit and Pool, and so came out again. He said also some other
things, but through his whole Evidence appeared so flagrantly false, that one of
the Council said, It was enough to make his Hair stand an end. The Judge
himself wished, He he had so much Religion as to fear an Oath. -- So he went
down in Disgrace. Their Second Evidence was an aged Woman, Mother to one of the
Defendants. -- She swore, That her Son did go up the Stairs by Mr. Adams, and
that Mr. Adams tore her Son's Coat, and would have broke his Neck down Stairs.
But she talked so fast, and her Evidence was so palpably false, that she was
sent away in as much Disgrace as the other. Their third and last Evidence was
Father to one who was in the Mob, though not one of the Defendants. The chief he
had to say was, That when Mr. Adams was coming from the Pool, one met him, and
said, Brother, how do you do? Upon which he answered, that he had received no
Damage, but had been in the Pool and came out again. So that all their
Evidences, however contrary one to another, yet corroborated ours, and proved
the Riot out of their own Mouths. The Book was then given to a Justice of the
Peace, who had formerly taken up Mr. Cennick, for preaching near Stroud, and
had lately given many signal Proofs thas he was no Friend to the Methodists. --
But he intending to speak only about their Characters, and the Council and
Judge looking upon that as quite impertinent to the Matter in hand, he was not
admitted as an Evidence. -- Upon this, his Lordship, with great Candor and
Impartiality, sum'd up the Evidence, and told the Jury, That he thought they
should bring all the Defendants in Guilty; for our Evidences had sufficiently
proved the Whole of the Information, and also, that the Riot was premeditated.
-- He said, That, in his Opinion, the chief of the Defendant's Evidence was
incredible; and that, supposing the Methodists were Heterodox, (as perhaps they
might be) it belonged to the Ecclesiastical Government to call them to an
Account; that they were Subjects, and Rioters were not to be their Reformers."
-- He also reminded them of the dreadful ill Consequences of Rioting at any
Time, much more at such a critical Time as this; that Rioting was the
Forerunner of, and might end in Rebellion; that it was Felony, without Benefit
of Clergy, to pull down a Meeting House; and, for all as he knew, it was High
Treason to pull down even a Bawdy house. -- That this Information came from the
King's Bench, that his Majesty's Justices there thought they had had sufficient
Reason to grant it; that the Matters contained in it had been evidently proved
before them, and consequently they should bring all the Defendants in Guilty.

Upon this the Jury were desired to consider of their Verdict. There seemed to
be some little Demur amongst them. His Lordship perceiving it, informed them,
They had nothing to do with the Damages, (that was to be referred to the King's
Bench) they were only to consider whether the Defendants were guilty or not.
Whereupon, in a few Minutes, they gave a Verdict for the Prosecutors, and
brought in all the Defendants guilty of the whole Information lodged against
them. -- I then retired to my Lodgings, kneeled down, and gave Thanks, with
some Friends, to our all-conquering Emanuel. -- Afterward I went to the (...)
prayed, and returned Thanks with the Witnesses, exhorted them to behave with
Meekness and Humility to their Adversaries, and after they had taken proper
Refreshment sent them home rejoicing. -- In the Evening I preached on those
Words of the Psalmist, By this I know that thou favourest me, since thou have
not suffered mine Enemy to triumph over me. -- God was pleased to enlarge my
Heart much. -- I was very happy with my Friends afterward, and the next
Morning set out for London, where we have had a blessed thanksgiving Season,
and from whence I take the first Opportunity of sending you as many Particulars
of the OCCASION, PROCESS, and ISSUE of our TRIAL, as I can well recollect. What
Report his Lordship will be pleased to make of the Case, and how the Defendants
will be dealt with cannot be known till next Term; when I know, I shall apprize
you of it, as also of our Behavior toward them. -- In the mean while let me
entreat you to give Thanks to the blessed Jesus in our Behalf, and to pray that
his Word may have free Course, may run, and be glorified, and a Stop be put to
all such rebellious Proceedings.

I remain, Sir, Your very affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, George
Whitefield.


