The essential Rights and Liberties of Protestants.

A seasonable PLEA FOR The Liberty of Conscience, AND The Right of private
Judgment, In Matters of RELIGION, Without any Control from human Authority.

Being a LETTER, From a Gentleman in the Massachusetts Bay to his Friend in
Connecticut.

WHEREIN Some Thoughts on the Origin, End, and Extent of the Civil Power, with
brief Considerations on several late Laws in Connecticut, are humbly offered.

By a Lover of TRUTH and LIBERTY.

Matthew. xxii. 21. -- Render unto Caesar the Things which are Caesar's; and unto
GOD, the Things that are GOD'S. If our Purses be Caesar's, our Consciences are
GOD'S: -- and if Caesar's Commands interfere with GOD'S, we must obey GOD
rather than Men. -- HENRY on the Place. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND
and T. GREEN in Queenstreet. 1744.

A Letter, etc.
SIR,
I Now give you my Thoughts on the Questions you lately sent me. As you set me
the Task, you must take the Performance as it is without any Apology for its
Defects. I have wrote with the usual Freedom of a Friend, aiming at nothing but
Truth, and to express my self so as to be understood. In order to answer your
main Enquiry concerning the Extent of the civil Magistrate's Power respecting
RELIGION; I suppose it needful to look back to the End, and therefore to the
Original of it: By which Means I suppose a just Notion may be formed of what is
properly their Business or the Object of their Power; and so without any
insuperable Difficulty we may thence learn what is out of that Compass.

That the SACRED SCRIPTURES are the alone Rule of Faith and Practice to a
Christian, all Protestants are agreed in; and must therefore inviolably
maintain, that every Christian has a Right of judging for himself what he is to
believe and practice in Religion according to that Rule: Which I think on a
full Examination you will find perfectly inconsistent with any Power in the
civil Magistrate to make any penal Laws in Matters of Religion. Though
Protestants are agreed in the Profession of that Principle, yet too many in
Practice have departed from it. The Evils that have been introduced thereby
into the Christian Church are more than can be reckoned up. Because of the
great Importance of it to the Christian and to his standing fast in that
Liberty wherewith CHRIST has made him free, you will not fault me if I am the
longer upon it. The more firmly this is established in our Minds; the more firm
shall we be against all Attempts upon our Christian Liberty, and better
practice that Christian Charity toward such as are of different Sentiments
from us in Religion that is so much recommended and inculcated in those sacred
Oracles, and which a just Understanding of our Christian Rights has a natural
Tendency to influence us to. And though your Sentiments about some of those
Points you demand my Thoughts upon may have been different from mine; yet I
persuade my self, you will not think mine to be far from the Truth when you
shall have thoroughly weighed what follows. But if I am mistaken in the Grounds
I proceed upon or in any Conclusion drawn from true Premises, I shall be
thankful to have the same pointed out: Truth being what I seek, to which all
must bow first or last.

To proceed then as I have just hinted, I shall First, briefly consider the
Origin and End of Civil Government.

First, As to the Origin -- Reason teaches us that all Men are naturally equal
in Respect of Jurisdiction or Dominion one over another. Although true it is that
Children are not born in this full State of Equality, yet they are born to it.
Their Parents have a Sort of Rule and Jurdisdiction over them when they come
into the World, and for some Time after: But it is but a temporary one; which
arises from that Duty incumbent on them to take Care of their Offspring during
the imperfect State of Childhood, to preserve, nourish and educate them (as the
Workmanship of their own almighty MAKER, to whom they are to be accountable for
them,) and govern the Actions of their yet ignorant Nonage, 'till Reason shall
take its Place and ease them of that Trouble. For GOD having given Man an
Understanding to direct his Actions, has given him therewith a Freedom of Will
and Liberty of Acting, as properly belonging thereto, within the Bounds of that
Law he is under: And whilst he is in a State wherein he has no Understanding of
his own to direct his Will, he is not to have any Will of his own to follow: He
that understands for him must will for him too. -- But when he comes to such a
State of Reason as made the Father free, the same must make the Son free too:
For the Freedom of Man and Liberty of acting according to his own Will (without
being subject to the Will of another) is grounded on his having Reason, which
is able to instruct him in that Law he is to govern himself by, and make him
know how far he is left to the Freedom of his own Will. So that we are born
Free as we are born Rational. Not that we have actually the Exercise of either
as soon as born; Age that bring (...) too. This natural Freedom is not a (...)
what he pleases without any Re^^rd to any L^w; (...) Creature cannot but be
made under a Law from its MAKER: But it consists in a Freedom from any
superior Power on Earth, and not being under the Will or legislative Authority
of Man, and having only the Law of Nature (or in other Words, of its MAKER) for
his Rule.

And as Reason tells us, all are born thus naturally equal, i. e. with an equal
Right to their Persons; so also with an equal Right to their Preservation; and
therefore to such Things as Nature affords for their Subsistence. For which
Purpose GOD was pleased to make a Grant of the Earth in common to the Children
of Men, first to Adam and afterward to Noah and his Sons: as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 115. 16. And although no one has originally a private Dominion
exclusive of the rest of Mankind in the Earth or its Products, as they are
considered in this their natural State; yet since GOD has given these Things
for the Use of Men and given them Reason also to make Use thereof to the best
Advantage of Life; there must of Necessity be a Means to appropriate them some
Way or other, before they can be of any Use to any particular Person. And every
Man having a Property in his own Person, the Labor of his Body and the Work of
his Hands are properly his own, to which no one has Right but himself; it will
therefore follow that when he removes any Thing out of the State that Nature
has provided and left it in, he has mixed his Labor with it and joined
something to it that is his own, and thereby makes it his Property. He having
removed it out of the common State Nature placed it in, it has by this Labor
something annexed to it that excludes the common Right of others; because this
Labor being the unquestionable Property of the Labourer, no Man but he can
have a Right to what that is once joined to, at least where there is enough and
as good left in common for others. Thus every Man having a natural Right to (or
being the Proprietor of) his own Person and his own Actions and Labor and to
what he can honestly acquire by his Labor, which we call Property; it
certainly follows, that no Man can have a Right to the Person or Property of
another: And if every Man has a Right to his Person and Property; he has also a
Right to defend them, and a Right to all the necessary Means of Defense, and so
has a Right of punishing all Insults upon his Person and Property.

But because in such a State of Nature, every Man must be Judge of the Breach
of the Law of Nature and (...) too (even in his own Case) and the greater Part
being no strict Observers of Equity and Justice; the Enjoyment of Property in
this State is not very safe. Three Things are wanting in this State (as the
celebrated Lock observes) to render them safe; viz. an established known Law
received and allowed by common Consent to be the Standard of Right and Wrong,
the common Measure to decide all Controversies between them: For though the Law
of Nature be intelligible to all rational Creatures; yet Men being biassed by
their Interest as well as ignorant for Want of the Study of it, are not apt to
allow of it as a Law binding to them in the Application of it to their
particular Cases. There wants also a known and indifferent Judge with Authority
to determine all Differences according to the established Law: for Men are too
apt to be partial to themselves, and too much wanting in a just Concern for the
Interest of others. There often wants also in a State of Nature, a Power to
back and support the Sentence when right, and give it due Execution. -- Now to
remedy these Inconveniences, Reason teaches Men to join in Society, to unite
together into a Commonwealth under some Form or other, to make a Body of Laws
agreeable to the Law of Nature, and institute one common Power to see them
observed. -- It is they who thus unite together, viz. the People, who make and
alone have Right to make the Laws that are to take Place among them; or which
comes to the same Thing, appoint those who shall make them, and who shall see
them executed. -- For every Man has an equal Right to the Preservation of his
Person and Property; and so an equal Right to establish a Law, or to nominate
the Makers and Executors of the Laws which are the Guardians both of Person and
Property.

Hence then the Fountain and Original of all civil Power is from the People,
and is certainly instituted for their Sakes; or in other Words, which was the
second Thing proposed, The great End of civil Government, is the Preservation
of their Persons, their Liberties and Estates, or their Property. Most certain
it is, that it must be for their own Sakes, the rendering their Condition
better than it was in what is called a State of Nature (a State without such
established Laws as before mentioned, or without any common Power) that Men
would willingly put themselves out of that State. It is nothing but their own
Good can be any rational Inducement to it: and to suppose they either should or
would do it on any other, is to suppose rational Creatures ought to change
their State with a Design to make it worse. And that Good which in such a State
they find a need of, is no other then a greater Security of Enjoyment of what
belonged to them. That and that only can then be the true Reason of their
uniting together in some Form or other they judge best for the obtaining that
greater Security. That greater Security therefore of Life, Liberty, Money,
Lands, Houses, Family, and the like, which may be all comprehended under that
of Person and Property, is the sole End of all civil Government. I mean not
that all civil Governments (as so called) are thus constituted: (though the
British and some few other Nations are through a merciful Providence so happy
as to have such.) There are too too many arbitrary Governments in the World,
where the People don't make their own Laws. These are not properly speaking
Governments but Tyrannies; and are absolutely against the Law of GOD and
Nature. But I am considering Things as they be in their own Nature, what Reason
teaches concerning them: and herein have given a short Sketch of what the
celebrated Mr. Lock in his Treatise of Government has largely demonstrated; and
in which it is justly to be presumed all are agreed who understand the natural
Rights of Mankind.

Thus having seen what the End of civil Government is; I suppose we see a fair
Foundation laid for the Determination of the next Thing I proposed to consider:
Which is, What Liberty or Power belonging to Man as he is a reasonable Creature
does every Man give up to the civil Government whereof he is a Member. -- Some
Part of their natural Liberty they do certainly give up to the Government, for
the Benefit of Society and mutual Defense, (for in a political Society every
one even an Infant has the whole Force of the Community to protect him) and
something therefore is certainly given up to the Whole for this Purpose. -- Now
the Way to know what Branches of natural Liberty are given up, and what remain
to us after our Admission into civil Society, is to consider the Ends for which
Men enter into a State of Government. -- For so much Liberty and no more is
departed from, as is necessary to secure those Ends; the rest is certainly our
own still. And here I suppose with the beforementioned noble Assertor of the
Liberties of humane Nature; all that is given up may be reduced to two Heads.
-- 1st. The Power that every one has in a State of Nature to do whatever he
judges sit, for the Preservation of his Person and Property and that of others
also, within the Permission of the Law of Nature, he gives up to be regulated
by Laws made by the Society, so far forth as the Preservation of himself (his
Person and Property) and the rest of that Society shall require And, 2. The
Power of punishing he wholly gives up, and engages his natural Force (which he
might before employ in the Execution of the Law of Nature by his own single
Authority as he thought fit) to assist the executive Power of the Society as
the Law thereof shall require. For (he adds) being now in a new State wherein
he is to enjoy many Conveniences, from the Labor Assistance and Society of
others in the same Community, as well as Protection from its whole Strength; he
is to part also with as much of his natural Liberty and providing for himself,
as the Good and Safety of the Society shall require; which is not only
necessary but just, since the other Members of the Society do the like. Now if
the giving up these Powers be sufficient to answer those Ends for which Men
enter into a State of Government, viz. the better Security of their Persons and
Properties; then no more is parted with; and therefore all the rest is ours
still. This I rest on as certain, that no more natural Liberty or Power is
given up than is necessary for the Preservation of Person and Property.

I design not to mention many Particulars which according to this Rule I
suppose are not parted with by entering into a State of Government: what is
reducible to one or two general Heads is sufficient to our present Purpose. --
Though as I pass I cannot forbear taking notice of one Point of Liberty which all
Members of a free State and particularly Englishmen think belonging to them,
and are fond of; and that is the Right that every one has to speak his
Sentiments openly concerning such Matters as affect the good of the whole.
Every Member of a Community ought to be concerned for the whole, as well as for
his particular Part: His Life and all, as to this World is as it were embarked
in the same Bottom, and is perpetually interested in the good or ill Success
thereof: Whenever therefore he sees a Rock on which there is a Probability the
Vessel may split, or if he sees a Sand that may swallow it up, or if he
foresees a Storm that is like to arise; his own Interest is too deeply
concerned not to give Notice of the Danger: And the Right he has to his own
Life and Property gives him a Right to speak his Sentiments. If the Pilot or
Captain don't think fit to take any Notice of it, yet it seems to be certain
they have no Right (...) of him who thinks he espys Danger to the whole Ships
Crew, or to punish the well-meaning Informer. A Man would scarce deserve the
Character of a good Member of Society who should resolve to be silent on all
Occasions, and never mind, speak or guard against the Follies or Ignorance or
Mistakes of those at the Helm. And Government rather incourages than takes away
a Liberty, the Use of which is so needful and often very beneficial to the
Whole, as Experience has abundantly shown.

But not to detain you here,

I. The Members of a civil State or Society do retain their natural Liberty in
all such Cases as have no Relation to the Ends of such a Society. -- In a State
of Nature Men had a Right to read Milton or Lock for their Instruction or
Amusement: and why they do not retain this Liberty under a Government that is
instituted for the Preservation of their Persons and Properties, is
inconceivable. From whence can such a Society derive any Right to hinder them
from doing that which does not affect the Ends of that Society? Should a
Government therefore restrain the free Use of the Scriptures, prohibit Men the
reading of them, and make it Penal to examine and search them; it would be a
manifest Usurpation upon the common Rights of Mankind, as much a Violation of
natural Liberty as the Attack of a Highwayman upon the Road can be upon our
civil Rights. And indeed with respect to the sacred Writings, Men might not
only read them if the Government did prohibit the same, but they would be bound
by a higher Authority to read them, notwithstanding any humane Prohibition. The
Pretense of any Authority to restrain Men from reading the same, is wicked as
well as vain. -- But whether in some Cases that have no Relation to the Ends of
Government and wherein therefore Men retain their natural Liberty; if the civil
Authority should attempt by a Law to restrain Men, People might not be obliged
to submit therein, is not here at all the Question: though I suppose that in such
Case wherein they ought to submit, the Obligation thereto would arise from some
other Consideration, and not from the supposed Law; there being no binding
Force in a Law where a rightful Authority to make the (...) is wanting.

II. The Members of a civil State do (...) natural Liberty or Right of judging
(...) of Religion. Every Man has an equal Right to follow (...) of his own
Conscien^^ in the Affa^^^ (...) (...). (...) is under an (...) himself (which
contains the whole of it) and to make the best Use of it he can for his own
Information in the Will of GOD, the Nature and Duties of Christianity. And as
every Christian is so bound; so he has an unalienable Right to judge of the
Sense and Meaning of it, and to follow his Judgment wherever it leads him; even
an equal Right with any Rulers be they Civil or Ecclesiastical. -- This I say,
I take to be an original Right of the humane Nature, and so far from being
given up by the Individuals of a Community that it cannot be given up by them
if they should be so weak as to offer it. Man by his Constitution as he is a
reasonable Being capable of the Knowledge of his MAKER; is a moral and
accountable Being: and therefore as every one is accountable for himself, he
must reason, judge and determine for himself. That Faith and Practice which
depends on the Judgment and Choice of any other Person, and not on the Person's
own Understanding Judgment and Choice, may pass for Religion in the Synagogue
of Satan, whose Tenet is that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion; but with no
understanding Protestant will it pass for any Religion at all. No Action is a
religious Action without Understanding and Choice in the Agent. Whence it
follows, the Rights of Conscience are sacred and equal in all, and strictly
speaking unalienable. This Right of judging every one for himself in Matters of
Religion results from the Nature of Man, and is so inseperably connected
therewith, that a Man can no more part with it than he can with his Power of
Thinking: and it is equally reasonable for him to attempt to strip himself of
the Power of Reasoning, as to attempt the vesting of another with this Right.
And whoever invades this Right of another, be he Pope or Caesar, may with equal
Reason assume the other's Power of Thinking, and so level him with the Brutal
Creation. -- A Man may alienate some Branches of his Property and give up his
Right in them to others; but he cannot transfer the Rights of Conscience,
unless he could destroy his rational and moral Powers, or substitute some other
to be judged for him at the Tribunal of GOD.

But what may further clear this Point and at the same Time show the Extent of
this Right of private Judgment in Matters of Religion, is this Truth, That the
sacred Scriptures are the alone Rule of Faith and Practice to every individual
Christian. Were it needful I might easily show, the sacred Scriptures have all
the Character necessary to constitute a just and proper Rule of Faith and
Practice, and that they alone have them. -- It is sufficient for all such as
acknowledge the divine Authority of the Scriptures, briefly to observe, that
GOD the Author has therein declared he has given and designed them to be our
only Rule of Faith and Practice. Thus says the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16;
That they are given by Inspiration from GOD, and are profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of
GOD may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good Work. So the Apostle
John in his Gospel, Chap. 20. Ver. 31. says; These Things are written that ye
might believe that JESUS is the CHRIST, the SON of GOD, and that believing ye
might have Life through his Name. And in his first Epistle, Chap. 5. Ver. 13.
These Things have I written, that ye may know that ye have eternal Life, and
that ye may believe on the Name of the SON of GOD. These Passages show that
what was written was to be the standing Rule of Faith and Practice, complete
and most sufficient for such an End, designed by infinite Wisdom in the giving
them, containing every Thing needful to be known and done by Christians, or
such as believe on the Name of the SON of GOD. Now inasmuch as the Scriptures
are the only Rule of Faith and Practice to a Christian; then every one has an
unalienable Right to read, enquire into, and impartially judge of the Sense and
Meaning of it for himself. For if he is to be governed and determined therein
by the Opinions and Determinations of any others, the Scriptures cease to be a
Rule to him, and those Opinions or Determinations of others are substituted in
the Room thereof. But you will say, The Priest's Lips should keep Knowledge,
and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, Mal. -- 7. -- Yes; that is, it is
their Duty to explain the Scriptures, and the People's Duty at the same Time to
search the Scriptures to see whether those Things they say are so. Acts 17. 11.
The Officers CHRIST has commissioned in his Church, as Pastors or Bishops, are
to teach his Laws, to explain as they are able the Mind and Will of CHRIST laid
down in the Scriptures; but they have no Warrant to make any Laws for them, nor
are their Sentiments the Rule to any Christian, who are all commanded to prove
all Things, to try the Spirits whether they be of GOD. 1 These. 5. 21. 1 John 4.
1. I speak as to wise Men, says PAUL, judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10. 15. These
and many other Texts I might have alleged, entirely answer the Objection, and
establish the Point before us.

The Evidence of the Point before us arises out of the Nature of a Rule of
Faith and Practice. For a Rule of Faith and Practice is certainly that from
which we must take and rectify all our Conceptions, and by which we ought to
regulate all our Actions, concerning all those Matters to which this Rule
relates. As it is the Rule of our Faith, we must receive no Doctrines but what
that contains: otherwise our Faith is not directed by that Rule; but other
Things in that Case are taken up and believed for Truths which that Rule takes
no Notice of; and therefore it is done on some other Authority, which in
Reality therefore becomes our Rule, instead of that which of Right ought to be
so. A Rule, considered as such, is a Measure or Director with which a Thing is
to be compared and made to agree: And therefore a Rule of Faith and Practice is
that which being applied to our Minds directs and regulates them, by informing
the Understanding and guiding the Will, and so influencing all our Actions.
That which is the Rule of our Faith must point out to us and teach us the
several Doctrines and inform us of the several Facts which we are to believe:
And if we have entertained any wrong Notions or erroneous Opinions, they are to
be corrected and regulated, by being compared and made to agree with this Rule.
So also the Rule of our Practice is that from which we are to learn the several
Duties we are to perform, and how all our Actions are to be regulated. -- It Is
the Nature of a Rule of Faith and Practice to include all this. That whereby
Men examine into the Truth of any Thing, is to them the Rule of Truth; that
from whence they learn what they ought to believe, is to them the Rule of
Faith; and that to which they conform their Actions, is their Rule of Practice.
If Men receive the Doctrines prescribed to them by the Pope, by a Council, by a
Convocation or a Parliament, from the Writings of Fathers, or any Doctors of
Learning and Reputation, and conform their Actions to the Dictates and Commands
of any of these or such like Authorities; the Authority to which they give this
Honor, is undoubtedly the Rule of their Faith and Practice. And so if we
submit our selves truly and impartially to the Authority of CHRIST, and search
for the Truths we are to believe, and the Duties we are to perform in his
written Word; then only do we make Him our Director and Guide, and the
Scriptures the Rule of our Faith and Practice. And it is the sacred Scriptures
alone which have this Right to our entire Submission, as now described: and no
other Authority which has yet been or ever shall be set up, has any Manner of
Right at all to govern and direct our Consciences in religious Matters.

This is a Truth of too great Importance for a Christian ever in any Measure to
give up; and is so clear and obvious a Truth, as may well pass for a
self-evident Maxim, That a Christian is to receive his Christianity from CHRIST
alone. For what is it which is necessarily implied and supposed in the very
Notion of a Christian but this, that he is a Follower and Disciple of CHRIST,
one who receives and professes to believe his Doctrines as true, and submits to
his Commands? And so far only as any does this, is he a Christian: and so far
therefore as he receives or admits any other Doctrines or Laws, is he to be
denominated from that Person or Sect, from whose Authority or Instruction he
receives them.

Every Society ought to be subject only to its own proper Legislature. The
Truth of this is evident at the first View; and civil Societies readily adhere
to this as an inviolable Principle. And this holds equally true with Respect to
religious or civil Societies; and therefore as in the Church of CHRIST no other
Power or Authority may be admitted but that of CHRIST alone; so no Laws may be
made for, or any Doctrines be taught and enjoined upon the Church of CHRIST
besides those he has made and taught and enjoined. The Laws of England are what
the Legislature of England has passed into Laws; not what any other Power or
Authority institute or teach under that Name. And what these are, cannot be
known from any other but the Law makers, by the Publications they have made and
authorized. The Doctrines of the Church of Rome (if that by a Figure may be
called so) are such as that Church and its Legislature assert and own. So the
Doctrines or Religion of CHRIST, is only that which he has appointed and
taught, and all that is contained in Scripture: every Thing else is of Men
only, and no Part of the Christian Religion. What is taught by any established
Church, and not contained in Scripture, is indeed the Doctrine of that Church,
but not of CHRIST: For none can make Laws to oblige the Church of CHRIST but
CHRIST himself. The Church of CHRIST as such, must receive its Laws from CHRIST
only; i. e. from the Scriptures: for they are to be found no where else. The
Christian Religion is that which CHRIST has taught; and therefore what he has
not taught, but some other Person, is not the Christian Religion. So also the
Church of CHRIST is that which is founded according to the Directions and Model
by him laid down. That therefore which is not so founded, but upon Principles
and Regulations laid down by Men, is so far not a Church of CHRIST, but of Men:
And in all these Things the Scriptures only can be our Rule. For we cannot know
what CHRIST teaches and commands, from what he does not say, and what is said
only by some other Person, but it must be from what he does teach and command;
and all that is contained in his Word.

Again, if CHRIST be the Lord of the Conscience, the sole King in his own
Kingdom; then it will follow, that all such as in any Manner or Degree assume
the Power of directing and governing the Consciences of Men, are justly
chargeable with invading his rightful Dominion; He alone having the Right they
claim. Should the King of France take it into his Head to prescribe Laws to the
Subjects of the King of Great Britain; who would not say, it was an Invasion of
and Insult offered to the British Legislature.

I might also add, That for any to assume the Power of directing the
Consciences of Men, not leaving them to the Scriptures alone, is evidently a
declaring them to be defective and insufficient to that Purpose; and therefore
that our LORD who h^s left us the Scriptures for that Purpose, did not know
what was necessary and sufficient for us, and has given us a Law, the Defects
of which were to be supplied by the Wisdom of some of his own wiser Disciples.
How high an Impeachment this is of his infinite Wisdom, such would do well to
consider, who impose their own Doctrines, Interpretations or Decisions upon any
Men by Punishments, legal Incapacities, or any other Methods besides those used
and directed to in the sacred Scriptures.

And as all Imposers on Men's Consciences are guilty of Rebellion against GOD
and CHRIST, of manifest Disobedience to and Contempt of their Authority and
Commands; so all they who submit their Consciences to any such unjust usurped
Authority, besides the Share which such Persons necessarily have in the Guilt
of the Usurpers, as countenancing and giving in to their illegal Claim and
supporting their wicked Pretensions, they do likewise renounce Subjection to
the Authority and Laws of CHRIST. To submit our Consciences to the Guidance of
any Man or Order of Men, is not to reason and act according to our own
Understanding; but to take every thing for true, that our spiritual Guide
affirms to be so, and that merely upon his Authority, without examining into,
or seeing the Truth and Reasonableness of it: And in every Instance wherein we
thus submit our selves to the Direction of any humane Authority, so far we set
aside and renounce all other Authority, our own Light and Reason, and even the
Word of GOD and CHRIST: And the Authority of the Guide we subject our selves
unto is substituted in the Stead of all these. If we must be directed and
governed by any humane Power, it concerns us not what any other may teach and
command; this the being subject to a Power necessarily supposes and includes.
An Englishman is subject to the Crown and Laws of England, and has nothing to
do with the Laws and Courts of Judicature in France or Spain, or any other
State, but disowns and renounces all Obedience thereto. This is a universal
Rule: And therefore if our Consciences are under the Direction of any humane
Authority as to religious Matters; they cease to be under the Direction of
CHRIST. What CHRIST himself has told us is infallibly true, that no Man can
serve two Masters, but he must unavoidably prefer the one and neglect the
other: And consequently whoever looks upon himself to be under the Direction
and Government of any humane Power in Matters of Religion, does thereby
renounce the Authority of CHRIST, and withdraw Obedience from him.

From these Principles, we have here laid down, which cannot but be held as
indubitably true by every consistent Protestant, THESE COROLLARIES may be
deduced.

I. That the civil Authority has no Power to make or ordain Articles of Faith,
Creeds, Forms of Worship or Church Government. This I think evidently follows
from what has been said, that they can have no Power to decree any Articles of
Faith. For these are already established by CHRIST himself; and for Mortals to
pretend any Right of Determination what others shall believe, is really to
usurp that Authority which belongs to CHRIST the supreme King and Head of his
Church; who only has and can have a Right to prescribe to the Consciences of
Men, as is evident from the last foregoing Head. So it also follows, that they
have no Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies in Religion, or Forms of divine
Worship. And this not only because these Things have no Relation to the Ends of
civil Society; it no Ways concerns the Commonwealth or any Member of it,
whether Men pray kneeling or standing, whether the Sign of the Cross be used or
omitted in Baptism, that this or the other Ceremony be made use of in the
Church; but also because this is already sufficiently done by CHRIST in the
sacred Scriptures. These contain every Thing needful to be known or done by
Christians. It is CHRIST'S sole Prerogative to institute the whole and every
Part of religious Worship. Who can tell what Homage will be pleasing to GOD but
He himself? Or in what Way the Creature shall attend upon him for the
Obtainment of any spiritual Blessing but He himself? Can a Creature connect a
divine Blessing with any of its own invented Methods of Worship? Or oblige him
to be pleased or displeased in any other Way, or upon any other Terms, but
those himself has made and proposed, and which are all manifestly contained in
the Scriptures?

Objection, If it should be here objected, That although CHRIST has instituted
every Part of religious Worship; yet the particular Mode or Manner wherein some
of those Acts are to be attended he has not specially pointed out, which
therefore must be determined in order to perform the instituted Act of Worship:
And why therefore may not the civil Authority determine such Modes of Worship
as well as ecclesiastical Rulers?

I know very well, some are fond of that Notion, that the Church (by which they
mean the Church Officers or ecclesiastical Rulers in some Form or other
considered and acting) has Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies in Religion:
and I am as willing for the present to allow the civil Authority has as much
Power to do it, as those ecclesiastical Rulers; -- because for any Thing I can
tell at present, my Neck might be as easy under the Usurpation of a civil
Ruler, as an Ecclesiastical one: But neither of 'em have any Power of
determining in the Case supposed.

As to ecclesiastical Rulers, CHRIST has precisely bounded their Authority.
They are to do what he has bid them, they are to open and explain their LORD'S
Will to others, or in a Word to teach Men CHRIST'S Laws. For this I appeal to
their Commission, Math. 28. 20. And as this bounds their Authority on the one
Side, so it draws the Line or Bound of Submission on the other. When they teach
us the Mind and Will of CHRIST our common Lord and Master; we are to hearken
with Deference to them: but if they get out of that Line, and teach (or decree,
I care not what you call it) some Thing that is not his Will, something to be
necessary for me to do in Religion which CHRIST has not made so; no Regard is
due to them therein. And I suppose I may venture to say, no one Ceremony in
Religion or Modality of any Act of instituted Worship, that has been devised
and decreed by any since the Apostles Days as necessary, exclusive of any
other, either was or is really necessary for a Christian to do in attending
these Acts of Religion or Parts of instituted Worship: At least I know of no
one: to be sure such as have been the Subjects of Debate between the Church of
England on the one Side and the Dissenters from that Establishment on the oath;
are unnecessary. The decreeing such unnecessary Modalities of Religion
therefore are without any Warrant from CHRIST: They teach therein what he has
not commanded them, and no Christian is bound to regard them therein.

But that the Objection may have a full and clear Answer, I offer a few Words
farther. -- The Objection supposes, that the Mode of performing some Acts of
instituted Worship is not determined by CHRIST, which must therefore be
determined by Man in order to perform such Act of Worship.

To which I say,

1. If there be several Modes wherein such Act or Acts of instituted Worship
may be performed, Man may not determine the one exclusive of the other; and if
there be but one Mode wherein it can be attended, there is indeed no Occasion
for a Determination upon it, all must of Necessity agree in such a Mode of
performing it. But in the former Case, no Determination may be made that it
shall be performed only after such a particular Mode, when it may be performed
after another Manner as well. As for Instance, Public Prayer may be performed
either standing or kneeling: it being supposed that CHRIST has not determined
the one Mode or the other; in such Case Man may not determine that it shall be
performed only standing, or only kneeling; the Worshippers must be left to
their Liberty as CHRIST has left it: For it being the only Reason why Man may
determine any Thing relating to an Act of Religion or divine Worship, viz. the
Necessity of such a Determination in order to the obeying a Law of CHRIST; then
it is certain, where that Necessity is not found (as in the present Case) there
no such exclusive Determination may be made* these Matters of divine Worship,
CHRIST'S Officers have nothing to do but to teach CHRIST'S Laws; and Christians
nothing else but to obey CHRIST'S Laws. It is therefore certain, that if all
CHRIST'S Laws relating thereto may be observed, without the Determination of
this or the other Ceremony or Mode of attending them; then the Determination of
this or the other Ceremony as a Rule of Action for Christians, falls not within
the Compass of the Power of Man or any Order of Men. And I think the keeping to
this Rule alone, that Man's Power in these Matters extends no farther than to a
Determination of those Things necessary to be determined in order to the
performing of CHRIST'S Commands, is the only Way to preserve CHRIST'S Worship
in its Purity. -- Certain it is, that the going beyond it has sadly polluted
it, and occasioned Divisions and Abundance of sinful Strife.

2. In such Cases where any Thing is necessary to be determined in order to any
worshipping Assembly's obeying CHRIST'S Laws, the Power of such Determination
lies with such worshipping Assembly. It is a Law of CHRIST, that He be
worshipped in public Assembly on the first Day of the Week; which cannot be
done unless some Place and Hour of the Day be fixed upon for that Purpose. If
CHRIST had determined where and when the worshipping Assembly should meet, Man
could not determine any Thing in the Matter: But since CHRIST has not; Time and
Place must be determined by Man; else CHRIST'S Law in that Case could not be
obeyed. And because that Law must be obeyed, and cannot be obeyed without such a
Determination of Time and Place; therefore it is, that Man may determine them,
and is warranted to do it. -- And every worshipping Assembly best knowing their
own particular Circumstances, and being best able to judge what may be
convenient or inconvenient in the Case, are will not to fix Time and Place for the
Purpose: And who has right to intermeddle in the Matter without their Desire or
Consent, I cannot imagine. This is a Right our worshipping Assemblies Claim, and
I know not that any call it in Question. Now although in this Instance, wherein
something falls necessarily under the Determination of Man in order to
Christians obeying a Law of CHRIST, no Ceremony or Mode of Worship is
concerned; yet as I apprehend there is greater Reason why every worshipping
Assembly should be left free in an uninterrupted Enjoyment of this Right to
determine the Mode of any Act of Worship (undetermined by CHRIST) where there
is a Necessity of such a Determination in order to obey his Laws: and that
because Conscience is immediately concerned therein. As I have said before, I
know not of such a Case. Yet if Christians do apprehend there is any Necessity,
every worshipping Assembly must in that Case determine for themselves. They may
be under a great Mistake in determining that to be necessary which may not be
so: but herein I think no others have a Power to determine for them. Not the
civil Authority (...) for the Reason before given, viz. That the Ceremony or
particular Mode of performing an Act of divine Worship, has no Relation to the
Ends of a civil Society: The Preservation of Person or Property, no Ways
requires the giving up this Liberty into the Hand of the civil Magistrate. This
therefore must remain in the Individuals. The civil Interest of a State is no
more affected, by kneeling or standing in Prayer, then by praying with the Eyes
shut or open; or by making the Figure of a Triangle or a Cross upon a Person in
Baptism, than by making no Figure at all. They have indeed none of them any
Relations to the Ends of a civil Institution. The civil Authority therefore
have no Business with it. Nor have the ecclesiastical Officers Authority to
determine in these Cases for particular Christians; because it is not within
their Commission. We have seen before how their Authority is limited, and what
is the Bound of Submission from particular Christians. As they are CHRIST'S
Officers, they have Authority to teach Men his Mind in Things pertaining to his
Kingdom. -- So they have no Authority to teach Men any Thing but the Mind and
Will of CHRIST. It is a Truth that shines with a Meridian Brightness, that
whatever is not contained in a Commission is out of it and excluded by it; and
the teaching his Laws only being contained in the Commission, what is not his
Law is out of it and by that Commission they are excluded from teaching it, or
forbid by it. The Power then of determining in these Cases before us, must lie
with every distinct worshipping Assembly; I don't mean exclusive of their
Pastor but with him And this I think is evident from the Right of private
Judgment that every Christian has in Matters of Religion. We have seen
evidently that the sacred Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and Practice to
every Christian; from thence each one is bound to learn what that Worship is
which Christ requires from him, and in what Manner be is to perform it: And
therein is every one to be persuaded in his own Mind. In all the Worship he
pays to GOD he is bound to act understandingly, which he cannot be said to do if
he does not understand for himself, and perform it in such a Manner as he
judges most agreeable to the Mind of Christ, and so most acceptable to him. If
another Person sees for him, it will be but a blind Service that he will yield.
Every one must give Account of himself to GOD, to whom alone as his only Master
he is to stand or fall: And it will be but a poor Account the Papist will have
to give of all his ceremonious Worship, that the Pope or Priest directed him
so. -- How much farther will it go in that Day to say, the King, or Parliament,
or Convocation directed me to pay such or such a Kind of Worship.

But the last Thing included in this Corollary is, that civil Rulers have no
Authority to determine for Christians the Form of Church Government: and that
for the Reasons before given, viz. Because this would be going beside the End
of civil Government, and because this is already done by Christ. If his Word be
a complete Rule of Faith and Practice to the Christian; it surely contains
sufficient Instruction in the Nature of a Church; what Kinds of Officers Christ
has instituted, what their Work and Business is; what the Rights and
Privileges of the Church are, and on what Terms to be enjoyed; what the
Discipline thereof is, and how it is to be administered. For that which is the
Rule of Faith and Practice to a Christian (as he is a Subject of Christ) must
certainly be the Measure of his Faith and Practice: For that certainly cannot
be the Measure of his Faith and Practice which contains any Thing more or less
than he ought to believe and practice. Christ is the Head of his Church, a King
in his own Kingdom; a Part of whose Royalty it is to give Laws to his Subjects;
these are contained in the sacred Scriptures, which are open to all for the
learning and understanding of them. And so far are Men from having any Power of
instituting or forming a Church for Christ, that it is their greatest Honor to
be Servants in the House of GOD. Heb. 3. 5. This being Truth, that Christ has
shown us what his Will is touching the ordering of his House in the sacred
Scriptures; it then follows, that none either Pope or Caesar, can have any
Authority to prescribe to Christians how it shall be ordered, to form the Model
or any Part of it.

II. The next Corollary I shall deduce from the Principles before laid down,
is, That the ci^il Authority have no Power to establish any Religion ( i. e.
any Professions of Faith, Modes of Worship, or Church Government) of a human
Form and Composition, as a Rule binding to Christians; much less may they do
this on any Penalties whatsoever. -- Religion must remain on that Foot where
Christ has placed it. He has fully declared his Mind as to what Christians are
to believe and do in all religious Matters: And that Right of private Judgment
belonging to every Christian evidenced in the preceding Pages, necessarily
supposes it is every one's Duty, Privilege and Right to search the sacred
Writings as Christ has bid him, and know and judge for himself what the Mind
and Will of his only Lord and Master is in these Matters. -- It does, I think,
from hence follow, that no Order of Men have any Right to establish any Mode of
Worship, etc. as a Rule binding to particular Christians. For if they may, then
Christians are abridg'd or rather striped of their Right, which is to involve
our selves in a Contradiction. For if A has a Right to judge for himself what
his Master's Will is, then B can have no Right to impose his own Sentiments
concerning that Master's Will as a Rule for A. -- For to suppose A has a Right,
which B has a Right to take from him, is to suppose A has no Right at all;
which is a direct Inconsistency. And to suppose B in such Case has a Right to
punish A for not receiving his Establishment, is but to increase the Absurdity.

But here you will say, Though they have no Authority to establish a Religion of
their own devising, yet have they not Authority to establish a pure Religion
drawn out of the sacred Scriptures, either by themselves or some synodical
Assemblies, and oblige their Subjects upon (at least) negative Penalties to
receive the same. -- This I shall endeavor fairly to consider when I have
observed, that if by the Word Establish be meant only an Approbation of certain
Articles of Faith and Modes of Worship, of Government, or Recommendation of
them to their Subjects: I am not arguing against it. But to carry the Notion of
a religious Establishment so far as to make it a Rule binding to the Subjects,
or on any Penalties whatsoever, seems to me to be oppressive of Christianity,
to break in upon the sacred Rights of Conscience, and the common Rights and
Privileges of all good Subjects. -- For let it be supposed as now pleaded,
that the Clergy or a synodical Assembly draw up the Articles and Form of
Religion, agreeable in their Judgment to the sacred Scriptures, and the
Reception of the same be made binding by the civil Authority on their Subjects;
-- It will then follow, That all such Establishments are certainly right and
agreeable to the sacred Scriptures. For it is impossible to be true that any
can have Right or Authority to oblige Christians to believe or practice any
thing in Religion not true or not agreeable to the Word of GOD: Because that
would destroy the sacred Scriptures from being the only Rule of Faith and
Practice in Religion to a Christian. If the sacred Scriptures are his Rule of
Faith and Practice, he is obliged and that by GOD himself, to believe and
practice accordingly. No Man therefore, or Order of Men can have any Right or
Power to oblige the Christian to believe or do any Thing in Religion contrary
to, or different from, what GOD has obliged him: The Position of the one is the
Removal of the other. This then is certain, that if this Proposition be true,
that a humane religious Establishment is a Rule binding to Christians, or that
the civil Authority have Power to oblige their Subjects to receive them; --
then they are always right and agreeable to GOD'S Word; but the latter is not
true; -- therefore the Proposition is false. Humane Establishments in Matters
of Religion, carry in them no Force or Evidence of Truth. They who make them
are no Ways exempt from humane Frailties and Imperfections: They are as liable
to Error and Mistake, to Prejudice and Passion, as any others. And that they
have erred in their Determinations, and decreed and established Light to be
Darkness, and Darkness to be Light, that they have perplexed the Consciences of
Men, and corrupted the Simplicity of the Faith in CHRIST, many Councils and
Synods and Assemblies of State are a notorious Proof. King Henry the 8th's
Parliament and Convocation, who established the famous six bloody Articles of
Religion in the Year 1540, had as much Right or Power to make a religious
Establishment binding to the Subjects, as any King and Parliament since. If
therefore the civil Authority has a Power to make a religious Establishment
binding to the Subjects; those six Articles were true, though they contained
abominable Absurdities, and amazing Falsehoods; and the People were obliged to
believe them, and those who suffered for disbelieving them suffered justly. --

Perhaps you will here say; Although they have no Authority to make an
Establishment contrary to Scripture; yet why may they not have Authority to
make an Establishment agreeable to the Scriptures, that shall be a binding Rule
to Christians, without the Supposition or that Proposition's being liable to
such an Inference from it (which I have made) viz. That then their
Establishments are certainly right and agreeable to Scripture, or in other
Words that they who make them must be supposed to be vested with Infallibility.
-- I will give then a Reason, if what already said does not satisfy. -- Let us
then have but a clear and determinate Idea of the Subject we are speaking of;
and I think you will find the Conclusion certain. This religious Establishment
that has this binding Force in it, -- is either in the very Words of the
Scriptures themselves; or in Propositions formed by this Body of Men we are
speaking of, which in their Judgment contain the true Sense and Meaning of the
Scripture. -- There can be no other Sense put upon it. -- The former of these
cannot be meant; for that is the Scripture it self which I am pleading is the
alone Rule in the Case before us: Besides it is a Vanity to talk of Mortals
making the Constitutions of GOD ALMIGHTY to become a binding Rule to
Christians. So that the Point before us comes to this Proposition, viz. That
the civil Authority have Power to make such a religious Establishment which
they think is agreeable to Scripture, a binding Rule to Christians. -- Then it
follows, that what they think to be the Sense of the Scriptures, is the Rule
for the Christian: for that what they so lay down for the Sense of the
Scriptures should be a Rule binding to Christians, and that yet what they think
is the Sense and Meaning of the Scripture, is not the Rule for a Christian, is
a Contradiction. -- It follows also, that what they think to be the true Sense
of Scripture, is certainly the true Sense of it: -- For to suppose, that what
they lay down for the Sense and Meaning of the sacred Scriptures, is a binding
Rule to Christians, and that yet the same is not the true Sense of Scripture,
is a Contradiction; unless that Proposition be false, that the sacred
Scriptures are the alone Rule of Faith and Practice to a Christian, which is a
sacred Maxim with every true Protestant. So that if a religious Establishment
which they think to be agreeable to Scripture is a binding Rule to a Christian;
it is the true Sense of Scripture, and the Supposal that they are vested with
Authority to make their religious Establishments a binding Rule to a Christian,
does necessarily infer their being invested with Infallibility too. -- Again --
to suppose any Thing not agreeable to the sacred Scriptures can be a binding
Rule in Matters of Religion to a Christian is what no Christian will assert;
because it destroys the Christian's only Rule in Matters of Religion. The
sacred Scriptures alone (or what is agreeable thereto) are a Rule in Matters of
Religion to a Christian: -- A religious Establishment (say you) made by the
civil Authority which they think to be agreeable to the Scriptures, is a Rule
binding to a Christian: Therefore (say I) such a religious Establishment made
by the civil Authority which they think to be agreeable to the Scriptures, is
certainly agreeable to them. Until these Contradictions can be reconciled --
viz. -- That which is not agreeable to the sacred Scriptures cannot be a Rule
binding to a Christian in Matters of Religion -- and -- this, That which is not
agreeable to the Scriptures is ( or may be) a Rule binding to a Christian in
Matters of Religion; or -- the Scriptures are the alone Rule of Faith and
Practice to a Christian, and this -- That something which the Pope or Caesar
thinks to be agreeable to the Scripture, is a Rule of the Christian's Faith and
Practice; -- or the Scriptures are the alone Rule, and not the alone Rule of
Faith and Practice to a Christian; -- or that which is a binding Rule to a
Christian in these Matters, is not a binding Rule to him: -- Until these
Contradictions can be reconciled, it will stand for a Truth, that if the civil
Authority have Power to make a religious Establishment which they think
agreeable to the Scriptures, a Rule binding to Christians; -- then such their
Establishments are certainly agreeable to the Scriptures, and so they invested
with Infallibility. -- So that instead of finding one infallible Man upon Earth
(at Rome) we may find a Body of them in every civil State at least throughout
Christendom, and why not throughout the Earth: For the civil Authority,
considered as such, must have equal Right and Power of determining in these
Matters in every State.

But you will say; the Question is concerning an Establishment that is agreeable
to Scripture and therefore whether such an one is not a Rule binding to the
Subjects. -- I answer -- It is no Rule at all; and so has no binding Force in
it, as it is an human Establishment: it is binding Force is derived from another
Quarter. The only Reason why it is a Rule binding to a Christian is, because it
is the Scripture, or the Will of GOD contained in the Scripture. What binds the
Christian in Religion are the Words of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the Doctrine
which is according to Godliness. This true Christians receive out of a Regard
to a much higher Authority than belongs to any Set of Mortals.

If it be still demanded; But have not these Synods who draw up these
Establishments out of the Scriptures, or the civil Authority with them, a Right
to judge of the Sense and Meaning of the Scripture in those Matters, and so
determine what shall or shall not pass for true, and be received by the Members
of the Community. -- I know some plead for such a Power: And I think if a human
religious Establishment can be a binding Rule to Christians; they must, either
a Synod, or civil Authority, or both together, have Power to determine the
Sense of Scripture as now pleaded for: and if they have no such Power, it is
most evident their Establishments can be no binding Rule to Christians. But
this is certain, they have no such Power: The Pretense to it is a Spice of that
Antichristianism that ought to be banished out of the World. -- For that this
very Supposition removes the sacred Scriptures from being a Rule of Faith and
Practice to private Christians, and sets up humane Determinations instead of
them; inasmuch as -- that from which the Christian receives his Information
what he is to believe and do, is evidently the Rule of Faith and Practice in
those particular Cases at least; and in the present supposed Case, he is to
receive his information from a human Determination. The Scriptures therefore
are struck out from being a Rule of Faith and Practice to private Christians;
and human Determinations substituted in their Room. -- However the Scriptures
may be supposed or pretended to be the Rule to those Bodies of Men who make
those Determinations; yet it is evident in this Case, the Scriptures are so
entirely reduced into the Power of Man, that in Truth these Bodies of Men, or
their Determinations are rendered the only and complete Rule to others. -- A
Tenet that suits very well at Rome. But to show the Absurdity and Wickedness of
this Principle, that Synods or the civil Authority may determine the Sense of
Scripture for private Christians as above supposed; let me add, That all,
whether Popes, Councils, Synods or civil States, that have made their religious
Establishments, have always pretended they took the sacred Scriptures for their
Rule in making them, and that they are agreeable to the Scripture. Upon this
Principle, all these must be received in their Turns, and in the several civil
States where they are made -- For those Synods (or in a Word) the civil
Authority in those several Ages, or States, have had all equal Claim to this
Right of determining the Sense of Scripture, and so of making these religious
Establishments. How very different and contrary these have been, one to
another; who, at all acquainted with History does not know? That is Falsehood
in England, which is Truth at Rome and France, -- And that was Truth in England
Yesterday, which is false there to Day. And so a Man (I don't say a Christian;
for as that Means a Disciple of CHRIST, and it cannot consistently mean any
Thing else, is by this Principle banished out of the World both Name and Thing)
might Yesterday walk to Heaven in a Path, which if walked in this Day would
lead him down to Hell. Alas what is the Christian bid to search the Scriptures
for, to repair to the Law and Testimony, as being the only Light to direct us
in these religious and important Concerns; if it comes to this at last, that he
must receive his Information and Direction herein, from some poor fallible
Creatures. This Principle, that a humane religious Establishment is a Rule
binding to Christians, does eternally militate with those plain Commands of the
supreme Lawgiver; is big with the Absurdities I have just hinted at, and
numberless more; has proved the grand Engine of oppressing Truth, Christianity,
and murdering the best Men the World has had in it; promoting and securing
Heresy, Superstition and Idolatry; and ought to be abhorred by all Christians.

But if you demand again; Is it not evident GOD has vested them with such a
Power, since he has bid us, obey them that have the Rule over us, Heb. 13. 17.
and that we be subject to the higher Powers: for that the Powers that be, are
of GOD, Romans 13. 1. Will it not follow, that if GOD requires our Subjection to
them, they must needs be vested with such Authority as is now pleaded for. --
It has been already shown that a Supposal that they are vested with such
Authority, necessarily supposes they are vested with Infallibility too;
otherwise the Christian lies exposed to have a Rule of Practice in Religion
different from the Word of GOD; which no Christian may admit of. If the sacred
Scriptures are the standing invariable Rule in these Matters to every
Christian, (which is an incontestible Truth) then he cannot possibly lie exposed
to have any Thing else made a binding Rule to him in Matters of Religion; GOD
has not subjected him in this Case to any other: and he may properly be said to
rebel against GOD, when he puts himself in Subjection to any other; -- And the
Thing now pleaded for, That an Order of Men are vested with Authority from GOD
to make any religious Establishment which they think agreeable to the
Scriptures, a Rule binding to Christians, does necessarily suppose one of these
two Things; that a Christian may have something different from the sacred
Scriptures for his Rule (i. e. That it is GOD'S Will he shall be in a State
liable to be bound by a Rule different from his Word) which is impossible; or
else, that these Men vested with this Authority, are also vested with
Infallibility. -- Now since it is most evident, they are not vested with this
Infallibility, it is equally evident they are not vested with this Authority
now pleaded for: and therefore no such Thing is implied in those Texts now
adduced for the Proof thereof. -- A great Dust I know has been raised by the
sophistical Reasonings of some Men from these Texts, who would erect a
spiritual Tyranny over the Consciences of Men. I will therefore distinctly
consider them, and show that they no Ways suppose such an Authority (as now
pleaded for) is vested in any Order of Men.

The Text in Heb. 13. 17. evidently relates to Church Officers; -- because they
are said to watch for their Souls, which is not the Business of civil Rulers:
and their being called in the Text, Rulers, will no Ways infer they have this
Legislative Authority over a Church or particular Christians; any more then
Jair^s being called a Ruler of a Synagogue, will infer he had a legislative
Authority over that Synagogue: Or that any subordinate Judges who are strictly
tied to the Laws in their Administration, being called Rulers, must needs also
infer a Power of Legislation. Nor can it be inferred from our being commanded to
obey them; any more than our Obedience to Judges in their just Application of
the Laws to particular Cases, infer a Power of Legislation also in those
Judges. In a Word, these Officers in the Text have so much Authority, and no
more than what CHRIST has given them. They have no more Authority in their
Commission, than what is to be found in Math. 28. 19, 20. where they are
expressly enjoined to teach People to observe CHRIST'S Laws; which necessarily
excludes them from a Power of making Laws of their own for CHRIST'S Subjects.
And the Reason given for our Obedience in the Text, does also suppose it; viz.
for they watch for your Souls. By their adhering strictly to the Will of CHRIST
in their teaching Christians, do they truly watch for the Salvation of their
Souls; and therein are they to be attended to as the faithful Ministers or
Ambassadors of CHRIST, in hearing of whom (when they do so) we hear him that
sends, as he elsewhere tells us But if they go out of this Line in teaching
Christians, they then don't watch for their Souls, but for themselves: and
therein therefore no Obedience is due to them, even according to this very
Text, which determines the Measure of our Regard to them, by their watching or
not watching for the Salvation of our Souls.

The other Text Romans 13. 1. no doubt relates to civil Powers: -- A Text often
wrecked and tortured by such Wits as were disposed to serve the Designs of
arbitrary Power, of erecting a civil Tyranny over a free People, and as often
wrested out of their Hands by the Force of Truth. Though my Business does not lie
with civil Tyranny now, yet the Observation I shall make upon the Text will
show that neither civil, nor spiritual Tyranny is at all favored by it. --
Here then let me distinguish between two Things, which as they are really
different, must be kept so in our Minds, if we would understand the Apostle;
viz. Between the Powers which are, and the Powers which are not. This is a
plain and undeniable Distinction; since it is well known there may be a
pretended Power where there is really none. Now the higher Powers in the Text
are the Powers which are. Since then it is express and certain, that the Powers
that be, are the Powers in the Text, the Powers which be of GOD, the Ordinance
of GOD; it is only of such Powers he speaks of Subjection to. On the other Hand
-- the Powers that are not, are not the Powers that be; and so not the Powers
in the Text, not the Powers that are of GOD, not his Ordinance, and so no
Subjection to them required in this Text. -- For Instance: The Powers that be
in GREAT BRITAIN are the Government therein according to its own Constitution:
-- If then the higher Powers for the Administration rule not according to that
Constitution, or if any King thereof shall rule so, as to change the Government
from legal to arbitrary; the Power from GOD fails them, it is then a Power not
in this Text, and so no Subjection due to it by the Text. -- To apply this then
to the present Case; we have seen before that civil Authority relates to the
civil Interests of a People, (their Persons and Properties) and is bounded by
the same; that they can have no Power to make any religious Establishment of
their own devising, a Rule binding to Christians: -- When therefore they
attempt to do so, they get out of their Line, with Respect to which they are
not the Powers that be, in this Text. A Power that is no better than a
pretended one, cannot challenge any Obedience by Virtue of this Text. As this
Text does not show they have such a Power, the Pretense of Obedience being due
to them by this Text, if they should be so vain as to fancy they have it, is a
mere Vanity. The Truth of the Case is plainly this; -- That this Text shows
Obedience is due to civil Rulers in those Cases wherein they have Power to
command, and does not call for it any farther: And when rightly understood
affords not a Shadow of an Argument, of Obedience being due to them when they
claim a Power in Matters of Religion which does not belong to them. -- It
appears indeed plainly, (though I need not spend Time upon it, in order to show
no Argument can be drawn from this Text in Favor of what it is now brought
for, unless it be first proved from some other Text or Topic, that the civil
Magistrate's Power does extend to the making any religious or ecclesiastical
Establishment a Rule binding to a Christian, which never can be done, the
contrary thereof being already demonstrated) I say it appears from what the
Apostle says in the 3 d and 4 th Verses, that their Power is a limited one: and
therefore the Obedience due is a limited Obedience. -- Salus Populi est Lex
Suprema, is the Apostle's Maxim; for he is express that the End of all humane
Authority is the Good of the Public. -- That therefore sets the Bounds to
civil Authority, as such, on the one Side, and fixes the Bounds of Obedience on
the other. -- The Ground of Obedience cannot be extended beyond the Ground of
that Authority to which Obedience is required.

Besides, no Obedience is here required to be given but to such Power as is
from GOD: Until therefore it be shown that the civil Magistrate has Power from
GOD to make any such religious Establishment (of which we are speaking) a Rule
binding to Christians; this Text is in vain pressed into the Service of such as
plead for any Obedience due to such an Establishment. -- It must lie on them
who plead this Obedience is due from Christians, -- to prove that GOD has
vested them with this Power. To pretend this Text for it, is begging the
Question, a taking the Point for granted which must be first proved; which I
scruple not to say will never be done 'till we have a new Bible. For by this
which CHRIST has given us, he allows us not to be reduced under any Yoke of
Bondage, or to become the Servants of Men, not only allows but requires us to
stand fast in our Christian Liberty, which subjects us in our Faith and
Practice to CHRIST alone; and by that very Thing exempts us from every other
Yoke, and from all other Laws not given us by CHRIST. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Gal. 5. 1.
CHRIST perfectly knew the Weakness of humane Nature, and how apt Men are to
assume Power over one another, even in Matters of a religious Nature, and how
unfit they are to have any Dominion therein: He therefore charges and warns all
his Disciples and Followers against this great and dangerous Vice, which he
knew would be very destructive to that Religion which he taught in Mat. 23. 8,
9, 10. Be not ye called Rabbi; For one is your Master even CHRIST, and all ye
are brethren: And call no Man your Father upon Earth; for are is your Father
which is in Heaven: Neither be ye called Masters; for one is your Master even
CHRIST. Here all Christians are charged upon the Duty and Obedience they (...)
to CHRIST, that they should none of them set themselves up for authoritative
Masters, Judges, or Directors of Men in religious Matters; (as the Pharisees
did) and likewise that they should not submit to any who should set themselves
up as such. CHRIST'S Prohibition here is so strong, of this dangerous Practice
of setting up or admitting of any other Rule or Judge in religious Matters
besides the Scripture, and of all Attempts to strip Christians of the most
valuable of all Rights, even the Right of judging for themselves in Matters of
Religion, (directly inconsistent with which, is the Authority you have been now
pleading for in the civil Powers in the Case we have been considering,) that
Christians here (I think) may safely take up their Rest, and be resolved to
give Place by Subjection, no, not for an Hour to any humane Authority on Earth
in any Matters of Religion, least they cast Dishonor on CHRIST their only
Lawgiver.

By what has been said you may see the Falsehood of another Supposition or
Argument you bring to support the civil Magistrate's Authority in the Case
before us, viz. That every Law not contrary to a superior Law, is to be obeyed;
-- which you seem to take for an allowed Maxim, and so think you may fairly
conclude, that any legal Injunctions of the civil Magistrate in Matters of
Religion which are not contrary to some express Law of GOD, are to be obeyed.
-- If that Proposition be limited to those Things which are the Objects of the
civil Magistrate's Power, viz. the civil Interests of the People; if it stands
for a Maxim it affects not the Case before us at all* But if it be extended to
Things out or beyond the Line of their Power, as Matters of Religion are; it is
then a Falsehood. In the latter extensive Sense it seems you take it for a
Truth, or you would not argue from it as you do. The Rule (then say you) to
know whether a particular Law is to be obeyed or not is to consider that Law in
Relation to a superior Law; and if it prohibits nothing which a superior Law
requires, or enjoins nothing which a superior Law prohibits the doing of, then
it is to be obeyed. -- This (I take it) is a Principle invented for the Support
of Tyranny, and industriously defended for the Support of Tyranny of the worst
Kind, i. e. Spiritual: And if such as are so mean as to flatter civil Rulers
with Notions of exorbitant Power, and they only felt the Effects thereof in
Fetters of Slavery, the Christian Church, and the World too, had been happier
than now it is. Rulers have their Infirmities as well as their Subjects, and
are too often carried away by the Stream of Temptation to play the Tyrant: And
still as heretofore, the World affords many in it that love to have it so, and
too many Assistants in forging the hateful Chains of Slavery and rivetting them
on too if possible unseen, whilst they are industriously scattering false
Notions of Power and Obedience, such stupifying Potions as this (you have now
thrown in my Way) that they may effectually lock up the Senses of those whom
they would enslave. -- But to return whence I have digressed. -- This pretended
Rule, as it holds not at all in Matters of Religion; so it does not hold true
in all other Cases, even in those that have no Relation to the End of civil
Society, agreeable to what has been already observed, Page 7. If civil Rulers
should take it into their Heads to make a Law, that no Man shall have Luther's
Table-Talk in his House, that every Man shall turn round upon his right Heel at
twelve of the Clock every Day, (Sundays excepted) or any such like wise Laws (
Thousands of which might be invented by a wise Tyrant;) By this Rule these Laws
are to be strictly obeyed, a higher Law to the contrary not being found. And
yet I think it may be presumed, a freeborn People can never become so servile
as to regard them, while they have Eyes to see that such Rulers have gone out
of the Line of their Power. -- There is no Reason they should be Fools because
their Rulers are so. Whenever the Power that is put in any Hands for the
Government of any People is applied to any other End than the Preservation of
their Persons and Properties, the securing and promoting their civil Interests,
(the End for which Power was put into their Hands) I say when it is applied to
any other End, then (according to the great Mr. Lock) it becomes Tyranny. And
since their Power would be as truly applied to another End, in making such Laws
as I have above hinted at, as in making those that are notoriously unjust and
oppressive, (though the latter is worse;) then it as truly becomes Tyranny. --
How long People are to bear with such Tyranny, or what they may do to free
themselves from it, (I should refer you to that Author in his Treatise of
Government) were it at all needful to come into Consideration in the present
Case, as it is not; since the only Thing I had here to do, was to show
Obedience was not due to such Laws, as I think I have done by showing they had
no rightful Authority to make them.

Let me add a Word farther for your serious Consideration; do you think that
when the Edict went forth in Germany for the burning of all the above mentioned
Books of Martin Luther (when eighty Thousand Volumes of them were destroyed)
did that good Man, who hid one of them under the Foundation of his House
whereby it was perserved, Sin in not delivering up the Book? Or when the
Proclamation went forth in England in King Henry the Eight's Time, that
Wickliff's, Tindall's, and many other Books, should on certain Penalties be
delivered up to be burned; did those good People sin, who refused to deliver
them up? By the Rule you are pleading for, I see not but that you must charge
Sin upon them for not obeying; -- when yet I believe you cannot but in
Conscience acquit them; and if you do, it must then be upon the Principles I
have laid down.

But I will no longer dwell here, it being somewhat foreign to the Point in
Hand. I proceed to consider this Rule as it respects religious Matters; to
which it is so confidently applied by the Lovers of spiritual Tyranny. -- And
here, if this be the Rule, that we ought to obey human Laws in religious
Matters in every Instance where we cannot find a divine Law enjoining what they
forbid, or forbidding what they enjoin; then it is evident, Religion is in
Danger of being made a very burdensome Thing. To Baptism you may add the Sign
of the Cross, the Salt, and Cream, and spitting in the Mouth, with a Hundred
other Things, that a fruitful Imagination could furnish out. -- The Popish
Wardrobe will yield some Furniture to dress up Religion with. But the
Inventions of Men may still go beyond. And if they do but take Care not to
enjoin any Action or Modality in Religion not prohibited by some Command in the
Bible; by this Rule Christians are bound to obey. It is a necessary Consequence
of this Principle, that Christians are subjected to a heavier Yoke than the
Jews were under the Mosaic Dispensation. If you say, not; because if the civil
Rulers should proceed so far (for I know not what else you can devise to say,)
it would be contrary to a general Law we have from CHRIST; Gal. 5. 1. Be not
entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage; which not only shows Christians are
not subjected to that particular Yoke, but also that their Yoke is not to be so
heavy as that was; so that if they should increase their Injunctions to make
Religion now so burdensome, as the Jewish was, it would be contrary to this
superior Law. -- Be it so, but then remember this is true upon their
Principles, that if they stop but one Hair short, they will tell you, their
Injunctions are not contrary to this general Law. If the Burden they lay upon
you be at all less, by your Principle you confess yourself under the Obligation
of Obedience; and how miserable Christians would be if human Law givers might
go near such a Length, I need not spend any Time to show, it is so very
obvious. -- But farther, suppose civil Rulers should go still beyond; who are
the Judges whether they go contrary to this Law or not? -- Are the Rulers the
Judges, or have private Christians a Right of Judgment in this Case? If the
Rulers only are to judge, we may be sure they will judge in Favor of their own
Laws: if they exceed this Bound you suppose set to them by this general Law; --
they will never judge that Law of CHRIST to be contrary to their Laws: and if
so, more miserable yet is the Christian's Condition. But if you say, private
Christians have a Right of Judgment for themselves in this Case; -- I then ask,
if they judge the Rulers in their Injunctions exceed the Bounds allowed by this
Law of CHRIST, whether they are to be tolerated by the Rulers in their not
conforming to those Injunctions they judge contrary to this Law? They have gone
as far (it is to be supposed) in conforming, as their Consciences will suffer
them: Are they then to be indulged to stop there according to their own
Judgments, or must they still conform farther, or else be subjected to a
Penalty for not going farther? If they must be subjected to Penalties for not
conforming in this Case; how deplorable is the Condition of Christians? Obey
the Inventions of Men or dye! -- You will doubtless answer; they must be
tolerated, since it is supposed they have a Right of judging for themselves,
when a human Injunction in Religion is contrary to a divine Law. This is
undoubtedly true: -- for to suppose they have a Right of Judgment for
themselves, is to suppose they have a Right to act according to their Judgment:
and therefore none (not the civil Magistrate) can have any Right to hinder
them. A Right that in this Case is dependent on the Will of another, is no
Right at all. Suppose then, private Christians should judge that it is contrary
to the Will of CHRIST expressed in that Text, Gal. 5. 1. that the civil
Magistrate should make any legal Injunction at all in Religion (which is the
Truth of the Case;) I then ask, whether these who so judge are not to be
allowed to act according to their Judgment, as well as the former? This surely
cannot be denied them; since the Right of private Judgment belongs to the latter
as well as the former. If then Christians have a Right to adhere strictly to
the Will of CHRIST delivered in the sacred Scriptures in every Thing relating
to their Faith and Practice in Religion, exclusive of all human legal
Injunctions; then no Power on Earth can have any Right to make a Law to
restrain them therefrom, or to add the least Thing thereto. -- For to have a
Right to adhere to the sacred Scriptures alone as a Rule in this Case, and not
to have such a Right is a Contradiction: -- and so suppose the civil Magistrate
has a Right to restrain them, or to add any one Law to CHRIST'S in this Case,
is to suppose Christians have not a Right to adhere to the sacred Scriptures as
their alone Rule. The Supposition therefore of any rightful Power in the civil
Ruler to make any one Law in Matters of Religion, involves in it as plain a
Contradiction to Truth, as a Right to a Thing and no Right to it does. -- The
Rule therefore which you would set up, by which to try what humane Laws in
Matters of Religion are to be obeyed, is justly to be rejected; not only
because it subjects Christians to an intolerable Yoke (if admitted,) but
because it can in no Instance be admitted, but at the Expense of a Christian's
natural and unalienable Right of private Judgment in Matters of Religion. -- It
may do well enough to amuse Men with a Pretense they have found out a Rule how
far Christians ought to obey the Laws of civil Rulers in Matters of Religion,
and where they may safely stop; where they can find Persons so weak as to think
that civil Rulers have some Power to make Laws in these Matters: -- But if that
be the Truth that they have no Power at all to make any Law in these Cases,
then the setting up such a Rule is a grand Absurdity. Now I have shown
evidently before, that the civil Magistrate can have no such Power, that his
Power relates to the civil Interests of a People, and is bounded thereby --
that the sacred Scriptures are the alone Rule of Faith and Practice in Religion
to a Christian; that the Right of private Judgment, what the Christian is to
believe and do in Religion according to that Rule, is his natural and
unalienable Right; so that he neither really may nor can give up his Soul, his
Conscience in these Matters to the Control of human Laws. And the Truth is,
the civil Magistrate is so far from having a rightful Power in these Cases, to
make Laws for CHRIST'S Subjects; that in doing so, he violates the fundamental
Privilege of the Gospel, the Birthright of Believers, Christian Liberty. 2
Cor. 3. 17. Where the SPIRIT of the LORD is, there is Liberty, Gal. 4. 31. We
are no, Children of the Bondwoman, but of the Free. It is impossible to suppose
that GOD by his special Grace in the Gospel should free us from the Bondage of
Ceremonies, his own Commandments, in these Things, and subject us to a more
grevious Yoke, the Commandments of Men. -- Nor has he given us this Gift only
as a special Privilege and Excellence of the free Gospel above the servile
Law; but has strictly commanded us to keep and enjoy it. -- You are called to
Liberty, Gal. 5. 13. -- 1 Cor. 7. 23. Be not ye the Servants of Men, Gal. 5. 1.
Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. A Command
accompanied with the weightiest Reasons. Romans 14. 9. 10. For to this End CHRIST
both died and rose and revived, that he might be LORD, both of the Dead and
Living. But why do thou judge thy Brother, etc. How presumest thou to be his
Lord? To be whose only Lord, at least in these Things, CHRIST both died and
rose and lived again -- We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST.
Why pretend you then to be a Lord, a Judge, in these Things, for which we are
to be accountable to the Tribunal of CHRIST only, our Lord and Lawgiver? Who in
so many express Words, has told us we shall have himself only our Master in
Religion, Math. 23.8, 9, 10. -- One is your Master even CHRIST. By all which I
think it is evident, that for Men to exercise such a Power in religious Matters
as you have been pleading for, is not only a Violation of the Rights of
Christians, whose Souls in Matters of Religion are S^^^ect (...) ^one but
CHRIST and his Laws; but an Invasion of the royal Power of CHRIST, who is the
sole Legislator in his own Kingdom.

To illustrate and clear this Point, let me bring it down to a plain and
familiar Instance. Let it be supposed a humane Law is made, that the Sign of a
Cross shall be made upon a Person's Forehead, after the Use of Water etc. in
Baptism, -- so that none shall be admitted to Baptism but who submit to this
Manner of Administration of it: or a Law requiring all who attend the Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper to do it in a kneeling Posture: and let it be supposed,
that there is no particular Law to the contrary in the Gospel forbidding those
Actions. Now according to the Rule you plead for, (on the Supposition now
made,) Christians are bound to obey these Laws. Now the contrary is evident.
For it has been already demonstrated, that every Christian has a Right to
adhere to the sacred Scriptures as the only Rule of his Faith and Practice in
Religion; and that the Right of private Judgment, what he is to believe and do
in Religion according to that Rule, is really unalienable: he cannot therefore
be bound to yield any Obedience to such Laws of Man, unless he be obliged to
yield up an unalienable Right, which is a Contradiction. Besides -- If the
making such Laws are an Invasion of CHRIST'S Authority; how is it possible the
Proposition should be true, that a Christian is obliged to obey them, unless
the Christian has two Masters in Religion, contrary to Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10. --
Where there is no Authority to command in Matters of Religion, there a
Christian is under no Obligation from such Laws to obey: But in the Case before
us, such Laws are not only enjoined without Authority, but they interfere with
CHRIST'S Authority: So that a Christian is indeed very far from being bound to
obey them.

Unto what has been already said that will show this, I shall add but a few
Words. CHRIST has in the Gospel Charter made a Grant of certain Privileges to
those who would be, and do approve themselves his Subjects. -- To them he has
granted the Privilege of attending on him in the Ordinances he has instituted,
for the conveying the sanctifying Graces of his SPIRIT to their Souls, to
prepare them for the Inheritance he has purchased and secured by Promise to
such as believe in and obey him. -- As this is clear and certain in the Nature
of the Thing it self, that the Grantor of a Privilege has the sole Right of
fixing the Condition on which the Privilege shall be enjoyed by the Grantee; so
it is equally certain, that if any other attempts in the least Measure to alter
the Condition on which such Privilege is to be enjoyed by the Grant, he does
therein invade the indisputable Right of the Grantor. Now in the Case before us
-- there cannot be a clearer Truth, than -- that this is Christ's sole
Prerogative to make the Grant and fix the Conditions on which the Privileges
are to be enjoyed, and that this is done in the Gospel Charter. The Privileges
are granted on the Conditions that are written in the Charter. The Privileges
are not granted on certain Conditions to be invented by Men after the making of
the Charter: -- For that would suppose that infinite Wisdom has granted certain
Privileges to Christians on such Conditions as humane Weakness establishes; and
that Christ strips himself of his Royalty to cloth a mere Creature with it,
and makes the Creature the Director of his Bequests: To suppose which of Christ
is to dishonor him with a Witness. It is indeed the greatest Absurdity
imaginable, to suppose this Matter could be settled by any other than Christ
himself, who makes the Grant: And the Conditions lie as plainly in the Grant as
the Privileges conveyed by it; That he who believes and obeys the Gospel, has
the Right to the Enjoyment of the Privileges belonging to a Subject of Christ.
-- This then being certain, that Christ has fixed the Conditions of Christians
enjoying the Privileges, the Ordinances of the Gospel; -- it is equally
certain, that Man and every Order of Men are excluded by Christ himself from
any Authority in this Matter: So that if any Man or Order of Men make any
Alteration in those Conditions, or make any new ones; they do it not only
without Authority, but against it, and therein control Christ's Authority. To
apply this then to the Case before us: -- Since the making the abovementioned
Figure on the Person to be baptized, or such a particular bodily Posture at the
Reception of the Lord's Supper, are not fixed by Christ as the Conditions of
Christians enjoying these Ordinances, or by any Law of Christ made necessary in
order to the Observance of these Institutions of his; for Man to make them
Conditions, without a Compliance with which Christians may not have the
Enjoyment of those Ordinances, is not only to act without Authority, but is
assuming an Authority which only belongs to Christ: it being a practical
Declaration that Christ's Subjects shall not enjoy the Privileges of the Gospel
upon the Conditions fixed in Christ's Grant* Which is therefore evidently an
Invasion of Christ's kingly Office, and an evident Violation of the Rights of
Christians. So that it is certain, Christians are not only, not bound to submit
to such human Laws, but do truly profess their Adherence to CHRIST'S Authority,
when they refuse to do so.

But if you say here; although the Rule you have been pleading for will not hold;
-- yet if every Thing relating to Decency and Order in divine Worship be not
particularly determined by CHRIST, why may not what is referrible thereto fall
under the Determination of the Laws of the civil Authority, and be warranted by
that apostolical Precept, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all Things be done decently and in
Order; and so those particular Instances I have mentioned be justly warranted
by that Precept? If some body must determine in such Cases, why may not the
civil Rulers do it? I answer --

1. If Christians keep from Indecency and Disorder in their Worship, they come
up to the Rule given by the Apostle in the now mentioned Text; and this they
may certainly do without the civil Magistrate's determining (...) Thing about
it. Christians observed this apostolic Precept as (...) before there was any
such Thing as a Christian Magistrate to be found, as they have done since: And
may do it as well to the second Coming of CHRIST, without the civil
Magistrate's intermeddling in this Matter (not to say with, more Honor to
Christ and greater Peace in the Church, if (...) forbears his Injunctions.) So
that it is impossible to get an Inference from this Text in Favor of the civil
Authority's determining any thing by their Laws in these Cases.

2. If by what you would call Decency or Order in Worship be meant, either any
Act or Mode of Worship, or any Ceremony that has any Religion at all placed in
it; then I say, no Man or Order of Men has the least Authority to invent or
injoin any such Thing: This would fall under our SAVIOR'S Condemnation in Mark
7. 7.

3. Any such Modes or Circumstances of divine Worship which are supposed in
this Objection left undetermined by Christ, may not be determined by any legal
Injunctions of the civil Authority. And that --

(1.) Because so to do, would be going out of their Line; these Things don't
lie within the Compass of the End of their Institution: The civil Interests of
the People being no Ways concerned therein, as has been shown in the preceding
Pages.

(2.) The Supposition that such Modes or Circumstances of divine Worship may be
determined by human Laws, does also suppose that the civil Authority may fix
Terms of Communion for Christians: What is thus supposed enacted by a
Legislature, is made a Rule of Action to the Subject by the very Supposition of
its being made a Law; so that in this Case the Subject is to attend divine
Worship, but according to a human Law; and is therefore excluded from the
Benefit of divine Worship and Ordinances, in Case of a noncompliance with that
human Injunction. This is the true State of the Matter with Respect to those
Instances I have just mentioned: And any the like Modes of Worship enjoined on
Christians by the Laws of Men, they are made the Terms of Communion to
Christians, the Conditions of their enjoying the external Privileges of
Christians: And for Men to fix any Terms of Communion for Christians in this
Manner, to make that necessary to their Enjoyment of the Privileges CHRIST has
purchased for them which he has not made necessary, has been already
demonstrated an Invasion of CHRIST'S kingly Authority.

(3.) The civil Authority may not determine such Modes and Circumstances of
Worship by legal Injunctions; because this would interfere with the Right of
private Judgment that belongs to Christians. The sacred Scriptures are
sufficient to furnish the Christian unto every good Work; they hold forth
sufficient Light about the Modes and Circumstances of divine Worship, which in
this Objection are supposed to be left undetermined by CHRIST. And it is the
Duty and Right of Christians to learn from thence, and judge concerning their
Duty in these as well as more important Matters of Religion; and such
Determinations of them are lawful and warrantable as are according to the
general Rules of Scripture given to direct us herein. And therefore there may
be various Modes of performing the same religious Duties that are each
allowable and lawful: though some particular Circumstances may make one more
expedient to some Persons than the other, and these also may be varied by the
Providence of GOD. It is the Right therefore of Christians, of every
worshipping Assembly, to determine for themselves these Modes and Circumstances
of Worship, as I have before observed. And for the civil Authority here to step
in and determine by a Law, what Modes or Circumstances of Worship shall be
observed; for Instance, what Posture we shall use in Prayer, when there are
several equally expressive of our religious Reverence; interferes with the
Christian's unalienable Right of private Judgment. And when I say, every
worshipping Assembly has this Right of determining or agreeing for themselves
about the Modes or Circumstances of Worship; it no Way supposes they have a
Right to (or do by such Agreements) exclude from their Communion any of their
Christian Brethren who may prefer the Use of a different allowable Mode of
Worship. Whom CHRIST receives they are also to receive. CHRIST has fixed the
Terms of Christian Communion, and none may alter them.

But say you once more; That the civil Authority must have Power to make such
religious Establishment which I have been impleading, in order to have Unity of
Faith and Uniformity of Practice in Religion. These you suppose necessary to
Peace and good Order in the State; and that this Unity etc. is effected by such
a religious Establishment, of which we are speaking; and consequently we must
suppose them vested with Power to make such a one. -- Much Weight I know has
been laid upon this Argument by the Lovers of spiritual Tyranny, and many
ignorant unthinking People have been amused and deceived by it: But if we will
look closely into it, it will appear lighter than Vanity. For

1. Unity of Faith and Uniformity of Practice in Religion, never was nor can be
effected in a Christian State by any such legal Establishment of Religion
pleaded for in the abovementioned Argument. By a Christian State, I mean at
least such a one, where the sacred Scriptures lie open to the People: and
therefore I don't intend, to consider this Proposition relative to a Popish
State, where People's Eyes being put out, they are more easily induced to
follow their Leaders; though it be also true that this Unity of Faith is not
found among them that are bound in the strongest Chains of human
Establishments. This has been tried in Protestant States, to make all think and
practice alike in Religion by legal Establishments and annexed Penalties: but
it never produced this Effect. It were easy if needful to multiply Instances:
but it is sufficient to our Purpose to Instance in our own Nation; where this
Method has been tried ever since the Reformation, and as constantly found
ineffectual for the accomplishing this Uniformity, for the Sake of which these
legal Establishments (...) been pretended to be made. So far (...) this Method
from bringing about an Unity of Faith, that this (...) not found (...) with
them that submit to a legal Establishment It is notoriously known, that the
Clergy of the Church of England are bound to subscribe to the thirty nine
Articles, i.e. to the Truth of Calvinistick Principles: But has this
Subscription answered its End? Is it not known, that they subscribe those
Articles in as widely distant and contradictory Senses as were ever put on the
most dubious Passage in the Bible. And the Truth is, if we consider the almost
infinite Variety with respect to the Understandings, Tempers and Advantages of
Men for Improvement in Knowledge; it must be evident, that this Uniformity of
Opinion and Practice in Religion, (as it has not) so it never can be produced
by the Art and Policy of Man. A Scheme for an artificial Conformity in Aspect,
Shape and Stature of Body, is not a whit more ridiculous, than an Attempt to
depress and contract the Understandings of some, to stretch the Capacities of
others, to distort and torture all, 'till they are brought to one Size, and one
Way of Thinking and Practice. So that if this Unity of Faith and Uniformity of
Practice in Religion is necessary to the Peace of the State; -- then it follow,
that the civil Authority have a rightful Power to put to Death or banish all
that cannot in Conscience conform to their religious Establishment. It will be
to no Purpose for the avoiding this Consequence, to say; the civil Magistrate
may not rise so high, or may affix some lower Penalties for Noncompliance with
his Establishment: For if this Conformity to his Establishment be necessary to
the Peace of the State, then the civil Magistrate has a Right to prevent a
Noncompliance with such Establishment; and if lesser Penalties will not do it,
(as Experience has perpetually shown they will not) then they must rise so high
as Death, or Banishment: For a Right to prevent such Noncompliance, that does
not amount to a Right to prevent it effectually, is no Right to prevent it at
all. So that on this Hypothesis, all Non-conformists to the religious
Establishment of any State, are to be rooted out by Death, or Banishment as
fast as they appear: Which both Experience and the Nature of Things evidence
will be continual; the cutting off all that appear to Day will no ways hinder
others from appearing so Tomorrow. Whence it is but a genuine Consequence,
that civil Government is one of the greatest Plagues that can be sent upon the
World; since it must, in order to keep Peace in it, be perpetually destroying
Men for no other Crime but judging for themselves and acting according to their
Consciences in Matters of Religion; (and so perhaps very often the best Men in
the State:) and all this in vain too, as to the proposed End, viz. Uniformity
of Practice in Religion, that being for ever out of their reach.

2. Such Unity, or Uniformity in Religion is not necessary to the Peace of a
civil State. Since God has formed the Understandings of Men so different, with
respect to Clearness, Strength, and Compass, and placed them in such very
different Circumstances; a Difference of Sentiments in some Things in Religion,
seems natural and unavoidable: and to suppose this does in its own Nature tend
to the public Mischief of the State, seems little less then arraigning infinite
Wisdom. From thence will arise greater Reason and Scope for mutual Forbearance
and Christian Charity. But it will certainly be found on Reflection, that it
has no ill Aspect on the civil State. Have we not known Persons of different
Sentiments and Practices in religious Matters, as Presbyterians,
Congregationalists, Churchmen (as commonly called) Baptists and Quakers, all
living in the same Community in Quiet and Peace with one another? I mention not
Papists; because though the Principles of a consistent Protestant, naturally tend
to make him a good Subject in any civil State, even in a popish one, and
therefore ought to be allowed in every State; yet that is not the Case with the
Papist: for by his very Principles he is an Enemy of Traitor to a Protestant
State: and strictly speaking Popery is so far from deserving the name of
Religion, that it is rather a Conspiracy against it, against the Reason,
Liberties, and Peace of Mankind; the visible Head thereof the Pope being in
Truth the Vicegerent of the Devil, Rev. 13. 2. To pretend that such as own the
sacred Scriptures to be the alone Rule of Faith and Practice in Religion, cannot
live in Peace and Love as good Neighbors and good Subjects, though their
Opinions and Practices in religious Matters be different, is both false in
Fact, and a vile Reproach cast upon the Gospel, which breaths nothing but
Benelovence and Love among Men: and while it plainly teaches the Right of
private Judgment in every one, it most forcibly enjoins the Duties of mutual
Forbearance and Charity. That golden Precept of our blessed LORD: Whatsoever ye
would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them, Math. 7. 12, well
taught and enforced by the Teachers of the Gospel, would (if I may use the
Word) infinitely more tend to make Christians of the several Denominations in
the State, good Neighbors and good Subjects, then this whimsical Notion of
Uniformity. Which if it had always had its due Force on the Minds of Men, we
should never have heard of the Necessity of Uniformity in Religion to the Peace
of the State, nor any such legal Establishment of Religion I have been
impleading. That Precept being a sacred Guard to the unalienable Rights of
Conscience, which are always invaded by such Establishments.

But if you say, that different Sects in Religion aiming at Superiority, and
endeavoring to suppress each other, form contrary Factions in the State; which
tends to distress and thwart the civil Administration. -- I answer; The civil
Authority's protecting all in their just Rights, and particularly this
inestimable and unalienable one, the Right of private Judgment in Matters of
Religion, is the best Guard against the Evil supposed in the Objection.
Besides, this is no more a natural Consequence of Men's thinking differently in
Religion, than of different Judgments about Wit, or Poetry, Trade, or Husbandry.

Or if you farther suppose, that Religion is a Matter of much greater
Importance than these Things, and demands therefore a more warm and active
Zeal. Be it so; Nothing farther follows from thence, than that we should
endeavor to support its Honor in a Way suited to its Excellency; to instruct
one another in its grand Principles and Duties, and recommend it by calm and
strong Persuasion. -- It is by Truth CHRIST'S Kingdom is set up, as he himself
has taught us, Luke 18. 37. And it is a most unnatural Excess of Zeal, for the
pretended Defense of Religion, to renounce Humanity, and that equitable Regard
and kind Affection, which are unalterably due from one Man to another.

If it be again said, that though these abovementioned Evils are directly
contrary to the true Genius and Spirit of the Christian Religion; yet they are
the actual Consequence of a Variety of Sects, exceeding fond of their
particular Schemes. I answer; they are only accidental Abuses to which the best
Things are liable: The same Argument may be urged against Reason, and every
Branch of natural and civil Liberty. It is equally conclusive as the Papists
have used it against the Laity's having the Bible; viz. the Consequence of
People's having the Bible in their Hands to read, has been the rising up of a
Variety of Sects in the christian World, and therefore they ought not to be
permitted the Use of it. As no such Conclusion can be drawn against every
Body's having the Bible from such Premises; so in the Case before us, no
Conclusion against the Right of private Judgment for our selves in Matters of
Religion, can be drawn from these Inconveniences; which do not spring directly
from it, but arise entirely from different Causes; from Pride, or foolish
Bigotry, that either does not understand, or pays no Regard to the unalienable
Rights of Conscience.

3. Such legal Establishments have a direct contrary Tendency to the Peace of a
Christian State. As the Exercise of private Reason, and free Enquiry in a
strict and constant Adherence to the sacred Scriptures as the only Rule of
Faith and Practice, is the most likely Means to produce Uniformity in the
essential Principles of Christianity as well as Practice; so this is certainly
the most sure Method of procuring Peace in the State. No Man having any Reason
to repine at his Neighbor's Enjoyment of that Right, which he is not willing
to be without himself; and on the same Grounds he challenges it for himself, he
must be forced to own, that it is as reasonable his Neighbor should enjoy it.
But then on the other Hand, every Claim of Power inconsistent with this Right,
(as the making such a human Establishment of Religion of which we are speaking)
is an Encroachment on the Christian's Liberty; and so far therefore he is in a
State of Slavery: And so far as a Man feels himself in a State of Slavery, so
far he feels himself unhappy, and has Reason to complain of that Administration
which puts the Chain upon him. So that if Slavery be for the Peace of the civil
State; then such Establishments as we are speaking of, tend to promote the
Peace of the State: i. e. what makes the Subjects miserable, really makes them
happy. And as it necessarily tends to the Misery of some, so it also promotes
Bigotry, Pride, and Ambition in such as are fond of such Establishments: which
have from Time to Time broken out in Extravagancies and Severities (upon good
Subjects) in Men of Authority and Influence, and into Rage and Fury, Hatred and
Obloquy, and such like Wickednesses, in the impotent and commoner Sort. This
has been the Case in all Places, more or less, as well as in our own Nation.
Thus when K. Henry threw off the Popish Tyranny, he would not destroy and put
an End to the Exercise of that unjust Power, but only transferred it to
himself, and exercised it with great Severity. The same unjust Dominion over
the Consciences of Men was again exercised in the Reign of Elizabeth; who (though
otherwise a wise Princess) yet being of an high and arbitrary Temper, pressed
Uniformity with Violence; and found Bishops enough, Parker, Aylmer, Whitgift
and others, to cherish that Temper, and promote such Measures. Silencings,
Deprivations, Imprisonments, Fines etc. upon the Account of Religion, were some
of the powerful Reasonings of those Times. The Cries of innocent Prisoners,
widowed Wives, and starving Children, made no Impression on their Hearts: Piety
and Learning with them were void of Merit: Refusal of Subscriptions, and
Nonconformity, were Crimes never to be forgiven. At the Instigation of that
persecuting Prelate Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, the High Commission
Court was established; which had a near Resemblance to the Court of
Inquisition: (A fine Invention to promote Uniformity) Which by the Cruelties
practiced in it in the two following Reigns, was rendered the Abhorrence of the
Nation; so that it was dissolved by Parliament, with a Clause, that no such
Court should be erected for the future. A Creature framed to promote the
wretched Designs of such Persecutors, was her weak Successor James the First,
who gave the Puritans to understand -- That if they did not conform, he would
either hurry them out of the Kingdom, or else do worse. The Bishops supported
by such an inspired King, according to Whitgift's impious and fordid Flattery,
pursued the Maxim to accomplish Uniformity by Persecution. The grievous
Severities and numerous Violences exercised on Non-conformists in that and the
next Reign, under that tyrannical Prelate Laud, (said in Parliament by Sir
Harbottle Grimstone, to be the great and common Enemy of all Goodness and good
Men) are well known by all truly acquainted with the History of those Times: As
well as the cruel Injustice exercised after the Restoration on great Numbers of
as good Subjects as any in the Nation; merely because they could not come up to
this Uniformity pleaded for, and enquired according to their Measure of
Knowledge after the Truth, and desired to worship GOD according to their
Consciences: until the late great Deliverer (WILLIAM the IIId. of happy Memory)
of the British Nation from Popery and Slavery, freed those miserable Sufferers
(noble Confessors for the Truth) from a Yoke of Bondage laid upon them, and
gave them a Law for the Security of their Christian Liberty; this Right of
private Judgment I have been pleading for. And that this has promoted Peace in
the State, Experience since has proved; as well as former Experience made it
most evident, that the Encroachments upon this Right of private Judgment, by
such legal Establishments, have been exceeding prejudicial to the Peace of the
State: It being impossible but that such Methods should cause and perpetuate
Schisms and Divisions of the Church, and disturb and disquiet the State; since
the Wrath of Man cannot work the Righteousness of GOD; and since civil
Punishments have no Tendency to convince the Conscience, but only to inflame
the Passions against the Advisers and Inflicters of them. And as History gives
us so dreadful an Account of the melancholy and tragical Effects of this
Practice, one would think, that no People who have any Regard for the Peace of
the Flock of CHRIST, who know the Worth of Liberty, would be fond of such legal
Establishments, or any such Methods as encroach upon Christian Liberty, the
most valuable of all our Rights.

Thus I think I have fully answered all your Objections against my second
Corollary. I therefore proceed to a third.

III. That the civil Authority ought to protect all their Subjects in the
Enjoyment of this Right of private Judgment in Matters of Religion, and the
Liberty of worshipping GOD according to their Consciences. That being the End
of civil Government (as we have seen) viz. the greater Security of Enjoyment of
what belongs to every one, and this Right of private Judgment, and worshipping
GOD according to their Consciences, being the natural and unalienable Right of
every Men, what Men by entering into civil Society neither did, nor could give
up into the Hands of the Community; it is but a just Consequence, that they are
to be protected in the Enjoyment of this Right as well as any other. A
worshipping Assembly of Christians have surely as much Right to be protected
from Molestation in their Worship, as the Inhabitants of a Town assembled to
consult their civil Interests from Disturbance etc. This Right I am speaking
of, is the most valuable Right, of which every one ought to be most tender, of
universal and equal Concernment to all; and Security and Protection in the
Enjoyment of it the just Expectation of every Individual. And the civil
Magistrate in endeavoring and doing this, most truly comes up to the Character
of a nursing Father to the Church of CHRIST. If this had been protected as it
ought to have been, what infinite Mischief to the Christian Church had been
prevented? From the Want of a due Care of this, the Clergy through Pride and
Ambition assumed the Power of prescribing to, imposing on and domineering over
the Consciences of Men; civil Rulers for their own private Ends helping it
forward; which went on 'till it produced the most detestable Monster the Earth
ever had upon it, the Pope, who has deluged the Earth with the Blood of
Christians. This being the true Spirit of Popery, to impose their
Determinations on all within their Power by any Methods which may appear most
effectual: and those civil Magistrates that suffered and helped that Beast to
invade this Right, did therein commit Fornication with her, and give her their
Strength and Power; and so instead of proving Fathers to their People, proved
the cursed Butchers of them. It has been by asserting and using this Right,
that any of the Nations who have been drunk with the Wine of her Fornication,
have come out from her Abominations: and would the civil Magistrates of those
Nations, who at this Day worship the Beast, but protect their Subjects in this
natural Right of every one's judging for himself in Matters of Religion,
according to that alone Rule the Bible; that settled Darkness of Ignorance,
Error and Idolatry, which now involves them, would vanish as the Darkness of
the Night does by the rising of the Sun. How unspeakably would the Advantages
be, arising from the Protection of this Right, did they reach no further than
to the Estates, Bodies, and Lives of Men?

All Reformations are built on this single Principle I have been pleading for,
from which we should never depart: yet it must be owned and deserves to be
lamented, that the Reformed have too much departed from this Principle upon
which they at first set up; whence it has come to pass that Reformations in one
Place and another have not been more perfect. For the Prince of Darkness has
always found Means this Way to make a Stand against the most vigorous Efforts;
and if any Advantages have been gained in any Point, to secure a safe Retreat,
by infatuating Men with that strange Sort of Pride, whereby they assume to
themselves only, but allow to none else, a Power of domineering over the
Consciences of others. Religion will certainly lie under Oppression if this
unjust Authority be transferred, to Decrees of Councils, Convocations,
Injunctions of civil Magistrates, or from one Man or any Order of Men to
another; as it is if we have any other Rule of Faith and Practice in Religion,
besides the Bible. It were easy to enlarge on the vast Advantages and Happiness
of admitting no other Rule or Guide but the sacred Scriptures only: thence
would flow the greatest Blessings to Mankind, Peace and Happiness to the World:
so that if there be any Rights and Liberties of Men that challenge Protection
and Security therein from the civil Magistrate, it is this natural Right of
private Judgment in Matters of Religion, that the sacred Scriptures only may
become the Rule to all Men in all religious Matters, as they ought to be. In a
Word, this is the surest Way for the Ease and Quiet of Rulers, as well as Peace
of the State, the surest Way to engage the Love and Obedience of all the
Subjects. And if there be diverse religious Sects in the State, and the one
attempts to offend the other, and the Magistrate interposes only to keep the
Peace; it is but a natural Consequence to suppose -- that in such Case they all
finding themselves equally safe, and protected in their Rights by the civil
Power, they will all be equally obedient. It is the Power given to one, to
oppress the other, that has occasioned all the Disturbances about Religion. And
should the Clergy closely adhere to these Principles, instead of their being
reproached for Pride and Ambition, as the Sowers of Strife and Contention and
Disturbance of the Peace of the Church of God; they would be honored for their
Work's sake, esteemed for their Character, loved as Blessings to the World,
heard with Pleasure, and become successful in their Endeavors to recommend the
Knowledge and Practice of Christianity.

IV. It also follows from the preceding Principles, that every Christian has
Right to determine for himself what Church to join himself to; and every Church
has Right to judge in what Manner GOD is to be worshipped by them, and what
Form of Discipline ought to be observed by them, and the Right also of electing
their own Officers. (For Brevity Sake I put them all together) From this Right
of private Judgment in Matters of Religion, sufficiently demonstrated in the
foregoing Pages, it follows, that no Christian is obliged to join himself to
this or the other Church, because any Man or Order of Men command him to do so,
or because they tell him the Worship and Discipline thereof is most consonant
to the sacred Scriptures; For no Man has Right to judge for him, whether the
Worship and Discipline of this or the other Church be most agreeable to the
sacred Scriptures; and therefore no other can have Right to determine for him
to which he ought to join himself: This Right therefore must lie with every
Christian. As this is the Right of each Individual; so also of a Number of them
agreeing in their Sentiments in these Things, to agree to observe the
Ordinances of Christ together, for their mutual Edification according to the
Rules of the Gospel, which makes a particular Christian Church. And having
voluntarily agreed together for such an End, no Man or Order of Men has any
Authority to prescribe to them, the Manner of their worshipping GOD, or
enjoining any Form of Church Discipline upon them. So a Number of such Churches
(who are all endowed with Equality of Power) have Right to judge for
themselves, whether it be most agreeable to the Mind of CHRIST, to consociate
together in any particular Form; as far Instance, of Presbyteries, or Synods,
or the like. And if they should do so, such Agreements of their's cannot be
made a binding Rule to them, by any Law of Man; As has been demonstrated in the
preceding Pages. These Churches are all of them as free to think and judge for
themselves, as they were before such Agreement; their Right of private Judgment
not being given up, but reserved entire for themselves, when they entered into
any such supposed Agreement. And if on Experience of such a Method of Regimen
as they have agreed to, and farther Light, they judge any of them, there is
good Reason for them to forbear practicing farther in that Form; they are not
held to continue therein, but have Right to act according to their present
Light; they having no other Rule but the sacred Scripture, they have always a
Right to act their Judgment according to that Rule. So also if a greater or
lesser Number of Christians in any particular Church, shall judge another Way
of Worship, or Method of Discipline, more agreeable to the Mind of CHRIST, than
what is practiced in that Church; they have Right to withdraw, and to be
embodied by themselves. As they ought to signify this Desire to their Brethren,
so they ought to consent* for they can have no Right to hold them to
themselves: and this without any Breach of Charity on either Side; or of after
Communion, so long as they held to CHRIST the Head, and are agreed in the great
Essentials of Christianity. So also from the same Premises it follows, that
every Church or worshipping Assembly has the Right of choosing its own
Officers: -- Though it may ordinarily be a Point of Prudence for a Church
destitute of a Pastor, to consult Pastors of other Churches where they may be
supplied with a Person suitable for that Office; yet that no Way supposes, the
full Power of Election does not lie with the Church. It is for the better
improving their Power of Election, that such a Method is ever to be taken, and
not because they have not the Power of Election in themselves. Nor can they be
bound to this, if they see good Reason to act otherwise, (as the Case has
sometimes happened and often may.) Nor can they be at all bound to elect the
Person recommended: They are to prove him themselves, and be fully satisfied in
his Ministerial Gifts and Qualifications, and may herein be controuled by no
Power whatever. It is their own good, their everlasting Interest that is
concerned, and if they judge his Doctrine not agreeable to the sacred
Scriptures, that he is not qualified as he ought to be for a Gospel Minister
they have Right to reject him. As they have a Right of judging the Doctrines
taught them them by the sacred Scriptures, and of rejecting the same if not
agreeable thereto, so it necessarily follows they have equal Right to refuse
such a one for their Teacher, who does not teach according to the Scriptures.

But if it be demanded how this Power can be exercised, must every Individual
be agreed in the Person, or no Election made?

I answer,

1. Such a universal Agreement is not necessary, the Election may be made by a
Majority. Experience has shown where the Candidate has had the Gospel
Qualifications for the Office, the Concurrence in the Choice has been
universal, at least so general as to bring no Difficulty in the Exercise of
this Right. So when there has been any considerable Number who judged they had
any weighty Reason against the Election made by a Majority, Experience has also
shown the Majority's denying themselves of that Choice, and trying farther, has
issued happily for the whole. In such Cases, it is certain, Wisdom if profitable
to direct. And that Rule of our Savior's, Math. 7. 12. will go a great Way in
keeping Churches in the peaceable Exercise of this Right.

2. Where a minor Part cannot in Judgment acquiesce in the Choice made by the
major Part of the worshipping Assembly, they have a Right to withdraw and
choose a Minister for themselves, or if not able to support one may attend
divine Worship in a neighboring Church, where they find they may do it to
greater Edification. They are all equally vested in the same Right, and hold it
independent one of another, and each one independent of the whole, or of all
the rest. So that the greater Number can have no Right to impose a Minister on
the lesser. It is not here as in civil Societies where the Right of each
Individual is subjected to the Body, or so transferred to the Society, as that
the Act of the Majority is legally to be considered as the Act of the whole,
and binding to each Individual. As to what concerns Men's civil Interests,
there is nothing in the Nature of Things to hinder or prevent its being lawful
or best, so to transfer their Power to the Community. But it is not so in
religious Matters, where Conscience and Men's eternal Interests are concerned.
If the Power of acting be transferred in this Case, as in that of civil
Societies (now mentioned) Thus, if for Instance, the Majority should elect an
Arminian Teacher, the minor Part must be so concluded by that Choice, as to
submit to such a One as their Teacher, when at the same Time it may be directly
against their Consciences to receive such Doctrines or such a Teacher. But
since the Rights of Conscience may not be touched, the Right of electing a
Teacher is not transferred to the Body by the Individuals, as civil Rights may
be in civil Societies. That Principle or Supposition, which any Ways infer, an
Infringement upon the Rights of Conscience, cannot be true; as that does, which
supposes a Majority may impose a Minister on a lesser Part.

If to avoid what I have asserted, that in such Case a minor Part may withdraw
and choose a Minister for themselves, it be here said -- That they may remove
their Habitations --

I Answer, Since this Right of electing a Teacher for themselves does truly
remain with them, after the Choice made by the Majority, that Right may be
exercised by them, and why not in one Part of the civil State as well as
another? They are guilty of no Crime for which they should be banished by the
State, nor of any Thing whereby they have forfeited a Right of possessing their
present Freeholds: their Right to their Freeholds remains, and consequently
their Right to exercise their Christian Rights where they be, and have a Right
to remain. -- It is to no Purpose here to say, Perhaps the Legislature has
fixed the Bounds of the Parish. -- For the Legislature can make civil
Societies, and may fix the Bounds of Towns and Parishes for civil Purposes; yet
they cannot make Churches, nor may they make any Laws that interfere with the
Rights of Christians. -- Nor is it to any Purpose to say, This would open a
Door to a great Multiplication of Churches: For how many populous Places, as
well as Boston, have tried it, and found Religion and Peace best promoted on
these Principles; nor is there a probability that Churches will by this Means
be increased beyond their Ability to support their Ministers.

By what I have said you will find some other of your Queries answered, without
my making particular Application, and therefore I leave that for you to do at
your own Leisure: And should here finish my Letter, but that you insist on my
giving you my Sentiments on a Law made in your Colony May 1742, Entitled An Act
for regulating Abuses, and correcting Disorders in Ecclesiastical Affairs:
Which it seems, through the fond Opinion some Persons among you had of it, was
thrust into one of our public News Papers, soon after it was passed; under
which every wise By-stander, that was a hearty Friend to your civil and
religious Interests, was ready to write, Tell it not in Gath etc.

I shall not descend into every Particular that might be offered upon it --
Some few Remarks may suffice.

I. The Law is founded on this false Principle, viz. That the civil Authority
has Power to establish a Form of Church Government by penal Laws. The Act
relates wholly to Matters of an ecclesiastical Nature: and as i^ supposes, the
civil Magistrate has Authority by penal Laws to regulate ecclesiastical
Matters, so consequently to establish an ecclesiastical Constitution by penal
Laws. It appears from the Preamble to the Act, that the declared Design of it
is to keep Persons from deviating from the ecclesiastical Discipline
established by Law, in the Year 1708 and that under the Penalties by this Law
enacted. -- But that they have no such Authority, has been fully demonstrated
in the foregoing Pages, which I need not repeat. Whence it must follow, that
the Act is fundamentally wrong, being made without any Authority. Be pleased to
reflect one Minute on this Power challenged by this Law, to correct, and that
by penal Laws, such Disorders as are purely of an ecclesiastical Nature, and
see the Consequence of it. One Disorder to be corrected is, A Minister's
preaching out of his own Parish undesired by the Minister and major Part of the
Church where he shall so preach. If the civil Magistrate has this Power the Act
supposes, if he judges it to be a Disorder for the Minister to preach in his
own Parish on a Week Day, he may then restrain him: or if he t^^^ks it a
Disorder that there should be any public Prayers but by a (...) p^^^ted Form,
he may then restrain all to such a Form. It is (...) the civil Magistrate has
Authority to correct ecclesiastical Disorders, he has a Right to judge what is
a Disorder in the Church, and restrain the same. If he may execute this in one
Instance, he may in another: and every Thing is on this Principle liable to be
disallowed in the Worship of God, which does not suit with the civil
Magistrate's Opinion. Whatever he judges to be a Disorder, is so by this
Principle, and may be restrained accordingly. And so farewell all Christian
Liberty. -- It signifies nothing to say, your civil Magistrates are so sound in
the Faith, there is no Danger they will go so far. I hope so indeed with you;
though you cannot tell what those or others in succeeding Times may do. It is no
new Thing for civil Authority to make dreadful Havoc of the Liberties and
Religion of Christians; but the Argument, you see, proceeds upon the Nature of
Things. The Principle, that Law stands upon, you may plainly see, is directly
inconsistent in its own Nature, with the unalienable Rights of Christians. What
sad Effects have been felt in our own Nation, in some former Reigns, from this
very Principle's being put in Practice; who at all acquainted with History can
be ignorant? While they were executing what they were pleased to call wholesome
Severities on Dissenters, they were only in their Judgment correcting Disorders
in ecclesiastical Affairs. If this Power belongs to the civil Authority, as
such, it must belong to those in one State as well as another; and is as justly
challenged by the civil Authority in France, as in New England. Let it be but
once supposed the civil Magistrate has this Authority, where can you stop? what
is there in Religion not subjected to his Judgment? All must be Disorder in
Religion, which he is pleased to call so; you can have no more of the external
Part of Religion than he is pleased to leave you, and may have so much of
Superstition as he is pleased to enjoin under the Head of Order. So that this
Law stands on no better a Foundation, than what infers the Destruction of
Christian Liberty.

Having made this general Observation, I go on, to consider the first
Paragraph, which runs thus -- That if any ordained Minister or other Person
licensed as aforesaid to preach, shall enter into any Parish not immediately
under his Charge, and shall there preach or exhort the People, he shall be
denied and secluded the Benefit of any Law of this Colony made for the Support
and Encouragement of the Gospel Ministry; except such ordained Minister or
licensed Person shall be expressly invited and desired so to enter into such
other Parish, and there to preach and exhort the People, either by the settled
Minister, and the major Part of the Church of said Parish; or in Case there be
no settled Minister, then by the Church or Society in said Parish.

The Minister's heretofore supposed Right to have Assistance and Help from his
Brethren in the Ministry by preaching, is hereby cut off. None may preach
unless the major Part of the Church desire it; though the Minister and one Half
of the Church and all the rest of the Congregation, which make up much the
greater Part of the Number, who have Right to hear the Word preached, are ever
so desirous of hearing the Word from another, and apprehensive (as the Case may
be) of the great Necessity of it. Before this Law was passed, I should have
presumed, there was not one Minister on the Continent, but what thought he had
good Right to invite any orthodox Minister to preach in his Pulpit: not only
Ministers, but Churches in every Part of the World, have so supposed and
practiced. But it seems by this Law this Supposition is a Mistake, and the
Practice a Disorder in the Church. -- Yet if the Minister has no such Right,
how comes it to pass, that the greater Part of his Hearers are cut off from any
Right to hear such as may be ever so well qualified to instruct. The
Noncommunicants, which perhaps makes three Quarters of the Parish, are in one
Part of this Paragraph considered as a Cipher, and in another Part as having
full Right to hear whom they desire, viz. In a Parish where they have no
settled Minister. In such Case, it is supposed, by this Law, they have Right to
hear any Minister they desire, though not one Churchmember join with them in the
Desire; for they may make up a Majority of the Society without one Communicant
with them. -- Yet if the Day before, while the Minister of such a Parish was
living, it seems, if the same Persons had been desirous of hearing the same
Man, they are by this Law cut off the Privilege; if the Minister's Des^^e too
had been joined with them, it would have helped nothing: or rather (in short)
as this Law stands, this very Circumstance of their having a Minister
extinguishes their Right of hearing such Preachers as they desire. Such now
being the plain Sense of this Paragraph; I say then, --

II. That it is apparently inconsistent with itself, deprives Ministers and
particular Christians of their Rights and Liberties, and invests a lordly Power
in a small Part of a Parish-Society, (...) Part or one Half of a Church, over a
worshipping Assembly, since they never had nor can have any rightful Power to
hinder other Christians in the Parish from hearing such Ministers as they judge
may promote their spiritual Good, as by this Law they are enabled to do.

III. It invests an exorbitant Power in Ministers over a Church and
Congregation. This may look very strange, especially when you reflect, that by
the Preamble to this Law the Ministers are represented as having departed from
the established ecclesiastical Discipline, and been guilty of disorderly and
irregular Practices; and therefore are such Persons as are not fit to be left
to conduct themselves, in their ministerial Office, nor to be governed by their
own ecclesiastical Constitution, but must of Necessity be laid under some
extraordinary legal Restraints. I say, they are thus plainly represented
(whether truly, or not, is not the Question) by the Preamble; yet,
notwithstanding all this, they are by this Law vested with an exorbitant Power
over the Churches. Christians, it seems, must be stripped of an invaluable
Branch of Liberty Christ has vested them with, and the same must be lodged in
that Order of Men, who are represented as unfaithful in the Execution of their
Trust. For by this Law every Minister has not only Power given him, to prevent
any other Minster's preaching in his Parish, not only if a small Number desire
it, but if the whole worshipping Assembly desire it; not only in the Pulpit,
but in any private House, which is directly inconsistent with the Rights of
Christians: but also in Case a Parish be under a Necessity of settling another
Minister through the Incumbent's Disability to discharge his Pastoral Office, it
is put into his Power to negative any Choice they shall make of a Minister, and
so Churches are really stripped of their Right of electing their own Ministers.
It is plain by the Words of the Law, none can preach in the Parish without the
settled Minister's Consent: and if one preaches to Day by his Leave, and the
whole worshipping Assembly desire his continued preaching, he has it in his
Power by this Law to prevent his preaching Tomorrow. And therefore if a Church
can call and settle none (in such a Case) but whom their present Pastor
pleases, (as is certainly the Case by this Law) the Right of electing their
Minister is taken from them. A supposed Right in A, dependent on the Will of B,
is no Right at all. -- And this, as I have heard, is the Case of one Church on
Connecticut River, now groaning under this Oppression, which may also prove the
Case of any, or of all other Churches in that Colony, if they remain under the
Misery of such a Law.

IV. The Persons supposed to be criminal by this Law, are subjected to an
unreasonable Punishment, and this too without any Trial in the Law, in any Form
whatever. The supposed Crime is a Minister or licensed Candidate's preaching in
a Parish where the Incumbent and major Part of the Church have not invited:
i.e. If the Incumbent has invited with one Half of the Church and three
Quarters of the whole Parish, or if the whole Church and Parish invite, and not
the Incumbent, or if there is not more than Half of the Church, or more than
Half of the Society, where there is no Incumbent; each of these is such a Crime
for which the Punishment is, The Denial and Seclusion from the Benefit of any
Law of the Colony made for the Support and Encouragement of the Gospel
Ministry. Now I find by looking into your Colony Law-Book, the Laws made for
the aforesaid Purpose may be sum'd up in these few Words, viz. That all
Agreements made by the Inhabitants of a Society or the major Part of them
assembled in a Society-Meeting, respecting the Settlement and Maintenance of
the Minister they have chosen, shall be binding to all the Inhabitants of such
Society, and to their Successors; which Sums or Payments so agreed to shall be
levied and assessed on the several Inhabitants in such Society, according to
their respective Estates from Time to Time, as they shall be set in the general
List; which Sums or Payments shall be gathered by such Person said Society
shall appoint to be the Collector of them, who is to repa^^ ^o an Assistant or
Justice of the Peace for a Warrant to enable him to collect the Rate. Now then,
as by the preceding Laws, such Agreements are made binding to the Inhabitants
of a Society and their Successors etc. hence to be denied and secluded the
Benefit of any Law made for the Support and Encouragement of the Gospel
Ministry, includes in it the being denied and secluded the Benefit of holding
the Society to such Agreements; and so this Law plainly intends, by prohibiting
any Assistant or Justice of the Peace, to sign any Warrant for collecting a
Rate where a Minister has been certified against, as having acted contrary to
this Law. So that, in short, the Punishment is the Deprication of his
Livelihood; and thence forward he may beg his Bread. This appears unreasonable,
to inflict so heavy a Punishment for preaching in such Cases as abovementioned,
when (as it may happen) it might be evidently Duty so to do. But let the
Preaching be at the Desire of more or fewer, still it is no Immorality: it is
but an ecclesiastical Disorder, even in the Account of this Law, which surely
cannot deserve so severe a Penalty. Many gross Immoralities have a much less
Punishment assigned for them, than this heretofore supposed innocent Action of
preaching the Gospel. If the civil Peace was broken by it, I cannot see how so
severe a Punishment for it can be justified. But it is evident, the civil Peace
is not broken by this supposed Crime, which is nothing but preaching the
Gospel; which is so far from breaking the Peace, or tending thereto, that it
entirely tends to make Men better, and so better Subjects. The preaching out of
his own Parish does not alter the Nature of the Action, nor is the natural
Tendency of the Word changed thereby; no Man's civil Property or Interest is at
all invaded by it; and how such an Action can be punished at all, appears
mysterious to me! It is not for preaching Sedition or Treason, but even the
Gospel of Peace, that CHRIST'S Ministers are rendered liable to be deprived of
their daily Bread.

If it should be here said, -- That these Laws made for the Support of the
Gospel Ministry, are to be looked upon as Acts of Favor, relative to such as
comply with the ecclesiastical Constitution of the Government; and so if any
Ministers will not keep within the Bounds of that Constitution, they justly
forfeit such Favor; and so the Punishment here is to be understood, a
Declaration that their Right to such Favor now ceases. I answer,

1. That Action, which by this Law is made thus criminal, is not contrary to,
but well consistent with the ecclesiastical Constitution, under which these
Ministers are supposed to settle. It is not inconsistent with that
ecclesiastical Constitution, for any Minister to preach in any other Parish
than his own to any Number of Christians on their Desire at any of their
private religious Exercises. -- But I will only Instance in one Particular made
thus Criminal by this Act, which is warranted by that ecclesiastical
Constitution, and the constant Practice of the Churches. The Right Hand of
Fellowship is given at every Ordination, in which the Ministers and Churches
concerned, do solemnly promise to esteem and treat the Person ordained as a
duly authorized Minister of CHRIST, and to be ready on all Occasions to own him
as such, and to assist him in his Work: In Consequence of these solemn
Promises, Ministers and Churches have looked upon themselves under such
Obligations to each other, that if one of these Ministers judges he has real
Need of Assistance in preaching, from another (where these mutual Obligations
take Place) he has Right to ask it, though the Church does not join with him in
it, and the Church's so hearing him preach they have always judged (and therein
they have judged truly) is acting but agreeable to those previous Obligations
they have laid themselves under to him, to treat him as an authorized Minister
of CHRIST, and to hold Communion with him as such; one Way of doing which, is
certainly hearing the Word from him. So that it is plain, one Minister's
preaching for another upon his Desire, though the Church joins not in it, is at
least well consistent with the Ecclesiastical Constitution (and I need say no
more of it in this Argument) under which these Ministers are supposed to
settle, according to the Objection: and therefore no Forfeiture is made, by
such an Action, of the Benefit of the Laws made in Favor of the ecclesiastical
Constitution. -- They have Right to this Benefit so long (at least) as they act
consistently with that ecclesiastical Constitution under which they settled. --
The Act, disallowed by this Law, and for which they are deprived of this
Benefit, is consistent with that Constitution. -- In this Manner therefore
(...) deprive them of it, is to take it away while their Right to it in Equity
remains good. This, you see, I have said on the Supposition, those Laws are to
be considered only as Acts of Grace, as laid in the Objection. But then I say
in the next Place --

2. The Laws here referred to, made for the Support of the Gospel Ministry, are
not Acts of Grace; they are no other than what the Legislature though it themselves
obliged to make. If the civil Authority of a State are obliged to take Care for
the Support of Religion, or in other Words, of Schools and the Gospel Ministry,
in order to their approving themselves nursings Fathers, (as, I suppose, every
Body will own, and therefore I shall not spend any Time in proving it) then the
Law especially referred to is not an Act of Grace. It was what the Legislature
judged most just, easy, and equal for the People, safe and easy for the
Minister, who is to give himself wholly to his Work; or in a Word, best for the
People and the Minister, that Contracts should be so made, so binding and so
performed; for both People and Minister are concerned in the Act. I don't say,
the Legislature could not have provided as well in some other Way: this is no
Ways necessary to be supposed in the Case. But as they were obliged to make
some good Provision in the Case, both with respect to the People who are to
pay, and the Minister who is to receive, so in their Wisdom they fixed on that
Method, as what was good for the whole. It Is therefore no more an Act of Gra^e,
than any Act of the Legislature respecting any civil Interests or Contracts of
the Subject. What the public Good calls for therein, they are obliged to do:
And the Acts they make in Pursuance thereof are no Acts of Grace, but (strictly
speaking) of Debt to the People. And as the Act, referred to, is not an Act of
Grace, so this Law brings a Punishment, not only on the Minister, as before
observed, but on the People too, by letting them loose from their Agreement
with their Minister, the now supposed Offender. For the Minister remaining with
the People, they have a new Contract to make, and must take some other Method
for performing it, than what the Law in the former Case had provided: And from
the known strait-handed Disposition in too many toward the Support of the
Gospel, it must needs follow, that the Burden of the Support of it must lie
much more unequally upon the People, and perhaps on but a very few. As this is
the certain Consequence, so is it a Certainty, that an innocent People are
punished, with their Minister, by this Law. -- Besides, how the letting a
People loose from their solemn Agreements with their Minister, for an Action
never supposed criminal before this Law was made, and is certainly no Violation
of the Contract he made with them, can consist with Justice and Equity, is
beyond the Ken of ordinary Understandings: which I might have argued from as a
distinct Head; but it is sufficient to observe it as I pass, it lying now in my
Way. -- To return, As the Punishment is extraordinary, so is the Manner of
inflicting it extraordinary too, viz. The Minister of the Parish where he shall
so offend, or the civil Authority or any two of the Committee of such Parish,
sending an Information thereof in Writing under their Hands to the Clerk of the
Parish where such offending Minister does belong, this does the Business at
once, as appears by the third Paragraph in the Act. -- So that merely from the
Information of one Person (as it may be) of a different Persuasion in Religion,
and inclined from a Party-Spirit to oppress, or one that has a personal
Prejudice against a Minister, given to the Clerk of a Parish (whether true or
false) the Minister is deprived of his Livelihood. Thus the Business is
effected without any Formality of a legal Trial, or the Shadow of it. This, as
I take it, is directly contrary to the Privileges of an Englishman contained
in Magna Charta, which has cost our Predecessors Rivers of Blood to defend, and
transmit down as sacred to their Descendants. If such a Law as condemns a Man
without hearing him, deserves to be expunged the Records of a free People (I
might say, any; such a Law being a Scandal to human Nature) I leave you to say,
what Fate such a Law as this before us deserves.

V. I observe, by the second Paragraph of this Law, any Association of
Ministers are subjected to the beforementioned Penalty, That shall undertake
to examine or license any Candidate for the Ministry, or assume to themselves
the Decision of any Controversy, or to counsel and advise in any Affair that by
the Say-Brook Platform is within the Province and Jurisdiction of any other
Association: Then and in such Case every Member that shall be present in such
Association so licensing, deciding or counselling, shall be each and every of
them denied and secluded the Benefit of any Law of this Colony made for the
Support and Encouragement of the Gospel Ministry. Now this is subjecting Men to
a heavy Punishment, for no Crime against the civil State, nay for Deeds in
themselves good, and such as may be very serviceable to the Interests of
Religion, as well as what may happen to be otherwise; for so the Acts of any
Association sometimes may be, that are allowed of by this Law.

As they who drew up the Platform, though it it would be best for the Candidates of
the Ministry to be examined, so they no doubt though it every Association had Men
of Learning and Fidelity to do it: and if it were done by any of them, the
great End proposed in such Examination would be answered. And suppose the
Association of New London County should examine and license a Candidate, that
belonged to the New Haven Association, may it not be supposed it would be as
well done, and as well answer the End, as if done in New Haven. Or if a Parish
within the District of New Haven Association, destitute of a Minister, should
after they had tried one Candidate and another, which they had been advised to
by the Association, and not suited by any of them, ask Advice of New London
Association, and they advise them to one within their Limits, who they judge
well qualified for the Ministry, whom upon Trial they judge so too, and so are
well suited in a Minister, what Harm comes of this? or what Iniquity was there
in the Act of New London Association advising in that Case? How often have
Churches found it needful to do so, and Religion been served by it? How often
have they gone out of the Colony for such Advice, and the Ministers of the
Massachusetts advised Churches in Connecticut in such a Case, on their
Application for it; and so on the contrary, Ministers in Connecticut, advised
Churches in the Massachusetts? Where lies the Difference! or was this always
criminal in its own Nature! or if not, why should a whole Association of
Ministers, for doing what I have above instanced in, be stripped of their
Livings, as it seems by this Law they must! And what is more extraordinary
still, a Minister's merely being present when it is done, renders him liable to
this Punishment, whether he has any Hand in it or no; nay, for ought appears,
if he should protest against it, yet he escapes no Part of the Penalty. The
Crime, it seems, is of such a Nature, that if a Man be in the same Room, though
he protests against the Action, he is still equally faulty with the Actors: for
since he is equally punished, he must be supposed equally faulty. I don't
imagine, you will envy any (...) of Men the Glory of such a rare Invention. --
But to finish on this Head; -- Nothing is more evident, than that such an
Examination or Advice, now instanced in, does not touch the civil Peace; and
certainly therefore, the civil Authority go out of their Line to make this
penal Law. And how near this comes to turning Judgment into Wormwood, may
deserve the serious Consideration of some.

VI. The fourth Paragraph respects a licensed Candidate's or any Layman's
publicly preaching and exhorting in any Parish, not desired in such Manner as
expressed in the first Paragraph. On which I shall but briefly observe, that
the Words expressive of the Offense, are of so loose or general Signification,
as that a Person merely for religious Discourse, or the most savoury Advice,
seasonably and prudently given at any private religious Meeting of Christians,
is liable to be treated as an Offender; and if I have not been misinformed,
there have been Instances of this: However that be, there is Danger of it. Or
if a Man going into any public House, should hear a Company talking profanely
and wickedly, and thereupon seriously lay open their Sin, and gravely advise
them thereupon, he would be liable to be treated as an Offender; and as the
Hands may be, into which he might happen to fall, he would not escape it. But
further, if it be supposed such Preaching and Exhorting there referred to, be a
Disorder sometimes, yet it is not always so: but whenever it is so (unless you
suppose it done to the Interruption of some lawful Assembly) it is no Breach of
the Peace, and comes not under civil Cognizance. Such disorderly Persons ought
to be proceeded against in an ecclesiastical Manner, agreeable to the Laws of
CHRIST.

VII. I come now to the last Paragraph, which runs thus: That if any Foreigner
or Stranger that is not an Inhabitant within this Colony, including as well
such Persons, that have no ecclesiastical Character, or License to preach, as
such as have received Ordination or License to preach by any Association or
Presbytery, shall presume to preach, teach or publicly to exhort in any Town
or Society within this Colony, without the Desire and License of the settled
Minister and the major Part of the Church of such Town or Society; or at the
Call and Desire of the Church and Inhabitants of such Town or Society, provided
that it so happen that there is no settled Minister there; that every such
Teacher or Exhorter shall be sent (as a vagrant Person) by Warrant from any one
Assistant or Justice of the Peace from Constable to Constable, out of the
Bounds of this Colony. Since which, you tell me, there has been last October an
Addition made viz. That whosoever thus offends shall pay the Costs of his
Transportation; and if he returns again and offends in such Sort, it is made
the Duty of any Assistant or Justice of the Peace that shall be informed
thereof, to cause such Person to be apprehended and brought before him, and if
found guilty, to give Judgment that such Person shall become bound in the penal
Sum of an hundred Pounds lawful Money, to his peaceable and good Behavior
until the next County Court, in the County where the Offense shall be
committed, and that such Person will not offend again in like Manner; and the
County Court may (if they see Cause) further bind etc. during their Pleasure.
-- Occasioned, as I am informed, by that good Gentleman Mr. Finl^y's coming at
the Direction of a Presbytery in the New Jersey Government, who had been
applied to for a Minister, and preaching to a Presbyterian Church at Milford,
who had joined themselves to that Presbytery, and put themselves under their
Care; for which being transported out of the Government, he returned and
preached to a congregational Church at New Haven, who had been allowed, as well
as the former at Milford, to be a Society for the worshipping of God, by the
County Court at New Haven, by Virtue of a Law formerly made for the Ease of
such as soberly dissent from the Way of Worship and Ministry established by the
Laws of Connecticut; and for this he was adjudged by the civil Authority to
(...) transported again, which was but in Part effected through the Negligence of
some Officer; and, I Am told, he returned and preached again. -- This his
Preaching and Exhorting, it seems, greatly disquieted and disturbed the People;
as the Preamble to this Act expresses it. -- Is it not strange, the preaching
of that peaceable and humble Christian (as you confess his Behavior bespoke
him to be while in the Colony) unto a Number of People, who had Right to hear
the Gospel preached from him, should greatly disquiet and disturb such as had
their Choice in hearing others! Or could it disquiet and disturb any Minds
except such as cannot bear their Christian Neighbors should enjoy their
unalienable Rights! -- But to return to the before mentioned last Paragraph, I
observe, that any Stranger, not an Inhabitant in the Colony, who has received
Ordination or License to preach from any ASSOCIATION or PRESBYTERY, that shall
presume to preach undesired, as expressed in the Paragraph, is liable to be
treated as a Vagrant, unworthy to tread on that Spot of Earth: But if he should
happen to be licensed by the Patriarch of Greece, a Super-intendant of Denmark,
or any Bishop, he may escape the Lash of this Law. If the coming in of a
Stranger and preaching in such a Manner be such a Breach of the Peace, as is
punishable by the State, why should there be such Partiality? Why should Dr.
Watts's preaching in such Manner in Connecticut be a greater Crime, because
ordained by a Presbytery, than any other Stranger's doing so that was licensed
by a Patriarch or Bishop, etc. -- However, that is much less to be wondered at,
than such Treatment as this Law subjects orthodox Ministers to, even the best
Ministers of Christ upon Earth, for a mere Nonconformity to a certain Point of
Order, that never took Place (I suppose) in any Church upon Earth.

But to be as brief as may be in the Consideration of this Paragraph; Let the
Question be, if you please, exactly according to the Words, viz. Whether a
civil State has rightful Authority to banish or thrust out a confessedly
orthodox Minister of Jesus Christ, though a Foreigner or Stranger, for only
preaching the Gospel to a Number, without the Desire of the Incumbent, and
major Part of the Church in the Parish wherein he shall so preach; the said
Minister being supposed to have a Right to Protection, and a Right to remain in
that State, until he does something to forfeit it? -- I have truly stated it,
because I have mentioned the very supposed Crime for which such Foreigners or
Strangers are to be thrust out of the Government; and I must necessarily
suppose them true or orthodox Ministers of Christ, because this Law supposes
them so, since it speaks of such as are ordained or licensed by any Association
or Presbytery not within that Government; which includes all such as are on
this Continent, as well as Great Britain (at least) all of which are esteemed
orthodox. I put in the last Words, because they really relate to the Subjects
of the King of Great Britain, from whom the Government holds it Charter, and so
to any Persons in the Plantations, as well as on the Isle of Great Britain, who
have a Right therefore to be treated as Englishmen, or Fellow Subjects under
King GEORGE, and so may be truly said to have a Right to remain in the Colony,
in such a Sense as you will not allow to any belonging to another Kingdom. I
don't mention this because I would go into the Consideration of what particular
Powers may be in your Charter, different from others; though I confess, I cannot
find any Words in your Charter, that express or imply a Power to do any Thing
that is pretended to be done by this Law, to establish or regulate by Law any
Matters of an ecclesiastical Nature, to impose any civil Pains or Penalties in
Matters of Conscience, relating to the Worship of God. But neither your Colony,
nor any other in the King's Dominions, have any rightful Authority to do as is
here supposed, according to the Question, as I have truly stated it. Let me
here take a plain Case to illustrate the Point. Wickliff arose a Light in
England, while Popery prevailed: be it supposed, he instructed a few in the
Truth, but neither Bishop nor Incumbent of the Parish would give Leave for his
preaching. However, he goes on preaching the Gospel, and the People will hear
him. In this Case, the King and Parliament had no rightful Authority to banish
Wickliff, or turn him out from the Island, for his so preaching. For, as has
been already shown in the preceding Pages, the End of civil Government being
the Preservation of Person and Property, it would be a plain departing from the
End of civil Government, to inflict any Punishment on Wickliff for his so
preaching. What the civil Authority is obliged to defend and secure, is not
hurt at all by the supposed Action of Wickliff; and it is really acting against
the Design of the civil Magistrate's Trust, to hurt an innocent Subject. --
Besides, the Right of private Judgment in Matters of Religion being
unalienable, and what the civil Magistrate is rather obliged to protect his
Subjects equally in, both Wickliff, and they who desired to hear him, had a
just Right to remain where they were, in the Enjoyment of that Right, free from
all Molestation from any Persons whatsoever; agreeable to what has been
sufficiently evidenced in the foregoing Pages. -- On the other Hand, see the
Absurdity of supposing that the civil Magistrate had rightful Authority to have
sent away Wickliff. If the Magistrate had Right to send him away because the
standing Clergy were unwilling he should preach (that being one of the Cases
supposed in this Law) then the civil Authority must have had equal Right to
send any other such Person away, as fast as they appeared; and consequently
they must be supposed to have had rightful Authority to hold their Subjects in
the worst Slavery, i.e. to keep them from the Exercise of their private
Judgment in Matters of Religion; a Power to do which never was nor could be
vested in the civil Magistrate, by the People, by any original Compact, which
is truly supposed the Foundation of all civil Government. It alters not the
Nature of civil Government, whether the Magistrate be Protestant or Papist,
Christian or Pagan. What of Right appertains to the civil Magistrate by Virtue
of his Office, must also necessarily belong to him, though Popish, or Heathen.
The Supposal therefore that the civil Magistrate in England at that Day had
rightful Authority to have sent away Wickliff, for preaching the Gospel without
Leave of the Clergy, is big with too great an Absurdity, for a consistent
Protestant to swallow. Suppose then these Colonies to have existed at that
Time, or Great Britain and these Colonies Popish now, as Great Britain was
then, and Wickliff to come into any of them and preach in some Parish without
the Consent of the Incumbent, at the Desire of a Number of People, it is
certain, in this Case none of these Colonies could have any rightful Authority
to thrust him out of their Borders, or do any Thing like it. -- The same
Reasons must conclude against these Colonies Authority to transport him, for
coming and preaching now without an Incumbent's Leave at the Desire of a
Number, as in the former Case; the same Principles and Reasoning will hold
equally true, applied to any such Instance as now before us, any Time since the
Reformation from Popery. The civil Peace is no Ways broken by this Action of
preaching, of which we are speaking: But indeed if any should take Occasion
from it, to contend and quarrel with their Neighbors, as Papists and Heathens
have sometimes done, the Apostle ( James 4.1.) has shown us the true Spring
thereof, the Lusts in Men's Hearts; the Outbreakings of which in Injuries to
their Neighbors, fall under the civil Magistrate's Cognizance. -- And the
Rights of Conscience and private Judgment in Matters of Religion are
unalterably the same: And it is a Scandal to Christians, to contend and quarrel
with their Neighbors for enjoying them, and inexcusable in a Protestant State
to make any Infringement upon them. And it was on these very Principles, which
I here Advance (and by which this Law must fall) that our first Reformers
acted, and on which all Reformations must be built. And though our Nation in
Times past under the Influence of a bigoted Clergy, and arbitrary weak or
popish Princes, have made Laws founded on Principles contrary to these I have
been pleading for; yet they seem in a great Measure rooted out of the Nation:
and these Principles of Truth have taken Root, and been growing ever since the
happy Revolution, and Act of Toleration; and it is to be hoped, will prevail and
spread more and more, until all spiritual Tyranny, and lording it over the
Consciences of Men, be banished out of the World.

But I shall finish with observing, That by Virtue of the Act of Toleration,
all his Majesty's Subjects are so freed from the Force of all Coercive Laws in
Matters of Religion, relating to Worship and Discipline, that they act their
own private Judgment, without Restraint: -- That any Number of Christians,
greater or less, hear any Protestant Minister they desire, without Control
from the Will of others, or Authority of the civil State: -- Since this is the
Case, and withal as plain as the Sun in the Meridian, that where such a Law as
this I have been considering, takes Place, There People are abridged of that
Christian Liberty, which the same Persons would enjoy under the present
Constitution, if they were in England. And how far therefore it falls short of
denying and secluding them from the Benefit of the Act of Toleration, I leave
you to say, who well know, that it is expressly provided by the Terms of your
Charter, that the Laws to be made in Virtue of it, shall not be contrary to the
Laws of England. This Right of private Judgment and Liberty now mentioned, is
confessed and secured to you by that Law which was the Glory of the Reign of
WILLIAM and MARY; but by your Law now before me, it is denied to you. How you
will clear it from a Contrariety to the former, I know not. Nor is this about a
trivial Matter, or what is dependent upon the Will of your Legislature. The
Rights of Magna Charta depend not on the Will of the Prince, or the Will of the
Legislature; but they are the inherent natural Rights of Englishmen: secured
and confirmed they may be by the Legislature, but not derived from nor
dependent on their Will. And if there be any Rights, any Privileges, that we
may call natural and unalienable, this is one, viz. the Right of private
Judgment, and Liberty of worshipping God according to our Consciences, without
control from human Laws. A Privilege more valuable than the civil Rights of
Magna Charta. -- This we hold, not from Man, but from GOD: which therefore no
Man can touch and be innocent. And all the Invaders of it will certainly find,
when they shall stand at his Bar, from whom we hold this, that CHRIST will be
King in his own Kingdom. -- In the mean Time, it stands Christians in Hand to
hold fast this Privilege, and to be on their Guard against all Attempts made
upon it. And I doubt not, those Ministers who were apprehensive of this, and
freely addressed the Legislative Body of Connecticut (as I hear was done
October 1742.) for a Repeal of this Law, did therein what was pleasing to their
great Lord and Master which is in Heaven. They acted becoming such as durst not
themselves, and were willing to do what lay in their Power that others might
not, Lord it over God's Heritage. Not that I would insinuate, that there were
no others like-minded with them -- but that therein they set an excellent
Example for others to copy after, and what was proper to awaken the Attention
of Christians. It has commonly been the Case, that Christian Liberty, as well
as Civil, has been lost by little and little; and Experience has taught, that
it is not easy to recover it, when once lost. So precious a Jewel is always to
be watched with a careful Eye: for no People are likely to enjoy Liberty long,
that are not zealous to preserve it. -- As a real Friend to it, I have given
you my Thoughts with Freedom and Plainness, as you desired. If they prove
satisfying to you, and you judge that they may be any Ways serviceable to the
Cause of Truth and Christian Liberty, you may use them for that Purpose as you
shall think best.

I am etc. Philalethes.
Eleutheropolis, March 30. 1744.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 21 for then, read hence. p. 15 l.12 r. other -- l.14 f. are, r.
is. l. 21 r. Acts. l. last r. In these -- p.17 l.18 r. Relation -- p.20 l. last
but one, for or, r. of. p.24 l. 7 r. it is. p.25 l.29 r. infers -- p. 32 l.23
r. and to -- p.33 l.19 r. griev -- p.34 l.13 f. Now, r. But -- p.39 l.19 r. it
follows. p.44 l.25 r. every Man -- p.45 l.21 r. unspeakable -- p.47 l.7 r.
enjoin. l.11 r. as for -- p.48. l.13 r. them, by -- p.49 l.18 r. infers an --
p.51 l.23 r. make -- p.52 l.30 dele if -- p.56 l.35 r. nursing --


