GRACE Defended, IN A Modest PLEA FOR AN Important TRUTH; NAMELY, That the
OFFER of SALVATION made to Sinners in the Gospel, comprises in it an OFFER of
the Grace given in REGENERATION.

AND SHOWING the Consistency of this Truth with the FREE and SOVEREIGN GRACE of
GOD, in the whole Work of Man's Salvation.

IN WHICH The Doctrine of ORIGINAL SIN and HUMANE IMPOTENCE, the Object and
Extent of REDEMPTION, the Nature of REGENERATION, the Difference between COMMON
and SPECIAL GRACE, the Nature of justifying FAITH, and other IMPORTANT POINTS,
are considered and cleared.

By Experience Mayhew.

Isai. lvii.14. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the Way, take up the stumbling
Block out of the Way of my People. Psalm. lxxxv.10. Mercy and Truth are met
together, etc. BOSTON: Printed by B. GREEN, and Company, for D. HENCHMAN, in
Cornhil. 1744.

THE PREFACE.
TRUTH is a very precious Jewel: Taken in general it is so; but that which is
emphatically called the Truth, is so more especially: I mean that which is
revealed to a sinful and perishing World, with Respect to a Way of Salvation by
a Redeemer; and which is indeed no other than the Gospel.

That was therefore good Advice of the wise Man, Buy the Truth, and sell it
not: And that was a very excellent Saying of the great Apostle, We can do
nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

Indeed there are many who are apt to make such a Profession, who cannot do it
on so good Grounds as the holy Apostle did. But I remember a Saying of a very
worthy Divine Mr. John Robinson.
to this Purpose, That when sober Persons offer to prove by the Word of God
what they say and maintain, we ought, in Honor to the divine Oracles, to show
so much Regard to them, as to examine into the Truth of what they so offer to
confirm.

However uncertain we may be with Respect to many Things, which we have a Call
to take under Consideration; yet I think we may be very sure of this, that the
best and wisest of Men, in their present lapsed State, know but in Part, and
prophesy but in Part; and so had need carry themselves very humbly in all their
Essays for the Ivestigation and Declaration of the Truth; and that the Truth
being such an invaluable Treasure, as is above expressed, it ought not on any
slighty Grounds to be parted with, and suffered to be lost. We are therefore
sometimes called to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints; and to be willing rather to suffer Reproaches, and other Evils, than
that the Cause of Truth should suffer through our Neglect. That is, in a good
Sense, a Truth concerning all Christians, but especially the Ministers of
CHRIST, who are set for the Defense of the Gospel, and made Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, viz. For this End was I born, and for this Cause came I into
the World, that I should bear Witness to the Truth.

As for the following Essay, whatever Censure I may fall under on the Account
of it, I think it has not been rashly undertaken, or engaged in; it being the
Result of many Years serious Enquiry after the Truth; and I have in it
endeavored, in my poor Manner, to imitate the noble Bereans, who received the
Word with all Readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether
those Things which they heard preached were so.

I have been from my Youth naturally inclined to endeavor to understand what I
believe; and why I believe this or that Proposition to be true: And yet I very
readily acknowledge, That when any Proposition is evidently delivered in the
Scriptures of Truth, I ought for that Reason to believe it to be true, though I
cannot fully comprehend the same, and am not able to answer all Objections that
can be made against it: But then I must be sure that it is indeed delivered in
the divine Oracles, -- in which Case every Though It should be captivated to the
Obedience of CHRIST.

In the little Reading for which I have had Leisure and Opportunity, I have
been chiefly conversant in the Writings of Calvinists; yet I confess I have
endeavored not to be wholly ignorant of the Principles of those who embrace or
incline to the Arminian Hypothesis; and have always preferred the Former as
much the best of the Two: So that I cannot justly be looked upon as
endeavoring to overthrow the First, and establish the Other. This is what I do
not at all intend; but what I endeavor is, to remove some Things out of the
Way, commonly asserted by Calvinists, which I think may be dismissed from their
Hypothesis, being no Ways necessary in order to the Support of the principal
Articles in that Scheme; but on the contrary, render it the more difficult to
be received and defended. And what I to this End advance, I humbly submit to
the Censure of the Learned and Judicious.

What is principally insisted on in this Essay, is, That the Offer of Salvation
made to Sinners in the Gospel, does comprise in it an Offer, or conditional
Promise, of the Grace given in Regeneration. I believe there is as really a
conditional Offer of this made to sinful Men, in the Gospel of the Son of GOD,
as there is of Pardon of Sin, Justification, etc. In this I think I differ from
most that are in the calvinian Scheme: And I confess I was for many Years
otherwise minded; but while I endeavored to defend what I then believed, the
Objections that offered themselves to my Mind against what I had admitted as
true, prevailed on me first to doubt of it, and by Degrees to receive the
Doctrine I now endeavor to defend: And if I make good what I assert, I think I
do not therein diminish, but exalt GOD's Grace.

I for several Years endeavored in a more private Way to get Satisfaction in
these Points, wherein I was fallen into a Way of thinking somewhat different
from many others, before I entertained any Tho'ts of publishing my Sentiments.
I frequently discoursed with, and sometimes wrote to learned Divines,
concerning the Matters here discoursed of; and had, I think, no Matter of
Conviction that I was under any Mistakes; much less, that I had advanced any
dangerous Errors. And I cannot deny but that some pious and learned Divines
have spoken somewhat favorably of my Hypothesis, and have expressed their
Willingness that I should, by the Press, show my Opinion.

I have in this Essay, endeavored not to provoke or offend any Person
whatsoever; and now profess, that I greatly respect and honor those, whose
Sentiments differ from some of mine, discovered in this Discourse: And I have
therefore chosen rather to argue on the Things considered, than meddle with the
Persons from whose Opinions I dissent.

And after all that I have said for the Support of my own Hypothesis, (in the
Explanation of which I have endeavored to be very free and open) I think I am
fully resolved seriously to weigh every Thing that shall be offered for my
Conviction, according to the best of my Skill and Judgment; and I hope if I am
in an Error, my Fault is not unpardonable.

I also hope, that if I am wrong in any of my Sentiments, I have taken such
Care to secure the fundamental Articles in the Doctrine of Grace, that Men's
Souls will not be endangered by any Thing advanced in this Attempt to set some
Things in a clearer Light than they seem to me to be set in, in such Books as I
have had Opportunity to rend; but it may be through my own Ignorance understand
not.

I have not in this Essay had any Design against the Doctrine of Original Sin,
GOD's eternal Decrees and Providence, the Difference betwixt common and special
Grace, and the Sovereignty of GOD in the Affair of Man's Salvation. For
according to my Hypothesis, as well as that I oppose, that is a great Truth
maintained by the Apostle* Romans ix. It is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of GOD that shows Mercy --. These Things I not only allow,
but occasionally endeavor to defend; though this not being my principal Design,
I have not much enlarged on them: But my main Design is that above expressed.

That what I have (...) in this Treatise, may not appear to be useless to such
as may please to read it, I have endeavored to render it practical, by some
useful Inferences from the (...) ^^^erted in it.

Though this Essay be more especially submitted to the Judgment and Censure of
the Learned, yet I aim at the Good of all Mankind in it; and I have written it,
and do consent to it is Publication, that I might serve my own Generation by the
Will of God. If he approve my Attempt, he can easily give Success to it; if
otherwise, I submit it to him, and say, The Will of the LORD be done.

I have unto the Body of the Treatise herewith emitted, prefixed the Contents
of the general P^rts and Chapters contained in it; of which I request my Reader
to take a view, before he reads the Book itself, whereof he has therein the
Sum. I desire my Reader also to read what I have written, in the Order in which
it is penned, lest otherwise he should mistake my Meaning in some Things, which
in this Discourse I have advanced; and therein prejudice both himself and me,
who sincerely desire to serve him, and glorify the GOD of all Grace.

E. Mayhew.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. UPON the Offer of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel. Page 1.
CHAP. I. Concerning those Sinners, and the State they are in, to whom the
Offer of Salvation is supposed to be made. Here the Doctrine of Original Sin is
considered. P. 1. CHAP. II. Concerning that Salvation, which Sinners are
supposed to have offered to them in the Gospel. P. 27. CHAP. III. Showing what
is imported in Salvation's being offered. Here the Nature of Conditions is
considered. P. 33. CHAP. IV. Proving that there is indeed an Offer, or
conditional Promise of Salvation, made to Sinners in the Gospel. Here the
Object and Extent of CHRIST's Death is considered. P. 40.
PART II. Showing that the Offer of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel,
compriseth in it an Offer of the Grace given in Regeneration. P. 53.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Grace of Regeneration, here said to be conditionally
offered to Sinners. P. 53. CHAP. II. Showing that the Grace of Regeneration is
such an eminent Part of Man's Salvation, that Salvation cannot be offered to
Sinners without an Offer of that. P. 58. CHAP. III. Concerning the Nature of
that Faith and Repentance, etc. to which the Promise of Life and Salvation, is
in this Discourse supposed to be made. Here the Difference betwixt common and
special Grace is considered. P. 61. CHAP. IV. Showing that GOD in offering
JESUS CHRIST with all his Benefits, to sinful Men, must needs offer them the
Grace given in Regeneration. P. 67. CHAP. V. That neither the Grace of
Regeneration, nor any Act flowing from it, or in which it is implied, is the
Condition on which Salvation is offered: And consequently, the same must be
comprehended in the Salvation offered to Sinners. P. 71. CHAP. VI. The Offer of
Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel, is an Offer of bringing them into a
State of Salvation: And consequently, must comprise in it an Offer of
regenerating Grace. P. 86. CHAP. VII. Their being an inseparable Connection
between all spiritual Blessings, or everlasting Mercies, hence whenever any one
of these is offered to Sinners, all the rest are intended: And consequently,
the Grace of Regeneration. P. 87. CHAP. VIII. That those exceeding great and
precious Promises by which we may be Partakers of the divine Nature, are
conditional Promises of the Grace of Regeneration. Here those Promises commonly
said to be absolute, are considered. P. 89. CHAP. IX. That the conditional
Promises made in Scripture, That such as seek GOD, and his special Favor,
shall find Him, do contain or imply in them an Offer of the Grace of
Regeneration. P. 97. CHAP. X. That the conditional Promises of the HOLY SPIRIT,
which we have in the Oracles of GOD, do comprise or imply in them Offers of
converting Grace. P. 99. CHAP. XI. That the Offers made to Sinners of the Water
of Life, in the Gospel, are Offers of the saving Graces of the SPIRIT. P. 104.
CHAP. XII. Those conditional Offers of spiritual Wisdom, which are made to
Sinners in the Word of GOD, are Offers of a Principle of saving Grace or
Holiness. P. 107. CHAP. XIII. That the conditional Promises of special Mercy,
made to such as come to JESUS CHRIST, do contain or imply in them a Promise of
regenerating Grace. P. 117. CHAP. XIV. That there are conditional Promises made
in the Gospel, to such as persevere and overcome, which contain in them Offers
of the Grace of Regeneration. P. 120. CHAP. XV. The Consideration, That Sinners
do therefore perish because they receive not the Love of the Truth that they
may be saved, applied as an Argument that they have an Offer of a Principle of
true Holiness made to them. P. 131. CHAP. XVI. Showing that the Doctrine
pleaded for in this Part of my Essay, is very consistent with that of Men's
utter Inability, while in a State of Nature, to perform any truly holy Actions
whatsoever. P. 135. CHAP. XVII. That Grace is not given according to Works, is
no Ways inconsistent with the Hypothesis by me defended. P. 142. CHAP. XVIII.
That the best Actions of the Unregenerate are not properly called Sins; nor are
they incapable of being Conditions of the Covenant of Grace. P. 148. CHAP. XIX.
The Doctrine pleaded for, no Ways inconsistent with that of Praedestination,
and the sovereign Freedom of the Grace of GOD in the Salvation of his Elect. P.
153. CHAP. XX. That Persons who have long resisted and quenched the HOLY
SPIRIT, and so provoked him to depart from them, may at last seek earnestly for
Mercy, and not obtain it, no Argument against what I plead for. Here of the
unpardonable Sin. P. 163. CHAP. XXI. Wherein the Power of Man, with Relation to
the Condition on which Salvation is offered to him in the Gospel, is further
considered. P. 170.
PART III. That the Doctrine maintained in the two former Parts of this Essay,
is a Truth of very great Importance, and many Ways useful. P. 177.
CHAP. I. The FIRST USE of the Truth asserted, that it gives Light to many
Texts of Scripture, which cannot be well understood without it. P. 178. CHAP.
II. The SECOND USE of the Truth maintained, that it renders the Offers of
Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel, very plain and intelligible. P. 182.
CHAP. III. The THIRD USE of the Doctrine insisted on, that it gives us a very
pleasant and endearing View and Prospect of the unparalled Love of GOD, in
finding out, providing and revealing such a Way of Salvation, as that made
known in the Gospel. P. 186. CHAP. IV. The FOURTH USE of the Truth insisted on,
the Encouragement given to awakened Sinners, to seek earnestly to GOD for his
special Mercy. P. 189. CHAP. V. The FIFTH USE of the Truth maintained, that it
takes from all those who refuse the great Salvation offered in the Gospel,
every Plea in Excuse for themselves. P. 192. CHAP. VI. The SIXTH USE of the
Truth pleaded for, that being allowed, it does, without any Disadvantage to the
calvinian Scheme, remove out of the Way the greatest Difficulty that attends
it; and renders it more easy to be received and defended. P. 194. CHAP. VII.
The SEVENTH USE of the Doctrine pleaded for, an Exhortation, with Directions,
to such as are yet in a State of Nature, to comply with the Terms on which
Salvation is offered to them in the Gospel. P. 199.
Advertisement.
WHEREAS, in PART I. CHAP. I. Page 12. of this Essay, I have professed my
Assent to what is asserted by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, in their
Shorter Catechism, viz. That The Covenant being made with Adam, not only for
himself, but for his Posterity, all Mankind proceeding from him by ordinary
Generation, sinned in him, and fell with him, in his first Transgression; I
have, on a Review of the Sheets printed off before the Writing of this
Advertisement, chosen to express my Sense rather in the Words here following,
than those of the Assembly referred to, viz. That the Covenant being made with
Adam, not for himself only, as an individual Person, but for the whole human
Species then in him, the Consequence hereof was, that all Mankind proceeding
from him by ordinary Generation, sinned in him, and fell with him, in his first
Transgression.

This being my true and only Sense in the Place referred to, I desire that all
other Passages in the Book, of the like Import, may be understood with this
Explanation.

GRACE Defended.
PART I.
The first Part of that Defense of the Grace of GOD which, in this Essay, I am
attempting, is to show,

That Sinners have, in the Gospel, an Offer of Salvation made to them.

CHAP. I. Concerning those Sinners, and the State they are in, to whom the
Offers of Salvation are here supposed to be made.
THAT we may understand what we say, and whereof we affirm, in this first Part
of my Discourse, we must in the first Place consider,

Who the Sinners are, and in what Condition, to whom Salvation is supposed to
be offered in the Gospel.

To this then I say in general, That the Sinners here intended, are such as all
Mankind fallen in Adam, by Nature, are; or as considered in that Estate, into
which the Fall has brought them. I do not here say, That the Offer of Salvation
is made to all that are in this Estate; but that all unto whom the Offer of
Salvation is supposed to be made, are of this Number; and such an Estate as
this they all, by their Fall and Apostasy from God, have been plunged into.

Now, that this is a very miserable and wretched Estate, is by all Calvinists
acknowledged; and in this I fully agree with them; and shall endeavor, as
briefly as I can, to show wherein the Misery of this Estate does consist. And
to this End, I shall here take a short View of the Wretchedness of that Estate,
into which Mankind have, by their Apostasy, brought themselves.

To this End, the first Thing I shall observe, is, That the Sin of our first
Parents in eating the forbidden Fruit, was exceeding great and heinous. It was
a Sin against an express and positive Command of God, immediately and plainly
given to them by God himself, to which they were, on their Peril, required to
yield Obedience, Genesis 2.17. So that it was a Sin against Light and Knowledge,
and a very presumptuous Sin. It was also a Sin against the most endearing
Discoveries of the Goodness of God to them. God had newly created them in his
own Image and Likeness, Genesis 1.26, 27. and in his Favor, with Dominion over
the Works of his Hands; and had plainly enough, for them to understand,
promised Life to them on Condition of their Obedience to him; though this Promise
was only implied in the contrary Threatening, Genesis 2.17. They wanted not Power
to keep this Commandment; but might have continued in their Obedience to it, if
they had watched and prayed, that they might not have fallen into Temptation;
and endeavored to withstand the same: This, I think, none will deny. They had
no Need to eat of the Fruit forbidden them, ^^ving Plenty enough besides, no
other Trees in that rich and plentiful Garden being denied to them. They had no
Need, nor Warrant, to seek after a better Condition, at present, than that they
were in. They had, no doubt, before they had sinned, enjoyed happy Communion
with God, and one with another. They had no Warrant to hold a Parley with the
Serpent endeavoring to entice them from their Obedience and Allegiance to
their Creator and sovereign Lord; much less to believe him in what he said, in
direct Opposition to that God that cannot Lie; and follow his Conduct, in
direct Opposition to the divine Command.

It was enough for them that God had created them in his own Image, in Respect
of Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness. They should not have aspired to have
been more like God in Knowledge, than he made them, or rather to be equal to
him, as in Genesis 2.5, 6. Nor should they have taken Part with the Devil to this
End. Thus heinous was their Transgression; and much more might here be said.
This is that Sin of Adam, which is, by Calvinists, supposed to be imputed to
his Posterity, which I, at present, take for granted, but may consider
hereafter.

What I shall here next mention, shall be some of the immediate and necessary
Effects, or Consequents of this now mentioned heinous Sin: I mean such
Consequents as followed naturally from the Crime committed, without any
Consideration of the Threatening denounced, in Case of Disobedience: That shall
anon be considered. Now this could not but produce extraordinary Shame and
Horror, unless God had (which was not the Case) given up the Offenders to a
most unaccountable Stupidity. I suppose God had a Design to make the Promise of
the Seed that was to break the Serpent's Head, Genesis 3.15. very welcome to them.

We may accordingly see what Shame and Confusion of Face seized on them, Genesis
3.7, 8, 9, 10. And the Eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they
were naked; and they sewed Fig Leaves together, and made themselves Aprons. And
they heard the Voice of the Lord God, walking in the Garden, in the Cool of the
Day: And Adam and his Wife hid themselves from the Presence of the Lord God,
among the Trees of the Garden. And God called unto Adam, and said unto him,
Where art thou? And he said, I heard thy Voice in the Garden: And I was afraid;
because I was naked, and I hid my self. Nor did the Shame or Confusion which
these Offenders were thus in, arise wholly, (if principally) from the
Threatening that had been denounced; but very much, (especially their Shame)
from a Sense of the most vile Wickedness whereof they had been guilty. This
seems evident from the Question God put to Adam, ver. 11. And he said, Who told
thee that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the Tree, whereof I commanded
thee that thou should not eat.

So heinous was this Offense, which was by these committed, that they could not
but be in great Horror on the Account of it; though they had though it nothing of the
Evil threatened against them. Nor could they have had any great Reason to hope
for a Pardon, though they had never been threatened; and though they could not have
known what Punishment God would have laid on them: And yet I acknowledge, there
would not have been Ground for utter Despair.

I shall therefore now come to consider their Guilt, as this signifies an
Obligation lving on them to b^^r the Punishment due to them by Virtue of that
Sanction of the Law, In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
Guilt, I think, may be taken, either for a Person's being truly chargeable with
some Sin or Crime; and this the Persons were, of whom I here speak, of which
before: Or it may be taken for that Obligation, by which the Offender is bound
to suffer the Penalty due to him for his Offense; and this is that which I am
here to consider in the Case before me. What was intended by the Death
threatened, I am not yet come to take an Account of; but the Nature of the
Obligation, and the Consequences thence arising, is what, at present, I am
upon: And this is expressed in such strong Terms in the Text mentioned, that
the Offenders, I think, had no Grounds given them to hope that the Sentence
might be reversed. I mean, they had not, before the Seed of the Woman was
promised, Genesis 3.15. No wonder then that the Offenders were in such a Plight as
they were, Genesis 3.11.

The Covenant of Works was doubtless given to be a standing Rule, according to
which God was resolved to deal with Mankind; and by which he obliged himself to
give them Life, in Case of constant and perfect Obedience to him, and assured
them that they should die in Case of the least Failure or Disobedience, as by
comparing Genesis 2.17. with Gal. 3.10, 12. and James 2.10. does appear. And God
was pleased to try Man's Obedience in one single Instance, before they had
committed any other Offense against him. Now on this Trial, they most vilely
forsook their Allegiance to him, and wickedly rebelled against him: Which,
having done, for any Thing that did appear, there was nothing to be expected,
but the Execution of the threatened Sentence on them They were for the present
bound over, as the fallen Angels were, with whom they had joined against God,
unto the Judgment of the great Day; and had no Reason to expect any Thing
better than what, in the Threatening, God had denounced against them.

The Day of their Probation was now ended, and the Covenant broken betwixt them
and the great God, and no Repentance or Obedience was by that Covenant now
required of them: Nor had they any other Relation to it, than that of capital
Offenders, doomed to present Death by it: Nor was there yet any Way of Escape
proposed to them; nor, as far as did appear, any Room for God to treat with
them, or they with him, on any Terms of Reconciliation whatsoever.

This was the State in which Mankind now were, and they doubtless were sensible
how Matters stood betwixt God and them; and they had Reason to be filled with
Dread and Amazement, as it seems they were. Nor had they any Room or Hearts to
beg for a Pardon. What a terrible Condition was this? They were, in Respect of
the Sentence pronounced against them, as dead Men, as soon as ever they had
sinned.

But the Misery of these Transgressors will further appear, if we consider what
that Death was, which, by the Sanction of the Law, they were thus bound over
unto. And this I shall now proceed to show; only I shall here first observe,
that the Death threatened against these Transgressors did not, properly
speaking, consist at all in the Obligation they were under to suffer it. For
though such as are under a Sentence of Death, are sometimes spoken of as dead
Men, as was before observed; yet there is a Difference between Men's being
under a Sentence of Death, and their actually dying; or betwixt a Judgment
passed on them, and the Execution of it: However, a Sentence of Death is very
terrible.

And now I may, without any further Delay, show what Death these Malefactors
were by the Law of God sentenced unto. I say then, these were, by the
Threatening annexed to the Law of God, Sentenced to undergo a threefold Death,
which I shall speak something concerning in the Order now to be expressed. And,

1. The first Kind of Death intended in the Threatening, undoubtedly was that
which we commonly call Death spiritual.

That Mankind are by Nature spiritually dead, the Scriptures abundantly
testify: And for the clearing up of what I here assert, I shall show (1.)
Wherein this Death does consist. (2.) That this came on our first Parents as a
Punishment of their Sin, in eating the forbidden Fruit.

(1.) Let us consider wherein this Death consists. Now to this I say, that
this Death consists in the Loss of the Image of God, which Man was created
in, Genesis 1.26, 27. or that Rectitude or Integrity, of which he was the Subject,
when he was in that Estate wherein he was created. Eccl. 7.29. God made Man
upright. This did not consist in the Essence of Man's Soul; for if it had, he
could not have lost it: But it consisted in that habitual Conformity of the
Soul to the holy Nature and Will of God, which was concreated with it, and was
the Bond of its Union with God, while Man enjoyed it; for he that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6.17. This was Man's Life, while he was
in a State of Innocence; and is so again, when he is renewed in Knowledge and
Righteousness after the Image of him that created him, Col. 3.10. Men destitute
of it are said to be alienated from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. To be without
this is Death, Romans 8.6. This Principle of Life is in Scripture called the
divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. The Seed of God, 1 John 3.9. Those who have it not,
have not eternal Life abiding in them, ver. 15. but on the contrary, are dead
in Sins, and in the Uncircumcision of the Flesh, Col. 2.13. When such are said
to be dead; and when their Deprivation of such a divine Principle is called
Death; these Expressions are, I acknowledge, metaphorical; and the Metaphor is
taken from the Likeness which there is, in some Respects, betwixt a proper
Death and this. Men, in this Estate, being as incapable of performing any
Actions that are truly spiritual and holy, as Men naturally dead are of
performing the Actions to which natural Life is required, Rom, 8.6, 7, 8. For
to be carnally minded is Death: But to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace;
because the carnal Mind is Enmity against God: For it is not subject to the Law
of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the Flesh cannot please
God. 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of
God, for they are Foolishness unto him: Neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. This Death does not, properly speaking, consist
either in Men's doing that which they should not, or in omitting or neglecting
that which they should do; but in their Want of such a Principle as is
necessary to their doing that which is, in a strict Sense, holy and good; and
in a right Manner avoiding to do the contrary, i.e. from a Hatred of it, and a
Love to that which is good. This, I think, is too plain to need any
Illustration. Thus briefly of this Kind of Death.

(2.) I am to show, That this came on our first Parents, as a Punishment of
their Sin, and that it belonged to the Death threatened. I say our first
Parents; for as yet I consider not how their Posterity became in this Sense
dead. That Adam and his Wife were thus dead, immediately after they had
committed their first and great Offense, I think to be an evident Truth. If
they had remained habitually holy after they had committed their first Sin,
they would certainly have carried themselves far otherwise than they did. They
would not have attempted to hide themselves from God, as they endeavored to
do, Genesis 3.8. In which they discovered much Atheism, and very wrong Thoughts of
God, from whose Presence it is impossible to hide, Jer. 23.24. Psalm. 39.8, --
12.) instead of lamenting and confessing their heinous Offense, and justifying
God, as by the Law of their Creation, (but not as a Covenant of Works) they
were obliged to do. They most wickedly endeavored to justify themselves, and
cast the Blame of their Fall on the God that made them, ver. 12, 13. So that by
this Carriage of their's, they gave Occasion for such a Reflection on them as
that in Job 31.33. If I covered my Transgression as Adam, by hiding mine
Iniquity in my Bosom. Does it not now appear, that these had, immediately after
their Fall, a very corrupt Nature in them? And indeed, if by Adam's first
Offense all Mankind were made in this Sense Sinners, as in Romans 5.12, and ver.
19. how can it be thought possible that he should himself escape becoming such
an One, when he had committed that heinous Transgression?

But we must a little consider how this came to be the Consequence of our first
Parents committing their first and great Offense. And here I will show, first
negatively, from whence this did not arise; and secondly positively, what was
the Cause of it.

1. Negatively, I say, This did not flow wholly nor principally from the
natural Influence of that Sin, which they had newly committed. Though sinful
Actions naturally produce and increase an Inclination or Disposition to sin yet
more; and if they be often repeated, they beget a strong Habit, inclining the
Transgressors to go on still in their wicked Courses, as in Jer. 13.23. Yet the
Sin of these Persons could not alone utterly eradicate all pious Dispositions
out of their Souls. Sinful Actions diverse Times repeated would scarce of
itself have done this; much less could one single Act of Disobedience have had
such an Influence, if there had been nothing else in the Case; but Adam might,
and it is very probable he would, this notwithstanding, have bitterly bewailed
his Fall, and earnestly begged the Pardon of it; and perhaps have obtained it,
and then had grown more watchful and circumspect in his after Conversation, as
is often the Case of good Men now: But it was far from being thus with him: Sin
had immediately Dominion over him, and reigned in him* Wherefore,

2. The Reason hereof was this, God having threatened he should surely die in
the Day he sinned; and being greatly provoked at him for the horrible
Wickedness he had committed, (of which before) did immediately begin to execute
the Sentence on him, which he was now fallen under: And this he did in the
first Place, by utterly taking his holy Spirit from him; the Consequence of
which was, that he immediately, and without any positive Act of God, infusing
any sinful Dispositions into him, became a most vile Miscreant; a Child of the
Devil, full of all Wickedness.

If we consider these Things following, it will appear that it must needs have
been so. (1.) God had obliged himself by his Word immediately to slay him, if
he sinned against him, with this only Reserve in his own Breast, unless a
Mediator should interpose to offer Satisfaction for his Offense, and reprieve
him from present Destruction. We know certainly by the Event, that there was
this Exception; and the Apostle shows plainly, in Romans 3.25, 26. that God could
not in Justice have spared him, in any other Way. The Threatening was absolute,
and expressed in the strongest Terms; and was to be immediately executed. To
imagine it only showed what the Crime deserved, seems to me to be most vain.
(2.) Man being in such a State of Condemnation, it would not consist with
either the essential, or rectoral Holiness of God, to hold any such Communion
with him, as he does, and will hold, with such as are his Friends and
Favorites. He was a Traitor against the King of Heaven, and by Law condemned
to Death for his Crime. How can we now imagine, that God might, while he was
under this Sentence, deal with him as with a Friend and dear Child, with whom
he was at Peace, when yet he was under his Wrath. (3.) Yet it must have been
thus, if Adam after his falling under a Sentence of Death, had remained a holy
Man still, being still endowed with God's Image, though but in such a Measure, as
the least of Saints now are. If Adam, after his Fall, had had but a Spark of
true Holiness remaining in his Soul, he must still have had holy Communion with
the blessed God; and God with him: That must have still been the Language of
his Soul, in Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none
upon Earth that I desire besides thee: And of God, with Respect to him, it
might have been truly said, as in Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes Pleasure in
them that fear him. This cannot be denied to hold true with Respect to all such
as truly fear God. Now it was impossible that Adam should have enjoyed such
Favors, while under a Sentence of Damnation. It follows (4.) That our first
Parents being fallen under a Sentence of Death, could no longer enjoy those
Influences of the Spirit of God, by which their habitual Holiness might be
preserved; or, in other Words, they could not have remained Temples of the Holy
Ghost; but must needs have been utterly and immediately deserted by him. That
must and did now befall him, which David so earnestly deprecated, in Psalm.
51.11. Cast me not away from thy Presence: And take not thy holy Spirit from
me. And being thus forsaken, they were indeed no better than the fallen Angels,
with whom they had joined in their Rebellion against the holy God. Being thus
wholly dead in Sin, spiritually dead, they were in this Respect Vessels of
Wrath fitted for Destruction.

I desire it may be here remembered, and laid up in our Minds, to be recollected
and improved, That the spiritual Death, of which I have been speaking, did not
precede, or go before, that Sentence of Death, Genesis 2.17. but belonged to the
Death there threatened, as the Wages of Sin, even of Adam's actual
Transgression, in eating the forbidden Fruit; because from hence it follows,
that this Sentence of Death must be taken off from the Sinner, before spiritual
Life can be again restored to him.

Before I pass to the next Head, I shall here briefly observe, that as this
spiritual Death did not properly consist in Adam's first Transgression, but was
a Fruit of it; so neither does it properly consist in those actual
Transgressions which Sinners in a State of Nature do commit; but is the
Fountain from which they flow, Matthew. 15.19. and Luke 6.43, 45, 46.

Let it be here also observed, that the Dominion which Man's spiritual Enemies
had over him after his Fall, though comprised or implied in the Death threatened
to be executed on him; yet was it not properly Part of that spiritual Death, of
which I have been now speaking: But Man's first Sin, and the spiritual Death
that followed thereon, was what has given the Enemies of Men's Souls, such an
Advantage as they have over all those who are dead in Sin. Of the great Power
of these Enemies over such as are dead in Sins and Trespasses, we have an
Account, Ephesians. 2.2.2 Tim. 2.26. and elsewhere.

2. The second Kind of Death mentioned, as threatened against our first Parents,
in Case they eat the forbidden Fruit, was Death temporal: By which I understand
Death, properly so called, viz. the Separation of Soul and Body one from the
other; of which Death we have a Description in Eccl. 12.7. That this Kind of
Death was intended in the Threatening, we have Reason to think; for (1.) This is
Death, in the most proper and literal Sense of the Word, and so is most justly
supposed to be here meant; there being no good Reason to be given to the
contrary. (2.) This Kind of Death is expressly mentioned in the Judgment God
passed on Adam after he had sinned, Genesis 3.19. (3.) Adam did, and his
Offspring do, generally die this Kind of Death. (4.) Though all Men, without
Exception, do not thus die, this does not prove, that Adam was not threatened
with this Kind of Death; because their escaping it may be supposed to be owing
to the Interposition of a Mediator. I could give other Reasons for this, if it
were needful.

For the same Reason that some Men die not at all, Adam did not die as soon as
he had sinned, viz. the Interposition of a Mediator, to offer Satisfaction for
Sin, and reprieve him from present Death, and this in order to his eternal
Salvation.

I know many think otherwise, not understanding the Threatening, Genesis 2.17. as I
do, but holding the Meaning to be, That Adam should, as soon as he had sinned,
become mortal, grow sickly and infirm, and should at last give up the Ghost;
and I grant, that, as Things have been since ordered, with Relation to sinful
Men, this Exposition seems to agree well with the Event. But we ought to
distinguish betwixt the real Intention and Design of God, the Lawgiver, and
the true Meaning of his Law. The Question here is not, What God really intended
to do, in Case Adam sinned? But, What must be done in Case the Threatening
should be executed according to the true Meaning of it? And consequently, what
Adam was to expect if he eat the forbidden Fruit?

Now there is no Question to me, but that the Meaning of the Threatening was,
That our first Parents should immediately die a proper Death, in Case they
sinned; only God did not so threaten this, as not to leave Room to have the
Execution delayed, in Case of the Interposition of a Mediator; yea, and to have
it finally remitted, in Case full Satisfaction should be given for the Offense.
This has been made evident in the Event: But for all this, the true Meaning of
the Law might be, That Adam should die in the Day he sinned, with the Exception
only now expressed.

And it is certain, that this is the most proper and literal Sense of the
Threatening, in the Place referred to, and so what we ought not to recede from,
unless by some urgent Necessity we are compelled to it; which I hope I shall
make it appear, that we are not, when I come to speak of the Imputation of
Adam's first Sin to his Posterity; and show how they partake of the Guilt, and
become liable to the Punishment of that great Offense; which Doctrine, I
suppose, the Hypothesis I here proceed on, is no Ways inimical unto; but that
it does, on the contrary, greatly favor it. I therefore now proceed to show,

3. What the third Death was, which Adam was threatened with, in Case of
Disobedience: And to this I say, That eternal Punishment in another Life and
World was doubtless intended in the Threatening: For which I give the following
Reasons.

1. Since Life eternal was by Promise engaged to him, in Case of Obedience,
such a Promise being implied in the Threatening denounced; so that Adam was to
have enjoyed positive Happiness, and that forever, on the mentioned Condition;
it seems not reasonable to think, that an eternal Punishment of Pain and
Grief was not intended in the threatened Death: For thus the Evil threatened had
not, in its Nature and Duration, been commensurate with the Good promised.
That, in the Threatening of Death, a Promise of Life was implied, will not, I
suppose, be denied: And this Life must needs have been the same, or a better
than that which Adam then enjoyed in the Garden of Eden, which none can deny to
have been a Life of positive Happiness. Had Adam continued in his Obedience, he
would have been greatly deceived, if he had ever been deprived of that
Happiness, and not had a greater given to him.

2. A Supposition of Adam's not being in a miserable State, after this Life,
having sinned, and being deprived of all Happiness, necessarily implies the
Mortality of his Soul. For unto what End should he be continued in Being, if he
were to be neither happy nor miserable? And how inconsistent is this with the
Nature of a rational Being, capable of Happiness, and desirous of it? For such
an one to be without it, must needs be a Torment to him. Therefore, to deny
that Adam must have been miserable after this Life, is, in effect, to deny,
that his Soul should have survived, when his Body should have returned to the
Dust; as in Genesis 3.19. and Eccl. 12.7. Now, if Adam's Soul was mortal, why not
other Men's too? Contrary to Matthew. 10.28. and Luke 16.22.

3. The Scriptures, by opposing that Death, which is the Wages of Sin, to Life
eternal, do sufficiently intimate to us, that that Death is eternal; so in Romans
6.22. The Wages of Sin is Death; but the Gift of God i^ eternal Life. Now, can
there be any Reason to question, whether Adam was to die such a Death? Was not
the Death threatened against him, the Wages of a most vile Transgression? The
Death which he was to die, was doubtless the same which those are freed from,
who believe in Jesus Christ, John 3.16. The Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.16. was
doubtless promised to save Adam and others from this Death, called the Wrath to
come, 1 These. 1.10. Jesus which delivers us from the Wrath to come. The same
is called the second Death, Rev. 20.6. Should not Adam have died this Death as
well as others, if he had not been redeemed by Jesus Christ? Is not this Death
included in that which entered into the World by Adam's first Offense; Romans
5.12. And if so, was not he himself liable to it? No doubt it was the same with
that everlasting Punishment which the damned are sent into, Matthew. 25.46. These
shall go away into everlasting Punishment; but the Righteous into Life eternal.

Having now considered the woeful Effects and Consequents of our first Parents
first and great Transgression, as these related to themselves, personally
considered; I shall now proceed to consider them, as they related to their
Children or Offspring. And here, I take it for granted, (and do my self
believe, as in the shorter Catechism of the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster,) That, the Covenant being made with Adam, not for himself only,
but for his Posterity, all Mankind proceeding from him, by ordinary Generation,
sinned in him, and fell with him, in his first Transgression.

Now here I might have concluded the first Chapter, in this first Part of my
Essay; (my Design in it not being to prove those Things wherein I and others
with whom I therein have to do, are agreed) but because of the great Importance
of the Doctrine asserted, in Respect of the Influence, Men's different
Apprehensions about it will necessarily have on their Principles, concerning
several other Points of Religion, I shall endeavor to give my Readers such an
Explanation of this great Truth, as I apprehend to be most agreeable to the
Oracles of God, and, as I think, will have a Tendency to remove some of the
Prejudices, which the Minds of many are apt to filled with against it; but will
endeavor to say Nothing but what will be co-incident with it.

And in the first Place, I suppose the Covenant, in these Words referred to, is
that of Works, made with Man, while he was in a State of Innocence; and that
this is the same that God made with our first Parents, Genesis 2.17. wherein he
forbid them to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, on pain of Death:
In which Threatening of Death, there was a Promise of Life, in Case of
Obedience, plainly implied. God was pleased in this Precept or Prohibition to
try Man's Obedience to him, as in a particular Instance; and in his
Transgression of this, that was verified, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty of all.

Adam, i. e. Man, with whom this Covenant is said to have been made, was not
Adam only, as that Name is sometimes strictly taken for the Person of the first
Man, but for Adam, or Man, taken collectively, i. e. the whole Species of
Mankind, Male and Female, as in Genesis 1.28. Job 28.28. Eve therefore rightly
understood herself to be included in it, Genesis 3.2, 3. Thus, though Adam was
personally spoken to, yet it really did include his Posterity also; and there
was the more Reason that it should do so, because the whole Species of Mankind
did then exist in the two Persons, with whom at first it was more immediately
made. The Persons of their Offspring did not then, indeed, personally subsist,
but the whole human Nature, and all that was essential to it, did; and so all
those that were by God's Command and Benediction to be propagated in the Way of
natural Generation, by or from our first Parents. They have Nothing in them but
what essentially belonged to these. They are only Adam multiplied, according to
God's Ordinance, above mentioned. And Adam's Children being of the same Nature
and Make as he was, would undoubtedly have done as he did, if they had been put
on the same Trial.

But I do not say, that Adam's Offspring being in this Sense in him was that
which constituted him their legal Head and Representative. It was their being
comprehended in the Covenant that did this; and that they were so appears by
their being made Sinners by Adam's one Offense, Romans 5.12, -- 19. If they had
not been intended in the Threatening, as well as our first Parents themselves,
the same Death had not come on them for the same Offense, as it plainly appears
it did; though it was the more congruous that they should be comprehended in the
Covenant because they were Adam's Posterity, and he their natural Head; yet
that they are affected, as they are, by his Sin and Fall, does immediately
arise and flow from their being comprehended in the Covenant, as they most
certainly were.

It appears from what has been now said, That Adam's Posterity were in him in a
twofold Respect. (1.) They were in him in a natural Sense, as Branches are
naturally in their Root or Stock, before they grow out of it. (2.) They were in
him in a relative and moral Sense, as he was their appointed Head and
Representative: And I acknowledge, that without being in him in this latter
Sense, they could not have sinned in him and fallen with him in his first
Transgression. And this is the Reason why Children now are not chargeable with
the Sins of their immediate Parents. God has not appointed their immediate
Parents to be their moral Head or Representative.

The Covenant being thus made with Adam for his Posterity as well as himself,
he virtually represented them, before they actually subsisted; so that his
Carriage, before they had, in this Sense, any Being, would affect their Persons
as soon as they should exist. And since he represented none, but what were in
the Way of natural Generation to descend from him, none could partake with him
in his Guilt, and the Death threatened, 'till in this Way they had a Being: And
consequently, if it had so fallen out, that none had ever been bro't into the
World, in the Way mentioned, then none should ever have suffered any Pain or
Torment, in Case of his eating of the forbidden Tree; because such Suffering
supposes the Existence of the Persons suffering: And the same will hold with
Respect to the Reward of his Obedience, had he not sinned: His Posterity having
the Advantage of it, did necessarily suppose, that, in order to it, they must
first exist.

Now Things standing thus, betwixt the blessed God and Mankind, before Adam's
Fall; and Adam having then Power to have continued in that State of Integrity,
wherein he was created; and being liable withal to fall from it, by eating the
forbidden Fruit, so, that, according to the Nature of second Causes, either of
these might come to pass, and one or the other of them would certainly do so:
We may briefly consider the Effects or Consequents of each of these supposed
Events; but must here consider these with Relation to that Covenant which Man
was then in, without any Relation to the Covenant of Grace made with Man after
his Sin and Fall; and thus we shall see how Things must have been, in either of
these Cases, had no Mediator been provided.

And here first let us suppose, that Adam had stood and not eaten of the
forbidden Tree. When I here make this Supposition, by Adam's continuing in his
Obedience, I mean his having done so during that Time which God had allotted
for the Trial of his Obedience to that positive Ordinance of his; on Adam's
Observation of which, his own and his Off-spring's Happiness did depend: But
how long a Time this was to have been, I cannot determine. God did not, in the
Covenant made with Adam, limit any certain Time for this, but kept his Mind to
himself: Only we know, that in Case of Sin, the Time was out as soon as it
should be committed. But how long Man must have continued in his Obedience,
before he should, on the Terms of that Covenant, have had a Title to Life, I
cannot say: But I think it is very probable, that if Adam had not fallen before
he had any Issue, God would not have permitted his falling into that Sin
afterward. For, on this Supposition, it seems, that some of his Offspring
would have been born in a State of Sin and others not, (should he have had any
after his Fall) which, I think, would not agree with the great End which God
aimed at in this whole Affair, of which we have an Account, Romans 3.19. and most
plainly in Romans 11.32. God has concluded them all in Unbelief, that he might
have Mercy on all.

And to me it is not at all improbable, that if our first Parents had endured
that first Shock, by which they fell into Sin, God would have confirmed them in
a State of Innocence, and not have suffered another Assault to be made on them.
I know of no Reason to conclude, that he would not have done thus; and that, on
this Supposition, Adam and his Offspring would have been happy for ever.

It is here supposed that if our first Parents had not sinned, they would have
had a Posterity in the World. That Command and Benediction of God given to
them, Genesis 1.28. will not admit of the least Doubt of this: And that, on this
Supposition, Adam's Posterity should none of them ever have seen Death, I think
unquestionable. Nor do I imagine, that they would all have lived in this little
World forever; but suppose it more than likely, that after they had for a Time
served their Generation by the Will of God, they would have been translated
into the heavenly World, as Enoch and Elijah Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5.2 Kings 2.11.
were, and as the Saints that shall be alive on the Earth, at the second Coming
of our Lord 2 These. 4.17.
, will be.

Thus far have I considered how it would have fared with Adam's Offspring, on
Supposition of his keeping the first Covenant; I shall now consider what the
Effects and Consequents of his breaking that Covenant must have been, according
to the Tenor of it; and if a Mediator had not interposed to offer a Price of
Redemption for these Offenders: Of which more afterward. And to this I must
say, that I am fully of Opinion, that in this Case the Transgressors must have
been immediately slain. Judgment must have been speedily executed on them,
there being no Reason or Room for delaying it.

I am sensible, that in this I differ from many wise and learned Men, whose
Opinion is, that the Threatening denounced Genesis 2.17. did not intend that the
Offenders should immediately suffer a temporal or proper Death; but that they
should immediately become frail and mortal; and should in the Time appointed by
God, give up the Ghost. But, premising all due Regards to those from whom I
differ in this, I shall say something to each of these Hypotheses, that we may
the better judge which of them is most agreeable to the Scriptures and the
Discoveries we have of the Mind of God in them.

And first, with Respect to what I hold, I have these Things to say.

1. That what I plead for seems much better to agree with the plain Sense of
the Threatening, than that which I dislike. The Threatening is very express and
positive on my Side, and the Terms used very strong and emphatical. In the Day
thou eatest thou shall surely die, or, shall die the Death. Now I have already
showed, that a temporal or proper Death is intended in the Words, as well as a
Death spiritual and eternal. And all the Kinds of Death intended were, without
Exception, by the Words of the Threatening, to be inflicted on the very Day in
which the Crime was committed. Nor have we any Liberty or License given us to
leave, or recede from, the plain and literal Sense of God's Word, unless by
some urgent Necessity we are compelled to it. This was the ordinary Sense in
which the Word Death was used, when Moses wrote the History of Man's Creation
and Fall, and no doubt long before that Time. Nor is there any Reason to doubt
but that Moses would use a Word to express the Thing intended in the
Threatening, in the same Sense that God did therein use it.

2. By Adam's Carriage after he had transgressed it seems that he expected
present Death. When Adam and Eve had sinned, they were afraid, and hid
themselves among the Trees of the Garden, Genesis 3. ver. 8, and 10. They acted
like Persons that expected to be slain as soon as they should be taken; and no
doubt they did so. And it is not to be questioned, but that they understood the
Meaning of the Threatening.

3. That God did not immediately execute these Malefactors, is no Argument at
all, that the Sanction of the Law did not intend it, any more than that the Law
against High Treason does not intend that a Person committing that Crime, shall
be put to Death for it; because the King is pleased to reprieve and pardon him.
We may well distinguish between the Meaning of the Law and the Intention of the
Prince, whose Law it is. The proper Sense and Meaning of that Law, Genesis 2.17.
might be, That our first Parents should die a proper Death, on the very Day
they sinned; and yet upon the Interposition of a Mediator to offer Satisfaction
for their Crime, in order to their being reconciled to God, they might be
reprieved from the present Stroke of Death, and might, instead thereof, have
Conditions of Peace proposed to them. Thus God might be gracious, and say,
Deliver them from going down into the Pit; I have found a Ransom, as in Job
33.24. and this I believe was the Case. It greatly favors this, that God would
pass no Sentence on our first Parents, after they had sinned, 'till he had
first promised a Savior, the Seed of the Woman that was to break the Serpent's
Head; as appears Genesis 3.15, -- 19. Had it not been for this, these
Transgressors must have had quite another Sentence passed on them, viz. a
Sentence of present Death and eternal Damnation.

Some have objected against what I here plead for, That, on this Hypothesis,
the World had at once been deprived of all its humane Inhabitants, though it was
made for the Use of Mankind: And I readily acknowledge this to be true, and
know of no Absurdity implied in it; for if it had been so, God could easily
have provided others to fill up the Room of those Wretches, who, for sinning
against him, had been destroyed. God (says Dr. Twisse Riches of GOD's Love to
Vessels of Mercy, Part 2^, Page 198.
) could have destroyed Adam after his Sin, and made another Author of
Generation of Mankind. But he never intended it should come to this. He knew
how to save the Offenders from that present Destruction which they deserved;
and to suffer them, in the Way which he had before prescribed to them, to
replenish the Earth with Inhabitants, though this was not the Intention of the
Threatening before mentioned, in Case Adam had sinned before he had any Issue;
and so could not have been done if a Way to satisfy the Law had not been found
out.

The Supposition which I have endeavored to defend, being allowed to be a
Truth, as I think it ought to be, it will from thence follow, That if our first
Parents committed their first and great Transgression before they had any
Children, as they certainly did, then no Posterity of theirs could, according
to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works, suffer any Pain or Torment, on the
Account of their first Offense, in eating the forbidden Fruit. The Reason of
this is obvious, viz. because they could not have any. If they had none before
they sinned, besure they could have none afterward, being to die on that very
Day, -- I say, this follows, according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works,
and supposing the Threatening annexed to that Covenant had been executed on the
Persons of the Transgressors, according to the genuine Sense and Meaning of it.
For otherwise they might have, yea, actually had, a numerous Issue, and these
all bro't into the World in a State of Sin and Death, as I shall by and by
show; and by what Means this came to pass, with the Advantages of allowing that
this was brought about in the Way here intended.

But, before I come to this I shall observe, that though Adam could not, on this
Supposition insisted on, have had an Offspring to suffer positive Pain and
Torment on the Account of his first Sin; yet he might, by transgressing the
Covenant he was then under, hinder an Offspring, which he should otherwise
have had, from enjoying very great and good Things, which, had he not sinned,
they might and should have enjoyed. Our first Parents were by Nature, capable
of propagating their Kind, and had not only God's Allowance, but Command and
Benediction to that End, Genesis 1.28. and if they had continued in their
Obedience to God, they would most certainly have had a large Offspring in the
World, all of which would have been brought into it in a very happy Estate, as
I have before showed. Now, by their Sin, they at once hindered both the Being
and Happiness of all these, considered with Relation to the Covenant of Works.
And thus these were great Loosers by Adam's Fall, (if I may speak of
Not-Beings, as is usual, in such Language as we speak of Things that do exist)
They were Loosers, I say, by being hindered from coming into the World, and
that in so happy a Condition, as they must and would have come into it in, if
the Sin of Adam had not prevented it. And though they could not have complained
of this Wrong, if they had never been; yet since they are bro't into the World
by Means of the Mediation of the Son of God, they can see and complain of the
Injury done them by their first Parents, in hindering them from being born in a
State of Innocence and Happiness.

By what has been said it appears, That Adam's Posterity were, according to the
Tenor of the Covenant of Works, much affected one Way or other by his Carriage
or Behavior while he was in a State of Probation. If he had not sinned, he
would have had an Offspring who would have been exceeding happy: But by
sinning against God, he excluded them (as well as himself) from that Happiness,
which otherwise they must and should have enjoyed. He prevented them from
living a happy Life in this World, and from being Heirs of everlasting Glory in
the World to come. Our first Parents did, by their first and great Offense,
virtually cut off all their Offspring before they were born. As these
virtually sinned in them when they sinned, so they had virtually died in them
(a proper Death I mean) if they had died; though the Threatening of the Covenant
of Works had been executed only on the Persons of those who actually
transgressed.

Having now briefly considered my own Hypothesis, with the Effects or
Consequents of it; I shall proceed a little to examine that which stands in
Opposition to it, viz. That our first Parents were not, according to the Tenor
of the Covenant of Works, to be immediately put to Death, in Case they sinned;
but were, according to the Nature of that Covenant to be permitted to live some
Time in the World (though a very frail and troublesome Life) and to propagate a
numerous Issue of sinful Creatures like themselves, and these all to be brought
into the World in a State of Sin, being full of all Enmity and Wickedness, mere
incarnate Devils; and being with those evil Spirits joined in their Rebellion
against the King of Heaven; being also with them in utter Despair of any Mercy
from God, bound in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day; and yet
going on to propagate their Kind, great Numbers still dying to make Room for
more such Wretches as themselves, 'till the whole Number of Adam's sinful
Offspring should be filled up, and then all of this Race, not one excepted,
our first Parents with all their Posterity, at the final Judgment, sent away
into everlasting Torment with the Devil and his Angels, as in Matthew. 25.46. But
observe, that this supposes that there had been no Redeemer provided; and that
God had dealt with Man according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works.

And let it be here considered, that on this Supposition, this dreadful
Destruction of all the Posterity of Adam must have been wholly owing to that
one Offense of his, in eating the forbidden Fruit; which yet these Sufferers
could no Ways have possibly prevented, or have saved themselves from the Guilt
of, for they, in their own Persons, neither did nor could give their Consent to
the Terms of the Covenant made with their great Progenitor; nor could they
hinder his sinning as he did, or any of the woeful Consequences of his so doing;
so that the whole would have been, as to them, unavoidable.

I suppose it will not be denied, that this must have been the Case of all
Adam's Posterity, on the Supposition which I call in question. Now this is to
many a very great Stumbling Block, or Matter of Offense; and though what is by
Calvinists offered in Defense of it deserves serious Consideration, yet I am
inclined to think, that the Imputation of Adam's first Offense to his
Offspring may be better defended on the Hypothesis which I have advanced, than
on that which I am not well satisfied with: And therefore I have chosen that
which I endeavor to defend; and will essay a little more fully to clear it up.

I take it for granted, That the Covenant of Works was, in the Nature of it, a
very gracious Covenant, a Covenant in which the Goodness of God was very
greatly discovered; and so a Covenant the Justice whereof might be vindicated
against all Objections that might possibly be made against it, though God had
insisted on the Terms of it, without abating one Jot or Tittle of its Demands,
or admitting a Sponsor to make Satisfaction on Behalf of the Offenders against
it; and therefore that Course in which this may be best done, and the Honor of
God's Justice and Goodness most clearly and easily vindicated, I think to be
the most eligible, Care being still taken that this be not attempted in any Way
inconsistent with any other divine Truth whatsoever. Now this I hope, the Way I
have taken is suited to; and that I may further show that it is so, I will
mention some of the happy Consequences following on what I plead for.

But before I do this, I think it needful to show, what does not follow from
it, at least that one Thing does not, which perhaps some may suspect does, I
mean that it does not follow, on the Supposition for which I plead, That Adam's
first and great Offense is not imputed to his Posterity. Could I think that
such a Consequence would follow on it, I should not easily admit it.

Though it be maintained to be a Truth, that according to the Tenor of the
Covenant which God made with Adam, Genesis 2.17. his Offspring (if he should have
any) were to suffer Death, as well as himself and his Wife, in Case of his
sinning in eating the forbidden Fruit; yet this notwithstanding it might be a
Truth, that, according to the Tenor of that Covenant, our first Parents were to
be put to Death, on that very Day in which they sinned, though that should fall
out, as it did, while they had no Issue. It is certain by the Event, that our
first Parents were liable to sin before they had any Children: And I think it
also evident, that God did not any Ways oblige himself by his Word, to give
them a Posterity, in Case they sinned before they had Issue: Nay, on the
contrary, I think it evident from what has been said before, that they were to
die on the very Day in which they should eat of the forbidden Tree. Now if this
be granted, it will not follow from it that if a Way were found out to redeem
these Offenders from present Death and Damnation, so that they might live and
have an Offspring in the World, that then the Children proceeding from them,
after they were become guilty, and their Natures depraved by Sin, should not be
involved in the same Sin and Death, which they themselves were involved in.
This, I say, will by no Means follow, on the Supposition mentioned. If they
proceed from Adam, in the Way of ordinary Generation, they must still,
according to the Tenor of the Covenant made with him for himself and
Offspring, (if any he should have) be brought into the World in a State of Sin
and Death, the Condition he was in after his Fall.

Having now showed what does not follow on the Hypothesis pleaded for, I shall
proceed to show what does follow from it.

And,

1. It plainly follows from what I would have granted, That none had ever
suffered any Pain or Torment, for Man's first and great Transgression, had the
Threatening denounced in the Covenant of Works, been, in it is utmost Rigor,
executed on the Breakers of it, but only those who personally sinned in eating
the forbidden Fruit. This Consequence is most evident; because, if that
Sentence of Death had been executed on Adam and Eve, according to the true
Sense and Meaning of it, on the Day wherein they sinned, there could not have
been any others to bear the Punishment with them, there being none to suffer
besides themselves: For these sinning before they had any Issue, must needs,
according to the Tenor of the Covenant they were under, have died without any
Issue as before. I know God the great Lawgiver, did not intend it should be
thus; the Event shows the contrary: But this, for ought any thing I can yet
see, was the meaning of the Threatening in the Covenant; so that the
Transgressors of it, could justly expect no other, on their breaking of it; and
I suppose they did not, though God found out a Way to spare them. It is
therefore, I suppose, a Mistake, though many have fallen into it, That if there
had been no Mediator provided, to undertake the Work of Man's Redemption, there
would have been many Millions of People, besides Adam and Eve, who only
personally transgressed the first Covenant, who must have suffered the
Vengeance of eternal Fire, for their Sin, in eating the forbidden Fruit: They
could have had no Posterity to have suffered, if no Mediator had been provided.

Therefore,

2. It plainly follows, on the Hypothesis insisted on, That all the Posterity
of the first Adam are obliged to our great Mediator for their very Being in the
World. Had not a Mediator interposed, and obtained a Reprieve for our first
Parents, they must have been put to Death on the very Day in which they sinned;
and then none of their Offspring could ever have had a Being. They might, and
doubtless would, have had a numerous and happy Issue, had they not sinned; but
by sinning against God while yet they were without any, they forfeited the
Blessing of Posterity, yea forfeited their own Lives, and must have died
Child-less, if the Son of God had not undertaken to be a Redeemer, born of a
Woman, and made a Sacrifice for them; and then we, who are now their
Offspring, should never have seen the Light, but should have been, as it were,
cut off before we had any personal Subsistence, though virtually we did exist in
these Persons, in whom the whole humane Nature was then comprised: So that if
they had been immediately cut off, we had virtually been cut off in them, as
virtually we sinned in them, while personally we did not exist. It is therefore
manifest, on the Supposition insisted on, that we are all beholden to Jesus
Christ, as Mediator betwixt God and Man, for our very Being and Subsistence on
the Earth. Had it not been for his Undertaking to be a Savior, we should never
have been.

3. It further follows, on the Hypothesis here insisted on, That our first
Parents, and all their Posterity, did, by Means of the Interposition of a
Mediator to redeem and save them, immediately become Subjects of his
mediatorial Kingdom. Mankind had, 'till then, been held fast under a Covenant
of Works, to be dealt with according to the Tenor of that Covenant; but now the
Son of God, (having been appointed a Mediator from Eternity) was promised to be
a Savior, in Genesis 3.15. and so (...) ^^cree was declared, as in Psalm. 2.7. and
his Undertaking this glorious Work revealed; and began to have its proper
Efficacy, he being the Lamb virtually slain from the Foundation of the World.
Not that Mankind were hereby immediately discharged from the Guilt of Sin, and
entitled to eternal Life; for they remained still subject to the Penalty
threatened in the broken Covenant of Works, 'till something might be farther
done for them, pursuant to the mentioned Undertaking of the Redeemer. But what
I intend, is, that they immediately became rightful Subjects of that Kingdom
which the Son of God had, as Mediator, committed to him, and which he was
afterward to deliver up to his Father, as in 1 Cor. 15.24. It was by paying
the Price of Man's Redemption, that our Lord obtained such a Right to rule and
govern all those, by his Laws and Ordinances, who are the Objects of his
Purchase: And all the Laws given to Mankind since the Fall, are properly the
Laws of the Mediator, by him given to them, the Price of whose Redemption he
undertook to pay, and in due Time did so, according to his Covenant with his
Father: And according to these Laws of his, he actually governs the World,
blessing and rewarding the Obedient, and punishing the Disobedient, as is in
the holy Scriptures abundantly declared. As for the Covenant of Works, that
being once broken, Mankind stood in no other Relation to it than this, that
they must undergo the Punishment threatened in it, unless in some Way consistent
with the Tenor of it, they might obtain a Discharge therefrom. God never after
the Fall of Adam, proposed the Covenant of Works to sinful Men, as a Way in
which they might obtain eternal Life; though he has sometimes given them a
Representation of the Nature and Tenor of that Covenant, that he might convince
them how impossible it is to obtain Happiness by Obedience to it, as in Gal.
3.10, -- 12. Yet sincere Obedience to the moral Law is required in the new
Covenant, and is, according to the Nature and Tenor of it, necessary to Man's
Happiness: Rev. 22.14.

4. It follows, on the Hypothesis for which I plead, That all Adam's
Offspring are bro't into the World in a salvable Condition. In such a
Condition, I mean, as that, in a Way consistent with divine Justice, and the
Tenor of the first Covenant, they may be eternally saved. Nor do I intend this
in such a Sense only, as wherein the same may be verified concerning sinful
Mankind, before (if I may so speak) a Ransom was found for them, because it was
in the Power of God to find out and provide a Way for their Salvation; which,
if he could not have done, no Sinner could ever have been saved.

But I here intend to speak of a nearer Capacity of Salvation, on the Account
of a Price already paid or promised to be paid, for their Redemption. For by
the same Means that our great Mediator procured a Reprieve for fallen Mankind,
that they might not, on their sinning against God, be immediately destroyed, he
also made Way for their eternal Salvation, i. e. by paying a full Price for
their Redemption, a Price every Way sufficient to answer the Demands of the
Law, and to satisfy God for the Injury done to him: And whereas the Price was
not immediately ^^id down when Man first sinned and broke Covenant with God;
the Security given for the Payment of this Price, was such as the blessed God
was as well satisfied with, as if the same had been immediately and actually
paid. There was no Occasion to seek any farther for a Ransom or Atonement for
the Sin of Mankind. Any Man might now be saved, without any other or further
Price of Redemption; and there was now a Foundation laid for a Treaty of Peace
betwixt God and sinful Men; and such Terms might now be proposed to them, as
they complying with, might be justified and saved, without doing any Injury to
God's Justice, as the Apostle fully declares in Romans 3.25, 26. Thus much Dr.
Twisse, and many of our English Divines of great Note, and not suspected as
inclined to Arminianism, have granted and maintained, as I can show if Occasion
call for it. And less than this cannot reasonably be allowed to be intended in
such Texts of Scripture, wherein the Extent of Christ's Death, with Relation to
the Object of it, is asserted; as in John 3.16. 1 John 2.2. Heb. 2.9. 2 Cor.
5.14, 15. Isai. 53.6. and Isai. 5.18, 19.

5. It follows from the Premises, That all Adam's Posterity are brought into
the World in a far better Estate, than that of Not-Being. Though I agree not with
them who think that a State of endless Torment is better than that of having no
Being at all; yet I prefer a State of Salvability from a State of Sin and
Death, which such as may be saved are at present supposed to be under, to that
of Not-Being. Supposing I am not yet passed from Death to Life, and that I am
not certain that I ever shall; yet since there is a Way found out, in which I
may be saved, i. e. not only delivered from Sin and Death, but also obtain an
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, I should be loath to change my present
State for that of having no Being at all. And Persons capable of propagating
their Kind, or of being Instruments of bringing Children into the World, may
very reasonably desire to multiply their Kind, though they are persuaded that all
that proceed from them, in the Way of ordinary Generation, will come into the
World in a State of Guilt and Corruption; nor do I see that God does any Wrong,
in bringing Adam's Posterity into the World, though they do and must come into it
(if at all) in a State of Guilt and Pollution, as has been expressed, since it
is better for them to be, though in such a Condition, than to have no Being:
Which will yet more fully appear by the Sequel of this Essay. We may therefore,
without any Inconvenience, allow unto Arminians that which some of them affirm,
viz. That it will not stand with the Justice of God, to bring Mankind into the
World in a worse State than that of Not-Being. I know of no Advantage that any
of the Enemies of the Grace of God can make of such a Concession as this is.

But it may be here objected, That to be a Sinner seems to be a worse Estate
than that of having no Being. We had better have no Being at all, than to be in
a State of Sin and Enmity against God, such as all Mankind are by Nature in, or
as they come into the World, if the Doctrine of original Sin be a true Doctrine.

I answer, That thus to say is to beg the great Thing in question. It seems
that a wise and holy God has thought otherwise. If he, in his infinite Wisdom,
had not seen it better that all Mankind should, by his Permission, fall into a
State of Sin and Death than not, why has he permitted them to fall into that
Estate? And if it had not been better for us to exist, though in a State of Sin
and Misery, rather than not to come into Being at all, why did he give to
fallen Adam a Posterity? when he might very consistently with the Covenant and
with Justice have instantly cut him off before he had any Issue; and when, if
Adam had an Offspring, they must needs be involved with him in Sin and Misery.

But when I say, that such an Estate is to be preferred to that of Not-Being, I
speak of what is best for Mankind, the Subjects here discoursed of. Nor do I
here Consider a State of Sin abstractly, without taking into the Consideration
of Man's Estate, the Means and Advantages afforded unto Sinners, in order to
their getting out of it, and getting into a Condition infinitely to be desired.

If it be here further objected, That it seems not consistent with the Justice
and Holiness of God, to punish Adam 's Posterity with Sin, for that Sin which
he committed;

I answer, That if Adam's Sin be justly imputed to his Posterity, so that they
justly bear the Punishment of it, which I now take for granted, I see no Reason
why they may not be punished in this Way, as consistently with the Justice and
Holiness of God, as if the Sin, for which they are supposed to be so punished,
were committed by them in their own Persons; as in the Case of Adam and Eve
themselves, and many others that might be named.

If it should be here said, That the Sin of a public Person, or moral Head and
Representative, cannot be so imputed to the Persons represented by him, as to
become their's, in the same strict Sense as it would be, if they in' Person had
committed it;

I grant this to be true; and as we must not say, That our Sins imputed to
Christ, were his, by Means of that Imputation, in the same Sense in which they
were our's, who committed them: So neither is Adam's Sin imputed to us, by that
Imputation made our's, in the same Sense in which it was his. -- Yet that Sin
and Fault of his was so our's, that we justly bear the Punishment of it, being
for it liable to the same Death as he himself was.

If it should here be further said, That Persons who have never actually sinned
against God, (if any such adult Persons there might be) could not have the same
Consciousness of Sin, as those, who in their own Persons, have actually sinned;
-- so niether of that Guilt and Corruption which they are fallen under, without
any personal Fault of their own;

To this I answer, That though this be allowed to be a Truth, since the Evils we
bear, by means of the Sins or Faults of others who represent us, may befall us
without our personal Consent given, in any Way whatsoever, to the Crimes
committed by them, which seems to hold also in the Case under Consideration;
yet it may be here truly said, (1) That this Misery unto which we are subject
by Means of Adam's Sin, has justly befallen us, on the Account of our own Sin,
though our's only by Imputation, according to a just and holy Covenant, which God
made with our moral Head and Representative. (2) Though Sin, by which the
miserable State we are in has been bro't on us, was not committed by our own
Persons; yet was it committed by Persons subsisting in our Nature, and so is,
in some Sort, the Sin of all Mankind, in the Way of ordinary Generation
proceeding from Adam, their natural, as well as moral and political Head. And
therefore, (3) We have no Reason to think or imagine, that had we, in our own
Persons, been put on the same Trial as our common Head, in our Room and Stead,
was, we should have done any better for our selves than he has done for us. (4)
Though we cannot lament and bewail that as a Crime which we have committed in our
own Persons, which we have not so committed; yet we may lament the Sin
committed in our Nature, by our moral Head and Representative. (5) We may also
lament and bewail the sad Estate we are in, though by our own personal Fault we
have not brought our selves into it. Though we brought not our selves into this
Condition by any personal Offense of ours; yet it is a very miserable Condition
which we are justly plunged into; and as such, may be justly bewailed by us;
and on the Account of which, we have Reason to loath our selves. See Psalm.
51.5. and Ezekiel. 16.2, 3, 4.

It appears by what has been already said, that the Posterity of Adam come into
the World under the Guilt of his first Transgression; and with Natures
depraved, by Reason of original Corruption conveyed to them in the Way of
ordinary Generation; and yet that their Condition is not worse than that of
Not-Being, they being brought into the World by the Interposition of a
Mediator, and so in a salvable State; so that they have no Wrong done them, by
their being bro't into the World in such a Condition as they are.

CHAP. II. Concerning that Salvation which Sinners are supposed to have offered
to them in the Gospel.
HAVING in the foregoing Chapter considered the State of Sin and Misery, which
Sinners are in, to whom the Offer of Salvation is supposed to be made in the
Gospel; we shall now the more easily conceive wherein that Salvation does
consist, which these are supposed to have an Offer of; to declare which is the
Business of this Chapter.

And to this I say in general, That this Salvation does consist in Man's
Deliverance from that Estate of Sin and Death, which I have already described,
together with his Enjoyment of those good Things, of which they only are made
Partakers, who are delivered from the forementioned Evils; and who are made
happy in the Enjoyment of God for ever. Man's Salvation does, indeed, most
properly consist in his Deliverance from all those Evils, which his Sin and
Apostasy from God has brought upon him; but it does also, by a Synecdoche,
contain and comprise in it all those good Things which they, and only they,
have bestowed on them, who shall be crowned with endless Happiness in the
Kingdom of Glory. It is called eternal Salvation, Heb. 5.9. and Salvation with
eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2.10. and very frequently eternal Life, as in John 3.15,
10.

This Salvation compriseth or includes in it several Things, some of the
principal of which may be here briefly named and considered.

As,

1. This Salvation compriseth in it, Man's Deliverance from the Guilt of all
his Sins, and his being made righteous by the perfect Righteousness of Christ
imputed to him. Indeed this seems not, in so strict and proper a Sense, to
belong to Man's Salvation, as the other Things hereafter named. Strictly and
properly speaking, a Man is rather by this entitled to Salvation, than actually
saved. As Sin was not the Death threatened in the first Covenant, but the
meritorious or procuring Cause of it, Man thereby losing or falling short of
that perfect Righteousness, on which his Title to Life did depend; so when a
Man is made perfectly righteous, by having the Righteousness of Christ imputed
to him, this is not properly the Life it self promised to those that believe,
but that by which they have a Right and Title to that Life; for of that none
are ever made Partakers, without first having a perfect Righteousness, by which
they come to have a Right and Title to it. Hence it was that Paul was so
solicitous that he might be found in Christ, having on his Righteousness, Phil.
3.8, 9. even the same Righteousness that is said to be unto and upon them that
believe, Romans 3.22. and which is said to be imputed without Works, Romans 4.6. It
may moreover be here observed, that the Imputation of Righteousness to us does
not make any real Change in our Condition, but a relative Change only. As when
a condemned Malefactor is pardoned, so that the Law has nothing to lay to his
Charge, this does not of it self set him free from his Prison and Chains, but
only makes Way for it. He remains still in Hold, and bears the Burden of his
afflicted State, it may be, in a filthy Dungeon, 'till something farther be
done for him, i. e. 'till he have a Jail-delivery.

This notwithstanding, the Guilt of Sin being the Ground of all the Misery that
follows on it, it may, on that Account, be looked on as a great Part of their
Misery that lie under it, being that by which they are bound over to eternal
Destruction, and excluded from eternal Happiness. Now on this Account, Men's
Deliverance from the Guilt of Sin may be reckoned as belonging to that
Salvation, which is in the Gospel offered to them; and therefore the Scriptures
both of the old and new Testament, do abound with conditional Promises of
Remission of Sin, in which a Promise of eternal Life and Salvation is always
implied; because eternal Life always follows Forgiveness and Justification in
God's Sight. See Acts 10.43. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.6, 7, 8. Christ's saving his
People from their Sins, doubtless comprehends his delivering them from the
Guilt of them.

2. The Salvation offered in the Gospel compriseth also in it, Men's
Deliverance from the Power and Dominion of Sin in them. And in Nothing that can
be thought of, does the Salvation of Sinners more properly and eminently
consist, than in this. All Men are, by Nature, Servants of Sin, wholly under
the Dominion of it. Every Imagination of the Thoughts of their Hearts being
only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. Their Hearts are evil from their Youth. What
Servants and Slaves of Sin, Men in their natural Estate, are, the Scriptures
largely express, Psalm. 14.1, -- 4. Psalm. 36.1, -- 4. Romans 3.9, -- 18. and
elsewhere, as we have seen, in Part, in the foregoing Chapter; as also how this
comes to pass.

But now Men's Deliverance from this Servitude and Slavery must needs be one
great Part of that Salvation, which Jesus Christ came to work for them, when he
came into the World to save his People from their Sins, as in Matthew. 1.21. Of
Men's Deliverance out of this Estate the Apostle treats largely, Romans Chap. 6.
especially from Verse 16 to the 22d, of which Discourse we have the Sum and
Conclusion in the last Verse referred to, viz. being now made free from Sin,
and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto Holiness, and in the End
everlasting Life. With which Words does well agree what we have in Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
You has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. Now, it is in the
great Work of Regeneration that Men are thus saved from the Power and Dominion
of Sin: Nothing short of this will effectually accomplish it. For this that
Text is plain and full, Tit. 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have
done, but according to his Mercy has be saved us, by the Washing of
Regeneration, and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost. When Persons are said to be
saved by the Washing of Regeneration, this means, that their Salvation does
formally consist in this: Not that this is the Condition required; for that it
is not, but one great Part of that Salvation which is conditionally offered to
us, I shall hereafter show. Indeed our Salvation does not more, or more
properly, consist in any Thing, than in Regeneration; called in Scripture, our
being created anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. and our being
delivered from the Power of Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of God's
dear Son, Col. 1.13. also our being, by Christ, redeemed from all Iniquity, and
purified unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of Good Works, Tit. 2.14. This
is indeed the Quickening of such as are dead, dead in Sin and in the
Uncircumcision of their Flesh; as in these Texts of Scripture does appear,
Ezekiel. 37.14. Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 2.13. Thus all true Saints are saved and called
with a holy Calling, etc. 1 Timothy 1.9. And herein God manifests the exceeding
Greatness of his Power toward them that believe, according to the Working of
his mighty Power which wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. When
this is done for Sinners, they are therein saved.

3. The Salvation under Consideration compriseth in it, Men's Deliverance from
the Power, Rule and Government of their spiritual Enemies. When Mankind first
sinned against God, they cast off their Allegiance to their rightful Sovereign,
and subjected themselves to the Government of the Devil, and became his Slaves
and Vassals, who designing their utter and eternal Ruin, by his Enticements,
prevailed against them, Genesis Chap. 3. and took them captive at his Will, and
still rules over all such as are not delivered out of his Snare. Now this
Prince of Devils does, by his Legions of evil Angels, that attend on him, as
the Prince of the Power of the Air, still work in the Children of Disobedience,
tempting and overcoming all such as belong to the Kingdom of Darkness; and
finally destroys all such as are not delivered out of his Hands.

Now in Men's Deliverance out of the Hands of this Enemy, (or rather, all these
Enemies) does their Salvation very much consist. And this their Deliverance was
most expressly foretold, yea engaged, in that Promise given immediately after
Man's Fall, Genesis 3.15. That the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's
Head: By his doing of which, the Seed of the Messiah were to be set at Liberty,
when that glorious Promise should be fulfilled, in Isai. 53.10, 11, 12. and
Isai. 49.24, 25. which Prophecies were accomplished by Jesus Christ, in the
Days of his Flesh; and the Praise of God was, on that Account, celebrated at
his Appearance in our Nature, by Zecharias, in his Song, Luke Chap. 1. Verse
67, -- 74. who being filled with the Holy Ghost, prophesied and said, Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his People, and
has raised up an Horn of Salvation for us, in the House of his Servant David;
as he spoke by the Mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the World
began; that we should be saved from our Enemies, and from the Hand of all that
hate us. To perform the Mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy
Covenant: The Oath which he swear to our Father Abraham, that he will grant us,
that we being delivered out of the Hands of all our Enemies, might serve him
without Fear, etc. The Price of this Redemption was paid by our Redeemer, when
he poured out his Soul unto Death, and was numbered with the Transgressors,
etc. as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, in Isai. Chap. 53. before quoted. And
Sinners are actually freed from the Dominion of the Enemies of their Souls,
when being made Partakers of the Graces of God's Spirit, they are made strong
in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might; enabled to wrestle with, and
overcome, the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, as is expressed at large in
Ephesians. 6.10. and onwards to Verse 18.

4. The Salvation offered to Sinners in the Gospel, does also comprise in it,
their Perseverance in true Faith and Holiness unto the End of their Lives.
Perseverance in true Faith and Holiness, is not the Condition on which eternal
Salvation is offered; as if our Salvation was suspended on our Perseverance:
But on the contrary, it is contained and engaged in the Promise of Salvation
made to every true Believer. Every true Believer, or regenerate Saint, has
already eternal Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from
Death to Life, Joh. 5.24. Romans 8.1. Such an one has already performed the
Condition, on which Salvation is promised to him: Therefore his Perseverance
unto the End belongs to his Salvation, and is secured to him in the Promise --
And how should the same Thing belong both to the Salvation promised, and the
Condition of the Promise? -- I hope in this, I shall meet with no Opposition
from Calvinists: And with Arminians my direct Design is not to dispute. And I
affirm, That there is no Text of Scripture, wherein eternal Salvation is
conditionally promised, but what promises Perseverance to the End, without
which Men neither are, nor can be, eternally saved. But besides this, there be
many other more express Promises made to the Faithful, (at least plainly
implied in the Texts intended) of Perseverance to the End. Among many such they
who please may see Jer. 31.38, 39, 40. Isai. 40.28, -- 31. also Chap. 41.10,
13, 14. and Chap. 49.14, 15, 16. also Chap. 54.6, -- 10. Psalm. 125.1, 2.

5. The Salvation of sinful Men does, in Part, consist in their complete
Deliverance from Sin and all Temptations to Sin, in the Moment of their Death.
Notwithstanding Men's Deliverance from the reigning Power of Sin and Satan, in
their Regeneration and Preservation from the destructive Influences of these
Enemies, in their Perseverance, they are not wholly freed from indwelling Sin,
and Temptations to Sin during this Life. While they are here in a militant
State, Sin and Satan are suffered to molest and annoy them, and sometimes, in
particular Conflicts, to prevail against them, and put them to the worse. The
Condition of God's Children, with Respect hereunto, is fully and clearly
expressed by the Apostle, in Romans Chap. 7. Ver. 14. and onwards to the End, and
Gal. 5.17. But at the Moment of the Death of the true Children of God, they are
perfectly freed from any further Molestations from, or by these Enemies, being
made then perfectly holy and removed out of their Reach. They are then taken
from the Evil that is here, and enter into Peace, dying in the Lord, and
resting in their Beds, each One walking in his Uprightness, Isai. 57.1, 2. They
rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them, Rev. 14.13. their Spirits
then being made perfect, in Respect of their Freedom from Sin. They are
prepared for, and conveyed to, the Society and Communion of the Saints in
Light, Heb. 12.22, 23.

6. The Salvation offered in the Gospel comprehends in it, Man's Deliverance
from his last Enemy, which is Death, 1 Cor. 15.26. Death is certainly an Enemy
to Mankind. Humane Nature shrinks at it: It is called the King of Terrors, Job
18.14. It is the Wages of Sin, Romans 6.23. Genesis 3.19. though our Savior has
taken away the Sting of Death, which is Sin, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.

But at the Resurrection of the Just, this Enemy shall be removed, when the
dead Bodies of God's Saints shall be raised, and this Corruption shall put on
Incorruption, and this Mortal shall put on Immortality, as in 1 Cor. 15.54, 55.
and when our vile Bodies shall be changed, and fashioned like to the glorious
Body of Christ, Phil. 3.21.

7. Man's Salvation, now under Consideration, does comprehend and include in
it, his being put in Possession of that Glory and Happiness which the Saints
shall enjoy in the heavenly World for ever, when the great Judge of the World
shall say to the Sheep on his right Hand, as in Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the
World.

It is to be feared that some, when they talk of Salvation, intend only this
Part of it last mentioned, without duly considering the other foregoing, and
with Respect to this, pre-requisite Parts of Man's Salvation, especially Man's
Salvation from Sin. But what God has joined together, we should not separate in
our Minds. The seven Things mentioned all belong to that Salvation which is
offered in the Gospel. God gives none of them to any one to whom he gives them
not all.

CHAP. III. Showing what is imported in Salvation's being offered.
HAVING considered what is intended by that Salvation which, I say, is offered
to Sinners in the Gospel; it is necessary that I now proceed to consider what
is intended by an Offer of it.

Now to this I say, in general, That by Salvation's being offered unto Sinners,
I intend its being conditionally promised to them. I take an Offer of a Thing,
to be the same, in Effect, as a conditional Promise of it made to the Person
unto whom it is said to be offered.

In an Offer, or conditional Promise, made to any Person, there is something
proposed to be done by him unto whom the Offer is made; and some Advantage,
either explicitly or implicity, promised to him on his doing what is proposed.
I say, proposed, because the Thing may not be required of him as his Duty, but
proposed only as the Term or Condition, on which he may have the Advantage
offered to him.

But, in the Offer of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel, the Thing
proposed to be done by sinful Men is proposed as a Duty, which they are under
indispensible Obligations to perform; because the Thing is required by God of
them; and therefore necessary, because they cannot be saved without it.

That which is required of sinful Men, in order to their Salvation, may, for
ought I can yet see, be very fitly called the Condition on which Salvation is
offered to them. I readily acknowledge, that there are several Sorts of
Conditions, differing very considerably one from another; of which Differences
I shall have Occasion hereafter to say something: For it is very necessary that
we rightly understand what Kind of Condition that is, on which Salvation is
said to be offered; but doubtless we may allow, that the Thing required may be
called a Condition, and so I intend to call it in this Discourse; and I hope it
will, in the Issue, appear, that no hurtful Consequences will attend its being
so accounted and called.

In this which I call the Condition on which Salvation is offered, I comprehend
and include every Thing that is required of Man, as indispensibly necessary in
order to his Salvation, so that God will not save him without his doing it; and
unto his doing of which a Promise of Salvation is annexed. To be sure, if there
be any Thing which if a Man will not do God will not save him, that Thing must
be understood as comprised in the Condition of Man's Salvation; and unto
whomsoever a Promise of Salvation is made in God's holy Word, the Thing being
to be done in order to our Salvation, that Thing is comprised in the Condition
required. -- It matters not whether all so required be considered as one
Condition, or as many, their Conditionality in this Affair being still
affirmed: But if we speak of this as one Condition; as I usually do, then what
is more particularly comprised therein, ought to be distinctly considered and
declared, by what Name soever such Things are called, as Faith, Repentance,
Obedience, seeking the Lord, calling on him, coming to Christ, etc. And it
doubtless comprehends all these Things in it, as I shall hereafter show,
removing such Objections as are apt to be made against it.

And whereas all Mankind may be divided into two Sorts, or People of two
different Conditions, viz. such as are in a regenerate and justified Estate,
and such as are not, but in a State of Nature, under the Wrath and Curse of
God, and so liable to eternal Damnation: it will certainly be necessary to
consider which of these two Estates Sinners must be supposed to be in, when
they perform the Condition, on which God offers to save them: And this seems to
me to be an easy Question, but since many have, in this, a different Way of
Thinking from me, this is to be particularly discussed in the second Part of
this Essay, although it seems well nigh put out of Question, in the second
Chapter of this.

That what is required of sinful Men in order to their Justification and
Salvation, is well called by the Name of Faith, I very freely acknowledge; and
that it is very frequently so called in Scripture is to me evident: But that it
is also called by many other Names I shall show, with the Reason of this
Variety --. But whereas some mislike the calling of that Faith, by which we are
in Scripture said to be justified, by the Name of a Condition; this may be here
a little considered. Some object against this Word on the Account of the
Ambiguity of it, there being Conditions of different Sorts or Kinds, some of
which will not, as they think, agree to the Nature and Use of that Faith by
which we are said to be justified. But this perhaps may as well be objected
against the Word Instrument, used by some instead of it. And some think that
this Word ascribes more to Faith, in the Affair of our Justification, than does
indeed belong to it; or at least, that it does not well express the true Use
and Influence of Faith, in the Justification of a Sinner before God. Some
therefore express the Influence of Faith in this Affair by the Word Instrument,
and sometimes call it an instrumental Cause. But the use of this Word or
Expression is also though it by several, to have its Inconveniences; with whom I
also concur.

A learned and judicious Divine observing these Difficulties, as he conceives
them to be, has thus expressed himself in this Matter. I humbly conceive, says
he, we have been ready to look too far to find out what that Influence of Faith
in our Justification is, or what is that Dependence of this Effect on Faith,
signified by this Expression of being justified by Faith, over-looking that
which is most obviously pointed forth in the Expression, viz. that the Case
being as it is, (there being a Mediator that has purchased Justification) Faith
in this Mediator is that which renders it a meet and suitable Thing in the
Sight of God, that he rather than others should have this purchased Benefit
assigned to him, viz. he that believes in the Mediator. Now I willingly agree
with this worthy Author, that that Faith by which the Ungodly are said to be
justified, is the most meet and suitable Thing that could have been required of
them to that End; and this was doubtless the Reason why God made choice of it
to the Place and Office to which he assigned it, rather than any other Thing
whatsoever; yet I think, with Submission to those of better Judgment, That this
is no Ways inconsistent with its being called the Condition of Men's
Justification: And it seems to me very evident, that its being so meet and
suitable a Qualification, as is expressed, is not that by which a firm and sure
Connection is established betwixt a Sinner's believing and his being justified.
The Reason why all that believe are infallibly justified and saved, is not
because the Sinner that believes in Christ is so meetly and suitably qualified
to receive the Benefit of Justification; but this rather, that by the Promise
of God there is infallible Assurance given, that whosoever believes shall be
justified and saved, as in John 3.15, 16. Mark 16.16. Acts 10.43. Were it not
for this, Sinners could not be sure that they should be saved on Supposition of
their believing, were it possible, that they should believe, having no such
Promise. So that af^^^ all, it is the Conditionality of Faith in the Covenant
of Grace, that gives it the Advantage of being any Ways instrumental in our
Justification See Willard of Justification, on Phil. 3.9.
. Thus it is by Faith, that through Grace the Promise may be sure to all the
Seed, as in Romans 4.16. Heb. 6.17, 18.

What that Faith is, unto which a Promise of Justification is annexed, is a
Matter of great Importance, and ought diligently to be enquired into; and I
purpose, with God's Help, to consider this important Point, before I finish
this Essay: But this is not what, in this Place, I design. At present I only
say, it is the same that is required in the Texts of Scripture last quoted, and
in other Places, showing what Men must do to be saved, as in Acts 2.37, 38. and
16.30, 31. What is here incumbent on me, is, to state and clear up the true
Notion of an Offer of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel; and unto this
End something further remains to be said.

1. Then, the Condition upon which Salvation is offered to Sinners is something
required of them, that so they may be saved; something to be done by them unto
whom the Offer of Salvation is supposed to be made. The Condition required is
not merely this, that if such or such a Thing come to pass, then God will save
us; but if we comply with his Will in doing what is required of us, then God
will bestow his Salvation on us. It is, I say, something to be done by us, not
by God himself, or any one else besides our selves; and this too something
wherein we yield Obedience to the Call of God in the Gospel; something
contained in a proper Answer to this important Enquiry, "What shall I do to be
saved". The Difference betwixt the Covenant of Works, and that of Grace, lies
not in this, that the Covenant of Works required our doing something that so we
might live, but the Covenant of Grace nothing at all. What the Covenant of
Grace requires to this End, is sometimes called the Obedience of Christ, Romans
16.26. and obeying the Gospel. It is something wherein we perform our Duty to
God as well as secure the Salvation of our own Souls.

2. The Condition, to this End required, is not only such, that we shall not be
saved if we perform it not; but that we shall be saved if we perform the Thing
required. We are not only threatened with Death and Damnation, in Case we do it
not; but have a Promise of Life and Salvation, if we perform it. There are some
Things which if those that enjoy the Gospel will not do, they shall be damned;
as to instance in two or three. If they will not hear or read the Word of God,
meditate on it, endeavor to understand it, nor at all Regard what is required
of them in it; such, I say, as will not do these Things shall certainly be
damned; but Persons may do such Things as these, and yet never be saved. God
has not promised, that all that, after any Manner, do such Things, shall obtain
eternal Life. But the Condition on which Salvation is offered, is such as
whosoever complies with it shall certainly be saved.

3. The Condition on which Salvation is offered in the Gospel, must needs be
such as may be, and is, performed by all that obtain eternal Life, before they
do obtain it. Men cannot, in the Way of a Covenant, obtain a good Thing
conditionally promised to them in it, 'till they have performed the Condition
on which that Thing is promised. But when I say here, before, this must not be
understood, as before, in Time, but in Respect of the Order of Nature, or
according to the Reason or Dependence of Things one on another: For otherwise,
as soon as the Condition required is by any Sinner performed, God without any
Delay begins to save him; yea, puts him into a State of Salvation, see John
5.24. But God will not so much as begin to bestow eternal Life on any Man,
'till he has performed the Condition on which the same is offered to him.

4. We ought here carefully to distinguish between an antecedent Condition, and
such as is only concomitant. By an antecedent Condition, I understand such an
one as is described in the last Head, i. e. one required in order to our having
a good Thing conditionally promised: But by a concomitant Condition, I intend
such a one as does inseparably accompany a good Thing conditionally promised,
but is not, in order of Nature, before it. Thus, true Holiness inseparably
accompanies the Justification of a Sinner; because God regenerates every one
whom he justifies, and that in the very Moment in which he justifies him. But
true Holiness is not an antecedent Condition of Man's Justification, not being
required in order to it, though it be inseparably joined with it, and is a
Qualification belonging to every justified Person. Hence, though God promises
Salvation to all holy Persons, yet Holiness is not the Condition on which
Salvation is promised; nor is any Act so, which flows from a Principle of
true Holiness, and so belongs to our Sanctification; as I shall hereafter
show.

5. We ought carefully to distinguish betwixt the Acts materially considered,
in which the Condition of the new Covenant does consist, and the Rectitude of
the same Acts, and the Manner in which they must be performed. In this Chapter
I only consider what Acts are required: What is required in Order to their
Rectitude will be considered in the second Part of this Essay.

6. Again, we must distinguish betwixt what is required in the Condition under
Consideration, with Relation to the general and special Nature of it, i. e. in
what Acts it consists, and how these must be performed; and what is required
with Respect to the Prolongation or Continuance of what is required: For a Man
may begin, and for a Time do what, as a Condition, is required of him, in order
to his having a Benefit which is conditionally promised to him; and yet by his
Failure sall short of the Good, which, in this Way, he is a Candidate for. Thus
our first Parents either did or might have, for a Time, continued their
Obedience to the Law of Works; and yet, for want of Continuance therein, they
sell short of Life and Happiness, and so ruined themselves and all their
Posterity.

And thus I will also show, that the Case may be, with Respect to Persons that
are in a State of Probation, in order to their obtaining the saving Benefits of
the new Covenant: And yet, I am far from holding a Possibility of falling from
Grace, in the Sense in which Arminians and others plead for it, viz. that
regenerate and justified Persons may fall away, and finally perish. Yet it is
true, that Persons may be engaged in such a Course that they should certainly
be saved, did not their Apostasy prevent it, as I shall hereafter make evident
from Ezekiel. 18.24. Matthew. 24.13. and other Places.

7. It is necessary that I here further observe, that the Condition of the
Covenant required, in order to the Salvation of sinful Men, differs greatly
from that which was required in the Covenant of Works, in order to Men's
obtaining Life.

If I mention three remarkable Differences betwixt these it will be sufficient.

1. They differ in Respect of the Nature of the Thing required: For in the
Covenant of Works, the Condition required was perfect Obedience, without any
Failure, as to the Matter or Manner of its Performance, as appears Gal. 3.10.
But in the Covenant of Grace, (...) Condition required is Faith, Repentance, a
seeking to God for Mercy, a coming to Christ for Life, etc. as will hereafter
be more fully declared.

2. These Conditions differ greatly in Respect of the immediate End of their
being required: For, according to the End of that required in the Covenant of
Works, it was to be the very Righteousness, in the Performance of which, Men
were to stand righteous before God, and obtain a Title to eternal Life: But
that required in the new Covenant is not, according to the Tenor of IT, to be
our justifying Righteousness, or that by which we should have a Right unto
eternal Life, but is required of Sinners in order to their having an Interest
in the perfect Righteousness of Another, for their Justification in God's
Sight; even the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is unto and upon all them
that believe, Romans 3.22. Such therefore as believe are in Scripture said to
believe unto Righteousness, i* e. unto the obtaining of it; their Faith not
being the Righteousness it self, that in which their justifying Righteousness
does consist. Read and compare Romans 10.10. with Romans 4.5, and ver. 22. The
Particle translated in, in the two Texts last referred to, being the same which
is translated to, in Romans 10.10. Faith therefore, which is unto Righteousness,
is only so far accepted of God, as that by it we obtain an Interest in the
Righteousness of Christ.

3. And from the Differences already mentioned, it follows thirdly, That the
Condition required in the Covenant of Grace is, in a Sense, a gracious
Condition, in which that required in the Covenant of Works was not. That
required in the Covenant of Grace is such as may be performed by Sinners. That
of the Covenant of Works was not so; but compatible only to the State of
Mankind, while in Innocence. That of the Covenant of Grace is required that so
we may become righteous; but that of the Covenant of Works was required that so
Men might remain righteous, as they then actually were. In a Word, that now
required is the Condition of a most gracious and merciful Covenant. That of the
Covenant of Works was such as that Men, in the Performance of it, might obtain
Life by their own perfect Obedience.

Thus it appears, that the Condition of the Covenant of Grace is of another
Kind than that of the Covenant of Works. But it does not by any Means appear,
that what is in the Covenant of Grace required of Men, in order to their
Salvation, is no Condition at all; nor ought that to be granted.

CHAP. IV. Showing, That there is an Offer or conditional Promise of Salvation
made to Sinners in the Gospel.
HAVING hitherto endeavored to explain the Proposition under Consideration; I
come now, in the fourth and last Place, to say something for the Confirmation
of the Truth asserted, viz. that it is indeed a Truth, that God does offer
Salvation to sinful Men in the Gospel; or that he does conditionally promise to
bestow eternal Life on them.

But before I enter on the Proof of this most comfortable Assertion, it is very
necessary that one Thing, very evidently supposed and implied in it, be a
little explained and cleared up, without the doing of which the main Assertion
here maintained cannot be very advantageously and clearly supported.

Now that which I here intend is this, That Mankind have, since their Fall into
a State of Sin and Death, had so much done for them, in order to their Recovery
out of that miserable Estate, as thereby to be put into a State of Salvability:
For otherwise there would be no Room for an Offer of Salvation to be made to
them. Now Mankind, since their Apostasy, may be conceived to be in a salvable
Condition in two Respects, or on a twofold Account. (1) In Respect of the
Sufficiency of God to find out and provide a Way for their Salvation, whatever
seeming Difficulties, in Respect of the Threatening denounced against Sinners,
and of his own Truth and Justice, seemed to lie against it; yet this
notwithstanding, I say, the Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of God was such, that
it was, in that Respect, possible for him to find out and provide a Way, in
which such Sinners as Mankind were, might be eternally saved. But this is not
what I principally here intend. Wherefore, (2) Mankind may be said to be in a
salvable State, in Respect of a Price already paid, or undertaken to be paid,
for their Redemption. I say, either paid or undertaken to be paid, because this
was the same Thing in Respect of the Efficacy of the Atonement I intend. It was
as available, in Respect of all the saving Ends of it, before it was actually
paid, as it was afterward; and on this Account our Savior is called the Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World. It is in Respect of this Price of
Redemption, that I here affirm Mankind to be in a salvable Estate. They are so
now, in Respect of a Price already paid for them, in order to their eternal
Happiness. And this I suppose to be a Truth, with Respect to all Mankind
without Exception: So that though there are many who never will be saved, yet the
Reason of this is not, because there is not a sufficient Price paid for their
Redemption, nor because this is not a Remedy applicable to them, according to
the Tenor of the new Covenant, but for other Reasons hereafter to be mentioned.

This State of Salvability, which Mankind are by me supposed to be in, has its
Rise and Foundation, as I have said, in the Price of Redemption paid for them,
by their great Savior; and that this was of sufficient Value to save the whole
World I here take for granted. That it was a Price laid down for all, without
Exception; and, according to the Tenor of the new Covenant, applicable to any
one, and to every one of the sinful Children of Men, I suppose to be a Truth
clearly revealed in the Word of God; and that the Reason why it is not so
generally believed so to be, is not because it is not sufficiently asserted in
Scripture, but because many have, without sufficient Grounds, supposed that a
Belief of this cannot be reconciled to some other Articles of Faith, which they
think clearly and sully revealed: But this I shall have Occasion hereafter to
consider.

At present I will show, what is in Scripture affirmed, with Respect to the
Extent of Christ's Death, with Relation to the End and Object of it. And here,
not to insist on what is said about his mediaterial Righteousness, in Romans
Chap. 5. betwixt the 12th and the 19th Verses, where his Righteousness is
opposed to the Sin of the first Adam, as a sufficient Remedy against the
Mischiefs and Miseries brought on Mankind by it; I shall only recite some of
those Passages of Scripture, wherein the Universality of Christ's Death, as it
respects the Persons for whom he died, seems to be plainly and fully asserted.
Thus we are told, that God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
Life, John 3.16. That he is the Propitiation for our Sins: And not for our's
only, but for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. That he tasted Death for
every Man, Heb. 2.9. That he gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. That he
died for all, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And that he is the Savior of all Men,
especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10.

That the most obvious Sense of these Texts of Scripture, is, That Jesus Christ
died for all Men without Exception, I think very evident. Nor is it at our
Liberty to recede from this, without some urgent Necessity compelling us to it,
which I suppose can never be shown; but instead thereof, I will show a
Necessity of taking of them in the full Latitude in which they are expressed. I
do not therefore wonder, that there have been a great many eminent Divines, in
the English Nation, who have been far from being Arminians, that have plainly
and fully asserted Christ's dying for all, as I could easily manifest, did I
rely on humane Authorities, as I do not.

Yet I shall mention one Instance of this, not so much on the Account of the
Authority of the Man (though I know of no Man whose Authority would go farther in
this Case) as because I think he fairly states wherein the Difference lies
betwixt himself and some others, and particularly betwixt what he held and I
now hold, and consequently wherein the Crisis of this Controversy does, in my
Apprehension, lie.

The Person I intend is the learned Dr. Twisse: And the Book from which I shall
take some Passages, is entitled, The Riches of God's Love to the Vessels of
Mercy, etc. Part 1. Page 5. We are often demanded, says he, whether every one
that hears the Gospel be not bound to believe that Christ died for him? Now I
say this Phrase, Christ died for me, includes many Things, as the Benefits
which arise unto me by the Death of Christ, may be conceived to be many. But
let these Benefits be distinguished, and we shall readily answer to the
Question made, and that perhaps differently, as namely, affirmatively to some,
negatively to others; as thus, Do you speak of Christ's dying for me, that is,
for the Pardon of my Sins, and for the Salvation of my Soul, I answer
affirmatively and say, I am bound to believe that Christ died for the procuring
of these Benefits unto me, in such Manner as God has ordained; to wit, not
absolutely but conditionally, to wit, in Case I do believe and repent. For God
has not otherwise ordained, that I should reap the Benefits of Pardon and
Salvation, by virtue of Christ's Death and Passion, unless I believe in him and
repent.

In another Place, this learned Author asserting the Death of Christ in the
same Latitude and Extent, says, (Page 154) To die for us, or for all, is to
die for our Benefit, or for the Benefit of all: Now these Benefits are of a
different Nature, whereof some are bestowed upon Man only conditionally (though
for Christ's Sake) and they are the Pardon of Sin and the Salvation of the
Soul, and these God does confer only upon the Condition of Faith and
Repentance. Now I am ready to profess and that, I suppose, as our of the Mouth
of all our Divines, That every one who hears the Gospel, (without Distinction
between Elect and Reprobate) is bound to believe that Christ died for him, so
far as to procure both the Pardon of his Sins and the Salvation of his Soul, in
Case he believes and repents. In another Place he says, That as Peter could
not have been saved, unless he had believed and repented; so Judas might have
been saved, if he had done so. And the Doctor referring to that Text, John
3.16. says on it, That it gives a fair Light of Exposition to those Places
where Christ is said to have died for the Sins of the World, yea, of the whole
World, to wit, in this Manner, That whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting Life.

Thus far I have Dr. Twisse fully with me in what I assert, viz. That Christ
died for all Men, so far forth as to purchase Life and Salvation for them, in
Case they believe in him, and repent of their Sins. He did this for the whole
World, and not for the Elect only: So there is no Man but what may be saved on
the Terms of the new Covenant, even Judas was not excepted or excluded.

But here I must add a Word, lest this should be misunderstood. The Meaning of
this Assertion is not, that it is a Truth, that Jesus Christ died for all Men,
if it shall eventually come to pass that all Men believe in him, but that
otherwise this Assertion is false. It is even now a Truth, that Christ died for
all Men, or otherwise that he did not die for all Men. This cannot be made
either true or false, by Men's future Carriages. The Meaning therefore of the
Assertion maintained, is, that Jesus Christ has really so died for all Men, as
to purchase this Advantage for them, that they shall be saved, if they will
believe and repent.

It is not supposed in what is here maintained, that Jesus Christ died equally,
or in the same Sense, for all Mankind, Elect and Non-Elect. The Difference here
is wide, and may, I think, ^e best conceived of, by a due Consideration of the
Relation of Christ's Death to the two Covenants, to which it has a Reference: I
mean that of Redemption betwixt the glorious Persons of the holy Trinity, and
that of Grace (as it is commonly called) which God has been pleased to propose
to Mankind since the Fall.

If we consider the Death of Christ, with Relation to the Covenant of
Redemption, or Terms agreed on betwixt the Son of God on the one Part, (as I
conceive) and the Father and the holy Spirit, on the other, though the Father be
more expressly mentioned in Scripture, as concerned in this Covenant, than the
holy Spirit: If, I say, we consider the Death of Christ, with Relation to this
Covenant, the Son of God did, by his Death and mediatorial Righteousness,
obtain for the Elect of God, or all those whom in Scripture the Father is said
to have given him, a perfect and complete Salvation in all the Parts and
Branches of it, the principal of which are enumerated in Romans 8.29. viz.
Effectual Calling, Justification and Glorification: For in the Covenant here
intended, Sinners themselves are not a Party; and therefore the Conditions to
be performed lie not on them, but on the Mediator, who undertook for them, and
fulfilled the Terms required of him, in order to the Salvation of those who
were ordained to Life. None of these, therefore, ever miscarry, as might be
plainly showed from Scripture, were it my present Business. Such as please may
read and compare Isai. 53.10, 11, 12. John 6.38, 39, 40. Romans 9.29. Acts 23.48.
John 7.37. and Chap. 10.27, 28, 29. Hence the Acts of Christ's Mediation are
spoken of, as having a peculiar Reference to these, in many Places of
Scripture, as in John 17. ver. 6, 8, and 19, 20. and Chap. 10.15. But such
Places are not to be understood as if Christ died for the Elect only: for
besides his absolutely mentioning the Salvation of all these, he was, according
to the Covenant of Redemption which he entered into, to bring the Rest into a
State of Salvability, that so God might be just in justifying any of them on
the Terms of another Covenant, (that of Grace I intend) which was to be
proposed to Sinners themselves, as plainly appears, in Romans 3.25, 26. with
which that well agrees, Heb. 9.22. And upon Christ's doing this are grounded
all the Offers of special Mercy made to Sinners in the Covenant of Grace, such
as are implied in John 3.16. Acts 10.43. Mark 16.15, 16. and Acts 16.30, 31.
And though Christ has by his Obedience and Death, purchased the Whole of the
Salvation of all the Elect, so that the same is justly due to him; yet they
cannot come to the Enjoyment of this Salvation, 'till they come up to the Terms
of the Gospel, wherein it is conditionally offered to them. How God deals with
those unto whom Gospel Terms are not offered, I am not here considering: But
this I will venture to say, that I conceive them to be in a salvable State, so
that if they are not saved, it is not because Justice will not allow of it. And
I doubt not but that Jesus Christ was to bring the whole World into such a
State as this, and not the Elect only.

And now let us consider the Death of Christ, as it has a Relation to the
Covenant of Grace, proposed to Sinners themselves. Now as Christ's Death
relates to this Covenant, no Man can plead a Right to the Benefits procured by
it, 'till he believes in him that died for him; nor can he be put in Possession
of the special Benefits offered in this Covenant, except he performs the
Conditions of it. In this Respect Peter and Judas, Elect and Non-Elect, are on
a Level. He that believes shall be saved; he that believes not shall be
damned. As the mediatorial Righteousness of Christ is sufficient for the
Salvation of the whole World, so it is, according to the Tenor of the new
Covenant, a Remedy applicable to any Person, on the Terms therein proposed; so
that it is not contrary to the Justice of God, effectually to call, justify,
and glorify any Person whatsoever. If this is not done for all, it is not
because there is not a sufficient Remedy provided, but for such other Reasons
as are given in God's Word.

But now let us consider the Doctor's Antithesis, in the Place above quoted,
Page 5. If, says he, the Question be made, Whether I am bound to believe that
Christ died for me, to procure Faith and Repentance for me, I do not say, that
I am bound, or that every Man is bound to believe this. And a little below he
says, I see a Reason manifesting that Christ merited not this for all, no not
for all, and every one that hears the Gospel. For if he had, then he had
merited it for them absolutely, or conditionally, not absolutely, for then all,
and every one should believe de facto, which is untrue; for the Apostle says,
(2 These. 3.) Fides non est omnium; nor conditionally, for what Condition, I
pray, can be devised, upon the Performance whereof, God, for Christ's Sake,
should give us Faith and Repentance. To this Demand I shall hereafter answer.

Thus, according to Dr. Twisse, though the Pardon of Men's Sins and the Salvation
of their Souls were conditionally purchased for them by Jesus Christ, viz. on
the Condition of Faith and Repentance, and this for all, without Exception; yet
these Conditions were, by Jesus Christ, purchased only for the Elect, and are
not offered unto Sinners, on any Condition whatsoever.

The latter Part of what he held I shall hereafter consider. That Christ died
to obtain Salvation for all Men, on the Terms of the new Covenant, I now take
for granted, at least suppose it to be a Truth: And all those for whom Christ
thus died, I hold to be in a salvable Estate; otherwise, how are they beholden
to Christ for thus dying for them?

And I would fain be plainly showed how the Gospel can be preached to any
Sinner for whom Christ thus died not? Or on what Foundation any Sinner can have
Salvation offered to him, for whom it has never been so much as conditionally
obtained by Jesus Christ, in the Sense allowed by Dr. Twisse, as above? May a
Sinner be saved without having any Price of Redemption paid for him, in Case he
believes? Or does this still remain to be done for him, if he should believe in
Christ? Or may Salvation be fitly offered to him for whom Christ died not, on
Condition of his believing, though it could not be given to him should he
believe? Seeing God knows that it is not in his Power to believe, having no
Object set before him, on which his Faith may be fixed, or any Eye to look to
him, if there were, as is required in Isai. 45.22. I may very seriously say, I
know of no Kindness that can be shown in such an Offer, i. e. an Offer of
Salvation made to Sinners that are not in a salvable State.

But Christ having died for all Men, to purchase Salvation for them, on the
Terms expressed in a most gracious Covenant, well ordered in all Things and
sure, there is then a Foundation laid for a Treaty of Peace and Reconciliation
with sinful Men, on the Account of a Price of Redemption paid by Jesus Christ,
as in Romans 3.24, 25, 26. where the Apostle having affirmed, that all have
sinned and come short of the Glory of God, he adds, that we are justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God
has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his
Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the Forbearance of
God; to declare, I say, at this Time, his Righteousness, that God might be just
and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. In which Words we are
assured, That it would not have stood with the Justice of God to have justified
a Sinner, though a Believer, had not Christ been set forth, as in the Words
expressed. And it will no more consist with the Justice of God to offer
Salvation to a Sinner for whom Christ died not, than actually to save him
without Christ's dying for him. And Salvation might have been as well offered
to the whole World, if Christ had not died at all, as to any one Sinner for
whom he died not.

How there has been a Foundation laid for the Salvation of sinful Men, or Way
made for it, so that it may be done without any Injury to the Justice of God,
or any other of his Attributes, yea, with great Honor to them all, has been
now sufficiently declared. And the Reason why the Gospel is not preached, and
Salvation offered to all Mankind, is not because all are not in a salvable
State, or because there is not a Foundation laid in the Mediation of Christ for
the Salvation of any Person or People in the World: So that there is no Sinner
that has not committed the unpardonable Sin, who may not be invited to believe
in the Son of God, and promised, that so doing, he shall be saved.

But before I prove, that Salvation is offered to Sinners in the Gospel, there
are three Things necessary to be observed to clear up my Way to what is
designed, and they are these here following.

1. The Promises of Salvation made in the Word of God, to such as are already
in a regenerate and justified State, are nor conditional, but absolute. God
does not in his Word say to any regenerate and justified Person, that if he
shall or will believe and repent, he shall be justified and saved. There is no
Reason or Occasion for God so to say to those who have already believed and are
passed from Dead to Life, and so are secured from ever coming into
Condemnation, as in John 5.24. Romans 8.1. But they are poor unregenerate,
unjustified Sinners that have, in the Gospel, a conditional Offer of Salvation
made to them. These are there told, that though they are at present in a State of
Sin and Death, yet if they will believe in the Son of God, they shall have Life
through his Name, as in John 20.31. but that otherwise, they shall die in their
Sins, John 8.24.

Indeed there is another Sense, in which it may be, and is, in Scripture, said
to Persons already in a State of Salvation, it being yet unknown to themselves
and others that they are so, viz. supposing ye are now true Believers, and in a
regenerate State, ye shall be certainly saved for ever: As ye be already in a
State of Salvation, so God will certainly save you for the future, perfecting
in you all that does concern you. He that has begun a good Work in you will
perfect it to the Day of Christ, as in Phil. 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. Hereto
agrees that of our Savior, John 11.26. (as well as John 5.24* before
mentioned) He that lives and believes in me shall never die. The Faith
intended in such Places of Scripture as these, is not a Condition on which
Salvation is offered, which they already have, but the Qualification by which
Persons may be known to be in a justified State; and this Kind of Faith is
infused in our Regeneration, as shall be hereafter shown. Of this Kind of Faith
that Text is to be understood, John 5.24. The same Kind of Faith is also
intended, 1 John 1.1.

2. I must here also observe, That whenever any spiritual Benefit or good Thing
is conditionally promised in Scripture, which is never bestowed on any but such
as are eternally saved, under the Name of that good Thing, the whole of Man's
Salvation is always comprehended or comprised. Salvation is a complex Subject
including several Things in it, all which are firmly connected or knit
together, so as never to be separated in any Person that is saved. As those who
are not saved have none of them, so those that are saved have them all:
Therefore all of them are spoken of as Things accompanying Salvation, Heb. 6.9.
Hence it comes to pass, that if but one or two of these Things are mentioned,
in any Promise of God, they are all necessarily intended and comprised under
the Name of that Thing, or those Things that are expressly named, as much as if
they were all enumerated. There is no Occasion of particularly naming of them
all, because they forever all go together, and he that shall have one of them
shall as certainly have all the rest. We are not therefore to think, that
Salvation is conditionally promised in the Texts only wherein it is
particularly named: A Promise of Pardon of Sin, of Justification, of the holy
Spirit, of spiritual Wisdom, respectively, is as truly a Promise of Salvation,
as that, Whosoever believes shall be saved. So when Salvation is in that Word
promised, all Things which that Term comprehends, as above, are therein
promised.

3. I must here further observe, That on whatsoever Condition any spiritual
Benefit comprised in Man's Salvation, is promised, under that Term or
Condition, the whole Condition of Man's Salvation, or every Thing required as a
Condition of it, is necessarily comprised or implied. The Reason of this is
very plain. If a Person be required to do one Thing, unto which several others
are inseparably connected, in Respect of the Nature of them, and their Relation
and Dependence one on another, all those Things must needs be virtually
required under the Name of that one. Hence whenever God, in Scripture, requires
either Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Prayer, or Fear, etc. he requires every
one of these. A Man cannot do any one of these Things without doing them all;
therefore God, in requiring any one of them, does virtually require them all;
and if he annex a Promise to the Performance of this, that, or the other of
them, that Promise has a Relation to them all, and they are all virtually or
implicitly comprised in the Condition of it. Thus if Salvation be conditionally
promised to Believing, it is therein conditionally promised to Repentance also;
because these Things are inseparable in the Nature of them, so that one of them
cannot be without the other; and the like may be said concerning calling on
God, seeking his Face, fearing his Name, etc. We therefore find in Scripture,
that Promises of spiritual Blessings, or, in a Word, of Salvation, in which all
such Blessings are comprehended, are made promiscuously to such Actions or
Duties as I have just now named; but by no Means to any of them exclusively of
the rest, but to this or that in which all the rest are implied, as being
inseparable from it.

And it is the more necessary thus to conceive, because the Things by God
required of Man, are of such a mixed Nature, and (if I may so speak) so blended
together, that they cannot be fully described or conceived of, without taking
into the Idea of them, respectively, something belonging to the rest. As to
instance, we have a Promise that he that believes shall be saved, Mark 16.16.
But how can we conceive of this Faith or Believing; as wholly excluding
Repentance, Obedience, and Prayer, etc. from the Idea of it? And how can we
define Repentance, without comprising Faith, Obedience and Prayer in it? Is not
Faith exercised in Repentance and Prayer? And does not Faith give Life and
Vigor to it? We cannot call on him, on whom we do not believe, Romans 10.14. Nor
is that worthy the Name of Prayer that has no Faith in it, or is not a Prayer
of Faith, Jam. 5.15. And of Repentance the same may be said. All our Duties
must be mixed with Faith, or they will be unacceptable to God, Heb. 4.2. and
11.^6. If we go about nicely to distinguish these Things, we neither edify our
selves nor others; nay, we do thereby but perplex the true Servants of God.
When we speak of Believers, Penitents, such as call on the Name of the Lord,
the Righteous, etc. the same Persons are, by these Terms, intended. And it is
so also when the Holy Ghost speaks of such.

These Things being observed, and duly considered, I need not say much to
prove, That Salvation is offered or conditionally promised unto Sinners in the
Gospel. The most that now remains needful to this End, is, to quote and recite
some of the many Texts of Scripture, wherein it is obvious that they have in
the Gospel such Offers of Salvation made to them; and in what Things the
Condition of the new Covenant does consist.

Of the Texts I here intend, some only need to be inserted; the rest I shall
only refer to, that such as please may read them. Those which I shall recite
are these which here follow, viz. Mark 16.15, 16. Go ye into all the World, and
preach the Gospel to every Creature. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. Acts 2.37, 38. Now when they
heard this, they were pricked in their Heart, and said unto Peter, and to the
Rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do? Then Peter said unto
them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for
the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Heb.
5.9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation to all
them that obey him. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have Right to the Tree of Life, and enter in through the Gates into the
City. Romans 10.13. Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved.
Amos 5.4. Thus says the Lord unto the House of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye
shall live. Prove. 8.17. They that seek me early shall find me. Matthew. 7.7, 8.
Luke 11.9, 10. Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find, knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives, and be
that seeks, finds, and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. Luke
11.13. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good Gifts to your Children:
How much more shall your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask
him. Prove. 1.23. Turn ye at my Reproof: Behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto
you, I will make known my Words unto you. Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. If thou criest after
Knowledge, and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding; if thou seek her as
Silver, and searchest for her as for hid Treasures, then shall thou understand
the Fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God. Hos. 6.3. Then shall we
know, if we follow on to know the Lord: His going forth is prepared as the
Morning; and he shall come upon us as the Rain; as the latter and former Rain
upon the Earth. Gal. 6.9. And let us not be weary in well doing: For in due
Season we shall reap, if we faint not.

Texts of Scripture like these that have been now mentioned are these which
here follow. Acts 10.43. Romans 10.9, 10. John 20.31. Acts 6.30, 31. John 8.24.
Acts 3.19. Luke 13.3. Isai. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.27, 28, and ver. 30. Prove. 28.13.
James 4.8. Romans 2.7, and ver. 10, Acts 10.34, 35. Prove. 8.17. Isai. 45.19. 2
C^^^n. 28.19. John 4.10. compared with ver. 14. and Chap. 7.37, 38, 39. Jer.
29.13. Psalm. 103.17, 18. Matthew. 11.28. John 6.37.

I shall, unto the Scripture Testimonies, add two Reasons to prove, That
Salvation is conditionally offered unto Sinners in the Gospel; and so I shall
conclude this Chapter, and this first Part of my Essay. Now my Reasons are
these.

1. If God does not offer, or conditionally promise Salvation unto Sinners in
the Gospel of his Son, then he does not save them in the Way of a Covenant,
which, I think, according to Scripture, he evidently does; and also according
to the Judgment of the Generality of orthodox Divines. That Sinners are saved
in the Way of a Covenant, I think, the Word of God does plainly enough hold
forth. This in Scripture is called the new Covenant; and generally, by
Protestants, the Covenant of Grace: Of it we read frequently in the Oracles of
God; unto some of which Places I shall content my self here to refer my Reader,
partly because it would take much Time to transcribe them; and partly because I
hope there are not many who question what I assert. This was the Covenant made
with Abraham and his Seed, Genesis 17.7. And that in which David professes, is
all his Salvation and all his Desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. It is a Covenant made with
Sinners in a wretched State of Sin and Misery, Ezekiel. 16.8. A better Covenant
than the old Covenant was; and a Covenant in which spiritual Blessings are
given, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10, -- 13. and in which everlasting Mercies are
conditionally promised to the Keepers of it, Psalm. 103.17, 18. Psalm. 25.10. and
Acts 2.38, 39. How then can it be denied, That Salvation is conditionally
promised in the Gospel? I expect, that if I meet with Opposition in this
Particular, I shall have many that will stand in my Defense; and I am sure I
can produce a great Number to vouch for me, among Divines who have been in good
Credit in the Church of God; though I know Antinomians deny what I here maintain.

2. If Salvation be not promised conditionally unto Sinners, then they have no
Ground of Assurance, that on the Performance of the Duties which God requires
of them, in order to their Salvation, they shall certainly be saved. I suppose
it neither can, nor will be denied, that God requires some Things of sinful
Men, to be done by them, with an Eye and View to their eternal Salvation: But
is it likely to be true, or comfortable to be believed, that God has not
promised us eternal Life, in Case we do what is required of us, in order (...)
our obtaining it? We are not yet come to consider, how far it is in the Power
of sinful Men to perform what is incumbent on them in order to their Salvation.
That will be the Business of the second Part of my Book. But the Question here
is, Whether God does not, in Gospel, conditionally offer to save Sinners? And I
say, if he does not, then Sinners have no Assurance given them of it, whatever
they do, in order to their obtaining eternal Life: And if so, I confess they
have not so good Encouragement to endeavor to comply with their Duty, as I
have ever though it they had, and, as I think, that Text much favors their having,
Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace; to the End the
Promise might be sure to all the Seed, not to that only which is of the Law,
but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all.

PART II.
I come now to the second Part of my Essay; and that which I principally
designed in it, Namely,

That the Offer of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel, compriseth in it an
Offer of the Grace given in Regeneration.

Now I shall endeavor the Explanation and Confirmation of this Truth, in
several Chapters hereafter following.

CHAP. I. Concerning the Grace of Regeneration, here said to be conditionally
offered unto Sinners.
SINCE I suppose the Grace of Regeneration to be comprised in that Salvation,
which is offered to Sinners in the Gospel; it will be necessary for me to show
what I mean by that which I so call: And I suppose that by a just Account o^
^t, it will appear to be a very eminent Part of that great Salvation which
Christ has purchased, and which God bestows on all those whom he eternally
saves.

Now I shall not here attempt to give a full Account of the great Work of
Regeneration, but only to observe and assert some Things concerning it, the
Observation of which will, I think, be to my present Purpose; and they are such
as here follow.

1. In Regeneration there is a real Change wrought in the Soul of a Sinner. (1)
That in Regeneration there is a Change wrought, I suppose will not be denied.
(2) This Change is a real Change. I so call it in this Place, not in Opposition
to the mere Show and Appearance of one, but to distinguish it from a Change
relative. In the Justification of a Sinner, he passes under a relative Change,
viz. a Change from a State of Guilt, to a State of Peace and Favor with God:
But in Regeneration, a Sinner has a real Change wrought in and upon his Person*
He is made in himself really better than he was before. (3) The immediate
Subject of this Change is the Soul of the Sinner, in whom it is wrought; though
the same does also affect his Body, yet I think the immediate Subject of it is
the Soul. In it he has a new Heart given to him, Ezekiel. 36.26.

2. The Change intended respects the Sinner's moral State and Condition. It is
not a Change in the Essence of his Soul, and Faculties of it; but it respects
its moral Qualities. The Soul of the Man is essentially the same in every
Condition. He has not really another Soul given to him, when he is regenerated;
but his Soul is made, in a moral Sense, better than it was; being made holy,
whereas it was utterly destitute of any true Holiness; (in a strict and proper
Sense so called,) and very full of Sin.

3. In the Change intended, Sinners are delivered from the reigning Power and
Dominion of Sin. Though they may still have, yea, they really have, a great deal
of Sin and Corruption remaining in them, as the Apostle shows at large in Romans
Chap. 7. and more briefly in Gal. 5.17. yet they are no longer under the
reigning Power and Dominion of their Corruptions, as the same Apostle asserts
at large in the 6th Chapter of Romans, as any one may see, that will please to
read it; especially Verses 2, 6, 7, 14, 18, and 22. which I need not transcribe.

4. There is in the Change which I speak of, a Principle of spiritual Life and
^oliness infused into, or implanted in, the Soul. As Sin is mortified in it, so
it is quickened and made capable of serving God in Newness of Life. Indeed it is
by that Change which is wrought in it that both these are effected.

But here I shall more particularly observe, (1) That in this Change the Soul
that was dead in Sin, is quickened: And so we are plainly informed in Ephesians. 2.1.
And you has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. And in Col.
2.13. And you being dead in your Sins, and in the Uncircumcision of your Flesh,
has he quickened together with him. (2) Sinners are thus quickened by having a
Principle of spiritual Life put into them, or implanted in them, Ezekiel. 37.5, 6.
This Principle of spiritual Life, or true Holiness, put into the Souls of Men
in their Regeneration, is in Scripture called by several Names, as a new Heart
and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. The Spirit which lusts against the Flesh, Gal.
5.17. The new Man, Ephesians. 4.24. The Seed of God, 1 John 3.9. The divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1.4. Eternal Life, 1 John 3.15. All that have this divine and heavenly
Principle in them, have already eternal Life, and are passed from Death to
Life, John 5.24. (3) This Principle is that by which such as have it, are
inclined and disposed to live unto God, or to live holy and godly Lives. Let it
be here observed, that Regeneration does not consist in any one or more good
Act or Actions, but in God's qualifying and disposing the Soul to perform them.
This is evident in Ephesians. 2.10. We are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good Works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them.
See, for the same Purpose, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. compared with Luke 6.43, 44, 45.
The Tree must be good before the Fruit can be so.

The Change under Consideration is wrought by the Power of the Holy Spirit, the
Soul being wholly passive in it. Here we may observe several Things, as (1)
That the Holy Spirit is the great Agent, who works this Change: Therefore
such as are said to be born again, are said to be born of the Spirit, John 3.5,
6. Our Regeneration is our Sanctification, and this is the Sanctification of
the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. This Work is not ascribed to the Spirit,
to exclude the Father and Son, but because it belongs to the Application of
Redemption, which, according to the Economy of the divine Persons, is
especially ascribed to the Holy Spirit. The Regenerate are frequently said to
be born of God; but then he works this Change by his Spirit. (2) The mighty
Power of the Holy Ghost is put forth in working this Change: By Nothing short
^^^^eof can this Work be effected. It is, according to the Language of the
Scripture, Creation-Work, Psalm. 51.10* Ephesians. 2.10. and Chap. 4.24. And being so,
the Power of God is put forth in it, even the xeceeding Greatness of his Power
to usward that believe, according to the Working of his mighty Power; which
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. (3) And
from hence it follows, that the Soul passing under this great Change, is
wholly passive therein. The Soul lends no Hand toward the Working this Change
in it. Alas! What can that do? If it had as much Power as ever it had, it could
do Nothing in such a difficult Work as this. To God only this is possible. This
therefore is a Work every where ascribed to the mighty God. There is no
Intimation in Scripture of the Sinner's doing any Thing toward it himself; but
the contrary is plainly asserted, as in John 1.13. where it is said of such as
were born of the Spirit, that they were born not of Blood, nor of the Will of
the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. It follows (4) That this
Change is not wrought by moral Suasion, but by the immediate Energy of the Holy
Ghost. By moral Suasion, I intend, the Word of God, either read or heard, or
any moral Motives or Persuasions whatsoever. And when I say this Change is
wrought by the immediate Influence of the Holy Ghost; I mean, that he uses no
Instrument at all in the Working of it; and that it is a supernatural Change.
When it is said by some to be a physical Change, I suppose they use that Word
to signify that it is not wrought by moral Suasion, as I also affirm. And that
indeed it is not, is from hence evident, that the Soul is passive in it, as I
showed under the last Head. For it is utterly impossible, that the Soul should
be wholly passive in any Change wrought in or upon it, by moral Suasion;
because the Nature of moral Suasion is to move and excite to Action, in a moral
or rational Way, in which a Supposition of Passiveness is a Contradiction. When
Sinners are said to be begotten by the Word of Truth, Jam. 1.18. their active
Conversion is intended, not that Change, in which the Soul is passive, betwixt
which Divines are wont to distinguish; and betwixt these there is a plain
Distinction made in Scripture, as has been before observed. See Ezekiel. 36.26,
27. Ephesians. 2.10. Jer. 31.18, 19, before quoted.

It follows from the Premises, That Regeneration is an instantaneous Change.
The Work of Sanctification is indeed a gradual Work, as plainly appears in 2
Cor. 3.18. but the Work of Regeneration is not so. This is evident from this
Reason, viz. that Regeneration is the very Beginning of the Work of
Sanctification. When God works the Change called Regeneration, he then begins
to sanctify that Soul that is the Subject of it. Of his Beginning of which Work
we read, Phil. 1.6. He that has begun a good Work in you, will perform it until
the Day of Jesus Christ. Now the Beginning of any Work cannot be gradual, but
must needs be instantaneous. Therefore every Man in the World is, at present,
either in a regenerate or in an unregenerate State. There is no such Condition
as wherein a Person is in neither of these, but betwixt both. As, in the
natural Birth, a Person is as fully born the first Day he comes into the World,
as when he comes to be of full Stature; so it is in the spiritual Birth also.
Those in whom God has wrought a saving Change, are as truly converted and born
again, as ever they will be, though they may after this grow in Grace, and grow
up to the Measure of the Stature of perfect Men in Christ Jesus.

Lastly, I observe here, That the Change wrought in Regeneration is a permanent
Change. It is never lost or fallen from. He that begins this good Work perfects
it to the Day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. before mentioned. The Seed of God remains
in all that have it, 1 John 3.9. not but that it might be lost, had not God
promised that it shall not, Jer. 32.40. and elsewhere. The Image of God, with
which Man was before his Fall endowed, might be lost, because God had not
promised that it should not, yea, because God had threatened, that if he sinned
it should; for so much was intended in that Threatening, Genesis 2.17. as I have
formerly showed. But now the Case is far otherwise. God has, in the new
Covenant, promised never to take his Holy Spirit from his true Saints and
Servants, who have experienced the great Work of Regeneration. His Seed shall
remain in them. They have eternal Life abiding in them; and they shall never be
deprived of it, John 11.26.

CHAP. II. That the Grace of Regeneration which has been described, is such an
eminent Part of Man's Salvation, that Salvation cannot be offered to Sinners,
without an Offer of it.
TO make good what I here maintain, I will (1) show, that the Grace of
Regeneration is a very eminent Part of Man's Salvation. (2) That it being so,
Salvation cannot be offered to Sinners without an Offer of it.

The former of these is so manifest from what has been already said, that there
is scarce any Occasion to add any Thing here, for the Confirmation of it. In
the first Part of this Essay, Chap. II. Page 30. I have showed, that Man's
Salvation does very eminently consist in his Deliverance from the Power and
Dominion of Sin; and in the first Chapter of this second Part, that this is
done in Man's Regeneration, wherein he is set free from the reigning Power and
Dominion of his own depraved Nature, which, as he comes into the World, he is a
Servant and Slave unto. I have therein also showed, that in this great Work,
Man is endowed with a Principle of spiritual Life, yea, with Life eternal; so
that he has everlasting Life as soon as he is born again, as in John 5.24. Now
wherein can Man's Salvation more eminently consist, than in his having such
Things as these done for him? And add hereunto what I have already made good,
viz. That all this is wholly done for sinful Men by the blessed God himself,
they doing Nothing in it or to it themselves, but being wholly passive therein.
This serves further to clear up the Point, that this belongs to the great
Salvation, of which God is the Author, and which none can work but he.

And how well does this agree with what we have in Scripture, with Relation to
the Salvation of God, wrought by Jesus Christ, who came into this lower World
to save his People from their Sins, as in Matthew. 1.21. 1 Timothy 1.15. And this
was not to save them from the Guilt of Sin only, but from the Defilement and
Dominion of Sin also. He accordingly gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all Iniquity, and parify to himself a peculiar People zealous of good
Works, Tit. 2.14. And this is accomplished for sinful Men when they are,
according to his Mercy, saved by the Washing of Regeneration, and the Renewing
of the Holy Ghost, as in Tit. 3.15. By which Words it appears, that their
Regeneration is their Salvation: And this was what was by the Prophet Ezekiel
foretold, in Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean Water upon you, and you shall
be clean: From all your Filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
And the next Words show how this was to be done, Ver. 26. A new Heart also will
I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, etc.

In this, as has formerly been said, Man's Salvation does more properly
consist, than in his Deliverance from the Guilt of Sin by Christ's Blood, which
yet is no less a Fruit of his Death, than that. By that, Way is made for Man's
Happiness: By this we are, in Part, actually delivered from the Dominion and
Slavery of Sin: By that we have a Right given us unto eternal Life: By this we
are put in actual Possession of it, so as never to be deprived of it. See John
11.26. and Chap. 4.14.

Thus we see that Man's Salvation does eminently consist in his Regeneration.

I now proceed to show, That since it is, as has been said, Salvation cannot be
offered unto sinful Men, without an Offer of regenerating Grace. A Supposition
of offering Salvation to Sinners, without offering to them that in which
Salvation does eminently consist, carries or implies in it a plain
Contradiction. Salvation is in Scripture called eternal Life, John 3.15, 16.
and frequently elsewhere. Now there is no other eternal Life mentioned in
Scripture, as by God given to sinful Men, but that spiritual Life which is
given in Regeneration. It is the same, I doubt not, that is intended by our
Savior, in John 17.3. This is Life eternal, that they may know thee, the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The Knowledge of God and
Christ, in this Place intended, is undoubtedly given in Regeneration, and this
is said to be eternal Life, not as being the Condition on which eternal Life is
offered, but because eternal Life does formally and eminently consist in it. It
is the great Happiness of all that have it: And they are already in a blessed
State that are the Subjects of it. So was Peter, Matthew. 16.27. Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-jona: For Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven. Such as so know God and Christ may say, as in 1 John
5.20. We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding,
that we should know him that is true: And we are in him that is true, even in
his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal Life. Persons thus
qualified in their Regeneration, are already possessed of the same Kind of
Life, which all the Saints shall live in Heaven for ever. For Grace here and
Glory hereafter differ only gradually, nor specifically, not in Kind but in
Degrees; and Grace in all its Degrees is called Glory.

The Impossibility of offering Salvation to sinful Men, without offering the
Grace of Regeneration to them, may be thus made further evident: God cannot be
truly said to offer Salvation to Sinners without offering to them whatsoever is
necessary on his Part, in order to their Salvation. God may offer Salvation to
Sinners without offering to them what is necessary on their Part, in order to
their Salvation, such as is the Condition required of them in order to it: But
an Offer of Salvation, without an Offer of what is absolutely necessary to it,
on the Part of him, by whom the Offer is supposed to be made, seems utterly
impossible. There may be indeed the Show of such an Offer, but really there can
be none. Such a seeming Offer cannot be sincere. If a Physician in whose Power
alone it is to heal a sick Man, should tell him he would bestow a plentiful
Estate upon him, provided he would do something, which a Man in Health only can
do, and not withal offer to restore him to Health; would any one say, that that
Physician was sincere and kind, in that seeming Offer? Or would he not rather
be guilty of mocking and tantalizing him therein. I do not charge the blessed
God with dealing thus with sinful Men, but am showing that he does not. A
better Account may be given of his Dealings with them than this is, as by the
Help of God, I hope to make evident in the Sequel of this Discourse.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Nature of that Faith and Repentance, etc. to which
the Promise of eternal Life is, in this Discourse, supposed to be made.
IT has been already said, That the Condition on which Salvation is promised to
Sinners in the Gospel, does include or comprise in it Faith, Repentance,
Obedience, Seeking of God, and in a Word, every Thing, whatever it be, that is
so required of them, to whom the Gospel is preached, that God will not save
them without it. But this is too general an Account of the Nature o^ the
Condition of the new Covenant, or of the Condition required of Sinners, in
order to their Salvation; which is the Reason of what is here proposed to
Consideration.

For whereas Faith, Repentance, Obedience, etc. or by whatever other Names
these Acts are called, are of two Sorts or Kinds, according to the different
States Persons are in, viz. either a State of Nature, I mean that Condition
that all Mankind are in, while unregenerate, or not born of the Spirit: Or a
regenerate and justified Estate, such as they are in, who are born of God and
become new Creatures. Whereas, I say, such Acts as in Scripture, go by the
Names of Faith, Repentance, etc. do specifically differ, according to the
different State of the Persons, by whom they are performed; it must needs be
necessary to enquire, which of these two Kinds of Acts they are, which are
required of Sinners in order to their Salvation; and to do this is the Business
of this Chapter.

Now, whereas I maintain in this Essay, That the Grace of Regeneration is
comprised in the Salvation conditionally offered in the Gospel, it will
evidently follow on this Supposition, That the Faith and Repentance required in
the Covenant of Grace, as the Condition on which Salvation is offered to us,
cannot be of that Kind which is exercised by none but regenerate and justified
Persons; for so, Sinners should be in a State of Salvation before they perform
the Condition required of them, in order to their being saved; contrary to
Reason and to Scripture also; for it is by Faith that we are justified, Romans
3.28. and 5.1. And the Wrath of God abides on Sinners till they believe, John
3.36. I therefore conclude, That whatever it be, and by what Names soever
called, that is required of Sinners in order to their being saved, is what they
must perform before they are in a State of Salvation, and so while they are in
an unregenerate and unjustified State: Which is no more than to say, before God
saves them. And when awakened Sinners ask, what they shall do to be saved? as
in Acts 2.37. and 16.30. this is plainly supposed in their Inquiry; and they
are confirmed in this by the Answer given to them, being suitable to the
Meaning of their Question.

In order therefore to my supporting the Hypothesis I have undertaken to
defend, it will be necessary that I do two Things, viz. (1) Prove it to be
impossible, that the Condition required of us should consist in any Act or Acts
to be performed by us, being already born again, and by virtue of that Grace
which in our Regeneration we receive. (2) That it is very possible, that the
Condition to this End required of sinful Men, should be performed by them,
before they are born of the Spirit; and that, by virtue of such Aids and
Influences as God may afford them by his Word and Spirit, without bestowing the
Grace of Regeneration on them; and before they receive this Grace: And both
these Things I shall have Occasion to endeavor to confirm in the Prosecution
of the Work, in which I am now engaged. But my present Design in this Chapter,
is briefly to consider the Nature of those Acts, which, I say, are comprised in
the Condition on which God offers to save Sinners; and wherein they differ from
those, which, though much better, are not, yea, cannot be, required to that End.

Now here I will first show, what the fundamental Ground and Reason of the
Difference that is between them, is: And then, secondly, wherein the Difference
does appear, so far as I am able to discern and discover it.

1. As to the Reason and Ground of the Difference betwixt the Acts now to be
compared, the Difficulty seems not to be very great; it being evident, that the
Reason thereof is this, that the Acts of such as are in a regenerate and
justified Estate, do, or may, flow from an inward Principle of true Holiness;
or from a Principle of spiritual Life, which, in their new Birth, they have
been endowed withal, called in Scripture, as has been declared, the new Man,
the new Creature, a new Heart, a new Spirit, the Seed of God, the divine
Nature, etc. This Principle, being a spiritual and holy Thing, denominates the
Persons spiritual and holy, who are the Subjects of it; and such as they are,
their Actions are, or may be also, like the Principle from which they proceed.
On the other Hand, such as are in a State of Nature, and so destitute of any
such heavenly and divine Principle, as has been now mentioned; and so not
spiritual, but carnal, do not, cannot, perform any such spiritual and holy
Actions, as such as are regenerate can do: For Actions cannot be better than
the Principle which they proceed or spring from. We are accordingly told, that
that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and that which is born of the Flesh
is Flesh, John 3.6. And with this agrees that in Romans 8.8. They that are in the
Flesh cannot please God: And that also 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. The natural Man
receives not the Things of the Spirit of God: For they are Foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he
that is spiritual judges all Things, etc.

Agreeably hereunto the State of Mankind, with Relation to their Actions good
and bad, seems to be fully and plainly set forth by our Savior, Luke 6.43, 44,
45. For a good Tree brings not forth corrupt Fruit: Neither does a corrupt
Tree bring forth good Fruit. For every Tree is known by his own Fruit: For of
Thorns Men do not gather Figs, not of a Bramble-Bush gather they Grapes. A good
Man, out of the good Treasure of his Heart, brings forth that which is good;
and an evil Man, out of the evil Treasure of his Heart, brings forth that
which is evil: For of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks. We may
doubtless, from the Scriptures that have been mentioned, conclude it to be a
Truth, That, in a proper and strict Sense, no Actions are holy and good, but
what are performed by good or godly Persons, such as are born of God, or born
of the Spirit; and which flow from an inward Principle of spiritual Life, or
true Holiness.

Yet on the other Hand it may be truly affirmed, that some Actions which may
be, and are, performed by Persons in an unregenerate State, which have
something of Goodness in them; (though of an inferior Kind) and are so far
acceptable to God, by whom Actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2.3. and who perfectly
knows what of Good or Evil there is in any of them, and values them
accordingly, approving them so far as they are good, and abhorring them so far
forth as they are evil. But of this more hereafter: At present my Business is
to show, that there is a real Difference betwixt the good Actions of the
Regenerate, and the best that can be performed by unregenerate Persons; and
wherein that Difference lies.

Wherefore,

I shall here, secondly, mention three Things, wherein I think the good Actions
of the Regenerate greatly differ, and that specifically, from any that can be
performed by unregenerate Persons.

1. And first, the Knowledge which the Regenerate have of God and spiritual
Things is experimental, and their other Actions proceeding from such Knowledge,
suitable to it; but not so the Unregenerate.

I will here consider, first, that Knowledge which the Regenerate have of God
and Things spiritual; and then their other Actions proceeding therefrom.

1. I say, the Knowledge of the Regenerate is experimental; which the Knowledge
of the Unregenerate is not. Now to clear up this, we may observe (1) That the
Elect of God have not, in their Conversion, any other objective Revelation of
God, than the Non-Elect, who are never savingly converted. The external
Revelation of divine Objects and Truths, which we have in the holy Scriptures,
is a sufficient Ground for the Belief and assured Knowledge of them; so that
those who do not believe and know them, as they ought to do, cannot plead, that
they have not sufficient Evidence of the Truth and Reality of them. If they
could truly so plead, this would be a good Reason for their not believing them,
which they evidently cannot have, (I speak of those who enjoy the Gospel) as
appears in Luke 16.27, -- 31. Nay, I suppose it cannot be proved, that when the
Elect believe, with a Kind of Faith peculiar to them, they have any other
objective Revelation of divine Truths, and Evidence to ground their Faith on,
than those have who never so believe.

2. Persons enjoying such objective Revelation and Evidence of divine and
spiritual Things, need Nothing more of that Kind, in order to believing and
knowing them in a gracious and holy Manner, than is afforded to those who never
so believe. What is further necessary in order thereunto, is done for them in
Regeneration or passive Conversion; (of which before) and in the Assistance
they have in exercising the Grace they have so received; unto all which no new
objective Revelation is required. This, I say, is done by God's giving unto Men
an Heart to know him, Jer. 24.7. and by his opening their Eyes, to behold
wondrous Things out of his Law, Psalm. 119.18. And this God does by working a
subjective Change; that is, he rectifies the Organ, and restores the depraved
Faculty. He does it not by sending new Light, in other objective Revelations,
which the Subjects of such a Change had not before: For it is plainly supposed
in the Places but now quoted, that Persons, for whom this is done, have, before
the doing it for them, a sufficient objective Revelation of the Things which
they are required to believe and know.

3. The Knowledge of spiritual Things, in this Way obtained, is experimental,
and such as none but the Regenerate have or can have. All the Knowledge which
the Unregenerate have, or can have, of divine and spiritual Things, called the
deep Things of God, 2 Cor. 2.10, is quite of another Kind, viz. only by a
natural Assent on Testimony unto the Truth of the Things believed. And their
Assurance of such Things, in this Way, can arise no higher than their Knowledge
of him that testifies will lay a Foundation for, and the Reasons which they do,
or may see of the Credibility of the Things testified, will be sufficient to
produce; which sometimes may be a considerable Measure of Certainty: Yet this
is vastly different from, and no Ways comparable to, that experimental
Knowledge which the Regenerate do attain.

The Difference betwixt the two Kinds of Knowledge I am speaking of, is, I say,
very great and plain, as the Difference is great betwixt what we know by Report
only, and what we know experimentally, by Seeing, Feeling, Tasting, etc. See 1
John 1.1. A sick Person, whose Appetite is vitiated, and who has lost his
Relish of Meat and Drink; though he can believe such as commend this and the
other Sort of either, because he reckons them credible; yet cannot have the
same Assurance of the Goodness of the Things he has often heard praised, as he
has, who being in Health can, and does, experience the Sweetness of the Things
he feeds on, and by which he is strengthened and nourished, and so certainly
knows the Benefit of.

Thus Sin is a Disease, which has deprived Mankind of their Appetite and Relish
of spiritual Things; therefore the carnal Mind is Enmity against God, Romans 8.7.
with which we may compare, 1 Cor. 2.14. but lately mentioned. But in
Regeneration, this woeful Distemper of Men's Souls is, in a good Measure, cured;
so that they find and experience the Certainty and Excellency of spiritual
Objects; and can converse with them with Pleasure and Delight, as the
Scriptures plentifully show. Such as please may read and compare, Job 42.5, 6.
Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. Psalm. 119.97. Cant. 2.1. 1 John 1.3.

From this experimental Knowledge called Wisdom, and spiritual Understanding,
Col. 1.9. there always proceed such Actions as are suitable thereunto, and as
become those that are spiritually wise, such as are the genuine Fruits and
proper Effects of the Knowledge of the Holy, mentioned Prove. 1.7. Psalm. 111.10.
Job 28.28. also Prove. 2.10, 11, 12.

2. Another Thing wherein, I think, the good Actions of the Regenerate differ
from the best that can be performed by any unregenerate Persons, is this, that
they are performed out of such a Love to God, as has his infinite Perfections
for the formal Reason and Ground of it. Here I shall observe, (1) That
unregenerate Persons may perform Actions that are materially good, though they
have no Love to God at all; yea, though they have no Regard to him. It is not to
be doubted, but that unregenerate Sinners may believe there is a God; and have
a Fear and Dread of him, as well as Devils, Jam. 2.19. And out of such a Fear
of him they may yield Obedience to his Commands, though they love him not. (2)
Unregenerate Persons may have some Kind of Love to God, which may put them on
doing many Things which he requires them to do. There be some unregenerate
Persons that have a very considerable Respect and Veneration for the great God
that made them, and continually preserves them. They therefore love not to hear
his Name blasphemed; and the Kindness they may apprehend they have received
from him, may influence them to do many Things, which they may think good in
themselves, and pleasing in his Sight; and they may apprehend that God is so
gracious as to reward them well for the good Works which they perform. There
may be in the Unregenerate, a Kind of natural Love to God, answerable to the
Apprehensions they have of some Goodness in him, as well as such a Love to
their Neighbors; even common Grace may go thus far. (3) But no unregenerate
Person ever loved and obeyed God, on the Account of the admirable Perfections
of his Nature; so that his Persuasion of his infinite Goodness, arising from
his own experimental Acquaintance with him, was the formal Reason of this his
Love to him, and Desire to do that which would please him; so that they would
do the same, though they themselves had no Benefit by it. I suppose, That he that
cannot do thus, is still in a State of Nature, and does not know and love God
in a gracious Manner: And has not, in the Sense of the Scripture, t^sted that
the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2, 3. Psalm. 34.8.

3. I think the Regenerate only can perform good Actions, with an Aim and
Design to glorify God, as the ultimate End of them. There is, as I think, no
Doubt to be made, but that the Unregenerate may, and sometimes do, aim at God's
Glory, in some of their Actions. Such may be persuaded, That to glorify God
here, is the only Way to obtain eternal Life hereafter; and this may put them
upon endeavoring to glorify God's Name. But none but a gracious Soul can aim
at God's Glory, as the ultimate End of what he does; and though he should see no
Advantage to himself by it. But I think every truly holy Soul would do this.
However, God does not require us to aim at his Glory, without any Eye or View
to our own Advantage: These are Things, by God himself, so joined together,
that we ought not to go about to separate them.

So much may suffice to have said in this Place, concerning the Difference of
the gracious and holy Actions of those who are already passed from Death to
Life, and those Actions in which, I suppose, the Condition, on which Salvation
is offered unto Sinners, does consist. This will necessarily be further spoken
to hereafter.

CHAP. IV. That GOD, in offering JESUS CHRIST, with all his Benefits, to sinful
Men, must needs offer them the Grace of Regeneration.
THAT there is in the Gospel, a gracious Offer of Jesus Christ, with all his
Benefits, made to Sinners, is, I think, in the Ministry of the Word of God,
very frequently asserted, by orthodox Preachers of the Gospel: How agreeable to
Truth, I shall in this Chapter consider: And whether, if this be true, it will
not from thence follow, That Sinners have in the Gospel, an Offer of the Grace
of Regeneration made to them; which is the Point I am endeavoring to maintain.

Now in order to the clearing up of this Truth, I shall (1) show, That there
is, in the Gospel, an Offer of Jesus Christ himself to Sinners. (2) That,
having an Offer of Jesus Christ himself, they have, with him, an Offer of all
his Benefits. (3) That, having an Offer of all his Benefits, they must needs
have an Offer of the Grace of Regeneration. To these Things I will speak
severally.

1. I say Sinners have in the Gospel an Offer of Jesus Christ himself made to
them.

This I shall take for granted, it being, as I suppose, generally acknowledged
by all that own that Sinners have Salvation conditionally offered to them. In
John 1.11, 12. we have a plain Proof of this Truth.

But it may be proper here to observe, That when it is said, that Sinners have
in the Gospel an Offer of Jesus Christ, we must not understand merely his
Person, God-Man; but his Person considered as clothed with his Office of
Mediator betwixt God and Mankind; and every Way qualified and inclined to
execute that Office; yea, as having undertaken it on the Behalf of all that
will receive him, or come up to the Terms on which he is offered to them: These
Names, Jesus Christ, are plainly expressive of the Office he bears, and his
being anointed, or set apart to the Execution of it; the Name Jesus signifying
a Savior, and that of Christ and Messiah, his being anointed or set apart to
his Office: And whenever we speak of Jesus Christ, as being offered unto
Sinners, we should not think his Person only to be understood, but his Person
clothed with the Office of a Savior, as in Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his
Name JESUS; for he shall save his People from their Sins. Now this Office of a
Savior includes in it those of Priest, Prophet, and King.

Nor is Jesus Christ, who is offered unto Sinners, to be considered merely as
clothed with the Office of a Mediator, but as perfectly qualified for the
Execution of it, or Accomplishment of the Work he has undertaken to perform,
viz. the bringing many Sons unto Glory, Heb. 2.10. To this End he was made
perfect through Sufferings, as is said in the same Verse; not only as hereby he
became a Pattern of Patience to his suffering Saints, but more especially as by
this he laid the Foundation of all that still remained necessary, in order to
their being bro't into a State of perfect Happiness and Glory. Unto this that
well agrees, 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also once suffered for Sins, the Just for
the Unjust: that he might bring us to God, being put to Death in the Flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit. To the same Purpose it is said of him, Heb. 5.9. That
being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them
that obey him. The Price of Man's Redemption being once paid, their great
Savior might comfortably go on and accomplish all that was further necessary
in order to their Happiness, in their effectual Calling, Justification, and
Regeneration, etc.

When Jesus Christ is spoken of, as offered to Sinners, we must also consider
him as filled with all that Good which is treasured up in him, to be
communicated to all those whom he eternally saves. For it has pleased the
Father, that in him all Fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. And in him are hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Chap. 2.30. And we are told, in John
1.14. That he was full of Grace and Truth. And in verse 16. such as have an
Interest in him are bro't in saying, Of his Fullness have all we received, and
Grace for Grace. Jesus Christ is indeed that Fountain of spiritual Good, of
which we read, Zech. 13.1. In him therefore all our Springs are, Psalm. 87.7. He
is a full Repository of all those good Things that needy Souls can desire, and
look out after; and unto all, to whom he is Offered, he is offered full as he
is.

2. Together with, and in Jesus Christ, Sinners have an Offer of all his
Benefits. This is indeed a plain Consequence of what is above said, viz. That
Sinners have an Offer of Christ with all his Fullness. But for the further
clearing of this Point, we must here consider, (1) What we may here understand
by Christ's Benefits. (2) How it appears that these are all offered unto
Sinners in and with him.

(1) Let us here consider what we are to understand by Christ's Benefits. Now
unto this, in a Word, I say, That by these Benefits, I understand, all those
special and everlasting Mercies, which God bestows on all, and only those, whom
he eternally saves; and which are called Things that accompany Salvation, Heb.
6.9. What these Things are, I have more particularly shown, Part I. and Chap.
II. of this Essay, where it appears, Page 30. That Man's Salvation contains in
it, as an eminent Part of it, his Deliverance from the reigning Power and
Dominion of Sin, in and by his Regeneration. Such as please may see what is
there said, but much rather what the Scripture says, Matthew. 1.21. Tit. 2.14.
and Chap. 3.5.

(2) I must show that all these Benefits, not any one of them excepted, are in
the Gospel offered unto Sinners in and with Jesus Christ. They cannot be either
offered or given in any other Way, than that now expressed. I mean, That,
according to the Way which God has stated in the Gospel, they cannot. The
natural Order and Reason of Things will not admit that they should. For,

First, These Things being all reposited in Christ, as has been shown, there
can, I suppose, be no Way showed, how any Person can be a Partaker of any of
them, without being made Partaker of Jesus Christ, in whom they are all
treasured up. Those therefore that have an Interest in any of them, are said in
Scripture to have the same in him. And it would be preposterous in any Person
to desire, or labor to obtain, any of them, in any other Way, than by getting
an Interest in Jesus Christ himself. Those that have an Interest in any one of
those Things, are therefore in Scripture said to have them in him. In him they
have their Righteousness, and Strength, and their Life, Isai. 45.24, 25. 1 John
5.11. Gal. 2.20.

Secondly, Union with Christ is therefore necessary in order to Persons being
Partakers of any of these Benefits. Never did any one Soul partake of any of
them, without being first united to Christ. They are all conveyed from him as
the Head of his Church, which is his Body, unto the Members of it; or as from a
Vine to it is Branches. For this the Scriptures are full and plain, as may be
seen, Col. 1.18, 19. and Chap. 2.19. John 1.16. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. See also John
15.1, -- 6.

But there being several Senses in which Persons may be said to be united to
Jesus Christ, I shall have Occasion in my next Chapter distinctly to consider
them, and show, in what Sense Persons must be united to Jesus Christ, before
they can partake of any of his special Benefits. At Present it is sufficient to
my Purpose that the Scriptures are plain and full, That Union with, or to, him
is necessary to that End; and that he must become our's in Order to our
partaking of any of his special Favors: Even as a Woman must marry a Man, in
order to her having such an Interest in his Estate, as Wives have in the Estate
of their Husbands. And thus much may suffice for my fourth Chapter.

CHAP. V. That neither the Grace of Regeneration, nor any Act flowing from it,
or by which it is implied, is the Condition on which Salvation is offered to
Sinners, and consequently the same must be comprehended in the Salvation
offered to them.
HAVING in the foregoing Chapter endeavored to prove, That Sinners have in the
Gospel, an Offer of Jesus Christ and all his Benefits made to them; and
consequently, of Regeneration, which is one of the principal of them: I am
apprehensive there is one Exception that will be apt to be made against the
Argument there insisted on, viz. That Regeneration itself, (or which is in
Effect the same Thing, an Act of Faith flowing from it, or implying it) is the
Condition on which the Offer of Salvation is made; and consequently cannot be
comprised in the Salvation offered; because one and the same Thing cannot be
both the Condition on which Salvation is offered, and the Benefit itself to be
obtained on that Condition; I intend, in this Chapter, not only to show the
Faultiness of such an Objection; but also to make some Advantage of the
Consequence made use of in it, for the Support of the Hypothesis which it is
designed to overthrow.

I then readily acknowledge, That the same Thing cannot be both the Condition
on which Salvation is offered, and either a Part or the Whole of the Salvation
offered on it. If therefore it can be proved, That either Regeneration itself,
or any Act flowing from it or employed in it, is required of Sinners, as the
Condition on which Salvation is offered to them, it will plainly follow, that
it can be no Part of the Salvation, on that Condition offered. -- But then, on
the other Hand, if it is or may be sufficiently proved, that Regeneration is a
Part, and an eminent and principal Part too, of the Salvation offered in the
Gospel, it will as firmly follow, that it cannot be the Condition on which God
offers that Salvation. If therefore I have proved, as I think I have, That
Regeneration is comprised in the Salvation offered to Sinners; or if I can
still, as I intend, make good this Assertion, then it will appear not to be
comprised or implied in the Condition. However, if I have not yet proved this
in the Way expressed, I hope I shall sufficiently evince it in what remains to
be spoken in this Chapter.

To go on therefore, there are now two Things before me to be made good, viz.
(1) That neither the Grace of Regeneration, nor any Act flowing from it, can be
the Condition on which Salvation is offered to Sinners. (2) That from hence
this Conclusion follows, That the Grace given in Regeneration must needs be
comprised in the Salvation offered: -- And these Things I shall endeavor
severally to illustrate and confirm.

1. I will endeavor to show that neither the Grace of Regeneration, nor any
Act flowing from it, and so involved and implied in it, can be the Condition on
which Salvation is offered, as above.

(1) I say, the Grace of Regeneration itself, cannot be the Condition on which
God offers Salvation to sinful Men. For First, The Condition on which Salvation
is offered to Sinners, is something required of them to be done by them, which
the Grace of Regeneration is not. The Condition required of Sinners is
something which they are directed to do, in Answer to such Enquiries of
awakened Souls as these, What shall we do? Acts 2.37. and, What shall I do to
be saved? Acts 16.30. It is something called in Scripture Believing, Repenting,
Obeying, Seeking the Lord, Calling on his Name, etc. as I have formerly showed.
But the Grace of Regeneration is no act at all, either of God, or of the
Sinner, though it be God's Gift. It is an infused Habit or Principle, by which
they that have it are disposed to act as they should do, not their acting. For
it is called in Scripture, a new Heart, a new Spirit, the new Creature, the
Seed of God, the Image of God, the divine Nature, etc. none of which Words or
Names signify Actions, but a Principle of Grace or Holiness wrought in Men's
Souls by the Holy Spirit, creating them anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
that they should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. and Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Secondly, The
Grace of Regeneration cannot be the Condition on which Salvation is offered to
Sinners, because they cannot have it before they are in a State of Salvation;
which to its being a Condition on which Salvation is offered, is necessarily
required. But this will by and by be made further evident.

(2) No Act flowing from the Grace of Regeneration, or implying it, can be the
Condition on which Salvation is offered. No such Act, I mean, as any Person
performs by the Help of that Grace, which, in his Regeneration, he receives.
And to make good what I here assert, I will show, (1) That if that could be
which is here denied, then a Sinner might be vitally united to Jesus Christ,
while he has no Covenant Interest in him. And (2) Then also might a Sinner be
born of God, and born of the Spirit, before he is justified by the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ to him: Neither of which can be true, or may by
any Means be admitted.

1. I say, if any Act, or Acts, flowing from the Grace of Regeneration, or
implying it, were the Condition on which Salvation is offered, then it would
follow, that a Person may be vitally united to Christ before he has any
Covenant Interest in him and his Benefits; which must be denied. I suppose
there are scarce any of our Divines that will deny this Consequence, because
the Conclusion or Inference is, what they generally hold and maintain: For they
think an Act of Faith, flowing from a Principle of Grace given in Regeneration,
is required in order to our Salvation; nor do they at all doubt, but that all
in whom a Principle of Grace is wrought, are vitally united unto Christ, and
that before they have any Covenant Interest in him: For they suppose it to be
impossible, that any Person should have a Covenant Interest in Jesus Christ
that has not believed in him, and this with that Kind of Faith which is given
in Regeneration; and which can be only exerted by a regenerate Soul. It is not
therefore supposed, that there is any Absurdity in the Inference I draw from
the Proposition I oppose. What, therefore, is here incumbent on me is to show,
that it is impossible that any Person should be vitally united to Jesus Christ,
before he has a Covenant Interest in him; and consequently such a Right to his
Benefits also.

I will therefore here endeavor to make it manifest, that this is impossible.
And to this End I will briefly show (1) What I take to be imported in a vital
Union to Jesus Christ. (2) What I intend by a Covenant Interest in him. And
then I will show (3) How unreasonable it is to imagine, That a Person that has
not such an Interest in Christ and his Benefits, may yet be vitally united to
him.

1. And first, I will here show, what I suppose to be imported in that vital
Union with Jesus Christ, whereof I here speak.

Now to this I say, (1) That this imports that the great Work of Regeneration
is really wrought in such a Soul; or that he is born of God, born of the
Spirit; that God has given him a new Heart, and a new Spirit; restored his
Image in him, which he had lost by the Fall; endowed him with a Principle of
spiritual Life; planted the Seed of Grace in his Soul; made him Partaker of the
divine Nature. All this must needs be implied in a vital Union with Jesus
Christ: For it is by the Soul's Conformity to the Image of the Son of God, or
by his having Christ formed in him, that this his Union with him is bro't about
or effected. We are therefore told, that he that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. (2) Such as these are actually become the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, having the Spirit of God, Father and Son, dwelling in them, as in 1
Cor. 6.15, 16, 17, and ver. 19. And God dwells and walks in them, 2 Cor. 6.16.
So that they are become an Habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. and
Christ lives in them, Gal. 2.20. (3) Such as these have already eternal Life;
and shall not come into Condemnation, but are already passed from Death to
Life, and have eternal Life abiding in them, so that they shall never die. See
John 5.24. 1 John 3.14, 15. and Chap. 5.12. also John 11. 25, 26. (4) Such as
these God has already began to glorify, as plainly appears, 2 Cor. 3.18. The
Spirit of God and of Glory rests on them.

2. I must next show, what I intend by a Covenant Interest in Jesus Christ and
his Benefits: And here, in general, I say, I hereby intend a just Right and
Title to them, by the Promises of God in the new Covenant; and that unto Men's
having such a Right, their Performance of the Condition on which Jesus Christ
and his Benefits are offered, or conditionally promised, is absolutely
necessary.

Now, with Respect to this Interest in, or Right to, Christ and his Benefits, I
think it necessary to say several Things.

1. And first, this supposes, that there are, in the Gospel, conditional
Offers and Promises made of these Things unto sinful Men, plainly importing,
that they shall become theirs on the Performance of the Condition or Conditions
to that End required of them. But on this I need not enlarge, having before
spoken fully to it.

2. That these Conditions must be performed before a Right can be had to the
Things conditionally promised. The very Notion of a conditional Offer or
Promise does plainly imply so much.

3. I acknowledge, that, according to my Hypothesis, a Sinner must, in order to
his having such a Right, perform the now intended Condition, before he has the
great Work of Regeneration wrought in him; and consequently, Strength given to
him in his Regeneration is not required in order to it: Yet I believe, that, in
order to this, a Sinner needs the Help and Influences of God, by his Word and
Spirit.

4. Sinners can have no Right to any of the Benefits purchased by Jesus Christ
for them, and laid up in him, 'till they have a Right to, and Interest in
himself, as has been already showed.

5. Union with Jesus Christ is also absolutely necessary, in order to our
partaking of his special Benefits. They are all communicated by, and derived
from him, as he is Head of his Church, Col. 1.18, 19. and Chap. 2.19. Ephesians.
1.22, 23. also John 15. from the Beginning to Verse 6.

6. The Grace of Regeneration cannot be received from Christ, by his People, as
their vital Head, or as being in such a vital Union with him as I lately
described. This is most obvious, because no Person is so united to him, 'till
he is regenerate or born again; it being by the Bestowment of the Grace of
Regeneration on any Soul, that such an Union with Christ is brought about or
effected. It is by putting his holy Spirit into some of the Children of Men,
that Jesus Christ unites them to himself; and thus all that are joined to the
Lord are one Spirit with him: And hence it appears, that they receive not the
Grace of Regeneration from him, as being, in this Sense their Head; but to the
End he may be so, and they his Members.

It is therefore by a foederal Union with Jesus Christ, that his People are
made Partakers of regenerating Grace. That Union with him is to this End
necessary, I have already showed. All his Benefits are communicated to his
People, as from a Head to its Members, and without some Union with him, none of
his saving Benefits can be received by them. But it is evident, that in order
to their receiving the Grace of Regeneration, they can have no other than a
relative Union to him; and this can be no other than a foederal Union with him:
And this, I say, they may and must have, before they can partake of
regenerating Grace.

What I have here said I shall endeavor to make good by the following
Considerations.

1. There is a covenant as well as a vital Union betwixt Jesus Christ and his
People. That there is a vital Union betwixt him and them, is generally
acknowledged among us. This I have spoken of before in Page 34. That there is
also a Covenant-Union betwixt our Savior and his People, I suppose to be
likewise acknowledged; and this is that of which I here speak, and the Nature
whereof I would explain.

1. Here then, in the first Place, I must observe, That there is a
Covenant-Union betwixt God and some of the Children of Men, immediately
arising, or resulting, from a mutual Agreement or Stipulation betwixt him and
them, which does not of it self entitle those who are taken into it, to any of
the saving Benefits of the Covenant entered into. This will be manifest if the
Nature of the Covenant intended (I mean the Covenant of Grace) be a little
considered; and who the Parties are that are engaged in it.

And, in general, I here say, that the Covenant by which this Union is brought
about, being conditional, the Union intended cannot be effected, 'till the
Condition be performed. The Covenant I here intend is the new Covenant, or the
Covenant of Grace; and this is a conditional Covenant, as I have sufficiently
proved in the first Part of this Essay. In this Jesus Christ and all his
Benefits are conditionally promised to sinful Men. The Condition therein
required of Sinners, is that they lay hold on the Covenant, or submit to the
Terms of it, and then perform what is required in it, in order to their
enjoying the Good of it. What that is which is required, has already been
sufficiently declared. By doing this, Sinners obtain a Right to Jesus Christ,
with all his Benefits offered to them; and so have such a Relation to him as
they never had before. And in this Relation, whereof I now speak, their
covenant Union with him, which I here intend, does consist.

But I shall endeavor to clear up this more fully by a brief Observation of
several Things here following, as (1) That there is a covenant Relation betwixt
God and his People, which does immediately arise and result from their taking
hold of the Covenant, or submitting to the Terms of it. Though God does, in the
Gospel, offer to enter into Covenant with Sinners, this C^^enant is not
actually made betwixt him and them, 'till there be a Consent of both Parties to
the Terms of it. This is done on the (...) of Sinners invited to come into it,
when they take hold of God's ^^^enant: In doing of which they are said to join
themselves to the Lord to serve him, Isai. 5 3, 4, 5. and Jer. 50.5. When this
is done there is a mutual covenant Engagement betwixt him and them, as in Deuteronomy.
26.17, 18. In the Language of the new Testament, this is done by a professed
Subjection to the Gospel, and our being baptized in (or into) the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 9.13. and Matthew. 28.19.
Now, though hereby there is a covenant Relation and Union brought about or
effected betwixt God and the Sinners thus taking hold of the Covenant, as is
expressed in the Places quoted; yet this is not that Union with Jesus Christ,
which I principally here intend: For Persons may be thus joined to the Lord,
and yet never be saved, as appears, John 15.1, -- 6. and Romans 9.3, 4. and
several other Places. Wherefore (2) There is yet a nearer covenant Relation, or
foederal Union betwixt Christ and his People, than that which has been now
mentioned, which is come into when Men come up to the Terms, or perform the
Condition, on which Christ and his Benefits are, in the Gospel, offered to
them. For whereas, 'till this is done, God's covenant People are but in a State
of Probation, in order to their obtaining the everlasting Mercies offered to
them in the new Covenant, on a Condition yet depending, not being fulfilled;
they having now performed that Condition, have a real and just Right to all
that Good, of which before they had no more than a conditional Promise made to
them.

Having thus declared what I intend, both by that vital and covenant Union,
which is betwixt Christ and those belonging to him, I shall proceed,

3. To show how unreasonable a Thing it is for any to imagine it possible, that
a Person who has no such covenant Interest in, or Relation to, Jesus Christ, as
that but now described, may yet be vitally united to him, in the Manner before
Expressed, (Page 74.) A Person vitally united to Jesus Christ, is made an
actual Partaker of him, and Christ has taken Possession of his Soul, to dwell
and walk in for ever: They who are thus joined to the Lord are one Spirit with
him, 1 Cor. 6.17. and so in such a Union as that mentioned by Jesus Christ
himself, in John 17.21, 22, 23. That they may be one, as thou, Father, art in
me and I in thee, that they may be one in us: -- and the Glory which thou
gave me, I have given them: that they may be one, even as we are one. I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. And such a Union as
that also by him intended, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if
any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me. -- Is it possible that they should enjoy Christ, in
such an Union with him? For my part, I am otherwise persuaded. If Sinners may
be thus made Partakers of Christ, before they have any covenant Interest in
him, or Right to his Benefits, What Occasion is there of a conditional Offer of
him to be made to them in the Gospel? And how unaccountable is it, that any do
affirm, That Sinners must be vitally united to Jesus Christ, before they can
have a covenant Right to him; yea, before they can perform the Condition on
which he is offered in the Gospel? I cannot think that such an Union with
Christ, in order to our having a covenant Interest in him and his Benefits, is
necessary; but on the contrary, That our having a covenant Interest in him is
necessary, in order to our having such a vital Union with him: And that
Sinners, who are eternally saved, do not perform the Condition on which Christ
is offered, after they are thus united to him, but in order to their being so.
Christ stands and knocks at the Sinner's Door, and the Sinner opens to him
before he comes in to him, as appears by the Text lately mentioned, Rev. 3.20.
If it be said, that no Man can possibly open his Heart to Christ, by any
Assistances he can receive from him, until Christ be vitally united to him; as
this is to beg the Thing in Question, so it seems to contradict the Text, which
supposes the Sinner to open to Christ knocking at the Door of his Heart,
before he enters, and takes up his Abode in it. Christ can knock loud enough to
stir up the Sinner to open to him, before he actually enters and takes
Possession of his Soul.

There is one Thing more here necessary to be said, before I proceed to another
Argument; viz. That though a covenant Union to, or with Jesus Christ, be only
necessary, in order to a Sinner's partaking of the Grace of Regeneration, or
indeed possible to be had; yet that Grace being once received, all future
Supplies of more of the same Kind flow from him to his Members, as vitally
united to him, and living Members of that mystical Body, whereof he is the
living Head. Hence it is that many Texts of Scripture, which speak of those
Influences and Supplies of Grace, which Christ's Members receive from him, do
plainly suppose and imply their being in a State of vital Union with him, as
John 1.16. and Chap. 15. v. 1, -- 6. But such Union cannot be necessary to the
first Grace, but that is necessary to it, as being immediately effected by it.

I now proceed to a second Argument, to prove, That no Act or Acts flowing from
the Grace of Regeneration, or implied in it, can be the Condition on which
Salvation is offered. And the Argument which I shall now make use of is this,
That if this might be, then may Sinners be made Partakers of the Grace of
Regeneration, before they are justified by the Imputation of the Righteousness
of Jesus Christ to them, which it is impossible they should be. Note here,
that, by before, as formerly, I intend before, in order of Nature, and not in
respect of Time. I acknowledge that in this Sense, these Mercies are granted
together, and at once; but if we respect the natural Order of their being
given, Justification or Absolution from the Guilt of Sin, goes before the other.

Before I proceed to make this good, I will, for preventing Mistakes, take
Notice of a necessary Distinction, with Respect to Man's Justification before
God, or by him. That which I intend is this, That by our Justification we may
understand, either our Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ to us, or our being accounted and declared righteous, on the Account of
our Interest in that Righteousness, after the Imputation thereof. As these are
Things evidently distinguishable, in respect of the Nature and Order of them;
so they are no less plainly distinguished in the holy Word of God.
Justification, in Scripture, sometimes signifies the making of a Man righteous,
by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ to him, or by the Gift
of that Righteousness conferred on him, as in Romans 5.17. And this agrees well
with the Meaning of the Word; for, as to glorify signifies to make glorious, so
to justify signifies to make just or righteous; and this is in Scripture used
for a Sinner's being made just or righteous, by the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ to him, Romans 4.5, 6. But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted to him for
Righteousness: Even as David also describes the Blessedness of the Man unto
whom God imputes Righteousness without Works. Thus such as are unjust and
ungodly before, and until they are justified, are by their Justification made
righteous, by a Righteousness imputed to them, the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ being unto and upon them, as in Romans 3.22.

But then, Justification is sometimes in Scripture taken for the declaring and
pronouncing one righteous, who really is so, before such a Sentence is
pronounced: And in this Sense, to justify, is a forensick Word or Term, taken
from Courts of Justice, and is in that Sense commonly used among Men. In this
Sense of the Word, Men never should, and God never does justify any, but those
who are just before such Justification. For he that justifies the Wicked, and
he that condemns the Just, even they both are an Abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 17.15. Taking Justification in this Sense, a Man must be just and holy
too, before God will justify him. And there is no Doubt to me, but that when
the Apostle James affirms, That a Man is justified by Works, he uses the Word
in this Sense: For thus God justifies none but such as have both an imputed
and an inherent Righteousness. But in the first Sense mentioned, which is that
in which I use the Word in this Discourse, a Man has no true Righteousness at
all before God justifies him, by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ
to him: And thus, for God to justify the Ungodly, is a Word or Term peculiar to
the Gospel; and is never used in any Courts of Justice among Men, that I know
of.

This being the Sense in which I use the Word, as I intimated, what I here
affirm is, That a Sinner is not, cannot be regenerated by the Spirit of God, or
born of the Spirit, before he is justified; and consequently no Act flowing
from the Grace of Regeneration, or implying it, can be the Condition on which
Salvation is offered, or given: And I will endeavor to make good both the
Antecedent and Consequence, or Inference from it.

1. I say, That no Sinner is, or can be regenerated by the Spirit of God,
before he is justified by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to him; or that
Justification is, in Order of Nature, before Regeneration, and not after it.

To make this good, I will show, that it will not consist with that perpetual
or standing Rule of Righteousness, which God entered into with Mankind in Adam,
while in Innocence, to regenerate sinful Men by his holy Spirit, while they are
in an unjustified Estate* And this I shall endeavor to clear up in several
Observations, which here follow.

(1) The Covenant of Works which God entered into with Mankind while in
Innocence, was designed to be a standing Rule of relative Justice, betwixt
himself and them, according to which he would deal with them for ever. This has
been well observed and asserted by the learned and very judicious Mr. SAMUEL
WILLARD, in his Exposition of the Assemblies Catechism, (Page 150.) Hence all
God's Transactions with Mankind have hitherto been, and ever will be ordered
according to that standing Rule. If therefore, there could not have been a Way
found out wherein the Justice of God, and the Honor of his Law might have been
vindicated, yea, every Tittle of that Law fulfilled, as in Matthew. 5.17, 18. no
Flesh could have been saved. With this agrees what we have in Romans 3.26, and
v. 31. also Chap. 8. v. 4.

2. According to the Tenor of this now mentioned Covenant, a perfect
Righteousness was required in order to Man's having Life and Happiness; and
Death was threatened for the least Offense against it, as appears in Genesis 2.17.
and Gal. 3.10, 12.

3. By sinning against God, Man forfeited and lost that Life, which, in a Way
of Obedience, he might have obtained, and became subject to Death: In which
Death not only Adam and Eve themselves, but all their Posterity were involved,
Romans 5.12. and Chap. 3.23. Gal. 3.10. Romans 6.23.

4. The Death which by Sin Mankind brought upon themselves, included in it, as
one special Part or Branch of it, the Loss of God's Image, and the Corruption
and Depravation of Man's Nature, which we call habitual Corruption, or original
Sin. This, I suppose, I have sufficiently proved in Part I. Chap. I. of this
Essay. Here let it be remarked, (1) That the Sin by which Mankind lost their
Right or Title to Life, or rather, by which they fell short of a Right to it,
was their eating the forbidden Fruit. By this Sin the Covenant of Works was
wholly broken, and the Life promised, utterly lost, and the Death threatened,
fully merited. (2) Man's loosing and being deprived of God's Image, the before
mentioned Depravation of his Nature, was no Part of this Sin, but a penal
Effect and Consequent of it, as I have showed in the former Part of this Essay.
Indeed this Corruption of Man's Nature, after his Fall, does very much consist
in it, as well as in his actual Transgressions; and the same may be said
concerning the Devils. But what I say here is, that the Depravation or
Corruption of Man's Nature was not the Sin by which he brake the Covenant of
Works, but a Punishment of it.

Indeed Man, after his Fall, went on sinning against the moral Law, considered
as a Rule of Righteousness; but the Covenant of Works, as a Covenant, he could
not more effectually break than he had already done. Nor did God after Man's
Fall, require Obedience of him, as the Condition of that Covenant which he had
already broken, and the Good whereof he had already forfeited, but treated with
him wholly on the Foot, and according to the Terms, of a new Covenant, which he
had begun to reveal and make known to him, Genesis 3.15. For had it not been for
this, there would have been no Room left for any Treaty with Sinners, in order
to their Obedience and Happiness. All that could have remained would have been
the full Execution of that Sentence of Death on Mankind, which they had already
begun to feel the Effects of. Please to compare what I have now said, with Part
I. Chap. I. Page 22, 23.

5. If a Man may be made Partaker of a Principle of spiritual Life, one Moment
in Time, or Reason, before he has an Interest in Jesus Christ and his
meritorious Righteousness, I see no Reason why he may not have this Life for
ever, and that in its full Perfection, without ever having any Interest in
Jesus Christ and his Righteousness at all. If we may begin to enjoy such a
Life, without first having any Interest in Christ, why may we not enjoy the
same Life forever, without having any Interest in him? And then, what great
Need have we of him, who is the Head of the Body, the Church: Who is the
Beginning, the Firstborn from the Dead, that in all Things he might have the
Pre-eminence, Col. 1.18.

Having now, as I think, sufficiently shown the Impossibility of any Person's
being regenerated by the Spirit of God, 'till he is first (in order of Nature)
justified by Christ's Righteousness imputed to him; I must now proceed to make
good the Consequence which I drew from that Assertion, viz. That no Act flowing
from the Grace given in Regeneration, or implying it, can be the Condition on
which Salvation is offered: And this is so evident a Conclusion, from the
Proposition from whence I infer it, that it is scarce possible to be made more
evident, by any Thing that can be said to make it manifest. Is it not obvious
to common Sense and Reason, that the Performance of the Condition, on which any
Benefit is offered, must go, at least, in order of Nature, before the obtaining
such a Benefit? If then Justification be, in order of Nature, before
Regeneration, how should any Act flowing from the Grace given in Regeneration,
or implying it, be the Condition on which Justification and Salvation are
offered to Sinners?

But when I have thus argued, I have been sometimes told, That Justification
and Regeneration are both together in Time, and that my Distinction of one of
these being, in order of Nature, before the other, is too nice and critical. To
which I answer, That there are Hundreds of other Cases, wherein learned Men do
not think such a Distinction too nice; as when Sinners are told, that they must
come to, and believe in Jesus Christ, before they may expect to be justified;
when yet, those that tell them so do believe and teach, that a Sinner no sooner
lays hold on Christ by Faith, than he is freely justified. And in the very
Case, on which I am here discoursing, the learned Dr. OWEN, disputing with Mr.
BAXTER, says, Absolution in Heaven, (as I call it) is before our actual
believing in order of Time, I have no where said, but only in order of Nature;
and that Mr. BAXTER has not disproved. By believing here, the Doctor
understands, that Kind of Faith, of which none but the Regenerate are the
Subjects. To the same Purpose, he says afterward, I profess that we are
absolved, pardoned and justified, for Christ's Sake, and therefore Christ is
reckoned to us, or made Righteousness to us, in order of Nature, antecedently
to all those Things which for his Sake we do receive, and are made Partakers of
with and by him, etc. These Quotations may be found in Dr. OWEN's Answer to Mr.
BAXTER, annexed to his Answer to BIDDLE, Page 27. and 43. Whereunto agrees
what is said by the excellent Mr. BUROUGHS, in his Book of Gospel Remission,
Page 25. God pardons a Sinner, not because he is changed, but that he may be
changed. He frequently asserts the same Thing in that Book of his, alleging
for what he affirms, Romans 4.5. Col. 2.13. Jer. 31.33, 34.

It is indeed a Truth, that if by Man's Salvation we only understand his
Happiness in his Communion with God, either in this Life, or in that which is
to come; his Regeneration must then be considered as a Condition of, or
Pre-requisite unto, his Salvation, not as a covenant Condition, but as a Thing
physically necessary in order to his Happiness, as being that without which he
can neither know Things spiritual, nor take any real Delight and Pleasure in
them. See 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. and Job 27.10. Will he Delight himself in the
Almighty? Heaven it self could not give Satisfaction to an unregenerate and
unholy Soul. As such cannot with Pleasure converse with God and Things
spiritual here, so neither could they in Heaven, could they get thither.

Men's Salvation does not therefore consist only in the setting such Objects
before him, as are very delightful to true Saints, but also in preparing them
to receive and entertain them with such Pleasure and Delight, as such Objects
should be received and entertained with, and will be by the Godly. Psalm. 17.15.
As for me, I will behold thy Face in Righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy Likeness. Psalm. 36.8, 9. They shall be abundantly satisfied with
the Fatness of thy House. And thou shall make them drink of the River of thy
Pleasure: For in thee is the Fountain of Life: And in thy Light shall we see
Light. Hence we ^^^d of Person's being made meet for the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. and of Vessels of Mercy prepared unto Glory, Romans
9.23. This great Work is begun in Men's Regeneration, John 3.3. and carried on
in their Sanctification, wherein they are changed more and more from Glory to
Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. and is comprised in their Sanctification, as above.

There is one Exception, unto which what has been asserted in this Chapter, may
by some be though it liable, viz. That if what I herein assert were true, it would
from thence follow, that our effectual Calling follows our Justification,
contrary to Romans 8.30. where, according to the Apostle, it goes before it. But
I deny the Consequence. It will follow, indeed, from what I maintain, that the
efficacious Grace of God, by which the Work of Regeneration is wro't in our
Souls, is not in order before our Justification. If it were a Truth, that Man's
effectual Calling does consist in that Act of God's Power on their Souls, by
which they are regenerated, or created anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
then indeed, it would follow, that our being effectually called would,
according to me, follow our Justification. But I see no Reason to grant, that
our effectual Calling consists in that efficacious Grace which I have now
mentioned. I take effectual Calling to consist in that Work of God, by his Word
and Spirit, whereby Sinners are persuaded and enabled to comply with the Terms
of the new Covenant; and to accept of Jesus Christ and all his Benefits, freely
offered to them in the Gospel; among which Benefits our Regeneration is one of
the chief. Our Regeneration by the powerful Operation of God's holy Spirit,
ought to be looked upon as an eminent Part of that Salvation, which, in our
effectual Calling, we are persuaded and enabled to go to God in Christ for, and
so is, in order of Nature, before our going to Jesus Christ, as we are
required; and before our Justification also, as in Romans 8.30. But this our
Regeneration by the efficacious Grace of God, I take not to be so.

But if (may some say) our Regeneration be not comprised in our effectual
Calling, in the Text lately mentioned, where then shall our Regeneration be
found in that golden Chain, in which the Method of Man's Salvation is by the
Apostle expressed? What Link in that Chain may we understand to intend the
glorious Work of our Regeneration? Or is not this Work taken Notice of in it?
To this I answer, That it is by no Means to be allowed, that this was therein
forgotten, or omitted by the inspired Apostle. Nor do I think with Barclay, a
learned and noted Quaker, that this is intended by our being justified. He
absurdly takes our Justification and Sanctification to be the same Thing: But I
freely acknowledge that I do not at all doubt but that our Regeneration, and
the progressive Work of our Sanctification, are comprised in our being
glorified. Nor is this an Opinion peculiar to me, as I can show if there be
Occasion for it.

It is a great Truth in Divinity, That when God regenerateth any Person, he
therein begins to glorify him; and in carrying on the Work of his Grace in
regenerate Saints, he glorifieth them more and more. To this that well agrees,
2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open Face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. Every regenerate Soul has eternal Life, i. e. he already
has it, and is passed from Death unto Life; and he has it abiding in him, as
in John 5.24. and 1 John 3.14, 15. Such have the very same Life in them which
all glorified Saints shall live in Heaven for ever: For, as Divines confess and
maintain, Grace is Glory begun, and Glory is Grace made perfect. God has
already given unto such the Earnest of their Inheritance, which is the same in
Kind with what they shall hereafter receive in full. Herewith agrees that,
Ephesians. 1.11. In whom we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined
according to the Purpose of him who works all Things after the Counsel of his
own Will. That also in Verse 13, 14. In whom ye also trusted after that ye
heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation: In whom also after ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest
of our Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession, unto the
Praise of his Glory. God has already called such unto his eternal Glory, 1 Pet.
5.10. And the Spirit of God and of Glory rests on them, 1 Pet. 4.4.

I would here further observe with Respect to our effectual Calling, that the
good Effects thereby wrought on us, though not of the same Kind with those
wrought in our Regeneration, yet they are the same with that Faith and
Repentance which, according to my Hypothesis, is the Condition of the new
Covenant. And I also suppose, that Men's Perseverance in the Exercise of such
Faith and Repentance, 'till they obtain the Benefits of Justification and
Regeneration, is comprised in their effectual Calling. None are effectually
called without being persuaded and enabled to hold out and go on to seek the
Lord 'till he has Mercy on them, and grants his saving Benefits to them.

CHAP. VI. The Offer of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel, is an Offer of
bringing them into a State of Salvation; and consequently must comprise in it
an Offer of regenerating Grace.
TO clear up this Argument I need only say a few Things very briefly.

1. By a State of Salvation I understand such an Estate as that spoken of by
our Savior, John 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my
Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not
come into Condemnation; but is passed from Death unto Life. Such an Estate as
this is also described by the Apostle, Romans 8.1. There is therefore no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit. And Verse 35. and onwards, Who shall separate us from the
Love of Christ, etc.

2. To put Men into such an Estate as this, is wholly the Work of the blessed
God. It is, I say, the Work of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. ( Matthew.
28.10. 1 John 5.7.) God only performs this Work, and he only can promise to
perform it. Never did any Man put himself into such a State. Whatever may be
required of Sinners in order hereunto, yet to put them into such a State is
wholly God's Work: Men themselves have no Hand in it. God only saves all that
are saved, Isai. 43.11. If Men are said to save themselves, we must only
understand by it, their doing something required of them in order to God's
saving them.

3. When God offers to save Sinners, he therein offers to bring, or put them,
into such a State of Salvation as that but now described. When God offers to
save Sinners, he therein offers to do all that for them, in which their
Salvation consists, i. e. all that he actually does for them when he saves
them. All this, I say, God offers to do for us, when he offers to save us; and
to be sure, out of this we must not, we may not, leave his beginning to save
us, and bringing us into a State of Salvation. It is impossible for God to save
Sinners, without doing this for them, i. e. without translating them out of a
State of Death, into a State of Life.

4. God, in thus bringing Sinners into a State of Salvation, does work in them
the great Work of Regeneration, gives them a new Heart, and a new Spirit,
creates them anew in Christ Jesus, unto good Works. Therefore in offering to
save them, he offers to do this for them, that is, he conditionally promises
that he will do it; which is the Point I am defending.

CHAP. VII. There being an inseparable Connection betwixt all spiritual
Blessings, or everlasting Mercies, whenever any of these are, by GOD, offered
to Sinners, all the rest are intended, and consequently, the Grace of
Regeneration.
IF one Person makes an Offer to another of any good Thing, which has many
other good Things inseperably joined with or unto it, the Person to whom the
Offer is made may well think, that he has an Offer of all those good Things
made to him, though they are not all enumerated in the Offer. No Man would, in
such a Case, imagine that he had only that one good Thing offered to him, or so
many only as were expressly mentioned, but would justly conclude that all those
other Goods which he was sure were firmly bound up in the same Bundle with
them, so as never to be separated from them, were as really intended in the
Offer, as those expressly named. Thus, if God offers any of his special saving
Mercies to sinful Men, he offers every one of them; because he never gives any
one of them to any Person unto whom he does not give them all.

That the special Mercies or spiritual Blessings which Jesus Christ purchased
for his People, are so inseparably joined together, both in the Nature of the
Thing, and by the Appointment of God, as never to be separated one from
another, is most evident. God never did, nor never will bestow any one of them
on any Soul, on whom he does not, at the same Time, bestow them all. All that
enjoy any of them may say, as in Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly
Places (or Things) in Christ. They are all of them Things that accompany
Salvation, yea, essentially belong thereto, as in Ephesians. 4.9. Therefore to whom
God gives any of them, he gives them all; and to whom he offers to give any one
or more of them, he offers to give them all.

Sometimes God, in a Promise mentions one of them, sometimes another, but he
always intends every one of them; and sometimes he makes Use of Words which
naturally comprise every one of them; as when God offers Salvation to Sinners,
Mark 16.15, 16. this Salvation compriseth all spiritual Blessings in it: So
when God offers to have Mercy on sinful Men, Isai. 55.9. this Mercy compriseth
not only Pardon of Sin, there expressly mentioned, but all other spiritual
Blessings, Grace and Glory and every good Thing needful, Psalm. 84.11.

That the Offer of Forgiveness of Sins, or of Justification, does include in it
an Offer of all other spiritual Blessings, is most manifest. In the
Justification of a Sinner, the meritorious Righteousness of Jesus Christ is
imputed or given to him: He therein receives the Gift of Righteousness, Romans
5.17. He receives Righteousness from the God of his Salvation, Psalm. 24.5.
Now, whoever has an Interest in the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ, has
therein and thereby an Interest in, or Right unto, all those good Things which,
by that Righteousness, he purchased for Sinners: And never had any Sinner any
one of these Benefits in any other Way, than by first having an Interest in the
Righteousness of Christ, by whom they were all purchased for those that believe
in him. Nor had ever any Sinner an Interest in this Righteousness in any other
Way, than that of obtaining an Interest in Jesus Christ himself, in whom it is,
and in and with whom it is bestowed, on all those who, by Faith, receive him;
and all such may say, as in Isai. 45.24. In the Lord have I Righteousness and
Strength, etc. Yea, unto all such Christ is made Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Those that have him have a
Righteousness, and all Things obtained thereby with him. When God gives his own
Son to them, he also with him freely gives them all Things, Romans 8.32. He then
gives them an Interest in his Righteousness, and in all those everlasting
Mercies purchased thereby.

And as it is a Truth, that if God offers a justifying Righteousness to
Sinners, he, in so doing, offers them all those Benefits that were purchased by
that Righteousness; so it is no less true, that if God offers unto Sinners any
of these Benefits that were obtained by Christ's Sufferings and Obedience, he
therein offers them an Interest in that Righteousness, by which the same were
purchased for those that believe in him. He offers not these without the
Righteousness that procured them; nor that Righteousness without the Benefits
procured by it.

Thus it appears, That whenever God offers any of his special Mercies or
spiritual Blessings unto sinful Men, he offers all of them: And it follows
from hence, that he must needs offer the Grace of Regeneration together with
the rest; nor is this excepted as implied in the Condition on which the rest
are offered, as has been before sufficiently manifested in Chap. V.

CHAP. VIII. That those exceeding great and precious Promises, by which we may
be Partakers of the divine Nature, are conditional Promises of the Grace of
Regeneration.
THE Promises which I here intend are those mentioned by the Apostle Peter, in
his second Epistle, Chap. 1. Verse 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great
and precious Promises, that by these you might be Partakers of the divine
Nature, having escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust.
Designing to give Instances of several conditional Promises in some of the
following Chapters; I intend in this, to endeavor to show, from the Testimony
now alleged, that we may expect to find such Promises in the Oracles of God,
and have no Reason to think it strange, if several such be named and insisted
on, for the Confirmation of the Hypothesis which I am defending.

The first Thing I shall observe in the Testimony read, is, that the Promises
mentioned therein are said to be exceeding great and precious. And such may
Promises be said to be, in several Respects, as (1) In Respect of the Matter of
them, or of the Nature of the Things engaged in them. If the Things promised
are great and precious, this puts a Value and Excellency upon the Promises
wherein they are engaged. (2) The infallible Truth and Certainty of them is
another Thing that greatly commends them, as precious and worthy to be prized,
being such as may be safely depended on.

I observe secondly, that the Promises are said to be given by the same divine
Power, by which, in Verse 3. all Things pertaining both to Life and Godliness
are also said to be given to us: For unto this, the Word whereby, in the
Beginning of the fourth Verse, seems evidently to refer. And this is said to be
done by God and our Lord Jesus Christ, just before in Verse second. By all
Things pertaining to Life and Godliness, in Verse third, I do not understand
Life and Godliness it self, but all Things requisite to it, unto which these
mentioned Promises belong; and so these Words are like those in Isai. 5.4. What
could I have done more to my Vineyard than I have done in it.

I observe thirdly, that these Pre-requisites to Life and Godliness, are said
to be given us through the Knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and
Virtue: And this Him is Jesus Christ, before mentioned; and it is by revealing
and making him known that Sinners have all Things pertaining to Life and
Godliness afforded to them. Nor is there Occasion of understanding their being
called to Glory and Virtue, of that which commonly understood by effectual
Calling, i. e. saving Conversion; for all that enjoy the Grace of the Gospel,
as in 2 Cor. 6.1. are called to Glory and Virtue. And by what follows in Verse
4, those here spoken to, (at least some of them) were not yet Partakers of the
divine Nature. And though this Epistle was inscribed to such as had obtained like
precious Faith with the Apostle Peter, and other true Saints, as appears in
Verse 1. yet there is no Occasion to suppose, that all that are spoken to in
it, had obtained the Faith of God's Elect; because that Kind of Faith which
some of the Non-Elect and Unregenerate are the Subjects of, may be also called
exceeding precious, in Respect of the Object of it, the glorious Truth unto
which it assenteth: And all that have received the Gospel, by giving Credit to
it, may be said to have obtained like precious Faith in Respect of its Object,
with those who have obtained Faith of a much better Kind, in Respect of the
Rectitude of its Acts; of which last Kind, no doubt many of those here spoken
to by the Apostle, had also obtained.

That those spoken to are said to have obtained the Faith mentioned through the
Righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, is a great Truth, whether
the Faith intended be of one of the Kinds mentioned, or the other; for common
Grace, as well as that which is saving, is an Effect of the Merits of Christ's
Righteousness. But if his Faithfulness in fulfilling his Promises may be
intended by the Righteousness here spoken of Verse 1. as some suppose, this
would seem to favor the Hypothesis for which I plead.

That the Apostle, in Verse 2d, wishes Peace from God the Father to those unto
whom he writes, is far from necessarily supposing them to be already in a
regenerate State.

I observe here fourthly, that the great End for which these precious Promises
are said to be given to those that have them, is, that by them they might be
Partakers of the divine Nature. By which divine Nature, our Divines generally
understand the same Thing which is by me called the Grace of Regeneration. And
I may here well observe, that this being the End for which these Promises are
given to those unto whom the Apostle here speaks, it from hence evidently
appears, that they are not by the Apostle all supposed to be in a regenerate
State, notwithstanding any Thing said in the first Verse: That the Persons thus
spoken to, still need the Grace of Regeneration is plain, and seems evidently
supposed in the Expressions: So that all the Question is, in what Sense Sinners
that are still unconverted may, by the mentioned precious Promises, be made
Partakers of the divine Nature here spoken of?

I further observe fifthly, that the Time when those here spoken to may by the
mentioned Promises be made Partakers of the divine Nature intended, is when
they have escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust: For thus the
Words run, Having escaped, etc. Which escaping the Corruption that is in the
World, is not effected by Regeneration, but by a Work, in the Nature of it,
preparatory to it; and of which Persons not savingly converted may be the
Subjects, as evidently appears in Chap. 2. Verse 20, 21, 22. of the same
Epistle; where such as had escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are yet mentioned as finally
miscarrying. Now I am not here discoursing with such as hold, that true Saints
may fall from Grace. In the Words therefore under Consideration, it is plainly
intimated, that God will not ordinarily, at least, make Persons Partakers of
the divine Nature 'till they have first reformed their Lives, in such a Manner
and Degree as Persons may before they are born again. And this is plainly
intimated to us in other Texts of Scripture, as in Prove. 1.22, 23. and 1 Cor.
6.9. as I shall afterward more fully show. Men have no Reason to expect, that
God will pour out his Spirit upon them, to their saving Conversion, that will
not repent and reform their Lives, in such a Manner as by the Help of common
Grace they may. This, I say, is necessary in order to Men's being made
Partakers of the divine Nature.

Now I know of but two Ways in which it can, with any Show of Truth, be
supposed, that the precious Promises mentioned can serve unto this End. One of
these, is, that they are Instruments in the Hand of God for the working this
great Change, called Regeneration; and so of communicating unto Sinners the
divine Nature spoken of. The other Sense is, that God makes Sinners Partakers
of this gracious Principle, in Pursuance of precious Promises, wherein he has
conditionally engaged so to do. The former of these Ways some take and I
mislike. The latter of them is that to which I adhere, and for which I plead. I
suppose, that those who are for the first, may think there is Danger in
admitting, that the divine Nature is given in Consequence of any conditional
Promises made of it. I think there is none. I will first briefly show why I
agree not with those who expound these Words in the first of these Ways; and
then show why I am for the latter.

And in the first Place, I will give some Reasons why I think these Promises
are not here considered as the Means or Instruments by which the Grace of
Regeneration is wrought in Men's Souls. And (1) I suppose, that if the Design
of the Holy Ghost had here been to declare what the instrumental Causes of
Man's Conversion are, he would not have mentioned the Promises of God only, but
would have ascribed this to the Word of God in general, as he does in other
Places, where it appears that this is his Design, as in Psalm. 19.7, 8. Romans
10.14, -- 17. and Jam. 1.18. The Spirit of God in mentioning Promises only,
gives us great Reason to think, that what he ascribes to them, is something
proper to them, and not to the whole Word of God, which is instrumental in
Men's Conversion, but to the Promises only, as giving a Right to the Good
spoken of in the Place under Consideration. (2) There is nothing either in the
Text or Context, to oblige us to think, that that which I now argue against,
must necessarily be intended in the Place; but on the contrary, that which I
plead for seems to be the most natural and obvious Sense of the Words, as I
shall presently show, (3) That the Instrumentality of the Promises unto Men's
Conversion, or to their being made Partakers of the divine Nature, is not
intended in the Words, I make evident by this Reason: The Promises neither are,
nor can be, instrumental in the Sense here in Question, in making any Persons
Partakers of the divine Nature. The Words must not be understood in a Sense in
which they neither are nor can be true.

But now, That no Man can by the Promises, be made a Partaker of the divine
Nature, in the Sense I oppose, I thus make manifest. Men's being made Partakers
of the divine Nature, is the same Thing which, by Calvinists, is otherwise
called passive Conversion; or Conversion taken in that Sense as Divines
understand it, when they say the Soul is passive in it; and affirm it to be
wro't by an immediate Act of the holy Ghost creating us anew in Christ Jesus to
good Works, as in Psalm. 50.10. Ephesians. 2.10. and Chap. 1.19, 20. In Conversion
thus taken, the Sinner does nothing, but God all, Jer. 31.18, 19. Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned --. After I was turned, I repented. In the Conversion of
a Sinner, taken in this Sense, there is a Principle of Grace, or a divine
Nature, put into the Soul, in the doing of which the Sinner himself has no
Hand. He has a new Heart given to him, and a new Spirit put within him, by God.
He does not this for himself, Ezekiel. 36.26. nor is it possible that any Promises
can be the Instruments of working such a Change in Men's Souls. The Change now
under Consideration is not wro't by a moral Instrument, but by a physical
Cause, or a supernatural Power; not by moral Suasion, but by the mighty Power
of God. When Mankind first sinned against God, they lost all the Power they had
to perform any Actions truly holy: Now when Sinners are made Partakers of the
divine Nature, this Power is restored again in and unto them; which the Word
read and preached is no Way competent to be an Instrument of; neither the
Precepts, Promises, nor Threatenings of it can do this; nor can all of them
together work such a Change, any more than an Argument or Syllogism can remove
a Mountain. All that the Word can do, it does in a moral Way, by Instructions,
Convictions, and Persuasions. It does not give any Power to the Soul that it
had not before, but excites and stirs Persons up to make a good Improvement of
the Powers they have.

'Tho' that Text, Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us by the Word of Truth,
seems to look another Way; yet we must know, that Regeneration, or the new
Birth, may be taken more largely, as it compriseth Men's active Conversion in
it, or as intending their passive Conversion only. In the former Sense,
Conversion is ascribed to the Word of God read and preached; but in the latter
Sense it is not, neither indeed can be. The Ministry of the Word does
ordinarily accompany Conversion, but never works the Change: It does much in
the Work preparatory to it, and in exciting to the Acts and Exercise of Grace,
when once given; but it does nothing toward the infusing of the Principle. The
preaching of the Word is not that by which we are created anew unto good Works:
It is another Kind of Word that does this, even such a Kind of Power as that,
Genesis 1.3. God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light, as appears by
comparing that Place with 2 Cor. 4.6. God who has commanded the Light to shine
out of Darkness, has shined into our Hearts, to give us the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. This God does by
giving the divine Nature to us, as in the Text under Consideration. Thus I have
shown why I think the divine Nature is not communicated by the Promises, as
instrumental efficient Causes of it.

I shall now proceed to show positively, why I conceive, that by these Promises
we are made Partakers of the divine Nature, as it is pursuant to them, that God
communicates the same unto us; or as it is by them we have a Right to it: And
to confirm this, I say, (1) This seems to be the most natural and genuine Sense
of the Expressions used in the Text here insisted on. When Persons are said to
be made Partakers of any Mercy, by Promise, who would once imagine, that this
meant, that the Promise intended was the efficient Cause in the Communication,
or Conveyance of the Good said to be given by it? And not rather, that it was
by Promise as that gave a Right to it. See Gal. 3.18. If the Inheritance be of
the Law, it is no more of Promise; but God gave it to Abraham by Promise. (2)
Another Reason of this is, because it is certain, that there are a great many
such exceeding great and precious Promises given, for the End here intended,
viz. That, by Virtue of them, the Persons to whom they are given, might be
Partakers of the divine Nature; the same being conditionally offered in them.
If no such conditional Promises could be found in Scripture, as these I speak
of, it would not then be easy to declare what Promises are intended in the
Place under Consideration, supposing their Instrumentality to Conversion were
what is therein designed. But if there are many conditional Promises of
Regeneration found in Scripture, then we have good Reason to suppose, that the
Way in which Sinners are by these made Partakers of the divine Nature, is by
entitling them to it, on their Fulfillment of the Condition on which it is
offered.

Now, That there are many such Promises, I will show in the Sequel of this
Discourse, by instancing in diverse of them; and so shall here suppose this to
be a Truth.

But I suppose it will by some be here said, That though it be denied, that there
are any such conditional Promises as I plead for; yet inasmuch as there are
absolute Promises of the Grace of Regeneration, (by some called the first
Grace) these may be the Promises intended in the Text insisted on; and in
Consequence of which the Grace of a new Heart may be given, without Men's
Performance of any Condition, by which they may be entitled to the Good of
these Promises: And Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. and Chap. 36.26. are commonly instanced
in, as containing such Promises. Unto this, several Things may be said, as,

First, It may be doubted whether these called absolute Promises, are indeed
any Promises at all. Some learned Men seem to think they are not; but rather
Prophecies of the Mercies mentioned in them. I think Mr. BAXTER was of this
Opinion. It seems essential to a Promise of good Things, that the Person or
Persons, to whom it is made, be some Way or other described or indigitated in
it. Now, these, here called Promises, do not this. No one Person can truly
affirm, that these Promises are made to him. If they be Promises Judas might
have laid as good a Claim to them as Peter. If God converts a Sinner, he does
not therein fulfill any such Promise to him: If he does, then was he obliged by
Promise to do it; which, how can any make manifest. If God should not convert
and save any Sinner in the World, none could say, that God has not kept his
Word with him: Unless, with me, conditional Promises of converting Grace be
acknowledged. If there be any Thing at all of the Nature of a Promise, in such
Declarations of God's Intention to convert and save some of the Children of
Men, all Mankind have an equal Right to it, by Virtue of what is therein
engaged, though God may, in his secret Purpose, intend the Good promised to
certain definitive Persons, and not to any other.

Secondly, If these are allowed to be properly Promises; yet some think they
are not Promises properly made to any of the sinful Children of Men, but to
Jesus Christ himself, in the Covenant of Redemption, agreed on betwixt his
Father and him; of which we have an Account in the holy Scriptures, Psalm, 39.3.
Isai. 53.10, 11, 12. and elsewhere. Of this Judgment was our very judicious and
learned Mr. WILLARD, as appears in his Treatise of that Covenant, Page 118.
Thus these Promises are not made to Sinners at all, nor given to us, as in the
Text under Consideration.

Thirdly, If these be allowed to be Promises, and to be made to the sinful
Children of Men, I desire to know how it appears, that there is no Condition
required of them in order to their being Partakers of the Good promised. -- The
Contrary seems plainly to appear, with Respect to that in Ezekiel. 36.26. For though
a Condition be not expressed in the same Verse or Sentence; yet there seems to
be one plainly required, a little after, in Verse 37. Yet for this will I be
enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. By which Words, I think,
all other Promises of the like Nature may be explained. God does, therein, as
good as tell those, unto whom such Promises are made, that they may not expect
this Mercy without seeking to him for it; and doubtless those that expect it in
any other Way will find themselves mistaken. What though God does not always
express the Condition of a Promise, in every Place where the Promise it self,
and the Good promised, is expressed; yet if, in other Places, the Condition be
expressed, as well as the Good he promises, this is sufficient to let us know,
that the Promise is every where to be understood as made on that Condition; at
least, that Men may not expect the Good of such Promises, without the
Performance of the Condition required in order to it. And I shall still have
Occasion to show, that there are many Places of Scripture where Promises of the
same Mercy are conditionally proposed to Sinners.

And suppose I should find, in the Bible, several Places where Pardon of Sin is
promised, without expressly naming the Condition on which that Promise is made,
might I from thence infer, that it is a Benefit that is not conditionally
offered? If this would do, we may find such Places, as in Isai. 43.22. Jer.
31.34. and Chap. 33.8. so in Micah 7.18. May we infer from hence, that Pardon
of Sin is not conditionally offered? Surely I think not.

CHAP. IX. That the conditional Promises, made in Scripture, that such as seek
God and his special Favor, shall find him, do contain or imply in them, an
Offer of the Grace of Regeneration.
I SHALL, for the clearing up of what is here asserted, endeavor to show, (1)
That there are in Scripture conditional Promises made, that such as seek God
and his special Favor, shall find him and that. (2) That these Promises
contain and imply in them, an Offer of the Grace of Regeneration.

To make good the first of these, I shall (1) instance in several such Promises
as I here intend. (2) Make some Observations on them.

1. The Promises I here intend are such as these which follow, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
-- If thou seek him, he will be found of thee. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. -- The Lord is
with you while ye be with him; if ye seek him, he will be found of you; if ye
forsake him, he will forsake you. Prove. 8.17. Those that seek me early shall
find me. Jer. 29.13. Ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me
with all your Heart. Amos 5.4. Thus says the Lord unto the House of Israel,
Seek ye me, and ye shall live. Matthew. 7.7, -- 11. Ask, and it shall be given to
you: Seek, and ye shall find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every
one that asks, receives: And he that seeks, finds: And to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. Or what Man is there of you, whom, if his Son ask
Bread, will give him a Stone? Or if he ask a Fish, will give him a Serpent? If
ye then, being evil, know how to give good Gifts to your Children, how much
more will your Father which is in Heaven, give good Things to them that ask
him. We have the same Words, in effect, Luke 11.9, -- 13. With these Texts
agrees Isai. 45.19. I said not unto the House of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.
Also Isai. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found --.

2. I shall make some Observations on the Promises. And here, I say,

(1) Though the Words, in some of the Places mentioned, are not expressed in the
Form of Promises; yet Promises are plainly supposed or implied in them; as in
that Isai. 45.19. and 55.6.

(2) These Promises are conditional. A Condition is plainly expressed in most of
them, and implied in them all: And the Condition required is, seeking God: And
is otherwise called, asking, knocking, etc.

(3) Such conditional Promises are made to unregenerate Persons, to encourage
them to seek the Lord for his special Mercies or spiritual Blessings. I do not
say, they are not made to the Regenerate also, to encourage them to seek for
more Grace; but I think the first and principal Design of them, is, to
encourage such as are in a State of Sin and Death, to seek to God for his
saving Mercies; such as Pardon of Sin, a new Heart, and a new Spirit. This is,
at least, one Design of them.

(4) Those Promises quoted out of the old Testament, as well as those out of
the New, are Promises of spiritual Blessings or everlasting Mercies, and ought
not to be understood of temporal Blessings only, see Psalm. 103.17, 18.

(5) When unregenerate Persons are called upon and encouraged to seek God, with
a Promise that they shall find him, and obtain Mercy from him, the seeking
intended does not comprise the exercising of true Grace and Holiness in it: It
is impossible it should do this: Because this is that, which they being
without, are encouraged to seek after. God does not say unto an unregenerate
Soul, Seek to me for the Grace of Regeneration, in the Exercise of that same
Grace, and then I will bestow it upon thee. It is a Dishonor to God so to
expound such Promises. Therefore though it be true, as in the last foregoing
Particular, that it is not any Kind of seeking that will answer this End, but a
seeking after a due and suitable Manner, i. e. seeking with Faith, in Hope,
under an humble Sense of Unworthiness, with great Earnestness and Perseverance,
etc. yet this Grace to be exercised in seeking the Grace of a new Heart and a
new Spirit, cannot be such Faith, Hope and Humility, etc. as is peculiar to
such as are already born of God, and become new Creatures; but such as may be
called common Grace; inasmuch as such may have it, as are not yet passed from
Death to Life; or as have not eternal Life abiding in them, as in John 5.24.
compared with 1 John 3.14, 15. This seems to be so evident, that I wonder that
all Men do not yield to it, as I know of some that do.

Having now considered the Nature of the Promises alleged in this Chapter, for
the Confirmation of my Hypothesis, I shall proceed to show, Secondly, That an
Offer of the Grace of Regeneration is implied in them. I have proved that they
contain and comprise conditional Promises of our finding God, and obtaining his
special Favor; and I must confess I am extremely mistaken, if this does not
include and imply in it our obtaining the regenerating and saving Influences of
his holy Spirit. Does not our obtaining Mercy at God's Hands, as well imply in
it his changing our Hearts, and endowing us with his holy Spirit, or making us
Partakers of the divine Nature, as his pardoning our Sins, and justifying of
us? Finding God, surely signifies, finding Favor in his Sight; and this
certainly implies in it, our receiving from him all those spiritual Blessings
which he bestows on all those to whom he extends his special Favor.

CHAP. X. That those conditional Promises of the Holy Spirit, which we have in
the Oracles of God, include and imply in them Offers of converting Grace.
THE Promises which I here intend are such as these following. Prove. 1.23. Turn
you at my Reproof: Behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make
known my Words unto you. Luke 11.13. If ye, being evil, know how to give good
Gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give his
Holy Spirit to them that ask him. Acts 2.38. Repent, and be baptized every one
of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall
receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

That these are Promises, and that they are conditional, seems too evident to
be denied. A Precept with a Promise annexed to encourage the Performance of the
Duty required, must, I think, be looked upon as a conditional Promise. Such are
these in each of the Places mentioned, as by the bare reading of them appears.

That these Promises are made to unregenerate Persons cannot, I think, be
reasonably denied. That in Prove. 1.23. is made to such Persons as are described
in Verse 22. who are there thus called on, How long, ye simple Ones, will ye
love Simplicity? And the Scorners delight in scorning. And it follows in Verse
23. Turn ye, etc. In Luke 11.13. the Persons spoken to are directed how they
may obtain the Gift of God's Spirit, which supposes that they are, or may be,
without it; and those who are so, may, I think, well take the Words as spoken
to them, or concerning them. The Words in Acts 2.38. were spoken to very
heinous Sinners, who were then closely dealt with, for having a Hand in the
crucifying the Lord Jesus, and who being pricked in the Heart, under a deep
Sense of their Sin and Guilt, asked that Question in Verse 37. What shall we
do? And the Answer given them did not import that they were in a State of
Grace, but the contrary. They were, many of them at least, in an unconverted
State.

These Things being briefly observed, I shall more distinctly consider two
Things, viz. (1) What the Benefit is, here conditionally promised to these. (2)
On what Condition it is promised.

1. Let us consider what the Benefit is which, in the Places under
Consideration, is conditionally promised to such Sinners as these: And, that we
may judge aright of this, we shall consider how the same is described in each
of the mentioned Places.

I shall begin with that in Prove. 1.23. And here the Good promised is thus
described; I will pour out my Spirit unto you. Whether by God's Spirit here, we
are to understand the Person of the Holy Ghost, or those Gifts and Graces of
which he is the Author and Bestower, need not be earnestly disputed. If the
former, then the Spirit is here spoken of as poured on Men to work his saving
Graces in them, which is as much as I desire. If the second, that is what I
plead for in this Essay. If both, this still comes fully up to my Purpose, viz.
That the Grace of Regeneration is conditionally offered or promised to Sinners
in the Covenant of Grace.

In which of these Ways soever this Promise is understood, saving Illumination
and Instruction is certainly intended in the Promise made, when God tells those
that he speaks to, that he will make known his Words to them. This will be
evident by comparing these Words with others like them: Such as we may find in
Prove. 2.5. and Psalm. 119.18, 19. John 17.6, 7, 8. The pouring out of God's
Spirit to sinful Men, certainly intends saving Illumination and Conversion.

In that Place, Luke 11.13. the Thing promised, is the Gift of the Holy Spirit
to those that perform the Condition to that End required of them. Now by this
Holy Spirit we must understand, either the Person of the Holy Ghost, whom God
sends into the Hearts of his chosen Ones, to regenerate, sanctify and influence
them, and dwell in them, as his Temple for ever, of which the Scriptures speak
plentifully; or that Principle of saving Grace and Holiness, which he works in,
or bestows upon, sinful Men in their Regeneration; which is also called by the
Name of the Spirit of God, Gal. 5.17. and Ezekiel. 36.26. and elsewhere: Either of
these will serve my Turn.

In Acts 2.38. the Good conditionally promised to the Sinners there spoken to,
is the Remission of Sin, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost: In the last of which
the Grace of Regeneration is certainly implied, as well as in the other
Promises which I have already spoken to. These are Things which God has, in the
Promise, joined together; and no Man ought to go about to separate them. What
is intended by Salvation, Mark 16.16. and in this Chap. Verse 22. is here
called Remission of Sin, is the same with that Believing, which is required in
the but now mentioned Text in Mark. As for that extraordinary Effusion of the
Holy Ghost, spoken of in the former Part of this Chapter, there are many who
repent and are baptized, who yet never obtain it. But the Spirit in its saving
Operations, all who repent, and obtain Remission of Sins do receive. And these
Benefits true Penitents are made Partakers of in the order in which they are
here mentioned, as I have already abundantly proved; first Pardon of Sin, and
then the Grace of Regeneration immediately thereon.

2. We must consider what the Condition is on which this Benefit is, or rather
these Benefits are offered.

And,

(1) In Prove. 1.23. the Duty or Condition required is Turning at God's Reproof,
by which we may not understand such a Turning from Sin unto God as does
pre-suppose the Gift of the Holy Spirit, in his regenerating Influences; for
the Gift of the Holy Spirit, understood in this Sense, evidently follows the
Turning here intended, as appears in the Text; so that the Turning here
required, is an Act on which the mentioned Benefit is promised.

We must know, therefore, that there is a Turning at God's Reproof, which is
preparatory to Regeneration, and, in Order of Nature, before God's pouring out
his Spirit unto us, and making known his Words unto us, in that special Sense,
in which these Words are here used; and unto which the Influences of the Holy
Spirit, with which some Sinners are favored before they are savingly
converted, are sufficient. It is evident in Scripture, that Sinners enjoying
the Ministry of God's Word, (here, as I think, called his Reproofs) accompanied
with the Strivings of his Spirit, may have a Work of Conversion wrought in
them, of a lower Kind than that which we call by the Name of Regeneration; and
yet such as to denominate them Believers, Penitents, Saints and Righteous;
insomuch that some who were never regenerated by the Spirit of God, are in
Scripture said to have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. If what I have here said be called in
Question, as I think it will not, I hope I shall be able, if I live, to make it
good: At present I shall content my self to refer my Reader to some of the
Texts by which this Truth is sufficiently confirmed: Such as Matthew. 13.20, 21.
Luke 8.13. Matthew. 12.41. and Chap. 11.21. Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. I
may add, that Sinners not yet savingly converted may be so far turned as to cry
earnestly to God for converting Grace, as in Jer. 31.18. and Prove. 2.3, 4.

Thus much being said, it is easy to conceive how Persons not yet endowed with
the Holy Spirit, in the Sense that the Regenerate are, may yet be such as ask
him, or pray to God to bestow him on them, as in Luke 11.13. The Condition
there required in order to Person's having God's Spirit poured out to them.

In the other Text mentioned, Acts 2.38. the Condition required, is, repenting
and being baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ. By the former of these we must
understand such a Kind of Repentance as I have already described in the last
Paragraph, viz. a Kind of Repentance going before, and being, in the Nature of
it, preparatory to Regeneration; because, according to the Text, Men's having
Remission of Sin and the Gift of the Holy Ghost, follows after it. Indeed when
Sinners, being pricked in their Hearts, cry out, What shall we do, as in Verse
37. and, What shall I do to be saved, as in Acts 16.30. their Enquiry is not
only after Pardon, but after a new Heart and a new Spirit also. Such are
therefore fitly here told how they may obtain the Gift of the Holy Ghost, as
well as the Pardon of their Sins. Note, that by Repentance, here, the same
Thing is intended as is meant by Believing, Mark 16.16.

What is implied in Men's being baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ; and how
this is required as a Condition of their receiving the Gift of the Holy Ghost,
must be here briefly considered; for it seems plainly to be so required in the
Words under Consideration.

I then conceive that Baptism here, is not to be considered as a mere Washing
with Water, in the Name of Jesus Christ, nor indeed ever should be so, but as a
Seal and Token of the new Covenant, as Circumcision, according to the Nature of
the Institution, also was, Genesis 17, 11. Romans 4.11. So that to be circumcised of
old was, and to be baptized now is, the same Thing in other Words, as to be
taken visibly into Covenant with God. Respecting Circumcision it is plain that
he that was circumcised was thereby bound and obliged to the Observance of the
whole Law, Gal. 5.3. Where by the Law, I do not understand the Covenant of
Works, but the Covenant of Grace, according to that Dispensation of it which,
under the old Testament, was to be observed; for according to that Law the Jews
were governed, and not according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works; if they
had, they could not have been saved. It is also evident, that he that is
baptized in, or into, the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, is thereby bro't under an Obligation to perform all the Duties required
in the Gospel, or under the new Testament. And, by the Way, Infants are as
capable of being brought under such covenant Obligations now under the Gospel,
as they were under the Law. And as for the Adult, when they are baptized, they
are bound by their own Act and Deed, to perform all the Duties required in the
new Testament. And hence it seems to follow, that to be baptized in the Name
of Jesus Christ, or in the Name of all the Persons in the Holy Trinity, is the
same Thing as to be initiated into the new covenant State, and laid under a
foederal Obligation to perform all the Duties of it.

Now this being duly considered, we may the more easily understand why, and in
what Sense Baptism is required, as a Condition of the new Covenant, or our
Willingness to take upon us an Obligation to the Duties of it, or to take the
Yoke of Jesus Christ upon us: And he that refuses to be baptized, does in
Effect therein say, That he will not have the Man, Jesus Christ, to reign over
him, as in Luke 19.14. Such therefore, as refuse to be baptized, are said to
resist the Counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. It Is therefore no
Wonder, that this is required as ordinarily necessary to Salvation, as in Mark
16.16. and as necessary to our obtaining Remission of Sin, and the Gift of the
holy Ghost, here in Acts 2.38.

Here, by the Way, I cannot forbear observing, how greatly they are mistaken,
who think that Baptism is, according to Christ's Institution, to follow after
Regeneration and the Remission of Sins, when in truth it is to be received or
submitted to, in order to our obtaining these Mercies, as in the Text I am
considering. Though the same Kind of Faith and Repentance be necessary in order
to it, as I have showed; yet not that which is peculiar to the Regenerate.

CHAP. XI. That the Offers made to Sinners, of the Water of Life, in the
Gospel, are Offers of the saving Graces of the holy Spirit.
THAT there are in the holy Scriptures most gracious Offers of the Water of
Life, is very certain. Such an Offer is that in Isai. 55.1. Ho! every one that
thirsts, come ye to the Waters. -- Such also is that in John 7.37. Jesus
stood and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Such
an Offer there also is in Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And
let him that is athirst come: And whosoever will, let him take the Water of
Life freely. Such an Offer is also implied in John 4.10. Jesus said unto her,
If thou knew the Gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to
drink; thou would have asked him, and he would have given thee living Water.

Now, all that is here necessary to my present Purpose, is to show, that an
Offer of the Water of Life, or of this living Water, does certainly contain or
imply in it, an Offer of the Grace of Regeneration. And to make this evident, I
shall (1) endeavor to prove, that the Grace of Regeneration, or a Principle of
saving Grace and Holiness, is the very Thing intended by the Water of Life, in
Scripture: But if that may not be admitted, then (2) it must be implied and
comprehended in that which otherwise is intended by it.

First, I will endeavor to show, that by the Water of Life, the Grace of
Regeneration is in Scripture intended: And this I will endeavor to make
evident, by comparing some of the Places of Scripture that speak of it. In John
4.10. our Lord having spoken of this Water, in such Language as plainly
implies an Offer of it, and his Readiness to give it to such as ask it of him,
he after some further Discourse with the Woman of Samaria, gives her this
further Account of the Advantages which such have by it, as receive it of him.
Verse 14. Whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst: But the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water
springing up to everlasting Life. In which Words of our Lord he plainly
intimates, that this Water is something, which the Persons partaking of it,
have within them, as a living Principle of Life and Motion; by which Principle
of Life, what can we so well understand as that divine Nature given to Men in
their Regeneration? Of which we read Ezekiel. 37.14. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Pet. 2.4. Or, if
not this, the Spirit himself, who is the Author, Bestower and Preserver of this
divine Principle? Which of these is to me equal, and comes to the same Thing.

Again, our Savior, in John 7.37. having invited thirsty Sinners to come to
him, and drink, (of the Water of Life, no doubt) he adds in Verse 38. He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of living Water: By which Water, that we might understand what he intended, the
Evangelist immediately subjoins these Words, in Verse 39. This he spoke of the
Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. Now, what can this
possibly intend, if by it be not meant either the Person of the Holy Spirit, or
that divine Principle which he is the Author of, in Men's Souls, as before.

The Belly, out of which these Waters are said to flow, may be understood to
mean the inward Parts, or Heart, as by comparing Job 15.35. with Psalm. 51.6.
does appear: And what we may understand by this Waters flowing from thence, we
may gather from Luke 6.45. A good Man out of the good Treasure of his Heart,
brings forth that which is good; with which agrees that in Psalm. 40.8. I
delight to do thy Will, O God: Yea, thy Law is within my Heart. The Scriptures
of the old Testament, to which these Words of our Savior, may, I think, be
supposed to refer, may be such as we have in Isai. 44.3, 4, 5. and Chap. 49.10.
and 58.11. the last of which Texts I shall only here transcribe, as agreeing
well with this Place and that before mentioned, John 4.14. The Lord shall guide
thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in Drought, and make fat thy Bones: And
thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters
fail not.

There is one Exception to which, what I here plead for, may seem liable, viz.
That the Evangelist says, that our Lord here spoke of the Spirit, which they
that believe on him should receive* For the Holy Ghost was not yet given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified: By which it seems as if our Lord here
intended those extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit given at Pe^^^cost, after
his Ascension, Acts 2. beginning, according to that Prophecy in Joel 2.28, 29.

Now to this I answer, That though there be no Doubt but that our Lord had a
Respect to the mentioned extraordinary Gifts; yet to restrain his Meaning to
these only, without taking into what he intended, the giving of the Holy Ghost,
for the Conversion of great Numbers of Souls about that Time, is, I think,
altogether without Warrant. I know of no Expositors that so restrain the Sense
of that Prophecy in Joel, to those extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit mentioned,
or to any other in the Days of Christ and his Apostles, or at any other Time
afterward, as not to include those that are common to all Believers: And our
Savior warrants our expounding it in this Manner, by speaking of his giving
the Spirit, as the Privilege of Believers in general, without any Exception, in
the Place discoursed on, and elsewhere, as in Romans 8.9. and Acts 2.38, 39.

If it be said, that none can believe in Christ, 'till the Spirit of God in his
saving Influences be given to them; And therefore, the Grace given in Men's
first Conversion cannot be given to them by Promise; I shall, besides what has
been already said to this, hereafter take this Objection under Consideration.

If what I have now said be not thought sufficient to prove the Water of Life
offered to Sinners, to be the same Thing with the Holy Spirit given in
Regeneration, as I think it is, then I here further say,

Secondly, That supposing Jesus Christ himself, as some think, be intended by
that admirable Water, the Gift of this Water will suppose and imply, the Gift
of the Grace of Regeneration; and so an Offer of Jesus Christ will imply an
Offer of that. As Jesus Christ is sometimes called the Bread of Life; so if it
be allowed that he is here called the Water of Life also, an Offer of the Grace
of Regeneration will be still implied in an Offer of Him. Those who come unto
him are said to come as to a living Fountain, 1 Pet. 2.4. And he may be
understood to be intended by that Fountain opened, Zach. 13.1. If it then be
supposed, that Jesus Christ himself is the Water of Life here intended, the
offering of this Water to Sinners, is an offering of him to them. But then
Jesus Christ thus offered unto sinful Men, is offered with all his Fullness to
them, even all that Fullness of which we read Col. 1.18, 19. and John 1.14, 16.
and if so, then to be sure not without his Spirit and Grace in and with him See
Part II. Chap. IV.
, which is the Point for which I, in this Essay, am obliged earnestly to
contend.

CHAP. XII. Those conditional Offers of spiritual Wisdom made to Sinners in the
Word of God, are Offers of a Principle of saving Grace or Holiness.
IN Pursuance of what I design in this Chapter, I must show, that there are
such Promises as I here speak of; and then prove, that these Promises contain
or imply in them a conditional Offer of a Principle of saving Grace or
Holiness. And I shall endeavor to make this good in both the Parts of it, with
Respect to two Promises, or rather one and the same, expressed in two Texts of
Scripture; one of which we have in the old Testament, the other in the new.

I shall begin with that in the old Testament, which we have in Prove. 2.
beginning. That we may at once see it with the Condition on which it is made,
with a Reason given for the certain Fulfillment of it, I shall transcribe the
Words from the first to the sixth Verse, My Son, if thou will receive my Words,
and hide my Commandments with thee; so that thou incline thine Ear unto Wisdom,
and apply thine Heart to Understanding: Yea, if thou criest after Knowledge,
and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding: If thou seek her as Silver, and
searchest for her, as for hid Treasures: Then shall thou understand the Fear of
the Lord; and find the Knowledge of God. For the Lord gives Wisdom: Out of his
Mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding.

It cannot be denied that these Words run in the Form of a conditional Promise:
My Son, if thou will do thus and thus, then shall thou, etc. And in order to
our rightly understanding the Text, we must consider, (1) to whom this Promise
is made, (2) on what Conditions, (3) what is the Good promised, (4) the Reason
given for the Confirmation of the Truth of the Promise.

1. Let us consider to whom this Promise is made. And here I shall only insist
on one Thing, viz. That this Promise is undoubtedly made to Persons in an
unregenerate State, as well as unto such as are regenerate or born again. It is
evident that it is the Scope and Design of the Place, to direct Persons how
they may get true Wisdom, that which is of the best Kind: And indeed this is
the Scope of the whole Book of Proverbs, as appears Chap. 1. Verse 2, -- 7.
Now, to imagine, that such Directions are, by the wise Man, and by God himself
speaking by him, given only to those who are already truly and spiritually
wise, is what there is not the least Color for. I deny not that the truly wise
are here directed how they may get more Wisdom of the same Kind; but I affirm,
that this cannot be the only, or indeed the principal, Intendment of the Place:
But such as are still destitute of the Wisdom intended, are here directed how
they may obtain it; and are encouraged to seek after it. Nor is that
Compellation, My Son, any Way inconsistent with what I here say, if we consider
how it is frequently used in this Book, and elsewhere in Scripture.

2. We may consider on what Condition this Promise is made. And there are here
several Things required of the Persons to whom it is conditionally proposed.
And here, before I instance in the Things required, I must observe in general
with Respect to them, that none of them have, nor in Reason can have, any Thing
in them that does imply, that the Persons to perform them must, in order to it,
be endowed with true spiritual Wisdom, such as they are directed and encouraged
to seek after; or that they are such as cannot be performed 'till the same Kind
of Wisdom be first obtained. The Reason of this is obvious. Every Thing here
required, is required of such as have not the Kind of Wisdom intended, and this
in order to their getting of it. Now, what can be more absurd than to imagine,
that the wise and inspired Solomon did, in the Name of God, advise Persons
destitute of a certain Sort or Kind of Wisdom, to labor to obtain the same, by
performing certain Conditions, to the Performing of which their first having
the same Kind of Wisdom was absolutely necessary? This would be no less
unreasonable, than to advise a blind Man to make Use of good Eyesight in
searching after Medicines to cure him of his Blindness. The Thing therefore
required of unregenerate Persons, in order to their obtaining the Wisdom here
intended, cannot be such as cannot be done 'till they are first endowed with
that Kind of Wisdom which they are called upon to seek for: Nor will they
appear to be such on a due Consideration of them. I will consider them
severally.

The first Thing required is the receiving of the Words of him who speaks
them. If thou will receive my Words, i. e. the Words of Solomon, or any other
true Minister's speaking in God's Name: Or if we say the Word of God himself,
it is the same Thing. This does not necessarily intend a receiving the Word of
God in such a Manner as none but the regenerate receive it. It may be such a
receiving of it as that intended, Matthew. 13.20, 21. Nay, I say, it must be such
a receiving the Word as this; for this receiving it, as it respects many of
those who are spoken to, is only in order to their obtaining saving Wisdom,
they being still without it.

The next Thing required as the Condition of such Persons obtaining true
Wisdom, is their hiding God's Commandments with them; and this may be done by
Persons not yet regenerate, as by some awakened Sinner made sensible of his Sin
and Guilt, and desirous to know what he shall do to be saved. Is it not
possible for such an one to hear the Word of God with some Concern of Soul:
Yea, to buy a Bible, and keep it by him, for his Instruction in the Way of
Life; and frequently meditate on what he reads, and mark such Places in it as
he thinks best suits his Case, committing others to Memory, with a Design not
to forget them, but observe and practice them? Or may we tell any one that does
so, that he is in a regenerate State?

The next Thing required of such is, that they incline their Ears to Wisdom,
and apply their Hearts to Understanding, i. e. give themselves to the Study of
them, with some Affection and Delight. So Mr. POOL on the Place. But then, I
say, this Affection and Delight required, in order to their getting spiritual
Wisdom, must be such as that mentioned in Matthew. 13.20. because the Persons
here spoken to, as those there mentioned, have no Root of saving Grace in them,
as was before declared. To apply the Heart to Wisdom, may be as well understood
of the Application of the Mind and Soul to the Study and Pursuit of it, as to
the actual Acquisition, or Exercise of it.

It is further required, in order to such Persons obtaining of Wisdom, that
they cry after Knowledge, and lift up their Voice for Understanding: That is,
that they pray earnestly to God for it, as in Jam. 1.5. Now is it not possible
for any unregenerate Person thus to do? If it be not, many others besides my
self, are mistaken with Respect to Ephraim, when he prays, Turn thou me, and I
shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. We frequently exhort and press unregenerate
Sinners to pray for the Grace of Regeneration, and consequently for spiritual
Wisdom, which consists in the Fear of the Lord, Job 28.28. Now I would know
whether we ought withal to tell them, that it is impossible that they should do
thus 'till after they have the Wisdom which, being without, we advise them to
seek after. That it is not in their Power to change their own Hearts, I readily
acknowledge; but that they are unable with God's Assistance to Pray to him to
do this for them, and this with great Earnestness, I see no Reason at present
to grant.

Another Duty or Condition required of unregenerate Sinners, in order to their
getting this spiritual Wisdom, is their seeking it as Silver, and searching for
it as for hid Treasures: By which I think we may well understand, their
industriously attending all proper Means in order to their obtaining of it. Now
I would know whether it be impossible for any unregenerate Person, under the
deepest Conviction of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment, that such are capable
of, to do this? Is it absolutely impossible for People, 'till after they are
savingly converted, and become wise to Salvation, and so passed from Death to
Life, to strive to enter in at the strait Gate, (as they are exhorted to do,
Luke 13.24.) or to press into (or toward) the Kingdom of God, (as in Luke
16.16.) 'till after they are actually in it? And do not Men begin to work out
their own Salvation, 'till after they are in a State of Salvation, and have
actually obtained eternal Life? I cannot think our doing thus is the Work only
of one Moment; but includes in it our watching at Wisdom's Gates, and waiting
at the Posts of her Doors, (Prove. 8.34.) in order to our being made wise to
Salvation, and not only after we are so: And it may be compared with the poor
Cripples waiting at the Pool of Bethesda, John 5.2, 3. Can we truly affirm,
that unregenerate Sinners neither can, nor ever do, thus wait on God in the Use
of Means for the converting Influences of his Spirit? Or for the Bestowment of
true spiritual Wisdom on them? Yea, let me ask whether there have never been
any unconverted Sinners that would rather have parted with all the Substance of
their Houses, than fail of true Conversion, and so of eternal Happiness? Yea, I
would yet farther enquire, whether it is impossible for any unconverted Sinner
to do otherwise than that young Man did, who would not part with his outward
Estate, though his Soul lay at Stake? Matthew. 19.22. For my part, I doubt not but
that an unregenerate Sinner may resist unto Blood fighting against Sin. Compare
Heb. 4.12. with 1 Cor. 13.3. Men's doing all that I have spoken of, will not
prove them to be already wise to Salvation: And yet I do not believe that any
that persevere in such a Course as this, shall fail of the Grace of God, and
finally perish.

Now this brings me to the Promise made in the Place under Consideration, to
those that perform the Conditions thus required: And this we have in Verse 5.
Then shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord; and find the Knowledge of God.
The Promise is very express and peremptory; and I believe there are scarce any
but what believe, that all who obtain the Good here promised, are made wise to
Salvation; not only brought nigh to the Kingdom of God, but actually into it.
Those who think that such Seekers are so, who are described in the foregoing
Verses, will doubtless acknowledge, that they must needs be so, unto whom the
Promise made in Verse 5 is fulfilled. When Words of the Promise here made, do
certainly signify the saving Illumination and Instruction of those happy Souls
that partake of the Good expressed in it. None can doubt of this that will be
at the Trouble to compare this Promise with what we have in Psalm. 25.14. and
51.6. and 19.18, 19. 1 John 2.27. John 17.8. Prove. 3.13. and Chap. 2.10, 11.
Such as are wise to Salvation know the Wisdom here intended to be that
mentioned Job. 28.28. and Psalm. 111.10.

We have in the Place under Consideration a Reason given to confirm to us the
Truth of the Promise made, Verse 6. For the Lord gives Wisdom: Out of his
Mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding, i. e. he that thus promises to
bestow spiritual Wisdom on such as come up to the Terms on which it is offered,
is the Lord Jehovah, who is the only and all-sufficient Giver of that Wisdom,
by which Men are made wise to Salvation; he being the Father of Lights, from
whom every good and perfect Gift comes down, Jam. 1.17. Therefore we may
assuredly depend on him for the Good thus promised, if we take the Course which
he directs us to for the obtaining of it.

I may now proceed to the other Testimony I intended, for the Confirmation of
what I have asserted; and that is in the new Testament, Jam. 1.5. If any of you
lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, that gives to all Men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given to him.

This Text is very much like that last produced and vindicated; and therefore I
shall need say the less upon it. The first Thing that I shall say on it is,
that the Thing promised in it is Wisdom; and this doubtless the same Kind of
Wisdom as that described by the same Apostle, Chap. 3. Verse 17. The Wisdom
that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy, and good Fruits, without Partiality and without
Hypocrisy. By which Wisdom the Apostle doubtless intends that which is truly
spiritual and saving; and this not only Wisdom necessary in some particular
Case, as when Persons are under Affliction and Tribulation, as in the foregoing
Verses, but also in every other Case; such as is intended Job 28.28. and Prove.
2.10.

The Persons to whom this Promise is made are any that lack Wisdom, as in the
Text, If any of you lack Wisdom --. For though this Epistle was more immediately
written to those mentioned in the Inscription of it, Chap. 1. Verse 1. yet it
was no Doubt intended for the Instruction and spiritual Good of all that read
it? For thus the Spirit of God speaking in the Scripture, is to be understood,
Romans 2.29. Mark 13.37. And who is there that lacks this Kind of Wisdom more
than those do, that have none of it; which is the Case of all unregenerate
Persons. But if it should be here said, that by such as lack this Wisdom, we
may understand such as are sensible of their Need of it; to this I answer, That
though I cannot believe that the Direction here is given only to such, inasmuch
as it may encourage those that are not yet duly sensible how much they need it,
to endeavor to become so; yet supposing this to be true, there is no Reason to
question, but that Persons still in an unregenerate State may be sensible that
they need spiritual Wisdom. Those that are sensible that they need Happiness:
And I believe it is possible, that an unregenerate Person may be convinced that
it is impossible that he should be made truly happy and blessed, without being
made spiritually wise. I know that natural Men are apt to place their Happiness
in sensual Objects; but is it not possible for them to be convinced of their
Error and Mistake in this, 'till after they are savingly converted? I incline
to tell People who are convinced of this, that it belongs to the Work
ordinarily required as preparatory to Conversion, rather than as an essential
Ingredient in it: For how should any sincerely turn to God, 'till first
convinced of the Vanity of the Creature? If an awakened Sinner tells me, he is
convinced that Nothing in any Creature, or in all of them together, can make
him truly happy, I cannot, on this Account, though I believe him, assure him that
he is in a converted State.

The next Thing to be considered is, the Condition required in order to the
obtaining the Wisdom intended; and this is, that they ask it of God, who gives
liberally, and upbraideth not. Here observe, (1) That such as need this Wisdom
are required to ask for it. (2) They are required, in asking it, to apply to a
right Object, viz. God. (3) Here is something to encourage them to do so, viz.
He gives liberally, and upbraideth not.

(1) If Sinners need spiritual Wisdom, they must ask for it. The Way of
obtaining it is not to acquire it by hard Study, but by Prayer. There is a Sort
of Wisdom that may be acquired by Study and Meditation, as other acquired Gifts
and Qualifications are; but this is not of that Kind, nor obtained in that Way,
(though necessary in the Work preparatory to it) but by fervent Prayer, called in
Scripture asking, seeking, knocking, Matthew. 7.7, 8. Luke 11.9, 10.

(2) Those that desire this Wisdom must seek it of a right Object, who is able
and willing to bestow it, viz. God. So in the Text, Let him ask it of God. The
most learned Men in the World cannot give this Wisdom, by the best Instructions
they can afford: Only God can do this, as we saw before. Prove. 2.6. The Lord
gives Wisdom: Out of his Mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding. And this
Knowledge comes out of God's Mouth, not only by Means of the Scriptures which
he has given by the Inspiration of his Spirit; but as the Light did which he
gave in the Creation of the World, Genesis 1.3. with which we may compare, 2 Cor.
2.6. And I may add, that when we ask this Wisdom, we must ask it in the Name of
Jesus Christ, as we must all other Mercies.

(3) Here is Ground of Encouragement thus to ask this Wisdom of God, viz. He
gives liberally, and upbraideth not: He gives to all that ask for it as they
ought to do. He gives not as Persons of narrow Souls are wont to give their
Gifts; nor does he twit and upbraid those who in their Straits seek his
Favors: And this, if there had been no more said, gives great Encouragement to
ask spiritual Wisdom of him.

But as if this was not enough, there is in the Words a positive Promise, that
those who ask it in the Manner required, shall obtain it: It shall be given
him; exactly answering to what we had before in Prove. 2.5. Then shall thou
understand the Fear of the Lord; and find the Knowledge of God.

But I expect that, against what I plead for the Support of my Hypothesis from
this Text, what follows in the two next Verses will be objected, viz. But let
him ask in Faith, nothing wavering: For he that wavereth is like a Wave of the
Sea, driven with the Wind, and tossed. For let not that Man think that he shall
receive any Thing of the Lord.

If these Words be objected against what I hold and plead for, I suppose the
Strength of the Objection (if it have any) depends on this, that such a Kind of
Faith as that described Verse 6. is required to such a successful asking of
Wisdom as that spoken of in Verse 5. is what an unregenerate Sinner cannot
possibly be the Subject of, but such only as are already in a regenerate State,
and so truly and spiritually wise; and that the Wisdom promised to be given to
such askers of it as are intended in the Place, must be more of the same Kind
that they are endowed with.

Now in Answer to this several Things may be said,

1. I readily grant, that the Asking intended in Verse 5. must be an Asking in
Faith: Otherwise it is not such as the Promise is there made to. And indeed it
is, I think, impossible, that any Prayer at all should be made to God, without
some Kind of Faith in him. Prayer is a coming to God for the Favors we need,
and desire him to grant to us. But we are assured in Heb. 11.6. that, he that
comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. So that there can be no such Thing as coming to God
without believing in him. To the same Effect is it demanded in Romans 10.14. How
shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? As Men cannot, in a
gracious and holy Manner, come to or call upon God, without that Kind of Faith
which is peculiar to Persons in a justified and regenerate State; so they
cannot, in any Manner, draw near to God, and call on his Name, without some
Kind of Faith; at least such as unregenerate Persons may be the Subjects of.

2. I affirm, that it is possible for unregenerate Persons to believe in God,
and in his Son Jesus Christ. Many such have believed. Many unregenerate Persons
have believed there is a God, Jam. 2.19. And many unregenerate Persons have had
Faith in Jesus Christ, as is evident in John 2.23, 24. and Chap. 12.42, 43.
Acts 8.13. Matthew. 13.20, 21. Luke 8.13. That Text therefore, 1 John 5.1.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, must be
understood of a Kind of Faith or Believing peculiar to God's Elect, already in
a regenerate State. The same may be said concerning Peter's Faith, Matthew.
16.16, 17. and their's also in Acts 13.48. Otherwise I know of no Proposition
in our holy Religion but what may be believed or assented unto by Persons in an
unregenerate State. Unregenerate Persons have the same objective Revelation of
divine Truths, and the same rational Evidence to ground their Persuasion of
them upon, as the Regenerate have; and this Evidence is sufficient to demand
their Assent, and to command it, did they not wilfully refuse to attend to it.
If this were not so, unregenerate Persons that do not assent to divine Truths
might justify their not believing: For no Man is bound to believe that, of
which he has not, or cannot have, sufficient Evidence. For,

3. Unregenerate Persons are able to understand the Evidence given or offered
to them, to satisfy them of the Truth of those Things which they are required
to believe; so that if they believe them not, it is because they shun the Light,
and will not consider as they may and ought to do, those Evidences which God
favors them with; having an Enmity in their Hearts against the Truths and
Objects revealed.

4. All unregenerate Sinners do not thus obstinately shut their Eyes against
the Light. They are by common Grace prevailed with to make a better Improvement
of the Advantages they enjoy, than others do. Nor is the Sin of those that
refuse Instruction, in this Way offered to them, unavoidable, so that they
cannot come to the Knowledge of the Truth, but must necessarily remain Infidels
or Unbelievers.

5. The Persuasion which some unregenerate Sinners do, in this Way, attain, is
so firm and strong, that it has a great Influence on their Lives. They receive
the Word with Joy, and do many Things that are required of them. Such a
Persuasion as these have, or may have, of the Truth, is sufficient to produce
Repentance in Sackcloth and Ashes; insomuch that such are sometimes said to
have escaped the Pollutions that are in the World, through the Knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. and to have been enlightened,
and to have tasted the heavenly Gift, and to have been made Partakers of the
Holy Ghost, and to have tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the
World to come, Heb. 6.4, 5.

Such an Assurance of divine Truths as Persons not savingly converted may, in
this Way attain, is sufficient to render them utterly inexcusable if they
engage not in the Practice of religious Duties, such as Praying to God in
public, private and secret; and Waiting on him in all the other Ways of his
own Appointment, for his saving and everlasting Mercies, and in particular for
that spiritual Wisdom here under Consideration: So that such Persons need not
be at such Uncertainties, with Respect to the Truth of God's Word, as not to
ask these Mercies in Faith; especially if they are taught, as I think they
should be, that God has firmly promised these spiritual Blessings to those
that, in a right Manner, ask them of him. They may then ask them in Faith
without wavering, like a Wave of the Sea, that is driven with the Wind, and
tossed, as in the Text objected: Or like double-minded Men who are unstable in
all their Ways, Verse 8. But on the contrary, they may with some Steadfastness
and Constancy, watch at Wisdom's Gates, etc. Prove. 8.34. and not grow weary in
well-doing, nor draw back to Perdition, as some do. See Ezekiel. 33.13. Heb.
10.38. Matthew. 24.12, 13.

I might have here shown the Difference betwixt this Kind of Faith, and that
peculiar to the Regenerate; but for this I shall refer my Reader to Chap. III.
of this second Part of my Essay: And I shall hereafter have Occasion to say
something further to it.

CHAP. XIII. That the conditional Promises of special Mercy made to such as
come to JESUS CHRIST, do contain and imply in them a Promise of rengenerating
Grace.
THE Promises which I here intend are such as these following, viz. Matthew.
11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give
you Rest. John 6.35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the Bread of Life: He that
comes to me shall never Hunger; and he that believes on me shall never
Thirst. So again in Verse 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me;
and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Such a Promise is also
supposed and implied in John 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have
Life. In these Places Jesus Christ freely invites all sinful Men, to whom the
Gospel is preached, to come to him for Life and Happiness, promising that if
they do, they shall obtain what they come to him for.

Now, this being allowed, as I think it cannot be denied, I shall here briefly
consider (1) What the Promises are which Sinners should go to Jesus Christ for.
(2) How they should go to Christ for these Benefits. (3) The Security given
them, that so doing, they shall obtain them.

1. Let us consider what those Benefits are which Sinners are invited to go to
Jesus Christ for. Now to this I say in general, that there is no Reason to
doubt but that they are invited to go to Christ for all spiritual Blessings, or
for all those everlasting Mercies which he freely bestows on all those whom he
eternally saves; all that Fullness which he has in himself, and which is by his
People derived from him, as in Col. 1.19. John 1.14, 16. That Pardon of Sin, or
Justification and Adoption are among those Blessings, which Sinners are invited
to go to Christ for, is not, I think, at all questioned among us; and so also
the Happiness enjoyed by true Saints in their Communion with God here in this
Life, and in that which is to come.

All the Question here is, whether unregenerate Sinners who enjoy such
Invitations by the Gospel, as those above expressed, are not therein invited to
go to Jesus Christ also for that Principle of spiritual Life which is given in
Regeneration? And this I am persuaded they are; and can hardly think that any
orthodox Divine will deny it. Is not every unregenerate Sinner who enjoys the
Gospel, bound to pray as David did in Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean Heart,
O God; and renew a right Spirit within me. Indeed, we have no Reason to doubt
of David's being in a regenerate State, when he thus prayed: But it being after
his great Sin and Fall, as appears by the Title of the Psalm, and is further
confirmed by the Contents of it, he may be justly supposed to have been under a
Cloud, with respect to his spiritual State, and to have wanted that Sense of
God's Love, which formerly he enjoyed. Several of his Expressions in the Psalm
lead us to think so; it is therefore no Wonder if he now called the Sincerity
of his Heart, and the Truth of his Conversion, in Question, and so prayed for a
new Heart, as if he had never before had such an Heart given to him: But he
could not desire this but only on Supposition that he had not already what he
was concerned that he might not fail of. And thus any Saint that knows not that
he is already in a regenerate State, may pray that he may be born again. And
those that are indeed destitute of true Grace should pray for it as Ephraim
did, Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: And that is to go to
Christ, and to God in and by him, for it. We are told, in Acts 5.31. That he is
exalted to be a Prince and a Savior; to grant Repentance and Remission of
Sins; no Doubt the Grace of true Repentance, as well as the Acts and Exercises
of it: And this shows us that Sinners should go to him for this Grace, as unto
one that has the Words of eternal Life, John 6.68. The wicked Jews refusing to
do this, was no Doubt one great Part of the Crime with which our Lord charged
them, John 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have Life. Or, shall we
suppose they were only to go to Christ for Pardon, and not for the Grace of
Regeneration, which he also merited for his People, and which they can have no
other Way than through him, who is that Head of Influence, by which his whole
Body is animated and nourished,; and who having Life in himself, quickneth whom
he will, Col. 1.18, 19. and John 1.16. and Chap. 5.26, 27. Thus, I think it is
sufficiently evident, that unregenerate Persons ought to go to Jesus Christ for
spiritual Life, or for the Grace of Regeneration.

2. I am to show how Sinners are to go to him for this Grace. And here I will
venture to say negatively, They are not required to go to him for it in the
Exercise of the same Kind of Grace. Is it possible for any rational Men to
think, that God requiring unregenerate Sinners to go to Jesus Christ for a
Principle of spiritual Life, which they are yet without, would require them to
come to him for it, in the Exercise of that very same Kind of Grace which he
requires them to seek after, and beg for? This is too absurd to be believed.

What then, are the Unregenerate in seeking to Jesus Christ for the Grace of
Regeneration, required to come to him in Faith, or without any? Surely they are
not required to come to Christ without Faith: That would be a strange Way of
coming, if any at all. How should they come to their Savior without having any
Faith in him? It is impossible. Heb. 11.6. Romans 10.14. How should Persons call
on Jesus Christ, as in Mat. 8.25. Lord, save us, we perish; or as in Verse 2.
Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, if they do not believe him able
to do these Things for them? And the Reason is the same if we go to him for a
new Heart, or to give us spiritual Life.

But how should Persons go to Christ in Faith, for such a Mercy, who are not
yet born again?

I answer, That the Mystery is this, that Persons may have Faith in Christ,
though they are not yet born of the Spirit, as in John 3.16, or have not yet been
made Partakers of the divine Nature, as in 2 Pet. 1.4. I have proved this in
Chap. XII. to which I here refer my Reader. And I am not yet convinced, that it
is impossible for a Sinner not yet born of God, and that has no other Faith
than a Person in that Estate may have, to go to Christ for regenerating Grace,
or for a new Heart; but I am thoro'ly convinced, that no Sinner is required to
go to Christ for the Grace of Regeneration, in the Exercise of the same Kind of
Grace.

3. We may now consider the Security given to all that come to Christ, in the
Manner intended, that they shall obtain the Benefits conditionally promised to
them; and so with the rest, the Grace of Regeneration: And the Promise for this
is as full and express in the Places quoted, as can be desired. Such shall
never Hunger nor thirst, John 6.35. Christ will by no Means cast them out,
Verse 37. They shall find Rest to their Souls, Matthew. 11.28. Which Promises can
never be made good to such as go to Jesus Christ for his everlasting Mercies
offered to them in the Gospel, unless the Grace of Regeneration be bestowed on
them, that being one of those for which they are invited to go to him, as I
have already showed. And, as if a Promise without an Oath had not been
sufficient, both have been (for the better Satisfaction of such as by Reason of
Infirmity need it) given to them, Heb. 6.17, 18. The Promise and Oath of God
here mentioned, does not only afford Matter of Consolation to such as have
already fled for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set before them; but also
great Encouragement to others to do so, who have not yet done it. Nor ought
Sinners to stay till they are born of the Spirit, before they begin thus to do;
though they should continue coming to Christ after they are born of God, as
appears in 1 Pet. 2.2, 3, 4. Those who intend never to go to God in Christ for
his saving Mercies, will be in great Danger of going forever without them.

CHAP. XIV. That there are conditional Promises made in the Gospel, to such as
PERSEVERE and OVERCOME, which contain in them Offers of the Grace of
Regeneration.
I IN the present Argument, join together the two Sorts of Promises mentioned,
because of their near Relation one to the other; the End of Perseverance being
our overcoming the Evils we have to meet with, in the Way that leads to
eternal Life.

However, I shall first consider those Promises of Salvation, which are made to
such as persevere: And here I shall first show that there are several such
Promises: And then, secondly, make it evident that these contain an Offer of
regenerating Grace in them.

First, I will Instance in several such Promises: And such an one is that,
which we have, in Matthew. 10.22. and Chap. 24.13. He that endures to the End
shall be saved. If the Circumstances of the Places wherein this Promise is
found, be duly considered, none can reasonably doubt that the Salvation
intended in it is that which is eternal; elsewhere in Scripture called eternal
Life: And that the Condition on which this Salvation is offered, is
Perseverance, is, I think, undeniable. It is called, in the Words under
Consideration, Enduring to the End, the direct contrary to that Enduring and
Believing only for a while, which Apostates are chargeable with, as appears in
Matthew. 13.21. Mark 4.17. and Luke 8.13. Such a Promise is that also in Hos.
6.4. Such a Promise is also in Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord: His going forth is prepared as the Morning; and he shall come
unto us as the Rain; as the latter and former Rain unto the Earth. To follow on
to know the Lord, is to persevere in our Endeavors to get that saving
Acquaintance with him, spoken of Job 22.21. And his coming unto such as the
Rain, doubtless imports the plentiful Effusion of the Holy Spirit on them, in
his converting and saving Influences, as in Prove. 1.23. and Isai. 44.34, 35.
Another such Promise we have in Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary in Well-doing,
for in due Time we shall reap, if we faint not. Which Promise, I suppose, to be
given to such as have begun to seek the Lord, whether they are in a regenerate
State or not. With these Texts we may compare what we have in Heb. 10.23. and
Verse 35, -- 39. which I may hereafter have Occasion to consider. Also that in
Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. Some there are that fail and fall short of eternal Life and
Happiness, by Means of their Apostasy from God, and their Duty; but these are
not such as have been regenerated by the Holy Spirit, but such as have been in
the Way to obtain this Mercy.

Secondly, I shall now proceed to show that such Promises as these contain in
them an Offer of the Grace given in Regeneration. And to make this good, the
first Thing I shall say is, that they are not made to such as are already in a
State of Grace and Salvation, i. e. to such as are in a regenerate and
justified State, and so already passed from Death to Life, as in John 5.24. and
1 John 3.14. God does not tell such as these, that if they do not fall from
Grace, and again become such as the unregenerate are, they shall be saved; as
if their future Salvation were still suspended on this Condition, that they
remain true Believers all the Days of their Lives. Such as these have already
performed the Conditions on which Salvation is offered to Sinners, and have
begun to partake of that Salvation, which God bestows on all who comply with
the Terms of the new Covenant; and all that remains necessary for the
perfecting of it is by the Promise and Oath of God secured to them. They may
depend upon his perfecting all that concerns them, even their Perseverance in
Faith and Holiness to the End is fully secured to them, Jer. 32.40. 1 Pet. 1.
3, 4, 5. The Promise of Salvation which they have already a Right unto,
includes in it a Promise of their Perseverance, in Faith and Holiness, even
unto Death. Their Perseverance therefore, rather depends on their Salvation,
than their Salvation on their Perseverance: How then can their eternal
Salvation be suspended on this Condition, if they persevere. I wonder any
Calvinist should thus expound the mentioned Promises so very inconsistently
with the Principles professed by them, and, as I shall show, with the plain
Sense of the Places wherein such Promises are found. It is too late to tell Men
they shall be saved on thi^ or that Condition, after their Salvation is fully
secured, with all Things necessarily implied in it.

The third Thing which I have to say respecting the Promises under
Consideration, is, that they suppose the Persons to whom they are made, to be
already so far forth qualified Subjects to partake of the Good promised, that
Nothing is wanting in order to it, but their Continuance or Perseverance in the
Way of Duty, in which they are at present walking: For Perseverance is all that
is now demanded of them, in order to their being Partakers of the Benefits
conditionally promised to them. Unto such therefore that belongs, Heb. 10.36.
Ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might
receive the Promise. Unto those also that is spoken Gal. 6.9. Let us not be
weary in Well-doing, etc. Not that such Persons have already a Right to the
saving Mercies of the new Covenant; but because in due Time they shall have an
Interest in them, if they go on in the Way they are in, and do not grow weary
and give out. Compare with the Text last mentioned, that in Luke 18.1, 7. The
Persons therefore, unto whom such Promises are made, are (though not in a
regenerate State) such as are striving to enter in at the strait Gate, Luke
13.24. Or pressing to enter into the Kingdom of God, (or toward it) Luke
16.16. being such convinced and awakened Sinners as have begun to work out
their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2.12. and consequently are
such as believe the Word of God, both Law and Gospel, though not with that Kind
of Faith as is infused into Men's Souls, in their Regeneration. And though they
are not savingly converted, in the Sense in which that Expression is generally
used; yet they have a Repentance like that intended in Matthew. 11.21. and are
such as have escaped the Pollutions that are in the World, through the Knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2.20. And are also in a Way of
Well-doing, watching at Wisdom's Gates, and waiting at the Posts of her Doors,
Prove. 8, 34.

Thus the Persons intended are supposed to be serious and diligent Seekers of
God, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for his special and saving Mercies, though not
in a regenerate and justified Estate. And Persons qualified as now expressed,
are, I say, qualified to be Partakers of the saving Benefits offered in the new
Covenant; so that it is no Ways inconsistent with the Truth, Justice and
Holiness of God, to bestow these saving and eternal Mercies on them: Yet he has
not bound himself by any Promise, that he will immediately save a Sinner so
qualified; but is pleased to require Sinners under such Preparations to wait on
him during his Pleasure, for the Bestowment of the same upon them: Only he has,
(as I think) for their Encouragement, engaged that they shall in due Time reap
these Fruits of his special Favor if they faint not.

And now, that Persons may be thus qualified to be Partakers of God's
everlasting Mercies, and yet not immediately have the same bestowed on them,
but be obliged to wait God's Time, under such Preparations, and this under Pain
of falling finally short of the Mercies which they seek, in Case they persevere
not, I shall endeavor a little further to clear up.

This would indeed be impossible, if that Kind of Faith, by Divines called
Fides infusa, were the Condition of the new Covenant; because such Faith
necessarily supposes all that have it to be in a State of Salvation, as I have
already showed. But that Kind of Faith and Repentance, which I look upon as the
Condition of the Covenant of Grace, is evidently, in the Nature of it, such as
Persons may have before they are in a State of Salvation; and therefore it may
be a Truth, (and indeed it evidently is so) that Perseverance is required of
such as would be Partakers of God's saving Mercies, in order to their obtaining
them; and not only that for a Moment they are qualified, as has been expressed.

This will be further manifest, if we consider, that we may well distinguish
betwixt a Condition on which a Benefit is offered, considered materially, or in
Respect of the Act or Acts wherein it consists; and considered with Respect
to the Prolongation or Continuance of the Thing required: If we consider the
Nature of the Things required, Persons may, in that Respect, have all that is
demanded of them, and yet not have a Right to the Benefits conditionally
promised; because they have not continued the Qualifications demanded, so long
as is required of them, in order to their having a Right.

Thus in the first Covenant made with Man, he might for a Time continue in that
Obedience which was required of him, and yet have no Right to the Life
conditionally promised; because he had not stood in Innocence the whole Term of
that State of Probation which was by God designed for his Trial. And I know no
Reason why it may not be so under the new Covenant also; nay, it seems
certainly to be so, inasmuch as God does not only require such Qualifications
as are mentioned in the Covenant, but also Perseverance in the Performance of
what is required; that is, God requires that we keep Covenant with him, in
order to his saving us; and this not by one transient Act only, but by our
constant Obedience to his Commandments, 'till we obtain his offered Mercies, as
in Psalm. 25.10. and 103.17, 18.

That the Sense which I have given of the Promises under Consideration, is very
agreeable with the Scope of the Places wherein we find them, will (I think)
appear if we consider them in Connection with the Context, to which they
respectively belong. In that Matthew. 10.22. those Christians to whom the Promise
intended has a Reference, are supposed to be liable to violent Persecutions,
under which they would be in great Danger of falling away, as stony-ground
Hearers are many of them supposed to do, in Matthew. 13.20, 21. and in the other
Evangelists. They are therefore encouraged with a Promise of Salvation, in Case
they should persevere, which they would not have been in Danger of not doing,
if they had been passed from Death to Life, in the Sense intended in John 5.24.
Those in Matthew. 24.13. are spoken to as liable to grievous Temptations, by
Reason of that abounding of Iniquity there foretold, which should occasion the
Love of many to wax cold, as in Verse 12. and so are encouraged to take Heed of
Apostasy, from the Consideration of that gracious Promise made to such as
persevere; viz. that if they should endure to the End, they should be saved;
they believing only for a while, as in Luke 8.13. I may here add, that when
some, in the mentioned Place, Matthew. 13. have Salvation promised to them, in
Case they should not fall away, as others would do; the Antithesis expressed in
the Words plainly show, that the same Kind of Faith or Religion is intended in
both Cases: So that of the same Sort of Believers some might fall away, and
perish, and others persevere, and be saved: And if those who are supposed to
fall away, should not do so, but should continue to believe, they should be
saved also.

The like may be said with Respect to that Text, Heb. 10.36, 38, 39. Ye have
Need of Patience; that after ye have done the Will of God, ye may receive the
Promise. Now the Just shall live by Faith: But if any Man (or, as it is in the
Original, I am told, if he) draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him.
But we are not of them that draw back unto Perdition, but of them that believe
to the saving of the Soul. I believe it can never be proved that the Faith
intended in Verse 38. is that which is peculiar to the Regenerate; but the
contrary seems evident. I grant that, according to the Text, the Faith intended
is of the same Kind with that by which the Just do live, that is, it is of the
same Kind of Faith with that which is required as the Condition of the Covenant
of Grace: And what Kind of Faith that is, I have sufficiently showed, and
proved it cannot be that given in Regeneration. Moreover, when it is said, That
the Just shall live by Faith, and it thereupon follows, If any Man draw back,
etc. it seems evident, that the same Kind of Faith is by some fallen from,
which others persevere in the Exercise of, to the saving of their Souls.
Therefore, when it is said, The Just shall live by Faith, the Meaning is, That
he shall do so, in Case he persevere in Believing, and continues a just and
righteous Man, in the Sense in which he is at present such an one; which many
not doing, God's Soul has no such Pleasure in them, as he has in those who so
do. And though such as are the Subjects of the Faith intended, are called Just,
this may not intend that they are so in the strictest Sense of that Word, any
more than that the Term Righteous, must be so taken, in (what I think to be) a
parallel Place, in Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. But if the Righteous turns away from his
Righteousness, and commit Iniquity, and does according to the Abominations that
the wicked Man does, shall he live? All his Righteousness that he has done,
shall not be mentioned; in his Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his Sin
that he has sinned, in them shall he die. When a righteous Man turns away
from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, and dies in them, for his
Iniquity that he has done shall he die. In which Words it is to me so evident,
that by a righteous Man, a regenerate Saint cannot be intended, that I think I
need not spend Time in making the same manifest, nor am I alone in this Though It;
such a one being spoken of as falling short of Life and Happiness, by turning
away from that Righteousness which he once had, when otherwise he might and
should have lived. Compare this Place with Ezekiel. 3.20. and 33.18. The Righteous
intended in these Places are, I suppose, such as are mentioned in 2 Pet. 2.20,
21. and there said to have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the
Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and to have known the Way of
Righteousness, but to turn again from the holy Commandment. That such righteous
Persons as these shall be saved, if they persevere in such Faith and Obedience
as they have attained to, is what I here endeavor to maintain: Not that any
can be saved without Regeneration; for Man's Regeneration is his Salvation,
Tit. 3.5. But my Meaning is, that such as so believe and obey, shall obtain
both Justification and Regenetion, if they persevere in so doing: Otherwise,
such as persevere should not be saved, according to the mentioned Promises.

I shall now proceed to consider the second Sort of Promises intended to be
insisted on in this Argument, viz. Those wherein special Mercies are engaged to
such as overcome; and in which I suppose the Grace of Regeneration to be
conditionally promised. I shall at present only insist on two Places, in which,
I suppose, we have such Promises. The first of these is in Rev. 2.17. To him
that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a
white Stone, and in this Stone a new Name written, which no Man knows, saving
he that receives it. The second Place I intend, is in Rev. 3.12. Him that
overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God; and he shall go no
more out. And I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the
City of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven
from my God; and I will write upon him my new Name. With Respect to these
Places we may consider, (1) The Subjects unto whom these Promises are made. (2)
The Promises made unto these Subjects, and that by Jesus Christ himself, whose
Words these are.

1. Then, the Subjects unto whom these Promises are made are such as overcome.
For to him that overcomes, etc. which Words being spoken indifinitely, must be
understood of all that overcome, whoever they be. But the Objects over whom the
Victory intended is supposed to be obtained, is not here expressed, but must be
understood from what is said in Scripture, with Respect to that Warfare,
wherein Christians are engaged against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, as
in 1 Timothy 6.12. Ephesians. 6.10, -- 17. Jam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 2.11. and many other Places.
From whence we may gather, that the Victory intended, is over all the Enemies
of our Souls. These are the Things which we must overcome, if we would have the
Benefits promised in the Words before us.

But we must consider when or how these Things may be said to be overcome. Now,
here it is very necessary that we observe, that there are two Periods, in
which, or remarkable Degrees of Victory, with Respect whereunto, Professors of
Religion may be said to overcome their spiritual Enemies, or to gain the
Victory over them. One of these is when they are first savingly united unto
Jesus Christ, and so entitled through his Merits, to the everlasting Mercies
offered in the Gospel. The other is when they are actually possessed of all the
Good which Jesus Christ has purchased for them; and which God has from
Eternity purposed to bestow; and are also perfectly freed from all the Evils
which their Sin and Fall had brought on them. Now of these two remarkable
Seasons and Degrees of the Christian's Victory, it will be to my present
Purpose to say something, especially of the first of them; because they ought
here to be carefully distinguished.

First then, Professors of Religion may be said to overcome Sin, the World, and
the Devil, even all the Enemies of Souls, when by Faith they obtain an Interest
in Jesus Christ, and so are united to him, and through Grace entitled to all the
sure and everlasting Mercies of the new Covenant, offered to sinful Men in the
Gospel. Whenever any of the sinful Children of Men are thus interested in Jesus
Christ, their Sins are all pardoned, and their Persons justified, by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to them. They are reconciled unto God, adopted
into the Number of his Children, being regenerated by his Spirit, and so made
new Creatures; And their future Happiness is as fully secured to them, whether
they know it or not, as if they were actually in the Possession of the Glory of
the World to come: So that now their State is that expressed, John 5.24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting Life; and shall not come into Condemnation, but
is passed from Death to Life. And Romans 8.1, 2. There is therefore now no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit. For the Law of the Spirit in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of Sin and Death. With these Places do many others agree,
some of which I shall only here refer to, as Romans 8.32, -- 39. Romans 6.14. 1
John 3.9. John 3.29. 1 John 5.28. Psalm. 32.12. Romans 4.7, 8. John 10.27, 29. 1
Pet. 1.3, -- 5.

When eternal Happiness is thus secured to any of the Children of Men, they may
be well said to have overcome; (though they are not past having any new Assault
made on them by their spiritual Enemies, and suffering greatly by them) so that
it may be said to every true Saint, as in 1 John 2.13. Ye have overcome the
wicked one. Therefore holy Paul, being justified by Faith in Christ, could say,
as in 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought the good Fight, I have finished my Course, I
have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day;
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his Appearing. Note here,
that these Words of the Apostle, I have kept the Faith, cannot mean that he had
persevered to the End of his Life; but that he had done so, till he had secured
his future and eternal Happiness, as in the forementioned John 5.24. And such
a Victory has every godly Man obtained over the Enemies of his Soul, though many
such are not, as Paul, assured of this.

But there is yet, Secondly, a further Victory to be sought and obtained by
Christians, over their spiritual Enemies, and all Things that hinder their
complete Happiness, even over all the Evils that trouble and molest them: For
which Victory they must wait patiently, 'till their spiritual Warfare be fully
accomplished, which it will not be while they live in this World: Nay, their
last Enemy will not be destroyed, 'till their Resurrection from the Dead, 1
Cor. 15.26. Now the Christian's Progress toward this complete Victory is but
gradual after the first Victory mentioned is obtained, and will be perfect when
the good Day arrives, wherein they shall behold God's Face in Righteousness,
and all their Tears shall be wiped away.

If it be now inquired which of these Victories thus described, is that
intended and refered to in the Places under Consideration, as that which
qualifies the Subjects that obtain it, for the Benefits promised to such as
overcome; unto this I answer, That the first of these two Victories described
must needs be that intended in the Places here discoursed on; because the
Promises in them made to such as are Victorious, are of Things belonging,
according to the Tenor of the new Covenant, to such as overcome, in the first
Sense explained.

This will be evident if we consider what the Benefits are, here promised to
victorious Christians. And in the first of these Places mentioned, ( viz. Rev.
2.17.) the Things by our Savior promised to be given to such, are these, viz.
(1) He will give such an one to eat of the hidden Manna. (2) He will give him a
white Stone. (3) In that Stone, a new Name written, which no Man knows,
saving him that receives it.

In the other Place insisted on, Rev. 3.12. the Things promised to the
Victorious are these following, viz. First, I will, says our Savior, make him
a Pillar in the Temple of my God; and he shall go no more out. Secondly, I
will, says he, write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of
my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my
God: And I will write upon him my new Name.

Now can it be imagined by any one who duly considers what is intended in these
Promises, that the Subjects unto whom they are made, are such as have obtained
a full Victory over all their spiritual Enemies, so as no more to be disturbed
by them? Nay, is it not evident, that the Benefits in these Promises engaged,
are actually given and granted to all such as are victorious in the first Sense
explained? Though it be true, that they are still in a militant State, fighting
under the Banner of Jesus Christ, the Captain of their Salvation, yet their
final Victory is fully secured. Is it not evident that Jesus Christ is the
hidden Manna intended in the mentioned Rev. 2.17? And is it not equally clear,
that all true Believers do now feed on that Bread of Life? as our Savior
shows in John 6.48, -- 58. Is it not evident that the white Stone promised,
is given to every regenerate and justified Soul? Is not every true Saint
favored with this precious Gift? Is not the white Stone here intended, the
same Thing that is elsewhere called a new and clean Heart, the Seed of God, the
divine Nature, the Image of God, etc.? And is not this an infallible Sign and
Token of the Justification of the Person it is given to? Even as the white
Stones which were of old given in Courts of Justice, to such as were cleared or
judged innocent, were given as a Sign of their Justification. They, says
Pareus on this Place, come nearest the literal Meaning, who think that Christ
in this respects the Manner of Judgment, where there were two Sorts of Stones
cast into a Basin; by the White the Innocent were absolved; by the Black the
Guilty were condemned. So that, according to Pareus, the giving of a white
Stone signified that the Person was justified to whom it was given, though he has
not yet obtained a perfect Victory over Sin and Satan. It is also true that a
new Name written in the white Stone here mentioned, is given in and with it,
and by every true Believer received. This is that Name which God has promised
to such as keep his Sabbaths, and choose the Things that please him, and take
hold of his Covenant, Isai. 56.4, 5. Even unto them, says he, will I give in
mine House, and within my Walls, a Place and a Name better than that of Sons
and Daughters. I will give them an everlasting Name that shall not be cut off.
The same Name is intended in 1 John 3.1. Behold, what Manner of Love the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the SONS OF GOD. Nor is this a
Name only, but both the Name and what is signified by it, as by the next Words
appears. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, etc. with which compare 2 Cor.
6.17, 18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord almighty. This is a Privilege belonging to every true Saint.

The same may be said with Respect to the Privileges or Benefits promised in
the other Place mentioned, Rev. 3.12. Every such an one is made a Pillar in the
Temple of God, that shall go no more out, etc.

But for the further clearing up of this Point, it must be here observed, That
we must carefully distinguish betwixt the Victory Men may be said to obtain
over Sin and Satan, in they Way of their own Duty, while they are called to
strive against them, in a Course of Well-doing, and that which they obtain by
what God himself does for them, when they have so far overcome, through his Grace
assisting them, as to have done what is required on their Part, in order to
God's doing for them what is necessary on his, for the perfecting of that
Victory, which is desired and endeavored after.

Now, Man may be said, on his Part, to overcome and be victorious, when he has
through Grace so far prevailed, as to have come up to the Terms of the Covenant,
wherein everlasting Mercies are offered and conditionally promised to him: And
yet his Victory cannot be said to be completed, (taking in God's Part of the
Work) till God has also performed the Promise made to Man, on Condition of his
doing what on his Part is required. Thus distinguishing, we may truly affirm,
that Man must first overcome so far as is required of him, before he may expect
that God will perfect his Victory, by doing what he has conditionally promised.

And thus it may be affirmed, that a Sinner must himself first overcome, before
God will give him to eat of the hidden Manna; give him a white Stone, with a
new Name written in it; make him a Pillar in the Temple of God, that shall go
no more out; write on him the Name of God, etc. All which denote God's granting
his saving and special Mercies to him, as I have showed above; but all such
Mercies are given in the Way of a Covenant, the Condition of which must be
complied with, before a Sinner can, in that Way, obtain them: Nor does our
coming up to the Terms of the Covenant suppose or imply our having any such
Mercy before we so do. I intend such Mercies as Regeneration and Justification
are. And yet I shall not doubt to affirm that no Sinner ever complied with the
Terms of the new Covenant, without having the distinguishing Grace of God
magnified toward him; and this I hope I shall make manifest before I have done.

CHAP. XV. That Sinners do therefore perish, because they receive not the Love
of the Truth, that they may be saved, an Argument that they have an Offer of
true Holiness made to them.
I GROUND the Argument proposed in the Title of this Chapter, on the Text
alluded to in it, viz. 2 These. 2.10. where the Apostle speaking of them that
perish, under the antichristian Apostasy, declares that they therefore perish,
because they receive not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved. Now I
shall endeavor to show how these Words serve to my Purpose, by considering (1)
What we may understand by their perishing, who fail of the Salvation mentioned
in the Text. And (2) The Reason given (...) their perishing as they do. (3) The
Inference that I draw from hence, viz. That this shows, that they have an Offer
of a Principle of true Grace or Holiness made to them.

1. Then, I will consider what is meant by their perishing, who recieve not the
Love of the Truth, that they might be saved. Now this may be the better
understood, if we consider what that Salvation is, which is opposed thereunto:
For there is no Doubt but that the Perdition of those that perish, and the
Salvation of those that perish not, but have everlasting Life, are so naturally
opposed one to the other, as to instruct us in the Nature of each of them, if
we compare them together.

Now by Salvation we are not here to understand that Happiness only, which
those that shall attain to it, shall enjoy in the World to come; but it does
comprise in it also the preparing such Vessels of Mercy for the Enjoyment of
that Glory which is intended for them: And thus this Salvation does include in
it, Men's being saved from their Sins, as in Matthew. 1.21. i. e. not only the
Pardon of them, but also their Regeneration and Sanctification. Ezekiel. 36.25,
26. But I need not here enlarge on this Particular, having at large considered
what is meant by the Salvation of Sinners, in Part I. Chap. II. to which Place
I refer my Reader.

But now, if we understand this of such perishing of Sinners as is fitly
opposed to the Salvation of those that believe, we shall find it to comprehend
much more in it, than the Pain and Torment endured by the Wicked in another
World, viz. Their being suffered to remain under the Guilt and Power of Sin, in
This; and so to pine away in their Iniquities, and die in their Sins, without
Repentance, and without a Pardon, in a State of Condemnation, and having the
Wrath of God abiding on them; the Case of all such as fall short of the
Salvation of God; as is in the holy Scriptures abundantly declared. I shall
only refer to some of the Places declaring so much. Those who please, may read
and compare such as these, Ezekiel. 33, 10. Isai. 22.14. John 8.21, 24. and Chap.
3.36. The Unregenerate and Unjustified are dead in Sin: And to remain in that
State is to perish, as well as to be punished for Sin in the Life to come.

2. I proceed to consider the Reason why such perish, as do so. Now this is
fully and plainly expressed in the Place under Consideration: And they
therefore perish because they receive not the Love of the Truth, that they may
be saved. Now, to clear up this, we may consider, (1) What is here intended by
the Truth. (2) What is meant by the Love of it. (3) What we may understand by
Persons receiving this Love. (4) That Sinners might be saved if they would do
this. (5) That they perish because they refuse thus to do.

1. Let us first consider what is here meant by the Truth. Now, though the Word
Truth, has many Acceptations in Scripture; yet there is no Doubt but that by
the Word Truth we may here understand all the divine Truth which God has
revealed and made known unto Man, in order to his Duty and Happiness, both by
his Works and by his Word; especially in the Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ:
This great Truth comprehends in it, all those excellent and glorious Truths,
which are necessary for Mankind to understand and believe, in order to their
Well-being; especially those that relate to the Way of Man's Redemption by
Jesus Christ, and Regeneration by the holy Spirit. This Collection of sacred
Truths, is emphatically called the Truth, in 2 These. 2.13. -- God has from the
Beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
Belief of the TRUTH. Thus the same is also called, in Gal. 3.1. 2 Timothy 2.25. 1
Pet. 1.2. and 2 These. 2.1. with many other Places which I need not transcribe.

2. The next Thing we have to consider, is, what we may understand by the Love
of the Truth. Now, to this I say, That this Love is such an Approbation and
Acquiescence of the Heart in it, as is suitable to the Nature and Excellency of
the Things supposed to be loved. This supposes an Assent of the Understanding
to it, as being what it is; and in that Respect good, which no Falsehood is. But
a Soul that loves the Truth here intended, does not stay here, but approves of
it, and takes Satisfaction in it, as it is divine, proceeding from God, and
being worthy of him: And in Respect of the Things revealed by it, exceeding
excellent; and necessary to be known by the Children of Men: And on these
Accounts he takes Pleasure in it.

A Soul thus loving the Truth, savoureth the Things of God, as truly excellent
and glorious. He can say from the Bottom of his Heart, as in 2 Kings 20.19.
Good is the Word of the Lord; and as in Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of the
Lord after the inward Man; and as in Psalm. 119.140. Thy Law is very pure;
therefore thy Servant loves it. The Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings of
God's Word are all esteemed by him, as in Psalm. 119.128. I esteem all thy
Precepts concerning all Things to be right; and I hate every false Way. A Lover
of the Truth is a good and holy Man. He that has the Love of the Truth in his
Heart, has the Love and Fear of God also in it. In a Word, such an One has a
Principle of true Holiness in his Soul. He has the Seed of God in him, as in 1
John 3.9. He has been made Partaker of the divine Nature, as in 2 Pet. 2.4.

3. The third Thing to be considered, is, what it is to receive the Love
described; and so what it is not to receive it. Now, to this I say, That this
must needs be done by some Act or Acts of the Person said to do it; which are
required, in order to his having of it, and which it is Man's Duty to perform.
It cannot intend only his being made Partaker of it, without doing any Thing in
order to it. This does from hence appear to be a Truth, That Men's not
receiving the Love of the Truth, is in the Text spoken of as the Sin and Crime
for which such Offenders eternally perish. Now, if something were not required
of Sinners, in order to their being made Partaker; of it, it could not be
charged on them as their Crime, though it might be their great Misfortune (if I
may be allowed to use that Word) that they partake not of it. God's not
bestowing the Love of the Truth on any Sinner, would not be the Sinner's Fault,
if nothing were required of him in orde^ theret^. When not receiving the Love
of the Truth, is spoken of as the Sin and Crime of those who have it not, this
plainly implies, that such as have this Love, have it in the Way of a Gift from
another, even from God himself, unto which their Act of receiving or accepting
it is necessary. It is not said that Sinners perish for not loving the Truth;
but for not receiving that Love: By which we are taught, that it is the Gift of
God; inasmuch as it is to be received from him; and that Sinners have a
conditional Offer of it made to them; as will by and by more fully appear.

4. The fourth Thing in Order, is, to show that Sinners might be saved, if they
would receive the Love spoken of. By the Text we are assured, that those who
perish, do so, because they receive not this Love, that they might be saved. In
which Words it is plainly intimated, that they might and should be saved, did
not their Refusal of the Love of the Truth, hinder it: And it accordingly
follows in Verse 11, 12. That for this Cause God sends some strong Delusion,
that they should believe a Lie: That they all might be damned, who believed not
the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness. In these Words, what is called
perishing, and opposed to Men's being saved, is signified their being given up
to such Unbelief and Hardness of Heart, as will end in their eternal Torment.

5. And fifthly, it follows, (as is above supposed) that the Reason why Men
perish, under the Gospel, is because they receive not the Love of the Truth. If
they would accept of that precious Gift, they should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. Nothing can be more evident than this, in the Place under
Consideration. The main Scope and Design of the Place is to assert this Truth:
Which Truth having now cleared up, I shall

3. Proceed, to clear up the Consequence which I draw from the Premises:
Namely, That it from hence follows, that a Principle of true Grace or
Holiness is offered to Sinners in the Gospel.

It is evident that such a Principle of Holiness is plainly implied in the Love
of the Truth, of which I have been speaking: And it is also manifest, that
Men's not receiving ( i. e. refusing, or not accepting) of this divine
Principle, plainly supposes their having, in the Gospel, an Offer of it made
to them; for how is it possible, that Persons should be guilty of a heinous
Sin, in not receiving from the Hand of Another, a Benefit which they never had
any Offer of? And how should their Refusal of such a Mercy be the Cause of
their eternal Ruin? If he who alone had the Disposal of it, never declared his
Willingness to confer the same upon them, on any Terms whatsoever; or never
proposed any Condition on which the same might be obtained; or never said to
Persons destitute of it, as in Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold
tried in the Fire, that thou may be rich; and white Raiment, that thou may
be clothed, and that the Shame of thy Nakedness do not appear; and anoint
thine Eyes with Eye Salve, that thou may see. Which Gold, etc. here spoken
of, certainly compriseth a Principle of true Holiness in it; and albeit it
cannot be properly purchased by any Sinner, yet it may, on some Terms or other,
be attained: And less than this, I think, cannot be implied in the Words.

Now, if I am asked what the Terms are, on which this inestimable Benefit may
be acquired, I need here only say, that they are the same which I have, in this
Essay, more than once declared to be the Condition of the new Covenant, or
Covenant of Grace; more especially this is done in this second Part, Chap. III.
whereunto, for the avoiding of Prolixity, I shall here only refer my Reader.

CHAP. XVI. The Doctrine pleaded for, in this Part of my Essay, very consistent
with that of Men's utter Inability, while in a State of Nature, to perform any
truly holy Action whatsoever.
MY Design in the following Chapters of this second Part of my Essay, is, to
answer several Objections which are apt to be made against the Truth, which I
have thus far by Scripture and Reason endeavored to confirm; and I shall not
willingly omit such as I think have most Appearance of Weight in them. In this
present Chapter I shall consider that which, with some Appearance of Reason,
may be objected from the Accounts we have in Scripture, of the Corruption of
Man's Nature since the Fall; and his Impotence thence arising, with Respect to
Things spiritual, and truly holy, from whence his Inability, by Nature, to
comply with the Terms of the new Covenant, is, with a very considerable Show of
Reason and Piety, by many, endeavored to be manifested; whether with any good
Success, and real Strength, with Respect to my Hypothesis, I shall now
endeavor to weigh in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

But let us a little consider what may be truly said, with Respect to Man's
Impotence while he is in a State of Nature: And here, I readily acknowledge,
that while he is in that State, he has no Power to perform any Action
whatsoever, in a gracious and holy Manner. I constantly affirm, that unto the
Performance of an Action as is expressed, it is absolutely necessary that the
Person performing it, be first endowed with a Principle of true Grace and
Holiness, from which such an Action may spring or flow. The Tree must be good,
before the Fruit can be so, Luke 6.43, 44, 45.

Men in a natural or unregenerate State, may, indeed, perform Actions that are
materially good, or in Respect of the general Nature and Kind of them, and so
such Actions as God has commanded them to perform; but they cannot perform them
in such a Manner, as will denominate them, in a strict Sense, good and holy.

And it must also be acknowledged, that Mankind are, by Reason of the
Corruption of their Nature, so bent and inclined to do that which is evil, and
so disinclined and backward to do well, that it is not easy for them to do
those Things that are materially good, and to forbear the contrary to them;
though this be not wholly above their Power; for they frequently, while in a
State of Nature, do the Good and abstain from the Bad. I think that in these
Things I agree with the Generality of those who are Pious and Orthodox.

And from what I have now said, I infer, that the Difference betwixt me and
those who mislike my Hypothesis, does not lie in this, that I exalt the Power
of Men in their natural State, more than they do; but in this rather, that I
exalt the Grace of God more: For whereas they affirm, that the Faith and
Repentance which God requires as the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, is
such as none can exercise 'till they are become good and holy Persons, being
born of the Spirit, and become new Creatures; I on the contrary endeavor to
maintain, that the Faith and Repentance, by God required as the Condition of
the new Covenant, is of a lower Kind than those who oppose me will allow of;
and suppose it to be such as Men, by divine Assistance, can perform, before
they are savingly renewed by the Spirit, and so become true Saints, as all that
are born of God are, and so in Christ, and passed from Death to Life, as in 2
Cor. 5.17. and John 5.24. does appear. I really think that God, in the Covenant
of Grace, does not insist on such Terms, as my Opposers imagine, and which can
never be complied with by any Sinner, while he is in his miserable and undone
Estate; but then only, when he has got into a State of Safety, and has already
obtained eternal Life.

Those therefore who would convince me of a Mistake in this Affair, should
answer my Arguments, by which I endeavor to prove, That neither Regeneration,
nor any Action implied in it, can be the Condition on which Salvation is
offered to Sinners in the Gospel. Part II. Chap. V. And they should also show,
if they can, that such Faith and Repentance, as I hold to be the Condition of
the new Covenant, neither is, nor can be so, by a Confutation of what I have
said, Part II. Chap. III. and elsewhere.

But it may be here said, That by my own Confession, Sinners are required to
come to Jesus Christ for Life, on Pain of eternal Damnation; which Coming must
needs be included in the Condition of the new Covenant, and is so, as appears
in John 6.35, 37. Matthew. 11.28. And yet the Coming intended, cannot be in the
Power of any Person, while in a State of Nature; for our Savior himself tells
us, in the said 6th Chapter of John, Verse 44. That no Man can come to him,
except the Father which has sent him, draw him: And in Verse 65. he says, No
Man can come unto me, except it were given him of my Father.

Now, to this Objection, I answer, (1) By acknowledging that Coming to Jesus
Christ for Life, belongs to the Condition of the new Covenant, or rather, is
the Condition intended, or Thing required, in order to the Salvation of sinful
Men. (2) By affirming that Persons in an unregenerate State, may have Power to
come to Christ for eternal Life. The last of these only needs to be considered:
And the Question here is not whether any Man can come to Jesus Christ, except
the Father draw him and incline his Heart to come; which must be denied; but
what that Drawing is, which is intended in the Words under Consideration; and
whether none but those that do come to Christ, have the Drawing intended.

Those who oppose my Hypothesis, suppose that that divine Drawing which our
Savior speaks of, consists in that powerful Influence of God on the Souls of
Men, whereby there is a saving Change wrought in them, in Respect whereof they
are said to be born of the Spirit; and consequently that such as have not such
a Change wro't in them, have no Power to come to Christ. But at present I see
no Reason to believe, that the Drawing intended by our Lord, means the
efficacious, and indeed, irresistible Influence of the holy Spirit, in the
great Work of Regeneration. I will offer some Reasons why I think this not to
be intended in the Places quoted.

And the first Reason which I shall name is, Because when Sinners are invited
to come to Christ for Life, one Thing intended in the Life which they are to go
to Christ for, is the Grace of Regeneration, or that Principle of spiritual
Life which we lost by the Fall, and which in the Work of Regeneration is
restored: Or is it not true that Sinners are called to go to Christ for this,
which is one of the principal Benefits which he purchased for his People, yea
even for the very first Beginnings of this spiritual Life? I hope none will
dare to deny this.

Now, if Sinners are invited to go to Christ for this Principle of Life, or
Grace, how can it be possibly imagined that their first having it is necessary
in order to their doing it? For must they first have the Life they should go to
Christ for, before it is possible for them to go to him for it? I cannot yet
understand this!

My second Reason is this: The Expression used in the Words under
Consideration, seems not well to agree with the Work intended, if by Drawing,
the Work of Regeneration be meant. The Work of Regeneration is wro't by the
immediate Operation of the Spirit; and it is, according to the Language of
Scripture, a creating Work, Psalm. 51.10. Col. 3.10. And it is compared to that
mighty Act of God's Power, by which Jesus Christ was raised from the Dead, Ephesians.
1.19, 20. It is also called the giving a new Heart and a new Spirit, Ezekiel.
11.19. and 36.26. Now this Work seems not to be well expressed by the Word
Drawing, which suits better to Persons being persuaded in a moral Way, than
their having a supernatural Work wro't in them by infinite Power. I confess the
Word Drawing, may be used in a physical Sense, but then I think it is not with
Application to moral or rational Agents, as such, as in the Case under
Consideration, which concerns Men's being drawn to their Duty, in a Way, no
Doubt, agreeable to their Natures. To draw a free Agent into Action, is, in a
rational Way, to excite him to it; and it is such Drawing that Men need in
order to their coming to jesus for his saving Benefits, whether it be before
their Regeneration, or after it: And when they are effectually drawn in this
Way, it is given to them to come to Christ, as in one of the Places quoted,
viz. John 6.65.

I shall here add, thirdly, That this Word Draw, and other Words like it, are
used in Scripture, in the same Sense I plead for, i. e. to persuade Persons to
what is their Duty and Interest, in a moral or rational Way: Yea, whether this
Course have Success or not, Persons may be said to be drawn, led, or persuaded,
etc. See Hosea 11.4. I drew them with Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love, and I
was to them as they that take off the Yoke on their Jaws, and I laid Meat unto
them. Romans 2.4. The Goodness of God leads thee unto Repentance. 2 Cor. 4.11.
Knowing the Terror of the Lord, we persuade Men. Acts 26.28. Almost thou
perswadest me to be a Christian. Agrippa was persuaded, though not prevailed
with. Persons may be thus drawn and persuaded to go to Christ, who yet never go
to him. When our Savior said, in John 12.32. And I, when I am lifted up, will
draw all Men unto me, did not mean, I believe, that he would draw all Men
effectually of whom he spoke. Some he intended so to draw as to leave them
inexcusable. See John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had
not had Sin: But now they have no Cloak for their Sin.

Though it be granted that no Man can come to the Son, except the Father draw
him: Yet I do not acknowledge, that no Man has Power to come to the Son, except
he be drawn effectually, so as actually to come to him; much less, except he be
drawn irresistably, so that he cannot but come to him: This is more than to say
that a Man cannot come to the Son, except the Father draw him. Though without
drawing, Men cannot come; yet many are drawn who never come. See Matthew. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings; and ye would not.

It may, perhaps, be objected against what I have here said, That such a
Drawing of Persons as I have been describing, can give no Power to come to
Christ. Drawing in a Way of moral Suasion does not give the Persons drawn any
Power which they had not before; though it may excite to the Exercise of Powers
they before had.

To this Objection I answer, That Persons may be said to be unable to do this,
that, or the other Thing, either in a more proper Sense, when they have no
Power latent in them, capable of being so excited and stirred up by proper
Means and Motives, suitable for the awakening and exciting such a Power, as
Instructions, Exhortations, Promises and Threatenings, etc. or less properly,
for such an utter Indisposition to Things proposed to be done, as renders a
Person actually incapable of doing them, without some Means used with him, for
removing the Indisposition unto which he is subject. Now I suppose Men's
Inability to come to Christ, is of the Kind or Sort first named. It consists in
the Aversion of their Wills to the Duty proposed to them, and arises from
several Causes, such as inherent Corruption, Ignorance, Temptations from
without of several Sorts, a contracted Habit by a long Course of evil Doings;
of which last see Jer. 2.24. and Chap. 13.23.

If Men's Inability to do well be of the latter Sort mentioned, Instructions,
Exhortations, Reproofs, etc. are not in the least suited to help and strengthen
them. Arguments will give no Power of the Kind needed by the Person that has
none; and it is wholly in vain to make use of any to that End. But if a
Person's Weakness and Inability to do well, be of the other Kind mentioned,
then Instructions, Exhortations, and convincing Arguments, are a proper Remedy
against such Weakness, and may greatly strengthen the Subjects of it. Means of
this Kind, commonly called moral Suasion, can be of no other Use than this: Nor
are the same designed by God, for the Production of supernatural Effects, as
the immediate End of them: They only enable Men to exercise the Powers they
have, but give none to such as are wholly without Strength.

The Drawing by the Father, without which no Man can come to the Son, I take to
be of this Kind, as above. I do not think that by Drawing, our Lord intends the
great Work of Regeneration, for the Reasons which I have given: And this Kind
of Drawing Sinners have who never yet come to the Son, in those Strivings of
the Spirit of God with them, which they often resist and quench, of which
hereafter, in Chap. XIX.

But if the Exposition I have given of the Texts objected be refused, and the
Sense of them which I oppose be still contended for, let us seriously consider
the Consequences which will follow it.

The Design then, with which these Texts are urged, is, to show that no Man has
Power of any Kind, to come to Jesus Christ for everlasting Life, but those
only, who, being unto that End first born of the Spirit, do actually go to him,
and are eternally saved: So that all others, being wholly without Power to come
to the only Savior of Sinners, do unavoidably continue in that Unbelief,
against which eternal Damnation is denounced, Mark 16.16. They cannot come to
Christ that they may have Life, and this Cannot, is not only because they will
not; but they have no such Power latent in them, which being excited and
stirred up, they might go to Christ for the eternal Salvation of their Souls.
The Impossibility, therefore, that they are under of going to Jesus Christ for
Salvation, is physical, as to the Kind of it, and not moral only; for they must
have a Work of new Creation wrought in them, before this physical Impotence can
be removed: Nor are they supposed to have any Offer of this Benefit made to
them, on any Condition whatsoever.

Now the plain Consequence of what is thus maintained seems to be this, That
all that perish under the Gospel, do perish unavoidably, any Means or
Advantages they enjoy notwithstanding. They have no Advantage in their Hands,
by the Improvement of which they may make sure of the Salvation of their Souls:
This is not promised to them, on any Condition within the Compass of their
Power; nor is any Strength, by which they may close with Christ, ever conferred
on them.

Now, if the Case be really such as has been now expressed, I would fain know
what Kindness (if any at all) is showed to those that fail of Salvation: Or
will it be said, That in the Revelation of a Way of Salvation by Jesus Christ,
there is no real Favor shown to any but those who shall eventually be saved?
May we then tell those to whom we preach the Gospel, that unless they obtain
eternal Life, God has shown them no real Kindness, in all that which has been
done, of which we have an Account in the Gospel? Can we think that the
maintaining of this would be to the Honor of divine Grace? For my Part, I
cannot think that all that seeming Love which God manifests to Mankind, in
sending his Son to redeem a sinful World, and setting up a Treaty of Peace
among all those to whom the Gospel is preached, is no Kindness to such as are
not eventually saved. Such an Opinion as this seems not to agree with such
Texts as these which follow, viz. John 3.16. 1 John 2.2. and Chap. 4.19. so
Luke 2.10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. and many other Places.

Nor can I, I confess, see how any should be obliged to be thankful to God for
his Goodness in sending his Son to redeem us, and his Gospel to persuade us to
be reconciled unto him, if he has showed no real Kindness in it. Neither can I
understand how Men's Consciences should upbraid them for not doing what they
are under a physical Impossibility of performing, though they are bound to
confess that they are justly deprived of that Power to do well, with which, in
their moral Head and Representative, they were endowed.

As yet I cannot see how any Dishonor can be done to the Name and Grace of
God, by our believing and asserting, that those who perish under the Gospel, do
not fall short of eternal Life, because they cannot, but because they will not,
come to Jesus Christ for it. On the contrary, I think it is much to the Honor
of God and his Grace, that we believe and confess, that he does in the Way of
the new Covenant, put Sinners, to whom the Grace of that Covenant is offered,
on a second Trial, wherein they stand Probationers for eternal Blessedness, on
Terms possible for them to perform. But I shall consider what may be objected
against this.

CHAP. XVII. That Grace is not given according to Works, is no Ways
inconsistent with the Hypothesis by me defended.
SOME may think that if, as I assert, Sinners have in the Gospel an Offer of
the Grace given in Regeneration, made to them, it will from hence follow, that
Grace is given according to Works; which is an Error condemned in the Church of
God, in all Ages; and very contrary to the Holy Scriptures, as in 2 Timothy 1.9.
Tit. 3.5. and Romans 11.6. I shall therefore consider, whether on this Account
there can be any just Objection raised against the Position I endeavor to
defend. And to this End, I shall consider, (1) What may be intended by Grace in
the Objection. (2) What may be meant by its not being given according to Works.
(3) Whether, these Things being rightly understood, the Proposition opposed to
my Hypothesis, does really make any Thing against it.

1. Let us consider what we may here understand by Grace. Now by Grace here,
the Grace of God is doubtless to be understood: And by God's Grace, his
undeserved Favor is most properly meant, in which Sense it being taken, it
cannot be obtained by any according to Works: To affirm this would be a plain
Contradiction both to itself, and to the Apostle Paul, Romans 4.4. To him that
works is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt. Also Romans 11.6. If by
Grace, then it is no more of Works: Otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it
be of Works, then it is no more Grace: Otherwise Work is no more Work. By that
Grace which is in Scripture, and by the Church of God in all Ages, denied to be
given according to Works, I understand the free and undeserved Favor of God,
with all those Benefits which flow from it to his People. Most properly the
Grace of God signifies the undeserved Favor of God to those whom he has set
his Love upon; and hence, by a Metonimy of the Cause for the Effect, the Word
Grace is used for those Benefits which God of his free Grace bestows on the
Children of Men; especially on those whom he eternally saves. And taken in this
Sense, Grace signifies Justification and Adoption; and also that Principle of
Grace which is given in our Regeneration, and all those holy Actions which by
his adjutant Grace proceed from it.

Now, though Grace may be taken in any or all of these Senses, in the Question
under Consideration; yet my present Design leads me to consider it as it
intends that Principle of Holiness which God bestows on Sinners in their
Regeneration; this being that which I say is conditionally offered in the
Gospel, and which many deny so to be.

2. Let us consider what is intended by this Proposition, That Grace is not
given according to Works. And unto this I answer, that there are two Things,
either or both of which may be intended thereby. (1) That God does not bestow
his Grace on the Children of Men, in the Way, or on the Terms, of the Covenant
of Works, wherein perfect and perpetual Obedience to the Law of God was the
Condition whereon Life and Happiness were promised to Mankind. God does not now
offer or bestow his Grace on such Terms as these. That Covenant has long since
been broken by all Mankind; and all that Good which was conditionally promised
in it, utterly and for ever forfeited and lost. Such as will now adhere to this
Covenant, can expect no Good at God's Hands, nothing less than the Wrath and
Curie denounced therein against the Breakers of it, Gal. 3.10. Or, (2) That
Grace is not given according to Works, may intend, that it is not given as a
just Reward of, or for, good Works performed, though they are not supposed to
come up to the Terms of the first Covenant. Persons may think that, for the
Services they perform to God, they deserve well at his Hand; so that it is but
a just and equal Thing that he should save them, though they are guilty of many
Failings. They may think they carry themselves so well, that God will deal
hardly by them, if he grants not his special Favor to them, and think they
well deserve it. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see it not?
Wherefore have we afflicted our selves, and thou take no Knowledge? Isai.
58.3. Observe how well the Pharisee thought of his Performances, Luke 18.10,
11. Persons that go about to establish their own Righteousness, and obtain
God's Favor and Grace on the Account of it, do not always suppose that they
come fully up to the Terms of the Covenant of Works. They have too much Light
to think so. But, however, they think very much to commend themselves to God,
by their good Performances; and on them they trust for Acceptance with him, and
for all the Grace they hope to receive from him. This seems evidently to be the
Case of those spoken of by the great Apostle of the Gentiles, Romans 9.31, 32.
But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness has not attained to
the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it, not by Faith, but
as it were by the Works of the Law. They did not, indeed, expect to be
justified, and find Favor with God, by the Works of the Law, or by fully
complying with the Tenor of the Law of Works; yet they depended on their own
good Works, for the Benefits they needed, and so they sought those Benefits, as
it were, by the Deeds of the Law. Compare with this, that in Chap. 10.3. Men
oftener miscarry in this Way, than by thinking that they can come fully up to
the Terms of the first Covenant. They think to commend themselves to God by
their own Righteousness, though they do not think that they can do all that the
Covenant of Works required.

But the Apostle shows the Vanity of such Hopes, in the mentioned Gal. 3.10.
compared with Verse 12. and elsewhere. If Grace were given in the Way such as
these seek it, it would be given according to Works. But I acknowledge, that
God does not bestow his Grace upon Sinners in this Way. He grants it not to
them on Account of any Goodness in them, nor for the Sake of any Works of
Righteousness performed by them, as plainly appears in 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has
saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our Works, but
according to his own Purpose and Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the World began. So again in Tit. 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the Washing of
Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost.

3. Let us consider whether the objected Proposition being understood as now
explained, any Thing can be inferred from it against the Hypothesis by me
defended. And to this I say, I think it will appear there cannot, if we
consider what here follows.

As, First, That Grace is, on my Hypothesis, given according to Promise, or in
the Way of a conditional Covenant, is not equivalent to its being given
according to Works, in the Sense explained. Things may nevertheless be freely
given, for being given in the Way of a conditional Covenant. Indeed it is not
so, if the Condition required be a valuable Consideration, such as deserves a
Reward, or some Testimony of Gratitude, on the Account of Things required to be
done; but very frequently this is not the Case, nor is so in the Case under
Consideration, as I shall presently show.

However, If God's bestowing his Benefits on Men, in the Way of a Covenant,
wherein something is required to be done by them, in order to their obtaining
of them; and unto the doing whereof a Promise is annexed, would infer or imply
their obtaining them by their own good Works or Merits, it would from hence
follow, That Pardon of Sin and eternal Blessedness are Benefits given according
to Works; for these Benefits are certainly obtained in a covenant Way. The
Scriptures are plain as to this; and none, that I know of, besides Antinomians
deny it. I shall only refer to some of the Texts in which this is manifest: I
need not transcribe them. See Mark 16.15, 16. Acts 2.37, 38, 39. and Chap.
10.43. and 16.30, 31. Psalm. 103.17, 18.

Though our Divines many of them deny, that the Grace of Regeneration, or of a
new Heart, is given in the Way of a conditional Covenant; yet I suppose there
are scarce any of them but what own Justification, Adoption, and eternal Glory
to be thus given: But now, if, because I hold that God gives his Holy Spirit,
and the saving Graces thereof, in the Way of a conditional Promise, it be
thence inferred, that, according to my Hypothesis, it is given according to
Works, or according to Men's Merits, I would know if it would not as well
follow from the same Premises, with Relation to the other mentioned Benefits,
that they also are given according to Works, or the Merits of those on whom
they are bestowed: But as this does not follow from the mentioned Premises, so
neither does the other.

Secondly, The Grace of Regeneration cannot, on my Principles, be given
according to Works; because, on my Hypothesis, no Man can perform any good
Works, properly and strictly so called, 'till after he is regenerate or born
again. That Grace may be given according to Works, two Things seem necessarily
required, viz. (1) That the Works are really good and holy, with Regard to
which the Grace intended is supposed to be given: For it is not likely that God
should give his Grace as a Reward for Works not truly good and holy. (2) That
the Works intended be done before the Grace is bestowed, which is supposed to
be given as a Reward of them: For the Thing for which a Reward is given must
needs be prior to that which is given as a Reward of it. But I, as well as
those with whom I dispute, am fully of Opinion, that no Man can perform any
good Action, (meaning by good what is in a proper and strict Sense so,) 'till
after he is born of the Spirit, or created anew unto good Works, as in Col.
3.10. with which compare Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. and Luke 6.43, 44, 45. How then
should the Grace of Regeneration be given, on my Principles, according to Men's
good Works or Merits?

If we duly consider what, according to my Principles, is really required of
Sinners, in order to their obtaining the Grace of Regeneration, it will plainly
appear, that Grace is not given to them according to Works. The Condition on
which, according to my Opinion, Grace is offered to them, does neither consist
in the perfect Obedience which the Covenant of Works required, nor yet in such
Holiness as the Gospel requires of regenerate Saints: If it required the last
of these no Person could ever be regenerated or born again.

But what the Gospel requires of unregenerate Sinners, to the mentioned End,
comprises in it such Things as these, viz. (1) That they acknowledge their
Sinfulness, both by Nature and Practice, and that they deserve eternal
Damnation. (2) That they acknowledge the Guilt of their many and mighty Sins,
and that without the Pardon of them they never can be saved. (3) That they are
sensible of the Corruption of their Natures, and their Need of regenerating
Grace. (4) That they believe the good Tidings of that Salvation by Jesus
Christ, which is revealed in the Gospel, and do not despair of God's Mercy. (5)
That they seek earnestly to God for the Pardon of their Sins, and the
regenerating Influences of his Spirit, seriously waiting on him in the Use of
those Means which he has directed to, in order to their obtaining these
Mercies. (6) That they carefully avoid all those sinful Courses which tend to
provoke him to deny his Holy Spirit, or withold the same from them. (7) That
they persevere in the Way of their Duty, that has now been expressed. (8) That
they confess, that in all this they are unprofitable Servants, and instead of
doing more than their Duty, they fall infinitely short of it, and so are not
worthy of the least of God's Mercies, much less of Pardon of Sin, and the
saving Graces of God's Spirit here, and eternal Glory hereafter. (9) That they
earnestly plead with God the Promises of his Mercy, made to such as seek him
for it; such as we have in Matthew. 7.7, -- 11. Prove. 1.22, 23, Luke 11.9, -- 13.
Prove. 2.1, -- 5. Hos. 6.3.

If in this Way Sinners seek and obtain the saving Graces of God's holy Spirit,
they will find no Occasion of boasting that they obtained them by Works of
Righteousness which they have done, or by the Desert of their own good Works,
and so have merited eternal Life at the Hand of God. There is not the least
Appearance of any such Thing in the Method proposed, of Sinners seeking Mercy
of the Lord; they having Nothing to recommend them to him, or to plead with
him, but their own Poverty and Misery, and the Riches of his Grace and Mercy,
and most gracious Covenant: All which is nothing like trusting in, and
pleading, their own Righteousness. Our supposing that to our obtaining the
Grace of God, our begging God's Mercy, pleading the Merits of his Son, and his
Truth and Faithfulness to his Covenant, is not, I think, to hold, that Grace is
given according to Works, but well consists with that Ephesians. 2.9. and Romans
3.27. Where is Boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of Works? Nay: But
by the Law of Faith.

CHAP. XVIII. That the best Actions of the Unregenerate are not properly called
Sins, nor incapable of being Conditions of the Covenant of Grace.
I HAVE owned and asserted in the foregoing Chapter, That Persons in an
unregenerate State, cannot perform any Actions that are, in a strict Sense,
holy, and as such, well-pleasing in God's Sight; but I think they carry this
too far, who affirm the best Actions of the Unregenerate to be properly
donominated Sins, and an Abomination in God's Sight, and accursed; yea, that
common Grace is Sin and Lust. I choose not to name the Persons who express
themselves after this Manner, but can do it, if it be necessary for my own
Justification.

I confess, if what is to this Effect said by many, be true, it will follow,
that nothing that can be done by any Person that is not born of the Spirit, can
be the Condition of the new Covenant, and as such, entitle the Doer of it to
eternal Life. I shall therefore endeavor to make it appear, that that which is
asserted, as above, is not to be admitted as a Truth, however worthy the Names
of the Persons are who have spoken to this Purpose. And to this End I shall
make some Observations relating to the Matter under Consideration; which being
put together, will, I think, sufficiently clear up the Point in Debate.

And First, Even those Actions that are esteemed materially evil, as being
expressly forbidden by the Law of God, and may on that Ac^^unt be opposed unto
such Actions as are said to be materially good; even such Actions as these, I
say, have something that is good in them. It is generally acknowledged that
these Actions, considered in the physical Entity of them, are good Things; and
that they are only evil, considered in respect of the Relation they bear to the
divine Law, which they are a Transgression of; so that though such Actions cannot
be performed without the Commission of Sin in the doing of them, being so
forbidden; yet there is a Distinction to be made betwixt the Actions
themselves, considered only as Actions, or in respect of the Substance of them,
and considered with Respect to the Obliquity of the same Actions, as they have
a Relation to the Law of God, wherein they are forbidden to the Persons who sin
in doing them. Such Actions therefore, seem more properly called sinful, than
Sin in the Abstract; because the former distinguishes betwixt the Act itself,
and the Vitiosity of it, whereas the latter does not.

Secondly, There is a great Difference betwixt such forbidden Actions and such
as are not forbidden, but may either lawfully be done or let alone: And it
seems not very proper to call those Actions Sins, which God has no where
forbidden. It is readily granted, that Persons may sin greatly in the
Performance of such, viz. either in the Manner how, or End for which they do
them; but not in doing the Thing done by them. When therefore it is said, That
the Ploughing of the Wicked is Sin; this must not be understood as if their so
doing was Sin in the Abstract; but the Meaning is, That the Wicked sin in their
Ploughing, i. e. that their is Sin cleaving to this Action of their's, though it
be in itself no Sin: And thus I acknowledge, that there is Sin cleaving to the
best Actions of the best Men, Eccle. 7.20. But more abundantly to the Actions
of the Unregenerate.

Thirdly There is a still greater Difference between the forbidden Actions of
the Unregenerate, and those which they do, being commanded to perform them. For
Instance: God forbids them to take his Name in vain, but requires them to call
on him. Their doing the first of these is no doubt a great Sin: But is their
calling on him a Sin too? Or is their doing it their Sin? I think not. It may
indeed be truly said, that they sin in not doing it as they ought. But this may
be truly said of the Actions of the Regenerate also, though the Unregenerate fail
much more in this Respect. I think there is a great Difference betwixt saying,
all the Prayers of the Unregenerate have Sin in them, and saying they are all
of them Sin.

Fourthly, There is a great deal of Difference between such Actions as have
some positive Wickedness committed in the Performance of them, and such as are
only negatively faulty, inasmuch as they want some good Qualifications which
they have not: As suppose one Man performs a materially good Action, out of
some wicked and malicious End, as out of Hatred to God or his Neighbor; but
Another performs the same Action, or another like it, not out of any such
wicked Design, but yet without any true Love to God and his Neighbor: Are
these both alike properly called Sins? Or are they both wicked Actions? One of
them seems to be so, indeed, being done for a wicked End; but what of
Wickedness is there in the other, though it would have been much better had there
been some other Kind of Goodness in it, which it had not? The Person that does
it is, indeed, to blame; but this is because he omitted something which should
have been done; not because what he did had any Evil in it. The Distinction I
have insisted on, seems evidently countenanced by that Text, Prove. 21.27.
according to that Translation of the Words, which I choose, and Mr. POOL seems
best to approve, viz. The Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination, because he
brings it with a wicked Mind. Thus the latter Part of the Verse, gives the
Reason of what is affirmed in the first Part of it; for according to this
Reading of the Words, they are accounted Wicked, who bring their Offerings with
wicked Minds and Intentions; and the Reason of God's abhorring them is, their
being offered in such a Manner, or for such Ends. Nor is there any Reason to
think that by the Wicked in this Place and others like it, all unregenerate
Persons are intended; but such as are meant in Psalm. 5^.16. not those that are
called Righteous in Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. and several other Places, though
Unregenerate.

Fifthly, Many of the Actions of the Unregenerate are not only good, as above,
but are performed from good Principles and for good Ends. When an unregenerate
Person feeds the Hungary, and clothes the Naked, out of natural Compassion
which he has toward them, it must be acknowledged that this is a good
Principle. It is not indeed true Grace or Holiness, neither is it from a
corrupt and wicked Principle, or from Sin that dwells in him. It is really
from Grace, i. e. the Grace of Nature, or some Remainder of the natural Image
of God, left in Man after his Fall, which is good, though it is not Goodness of
the best Kind. It is no Part of the Image of God lost by the Fall, and restored
in our Regeneration, nor does our Regeneration eradicate, but sanctify it. So
unregenerate Persons perform some Actions for good Ends; as when they labor
with their Hands that they may get their Bread honestly, and not steal from and
rob Others to get it. So when an unregenerate Person reads the Word of God,
hears it preached, and meditates on it, and calls on the Lord, to the End that
he may escape Damnation, and obtain the great Salvation offered in the Gospel;
these are good Ends, such as God requires him to aim at in the Performance of
such Duties. If a Man labors to obtain his own Happiness, this, indeed, is not
the highest End of all, which is the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. And even this
an unregenerate Person may aim at in what he does, though not ultimately, as what
he chiefly intends. Nor ought regenerate Persons to cease to aim at the
Salvation of their own Souls, in what they do, after they can a^^ at a higher
End than this.

Sixthly, Many of the materially good Actions which unregenerate Persons
perform, are the Effects of the Grace of God, in and upon them; and therefore,
I think, not Sins. I cannot think that Actions which Men perform by the Help
and Influence of the Word and Spirit of God, are well called Sins. God may be
truly said to be the Author of such Actions: It is he, of his Grace, who stirs
up and excites poor sinful Creatures to perform the Actions I speak of. He
enables and excites them to hear, read, meditate, and pray, etc. and he is the
Author of such Faith as they have, who believe sometimes only for a while, as
in Luke 8.13. Or may it not be granted, that such Faith, Repentance, etc. as
the best, of which unregenerate Persons are sometimes the Subjects, are Effects
of the Grace of God, wrought by God's Word and Spirit in their Souls, and
frequently called common Grace? And are they, this notwithstanding, all Sin,
and an Abomination in God's Sight, and, as some say, contrary to saving Grace?
I constantly maintain, that there is a specifical Difference betwixt common
Grace, and that which is special; but I see no Reason to oppose them one to the
other, as Contraries are opposed. Whether by common Grace we intend those
gracious Influences of God's holy Spirit, with which the Unregenerate are
sometimes savoured, or the good Effects produced in them by these gracious
Operations, I am not, for my Part, willing to allow them to be Sin.

Seventhly, I think what is said by that learned Man, Dr. OWEN, in his
Perseverance of the Saints, Chap. I. Sect. 17. much favors what I have in this
Chapter asserted. Of those who are said to believe and to be holy really, and
in the Truth of the Thing it self; there are two Sorts. First, Such as having
received sundry common Gift^ and Graces of the Spirit, as Illumination of the
Mind, Change of Affections, and thence Amendment of Life, with Sorrow of the
World, legal Repentance, temporary Faith, and the like, which are all true and
real in their Kind, do thereby become Vessels in the great House of God, being
changed as to their Use, though not in their Nature, continuing Stone and Wood
still, though hewed and turned into the Serviccableness of Vessels, and on that
Account are frequently termed Saints and Believers. On such as these there is a
lower (and in some a subordinate) Work of the Spirit, effectually produci^g (
in and on all the Faculties of their Souls) somewhat that is true, good, and
useful in it self, answering in some Likeness and Suitableness of Operation
unto the great Work of Regeneration, which fails not. There is in them Light,
Love, Joy, Faith, Zeal, Obedience, etc. all true in their Kind, which make many
of them in whom they are, do worthily in their Generation, howbeit they attain
not to the Faith of God's Elect, neither does Christ live in them, nor is the
Life which they lead, by the Faith of the Son of God: As shall hereafter be
fully declared.

I now appeal to such as are judicious, whether the best Actions of the
Unregenerate are properly their Sins: If they be not, then we cannot from a
false Proposition prove, that none of them can be, by the Constitution of God,
appointed to be Conditions of the new Covenant.

I think it plainly appears, from what has been above said, That the best
Actions of the Unregenerate, have not more of moral Evil than of moral Goodness
in them; I therefore do not believe any Conclusion that can be drawn from a
Supposition hereof.

Eighthly, If the best Actions of the Unregenerate be truly and properly Sins,
I see no Reason at present, but that it were better that they were let alone,
than done. If it be said, that though the doing of them be Sin, yet it is a
greater Sin to omit them; I answer, that if they are properly Sins, I know not
of any Rule Men have, of two Sins to choose the least: I believe that neither
the one nor the other ought to be chosen, but that both ought to be abhorred.
Indeed, of two Things where one is less good than the other, if both cannot be
done, the best ought to be made choice of; but where both the Things in
Question are properly Sins, this is not the Case.

But I believe that if the best Actions (if I may so speak) of the Unregenerate
were really Sins, all the Regenerate would be obliged to repent of all they did
before their Regeneration, and in order to it, as their Reading, Hearing,
Meditating, Praying for converting Grace, Giving Alms, etc. I confess they
ought to repent that they performed these Things in no better a Manner than
they did; but not that they did them at all, though they did them not in such a
Manner as the Regenerate only can perform Actions that are good in Respect of
the Matter, or general Nature of them.

CHAP. XIX. The Doctrine I plead for, no ways inconsistent with that of
Predestination, and the sovereign Freedom of the Grace of GOD in the Salvation
of his Elect.
I FREELY acknowledge that it is implied in the Doctrine I plead for, That
Sinners who perish under the Gospel, do not perish for want of Power to comply
with the Terms of the new Covenant: That they fail of the Grace of God, or fall
short of eternal Life, is (according to my Principles) not because the
Condition of the Covenant of Grace is such, that those who are not saved, have
no Power to perform it; but because they will not do so, John 5.40. And ye will
not come to me that ye might have Life, And Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not! Indeed I cannot see
how the new Covenant could be fitly called the Covenant of Grace, if the
Condition of it were so very difficult, that all that fall short of the Good of
it, might truly plead, That it never was in their Power to comply with the
Terms on which Salvation is offered to them in it: But that under all the
seeming Advantages of the Gospel which they have enjoyed, their eternal
Damnation has been, as to any Thing they could do, utterly unavoidable. Indeed
I cannot think this to be the Truth of Man's Case, while he enjoys the Grace of
God granted to him, in and with the Gospel, as in 2 Cor. 6.1.

Now, whether the Doctrine of Predestination, and of the free and sovereign
Grace of God, manifested in the Conversion and eternal Salvation of Sinners, be
at all inconsistent with the Opinion I entertain, is what, in this Chapter, is
to be considered.

It is then, or may be here said, that if a sinful Man has such a Power as is
here supposed, it will from hence follow, That his Salvation cannot depend on
God's sovereign Grace: For if Grace and Salvation be offered and promised, on a
Condition which Man has Power to perform, or not to perform, then it is in his
own Power to determine this Point, whether he shall be saved, or not; and so
his Salvation cannot depend on divine Sovereignty, but on his own free Will,
which is contrary to the Doctrine of orthodox Protestants, who constantly
maintain the Sovereignty of God with Relation to Man's Salvation; which is also
agreeable to that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 9.11. and onwards, where he shows
at large, that God has Mercy and Compassion on whom he will; and he concludes
from it in Verse 19. that it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows Mercy.

Now, this Objection has great Appearance of Strength in it; and I know of
Nothing that seems to make more against the Doctrine I plead for, than this
does: I shall therefore endeavor to give it a just and impartial
Consideration, in the Particulars which here follow.

1. As I have formerly said, so I say now, that I am fully persuaded of the
Truth of the Doctrine of God's Decrees of Election and Reprobation, as the same
is revealed in Scripture; and for the Substance, as it is explained in our
Confessions of Faith and Catechisms, and by our orthodox Divines, such as Dr.
TWISSE, Dr. OWEN, Mr. NORTON, Dr. MATHER, Mr. WILLARD, etc. I hold God's Decree
to be absolute, eternal and unchangeable; and that he has chosen a definite
Number of Persons to Salvation, whose Names are all written in the Book of
Life, passing by and not choosing the Rest, as they are called Romans 11.7. and
that all, and only those that are so chosen shall be eternally saved.

2. I am persuaded, that in choosing a Number of Mankind to Salvation, and in
passing by the Rest, God acted in a Way of absolute Sovereignty, doing therein
according to his own good Will and Pleasure, not being moved by any Causes or
Motives out of himself, as by any Excellency in One more than in Another, or by
any Faith or good Works foreseen, or by any Wickedness foreseen in them that
are not chosen.

3. I have no Doubt but that God acts as an absolute Sovereign, in the
Execution of his Decrees, as well as in willing the Events decreed by him,
doing as he will in the Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the
Earth, Dan. 4.35.

4. I am accordingly well satisfied, that the future and eternal State of
Mankind, whether of Weal or Woe, depends on the Sovereignty of God, who has
Mercy on whom he will, as is above declared from Romans Chap. 9.

But the great Question here is, Whether all this being granted and received
for Truth, the Inference or Consequence drawn from it in the Objection, that
then it cannot be in the Power of those to whom Grace and Salvation is offered
in the Gospel, either to accept the same, on the Condition on which it is
offered, or not to accept it, refusing so to do, when the Consequence depending
on their doing or not doing it, is, according to the Tenor of the new Covenant,
either their Salvation or Damnation? As in Mark 16.15, 16. This, I say, is what
I conceive to be the great Question here, and I am content that a due
Resolution of this should decide the main Question, which in this Discourse, I
have under Consideration.

Now the turning Point here is, Whether the Liberty of reasonable Creatures, in
their Actions, will not consist with the Decree and governing Providence of
God, in ordering all Events according to his own Pleasure? Or in the Language
of Scripture, in Working all Things after the Counsel of his own Will? Ephesians.
1.11. For if God's decreeing future Events, does not take away the Liberty of
subordinate Agents, concerned in the Execution of his Purposes, or their Power
of doing or not doing what is done by them, why may not he that believes and is
saved be supposed at the same Time to have had Power, his Election
notwithstanding, not to have believed: And on the other Hand, he that does not
believe, and so perishes, to have or to have had Power to believe, though he did
not, and though this were according to God's Decree. The Decree does not take
away this Power, or rather is not inconsistent with it. However this may seem a
Paradox to many; a Creature may have Power to perform an Action which God has
decreed he shall not do. This will appear if the Manner of his decreeing what
free Agents shall do or not do, be duly considered and understood.

A little to clear up this Point, I shall (1) Show the pernicious Consequences
that will follow upon denying it. (2) Produce some Authorities for it. (3)
Essay briefly to show the same to be in Reason possible.

Now for the First, If God's decreeing that his reasonable Creatures shall do,
or not do, this or that Action, be inconsistent with a Power or Liberty in them
to do the contrary, then it will follow, either that he has not decreed all
their Actions, and does not by his Providence order and bring about all those
Things which are done by them: Or otherwise, they having no Liberty respecting
those Things or Events which God has decreed shall exist, or come to pass by
their Means, they are under an inevitable Necessity of doing whatever Actions
are done by them, and have no more Liberty than a Clock or Watch has, that is
moved by the Weights and Springs that are the irresistible Cause of its Motion:
And so Hobbs, who asserted the Necessity of all Things, was in the Right. The
Consequence of the first Supposition is, That God does not govern the World,
but in some of the most important Concernments of it, lets Things run at
Random, according to the Pleasure of fickle and unsteady Agents, contrary to
Ephesians. 1.11. and many other Texts of Scripture that might be alleged. But
otherwise, according to the other Hypothesis, Creatures having no Power to
govern their own Wills and Actions, are most certainly incapable of being
governed in a moral Way, by Laws with Sanctions annexed to them, i. e. Rewards
promised in Case of Obedience, and Punishments threatened in Case of
Disobedience: For why should a Creature be rewarded with Good, or punished with
Evil, if he has no more Liberty with Respect to what he does, than a Stone has
not to fall, when it is tossed up into the Air? If the Case be so, how should
Men's Consciences accuse them, either for doing what they do, or omitting what
they do not, which is one great Part of the Punishment of their Sins. The
Consequences of both these Suppositions are intolerable; therefore neither of
the Hypotheses are to be allowed.

Wherefore,

Secondly, Learned Men avouch, that God's Decrees respecting future Events, are
consistent with the Liberty of free Agents, with Relation to what they do in
effecting them. Thus that learned and judicious Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, affirm, in their Confession, Chap. 3. Sect. 1. That though God from
all Eternity did, by the most wise and holy Counsel of his own Will, freely and
unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass; yet so (say they) as thereby
neither is God the Author of Sin, nor is Violence offered to the Will of the
Creature, nor is the Liberty or Contingency of second Causes taken away, but
rather established. To this Effect also Dr. TWISSE, in his Treatise of
Reprobation, in Answer to Hord and Mason, Part 2. Page 63. says, That whereas
we see some Things come to pass necessarily, some contingently; so God has
ordained that all Things shall come to pass; but necessary Things, necessarily,
contingent Things, contingently, that is avoidably, and with a Possibility of
not coming to pass: For every University Scholar knows this to be the Notion of
Contingency. Thus also our Mr. NORTON, in his Orthodox Evangelist, Page 76.
says, Man acts as freely as if there were no Decree, yet as infallibly as if
there were no Liberty. Liberty is the Effect of the Decree; so far is the
Decree from being a Prejudice to Liberty.

But why should I quote any other such Passages? All that are acquainted with
the Writings of Calvinists know that in this Point they are generally agreed;
so that I am not singular with Respect to this Article.

But because I am not willing to content my self with telling my Reader, that
there are great Absurdities that follow the Denial of this, and that there are
many that affirm it, and think they are bound so to do, how difficult soever it
be to conceive of the Modus thereof; for this Reason, I say, I shall not
content my self to rest here, without endeavoring to say something briefly,
for the clearing up of this Point, and showing the Possibility of the Thing
asserted. And here I say,

1. That it seems evident, that it is impossible that any Thing should come to
pass, God in no Sense willing it. This, I think, follows as an undeniable
Consequence from this Truth, That his Knowledge and Power are infinite, which I
take for granted. As I cannot see how it is possible that any Thing should come
to pass, without the Knowledge of him, whose Understanding is infinite, and
unlimited, so I can no more conceive how any Thing can come to pass without the
Will of him whose Power is infinite, he knowing it at the Time when it was
done, or about to be done: For suppose it was not done or brought to pass by
his own Efficiency, either immediate, or through the Instrumentality of some
other Agents; yet at least he could have hindered it by his mighty Power, which
he would most certainly have done, had he not willed its coming to pass, at
least by his permissive Will. Now the Will of God that this or that Thing shall
come to pass, is what I understand by the Decree.

2. Suppose it be granted, that God decrees some Things by a permissive Decree
only; and his Providence with Respect to this Accomplishment be correspondent
with such a Decree as that is; yet it must be here observed, that Permission in
God must not be looked upon as merely the not hindering an Event of which we may
have an Idea in our Minds; for God does Nothing to hinder the Being of Millions
of Worlds, which neither now exist, or ever shall: But how absurd would it be
to say, on this Account, he permits their Being. Permission in God therefore
intends his not hindering Things from coming to pass, which he knows will come
to pass, unless he hinders them. And thus divine Permission supposes God's
doing more toward this or that Thing's coming to pass, than barely permitting
it in the Manner now expressed.

For, 3. He must at least be such a Cause of it, as without which such a Thing
could not come to pass, inasmuch as it never could have come to pass, had he
not done several Things that were absolutely necessary in order thereunto; as
his making the Agents acting, and giving them Power to act, and exhibiting the
Objects about which the Act is conversant, and providentially ordering the
Occasions leading to it, and giving that Aid to the Agents, without which they
could not do what is done by them: For in him we live, move and have our Being,
Acts 17.28. Now all this supposes that God has from Eternity decreed thus to
do: For whatever God does in Time, he decreed to do from Eternity; and this is
much more than barely not hindering a free Agent from doing this or that Act.

4. From God's permitting free Agents thus to act, the Things in this Way
brought to pass, will as certainly have a Being as if God decreed to bring them
about by a positive Act of his Power. For if he himself does, or decrees to do
all that is necessary in order to their Futurition, giving his Creatures all
the Power and Aid that is necessary thereunto, administering also the Occasions
leading to such Actions or Events, when he knows that his Creatures being put
into such a State, and then left to their own free Will, will assuredly act
after such a Manner; he does by Consequence will or decree such Actions or
Events, as they, not he, are the immediate Efficients and formal Causes of. I
say, he that wills to do that on which he certainly knows such an Event will
follow, does by Consequence will that Event, though he himself neither does the
Thing, nor is properly the Cause of another doing it; and though the Agent by
whom such an Action is done, or such an Effect produced, be at perfect Liberty
whether he will do so or not. In this Case the Event will assuredly happen, or
the Effect be produced, as if the Agent acting had no Liberty; because God has
determined to do, and actually does, that which he knows will be an Occasion
(not Cause) of that Agent's so acting.

The certain Futurition of any Events thus necessarily, or rather certainly,
consequent on God's permissive Decree, relating to them, does not at all infer
a Want of Power or Liberty in the Agents immediately concerned in them, of not
acting as they do. If God decrees to do that, on which he knows such an Event
will follow, that is, That his Creature having Power so to act, will of its own
Accord do so, the Consequence of this is not, that his Creature has not Power
to do otherwise. I think this is as plain as any Thing can be. How should God's
Decree to suffer a free Agent to act after such a Manner, infer that Agent's
not having Power to forbear so acting?

If it be here said, that it is not possible that even God himself should know
what a free Agent will do in a Case wherein he is supposed to have Power to do
a Thing or not to do it; I answer, first, By asking him that says so, How he
knows this? Does he find any such Thing asserted in the holy Scriptures? Or
will he say, That a Supposition of God's knowing what a free Agent will do,
implies a Contradiction, and so cannot be true. If this be what is intended, I
declare my self very far from seeing it to be evident. If a Creature may be
supposed to have Power to do that which he does not; or on the other Hand, not
to do that which he does; How does it appear that God, whose Understanding is
infinite, cannot know whether he will do the Thing or not do it? To suppose,
that God may know both that such a Creature will do such an Action, and that he
will not do it, would indeed be a plain Contradiction: The Reason is, because
both these cannot be true: But to suppose that God may know that such a
Creature will do such an Action, though that Creature have Power not to do it,
when it is a Truth that he will do it, even then when God is supposed to know
it, has not, I think, any Appearance of a Contradiction in it.

It was always a Truth, even from Eternity, that Creatures by whom such and
such Actions are done in Time, would so do them. If it be true a Minute before
a Creature performs an Action, that he will perform it; the same was true an
Hour before that, and a Year before that and so from Eternity: Or did this at
any Time begin to be a Truth? Now, how can any Man affirm, that there may be a
Truth which God may be, nay, must needs be ignorant of? Let it also be
considered, that if God cannot foreknow such Contingencies, then he cannot know
of them one Hour before they come to pass. but thus to dispute is to argue
against plain Fact: For it is certain that God has both fore-known and
revealed many such Things long before their Accomplishment; as that of Cyrus
his sending the Jews back to their own Land; and that of Judas's betraying his
Lord and Master, etc. Or had not these Agents Power to forbear doing these
Actions? I can show that Dr. TWISSE, who was no Arminian, affirms this with
Respect to Judas, and says the same with Respect to Men's sinful Actions in
general; yet he truly acknowledges that Men cannot exercise Grace in their
doing good Actions, or in their forbearing evil ones, till God bestows his
Grace upon them.

I think it appears plainly enough, by what has been said in several of the
last foregoing Paragraphs, That the Sovereignty of God in decreeing future
Events, and bringing them to pass in the Way of his Providence, is no Ways
inconsistent with the Liberty of his Creatures.

And this I think well agrees with the Assembly of Divines, in their
Confession of Faith, Chap. 5. Sect. 2. Although in Relation to the Foreknowledge
and Decree of God, the first Cause, all Things come to pass immutably, and
infallibly; yet by the same Providence he orders them to fall out according
to the Nature of second Causes, either necessarily, freely or contingently. Now
this undoubtedly holds true with Respect to God's Decree and Providence
relating to Man's eternal State, as well as with any other Thing whatsoever.

I crave Leave in this Place to make a short Digression from what is the proper
Design and Business of this Essay, which is not to defend those calvinian
Doctrines which I acknowledge, but to establish my own Hypothesis, in those
Articles, wherein I differ from most that are in that Scheme.

But having in Page 154. acknowledged the Truth of the Doctrine of Reprobation,
as well as that of Election; and being sensible how very tender many serious
Souls are, with Respect to the first mentioned of these two Articles; I shall
attempt in a very few Words, to take off the seeming Harshness of the Doctrine
which I have now named. But let those who own the Doctrine of Election, as it
is asserted in Ephesians. 1.4.5. and Verse 11. Romans 8.30. Acts 13.48. and many other
Places: Let such, I say, as believe this Doctrine, consider how this can be
true, and the other mentioned be false. How can we suppose it to be a Truth,
that God chooses some of Mankind to eternal Life, and yet not leave the Rest
unchosen? How can he be said to choose any, if he makes no Difference, but takes
all? Now, if we acknowledge that God chooses some of Mankind from among the
Rest, to be the Objects of his special Favor, as in the Texts above quoted,
this with what is plainly implied in it, and evidently held forth from it,
contains the Substance of what they hold, if I do not misunderstand them who
maintain the Doctrine of which I am now speaking: And I desire such as are
willing to submit to the Authority of God's holy Word, to consider whether as
much as this is not plainly held forth in such Texts of Scripture as these,
viz. Jude ver. 4. Romans 11.7, 8. and Chap. 9.21, 22. Many such Texts might be
easily named.

And let it be considered that if God does, or ever will, inflict eternal
Torment on any of the Children of Men, he must be supposed always to have
intended to do so; for we cannot suppose that God ever did any Thing but what
he first purposed or intended to do; nor can we reasonably think, that God ever
purposed or intended to do any Thing, which he did not before purpose. Or can
we think that any new Reasons can offer themselves to God, which before he knew
not of, to move him to purpose or decree Things which he never before intended
to do, or intended should be done? I hope none have so mean Tho'ts of God, as
such an Imagination would imply! I suppose it undeniable, that whatever God
does in Time, he has purposed to do from Eternity.

For the same Reason that God does any Thing in Time, that is done by him, he
always purposed to do it. If therefore, God inflicting Pain or Torment on any
of the Children of Men, he inflicteth the same for their Sins; then he
eternally purposing to inflict Pain or Torment on them, and always purposed to
do this for their Sins, or as a Just Punishment of them.

But if any think it will from hence follow, that Men's Sins are the Cause of
God's Decree to punish them, they are herein grossly mistaken: Sin is the Cause
of Man's suffering, and the Thing for which God intends he shall suffer; yet
the same cannot be the Cause of God's Act in decreeing: The Reason of which is
evident, viz. Because the Decree of God, being an eternal and immunent Act of
his, cannot be an Effect of any Thing out of himself; and most evidently it
cannot be an Effect of any Thing that is temporal, as Sin is: For how should a
Thing that had no Being till very lately, be the Cause of a Thing that had a
Being from Eternity. Of God's Actions of this Kind, the Perfections of his own
Nature, such as his own perfect Knowledge, Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, which
belong to his eternal Power and Godhead, can only be the Cause, not the
temporary Actions of his Creatures.

What God may justly do in Time, he may justly decree to do from Eternity. If
God does nothing in the Execution of his Decrees, which is unjust, he does no
Injustice in decreeing: Or can we imagine that God does unjustly in decreeing
to do justly? This would be strange! Indeed God's eternal Decree does not of
itself any Ways affect any of his Creatures. His Decree does not of itself
either give them a Being, or work any Effects on them. This is only done by his
Efficiency and Providence. If therefore, in and by these, he does his Creatures
no Wrong* he never does them any at all. If God deals fairly by his Creatures
in all his Works, or providential Dispensations toward them, they ca^ have no
Reason to complain of him as if his Way was not equal. When therefore God
justifies himself against all the hard Thoughts and wicked Cavils of sinful
Men, the Course he takes is to show the Justice and Equity of all his Actions
toward them, and is not wont to dispute with them concerning his eternal
Decrees. See these following Texts and others like them, Ezekiel. 18.25, -- 29.
Lam. 3.33, -- 36. Job 34.11, 12, 23, 24.

Though it be true, that God does nothing but what he first decrees to do, and
this even from Eternity; and as true that God decrees to do nothing but what he
does, and that in the very same Manner in which he decreed to do it; yet no
Instances can be given of God's doing any Thing that is unjust or unequal in
the Execution of his Decrees. He manages all Things in such a Manner, that Man
has not the least Reason to complain of him. That is most true concerning him,
in Deuteronomy. 32.4, He is the Rock, his Work is perfect: For all his Wa^s are
Judgment: A God of Truth and without Iniquity, just and right is he.

As God neither will, nor ever designed to torment Men in another Life, save
for their Sins, whereby they well deserve the same; so he never is, nor
intended to be, the Cause of those Sins for which he resolved to punish those
who he ever knew would deserve it. If God should himself cause Men to commit
Sin, it would not stand with his Justice to punish them for it. But no Man can
prove, that God was ever the Author of any Sin. To affirm he ever was, is to
blaspheme his holy Name. If any have let fall Expressions implying that God is
the Author of Sin, they have certainly erred therein: And they who accuse Men
with this (as I think, is frequent) when they are not guilty of it, are guilty
of grievously wronging them.

They who affirm, That God has from Eternity decreed to permit those Sins to be
committed, which he certainly knew would be committed, if he prevented them
not, and that he accordingly does permit them, do not hereby make him the
Author of Sin. God's suffering his Creatures to Sin, when it is in his Power to
hinder them, is not to be the Author of Sin. No^ in God in Justice obliged to
exert his Power in hindering Persons from sinning, though he knows they will Sin
if he does not, and that their Sinning will bring Ruin on them.

But if God should lay any of the Children of Men under an absolute and fatal
Necessity of sinning against him, and then punish them for the Sins they
commit, (which I suppose he never does) this would be what I cannot see the
Equity of? But that Men do, by their own voluntary Rebellion, bring such a
Necessity on themselves, I deny not; and then they may justly suffer for the
Sins they commit, or rather for their Crime in bringing themselves into such a
bad Condition.

God does not, by his eternal Decree, that he will punish these or those
Persons in another Life and World, nor in the Execution of this Decree of his,
lay such Persons under a Necessity of sinning against him; though in this his
Permission of Sin is implied his willing the Being of Sin by his Permission!
But this permissive Will of God must not be understood of his Will, as he is
Lawgiver, by which he wills what should be done, and what should not; but of
his Will concerning Events, by which he wills what Things shall come to pass,
and what shall not, either by his effective Providence, or at least by his
suffering them to be done.

CHAP. XX. That Persons who have long resisted and quenched the Holy Spirit,
and so provoked him to depart from them, may at last seek earnestly for Mercy,
and not obtain it, no Argument against what I plead for.
THAT Sinners are often guilty of resisting and quenching the Holy Spirit of
God, and this for a long Time, is here taken for granted; and it is a Truth
unto which what was spoken by the holy Martyr Stephen, in Acts 7.51. is a very
clear Testimony: Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost: As your Fathers did, so do y^. That in Isai.
63.10. is to the same Purpose; but they have rebelled and ^e^^d his Holy
Spirit, etc. Also that in 1 These. 5.17. Quench not the Spirit, implies in it
the Truth here taken for granted; and there are a great Number of other Texts
in which the same Truth is implied.

Now, in all such Texts as these, the Striving of the Holy Spirit with Sinners
is evidently supposed, even the same that is expressly mentioned, Genesis 6.3. My
Spirit shall not always strive with Man. Sinners could not resist the Holy
Spirit, if he did not strive with them, or were not engaged in some Design or
Work wherein they might be supposed to oppose or resist him.

Now, this Operation or Striving of the Spirit, in which Sinners act in
Opposition to him, cannot be justly conceived to be a Striving in the proper
and literal Sense of the Word, which implies, a Person's doing all that is in
his Power to accomplish a Work, wherein he is engaged; for this is utterly
inconsistent with the infinite Power of the Holy Ghost, who is One of the three
Persons in the Godhead: This must, therefore, be attributed to the Spirit of
God, after the Manner of Men, as Things are in Scripture frequently attributed
to God. Thus, because the Spirit of God does those Things which have a natural
Tendency toward their Conversion and eternal Salvation, he is said to strive
with them to that End, though he does not all that is in his Power; which, were
he a Man or some other created Agent, he might be supposed to do, if he were
resisted, and did not accomplish what he attempted.

I must also observe, that the immediate End of this Operation of the Spirit,
wherein he is supposed to be resisted, and many Times effectually, so that he
accomplisheth not what he attempteth, cannot be the Regeneration of the Persons
he is said to strive with; for this being a Work, to which the infinite Power
of God is required, like that by which he wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the Dead, such a Power must needs be exerted, whenever this Work is
attempted; and then there can be no Resistance given to the Holy Spirit
therein. The Holy Spirit never fails of accomplishing this, when he sets about
it: As the Soul is wholly passive in it, so it can make no Resistance against
it. When the Spirit works in this Way, none can hinder.

The Work, therefore, of the Holy Spirit which Sinners are supposed to resist
and to prevent, is a Work of quite a different Nature from that but now
mentioned: A Work in which the Spirit of God acts in a moral, not in a physical
Way (if I may use these Terms) I mean he works in the Way of moral Suasion, by
offering Matter of Conviction and Awakening to those he is said to strive with.
He sets proper Arguments and Motives before them, and inculcates the same upon
their Mind and Conscience, to persuade and excite them to apply themselves to
the Things wherein their everlasting Peace and Welfare is concerned. He uses
Means to remove their Prejudices against the Things which he persuades them to,
and to stir them up to improve the Powers which they have latent in them, but
seem as if they had not, and will never exert, unless they be in this Way
assisted. This, I say, is the Way of the Spirit's Working, when he strives with
Sinners in order to their Good. And thus he strives with them in a Way, unto
the Success of which their own Concurrence and Activity are required; which to
the Act of Regeneration it is not; though in the Work preparatory to this it is.

Now, in the Spirit's Striving here intended, I do not suppose what he does by
the written and preached Word, only to be included; but doubt not that he also
strives with Sinners by instructive and convincing Providence, and sometimes
by the Ministry of his holy Angels, and immediate Suggestions; by all which
Means, Things are bro't to the Minds of sinful Men, which tend to instruct and
excite them to their Duty: But still this is striving with them in a moral Way;
not by attempting to create new Powers in them, which they are without. And if
the Striving of the Holy Spirit be in the Way now expressed, it is easy to
conceive how he may be refused by sinful Men, and his Design and Work
frustrated; because Persuasions, properly such, suppose a Power in the Subjects
persuaded, either to do or not do the Things they are persuaded to: For to what
End is a Person persuaded to do that which he is supposed, either to have no
Power to perform, or no Power to let alone; unless the Persuasions used are
supposed to give him Power to do the Thing required? And then he is enabled to
do it in a moral (not a physical) Way, which I willingly allow, i. e. he is
excited and made willing to do that which he had Power before (in a physical
Sense) to perform; but never would have performed (and in the Sense explained
could not) without such Persuasions. Thus have I showed what that Striving of
the Spirit of God is, which Sinners are here supposed to resist and quench.

I shall proceed to consider how sinful Men resist and quench the Spirit, in
these Operations. And here I shall briefly name some of the principal Ways in
which this is done. And,

(1) Sinners resist and quench the Spirit when they will not hearken and attend
to what he says to them. All that God says to sinful Men in his written and
preached Word, by the Voice of his Providence, and by the Ministry of his
Angels; by all which they are put in Remembrance of their many Sins, and the
Duties required of them; all these, I say, are the Voice of the Holy Spirit to
them, unto whom the Application of Redemption most especially belongs. Now,
when Sinners refuse to hear and consider what the Holy Spirit does in these
Ways say to them, this is evidently to resist and quench him. By thus refusing
to hear the Voice of the Holy Spirit, Sinners refuse to receive Influences and
Convictions, the giving of which is the special End of the Spirit's being sent
into the World to them, as appears in John 16. and 30.

(2) Sinners resist the Spirit of God in their Refusal of the Offers of his
Mercy made to them, through a Redeemer, by neglecting the great Salvation offered
to them, as in Heb. 2.3. The Application of that Redemption which has been
purchased for sinful Men, does especially belong to the Holy Spirit, as his
Work; and to this End he labors with Sinners to prepare and qualify them to be
Partakers of it, and make them willing to go to Jesus Christ for the Benefits
offered to them: He calls, invites and persuades them to do so. Now, when they
refuse to obey these Calls, they in this, in a very especial Manner, resist and
quench the Holy Spirit of God. This especially was the Sin with which the Jews
were charged. John 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life. The
like we have in Matthew. 23.37. The same Sin is called a doing Despite to the
Spirit of Grace: Because the Tendency of the Influences of the Holy Spirit, in
the Work of common Grace, is to bring Sinners to an Acceptance of the Savior,
and Salvation offered to them, in which Work of his, they wickedly resist him.
See Heb. 10.29.

Sinners may especially be looked upon as Resisters of the Holy Spirit, in this
Work of his, when they fall away after he has wrought a very considerable
Change on them, has actually done a great deal for them, in order to their
being made Partakers of the special Mercies offered to them in the new
Covenant, and so brought them very nigh to the Kingdom of God, as that Scribe
was, Mark 12.34. This I take to be the very Case supposed in Ezekiel. 18.24, 26.
and Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and 2 Pet. 2.20. and in Heb. 10.38, 39. which Places I only
here refer my Reader to.

But most of all do Sinners resist and quench the Spirit of God, when the
Opposition which they give to him and his Work, is with an Intent to reproach
and dishonor him, and the gracious Design wherein he is engaged. This seems to
be the Crime (or the great Aggravation of the Crime) of the Scribes and
Pharisees, when they said, Does not this Fellow, (meaning our Lord) cast out
Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils? Matthew. 12.24. And so in Mark 3.22. it
is said, The Scribe which came down from Jerusalem said, He has Beelzebub, and
by the Prince of the Devils casts he out Devils. And the Blasphemy, for which
they are spoken of as in Danger of eternal Damnation, is thus described in
Verse 30. Because, said they, he has an unclean Spirit.

(3) Sinners resist the Holy Spirit by obstinately rebelling against him, and
refusing to do what he requires of them. Of Sinners thus resisting the Spirit
of God we have an Account in such Texts of Scripture as Isai. 63.10. But they
rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit: Therefore he was turned to be their Enemy,
and fought against them. Jer. 2.25. and Chap. 44.16. As for the Word thou have
spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.

Especially when Persons sin against Light and Knowledge, they are guilty of
resisting and quenching the Spirit of God. When if notwithstanding Men are by
the Holy Spirit convinced, that such and such Actions are evil and provoking in
God's Sight, yet they will do them, in this they greatly sin against the Holy
Ghost. Of this Kind of Sin our Savior speaks, John 15.22. If I had not come
and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin: But now they have no Cloak for
their Sins.

And now that the Spirit of God does sometimes utterly withdraw from Persons
who have long resisted him in the Instances above expressed, is what I am here
next to show; and the same is most manifestly held forth in Genesis 6.3. And the
Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he also is
Flesh. Which Words are well explained by the Apostle Peter, in his first
Epistle, Chap. 3. Ver. 18, 19, 20. For Christ also has once suffered for Sins,
the Just for the Unjust, (that he might bring us to God) being put to Death in
the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: By which also he went and preached unto
the Spirits in Prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the
Long-suffering of God waited in the Days of Noah, while the Ark was a
preparing, wherein few, that is eight, Souls were saved by Water. Thus the
Spirit of God departed from Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14. And thus David prayed, that the
holy Spirit of God might not be taken from him, when probably he though it himself
unconverted: Psalm. 51.11. As for God's true Saints, he has promised that he
will never take his holy Spirit from them. Isa. 59.20, 21. Jer. 32.38, 39, 40.

There are other Texts of Scripture, wherein the final Withdrawing of the
Spirit of God from some, who long resist and rebel against him, is very
evidently implied: Such as that, Psalm. 81.11, 12. But my People would not
hearken to my Voice: And Israel would none of me. So I gave them up unto their
own Hearts Lusts: And they walked in their own Counsels. With this Place
compare these following, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Ezekiel. 24.13. Rev. 22.11.
When God wholly and forever gives up any Sinners to their own Heart's Lusts,
resolving that he will let them follow the Devices and Counsels of their own
wicked Hearts, his thus taking his Spirit forever from them, is therein most
evidently implied: And what the dreadful Consequences of this are, comes next
in order to be considered.

Now, when God deals thus with any of the rebellious Children of Men, they are
undone, and that forever: It is then impossible to renew them again to
Repentance, as in Heb. 6.6. When the Spirit of God has utterly forsaken them,
there then remains no more Sacrifice for their Sins; they having trodden under
Foot the Blood of the Son of God, and therein done Despite to the Spirit of
Grace, as in Heb. 10.26, -- 29. This is a Sin unto Death, which we are required
to pray for the Pardon of. It is impossible that the Sin of such Persons should
ever be pardoned: And at present I see no Reason but that it may be the same
Sin against the holy Ghost, that is spoken of in Matthew. 12. and Mark. 3. I
suppose the Sin in those Places intended, to consist no less in the Enmity of
Men's Hearts against the holy Spirit, and the Work he is engaged in, and the
Resistance they give to him in it, than in the Words they utter against him:
And I am far from agreeing with a certain Author, who thinks the Sin intended
in these Places cannot be committed without Men's pronouncing those blasphemous
Words here spoken of. Perhaps such malicious Speeches are rather to be looked
upon as a plain Indication of the Persons guilty of the horrendous Crime, by
our Savior pronounced unpardonable, than as that, in which the intended Sin
does either wholly or principally consist. And if this be the Truth of the
Case, I suppose none can be known by others to have committed the mentioned
Sin, except such Blasphemers as our Savior describes: And I believe that
Sinners cannot ordinarily in this Life know that they have sinned unpardonably.
In this, I think, I well agree with the Learned Mr. How, in his Redeemer's
Tears, which Book I have not now by me.

Indeed none have committed that Sin which is unpardonable, but those from whom
the Spirit has finally withdrawn himself, or is about so to do; and it is
certain, that all such are guilty of an unpardonable Sin: And the Reason why it
is impossible such Sinners should ever obtain a Pardon, is, because the Spirit
of God has utterly forsaken them, and will never return to them again; and on
this Account it is impossible they should ever be renewed again to Repentance,
as in Heb. 6.6. In which Clause it is implied, that they once had a Repentance
which they have lost, and fallen from, but not of the same Kind which the
Regenerate only have; for those who have that never fall away, as those do
spoken of in the Place referred to, Heb. 6.6. Nor can Persons be such Apostates
in whom common Grace, which implies Repentance of a lower Kind than that of the
Regenerate, has never been wrought. But the Spirit does not bring all with whom
he strives unto this Length, which is the same with that described, 2 Pet.
2.20. without attaining unto which Persons may provoke the Spirit of God to
leave them: But I think that ordinarily such cannot know that the Spirit of God
will no more strive with them.

I shall have finished this Chapter, when I have said, That its being a Truth,
that the Spirit of God having been long resisted by wicked Men, may at last
thus leave them (as is in many Scriptures implied) so that hereupon their
Destruction is unavoidable, can be no Evidence that before this they could not
comply with the Terms of the new Covenant. If now they are given up to their
own Heart's Lusts, so that they cannot do this, it follows not that they
could never have done it. If now the Things of their Peace are hidden from
their Eyes, it does not thence appear, that they always were so; nay, the
contrary is plainly implied in the Words alluded to. If now God will not hear
their Cries to him for Mercy, as in Prove. 1.24. it follows not, that he never
would have heard them, if they would have called on him: The contrary is
plainly implied in the Place quoted. If Sinners will not seek the Lord while he
may be found, and call upon him while he is near; no Wonder if he will not hear
their Cries, when the Day of his Patience is at an End. Nor can Sinners seek
the Lord after their Day of Grace is ended, as they might have done, while he
was striving with them by his Word and Spirit. They now, indeed, cry for
Deliverance when they feel the Terrors of the Almighty seizing on their Souls,
as in Prove. 1.26, 27. which Cries are nothing like the Prayers of Sinners, though
unregenerate, while under sensible Encouragements from the Invitations of the
Gospel, and while God says to them, as in 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the accepted Time;
now is the Day of Salvation. After the Door of God's Mercy is shut (though here
in this World) Sinner's Cries for Deliverance from the Torments which they may
suffer, are of the same Kind with those of the Wicked after this Life is at an
End, Luke 13.25, 26. and Matthew. 25.10, 11.

CHAP. XXI. Wherein the Power of Man, with Relation to the Condition on which
Salvation is offered to him in the Gospel, is further considered.
THOUGH my Tho'ts with Respect to the Point here proposed to further
Consideration, have, I hope, been in some tolerable Measure manifested, so that
I though it not to have added any Thing further; yet that I may not fail of being
understood, with Respect to this important Article, I shall endeavor more
fully to explain and confirm what I hold.

I think I have sufficiently proved in Part II. Chap. V. of this Essay, that
neither the Grace of Regeneration, nor any Act implying it, can be the
Condition on which Salvation is offered in the Gospel; and consequently if
Salvation be conditionally offered, as I have showed it is, Part I. Chap. IV.
the Condition required is not performed by Virtue of any Power received in our
Regeneration, that, in Order of Nature, following our Faith and Justification.
It is therefore here supposed, that the Power by which any Sinner believes
unto Righteousness, as in Romans 10.10. be that Power what it will, and however
the Sinner comes by it, is such a Power as the Sinner may, and must have before
he is born again, or born of the Spirit.

Nor is there any Doubt here, whether this Power is given to Man by God, from
whom every good and perfect Gift comes down, Jam. 1. 17. though it may be very
reasonably enquired in what Way and Manner God gives this Power, and whether he
gives it only to such as when they have it use it well, and so actually comply
with the Terms on which Salvation is offered to them.

That Sinners may have Power to do that which is never actually done by them, I
know not of any that will deny, with whom I am any Ways likely to be concerned.
I shall therefore take it for granted, That it is possible for Persons to do
some Things which it is in their Power to avoid; and also not to do some Things
which they have the Power to perform.

The Question therefore here is only respecting the Power of performing the
Condition on which Salvation is offered to Sinners; and this Inquiry can only
here relate to those Sinners that never accept of Salvation on the Terms of the
new Covenant; for as for such as do accept of it, they certainly have a Power
some Way or other to do so.

I shall then here enquire, whether such as will not, and so do not, come to
Jesus Christ for Life, in the Manner required of them in order to their being
saved, do fail of doing this for want of a Power necessary to that End. And let
it be remembered that I here speak of such only as enjoy the Means of Salvation,
the Grace of God spoken of in 2 Cor. 6.1. And the Question here is not, whether
Sinners can believe to the saving of their Souls, without Aid and Assistance
from God; but whether they might not do so, having such Means and Helps as many
have, who yet never comply with the Terms of the Gospel, and so perish for ever.

Nor do I by that Aid and Assistance which I suppose necessary in this Case,
intend such only as consist in external Means; as the Word of God written and
preached, the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, instructive and
awakening Providence, etc. But besides these I suppose there is necessary unto
a Sinner's doing what is required of him in the Gospel, the Aids and Influences
of God's holy Spirit to move and excite him to the Things required of him, by
bringing his Duty to his Remembrance, and his Obligations to perform it; also
by putting him in Mind of his Sins and the Calls given him in the Word of God
to repent of them, and turn from them, and lay hold on the great Savior
provided for him, etc.

These Motions and Influences of the holy Spirit, have all of them a Relation
to the Things required of Man in the holy Scriptures, and not to Things which
are not therein prescribed; and are intended by the Strivings of God's Spirit,
of which we read, Genesis 6.3. and which the Wicked resist (Acts 7.31.) and
quench, (1 These. 5.19.) and whom they are said in so doing to vex and grieve,
Isai. 63.10. Ephesians. 4.30.

In these Motions and Influences of the holy Spirit which I here speak of, I
confess I conceive he acts in a moral, rather than a physical Manner, viz. by
instructing, reproving, exhorting, and persuading, etc. and not by creating any
new Powers in Men's Souls; but by doing what is necessary on his Part in order
to his moving and exciting Men to the Performance of their Duty; and so
rendering them the more inexcusable if they engage not in it.

However these Motions of the Spirit being such as Persons may enjoy, and yet
never be savingly converted, they are quite of a different Nature from those
Operations of the Spirit of God, by which the great Work of Regeneration is
effected, nor are they designed to the same End as these last mentioned are;
but to excite Sinners to the Duties that are preparatory to a Work of saving
Grace on their Souls, a Work like that which was wrought in Christ, when God
raised him from the Dead, (Ephesians. 1.20.) and by which we are said to be created
anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10.

Now the great Question here is, Whether when Sinners are under such a Work of
God's Spirit, with the external Means afforded to such as enjoy the Gospel, and
yet do not come to Christ for Life; whether, I say, these remain, being under
such Advantages, without any Power to believe to the saving of their Souls?

Now if this be affirmed by any, I confess I cannot agree with them in their
Sentiments.

But for preventing Mistakes in this important Article, I shall here
distinguish of Impotency, which is twofold; and each of these Kinds does
suppose there may be a Power opposite to it. The Kinds of Impotency I here
intend are by some, if I mistake not, called natural and moral. I shall speak
of these two Kinds of Impotence according to the Notion I my self have of them.

And first, By what I call a natural Impotence, I intend such an Inability to
do a Thing, as renders the Thing utterly impossible to be done by a Person
without having a new Power or Powers given to him. Thus it is properly said of
a blind Man, that he cannot see; and of a deaf Man, that he cannot hear: And
thus I acknowledge that it may be truly said of a Person in a State of Nature;
not being born of the Spirit, that he cannot perform any Actions that are truly
spiritual or holy. This is as impossible as it is for a Thorn-Bush to bear
Figs, or for a Bramble-Bush to bear Grapes, Luke 6.44. Nothing less than
changing the Nature of a Tree will render it capable of this. And thus he that
is utterly destitute of saving Grace, cannot bring forth any Fruits of
Holiness, till he is savingly renewed and made a new Creature, Ephesians. 2.10. No
Arguments, Motives, or Persuasions can give Power to a Man in this Sense unable
to do a Thing, to perform it.

But then, secondly, There is another Kind of Impotency, which arises only from
Error in Men's Judgments, and Obstinacy in their Wills; and this does in some
Sort disable Persons from doing some Things which otherwise they might do, were
their Prejudices removed. However it may not be unfitly said of Persons under
such Disadvantages, that they cannot for the present do this or that Thing,
which they have an Aversion to, when yet such Persons want not a natural Power
to perform what they are said to be unable to do. Thus when a Man is persuaded
that his doing this or that which he is urged to, will prove hurtful and
injurious to him, it may be said, that at present he cannot do it, i. e. he
cannot find in his Heart a Willingness to engage in doing that which he thinks
will rather hurt him than do him good: Or if he thinks he might obtain some
Benefit by doing the Thing, yet thinks the Advantages he might reap by it will
not countervail the Difficulties he must undergo in that Self-denial which is
requisite in order to it, he cannot bring himself to a Willingness to do it.

Persons are in Scripture in this Sense sometimes spoken of as unable to do
this, that or the other Thing, which yet really they want not a natural Power
to perform. Thus it is said of Joseph's Brethren, that they hated him so, that
they could not speak peaceably of him, (Genesis 37.4.) Such Impotence as this is
plainly spoken of by our Savior, and the Nature of it unfolded in Luke 11.5, 6
7, 8. He said unto them, Which of you shall (...) a Friend, and shall g^ unto
him at Midnight, and shall say unto him, Friend, Land me three Leaves; for a
Friend of mine is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him: And he from
within shall answer, and say, Trouble me not; the Door is now shut, and my
Children are with me in Bed; I cannot rise to give thee. I say unto you, though
he will not rise to give him because he is his Friend; yet because of his
Importu^^^y he will rise, and give him as many as he needs. Note here, I
cannot rise to give thee, in the latter End of Verse 7, is nothing more th^n,
he will not, Verse 8. And this which he would not, he is by and by supposed to
do. The same Kind of Impotency is pleaded in Excuse for not going to the great
Gospel-Feast, Luke 14.20. I have married a Wife, and therefore I cannot come.
And our Savior himself acknowledges this Sort of Impotency in some Men with
Respect to their believing in him, John 5.44. How can ye believe which receive
Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only? This
Kind of Impotency is not an absolute and utter Inability to do the Thing which
Men are sometimes said to be unable to do. This is often made evident by
Persons actually doing what they have alleged themselves to have no Power for.
Their could not, being indeed no more than this, that they would not, and not
their being utterly unable to do the Thing intended. This is a Sort of Cannot
which may be cured by good Instructions and Arguments which yet properly give
no new Power; and Men may help themselves against this Sort of Inability by
reasoning themselves out of their Prejudices against the Things, which they and
others may imagine they have no Power to do; so that they may see it was not
Want of Power, but Want of a Will, that hindered them from doing as they should.

In the Sense now explained I acknowledge, that some cannot come to Christ for
Life, and never will, except the Father draw them, as in John 6.44. But then
our Lord himself shows wherein this Inability consists. John 5.40. Ye will not
come to me, that ye might have Life; and Matthew. 23.37. How often would I have
gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
Wings, and ye would not. It would, in my Opinion, be very improper to charge
Men's not coming to Christ merely on their wilful Rebellion, if a real
Inability were the Cause of it.

If it be here said to be true of all that do not come to Christ for Life,
that, in a strict and proper Sense, they have no Power so to do. I must crave
Leave to dissent from this, 'till I can see otherwise than at present I can do.

And I shall only here insist a little more fully on one Argument against what
I here oppose. I desire to know what Kindness it is to any Sinner, that he has
an Offer of Salvation made to him in the Gospel, if he have no Power given to
him to accept of that Offer. What Kindness is it to a Person that he has
Tidings of a Savior, and is promised that he shall be saved by him, on this
Condition that he believes on him, when, this notwithstanding, God never did
nor ever will give him any Power to believe? Especially supposing that if he
does not believe, he shall be punished with a much sorer Punishment than he
should have been, if he had never had an Offer of eternal Life made to him;
which will be the Case of such as enjoy the Gospel, and yet do not believe,
Matthew. 10.15. I confess I think that God is much more merciful unto such as
never have any Offer of Life, than he is to those who have an Offer on such
Terms.

And yet is it not a Truth, that all who enjoy the Gospel of Christ, severally
considered, are bound to bless God that he has sent his Son into the World to
redeem them, and sent his Gospel to invite them to believe in him, that so they
may have eternal Life through him? If it be said, that no Man unto whom the Offer
of Salvation is made does know any Thing to the contrary but that he is one of
God's Elect, and so shall sooner or later be enabled to believe on the Son of
God, and obtain Life through his Name; I answer, that if he knew he was so, he
would be bound to praise God for such an invaluable Mercy; but since he does
not know whether he is one of these or not, he does not know whether he have
any Cause to give Thanks to God for the Offer of Salvation or no; and God does
not require us to give him Praise for supposed Favors, which we neither do nor
can know we have received: Nay rather, to do this would be to mock him. And it
seems as if it would be to mock us, if he should make a great Show of Kindness
to us when he really shows us no Favor, as indeed, according to the Principle
opposed, I affirm, he shows none to those unto whom he gives no Power to accept
of the Mercy which he seems graciously to offer to them. But God forbid, that I
should have any such hard Thoughts of him, as to think that he offers Salvation
to Sinners, and threatens them with a double Damnation in Case they perform not
the Condition on which that Offer is made; and yet neither gives nor offers
them any Power by which they may perform the Condition of that (to all
Appearance) most gracious Offer.

If it be here demanded, what Mercy it is in God to make an Offer of eternal
Life to such Sinners as he certainly knows will never accept of it; but will,
notwithstanding such an Offer, perish forever: To this I answer, that the
Kindness of God in the Offers which he makes of his everlasting Mercies, must
be judged of according to the Nature of the Condition on which he offers them,
and not according to the Events following such Offers, and his Knowledge of
those Events. What if Sinners never accept the Benefits offered, and God knew
they would not when he offered his Favors to them; (as it is impossible that
he should not know what they would do) yet supposing the Offers to be made upon
reasonable Terms, such as Sinners may comply with if their own wilful Obstinacy
does not hinder them, his Kindness in such Offers is manifest. If this be not
granted it will follow, that God shows no Kindness in the Offers of Salvation
which he makes to any others besides those that are eventually saved. But who
dares thus to affirm: And I can hardly think any Man will affirm, that it is a
Kindness in God to offer Salvation to any Sinner without ever giving him Power
to accept of it.

But some seem to fear that the Doctrine I plead for, is not calculated to hide
Pride from Man, and keep him humble. Unto which I say, (1) That I do not think
that any Doctrine is well adapted to make and keep Men humble which is contrary
to Truth, which I suppose the Doctrine I oppose to be. (2) I would ask which of
these two Doctrines has the greatest Tendency to make and keep Men humble, viz.
First, this, That if any Sinner that has the Offer of Salvation made to him
does continue in his Unbelief, and so perishes, the Reason of this is, because
the Condition on which God offered to save him was wholly above his Power, and
such as he could not possibly comply with: Or, Secondly, this, that if any
Sinner fails of that Salvation which he has an Offer of in the Gospel, the
Reason is not, because he is utterly unable to accept of it on Gospel Terms;
but because his Obstinacy is such that he will not, unless God out of his
distinguishing Grace does more for him than he ever does for any Sinner that
continues in his Unbelief, and so perishes. This last is what I maintain: the
former is what I oppose. What I affirm tends both to humble and encourage
Sinners; what I oppose tends greatly to discourage them, rather than to humble
them.

PART III.
I COME now to the third and last Part of my Essay, which is to show,

That the Doctrine maintained in the two former Parts of it, is a Truth of very
great Importance, and many Ways useful.

If now it be demanded of me (as by some it has been) what the Advantages are
of insisting so much on the Hypothesis I endeavor to defend; and what will be
gained by it, if the Truth of it were granted to me; I unto this answer, Much
every Way.

I presume there is no Truth that is asserted in Scripture, and which can be
well defended by the Oracles of God, but what may have very profitable
Inferences or Conclusions drawn from it: And much more may this be asserted
concerning a Truth so abundantly affirmed in the Gospel of our Salvation, and
interwoven with all the Parts of it, as that is which I suppose I have now
sufficiently defended.

I shall, therefore, now proceed to instance in some of the Advantages we gain
by admitting of it.; and to show what useful Inferences it yields to us; and
this I will endeavor in the following Chapters.

CHAP. I. THE FIRST USE of the Truth asserted, is, That it gives Light to many
Texts of Scripture, which cannot be well understood without it.
To instance in some of them.

1. THERE are several Texts of Scripture, in which it is plainly affirmed, That
Jesus Christ died for all. Heb. 2.9. That by the Grace of God he should taste
Death for every Man. 1 John 2.2. He is the Propitiation for our Sins: And not
for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World; with which that well
agrees, Isai. 53.6. All we like Sheep have gone astray: We have turned every
one to his own Way, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all. We
have also the same Thing, in effect, asserted by our Savior himself, John
3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. I know
that many of our Divines endeavor to give such an Exposition of these Places
and others like them, as to reconcile them to their own Opinion of Christ's
dying for the Elect only: But my Design is not to consider the Weight and
Strength of what they say to this Purpose. However, I know that all they can do
or say, does not satisfy me and many others. And several who were no Arminians
have endeavored to maintain this as a sacred Truth, That Jesus Christ died for
the whole World of Mankind; who yet have maintained the Necessity of special
Grace, in order to the Conversion and Salvation of the Elect of God: And with
these I agree, supposing they mean, (1) That none will ever savingly believe in
Christ, and so obtain eternal Life, for whom God does no more than he does for
those that never so believe. (2) That without an Act of his special Grace, and
of his mighty Power, such as none but the Elect have experience of, none are,
or ever can be, regenerated or born again: But if those who go this Way deny
that any besides the Elect have that Grace given them, by the Help whereof they
may comply with, or perform, the Condition on which Salvation is offered to
them, not being without a Power by which they may do it, I can by no Means
agree with them. By Grace I here intend such as is meant, and to be understood
in 2 Cor. 6.1. and Isai. 5.4.

To what End can we suppose Jesus Christ should lay down his Life to purchase
Salvation for any, so far forth that they might be saved on some Condition
proposed to them in the Gospel, (as he has indeed done, John 3.16.1 John 4.9,
10.) without a Supposition of their having Power given them to perform that
Condition? What Advantage has any Sinner by this, that he may be saved, if he
believe and repent, or perform such or such a Condition, when he neither is,
nor ever will be, enabled to perform it? For such must as certainly and
unavoidably perish, as they should have done if Christ had not died for them. I
therefore suppose their Principles to be altogether inconsistent, who hold,
that Christ died for all, and yet deny that God gives Power to any besides the
Elect, to perform the Condition on which Salvation is offered to all, unto whom
the Gospel is preached. And I would here ask any One who thinks he can
vindicate this Principle of Dr. TWISSE in particular, That Christ died for all,
i. e. to purchase Salvation for them on this Condition, that they believe and
repent, who yet hold, as I suppose he did, That the Faith and Repentance to
this End required of Sinners is of that Kind which is given in Regeneration;
and which no Man can have 'till he is born again; (because none but the
Regenerate can believe and repent) how these Things can consist one with the
other?

But now, on the Hypothesis which I have endeavored to defend, Christ not only
obtained this Advantage for Sinners, that they might be saved on the Condition
of the gospel Covenant, but also obtained that Grace for them, by which they
should be enabled to perform that Condition. But then the Condition required,
according to my Principles, is not this, that they savingly change their own
Hearts, and become regenerate Saints; but that they, in a suitable Manner, seek
to God to do this for them; and yet in such a Manner, as with his Help they
may, before they are new Creatures.

And thus I account for what is affirmed in those Texts of Scripture, where
Jesus Christ is said to have died for all Men, without denying what is plainly
asserted in them: And I am glad that on my Principles I am not obliged to
depart from the literal Sense of such Texts.

Again 2. There are in several Texts of Scripture, so far as I can see, as
plain conditional Promises of converting Grace, as can in Words well be
expressed; some of which Places I have already considered and vindicated in
this Discourse; as Prove. 1.22, 23. and Chap. 2.3, 4, 5. Jam. 1.5. Luke 11.13.
and others. But such as are fixed in this Principle, That God has not promised
to give his holy Spirit to any Person, on Condition of his doing any Thing that
is possible for a Sinner to do, before he is actually converted, and endowed
with the Grace of Regeneration, seem to me to be at a great Loss how to account
for what is said in several such Promises. Thus when God promises to give true
spiritual Wisdom to those that cry after it, lifting up their Voices for it,
seeking it as Silver, and searching for it as for hid Treasure, as in Prove.
2.2, 3, 4, 5. before mentioned; the Meaning of this Place is commonly said to
be, that God will give more spiritual Wisdom to such as are already spiritually
wise, which such Seekers are already supposed to be. Now this Place thus
explained, is not allowed to be a Direction to such as are yet destitute of
saving Grace or Holiness, (the Wisdom intended in it) what Course they should
take, in order to their obtaining it; (which yet is the plain Design of the
Words from Verse 1. to the 6th.) but only to show such as are already
spiritually wise, how they may become yet wiser.

For my Part I dare not so expound this Place, and several others like it; and
I believe none else would, were it not for a prae-conceived Opinion, that a
Principle of saving Grace is not on any Condition offered and promised to
Sinners: Which Opinion I know no solid Ground for. Whereas on the other Hand,
on the Principle by me received, all such Places may be taken and understood
according to the plain and literal Sense of them; and we need not be put to any
Difficulty to account for the Meaning of them: And I can assure my Reader, I
have met with pious and learned Men, who have declared to me, what Difficulty
they have been put to about the Meaning of such Places; and who have declared
their Satisfaction in the same Account of them that has now been given.

I shall instance in one other Sort of Texts, which, I think, cannot be
understood without allowing my Hypothesis to be true: I mean such Texts as
require Perseverance, as a necessary Condition of Man's Salvation, or such
special Mercies as imply Salvation in them, to such as persevere, Matthew. 10.22.
and Chap. 24.13. He that endures to the End, shall be saved. We have the same
in Effect, Luke 13.13. The same Thing is implied in Hosea 6.3. Gal. 6.9. and I
doubt not also in Heb. 10.25, -- 30. I cannot think that the Meaning of these,
and such like Texts, is this, That if such as are Believers, in the strictest
Sense of this Word, i. e. such as are born of God, and become new Creatures, do
not fall from their Faith, and become Unbelievers, and again Unregenerate, then
they shall inherit eternal Life. Such as these have sufficient Assurance given,
that they are in no Danger of such an Apostasy, as appears in John 5.24. Romans
8.1. Jer. 32.38, 39, 40. John 10.27, 28, 29. 1 Pet. 1.2, -- 5. and in many
other Places, as those with whom I dispute do acknowledge. Calvinists maintain
that justifying Faith, by which the Elect of God receive Jesus Christ and all
his saving Benefits, is but one Act; that a Sinner does no sooner begin to
believe with Faith of that Kind, than he is perfectly justified and firmly
entitled to all the everlasting Mercies which are offered in the new Covenant;
and that in this Covenant, even his Perseverance, and his being made perfect in
Holiness, is firmly promised, so that there is no Possibility that any such
should fall away and eternally perish.

Now, how incongruous would it be to tell Persons in such a State as this, that
they shall be saved, if they do not fall from Grace, relapsing again into that
Estate, which they were in before they were born of the Spirit! I think nothing
could be more absurd. I therefore conclude, that the mentioned Texts can have
no such Meaning. They cannot be intended as Cautions to regenerate Persons,
against a total and final Apostasy, they having already fully complied with the
Terms, on which the whole of their Salvation is secured to them, in the
Covenant of Grace.

But now, on my Hypothesis, there may be a fair Account given of all such Texts
as these mentioned: For, according to that, I freely acknowledge a Person may
have the same Kind of Faith which is the Condition of the new Covenant, and yet
be still in an unregenerate and unjustified State; because the Covenant I speak
of does not only comprise in it the Condition of it, Men's beginning to act
such a Kind of Faith: So that believing for a Moment should be sufficient to
entitle the Sinner to the same Mercies of that Covenant: This, according to the
Tenor of the new Covenant, will not answer the End: But the Condition of it
includes this also in it, that the Sinner that would be saved in the Way it
prescribes, must persevere and go on to believe, during the whole of that Term
of Time which God, according to his good Will and Pleasure, has allotted for his
Probation, in order to his securing his eternal Happiness; which how long it
may be, God does not ordinarily reveal to those unto whom he grants it, but
keeps it in his own Power; yet will he be mindful of his Covenant, and take
Care to fulfill that Word of his, on which he has given us Reason to depend,
Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due Season we shall reap,
if we faint not. With which Words many other Texts very well agree, such as
those last mentioned, and Luke 18. Beginning. And then God fulfills such
Promises unto those who wait for his Salvation, when he pardons their Sins,
and pours out his holy Spirit on them, as in Acts 2.39. Prove. 1.23. Luke
11.13.

CHAP. II. THE SECOND USE of the Truth maintained, That it renders the Offers
of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel, very plain and intelligible.
IT is very necessary that the Gospel, and the Offers of it made to sinful Men,
should be very plain, and easily understood. Mankind in their lapsed State,
unto whom the Offers of Salvation by a Redeemer are here supposed to be made,
are in a State of Darkness. That is their Character, Ephesians. 4.18. Having their
Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the
Ignorance that is in them, because of the Blindness of their Heart. They are
not only exceeding backward to believe, but are also dull of understanding the
Things that belong to their eternal Peace and Welfare, however clearly they are
proposed to them: How then should they understand them, if they are not clearly
and intelligibly proposed? And it seems to me, that the common Way of Preaching
the Gospel, is somewhat defective in (...) ^espect The Way is not made so plain
as it should be. Now I hope that if the Doctrine I plead for be admitted as
true, the Way of Salvation by a Redeemer will be made much the plainer.

There are two great Difficulties that the apostate Children of Men labor
under; one of them is that State of Guilt, in which they are, in Respect of
which they are all, without Exception, Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Gal. 3.10.
The other is that Corruption of their Nature, unto which, by the Fall, they
have been made subject; and which in the Way of Propagation, has been conveyed
from Parent to Child, even to all descending from Adam, in the Way of natural
Generation, from Age to Age, ever since the Beginning of the World: For Adam,
our moral Head and Representative, having sinned against God in eating the
forbidden Fruit, God was so provoked with him that he took his Holy Spirit from
him, and deprived him of his Image, as was declared in Part I. Chap. I. And all
his Posterity ever since, being liable to the penal Consequences of his
Apostasy, have been brought into the World in the like miserable State, with
Natures depraved as his was. Hence such Texts as these, Psalm. 51.5. and 58.3.
also Isai. 48.8. Romans 5.12. and Verse 19. Now while this Corruption remains,
Men are incapable of Happiness by a Sight of God, and Communion with him, as
the Scriptures abundantly declare, John 3.3. and Verse 5. with which Places
that well agrees, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. and Verse 14, 15. and Matthew. 5.8. Nor can
such unclean Persons enter into the Kingdom of Glory, Rev. 21.27.

Now, that the Gospel may afford sufficient Relief to Sinners with Relation to
both these Difficulties which they are under, it seems needful it should afford
a Remedy in Respect of both; and I suppose it does so, by offering Deliverance
from one, as well as the other of them, without which it is impossible such
miserable Sinners should be made happy.

Let us now consider, whether this be really done in the common Way of
Preaching the Gospel; and whether it be not done in the Way which, according to
my Principles, it ought to be.

First then, according to the common and allowed Way of Preaching the Gospel,
there is only supposed to be an Offer of Pardon or Justification made to
Sinners, with such other Benefits as are supposed to follow thereon; such as
Peace with God, Adoption, Growth in Grace, Perseverance in it, and eternal
Glory in the heavenly World: But there is no Offer supposed to be made to
Sinners, of Regeneration, or a new Heart and a new Spirit, or of the restoring
God's Image to them; which is a Mercy they as much need as the others
mentioned. It is supposed that God does not, on any Terms, offer to do this for
them: Nay, it is earnestly disp^^^d that he does not. They are, indeed, told
that God may (...) for them, and that there are Reasons for them to h^pe for
th^^; but conditional Promise they have none, on which they may ground such
Hope: Nor can they do any Thing, but sin and provoke God, 'till this be first
done for them; and so, I think, nothing that has any Tendency to prevail with
God to grant them this Mercy.

And whereas such Sinners are frequently said to have an Offer of Salvation
made to them, this Salvation must still be understood to comprise no more in
it, than the Benefits mentioned in the last Paragraph. To be sure it is not
supposed to imply the Grace of Regeneration in it; which I take to be one of
the most eminent Parts of the Salvation of sinful Men.

Let us a little consider how Justification, Adoption, etc. may be said to be
offered on the Hypothesis I oppose, where there is no Offer supposed to be made
of the Grace of Regeneration. According to the Scheme opposed by me, the Offer
of Forgiveness, etc. made to Sinners in the Gospel, is made on Condition that
Sinners believe on the Son of God; but the Faith in this Case required is
supposed to be an Act of a regenerate Soul, and cannot be exercised by any
Person 'till he is first born of the Spirit, and become a new Creature; which
Grace the Sinner is not set in any certain Way to obtain: So that there is
supposed to be an Offer of Salvation on a Condition which the Sinner is under a
physical Impossibility of performing, 'till he be created anew, and this none
can do for him, but God; and he does not on any Terms offer to do it, if the
Doctrine I oppose be true. Such an Offer (if any such there were) I confess,
seems not to me to have any Kindness in it. If a rich Man should offer a sick
Man to give him a fair and large Estate, on a Condition which none but a Man in
Health can perform; and which the rich Man being a Physician, could only
restore to him, but would not put him in a Way to recover, would the sick Man
in this Case think himself much obliged to him for such an Offer, especially if
he never did the Thing for him? I think he could not have much Reason for it.
Yea, I think that though there would be the Show of an Offer, yet really there
would be none.

If it be here said, that Sinners are required to endeavor to believe in Jesus
Christ, and they do not know but that God may help them so to do; I desire to
know how an unregenerate Man may endeavor to believe in such a Manner, as he
is assured he is under a physical Impossibility of doing. I have no Idea of a
Way to try to do that which I have no Power to do any Thing toward, and a
Thing in my present State utterly impossible for me to do. An unregenerate Man
may pray to God to give him Grace to believe; and to do so is his present Duty;
and I believe in his Power: But I would be informed how an unregenerate Person
should try to do that which he is sure he cannot? When our Savior commanded
the Man with the withered Hand, to stretch it forth, Matthew. 12.13. he did not
command him to do something which he had no Power to do. The Meaning of the
Command was, that he should attempt to do it, i. e. by moving his Arm, or Parts
contiguous to his Hand that was withered, which no Doubt the Man had a Power of
doing; and if he had failed in his Attempt, he had not therein been disobedient
to Christ's Command. But I suppose the Command implied a Promise of necessary
Aid, if Obedience to it were regularly endeavored.

Thus, I think it evident, that the Gospel being understood according to the
Supposition I am dissatisfied with, is far from being plain and intelligible.

But, Secondly, let us consider on the other Hand, whether on my Hypothesis,
the Offers of the Gospel are not more plain and easy to be understood; and so
better accommodated to the State of a sinful World, to whom they are supposed
to be made.

According as I explain the Gospel of the Grace of God, the Salvation offered
in it comprises all that is necessary on God's Part, in order to the
everlasting Happiness of those, to whom the Grace of God is offered. God is
willing to give Grace and Glory; and no good Thing will he withold from them
who humbly seek him for his Salvation. The Salvation he offers comprises in it,
not only the free Pardon of all our Sins, and the Justification of our Persons
in his Sight, through that most perfect and everlasting Righteousness, which
Christ has already brought in, as in Dan. 9.24. a Righteousness ready at Hand,
to be imputed to all those that believe in him who is the Author of it; and is
actually imputed to all that ever have believed in him in the Manner which the
Gospel requires; and shall be also imputed to as many as shall hereafter
believe in him, Romans 4.23, 24. The Salvation offered does, I say, not only
comprise in it the Justification of them that believe, by the Righteousness of
Christ imputed to them; but also as a Consequence of such Imputation, the
Renovation of their Natures by the special Grace of God, restoring the Image of
God, which by Reason of Sin we had lost; and which could never be restored,
were not Sinners first absolved from their Guilt, as I have abundantly proved.
In order to their receiving such Benefits there is something required of them,
Namely, That they believe, repent, and seek the Lord, etc. which may not be
understood of such Actions, for Kind, as follow our Justification and
Regeneration, but such as, in Order of Nature, go before the same, as I have
formerly showed. And thus the Gospel is plain and intelligible, and the Grace
of God shining forth in it, very mavelous, God in it not requiring the
Exercise of that Grace, which he does not give, but which Sinners do receive
from him; and which he requires them not to receive in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1.

CHAP. III. THE THIRD USE of the Doctrine insisted on, That it gives us a very
pleasant and endearing View and Prospect of the unparalled Love of God, in
finding out, providing and revealing such a Way of Salvation as that made known
in the Gospel.
I HAVE proved, That there is a conditional Offer of Salvation made to Sinners
in the Gospel; that the Grace given in Regeneration, is comprised in the
Salvation offered; that, consequently, that Grace cannot be contained or
implied in the Condition of the new Covenant, or in the Terms on which God
offers to save Sinners; that, therefore, these Terms are such, that Men need
not be regenerated or born again, in order to their complying with them; but
may, through the Grace of God granted to such as are still in an unregenerate
State, be complied with; and that Sinners cannot, while they enjoy the Grace of
God granted to them in and with the Gospel, truly plead their utter Inability
to comply with the most gracious Terms of the new Covenant.

And from these Things which I now take for granted, it plainly follows, that
God does in the Gospel put Sinners, to whom the Offer of it is made, on a new
and second Trial, on Terms in their Nature possible to be performed by them, in
order to their eternal Happiness; so that if they again miscarry, it is because
they will, and not because they have no Power to come to Jesus Christ, our
glorious Redeemer, for eternal Life and Salvation.

Now, what unparalled Love is this to self-destroying Sinners, to whom God
may truly say, as in Hosea 13.9. Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self; but
in me is thine Help. This Love of God is very much celebrated in the holy
Scriptures. Give me Leave to recite a few of the Passages wherein it is so.
John 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. 1
John 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him.
Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the Propitiation for our Sins. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. God -- has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of
Reconciliation; to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us
the Word of Reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled unto
God. Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye
would not! Romans 24. Or despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness, and
Forbearance, and Long-suffering; not knowing that the Goodness of God leads
thee to Repentance. Hosea 11.4. I drew them with Cords of a Man, with Bands of
Love; and I was to them as they that take off the Yoke on their Jaws; and I
laid Meat before them.

I am not ashamed to say, (if I were I should be ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, contrary to Romans 1.16.) that the Love of God thus manifested toward
Sinners, has not a Relation to the Elect only, (though principally unto them) but
extends it self to the whole World, as in the mentioned John 3.16. and in 1
John 2.2. Mark 16.15, 16. and 2 Cor. 5.19. as I will, if I am put upon it, and
God gives me Liberty, more fully show.

They are greatly mistaken who think that the Goodness and Kindness of God
toward Mankind appearing, is only to be discovered and judged of, by what does
in the Event befall them, and not at all by the Nature and Tendency of what he
does for them. If God affords unto Sinners such Means and Aids as, according to
the Nature of Things, are sufficient to put them in a Way to obtain eternal
Life, they using proper Endeavors to that End: He therein displays his
Kindness and Good Will toward them, what ever the Issue be with Respect to
them. Nor will God's fore-knowing that these or those will neglect or
misimprove the Means and Advantages with which he favors them, alter the
Nature of the Thing, and make them no Benefits, which otherwise would have been
such; if it would do so, it would be impossible that any should receive real
Benefit who finally perish; for it is impossible that God should not know how
they will improve, or rather misimprove them: And if God might not justly
punish Sinners, either for not doing what they should, or doing what they
should not, because he fore-knew what they would do, and what they would not,
it would follow, that he could never justly punish any for Sin, because he
could not be ignorant of what Men would do or omit, before such Things were
done or omitted.

Now since we must judge of the Goodness of God to Mankind, by the Nature and
Tendency of what he does, and not only by what eventually befalls them, we must
acknowledge the great Goodness of God unto Sinners, even to those of them that
shall at last perish; especially this may be affirmed on the Hypothesis I
defend: And there is no Doubt but that God intends to gain unto himself a large
Revenue of Glory, on the Account of what he does for them, who shall eternally
perish for their Sins, as well as for those whom he will eternally save: And in
the mean Time, those who never will attain eternal Life, are bound to give
Thanks and Praise to God, for putting them in a Way in which they may attain
it, if the Fault be not their own.

And it is a great Sin in God's own People, if they do not confess to his
Glory, that he deals very kindly by those, who, through their own Fault and
Negligence, fail of the Grace of God, and fall short of eternal Life. The
Obstinacy and Unbelief of Sinners who despise his Goodness, and tread under
Foot the Blood of his dear Son, whom he sent to save them, ought not to make us
think meanly of what he does for them; but we should admire and magnify his
Grace on the Account of it. And I confess I cannot but wonder that many who
treat of the Kindness and Compassion of God toward perishing Sinners, restrain
all their Discourse about it, to what he has done for the Elect, as if others
were no Ways concerned in it; which the Scriptures seem not to do, as appears
in the Texts last above quoted, and in many others beside them, as in Isai.
53.6. All we like Sheep have gone astray: We have turned every one to his own
Way, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all. Hos. 13.9. 2 Pet.
3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise (as some Men count Slackness)
but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance. Can any possibly think that these Places and
others like them, may be understood only of the Elect? and that particularly in
Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all your Transgressions whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit: For why will ye die,
O House of Israel.

CHAP. IV. THE FOURTH USE of the Truth insisted on, viz. The Encouragement
given to convinced and awakened Sinners, to seek earnestly to GOD for his
special Grace and Mercy.
IF it be a Truth, as I think it evidently appears to be, That God has in his
holy Word, made many conditional Promises to the Unregenerate, of bestowing his
special and eternal Mercies (the Grace of Regeneration not excepted) on all
such as do, in the Way by him appointed, seriously and diligently seek to him
for them; what great Encouragement is there herein to such convinced and
awakened Sinners, to comply with the Method proposed in the Gospel, in order to
their obtaining these Mercies? There be many of the sinful Children of Men too
insensible of their miserable State by Nature; and these had need have the
Terrors of the Lord set before them, lest they should remain insensible, and so
never look out for a Remedy, but perish in their Sins: But the Case is not so
with all: There are some who have been bro't to a Sight of the woeful State they
are in by Nature; and those need all the Encouragement to seek to God for
Mercy, that can, according to the Tenor of the new Covenant, be given them.

I suppose it will not be denied, that Sinners in an unregenerate State, are
sometimes greatly awakened, and in some Sort humbled, under a deep Sense of
their wretched State by Nature. The Spirit of God sent to convince the World of
Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment, does so set home the Terrors of the broken
Covenant of Works upon their Souls, that they see themselves in such Danger of
Damnation, that they are put upon enquiring, what they shall do to be saved, as
in Acts 2.37. and Chap. 16.30. And now they desire to flee from the Wrath to
come; and it may be are convinced that they cannot be saved by any
Righteousness of their own; being sensible that in their present State of Sin
and Death, they cannot perform any Actions truly holy; and that, if they could,
they should not thereby deserve any Favor at the ^^nd of God; and that they
are therefore wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked: And now they would
be glad to see a Door of Hope opened to them: And hereupon having had the
Gospel preached to them, they begin to conceive that there is some Hopes for
them, and some Encouragement given them, and upon this they begin to cry to God
for Mercy. But all this nothwithstanding, they are in a State of Nature still,
and have not yet attained the Faith of God's Elect, and the Remission of their
Sins: Or may we venture to tell them the Bitterness of Death is past with them,
being already passed from Death to Life, and that there is no Condemnation for
them, as being in Christ Jesus? John 5.24. and Romans 8.1. If we should tell them
so, they would be Fools if they believed us, without any better Evidence of a
State of Grace, than any Thing that is above expressed. However, it will be
acknowledged, that these ought to be encouraged to seek to God in the Way of
Duty and Well-doing, for his everlasting Mercies, and in particular for the
regenerating Influences of his holy Spirit.

And here the Question is, What Encouragement may these have from the Word of
God, to seek to him for the mentioned Favors? Now some must on their
Principles say to them, God calls you to seek to him for his saving Grace, but
has not, indeed, promised that he will grant you the Desires of your Souls
herein; but it may be he will do so; for he is very gracious and merciful, and
does bestow his Grace on many that seek to him for it; and you do not know but
he may do so for you, as well as for others: Though it may be a Truth, that after
all your Strivings and Seeking, you may fail of the Grace of God, and perish
for ever: But there is Room for you to hope, that God will bestow his Grace
upon you, if you diligently seek him for it, and persevere in so doing: But
however you cannot be sure of this, there being no Promise of it in the Word of
God.

But on the Hypothesis I advance, we may say to such awakened Sinners as are
before mentioned, who also have begun to seek the Lord; Go on, poor Souls, cry
to God Day and Night, and cease not: Work out your own Salvation, and do it
with Fear and Trembling, lest through your own Negligence you fail of the Grace
of God, and perish for ever. Consider how ready God is to work in you both to
will and to do according to his own good Will and Pleasure. You need not doubt
of his Mercy to you, if you persevere in seeking him. He has not said to the
Seed of Jacob, (who prayed earnestly and prevailed, Genesis Chap. 36.) seek ye my
Face in vain. Isai. 45.19.
Therefore never doubt; for ye shall in due Time reap, if ye faint not. Gal.
6.9.
Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you, etc. Matthew.
7.7, 8.
God will certainly give his holy Spirit to them that ask him. Luke 11.13.
Then shall ye know, if ye follow on to know the Lord: His going forth is
prepared as the Morning; he shall come upon us as the Rain, as the former and
latter Rain upon the Earth. Hosea 6.3.
If thou criest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding; if
thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid Treasure; then
shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord; and find the Knowledge of God.
Prove. 23.5.


Thus may we treat awakened Sinners on my Principles. Now, is there not a great
Advantage in having a Foundation in the Word of God, thus to treat those that
desire Encouragement to seek God's Face? Has not a poor Sinner on this
Hypothesis, greater Encouragement to seek the Lord, than on their's, who only
hold, that there are Grounds of Hope that God will convert and save those who
earnestly seek him for his converting Grace; but deny that he has promised that
he will do so? Surely this is an Advantage that ought not to be lightly
esteemed.

CHAP. V. THE FIFTH USE. The Truth maintained in this Essay, takes from all
those who refuse the great Salvation offered in the Gospel, any Room to excuse
themselves.
THAT Sinners who neglect their Duty, and the great Salvation offered to them
in the Gospel, are very apt to endeavor to excuse themselves in the Neglect
whereof they are guilty, is too evident to need Time and Pains to be spent in
the Proof of it. For Satisfaction as to this, we need only turn to the Parable
of the great Supper, Luke 14.18, -- 23.

And so far as my Observation reaches, there is Nothing by Sinners more
frequently pleaded as an Excuse for their wicked Neglect of the Salvation
offered, and Duties required of them; than their utter Inability to comply with
the Terms of the Gospel, and perform the Conditions of the new Covenant. They
plead, that it is not in their Power to believe and repent, and to call upon
God in a Manner acceptable to him: They say, that such as are still in an
unregenerate State are wicked Persons, and if they should attempt it, all that
they could do, would be an Abomination to the Lord, and would but provoke him.
And indeed I know not very well how to answer such Objections, on the
Hypothesis I oppose; for if all that it is possible for the Unregenerate to do,
is, as we are taught, truly and properly Sin; and we do but provoke and offend
the most High God in the best of our Actions, while we are in that State, it is
not easy, if possible, for such Sinners to see that their Attempts to seek the
Lord, will (...) to turn to their Advantage.

But now, if the Case be otherwise than is by (...), and even as I have
maintained it to be, namely, That the Condition on which Salvation is offered
to Sinners, does not consist in any Act or Acts, to be performed by them after
they are born of the Spirit, and become new Creatures; but in such a Kind of
Faith, Repentance, and Seeking of God, as convinced and awakened Sinners, though
unregenerate, are capable of, during the Day of their Visitation, while God is
striving with them by his Word and Spirit; then the seeming Strength of the
Objection vanishes away, and there does not appear to be any Force in it at
all.

For according to my Hypothesis, those who go about to excuse their Unbelief
and Impenitency, from a pretended utter Inability to do the Things required of
them, ought to be told plainly, that this Plea of their's is utterly false, and
that they speak falsely in saying, that God in this requires of them what they
are not able to perform. If it be said, that they cannot do it without Help
from God, I answer, that God does not require them to do it without Help from
him: He actually affords them the Aids necessary in order to their beginning to
do what he requires; and is ready to afford them more Help, if they need and
desire it. I doubt not but so much is intended in Jam. 4.8, 9, 10. Draw nigh
unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you: Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners, and
purify your Hearts, ye Double-minded. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: Let
your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and your Joy into Heaviness. Humble your
selves in the Sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.

Ye unregenerate Sinners, if ye say ye cannot do this, by the Help of that
Grace which God either gives or offers you, ye belie the Lord, as the Phrase
is, Jer. 5.12. Our Lord upbraided the unbelieving Jews that they would not come
to him, that they might have Life, John 5.40. They could, I acknowledge, have
truly said, that they could not do this unless God drew them; but they could
not truly say, that God drew them not. He drew them with the Cords of a Man,
and with the Bands of his Love, as in Hos. 10.4. The Goodness of God leads
even those unto Repentance, who after the Hardness and Impenitency of their
Hearts, treasure up unto themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.4, 5. A Man cannot, I
confess, become a new Creature, unless God creates him anew, giving a new Heart
to him: But they speak falsely who say they cannot seek to God for the Mercy,
'till he has first granted the same to them. Corazin and Bethsaida, as well as
Tire and Sidon, might have repented in Dust and Ashes, though God had not first
given them new Hearts. Matthew. 11.21, 22. Nineveh did so, Jonah 3.^. 6.

CHAP. VI. THE SIXTH USE. The Truth pleaded for being allowed, does, without
any Disadvantage to the calvinian Scheme, remove out of the Way the greatest
Difficulty that attends it; and renders it the more easy to be received and
defended.
ON the Hypothesis pleaded for in this Discourse, I conceive some Grounds to
hope for a better Accommodation of some of the Points in Controversy, betwixt
those who are commonly called Calvinists, and such as are called Arminians: At
least I hope that if my Hypothesis might be admitted, the Way would be thereby
paved for the contending Parties to come to a better Understanding of some (at
least one) of the most important Articles controverted betwixt them; and this
without the least Damage to the Substance of that Hypothesis which Calvinists
endeavor to support, against those who are for the Arminian Scheme, in which
we think some of the Doctrines of Grace are not well asserted.

Many of those by whom several of the Arminian Doctrines seem to be something
favored, appear to me to be Persons of great Seriousness; and I cannot think
that the Opposition which they sometimes make against some Things in the Scheme
by Calvinists pleaded for, arises from an Enmity in their Hearts against the
Grace of God; but rather, lest while Men maintain the Sovereignty of God, in
the Affair of Man's Salvation, in the Manner that many Calvinists do, they
should thereby reflect some Dishonor on the Attributes of his Justice and
Holiness, the doing of which they seem to dread. However, I believe it will be
safest for us to be as charitable as may be, in our Opinion of such Persons;
and that we take Care not to make the Difference more and greater than we need.

Now, suppose the Hypothesis which I have advanced and pleaded for, be a Truth,
I hope our owning and allowing of it would, as I have said, render several
other Things contained in the Scheme maintained by the Orthodox, the more easy
to be admitted by such as at present seem to be afraid to own and embrace them.
And that I may make what I here say the more probable, I will give some
Instances, in which I apprehend Things might prove as I hope and desire they
may.

The first of these is the Case of Original Sin. Calvinists generally maintain,
that the Guilt of Adam's first and great Transgression, has fallen on all his
Posterity; and that they are all thereby become naturally Children of Wrath,
and Heirs of Death. They hold also, that on the Apostasy of our first Parents
from God, they lost his Image, in which they were created; and their Natures
were so depraved, that they were thereby rendered incapable of performing any
Actions truly gracious and holy, and as such acceptable to the Lord; and so
were incapable of Communion with him, and the Enjoyment of him, without the
Pardon of Sin and renewing Grace. They also maintain that in this deplorable
State all the Offspring of the first Adam are involved.

And hereupon they further affirm, that before Men's Regeneration, they are
utterly incapable to accept the Terms, or perform the Conditions, required of
Sinners in the Gospel, in Order to their Salvation; because they suppose the
Gospel in this Case requires something, the doing whereof supposes Men first
born again, and become new Creatures; which, they say, few ever attain to: Nor
have Sinners any Offer of this Grace made to them. Now, if it be thus, thinks
the Person inclining to Arminianism; (and who is there but by Nature is not
inclined to Error?) if this be the Doctrine of original Sin, and the
Consequences following on it, I cannot, I will not receive it, 'till I can see
such Evidences for it, as will compel me to yield my Assent thereunto. And now
scarce any Evidence will convince such Persons that a Doctrine is true, that is
so hard to be digested.

But now let such Dissenters from the calvinian Doctrines be told, that the
Doctrine of original Sin is indeed a great Truth; and that the same may be
defended, being duly stated and understood; but that it is true also, that God
had a Design of glorifying his Grace and Mercy, in the Redemption of Mankind
when fallen into a State of Sin; and that for this End, God sent his Son into
the World so to die for all Men, that they might be saved on the Terms of a new
Covenant, which Terms are not such as they are not able to comply with, by the
Help of God's Grace afforded to them, nor such that they must be savingly
converted or born again, before, and in order to, their Performance of them;
but such as through God's Help, by his Word and Spirit, they may come up to in
their present State; and so obtain Deliverance from Sin and Death, if it be not
their own Fault in refusing the Mercies offered to them. If these Truths are
owned and allowed, I think many People would not be so averse to the Doctrine
of original Sin as they now seem to be: For thus the Gospel proposes a Remedy
against it, to every Person afflicted with the Sense of it, inasmuch as it
tells every Sinner how he may come to have his Nature renewed, and the Image of
God restored in him; and that the Condition unto this End required of him, is
not such as a Person in a State of Nature cannot by God's Help perform.

Secondly, Another Point which I here intend is that of Conversion or
Regeneration: In this I think Calvinists and Arminians differ greatly.
Calvinists (at least many of them) hold, that true saving Conversion, which
they also call Regeneration, is a great Change wrought in the Soul of a Sinner
by the Spirit of God, whereby he has a new Blass or Disposition given him. By
this, according to them, the l^st Image of God is restored to a Sinner: Of
carnal he is hereby made spiritual, having a new Heart given to him, and a new
Spirit put within him, as in Ezekiel. 36.26. And this they think is an
instantaneous Change; and that the Soul is passive in it, having no Hand in the
working of it; but that it is wholly a Work of God by his Holy Spirit, creating
Men anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works, as in Ephesians. 2.10. Psalm. 51.10. John
3.8. and Chap. 1.13. Ephesians. 2.19, 20. and many other Places.

Add hereunto, that, according to Calvinists, Sinners can do no Actions that
are spiritually good, or truly holy, 'till this Change be first wrought in
them; and consequently, it is impossible, (as they think) that any Sinner
should perform the Condition on which Salvation is offered to him, 'till he is
first converted and born of the Spirit, as is above expressed. And they further
think, (some of them at least) that God has no where offered or promised in his
Word, on any Condition whatsoever, that he will work such a Change in any
Sinner's Soul: And yet if any Sinner does not believe with such a Kind of Faith
as can only be exercised by one already so converted, he shall be more severely
punished, than if he had never had any Offer of Salvation made to him.

Now those who are inclined to Arminianism think this Doctrine is so harsh they
cannot endure it: Nor does it seem to them any Way agreeable to the infinite
Goodness and Mercy of God, made known and revealed in the Gospel. And then such
seek to find some Flaws in the Doctrine mentioned; and what most readily offers
it self to their Mind is, that those who thus hold are mistaken with Respect to
the Nature of Conversion; and that Conversion or Regeneration is no such Thing,
as they imagine it to be.

The Nature of Man (think they) is not so corrupted, as to need such a mighty
Work of the Spirit of God, in order to the changing of it. The Ministry of the
Word, they think, and those Motions and Convictions of God's Spirit, which he
affords to Sinners under the Gospel, are sufficient to work all the Change in
them that is necessary in order to their eternal Happiness: And what is talked
of more than this, is a mere Fiction of some Men's Brains, and has no
Foundation in the Word of God, on which it can be built.

But unto such as these I say, according to my Hypothesis, there is indeed a
great Mistake relating to the Matter under Consideration; but it does not lie,
as they imagine, in the Doctrine of Regeneration by Calvinists maintained.
Sinners need by Conversion or Regeneration, such a Change as they hold
necessary. The Depravation of their Natures by original Sin, renders such a
Change indispensibly needful, as our Savior himself teaches, John 3.3, -- 8.
and as is in many other Places of Scripture manifested.

But the Mistake lies in this, that it is not truly supposed and maintained,
that the Condition required of Sinners in the Gospel, in order to their
Salvation, is, that they believe and repent with a Kind of Faith and
Repentance, of which no Sinner can be the Subject, who is not first born of
God, and so a new Creature; and consequently in a State of Salvation, before
ever he exercises such Faith and Repentance: When indeed, God's giving us that
Grace whereof such Faith and Repentance is the Fruit and Exercise, is his
saving us; not that whereby we are enabled and disposed to perform the
Condition required of us. No: The Condition required of us, is, that we,
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked as we are, apply our
selves to Jesus Christ, for Gold tried in the Fire, (true Grace) that we may be
rich; for white Raiment, (his perfect Righteousness) that we may be clothed,
and that the Shame of our Nakedness do not appear; and for Eye Salve, to anoint
our Eyes, that we may see. We must not stay 'till we are renewed and sanctified
by the Spirit of God, before we do this; but out of a Sense of our Misery, make
Haste to Christ to do it for us: And awakened Sinners may, by the Help of that
Grace of God, which they should not receive in vain, do thus. Though their Hearts
are not yet changed by the Grace of Regeneration; yet they may go to him for
that Grace. When God requires this of us, he requires not what is above our
Power, and impossible for us, being furnished with that mentioned Grace of his,
2 Cor. 6.1. Though we cannot regenerate our selves, yet it is not true, that we
cannot apply our selves to Christ to work this great Change in us by his
Spirit. And he invites and requires us thus to do; and has promised, that if we
do, he will not cast us out, John 6.37.

Let this Doctrine be owned and preached among us, to awakened Sinners, though
unsanctified, that we may thereby encourage them to lay hold on God's Mercy;
and it is possible Arminians may then think, that they have far less to cavil
against in our Doctrine of Regeneration, than they should have if this were
denied. I am in Hopes, that if this Truth were duly acknowledged, such as are
disposed to Arminianism among us, would be more inclined to receive our
Doctrine, in such Articles of it as are indeed essential to it.

Thirdly, There is one Point more, which is very essential to the Scheme which
I have endeavored to explain and confirm; which being allowed, and clearly
asserted among us, would have a great Tendency to gain over to us such as lean
toward Arminianism; and make them more favorably inclined toward our
Doctrine: And this is, That God does not either by his Decree, or the Execution
of it, lay a Necessity on any of his Creatures to sin against him. This is one
of the Things, about which the Arminians contend very earnestly with
Calvinists, with Relation to our Doctrine: And though much of what they say on
this Head, is, if I mistake not, very unjust; yet on the other Hand, I am of
Opinion that some Calvinists have said Things with Respect to God's Decree,
which have given too much Occasion of Offense to those who differ in Judgment
from them. If it were granted on our Part, (1) That God does neither in his
Decree, nor in the Execution of it, take away the Liberty of free Agents, such
as Men and Angels are. (2) That when it is said, that God wills or decrees the
Actions of sinful Men, this must not be understood of an effective Decree, but
permissive only: The Nature of divine Permission being rightly understood. (3)
That by that efficiency of God, whereby he executes his Decree, he does not by
any Action of his, lay his Creatures under a Necessity of doing Actions wherein
they sin against him: The Concourse of the first Cause with the second, does
not infer this. If these Things were well asserted and explained, it would, I
think, tend much to quiet the Minds of such as are apt to be stumbled at the
Doctrine of Calvinists about them.

What I have briefly said of such a Tendency, in this Essay, is not only
designed as a Testimony to the Truth; but as what I hope, if allowed to be
agreeable thereunto, might in some Measure serve to quiet the tumultuating
Thoughts of those who have entertained such an Opinion of the Doctrine of God's
Decree and Providence, as does not become the infinite Perfections of his
Nature; and who are displeased at such as maintain the Truth in these Points.

CHAP. VII. THE SEVENTH USE of the Doctrine pleaded for. An Exhortation, with
Directions, to such as are yet in a State of Nature, to comply with the Terms
on which Salvation is offered to them in the Gospel.
TO encourage Sinners to endeavor that which they are now exhorted to, has
been the principal End at which I have aimed in the doctrinal Part of this
Essay: And in order hereunto, I think I have plainly showed, that even the
Grace of Regeneration it self is comprised in the Salvation offered; and
consequently not included nor implied in the Condition on which the Offer is
made, nor necessary in order to a Compliance with it; so that for Want of it,
Sinners should have no Power to comply with the Terms of the new Covenant.

It therefore now only remains incumbent on me, that I endeavor to persuade
such as are still in a State of Nature, unregenerate and unjustified, to
endeavor to comply with the Terms on which God offers to save them, i. e. to
justify and regenerate them, etc.

If God offers such a Salvation to Sinners in a conditional Covenant, as I have
well proved he does, they have no Reason to expect it in any other Way, than in
that in which it is thus offered to them. It must needs, therefore, be a Matter
of vast Importance, that those, unto whom this Offer is made, do comply with
the Terms or Conditions on which Salvation is thus offered to them.

That there are in the World many such as this Exhortation is directed to, is
too evident. There are Multitudes whose irreligious and unholy Lives show them
to be of this Number. And besides this, Men may have gone far in the Profession
of Religion, and in the Practice of the external Duties of it; and yet have not
hitherto fulfilled the Conditions of the new Covenant, nor obtained a Right and
Title to the Benefits of it; and if they shall never do this, they will be
exceeding miserable, and that for ever.

But the Misery of such both in Respect of Loss and Sense, is not what I intend
here to enlarge upon, this being very well done by many others.

What I here intend, is to offer some Things by Way of Exhortation and
Direction to those unto whom this Part of my Discourse is directed. Unto such I
then say what here follows.

DIRECTION I.

Consider well what a miserable State you are in before, and until, you have
complied with the Terms of the new Covenant. An unjustified and an unregenerate
State, is a very miserable State indeed. Such, whatever outward Privileges they
may enjoy, are still in a State of Condemnation; and the Wrath of God abides
on them, John 3.18. and Verse 36. Such are also unsanctified and unholy; and so
incapable of the Enjoyment of God, and such Communion with him as true Saints
may enjoy, either in this Life or that to come; and are liable to the Torments
of the Damned, to be suffered in Hell to all Eternity. If you are still in a
State of Nature, this is your Case; and it is necessary that you should be
sensible of it; for if you will not apply your selves in good Earnest to work
out your own Salvation, nor endeavor to perform the Condition of the new
Covenant, no^ indeed so much as enquire what you shall do to be saved, as they
did Acts 2.37. and he in Acts 16.30. you must miserably perish for ever.

Such therefore as are still in an unregenerate State, should meditate Terror,
as in Isai. 33.18. They should consider the Justice and Holiness of God, the
Strictness of his Law, his perfect Knowledge of all that Men do, the Judgment
to come, the Punishment that will be inflicted on all such as die in their
Sins; and that this will be the woeful Case of all that comply not with the
Terms of the new Covenant. By such Considerations they should endeavor to get
a deep Sense of their miserable State by Nature: For while Men say they are
rich, and increased in Goods, and have need of Nothing; and know not that they
are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, as in Rev. 3.17.
they will never follow the Advice given them in the next Words, Verse 18. I
counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may be rich; and
white Raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the Shame of thy Nakedness
do not appear; and anoint thine Eyes with Eye Salve, that thou may see: For
they that are whole, need not the Physician, but they that are sick, Matthew.
9.12.

DIRECTION II. Consider well, and rightly understand, what it is that God
requires of you, in order to your Salvation. Take heed lest you be mistaken in
the Terms of the new Covenant. If you are mistaken in this, the Mistake may be
fatal to you. There are here two Ways in which Persons may be mistaken to their
own Hurt. As (1) by thinking the Terms so low, that Persons may attain to, and
perform what they think is required, and yet never be saved: As when Persons
think an external Reformation will answer the End, without any
Heart-Reformation; and so have no Regard to the inner Man, but content
themselves with such an Amendment of their Lives, that Men cannot accuse them;
but take no Care to do what is required in Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine
Heart from Wickedness, that thou may be saved: How long shall thy vain
Thoughts lodge within thee! And Ezekiel. 18.31. -- Make you a new Heart, and a new
Spirit; for why will ye die, O House of Israel! Joel 2.13. Rent your Hearts,
and not your Garments; and turn to the Lord thy God --. Observe that here is
Heart-Humiliation and Reformation required; yet I do not think that Sinners in
these and such like Texts, are required to regenerate themselves; which never
any Sinner did or will do. There is a Reformation of the Heart which is a Work
very much short of, and inferior (...), the great Work of Regeneration, which
God only can work. Sinners may very much reform and amend their own Hearts, as
well as their external Actions. Such as please may for this see the Supplement
to Mr. POOL's English Notes, on the mentioned Ezekiel. 18.31. There is such a
Thing as a moral as well as a gracious Sincerity; and the former of these God
requires Sinners, by the Help of his common Grace, to work upon their own
Hearts, but not the latter: This he reserves to himself as his own Prerogative,
as appears in Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26. Wherefore (2) Persons may also wrong
themselves greatly, by supposing that to be required of them which is not. If
Sinners suppose, that God requires of them, as the Condition of his Covenant,
that which no Sinner ever did, or can do; no, not by Grace received from God
himself, it is no wonder if they are discouraged, and never attempt this.

And here I will mention two Things which I suppose God never required of any
Sinner, in order to his Salvation. As (1) God never required any Sinner to
regenerate himself. I do not understand that God requires Men themselves to
work that great Change which is wrought in Men's Regeneration; or so much as to
have any Hand in it. Calvinists, I think, generally own, that in this the Soul
is wholly passive; and I cannot but understand the Scripture to speak of it as
such a Work, in Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26. before mentioned; also Jer. 31.18. Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned; and this is spoken of as the Effect of the
mighty Power of God, in the Texts before quoted. This therefore is a Work which
I cannot think God requires Sinners themselves to perform. (2) I do not think
that God requires Sinners to exercise saving Grace, while they have it not. One
of my Reasons, is, because this is physically impossible; as impossible as it
is for a Man void of natural Life, to act and move himself. Another Reason of
this may be, that it seems to imply a plain Contradiction, as much as it is for
a Person to see while he is blind. If God gives a Man Grace, he can exercise
it, but he cannot be enabled to exercise Grace while he has it not: Neither
does God require this of any Man living. Man's present Duty, while
unregenerate, is not to exercise that Kind of Grace which he is without; but to
wait on God in the Use of Means for the obtaining of it; attending the
Ordinances instituted by him for that End, and performing the Duties unto that
End demanded of him, as hearing and reading his Word, meditating on it, and
calling on him for his Blessing on the Means of Grace, and praying earnestly to
him for the Pardon of his Sins, for Christ's Sake, and to give him his Holy
Spirit in the converting and saving Influences of it, etc. Now these are Duties
which Persons by the Help of common Grace may perform.

DIRECTION III. Consider well, and understand, how very difficult the
Conditions required are to be performed. Though I suppose these Conditions may be
complied with, by the Help of common Grace, by Persons not yet born of the
Spirit; because if these Conditions are complied with by any, it must be in
order to their Regeneration; and so before, not after, that Work is wrought in
them. Though therefore I affirm, that these Conditions are not such as the
Unregenerate cannot, by the Help of common Grace, perform; yet I by no Means
say, that the Conditions required in order to their Salvation, and consequently
in order to their Regeneration, are such as may by them be easily complied
with, while they are in a State of Nature. Even those Duties which unregenerate
Persons can, by the Help of common Grace, perform, and must perform, if they
would be saved, are very contrary to Flesh and Blood, and difficult to be
performed by them. That Corruption which they have in them, greatly disinclines
them to the Performance of them. They do not find their Hearts well inclined to
read the Word of God, hear it preached, and meditate on it; and to examine
themselves, and pray earnestly to God for the convincing and converting
Influences of his Holy Spirit, etc. Though Men may possibly do these Things by
such Help as the Unregenerate may receive; yet this is to them hard Work: There
is a hard Striving required to it, and great Self-Denial in it. Even in such
Actions of the Unregenerate, there is a Wrestling with Flesh and Blood, and
against Principalities, and Powers, and against the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, and against spiritual Wickedness in high Places, Ephesians. 6.12. Which
Words I think may be understood not of the Regenerate only, but of the
Unregenerate also, when awakened, and excited to begin to work out their own
Salvation; and to begin to press into (or toward) the Kingdom of God, Luke
16.16. and to strive to enter in at the strait Gate, Luke 13.24. The Kingdom of
Heaven must be taken by Violence by such as would enjoy it; and this Violence
must be used in order to Men's obtaining; not after they have it, Matthew. 11.12.
Striving to enter into it, is in order to Entrance; not after Persons are in
it. The strait Gate and the narrow Way must be found, entered into, and walked
in, before we enter into Life, and in order to it; and not only after we have
obtained it. Nor does the Difficulty of this consist in the Work of
Regeneration it self, which Men themselves have no Hand in, it being wholly
performed by God for them; but in the Duties that are preparatory to it.

It is dangerous for Persons in an unregenerate State, to think the Duties and
Conditions easy, which are required of them in order to their Salvation; for
this tends to make them slighty and careless about them, and to occasion their
delaying to perform them.

DIRECTION IV. You must confess, and be very sensible, that there is nothing of
Merit in any Thing required of you, or that can be done by you, in order to
your Salvation. It is most evident, that the Conditions required in a Covenant
of Grace, can have Nothing of Merit in them. Even the Condition of the Covenant
of Works had Nothing of Merit in it, much less can the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace have any Merit in that. Indeed, if Grace were given according
to Works, that would, according to the Language of the Scriptures, and good
Divines, be according to Merit; and then it would not be of Grace, but of Debt,
as in Romans 11.6. But must this be the Case, if any Conditions are required in
the Covenant of Grace? Will it then follow, that his Salvation is of Debt, and
not of Grace? This cannot be allowed, and has been sufficiently disproved in
Part I. Chap. III. and Part II. Chap. XVII. A Thing may be not at all the less
of Grace, because it is given in the Way of a Covenant, on some Condition to be
performed by him that shall receive it. When Sinners are required to seek the
Lord for his Grace and Mercy, through the Merits of his dear Son, who has obeyed
the Law, and suffered the Penalty of it for them, there is not the least Room
for them to imagine they can by this merit any Thing at his Hands. Repentance
for Sins committed, believing in a Redeemer for Righteousness and Life, and
begging Pardon, have no Appearance of Merit in them. Let not unconverted
Sinners think they merit any Thing at God's Hands, when they do this. I am sure
they have no Reason for it. Let them, on the contrary, plead with God the
Riches and Freedom of his Grace, and the Merits of his Son, when they are
seeking to him for his spiritual Blessings and everlasting Mercies, and that
will be the Way to obtain them.

DIRECTION V. Take heed you do not, by living in the Practice of any known Sin,
provoke God to deny or withold his special and everlasting Mercies from you.
Sinners have no Reason to expect that God will pardon their Iniquities, and
sanctify their Hearts by his Holy Spirit, so long as they indulge themselves in
any known Sin, either of Omission or Commission. Paul was indeed very suddenly
converted: He was going on in an evil Way, Acts Chap. 9. But he himself
declares, he obtained Mercy because he did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13. Nor was
his saving Conversion (I am persuaded) so very sudden that there was no
preparatory Work going before it, though but of short Continuance. That Outcry
of his, when trembling and astonished he said, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? was, I suppose, of the same Kind with their's, Acts 2.37. and his Chap.
16.30. Compare those Scriptures and see how much the Passages are alike. I
think it is very probable he was then born both of Water and of the Spirit,
when Ananias baptized him, saying to him, as in Acts 9.17. Brother Saul, the
Lord, (even Jesus that appeared unto thee in the Way as thou came) has sent
me, that thou might receive thy Sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost.
After which Words, it follows, Verse 18. And immediately there fell from his
Eyes, as it had been Scales; and he received Sight forthwith, and arose and was
baptized. Men must first turn at God's Reproof, before they may expect that he
will pour out his Spirit unto them, and make known his Words unto them, as in
Prove. 1.23. If we have exceeding great and precious Promises, by which we may
be Partakers of the divine Nature, we may not expect to receive this Benefit,
till we have first escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust, 2
Pet. 1.4. They are mistaken who think, God's ordinary Way is first to
regenerate Men, and by that Means to reform their vicious Lives. God's Way is
the Reverse of this: He first humbles and reforms Sinners, and then pours out
his Spirit on them, and savingly converts them. They must not live in such
abominable Practices, as are mentioned in 1 Cor. 6.9. if they design to see or
get into the Kingdom of God, by obtaining true and saving Grace, as in Mark
12.34.

DIRECTION VI. Delay not your Repentance till it be too late: I mean, 'till it
is too late for you to repent, or 'till your Season for it be past and gone.
Now there are two Cases in which this may befall you, viz. (1) Death may
overtake you while you delay it, and then you have lost your Opportunity for it
for ever! Oh! take heed of this. Remember that awful Word in Prove. 27.1. Boast
not thy self of Tomorrow; for thou know not what a Day may bring forth. And
forget not that of the Apostle, James 4.14. Ye know not what shall be on the
Morrow: For what is your Life? It is even a Vapor that appears for a little
Time, and then vanishes away. Tremble at the Though It of that in Prove. 29.1. He
that being often reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without Remedy. Think seriously what Multitudes there are now roaring in
Hell, because they wickedly delayed their Repentance, till Death overtook them;
and that after Death there is no Season for Repentance unto Life. Be persuaded
to do as David did, Psalm. 119.59, 60. I though it on my Ways and turned my Feet
into thy Testimonies. I made Haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.
(2) The holy Spirit may be finally taken from you, if you continue long to
resist him, and quench his Motions, by an obstinate delaying of your
Repentance; and then you are undone for ever. It will therefore be your Duty
and Interest, seriously to consider such Texts of Scripture as hold forth the
Danger of his utterly forsaking you, lest he forever leave you. To this End,
ponder and lay to Heart, what we have in Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always
strive with Man. Psalm. 81.11, 12. My People would not hearken to my Voice, and
Israel would none of me. So I gave them up to their own Heart's Lusts; and they
walked in their own Counsels. Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged any more, 'till I have caused my Fury
to rest upon thee.

DIRECTION VII. Persevere in well doing, when you have begun well; and take
heed of Apostasy. Some begin well, but fall away and lose all they have done.
This is the sad Case supposed in Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and in 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
also in Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. And I doubt not also in Heb. 10.38, 39. Nor is this a
Supposition of what never falls out: There be many to whom it may be truly
said, as in Gal. 5.4. Ye are fallen from Grace: And this not only on Account of
fundamental Errors in Doctrine, which they embrace; but also in Respect of
abominable Practices into which they fall, and in which they continue, as in
the mentioned Text, 2 Pet. 2.20. Not that regenerate and justified Persons ever
do thus, or are liable to it; for these are all kept by the Power of God, through
Faith unto Salvation, 2 Pet. 1.5. They are become Pillars in the Temple of God,
and shall go no more out, Rev. 3.12. I cannot believe, that the Suppositions of
Apostasy which we have in Scripture, relate to the Regenerate, who are expressly
secured against it; but to those, on whom a Work of common Grace only has been
wro't, and so are liable to fall away: And such had need beware, lest being led
away by the Error of the Wicked, they fall from their own Stedfastness, 2 Pet.
3.17 At least, I think that this may be accommodated to the Condition of the
Unregenerate, under a Work preparatory to Regeneration, and must be so, if a
total Apostasy be intended. It is certain that many Professors of Religion have
totally fallen away, after great Convictions and Reformation. Nor is the
Promise of Salvation made to any Measure of such Grace as the Unregenerate
have; but to such as persevere in that Way of well-doing, which some who are
not savingly converted, are engaged in, as I think I have sufficiently showed,
Part II. Chap. XIV. To such I say, as in Heb. 10.35, 36. Cast not away
therefore your Confidence, which has great Recompense of Reward. For ye have
need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might receive the
Promise.

DIRECTION VIII. Rely on the free and sovereign Grace of God, to make you
willing to attend the Duties required of you, in order to your Salvation.
Acknowledge also, that your doing so depends absolutely on his Good Will and
Pleasure. Though God has promised that he will save you, if you perform what is
to that End required of you; yet he has made no Promise to you, that you shall
perform the Condition on which Salvation is offered to you. Whether he will
effectually incline your Hearts to this, is absolutely at his Liberty. It is
not consistent with the Nature of a conditional Promise, that he that proposes
it should engage himself to the Person unto whom it is made, for both the
Condition required, and the Promise made on that Condition. To suppose, that in
the conditional Promise of the Gospel, God promises Sinners both these, is a
plain Contradiction. Though I cannot tell you, that if you fail or fall short of
the Grace of God, the Reason is, because you have no Power to comply with the
Terms of the new Covenant; yet I can tell you, that your doing this depends
absolutely on God's free and sovereign Grace; who, if ever you are saved, must
work in you both to will and to do, according to his own good Will and
Pleasure. Here that is applicable, Romans 9.16. So then it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy. Persons may
have Power to comply with the Terms of the new Covenant, and yet never do it.
There is a great deal more to be done for a Sinner in order to his Salvation,
than the bare giving him such a Power; even an effectual Persuasion to do the
Things required of him; which though he has Power to perform, yet he never would
without such Persuasion. Let therefore every unregenerate Sinner humbly and
freely confess, that after all that God has hitherto done for him, he shall
miserably perish, and that for ever, if he does not, in his infinite Mercy,
effectually persuade him to do what is incumbent on him in order to his eternal
Happiness. And I do most freely and heartily acknowledge, that a Soul that is
bro't to this, is in the most likely Way to obtain saving Grace and Mercy; and
such an one seems not to be far from the Kingdom of God. If some believe and
are saved, when others neglect the Salvation offered to them, and eternally
perish, a sovereign God must have the Glory of making the Difference: Those who
believe and are saved, would have done no more than those who remain
Unbelievers and are damned, if God did no more for them. And we may to this
Case apply those Words of our glorious Lord, with very little Variation, Matthew.
11.25, 26. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have
hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes.
Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight. It must be so, and it is
best it should be so: It is for our Interest to acknowledge it, and that our
Hearts should acquiesce in it, and to it say, AMEN.

DIRECTION IX. While you seek to God for his Salvation, rely on his Mercy, and
on the Merits of his dear Son; and plead with him his Promises of saving all
such as diligently seek him. They are not only the Regenerate and Justified
that may do this: Those who have not yet secured the Salvation of their own
Souls, are bound so to do; and it is not impossible that they should. They
cannot indeed do this in that gracious and holy Manner, that Persons already in
a State of Grace can; but that they cannot do it at all, is not to be allowed.
The Unregenerate may have a Hope and Trust in God, answerable to that
Persuasion of his Power and Mercy, which by Means of the glorious Gospel, they
have attained to. If this were not so, how should they wait on God in the Use
of Means, for the Salvation of their Souls? which many unregenerate Persons do.
Such may also plead with God the conditional Promises of his Covenant, made to
such as diligently seek him: Such as we have in Matthew. 7.7, -- 11. Luke 11.9,
-- 13. Prove. 23, 4, 5. And unto awakened unregenerate Souls, I say, Do not
think it impossible to do this, by the Help of God's Grace, before you are born
of the Spirit, or savingly converted, and while your Day of Grace lasts, and
God is by his Word and Spirit striving with you. Let the Promises God has made
encourage you to do so: For he has not said to the Seed of Jacob, (of which
many are unconverted) seek ye me in vain: Therefore seek the Lord while he may
be found -- Isai. 55.6. Let nothing discourage you from endeavoring to do so:
And while you are thus drawing nigh unto God, he will draw nigh unto you, James
4.8. Trust in God, and he will not fail you. Psalm. 34.8. O taste and see that
the Lord is good: Blessed is the Man that puts his Trust in him.


