A Twig of Birch for Billy' s Breech. A LETTER To the Reverend Mr. William
Hobby, A Pastor of a Church at Reading. Being a gentle and necessary Correction
of him, for his Folly and Wickedness lately published to the World, in a Piece
entitled, A DEFENSE Of the Itinerancy and the Conduct of The Reverend Mr.
Whitefield.

By J. C.

Judgments are prepared for Scorners, and Stripes for the Back of Fools.

Prove. 19.29. -- O bone, ne te
Frustrere, insanis et tu, --
Hor. BOSTON, N.E. Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in
Cornhill 1745.

A Twig of Birch for Billy's Breech, etc.
SIR,
IT is well known that a Cause oftentimes suffers more from the Unskilfulness
of its Advocates, than from the Strength and Number of its Enemies. For this
Reason, it has been a Method with some Persons to disguize themselves under
fictitious Names, and appear outwardly in Defense of that which, in their
Hearts, they are endeavoring to destroy. And these, by a designedly weak and
injudicious Management of the Controversy, have many times with ease, effected
that which it would have cost them much Labor and Pains to do by an open and
avowed Opposition.

Upon reading a Pamphlet subscribed William Hobby, entitled, A Defense of the
Itinerancy, and the Conduct of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, which was the last Week
should into the World, I readily imagined it to be a Stratagem of this Kind;
and should have thought it tolerably well executed, had I not discovered too
much Rancour and Malice in some Passages of it, and too much Profaness in
others.

In this my Mistake I should probably have continued, had I not been informed,
that there was really a Person of the Name subscribed to the Pamphlet; that he
was Pastor of a Parish in a small Town some few Miles from Boston, and that he
was far from any Design to hurt Mr. Whitefield's Interest by the Publication of
his Piece, though it might in reality have that Effect. Upon this Information,
I could not help pitying Mr. Whitefield, whose Cause I now looked upon as at
the last Gasp, since it stood in Need of such wretched Stuff to keep it alive.
But at the same Time, Sir, I must own, I felt some Indignation against the
Vanity and Presumption you have discovered, by engaging in a Controversy for
which you are so little qualified, and with the very Grounds and Foundation of
which, your Letter plainly shows you are altogether unacquainted.

GOD, we are told, requires no more of us than we are able to perform. His
Expectations from us are in Proportion to the Talents he has given us. So that,
it seems, your Stage of Duty is enclosed in a very small Circle, in which, if
you had confined yourself, and been content to have remained unknown beyond the
Limits of your own Parish, you might, like many others, have silently passed
through the World unnoticed and uncensured. But alas, the Vanity of some Men!
who had rather be known to be bad, than not known at all. Since therefore you
have broke through your Bounds, and thus openly proclaimed your Ignorance and
Wickedness to the World, it may not be improper, in this public Manner, to tell
you of your Faults, and give you some gentle Reproof.

I know very well, the general Opinion of your Performance is, that it rather
deserves the Chastisement of the Cudgel, than the Confutation of the Pen. But
when I consider that the End of Punishment, in this World, ought to be not so
much to afflict the Offender, as to deter others from the Offense, I cannot but
think this Way the most likely to have a good Effect, that others may hear and
fear and do no more any such Wickedness.

It would certainly have been not a little for your Credit, since it appears
that you are not yourself much skilled in Language, to have employed some
Person who understood English, and was acquainted with the Rules of Grammar, to
overlook and correct your Letter before you offered it to the Public; for I
think no Man has a Right to trouble the World with any thing so stuffed with
Blunders as this Performance of yours. You tell us in pa. 4. "The Apostle Paul
did not, nor would not preach." -- But do you not know the Force of two
Negatives, and that the Meaning of this Expression is directly contrary to what
you design? So in p. 11. speaking of the Itinerancy you say, Mr. Whitefield is
peculiarly formed for such a Design. But how does the Itinerancy appear to be a
Design? There may, for ought I know, be a Design in it; but that the Thing
itself is a Design, we should, perhaps, never have found out, if you had not
told us. Again, pa. 24. you speak of somebody having been all the Week
o'running Goods, and afterward tell us of three Hogsheads of Sugar that weigh
heavy with Guilt. But what the poor Hogsheads had done, that such a heavy Load
of Guilt should hang upon them, you have not been kind enough to tell us. I
have heard of many Sorts of Sugar, but never heard of Guilty Sugar till now.
But to repeat all the Instances of false Grammar and bad English, would be to
transcribe the whole Book; a Task which I am sure it would be unreasonable to
impose upon any one who has already undergone the Penance of reading it. Should
a School Boy commit such Blunders, we know well enough, what his Punishment
would be. A little Birch duly applied would bring him to a Sense of his Faults,
and make him more careful for the future. But you, Sir, are like to escape with
Impunity, since your Rev. Breech is exempt from this Kind of Correction, and it
is highly probable you will be insensible to any other. I will only add here,
that if the Rev. Mr. M. -- d designs ever again to favor the World with any of
his Labors, now is his Time, or never; for if he lets this Opportunity escape,
he can never hereafter hope to meet with another Pamphlet to keep his own in
Countenance. I shall go on now, and take Notice of some of your Faults of
another Kind.

You set out with endeavoring, in the first place, to desend Itinerancy. But
it seems you have been so unlucky here, as entirely to mistake the Question in
Dispute. For who has ever affirmed, that Itinerant Preaching is in it self so
unlawful, as not to be allowed upon any Account at all? or, that a Minister
ought never to preach out of his own Pulpit? Upon this Supposition, however,
you bestir your self most notably for about a dozen Pages, to prove what nobody
ever yet thought of denying. The greatest Opposers of Mr. Whitefield's
Itinerancy will readily allow, that there may be and often are Reasons and
particular Circumstances that will make Itinerant Preaching not only lawful but
expedient; and should he direct his Zeal where these Circumstances take Place,
they would never either condemn or oppose his Conduct. Should he journey to
Maryland, Virginia or Carolina, where Preachers are scarce, and the Inhabitants
scattered, or take a Voyage to some Parts of the West Indies, where Religion is
little known and less practiced, he might not only escape Censures but deserved
Applause. By this he would convince the Gainsayers, that his Design was the
same with his Profession, the Glory of his Master, and the Good of his
Neighbor, without any worldly Considerations of his own. So that it is not
Itinerancy barely as such, that is condemned, but Mr. Whitefield's Itinerancy:
And unless this can be defended, you do nothing; for you have as yet only beat
the Air, and sweated hard to defeat a Phantom of your own raising.

You go on to enquire whether the Itinerancy, by which I suppose you mean Mr.
Whitefield's, may not probably subserve some good and valuable Ends? And if so,
you ask, why it should not be countenanced? I answer, because it certainly
disserves more and better and more valuable Ends. Of this there are as many
Witnesses as there are mournful Spectators of the Dissentions and Disorders
that have torn so many Towns, Churches, and even private Families in pieces. We
have seen Malice and Hatred treading upon the Neck of Charity, and every Man's
Heart and Tongue set against his Brother. We have seen Religion's lovely Form
metamorphosed into the most ugly Monster, Religious Assemblies turned into
frantic Tumults, and the Beauty of Holiness into the Confusion of Bedlam. And
are these no Evils? Or are they Evils so light as to be overbalanced by the
throwing a few silly Girls into Hysterics?

You sometime after say, you really believe, that the Gospel is as faithfully
preached in New England, as in any part of the World, in the Generality of our
Churches. What Value the Clergy may set upon this Testimony, I know not; but
for my own Part, considering from whence it comes, I cannot look upon it as any
great Complement, You add, though God knows it is preached but poorly enough in
many of them. I am apt to think that the People of Reading know this too;
otherwise they would not have discovered so great a Readiness to part with
their Pastor, as they did on a late Occasion. A little on ward you come to
lament, that proper Watchsulness over the Pulpits of New England has been
greatly decaying -- In Consequence of which Remisness many have admitted into
the Ministry, of inferior Knowledge, etc. This, I am of Opinion, is not Matter
of so great Lamentation to you, as to many others, since you have been so great
a Gainer by the Consequence. For had this Watchfulness over the Pulpits of New
England been kept up, and none admitted into the Ministry of inferior
Knowledge, loose Principles or of poor Lives, you might, beyond all doubt, have
engaged in the present Expedition, provided you had escaped the last, without
the Formality of applying for the Consent of a Parish. You pursue this Subject,
and add, or rather shall I say, that some have been admitted into Christ's
Pulpits, who perhaps were not fit to be received into his Church? Instances of
this Nature might easily be produced in too great Plenty, and I need not go far
for some of them neither. Here indeed you have spoken the Truth; for if we may
judge of the Tree by its Fruit, every Page of your Letter is an ample Proof
that you were furnished with ONE Instance of this, without stirring a Step for
it.

But it seems, the Expediency and Lawfulness of the Itinerancy further appears
from this, that some of the greatest Opposers of it have themselve been
benefitted by it. And it it such a strange Thing that good Men should be
benefitted by the Faults and Miscarriages which they observe in the World? They
may and will reap Advantage to themselves from the Wickedness of others. This
puts them upon lamenting the Depravity and Weakness of Human Nature, and
excites in them a greater Vigilance over their own Conduct. It shows them the
Need they have of divine Restraints, and raises up their Soul in Gratitude to
that God who makes them to differ. Every Instance of Perjury or Murder that
comes within their Notice, works these good Dispositions in them; but who, for
this Reason, ever argued that Perjury and Murder were either expedient or
lawful?

You go on to tell us another good Effect of the Itinerancy, that Things that
were weak in many Places have been strengthened, and those which were ready to
die are in a Measure revived. This alas! is a melancholy Truth. The Fueds and
Contentions that had so long reigned among us were subsiding, and Brethren
began to look kindly one upon another. That censorious, uncharitable Spirit
which had raged with so much Fury was sickning apace, and would, in all
Probability, before now have given up the Ghost, had not this second
Itineration revived and strengthened it. For, whether you know it or not, every
Man who views things with an unprejudiced Eye, and is able to trace Effects up
to their Causes, will easily discover that these things necessarily, in the
Nature of Things, flow from the Itinerancy, and that this is properly causal of
them. You however are bold enough to say, whatever be the Judgment of others, I
shall EVER give it as mine, that it is not the Itinerancy but the Opposition to
it, that has made the Confusions of the present Day. Well determined for a
youngster, truly! But how do you know that this will always be your Judgment?
Wiser and better Men have changed their Opinions, as to this very Matter; and
may it not be possible for you to do so too? Is your impenetrable Scull Proof
against the Force of the strongest Arguments? Or does the triple Brass round
your Heart make it impossible for Conviction to enter? But if so, have you ever
learned, with all your Divinity, that Obstinacy and a seared Conscience are
christian Graces? Why then do you make this public Boast? Why do you thus glory
in your Shame?

A little onward you advise us to a Conduct with Regard to Itincrants, which is
indeed highly reasonable. "Thy, say you, the Spirits by the Word of God." --
Agreed -- This is the very Test to which the Opposers would bring them; and by
the Decisions of this they are willing to stand or fall. You add, "and the
everlasting Reason of Things." How these Words came into your Mouth, I cannot
imagine. Why do you thus toss upon your Tongue Terms of which you have no
Understanding? For know thou not, O vain young Man, that if the everlasting
Reason of Things is once appealed to, thy Cause must vanish in a moment, like a
thin Vapor before the Noonday Sun?

I cannot forbear taking Notice, how manfully you beat down an Objection raised
against Mr. Whitefield, that he has appropriated Money which he has collected,
to other Uses than those for which it was designed. This you tell us cannot be,
because he has not bought either Houses or Lands; and run on with this Argument
with wonderful Volubility for about half a Page. But here you really seem, if
possible, to sink even beneath yourself. For it is no more than saying, Mr.
Whitefield cannot be supposed to have embezzled any Money, because he has not
been weak enough himself to prove to all the World that he has done so. For my
own Part, I never thought there was sufficient Ground for this Objection
against Mr. Whitefield; but if this is all that can be said in his Defense, I
may, perhaps, change my Opinion for the future, since to me it looks more like
owning the Charge, than vindicating him from it.

Another Objection against Mr. Whitefield, which you have thought fit to
encounter, is the injurious Reflections he has thrown upon the College. And
here having given your Opinion of the Testimony which the Heads of that Society
have published against him and his Conduct, you add, I cannot find that
Circumcision avails much, or Uncircumcision, to the Proof of the Charges
alleged against Mr. Whitefield; by which you have discovered no great Regard
for that Gospel you profess to preach; otherwise you would never have
sacrificed it to such a pitiful low Pun, and proved to the World, that you are
equally destitute of Religion and Wit. You go on, however, and declare, that
Mr. Whitefield's Expression has been ever disagreeable to you, as it tended to
discourage the Growth of the College; and yet presently after give us to
understand, that it might be a Piece of Service beneficial to the College. But
how that which tends to discourage the Growth of the College, can be said to be
beneficial to it, I confess I am not able to comprehend. In like Manner you
say, that unless real and substantial Godliness was better understood and
practiced within a few Years after I left the College, than when I was there,
the College in general might justly be said to be in Darkness. -- We dwelt much
upon the Shell of Religion, but little regarded the Pearl of great Price. --
All this is to be understood of the Society in general. -- And presently after,
"Religion was at a low Ebb among the Students in general." And was this same
College at this Time one of the Glories of the Land? You had just before
declared, that it ever was, and you hoped ever would be so. "However, cry you,
I am no Judge in this Matter," and then very modestly proceed to give Judgment,
and pronounce Mr. Whitefield "greatly excusable, if not entirely justisiable."
Really, Sir, here is a Cluster of Inconsistencies, which it will require the
utmost Skill of some new Apologist to reconcile.

In order to prove the Truth of the Charge Mr. Whitefield has brought against
the College, you say, for my own part, had I no more Religion after I left the
College than I had there, I might have sold my Right to Heaven for a Mess of
Pottage, and been a Gainer by the Bargain. I am very sorry we have so much
Reason to judge, from the Spirit and Temper of your Pamphlet, that you might
make the same Bargain now, and be no Loser by it. But, because you was a
graceless wicked Wretch when you was at College, does it therefore follow, that
the generality of the Students must be so too? If this be just Reasoning, you
have it equally in your Power to prove, that the College was likewife
overwhelmed with Ignorance and Stupidity.

Another Argument you bring to prove the dark State of the College, is, that
"one Tutor and one Professor were discarded for Immoralities." Here you have
unluckily blabb'd out a Truth against yourself, which in a great Measure
overthrows all you have said upon this Subject. Had the College encouraged
these Persons in their Immoralities, and continued to hug them in her Bosom,
this indeed would have been a sad Symptom of her Degeneracy. But the casting
them out from her upon this Account, surely is a strong Proof, that Discipline
was not at such a very low Ebb, nor the College immersed in such thick Darkness
as you would have us believe. To these two Instances, which you have brought,
in Favor of the College, however you designed them to the contrary, I will add
a Third. That when a young Man made Application for the Place of a Tutor, which
was then vacant, and was supported by the Recommendation of no lefs a Person
than a Governor, the College rejected him with Disdain, well knowing that his
inferior Knowledge, loose Principles, and to say no worse, poor Life, rendered
him altogether unfit for such a Station. This Instance surely you have not
forgot. I rather think it was fresh in your Mind while you was writing, and
that it was the Remembrance of it that pushed you on to your irreverent and
scurrilous Behavior toward the College. You go on and say, another Tutor
declares himself a Stranger at that Time to any true vital Piety. Here, though
you do not mention his Name, it is well known who you mean. And much Good may
his Testimony do you. He once formerly, and now again has run into such wild
Freaks and Extravagancies, that Mr. Whitefield himself dare not countenance him.

But endeavor, if you can, impartially to recollect the State of the College
while you was there; and then, if Shame and Sorrow will suit a Constitution
like yours, be covered with Confusion for, what you have wrote. The Gentleman
at the Head of the Society, when you entered, was a stanch Calvinist in
Principle, of strict Morals, and exercised the severest Discipline. His
Successor was renowned through the whole Land for his Piety; his Name is, upon
that Account, mentioned among us with the utmost Honor, and his Memory will
live for ever. The Tutors and Professors were, while you belonged to the
Society, of virtuous Lives and Conversations, and of unblemished Characters;
and all of them, except the two discarded by the College, do at this Day make a
distinguished Figure in Church or State. Morning and Evening Prayers we
constantly kept up; the holy Scriptures read, and a strict Attendance required.
None were allowed to absent themselves from the public Worship on Lord's Days,
without some necessary Hindrance. Vice and Immorality of all Kinds were
forbidden upon the severest Penalties, and when detected, were sure to be
punished. And now, what Sign of Darkness in all this? Why, say you, we dwelt
much upon the Shell of Religion, but little regarded the Pearl of great Price.
That is, in other Words, the Students did not, as the Fashion is among some
sort of People at this Day, tell one another how often they said their Prayers,
and how good they felt themselves. What Pity is it, that a Practice, so suited
to gratify a vain Temper, was not then in Vogue? If it had been, I doubt not we
should have had a much earlier Date to your Conversion.

I say nothing of the present State of the College, because you have confined
your Reflections to your own Time, and the Gentlemen now concerned in the
Government there, have their Characters too well established to fear any Injury
from such Pens as yours.

If an Attempt upon the Life of a Parent, could once untie the Tongue of a dumb
Son, it may perhaps seem strange to some, that the Sons of the College should
all sit so long silent, when they see such vile Assassins stabbing at the
Reputation of their venerable Mother. But when we consider the Obscurity of
these Persons, for Mr. Whilefield, it la allowed, had his Information from some
secret Whisperers, I say, if we consider their Obscurity, and the Feebleness of
their Attack, it will really be doing them too much Honor to take the Alarm.
Would a Man draw a Sword against a Louse, or think it necessary to discharge a
Cannon to kill a Fly? Whenever any shall appear against her, whose Character
may seem to give Credit to their Cause, it will soon be found, that among her
Sons there are wanting neither Tongues nor Pens sufficient for her Defense. She
will and must flourish as long as Religion, Virtue and Learning have Charms to
attract our Esteem. Supporting these, and supported by them, she may sit safe
and unconcerned amidst all the leaden then, ye spightful Curs, do ye look up
and bark and howl, the Object of your Malice is placed high above your Reach,
nor shines the less bright for all your Yellings.

From this Head you pass to consider another Article against Mr. Whitefield,
which is, his having represented the Generality of the Ministers of this Land
as unconverted Men. Upon this you say, Has Mr. Whitefield and where pronounced
this the real State of the Ministry? No, but has only said, that he fears it,
as (if I mistake not) the Expression is. But you do mistake, young Man; for the
Expression is not, that he fears it, but that he is VERILY PERSUADED of it;
which, however you understand it, I take to be a pretty round Assertion. So
that all you have said here, to excuse him as though he had only just hinted his
Fears, being built upon a false Supposition, must of it self fall to the
Ground. You go, on, But if Mr. Whitefield has insinuated any thing as if many
Ministers were unconverted, what need they by the Umbrage taken at the
Insinuation, pave the Way to the Proof of it? A most extravagant Piece of
Arrogance this! Here we have a new Standard set up, whereby we may judge of our
own State, and that of others. But shall the taking Umbrage at the most
exceptionable Step in Mr. Whitefield's Conduct, a Step which very few of his
warmest Advocates would pretend to justify, and which he himself has condemned
as rash and unwarrantable, I say, shall the bare taking Umbrage at such a Step
be sufficient to prove a Man's Unconversion? Alas, poor deluded young Man! if
the not taking Umbrage at this Behavior of Mr. Whitefield be all the Evidence
you have of your own Conversion, and I greatly fear you have no other, you are
in a very miserable Condition indeed.

You come now to tell us in your 24th. pa. about of running Goods, and three
Hogsheads of Sugar weighing heavy with Guilt. This, as I have already observed,
being rank Nonsense, may be neither true nor false. But the base Insinuation
that you would couch under it, and the Temper and Spirit visible in it,
evidently discover that it proceeded from a Heart swollen with Malice. What is
now become of your Passage of Scripture that could give such a fatal Blow, or
rather blast like a Flash of Lightning? Has it so suddenly lost all its Force?
Or, have you not since you wrote your Pamphlet, ever once looked into your
Bible?

You go on and inform us, that you have said nothing about the Inconsistency of
Mr. Whitefield's Conduct with his Obligations as a Minister of the Church of
England. And, it seems, the Reason of it is, because this Objection is crushed
to Death by the late Apology for Mr. Whitefield, against the Exceptions of L.
K. But alas! unluckily for you, this Apology has been long since confuted, and
so universally exploded, that he fecret Contrivers of it, to save their sinking
Reputation, have been obliged to disown it. But it seems you have been so busy
in writing your Letter, and so wrapped up in the Contemplation of the Applause it
would heap upon you, that you knew nothing of this. The Maul, heavy as it is,
has not been able, in the least, to blunt the Edge of the Razor; no, this
remains keen and bright as ever, and is like to do so, while the other, with us
owr Weight, is sinking a-pace into the Earth.

You are willing, however, after all, to allow Mr. Whitefield has his Foibles
and Imperfections, and that he is a Man of like Passions with others. Wonderful
Condescension indeed! You go on and say, I would do by him as God himself does
by sinful Man, damn the Sin and glorify the Sinner. Alas, to what a Height of
Impiety are you arrived! The Parallel has often been run beteen our Savior and
Mr. Whitefield: You yourself have done it several Times in your Letter; and it
is now become so familiar to us, that our Ears seem to be no longer shocked at
it. But here you rise a Step higher. And do you know, poor young Man, the
Meaning of these Expressions you so wantonly throw out? Surely if you did, you
would never talk thus of your damning the Sin, and GLORIYYING the Sinner. In
short, nothing but the most profound Ignorance can acquit you from the Guilt of
the highest Profaneness.

There is one Thing more I will just take Notice of, as a Proof of your
exquisite Faculty of Discernment. Speaking of Mr. Whitefield's Design of
bringing over a Number of Ministers from Scotland and other Places to settle
among us, and having told us there can be no Harm in this, you go on to ask,
"Are there not two Pulpits at Boston supplied and adorned with the Produce of
Scotland and Ireland?" Had these two Pulpits been thus coupled together by any
Body else, we should immediately have known it was done with a Design that they
should set off each other by way of Contrast: But as it comes from you, it must
be looked upon as a strange confounding of Characters, a motly Mixture of Light
and Darkness; and you might as well have jumbled together, as Ornaments of the
Mathematics, Sir Isaac Newton and Whittemore the Almanac maker. And is the
Rev. Mr. M. -- d such an Ornament to the Pulpit? This, among many others, is
one Instance of the Solidity of your Judgment, which may hereafter be
remembered to your Honor. It is no unusual Thing for Persons, from their
general Character, or some particular Circumstance of their Lives, to have
prefixed to their Names some honorable Epither, without which they are seldom
or never mentioned. Thus we say, the wise Solomon, the venerable Bede, the
incomperable Newton; and who knows but that future Ages may add you to the
illustrious Roll by the Name of the JUDICIOUS HOBBY?

But it would be endless as well as needless to enumerate all the Faults of
your Letter. I have spent too much Time with you already, and shall therefore
only add, that if you are wise enough, from this gentle Rebuke, to shrink back
again into that Obscurity, for which Nature and Providence seem to have
designed you, it is probable you may escape any further Correction for your
past Folly; as the Snail (for I would not be too unequal in my Comparison) from
the lightest Touch, retires into its Shell, and lies there safe and unseen. But
if you are ever hereafter caught out of your Line, or shall again presume to
trouble the World with your Malice, Profaneness and Nonsense, know, young Man,
that there are those, who want neither Inclination nor Power to chastise you
with the utmost Severity your Offenses shall deserve.

I am, etc.
March 20th. 1744.

