FAMILIAR LETTERS To a Gentleman, UPON A Variety of seasonable and ^^portant
Subjects in RELIGION.

By JONATHAN DICKINSON, A. M.

Minister of the Gospel at Elisabeth-Town, New Jersey.

-- To write the same Things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you
it is safe.

Phil. iii. 1. -- I have written briefly, exhorting and testifying, that this
is the true Grace of God wherein you stand.

1 Pet. v. 12. -- Even as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the
Wisdom given to him, has written unto you. As also in all his Epistles,
speaking in them of these Things, in which are some Things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.

2 Pet. iii. 15, 16. BOSTON:

Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, next to the Prison: And
by J. BLANCHARD at the Bible and Crown in Dock-Square. 1745.

THE PREFACE.
THE irregular Heats and Extravagancies of some late Pretenders to
extraordinary Seize in Religion, their imaginary divine Impulses, and
extatick Raptures, with other Effects of their disordered Fancies, have cast
such a Blemish upon the Christian Profession, in the Eyes of unsettled and
unthinking People; that it is well if too many are not in Danger of calling
Christianity it self into Question, from the manifestly false Pretenses and
enthusiastic Flights of some, who have put in a Claim to so eminent Experience
in the divine Life. -- It is therefore thought needful, as well as seasonable
at this Time, that a brief and plain Confirmation of the Christian Religion be
sent abroad among our People, to establish them, in the Foundation of our
eternal Hope. -- This has been my special Motive to the Publication of some of
the first of the ensuing Letters.

On the other Hand, whether for want of duly distinguishing between delusive
Appearances, and the genuine Effects of an Effusion of the HOLY SPIRIT, or from
whatever Cause, such has been the violent Opposition of some to the late
Revival of Religion in the Land, that the Doctrines of special Grace and of
experimental Piety seem now by too many not only rejected and opposed, but even
treated with Contempt, under the opprobrious Character of New Light; as if they
had never before been heard of, or professed among us. This I take to be one of
the darkest Symptoms upon this Land, that we have ever yet seen. -- It must on
that Account be not unseasonable, to represent to our People, in a clear and
distinct View, the Experiences of vital Religion, which are necessary to
constitute them Christians indeed. -- This is aimed at in the Publication of
the most of the following Letters.

The Danger we are in of prevailing Antinomianism, and the actual Prevalence
that it has already obtained (especially under the Name of Moravianism) in some
Parts of the Country, is a sufficient Justification of the Attempt I have made
to set the Foundation-Error of the Antinomians in a true Light; and to discover
its dangerous Tendency.

If any are inclined to censure me, for troubling the World with new Discourses
upon such Subjects, as I had publicly treated on before; particularly the
Evidences of Christianity, the Sovereignty of divine Grace, Faith and
Justification: They may consider, that these are most important Points, and
deserve the most particular Illustration; that there is at this Time a special
Call to remove the Objections against them out of the Way; and that this is now
attempted in a different Manner, from my former Discourses on these Subjects;
and, I trust, with some additional Evidence to the Truth.

If any of my Readers are so curious as to inquire, to whom these Letters were
directed; it is sufficient Answer, that they are now by the Press directed to
them; and if they can improve them to their spiritual Advantage, it will answer
the End of their Publication. -- May the Blessing of GOD attend them to this
Purpose!

J.D.

CONTENTS.
LETTER 1. THE DANGER of INFIDELITY. -- 2. The EVIDENCES of CHRISTIANITY. Page
11. -- 3. The HISTORY of our SAVIOR collected from the Prophecies of the Old
Testament. Page 29. -- 4. The CERTAINTY of the FACTS reported in the Gospel.
Page 46. -- 5. The INTERNAL Evidences of Christianity. Page 59. -- 6.
OBJECTIONS against the internal Evidences, answered. Page 77. -- 7. GOD's
SOVEREIGN GRACE vindicated against several Exceptions. Page 91. -- 8. A true
and false FAITH distinguished. Page 107. -- 9. A legal and an evangelical
REPENTANCE distinguished. Page 129. -- 10. The CHARACTERS in ROMANS vii.
distinctly illustrated. Page 156. -- 11. MORAVIAN and ANTINOMIAN Justification
considered and refuted. Page 182. -- 12. IMPUTED Righteousness explained and
vindicated. Page 210. -- 13. The NEW LAW of Grace examined and disproved. Page
238. -- 14. FIRST and SECONDARY Justification, a groundless Distinction. Page
270. -- 15. Justification by WORKS in JAM. ii. considered and explained. Page
294. -- 16. Our OBLIGATIONS to GOOD WORKS distinctly stated and urged. Page
321. -- 17. The Nature and Necessity of our UNION to CHRIST. Page 348. -- 18.
Antinomian PLEAS for LICENTIOUSNESS considered and obviated. Page 374. -- 19.
DIRECTIONS for a close and comfortable WALK with GOD. Page 402.
FAMILIAR LETTERS ON A Variety of religious Subjects.
LETTER I. Wherein the Danger of Infidelity is briefly represented.
SIR,
I Heartily rejoice to hear from you, that you are at last come into a
Resolution, immediately to enter upon a serious and impartial Examination of
the Christian Religion. What you observe is certainly true, that this is an
Affair of too great Consequence, to be carelessly neglected, to be decided at
the Clubb, or to be rejected by Wholesale, with the too common Arguments of
Mirth and Raillery, Sneer and Banter. -- I should therefore be inexcusable,
should I refuse a Compliance with your Request, to maintain a Correspondence
with you by Letter; and assist you, what I can, in your Inquiries into the
Truth of Christianity, the Nature of the Christian Institution, and the
Character and Qualifications of those who are entitled to the Rewards therein
promised. But what can a Gentleman of your Capacities expect from me? And has
not this Cause been clearly and fully handled, especially of late, by a Variety
of Authors? Has it not triumphed over all Opposition? Have not its poor deluded
Opposers been covered with Shame and Confusion, in all their feeble Attempts to
subvert our Faith, and to destroy the blessed Hope of our future Happiness? And
are not these Books in your Hands? -- Read them, Sir, with that Attention,
which such an awful and important Affair demands of you; and I think, you cannot
fail of obtaining Conviction and Satisfaction.

To your Inquiry, How shall I first enter upon a proper Disquisition of this
Cause? I answer, in a few Words. Consider the Importance of it Consider, I
entreat you, that it is an eternal Concern. Were this duly considered, it would
be impossible for you to content your self in such a State, wherein there is so
much as a Peradventure as to the dreadful and astonishing Consequences of a
Disappointment.

You may perhaps have hitherto concluded all revealed Religion to be but a mere
Cheat and Imposture. -- You may have borne your Part in the Conversation at
Taverns or Coffee-Houses, against Priestcraft, Cant, and Enthusiasm. -- You
may have ridiculed all Pretenses to vital Piety; and exploded all the
Gospel-Doctrines respecting future Rewards and Punishments, as unreasonable, or
unintelligible Dreams and Fictions. -- Well! supposing you were in the right,
What Happiness, what Comfort or Satisfaction would your Infidelity afford you?
-- What rational Man would envy you the Consolation, of imagining your self
upon a Level with the Beasts, and of expecting, that Death will terminate all
your Hopes and Fears! -- What Believer would part with the glorious Hope, of
eternal and inexpressible Happiness and Joy, for the gloomy Prospect of
Annihilation!

It is certain, upon this Supposition, the Believer can be in no Danger; he has
nothing to lose, or to fear: but has every Way the Advantage of you. -- He has
the present Satisfaction of being a Favorite of Heaven. -- He has a continual
Source of Support and Comfort, amidst the darkest Scenes of Providence, from
the gracious Promises of the Gospel. -- He can overcome the Miseries of Life
and the Terrors of Death, with the ravishing View of a blessed Immortality. --
And it is certain, if mistaken, he will never lament his Disappointment: but
sleep as quietly in a State of Nonexistence as you can do.

But perhaps I have mistook your Sentiments. You may possibly have given into
an Opinion of a future Existence, though you have called the Truth of the
Gospel into Question: -- Be it so. Yet upon this Supposition also, the Believer
has vastly the Advantage of you. He has all the Happiness in this Life which
Christianity affords: and this you must be a Stranger to. -- He can live in
Comfort, and die in Peace. -- His Religion deprives him of nothing, which can
any Way (...) to his rational Happiness and Delight; but every Way tends to
subserve and promote them. -- And certainly (even upon your own Principles) he
may have as fair a Claim to Sincerity, in his Endeavors to approve himself to
the glorious Author of our Being, as you can have; and consequently as good a
Prospect of future Blessedness. -- So that, upon the whole, it is evident that
he has nothing to fear from his Principles, whether they be true or false. --
He has no Cause for those stinging Reflections; What if I am mistaken! What if
my Sentiments should prove false, when it comes to the decisive Trial!

And now, let us turn the Tables; and consider the bitter Fruits of your fatal
Mistake, if Christianity should at last prove true. -- You cannot but
acknowledge, that there have been great Numbers of Men of the best moral
Qualifications, whose intellectual Powers were no Ways inferior to theirs on
the other Side of the Question, who have professed the Truth, and experienced
the Power of that Religion, which you have despised. -- How many most excellent
Persons, of the greatest Integrity, Learning, and Sagacity, have at their Peril
appeared to stand by this Cause; and have sacrificed their Estates, their
Honors, and their Lives, to the despised and persecuted Doctrines of the
Cross! -- It Is certain, that you cannot have a greater Assurance of being in the
right, than these Men have had; and consequently there is at least a
Probability on their Side, as much as on yours. -- You your self therefore, and
all the unbelieving Gentlemen of your Acquaintance, who have any Degree of
Modesty lest, must necessarily own, that the Cause possibly may turn out
against them. -- And what if it should! I am even afraid to represent the
Consequences in a proper Light; it will possibly be esteemed Preachment or
Cant; or be voted harsh, uncivil, or unmannerly Treatment. But Sir, I would
pray you to consider this Matter, without any Resentment of my rustic Method
of Address. Consider it only as it is represented in the Scriptures; and in
that View it will appear, that the dreadful Confusion, the amazing Horror, and
the eternal Misery, which will be the Consequence of your Infidelity, will be
vastly beyond the utmost Stretch of your most exalted Apprehension or
Imagination. As soon as your Soul is separated from your Body, it will become
the immediate Object of the divine Wrath; and how lightly soever you may think
of these Things at present, you will find, that it is a fearful Thing to fall
into the Hands of the living God. -- When the great Judge of the World shall
descend from Heaven, to take Vengeance on all those, who do not obey the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, where will our unbelieving Gentlemen appear? Will Not their Mirth
be quite spoiled, their sarcastick Flouts and Fleers be for ever over, when
they must stand trembling at the lest Hand of their Judge, having no possible
Refuge to betake themselves, to (...) Plea to make for their Infidelity, no
Place of Retreat in a dissolving World, to hide their Heads! -- What Comfort
will it then afford them, to say, "Alas! how have we been deceived! We never
though it it would have come to this! Now we have found to our Cost, that there is
something more in the Doctrines of a final Retribution, than Fable or Fiction,
Priestcraft or Fanaticism, however we have in the Gaiety of our Temper
rejected and despised them." -- Will they then be possessed of a sufficient
Bravery and Presence of Mind, to out face their glorious Judge; and to hear
with Intr^^pidity the terrible Sentence, Depart, ye cursed, into overlying Fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels? -- Will they with their usual frolic
Humor, endure the Execution of this Sentence; and with Sport and Pastime,
welter in the eternal Flames of that Furnace of Fire, that is the destined
Abode of every final Unbeliever?

Now, Sir, does it not infinitely concern you, to consider the Case before you
in this awful View, to compare and make a proper Estimate of the inconceivably
different States of the Believer and the Infidel, both with Respect to Time and
Eternity; and to enter upon the Disquisition you propose, with a Mind duly
impressed with the vast Importance of your coming to a safe Conclusion?

You tell me, that you cannot from the Nature of Things see any Necessity of
such a Way of Salvation, as the Gospel proposes. The Light of Nature (...) us,
that God is merciful; and consequently that he will pardon Sinners, upon their
Repentance and Amendment of Life. Let us then consider this Case impartially.

I think, there is no Need of Arguments to convince you, that you are a Sinner.
Do but consider the natural Tendency of your Affections, Appetites and
Passions; and review the past Conduct of your Life; and a Demonstration of this
sad Truth will unavoidably stare you in the Face. -- Let any Man enter into
himself; and seriously consider the natural Operations of his own Mind; and he
must necessarily find, that instead of a frequent and delightful Contemplation
of the Perfections of the divine Nature, instead of a thankful Acknowledgement
of his Obligations to the divine Goodness and Beneficence, and instead of that
sublime Pleasure and Satisfaction, that should flow from the Remembrance of his
Creator and Benefactor, his Affections are naturally following mean low and
unreasonable, if not (...) and wicked Entertainments and Gratifications. He
will find, that all Communications with his glorious Creator are naturally
painful and uneasy to him: while every trifling Amusement, and the vilest
sensual Object of his Thoughts, find a more easy Entrance, and a more peaceable
Rest in his Soul. -- From hence it is most evident, that the Heart is revolted
from God; and that we have substituted the Creature in his Stead, as the Object
of our Pursuit and Delight. -- And besides this; Who are there among the best
of the Children of Men, whose Consciences will not charge them with innumerable
actual Transgressions of the Law of Nature? -- From this View of the Case, you
must therefore (...) find your self in a State of moral Pollution and Guilt.

And can you in such a State as this, reflect upon a God of infinite Purity and
Justice with Comfort and Courage? Will Not Conscience fly in your Face, and (...)
you with your Guilt and Danger? Don't your Reason tell you, that the great
Creator and Governor of the World is too holy to (...) and too just to
overlook such a fixed Aver^^on to him; and such numerous Sins and Provocation
against him, as you cannot but charge to your own Account?

But "God is merciful." True, he is so, to all proper Objects of Mercy; and in
a Way agreeable to the Laws of his immutable Justice and Holiness. But can you
suppose, that God will give up his Justice and Holiness, as a Sacrifice to his
Mercy, out of Compassion to those, who deserve no Pity from him, to those who
refuse the Offers of his Mercy in the Gospel, because disagreeable to their
sinful Desires and Imaginations?

But Repentance will entitle the Sinner to Pardon, without any other Atonement.
-- Are you sure of this? Certain it is, that Mankind have always, in all Ages,
thought otherwise. What else was the Meaning of those Sacrifices, that have
every where obtained; and what the Meaning of those superstitious Austerities,
and severe Penances, that have been so commonly practiced in the Heathen World,
if some Atonement beside Repentance, was not thought necessary to pacify an
offended Deity? -- Consider, I entreat you, that as Sin is contrary to the
divine Nature, it must be the Object of God's Displeasure. As it is contrary to
the Rules of his governing the World, it must deserve Punishment. -- If God be
the Rector and Governor of the World, he must have some Laws to govern by. If
he has Laws to govern by, they must have some Penalties to enforce them. If his
Laws have Penalties annexed to them, these must be executed; or else they would
be but ScareCrows, without Truth or Justice. -- I entreat you also to consider,
how the Repentance of a guilty Criminal can answer the Demands of Justice. --
What Satisfaction will our Sorrow for Sin afford to the divine Being? How will
it repair the Dishonor done to the Perfections of his Nature? How will it
rectify our depraved Appetites and Passions; and qualify us for the Enjoyment
of his Favor? How will it vindicate his Holiness; and discover to the rational
World, his natural Aversion to Sin and Sinners? Or how will the Feat of God's
Displeasure be a sufficient Restraint to Men's Lusts and vicious Appetites, if
Sinners may suppose, that when they have gratified their Lusts, and taken their
Swing in Sin, they can repent when they please; and thereby have an easy Access
to the Favor of God? In a Word, What Evidence can you possibly pretend to from
the Light of Nature, that Repentance only will satisfy the divine Justice; and
reconcile you to God?

But after all, were it even supposed that Repentance would necessarily give us
a Claim to Mercy, without any other Satisfaction to God's Justice, it must then
be another Sort of Repentance, than you seem to suppose. You must then allow,
that this Repentance must be a thorough Change of Heart and Life. For you can
hardly suppose, that we are qualified for God's Favor, while all the Powers of
our Souls are in direct Opposition and Aversation to him. And is this
Repentance in our Power? Can we at Pleasure renew our own Souls; and give our
selves new Affections, Dispositions, Desires and Delights? Can we change the
Bent and Bias of our Inclinations to the Objects of Sense, and bring our selves
to love God above all Things; and to take our chief Delight and Complacency in
him? -- This must be obtained, in Order to enjoy the Favor of God. And yet it
is manifestly out of our Reach. It must be the Effect of an Almighty Power.

I hope, you may now see the Necessity of a Savior, both to expiate your Sin
and Guilt, which your Repentance can never do; and to sanctify your depraved
Soul; and make you meet for the Service and Enjoyment of God. -- If these are
obtained, you must be certainly and eternally safe: but if you dare venture
into Eternity without them, I must needs say you don't want Courage.

You see, I have addressed you with an unreserv'd Freedom and Familiarity. I
have overlooked the Distance of your Character; and treated you as if we were
in the same State of Equality now, as we shall quickly find our selves before
the Tribunal of our glorious Judge. -- The Cause requires this at my Hands; and
I should have been unfaithful, I had almost said unmerciful to you, if I had
not failed of the Decorum, which would have been my Duty to have observed in
any other Case. I shall therefore depend upon your candid Interpretation of
this unpolished Address; and your kind Acceptance of the faithful Designs and
Desires of,

SIR, Your most Obedient humble Servant,

LETTER II. Wherein a brief and general View is given, of the Evidences of the
Christian Religion.
SIR,
YOU tell me, my Letter had almost thrown you into a Fit of the Spleen. But I
cannot but hope, from your awful Concern, left you meet with the Confusion I
have therein described, that it will have a better Effect. -- I acknowledge,
that a pathetick Declamation cannot be received for Argument. And that your
Faith must be built upon Evidences, that will reach the Understanding, as well
as the softer Passions of the Soul. But what Evidence do you desire or want, of
the Truth of Christianity? Consider, Sir. Consult your Books and your Friends.
Make your Demands as large, as you or they can contrive. And whatever rational
Evidence you are pleased to ask for, shall be at your Service. -- I have myself
with particular Application been considering, what reasonable Evidence can
possibly be consulted or desired, which the glorious God has not already given
us, in Confirmation of the Christian Institution; and I find Nothing wanting,
which we are capable of receiving. -- And I cannot but presume, that if you
likewise would impartially and in earnest put your self upon the same Enquiry,
you must meet with a full and complete Satisfaction.

You will certainly acknowledge, that the great Creator is capable some Way or
other to communicate his Will to intelligent Beings, with sufficient Evidence
that the Revelation is from him. -- Now what I desire of you is to sit down,
and consult upon some such Means of doing this, as would strike your Mind with
the strongest Conviction, obviate all your Doubts; and give you the fullest
Confirmation of the divine Original of such a Revelation. When you are come to
a Point, consider the Credentials of Christianity; and see whether you can find
what you your self would demand, and what you suppose most likely to give you
Satisfaction.

Would you expect from such a Revelation, a reasonable Account of our first
Original? -- Look into the Mosaic History of the Creation; and there you will
find, how the World, and how yourself originally sprang from the divine Fiat;
and in what Manner we are the Offspring of God.

Would you expect a Narrative of such Circumstances of God's Dispensations
toward us from the Beginning, as would be correspondent with our constant
Experience and Observation? -- The same History will inform you of those
irregular Affections, and vitiated Appetites and Passions, which every Man
finds in himself; and which have bro't such Destruction and Misery upon the
World, in all its successive Periods, since Adam's Fall.

Would you expect, that there should be early Intimations of the Method of our
Recovery from the State of Sin and Guilt, which we had brought our selves into
by our Apostasy? -- You will there also find the gracious Promise, that the
Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's Head; and deliver us from the
deadly Effects of his malicious Temptation.

Would you desire to find a particular Prediction of the promised Savior, by
whom we are to obtain a Redemption; his Lineage and Descent, the Time, Place
and Manner of his Birth, the Circumstances of his Life, Death and Resurrection,
a particular Description of the Nature, the Subjects, and the continual
Progress of his Kingdom? -- Read the Prophecies of the Old Testament; and read
the History in the New; and you will find such a Correspondence and Agreement,
as will afford you Matter of fullest Satisfaction, that they are both from God.

Would you expect, that there should be some Means, to keep the promised
Savior in the continued View of God's People, before his actual and personal
Manifestation; and to keep alive their Faith and Hope in him? -- What were all
their Sacrifices, their legal Purifications, their Priesthood, and all their
long Train of Rites and Ceremonies, but Institutions purposely adapted to that
End?

Would you expect repeated and renewed Testimonies from Heaven, to the
professing People of God, that their Religion was from him; and that their
Faith and Hope, excited by these typical Institutions, were built upon a sure
Foundation? -- Such were the Miracles frequently wrought among them, the
Manifestation of the divine Presence in the Shechinah, their Urim and Thummim,
their frequent Oracles, their Succession of Prophets, whose Predictions
respecting the Jews themselves, and the Nations round about them, were
continually fulfilled and fulfilling before their Eyes; and the Accomplishment
of many of 'em, are apparently open and visible to us also.

Would you suppose, that near the predicted Time of the Savior's Appearance,
not only the Jewish Nation, but all others that were acquainted with their
sacred Books, would live in raised Expectations of this great and wonderful
Event? -- You will find in the Gospels, in Josephus, De Belli Jud. Lib. vii.
Cap. 31.
Tacitus Hist. Cap. 13.
, and Suetonius In Vespas. Cap. 4.
that this was the Case in Fact.

Would you expect, that when the Savior did appear, he would by the Holiness
and Beneficence of his Life, and by numerous open and uncontested Miracles,
give such Attestation to his divine Mission, as would be sufficient Evidence,
that he was indeed the Messiah so frequently predicted, and so earnestly
expected? -- Don't the sacred Historians answer your highest Expectations, in
this Respect? -- In them you find, that the dead were raised, the sick healed,
the maimed restored to the Use of their Limbs, the Sight of the blind
recovered, the deaf brought to their Hearing, the Lepers cleansed, the Demons
ejected; and in a Word, that the whole Time of his Ministry was a continued
Succession of the most beneficent and astonishing Miracles; Miracles as
surprising in their Nature, as their Number, such as vastly exceeded the Power
of all created Beings; and were therefore the strongest Testimony from Heaven,
that this Savior most certainly was, what he professed himself to be.

Would you expect, that this Savior should verify his divine Mission, to
future Times, by Prophecies of succeeding Events? -- Don't the Evangelists
afford you many Instances of such Predictions, which have been clearly and
fully accomplished? -- In these Historians you will find, how he foretold the
Treason of Judas, the shameful Fall of Peter, with the Flight of all his
Disciples, in that gloomy, dreadful Night, when the Shepherd was smitten; and
the Sheep scattered. In these you will find, how He foretold the Time and
Manner of his own Death, the Term of his Continuance in the Grave, with his
glorious Resurrection and Ascension. You will there also find him foretelling
the Mission, divine Inspiration, miraculous Powers, and glorious Success of his
Apostles; and their Fellow Laborers in the Gospel Ministry. -- These
Historians do likewise set before you, his particular Prediction of the
Destruction of Jerusalem; and the Abolition of the Temple, with the Prodigies
which proceeded, the Tribulation which accompanied, and the Dispersion of the
Jewish Nation which followed, that amazing Desolation. -- And don't it surprise
you to find from Josephus, that the twenty fourth Chapter of Matthew, and the
twenty first Chapter of Luke, are more like a History than a Prophecy of that
dreadful Event? -- If you should yet further expect some Predictions from him,
that extend to the present Times, and are now visibly accomplished before your
Eyes; has he not foretold, and do you not find it true, that Jerusalem shall
continue to be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the Time of the Gentiles be
fulfilled?

Would you expect, that when this Messiah, according to the Prophecies
concerning him, was cut off, he should declare himself the Son of God with
Power, by his Resurrection from the Dead? -- And has it not appeared true, that
no Precaution by sealing his Tomb and setting a Guard over it, could prevent
his Triumph over the Grave; and his appearing to great Numbers of his
Disciples; and frequently and familiarly conversing with some of them, for
forty Days together; and finally ascending up to Heaven before their Eyes.

Would you expect, that his Disciples, who were Eye and Ear Witnesses of his
Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; and could not possibly be deceived in
Facts so open to all their Senses, should at their Peril preach this Savior to
the World; and continually undergo a Life of painful Travel and Fatigue,
Poverty and Reproach, Opposition and Persecution, to propagate his Gospel; and
that they would finally sacrifice their Lives in the Cause, and seal their
Doctrine with their Blood? -- This they have done, and it is impossible that
more could be done: to raise their Truth and Sincerity above all Suspicion.

Would you expect, that these Disciples should be extraordinarily and
peculiarly qualified for their great Work; and sent forth to the Nations with
sufficient Credentials, to confirm their Testimony and make their Doctrines
credible? -- What greater Furniture can you possibly suppose needful in such a
Case, than for a Number of unlearned Men and Women, to be instantaneously
endued with an intimate and familiar Acquaintance with all Sorts of Languages;
and (not, as pretended by some Energumens and the modern French Prophets, have
their Organs of Speech improved by the Devil, in pronouncing Languages which
they did not understand; but) capable constantly and familiarly to converse
with every Nation in their own proper Speech; and with greatest Propriety to
write, and transmit to Posterity, the History and Religion of their Lord and
Master in a foreign Language which they had never learned. -- Can you, Sir,
possibly imagine a greater and brighter Display of the immediate Agency and
omnipotent Power of the glorious Author of our Beings, than thus at once to
enlarge the Mind, and furnish it with such an amazing Extent of Knowledge,
while God himself has born them Witness, with Signs and Wonders; and with
diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will?

Suppose, you should see some unlearned Rusticks with whom you are acquainted,
pretending to a new Revelation; and confirming their Pretenses, by speaking
familiarly all the Languages of Europe, by healing the sick and decrepit with a
Word, raising the Dead to Life, and striking Men dead by a Word, revealing the
Secrets of other Men's Hearts, communicating these and such like Powers to
others by the Imposition of their Hands; and declaring to you that it was not
by their own Power or Holiness, that they performed these Works: Should you
find the strictest Holiness and Conformity to the divine Nature, joined with
these miraculous Powers: -- Would you not believe the Truth of their
Pretensions? -- Would you not acknowledge, that God was in them of a Truth?

Would you expect that those Men, who were sent out to preach and propagate a
new Religion in the World, should themselves be inspired with a prophetic
Spirit; and capable to foretell future Events? And is not this also visibly
Fact, in the Case before us? Have they not distinctly foretold the State and
Fate of the Church in all its Periods, until the Consummation of all Things? --
Don't we our selves see their Predictions exactly and circumstantially
verified, with Respect to the Rise, Reign and Rage of Antichrist; and with
Respect to the Jews still continuing a distinct People; and remaining in their
Unbelief, until God shall again graff them into the Olive Tree, from whence
they have been cut off?

Would you expect that the Messiah should prosper and succeed those Disciples,
whom he should send out to propagate the Gospel among the Nations, by the
Conversion of Multitudes to the Faith? -- And do we not find in Fact, that he
has assisted a few mean and unlearned Fishermen, without Riches or Power, Art
or Eloquence, to triumph over all the Prejudices in Men's Minds against the
Doctrines of the Cross, over all the bitter Opposition of the Rulers of the
World, all the riveted Prepossessions amongst both Jews and Gentiles, to their
ancient Religion; and all the Learning of Greece and Rome; and to bring so
great a Part of the World into a professed Subjection to the Cross of Christ!

Would you expect, that the Religion of such a Savior should be every Way
worthy of God, agreeable to all his glorious Perfections; and every Way suitable
for Man, perfective of his Nature, and adapted to his Welfare, in every
Station, Relation, and Capacity that he sustains in this World, as well as to
his eternal Interest in the World to come? -- All this (I think) is what the
Deists themselves are forced to allow.

Would you expect some apparent Influence of this Religion, upon the Hearts and
Lives of those who sincerely profess it; and who commit their Souls and eternal
Interests into the Hands of this Savior? -- And don't you your self see this
continually exemplified? Don't every Body see, that they who cordially receive
the Lord Jesus Christ for their Prince and Savior, are distinguished from the
rest of the World, by the Exercise of Love both to God and Man? -- Is not the
Change wro't in the Hearts and Lives of such, visible to every Observer, in the
blessed Fruits of Holiness, Righteousness, Charity and Beneficence? -- This
Change they themselves profess to have experienced, by their Exercise of Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ. This Experience they justify to the World, by the
steady Conduct of their Lives. -- And thus the great Redeemer approves himself
indeed the great Physician of Souls, by recovering all from their spiritual
Maladies, who apply to him, and depend upon him for a Cure.

Would you expect a consistent and harmonious Scheme of Religion, through all
the Parts of divine Revelation? -- And is it not wonderful to observe, how the
New Testament every Way answers the Design of the Old; and how all the numerous
Writers of these sacred Books, notwithstanding their very different Manner of
Writing, the very distant Ages in which they wrote, and the very different
Circumstances of the Church in their respective Times of writing, have yet all
taught the same Doctrines, all described the same Dangers, and all pointed out
the same Way to eternal Salvation!

Thus, Sir, I have set before you, in the closest and most connected View, some
brief Hints of the Credentials of Christianity. -- I know, you are capable of
extending your Demands yet further; and of proposing something else, that may
still serve to reflect new Light upon the Christian Revelation: And there is
yet much more at your Service, when you will be pleased to make your Demands. You
must however in the mean Time allow me the Freedom to say, that the Evidence
now in View is sufficient to fill the Mind of every unprejudiced Person, with a
necessary and infallible Certainty of the Truth we are inquiring after. --
Deliberately consider each of these Arguments separately and particularly;
consider them all in their Connection and Relation to each other; and then try
whether you can refuse your Assent to the Gospel of Christ.

There is (I Am sensible) one Objection ready to offer it self to your Mind
against all this; and that is, How do I know, that the great and principal
Facts, upon which Christianity is especially built, may be depended upon, as
certainly true? -- How do I know the Congruity of the Prophecies with the
Event? -- How do I know the miraculous Conception of the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Attestation of the Angels to his Birth; or that he wrought such Miracles in
Confirmation of his divine Mission; and that he rose again from the Dead; and
ascended up to Heaven? -- How do I know, that his Apostles were inspired with
such extraordinary and divine Gifts; or that they performed such miraculous
Operations?

To this I answer, that some of the Evidences which I have offered, are what
directly, upon the very first View, you may know, and cannot but know, to be
certainly and infallibly true, if you will but open your Eyes to observe them.
-- You do certainly know, that human Nature is dreadfully corrupted and
vitiated, that it is opposite to the Holiness and Purity of the divine Being;
and that there is therefore great Necessity of a Savior, to bring us to God,
and to rectify our depraved Nature. -- You may certainly know, that there a
great Variety of Predictions of such a Savior, dispersed through the whole Old
Testament; and that the whole Nation of the Jews always did, and still do, from
thence live in raised Expectation of a Messiah. -- You may certainly know, that
there were a great Number of Rites and Ceremonies religiously observed and
practiced among the Jews; and that sacrificing, in particular, was not only
enjoined upon them, but early and generally practiced among all Nations. For
none of which Things can there be any Manner of Reason given or imagined,
unless they were Types and Adumbrations of an expected Savior. -- You may
certainly know, that the Time prefixed in the Jewish Prophecies for the
Manifestation of the Messiah, was the very Time, in which by the concurring
Testimony both of the Friends and Enemies of Christianity, the Lord Jesus did
appear. -- You may certainly know, that the Jewish Prophets did foretell a
suffering Savior, a Savior that should be wounded for our Transgressions,
bruised for our Iniquities, that should make his Soul an Offering for Sin; and
that should be cut off, but not for himself: and you are equally certain from
all other Historians, as well as from the Evangelists, that our Lord Jesus did
undergo such Opproby, Misery and Death, as was foretold of the Messiah by the
Prophets. -- You may certainly know, that it was foretold in the Prophets, that
the Scepter should not depart from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his Feet,
until the coming of the Messiah; But that after his Death, the Jewish
Sacrifices should cease; and their holy City and Sanctuary be destroyed and
made desolate: and that the Event does assure us, that the Circumstances of the
Jewish Nation did exactly answer to these Prophecies, both before and after the
Death of Jesus Christ. -- You may certainly know, both by the Jewish and
Christian Prophecies, that under the Gospel Dispensation, the Jews were to be
rejected of God; and to continue, despised and dispersed among all Nations; but
the Gentiles to come to the Light of the Messiah, and see his Righteousness and
Glory: and that the Event is agreeable to the Prediction. -- You may certainly
know, that the Rise of Antichrist was predicted to be after the Fall of the
Roman Empire, when that could no longer let or restrain him; that he should
appear under the Guise of a Minister of Religion, in the Temple of God; that he
should pretend to all Power and Signs and lying Wonders; that he should make
War with the Saints and overcome them; that he should reside in the great City,
that was then built upon seven Mountains, and reigned over the Kings of the
Earth, which was true of the City of Rome only. And you may consider, whether
all this is not true of the Pope and the Roman Papacy. -- You may certainly
know the amazing Progress of the Gospel in the first Ages of Christianity, in
the Face of the most formidable and powerful Oppositions; and its continuing
Progress, against all the Attempts of its heathen and papa^ Enemies. -- You may
know the Excellency of its Doctrines; and the glorious Effects it has upon the
Hearts and Lives of true Believers. -- You may know (as, blessed be God,
Multitudes do know, by Experience) how it conquers Men's Corruptions, changes
their Natures, pacifies their Consciences, fills their Souls with Light and
Joy, strengthens them against Temptations, sweetens the Afflictions of Life;
and fortifies 'em against all the Pains and Terrors of Death. -- And you also
may know, that this Gospel is the Gospel of Christ, and consequently that these
wonderful Effects, which so apparently carry a divine Signature upon them, are
produced by him. -- All these Things, and others of a like Nature which might
be mentioned, are immediately open to your View, most visible and certain; and
one would think, that these alone would satisfy the Mind of a serious and
impartial Enquirer into the Truth of Christianity. And especially when these
are accompanied with such other Credentials of our holy Religion, which (though
not so directly in View, yet) by necessary Consequence give us the same
Assurance and Certainty of the Truth.

But it is Time I should come more directly to answer the Objection; and to show
you, how it may by necessary Consequence be known, that the Facts upon which
Christianity principally depends, are certainly true.

You your self must own, it is impossible that those Doctrines can be false,
which are attested by so many and such Kind of Miracles, as are said to be
wrought by our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles. -- For God cannot set his
Seal to a Lie; nor confirm a horrible Imposture, by his immediate Attestation
from Heaven.

You must own, that it is impossible for the Apostles and other Witnesses of
these miraculous Operations, to be themselves deceived, while they had all the
Means of Certainty in the Case before us, that ever any Man had in any Case
whatsoever.

You must likewise own, that it is impossible for a great Number of sober,
judicious, and apparently honest Men, to spend their Lives in a continued
Conspiracy against their own Ease, Comfort, Honor, Life, and eternal Welfare,
for no other Motive, but to deceive the World; and bring eternal Ruin upon
themselves and their Fellow Creatures; as these must have done, if they knew
those Facts to be false, which they published at their Peril, and sealed with
their Blood.

You must also own, that it was impossible to deceive the World about them, at
the Time when these Facts were done, by reporting, that such miraculous
Operations were openly performed before them all, which none of them knew any
Thing about.

You will certainly own, it is impossible that they could deceive the Churches
to whom they wrote, by vain Pretenses, that each one of these had themselves
the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, such as Tongues, Miracles, Healing,
Prophecy, and the like, when every one of them knew that there was nothing in
it.

You must in like Manner own it impossible for such Multitudes of People, for
so long a Tract of Time, to be imposed upon by Pretenses of miraculous
Operations; and none of them ever detect the Imposture, so much as in one
single Instance, while all of them had the Opportunity of doing it when they
pleased, if the Facts had not been true.

Can you imagine it any Ways possible, that such Multitudes in the first Ages
of Christianity, in such distant Countries and Nations, should conspire
together to acknowledge these Facts, and the Doctrines founded on them, at the
Peril of their Lives; and no Man among these Professors themselves, or among
the Heretics and Apostates that fell away from them, should discover the
Fraud, either living or dying?

You will certainly own it utterly impossible, that so many Thousands, in so
many Lands, could with Joy and Cheerfulness submit to such poor and afflicted
Lives, and to such cruel and barbarous Deaths, as were the common Lot of the
first Christians, in Confirmation of a Religion, founded upon Facts which they
knew to be false.

And you must acknowledge it also altogether impossible, at any Time after
these Facts were pretended to be done, to palm the History of them upon the
World, if it was false; and to persuade so many Nations to receive it for
Truth. -- It were impossible to persuade any Nations, and much more all the
early Nations of Christendom, that at some distant forgotten Age there were a
Number of Men that came among them, taught them the Doctrines of Christianity,
confirmed the same by Miracles, baptized them into the Faith; and established a
settled Order of the Ministry in their Churches: From which Time, they have all
of them professed the Christian Faith; had the New Testament in their Hands;
and enjoyed a continued Succession of Ministers and Ordinances. -- Let an
Attempt of this Kind be made upon our Indians, and try, if any one Man among
them, can be imposed upon, to believe these Things.

To this I may add, that it is absolutely impossible, at any one Time, to have
obtruded the inspired Writings upon the World, if they were indeed spurious;
and to have made all the Christian Nations believe, that these were written in
the Apostolic Age, speedily translated into diverse Languages, publicly kept,
and publicly read and preached in their Churches; that they and their Fathers
before them had always reverenced and esteemed them as the Rule of their Lives;
and their Guide to eternal Happiness. -- What Success, but Scorn and Derision,
could be hoped for from such an Attempt?

I may once more subjoin to all this, that it is at least highly improbable,
that the early Writers against Christianity should never deny these Facts, if
they were not notoriously true, when they could not want Advantages to detect
any Fraud or Deceit, that can possibly be supposed in a Case of this Kind. --
And it is yet more improbable, that any of the Adversasaries of Christianity
should confirm the Truth of these Facts, as we find some of them do, if they
had not been most apparently and undoubtedly true.

And now, Sir, what can be wanting, what can you demand or desire more, to
confirm you in the Faith of Christianity? It is established upon the Veracity
of God himself; upon those Facts, by which he has from Heaven attested to the
Truth of it; and these Facts are verified by Evidences, which cannot possibly
deceive us. -- By believing therefore, we set to our Seal that God is true: But
he that believes not, makes him a Liar; because he believes not the Record
that God gave of his Son.

You may perhaps tell me, that if you had seen these Miracles your self, you
would have believed them. -- But han't every Body else the same Claim to this
Sort of Satisfaction as you; and the same Reason to desire, to be Eye and
Ear-Witnesses of such miraculous Operations? -- At this Rate, Miracles would
cease to be miraculous, they would become come common and familiar Things; and
no longer strike the Mind with any Conviction at all, any more than the ebbing
and flowing of the Sea, the rising and setting of the Sun; or any other such
Displays of the divine Power, in the common Course of Providence.

Upon the whole, there is no Evidence wanting, to leave the Unbeliever
inexcusable. -- There is Evidence every Way sufficient, to satisfy the Mind of
an impartial Enquirer after Truth. And it is impossible for any Man in the
World to imagine any Means of Confirmation in this important Truth, superior
to what is herein set before you. -- How unreasonable would it therefore be, to
require more Evidence in a Case, wherein we have already as much as we are
possibly capable to receive? -- That it may be effectual to establish you in
the Faith, is and shall be the Prayer of,

SIR, Yours, etc.

LETTER III. Wherein an historical Account of the Birth, Life, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, and future Kingdom of our blessed SAVIOR, is
collected from the Prophecies of the Old Testament.
SIR,
I Rejoice to hear from you, that any Endeavors of mine have contributed in
the least toward your Satisfaction. I am thereby the more encouraged to hope,
that your remaining Difficulties may easily be obviated; and particularly, that
it will not prove difficult to answer your present Demand; to show you how you
may certainly know that the Prophecies of the Old Testament bad a direct
Reference unto Jesus Christ. -- You may know this by the exact Accommodation of
the Prediction with the Event. That this therefore may be set before you in a
proper Light, I will endeavor to give you (in the Form of an History) a brief
Representation of our blessed Savior, gathered from the Old Testament; and
leave you to compare this with the Narrative of him in the New. -- If these
agree, you thereby have a certain Discovery of the divine Original of these
Prophecies; since none but an omniscient Mind could possibly foresee these
Events. And you have likewise the same Certainty, that Jesus Christ is the
predicted Messiah, and that his Mission is divine, since what was foretold of
the Messiah in the Prophets, is fulfilled in him.

The Time of the Manifestation of this glorious Person, whom I am now to
describe, was during the Continuance of the Kingdom of Judah, while a Scepter
was in the Hand, and a Lawgiver came from between the Feet of that Tribe, Genesis
49. 10.
while the second Temple was yet standing, Mal. 3. 1. Hag. 2. 7.
just 450 Chaldee Years after the Decree went forth to restore and to build
Jerusalem, which was in the twentieth Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, King of
Persia. Dan. 9. 25.
Daniel's seven Weeks and threescore and two Weeks, or 483 Years, were to
terminate at the Death of the Messiah. We must therefore substract from that
Number, the 33 Years of his Life; and there remains 450 Years to his Birth.
-- This King likewise came into the World, and the God of Heaven set up his
everlasting Kingdom, at that Season of the fourth or roman Monarchy, Dan. 2. 44.
when there was an End put, to the dreadful Shaking of the Heavens and the
Earth, the Sea and the dry Land, and indeed of all Nations, by the Wars of
Alexander the Great, the four Kingdoms that arose out of his Conquests; and the
Romans the Conquerors of them all; and when Peace was restored to the World,
Hag. 2. 6, 7, 9.
which happened when Augustus Caesar was Emperor of Rome, and Herod the great
was King of Judea.

As to the Pedigree or Descent of our blessed Savior, it must be considered
with Respect to the two different Natures, that were united in this glorious
Person. For how wonderful soever it may appear to us, the Man Christ Jesus was
also Immanuel, God with us Isai. 7. 14.
and that divine Child which was born, and that Son which was given to us (at
the Time before described) is the mighty God, and the everlasting Father, as
well as the Prince of Peace. Isai. 9. 6.
He is that God, whose Throne is for ever and ever; Psalm. 45. 6.
and though a Man, yet such a Man, as is also God's own Fellow. Z^ch. 13. 7.
Now, if we consider his Descent, with Respect to his divine Person, it must
necessarily be, that though he be God the Father's Son, and begotten by him,
Psalm. 2. 7.
yet his going forth must have been from of Old, from Everlasting. Mich. 5. 2.
And it is accordingly true, that the Lord Possessed him in the beginning of
his Way, before his Works of old: He was set up from Everlasting, from the
Beginning, or ever the Earth was. Prove. 8. 22, 23.
-- Being thus necessarily stopped from looking any further than to Eternity, and
to him that inhabits Eternity, in considering the Original of his divine
Person; I proceed to take Notice, that in his human Nature, he descended from
the Loins of Abraham, Genesis 12. 3.
of Isaac, Genesis 26. 4.
and of Jacob, Genesis 28. 14.
from the Tribe of Judah, Genesis 49. 10.
and from the royal Family of David; Psalm. 89. 35, 36.
and that in a Way surprizingly different from any ordinary human Generation, a
Virgin conceived and brought forth this Son, whose Name is Immanuel; Isa. 7. 14.
and this new Thing did God create in the Earth, that a Woman has compassed a
Man. Jer. 31. 22.


The Place where our blessed Savior was born, was Bethlehem-Ephratah. This
Town, though but little among the Thousands of Judah, was honored with being
the Place out of which he came forth who is the supreme Ruler in Israel. Mich.
5. 2.
Here he was born: but this was not the Place of his chief and principal
Residence; that was Galilee of the Nations. This People who had walked in
Darkness, saw this great Light among them: even upon them who had dwelt in the
Land of the Shadow of Death, has this Light shined. Isa. 9. 1, 2.


The Circumstances of his appearing in the World, were low, mean and abased;
very different from the Expectations Men had entertained of the Messiah; and
therefore he was despised and rejected of Men, they hid their Faces from him,
he was despised, and they esteemed him not. Isa. 53. 3.
Nay, many were astonished at him, his Visage was so marred, more than any Man;
and his Form, more than the Sons of Men. Isa. 52. 14.
So far was his Appearance from that Glory and Majesty, that Pomp and Splendour,
which was expected in the Messiah, that he was considered as a Worm and no Man,
a Reproach of Men; and despised of the People. Psalm. 22. 6.
-- Even the Priests and Rulers themselves, who should have been the Builders
of the Jewish Church, refused this Stone, which is become the Head of the
Corner. Psalm. 118. 22.
-- And the Reason of this was, that they saw no Form nor Comeliness, no Riches
nor Honor, no Magnificence nor Beauty in him, that they should desire him.
Isai. 53. 2.


The Characters, in which he appeared in the World, were those of a Prophet,
Priest, and King: to each of which, it is proper to speak something
particularly.

The Lord our God did in the Person of our blessed Savior, raise up unto his
People a PROPHET, like unto Moses, the greatest and most eminent Prophet of the
Jewish Church: he put his Words into his Mouth, that he might speak unto them,
whatsoever he commanded him; and held his People under the strongest Injunction
upon their Peril, to hearken to the Words, which this Prophet should speak in
his Name. Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19.
And as our Lord Jesus Christ, was destined by God the Father unto the
prophetical Office, he cheerfully undertook it. Lo, I come (says he) in the
Volume of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy Will, O my God:
Yea, thy Law is within my Heart. Psalm. 40. 7. 8.
And as he cheerfully undertook, so he diligently and faithfully discharged
this sacred and important Trust. He as a wonderful Counselor, Isa. 9. 6.
preached constantly to the People and made known the whole Mind and Will of
God to them; and could make this Appeal to his heavenly Father, I have preached
Righteousness in the great Congregation. Lo, I have not refrained my Lips, O
Lord, thou know. I have not hid thy Righteousness within my Heart. I have
declared thy Faithfulness and thy Salvation. I have not concealed thy Loving
kindness and thy Truth from the great Congregation. Psalm. 40. 9, 10.
He constantly preached among the People the blessed and joyful News of a
glorious Salvation from their Sin, Guilt, Danger and Misery. The Spirit of the
Lord God was upon him, because the Lord had anointed him to preach good Tidings
unto the meek, he sent him to bind up the broken hearted; to proclaim Liberty
to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that were bound, to
proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord, to comfort all that mourn, to appoint
unto them that mourn in Zion, and to give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil
of Joy for Mourning; and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness.
Isai. 61. 1, 2, 3.
-- He exercised most tender Compassion to dark, doubting and tempted Souls.
The bruised Reed did he not break; and the smoking Flax did he not quench,
until he brought forth Judgment unto Truth. Isa. 42. 3.
He strengthened the weak Hands; and confirmed the feeble Knees; and said to
them of a saint Heart, Be strong, fear not. Isa. 35. 3.
-- He warned the careless and secure Sinners of their Misery and Danger; and
Proclaimed unto them the Day of Vengeance of our God. Isa. 61. 2.
He warned them to be wise, to serve the Lord with Fear; and to kiss the Son,
lest he should be angry, and they perish by the Way, when his Wrath is kindled
but a little. Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12.
-- He made the Pathway of Salvation plain, before the Eyes of all those who
believe in him, like an high Way, where the Wayfaring Men, though Fools, could
not Err. Isa. 35. 8.
-- He considered his People as his Flock; and took Care of them, as a most
watchful and careful Shepherd. He fed his Flock like a Shepherd, he gathered
his Lambs with his Arm, he carried them in his Bosom, and gently led those that
were with Young. Isa. 40. 11.


I next proceed to give you a View of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the great HIGH
PRIEST of our Profession. As such, he undertook to make an Atonement and
Expiation for our Sins. He bore our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; the
Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed. God
laid upon him the Iniquity of us all; and he made his Soul an Offering for our
Sins. Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6, 10.
Thus he finished the Transgression, made an End of Sin; and made
Reconciliation for Iniquity. Dan. 9. 24.
He likewise wrought out a perfect Righteousness for Sinners, whereby they
should be justified before God; and accepted of him. God raised up this
righteous Branch unto David, in whose Day Judah is saved, and Israel dwells
safely; and this is the Name whereby he is called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Jer. 23. 5, 6.
He is one who speaks in Righteousness, mighty to save. Isa. 63. 1,
For he has brought in everlasting Righteousness Dan. 9. 24.
-- As a Priest likewise, he brings us into a Covenant Relation to God. He is
the Messenger or Angel of the Covenant. Mal. 3. 1.
The Lord in an accepted Time heard him; and in a Day of Salvation has helped
him, has preserved him, and given him for a Covenant of the People, to
establish the Earth. Isa. 49. 8.
By the Blood of his Covenant, God has sent forth his Prisoners out of the Pit,
wherein is no Water; and God has promised that he will keep his Mercy for him
for evermore; and that his Covenant shall stand fast with him. Psalm. 89. 28.
Thus the Counsel of Peace was between God the Father and him. -- In a Word, as
our priest, he is our Advocate with the Father; and makes Intercession for
Transgressors. Isai. 53. 12.
Thus we see, that according to God's Oath concerning him, he remains a
Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchizedec. Psalm. 110. 4.


This blessed Savior sustained likewise the Office of a KING. God has set
this his king upon his holy Hill of Zion. Psalm. 2. 6.
-- The Throne of God (our Savior) is for ever and ever; and the Scepter of
his Kingdom is a right Scepter. Psalm. 45. 6.
-- As a King, he reigns in the Hearts of his People, brings them into
Subjection to himself; and makes them willing in the Day of his Power. Psalm.
110. 3.
As a King, he sits at God's right Hand; and rules in the midst of his Enemies.
Psalm. 110. 1, 2.
In his Majesty he rides forth prosperously; and his Arrows are sharp in the
Heart of the King's Enemies Psalm. 45. 4. 5.
-- His regal Office was not limited to the Time of his bodily Residence among
us; for of the Increase of his Government and Peace there is no End. He sits
upon the Throne of David, and in his Kingdom, to order it and to establish it,
with Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever Isa. 9. 7.
-- Such Cause had Zion to rejoice greatly, and the Daughter of Jerusalem to
shout; for behold, her king came to her, just and having Salvation. (...) ^, ^.


Having thus shown from the prophetic Account of our blessed Savior, the Time
of his Manifestation, his Descent, the Place of his Birth, and the Place of his
principal Residence, with the Circumstances of his Appearing in the World, and
the Characters in which he appeared; I proceed to observe some of his
distinguishing Qualities, and the more remarkable Incidents of his Life and
Death.

As to his personal Properties, he was perfectly innocent, and most exemplarily
holy both in Heart and Life; and in that Respect, fairer than the Children of
Men. Grace was poured into his Lips, therefore God has blessed him for ever.
Psalm. 45. 2.
He was God's righteous Servant, and there was no Deceit found in his Mouth.
Isa. 53. 9. 11.
He was the Sun of Righteousness, which arose upon his People, with hea^^ng
under his Wings, or in his Rays. Man. 4. ^.


He was of a meek and lowly Disposition. This King of Zion came to her, not
only just and having Salvation; but showed himself lowly, by most astonishing
Condescensions Zech. 9. 9.
-- He gave his Back to the Smiters; and his Cheeks to them who plucked off the
Hair; he did not his Face from Shame and Spitting. Isai. 50. 6.
Though he was oppressed and afflicted; yet he opened not his Mouth. Isai. 53.
7.
He did not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his Voice to be heard in the Streets.
Isai. 42. 2.


He was endowed with astonishing Wisdom and Capacity. The Spirit of the Lord
rested upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel
and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord. Isa. 11. 2, 3.
Thus did the Servant of the Lord deal prudently, he was exalted and extolled;
and was very high. Isa. 52. 13.
-- He and only he, of all the human Race, could say, Counsel is mine, and
found Wisdom, I am Understanding, I have Strength. Prove. 8. 14.


Previous to his entering upon his public Ministry, there was a Messenger sent
before him, to prepare the Hearts of God's People for his Reception, whose
Voice cried in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make straight in
the Desert a high Way for our God. Every Valley shall be exalted; and every
Mountain and Hill shall he made low; and the crooked shall be made straight,
and the rough Places plain; and the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed; and
all Flesh shall see it together: for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Isa.
40. 3, 4, 5.
Thus God sent one to his People in the Spirit of Elijah the Prophet, before
the coming of the great and dreadful Day of the Lord, to turn the Heart of the
Fathers to the Children; and the Heart of the Children to the Fathers. He sent
his Messenger to prepare his Way before him; and then the Lord whom they
sought, came suddenly to his Temple. Mal. 4. 5, 6. and 3. 1.


When he entered upon his public Ministry, God gave him the Tongue of the
learned, that he should know how to speak a Word in Season to him that is
weary; and he was most painful and diligent in his Work, he was awakened
Morning by Morning, his Ear was awakened to hear, and vigorously to attend to
the great Business before him. Isai. 50. 4.
-- He began his Ministry in the mountainous Parts of Judea; and how beautiful
then upon the Mountains were the Feet of him who brought good Tidings, who
published Peace, who brought good Tidings of Good, who published Salvation, who
said unto Zion, Thy God reigns. Isa. 52. 7.
As he resided in Galilee (as was before observed) so his Ministry early and
peculiarly enlightened those dark Corners, the Land of Zebulon, and the Land of
Naphtali; though they had dwelt in the Land of the Shadow of Death, this Light
shined upon them. Isa. 9. 1, 2.
But then, his Ministry was not limited to them. This Star which came out of
Jacob Number. 24. 17.
enlightened the whole Land of Israel, in that Time of gross Ignorance, and
thick Darkness. -- They might all be called upon to arise and shine, for their
Light was come: and the Glory of the Lord was risen upon them; though Darkness
had covered the Earth, and gross Darkness the People, yet the Lord arose upon
them, and his Glory was seen upon them. Isa. 60. 1, 2.
He preached Righteousness in the great Congregation. Psalm. 40. 9.
He came into the Temple Mal. 3. 1.
and by his preaching there, made the Glory of that latter House, much greater
than the Glory of the former, which was built by Solomon. Hag. 2. 9.
-- In what Manner he fulfilled his Ministry, has been already considered.

In Confirmation of his divine Mission, he wrought many wonderful Miracles
among the People, wherever he went. The Lord their God came among them, he
came to save them: then the Eyes of the Blind were opened; and the Ears of the
Deaf unstopped; the lame Man leaped as an Heart; and the Tongue of the dumb
sung. Isa. 35. 5, 6.
In that Day, the Deaf heard the Words of the Book; and the Eyes of the Blind
saw out of Obscurity and out of Darkness, the Meek also increased their Joy in
the Lord; and the Poor among Men rejoiced in the holy One of Israel. Isa. 29.
18, 19.


When the Stretching out of Immanuel's Wings had thus filled the Land of Judah,
it might have been expected, that he would have met with a most joyful
Entertainment amongst the People: but the Case was otherwise. Though he was for
a Sanctuary to some; yet he was for a Stone of Stumbling, and for a Rock of
Offense to both the Houses of Israel, for a Gin and a Snare to the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem; and many among them stumbled and fell, were broken and snared and
taken. For the Testimony was bound up; and the Law sealed among his Disciples
Isa. 8. 8, 14, 15, 16.
known indeed and understood by them: but kept hid as a Secret from the Body of
the Jewish Nation. Notwithstanding the indefatigable Labors of our blessed
Lord, in instructing this People, though God made his Mouth like a sharp Sword;
and made him a polished Shaft in his Quiver: Yet did he find Cause to complain,
that he labored in vain; and spent his Strength for naught, and in vain. Isa.
49. 2, 4.
Who among all the Jewish Nation were there, that believed his Report? and to
whom was the Arm of the Lord revealed? He was rejected and despised of them;
and they hid their Faces from him. Isa. 53. 1, 3.
It is true, he had a considerable Number of temporary Followers, there
appeared some Numbers of the Children of Zion, who rejoiced greatly; and of the
Children of Jerusalem who shouted, when they beheld their King come to them,
just and having Salvation, lowly and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the
Fool of an Ass. Zech. 9. 9.
But we shall quickly see, that this Joy was all turned into Hatred, and Rage,
and Malice.

I proceed next to show the Manner of our Savior's Sufferings, from the Hands
of this People. When their Rulers took Counsel together against the Lord, and
against his Anointed Psalm. 2. 2.
He was betrayed into their Hands, by one of his familiar Friends, in whom be
trusted. Psalm. 41. 9.
They wounded and bruised him, the Chastisement of our Pea^e was upon him, that
by his STRIPES we might be healed. Isa. 53. 5.
He gave his Back to the Smiters; and though they buffeted and spit upon him,
yet such was his astonishing Meekness and Patience, that he gave his Cheeks to
them that plucked off the Hair; and hid not his Face from Shame and Spitting.
Isa. 50. 6.
They pierced his Hands and his Feet, Psalm. 22. 16.
And when they had nailed him to the Cross, they gave him Gall for his Meat;
and in his Thirst gave him Vinega^ to drink Psalm. 69. 21.
They mocked (...) ^pbraided, and (...) ^aught him to Scorn, they shot out
their Lips, they shook their Heads, saying, He trusted in the Lord, that he
would deliver him, let him deliver him seeing he delighted in him. Psalm. 22. 7,
8.
In Time, they cut him off from the Land of the Living Isa. 53. 8.
Thus was the Messiah cut off, but not for himself Dan. 9. 26.
For the Transgression of God's People, was he stricken. He made his Soul an
Offering for Sin, and he poured out his Soul unto Death, that he might bear the
Sin of many, and make Intercession for Transgressors Isa. 53. 8, 10, 12.
After his Death, his Murderers parted his Garments among them; and cast Lots
upon his Vesture. Psalm. 22. 18.
And being dead, he made his Grave with the rich, Isa. 53. 9.
that is, he was buried in a rich Man's Tomb.

Thus I have followed our blessed Savior to the Grave. But could the Grave
detain him? Could it keep him its Prisoner? No! I know that my Redeemer lives;
and that he shall stand at the latter Day, upon the Earth. Job 19. 25.
His Flesh might go to the Grave, and rest in Hope; for God would not leave his
Soul in Hell; nor suffer his holy One to be so long under the Power of Death,
as to see Corruption. Psalm. 16. 9, 10.
-- After his Soul was made an Offering for Sin, he saw his Seed; and prolonged
his Days Isa. 53. 10.
He ascended to the right Hand of God; and the Lord said to him, Sit thou at my
right Hand until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. Psalm. 110. 1.
-- He ascended on high, that he might lead Captivity Captive; and give Gifts
unto Men. Psalm. 68. 16.


Having thus given you some Account from the ancient Prophecies, of the Life,
Death and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, I shall now proceed to show
you some of the Consequences of this great Event.

And it may be proper in the first Place to take Notice, what were the Effects
of the Jews thus rejecting and murdering the Prince of Life; and to show you,
that the People of Titus the Roman Prince came upon them, destroyed the City
and the Sanctuary, caused the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease; and the
Abominations (or abominable Armies) with their Eagles (and superstitious Rites)
to overspread and to make them desolate. Dan. 9. 27.
-- When God had laid in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a
precious Cornerstone, and a sure Foundation (...) all that would believe on
him, he then took Notice of the scornful Men that ruled in Jerusalem. He laid
Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, the Hail swept away
their Refuge of Lies; and the Waters overflowed their hiding Place. Their
Covenant with Death was disannulled, and their Agreement with Hell could not
stand; when the overflowing Scourge passed through them; and they were trodden
down by it, from the Time it went forth it took them, for Morning by Morning it
passed over them, by Day and by Night, until it was a Vexation only to
understand the Report. For the Lord rose up as in Mount Perazim, he was wroth
as in the Valley of Gibeon; and a Consumption was determined upon the whole
Earth, or upon their whole Land. Isa. 28. 14 to the 22.
The Lord numbered them to the Sword; and they all bowed down to the Slaughter;
because when he called they did not answer, when he spoke they did not hear:
but did Evil before his Eyes, and chose that wherein he delighted not;
therefore the Lord said unto them, Behold, my Servants (the Christians) shall
eat: but ye shall be hungry. Behold, my Servants shall drink: But ye shall be
thirsty. Behold (...) Servants shall rejoice: But ye shall be ashamed. Behold,
my Servants shall sing for Joy of Heart: But ye shall cry for Sorrow of Heart,
and shall howl for Vexation of Spirit. And ye shall leave your Name for a Curse
unto my Chosen, for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his Servants by
another Name; Christians, and not Jews. Isa. 65. 12 to 16.


Another Consequence of the Excision of the Messiah, and his pouring out his
Soul unto Death, was the Calling the Gentiles into a Church State. -- Behold
God's Servant whom he upholds, his Servant in whom his Soul delights, he has
put his Spirit upon him; and be has brought forth Judgment unto the Gentiles.
He has not failed nor been discouraged, 'till he has set Judgment upon the
Earth; and the Isles have waited for his Law. Isa. 42. 1. 4.
Then did the Barren sing that did not bear; she broke forth into Singing and
cried aloud, that had not travailed with Child; and more were the Children of
the Desolate, than of the married Wife. For she brake forth on the right Hand
and on the left; and her Seed inherited the Gentiles; and made the desolate
Cities to be inhabited. Isa. 54. 1, 3.
Thus was our Lord Jesus Christ given for a Light to the Gentiles, that he
might be for Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth. Isa. 49. 6.
And the Gentiles came to his Light, and Kings to the Brightness of his Rising.
Isa. 60. 3.


Thus you have had a general View of our blessed Savior's Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and Kingdom, out of the Jewish Prophets. -- I have not
given you all (nor indeed a tenth Part) of the Predictions of the Messiah, that
are to be found in the Old Testament; and yet I have by these brief Hints,
given you the Advantage to consider, whether these Prophecies did not in all
Circumstances exactly agree to the Lord Jesus Christ; and whether they did or
possibly could agree to any other Person in the World.

And now, Sir, I leave it to your self to judge, whether we can either have or
desire greater Certainty of any past Event, than that these Prophecies did
directly refer to and were all accomplished in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Suppose we had as certain Direction, when to begin the forty two Months, or
one Thousand two Hundred and Sixty Years of Antichrist's Reign, as we have with
Respect to the Beginning of Daniel's Weeks; and you should find, by Calculation
that they would terminate in the Year 1746; and being filled with Expectations
of the Events of that Year, should (when it comes) actually see all the Popish
Princes of Europe brought into Subjection, the Protestant Princes united in
Confederacy, the City of Rome sacked and burnt, and the papal Hierarchy every
where overturned; the Turkish Empire destroyed; and the Jews collected and
brought into the Christian Church: would you not acknowledge these Prophecies
to be of divine Original; and the Pope and Roman Papacy, to be the Antichrist
therein predicted? And would you not also live in certain Expectation of all
the other Events, which are foretold as Consequences of this Revolution? -- You
certainly would. And yet I must take the Liberty to tell you, that there is a
much brighter Light shines upon the Prophecies concerning our blessed Savior,
in their exact Accomplishment, than this would prove, should all these
Circumstances concur, as is here supposed.

That the Lord may graciously grant both you and me a sincere Faith in this
blessed Savior; and prepare us both for the great Events that are hastening
upon us, is the Prayer of

Sir, Your etc.

LETTER IV. Wherein is considered the Certainty of those Facts, upon which the
Evidence of Christianity depends.
SIR,
YOU mistake in supposing, that my last Letter has set the Evidence of our
Savior's divine Mission, from the Old-Testament-Prophecies, in the strongest
Light. -- There might be much stronger Light brought from the prophetic
Writings, in Confirmation of this blessed Truth: and yet you must allow me the
Freedom to tell you, that my Letter justly demands of you a firmer Assent, than
you are pleased to express, to that fundamental Article of our Faith and Hope.
It represents to you more than a strong Probability, that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, and the Savior of the World. -- Consider, I beseech you, whether
it is possible, for any or for all created Intelligences, to foresee and
foretell such future Events, as depend wholly upon the mere good Pleasure of
God; Such Events as are altogether out of the Way of God's ordinary
Dispensations of Providence; and such Events as had not the least Probability
from the known Laws of Nature, to have ever come to pass; and then to overrule
the various Revolutions of Nature and Providence in such a Way, as is utterly
inconsistent with, and in many Instances altogether contrary to, the known
stated Methods of God's governing the World, in Order that those Predictions
(even in every particular Circumstance) should be exactly accomplished. -- I
entreat you, Sir, to consider the Affair in this View (for in this View it
ought to be considered) and then tell me, whether the Evidence don't amount to
more than a strong Probability. -- And consider what Evidence of this Kind you
your self can possibly imagine, that would bring your Mind into a full
Acquiescence in this Truth, as certain and undoubted.

If there can be any reasonable Doubt remaining, it must be for one of these
following Causes. Either,

1. It must be supposed, that the Jewish Prophets had no such Events in their
Eye; that the quoted Predictions had a Reference to something else; or perhaps
no Reference to any Thing at all: but were the casual Sallies of the several
Authors fruitful Fancies or Imaginations.

But then, if this be supposed, how comes it to pass that they are all so
exactly verified? -- Certain it is, that the Jews supposed all these
Predictions to be divine Inspirations, kept up stated Memorials of them, and
longed for their Accomplishment. And it is equally certain, that at the very
Time when they ought to be expected, they were all fulfilled, in every
Circumstance. -- This is an Affair that demands your Attention. -- Here are
Predictions of most wonderful amazing Events; such as no Appearances, that ever
had been in the World, could any Way lead the Minds of the Prophets to think
of, or imagine. -- These Even^s were foretold as to Time, Place, and many other
particular Circumstances, that you see a History of our Savior's Birth, Life,
Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and future Kingdom, could be made up out of
these Prophecies: -- and to crown the whole, they have all been exactly
fulfilled. Now then, I have a Right to demand; Were these from Heaven, or of
Men? Can the most licentious Imagination apprehend these very numerous and
various Predictions to be the Effects of capricious Fancies; and their
Fulfillment, a Matter of mere Chance or Casualty? Then may the Epicurean
Philosophy take Place again; and the World in all its Glory, Order and
Symmetry, be reasonably believed to be the Effect of a fortuitous Concourse and
Jumble of Atoms. I hope, this Doubt is cleared out of your Way; and I know of
but one more that can remain: Which is,

2. That there never were any such Predictions of these Things in the Jewish
Prophets: but that all of them were written since the Events.

But then, you must suppose, that this was done by the Christians, without the
Privity of the Jews and others, who had these Books in their Hands; or that it
was done by a joint Confederacy of Christians and Jews. -- If the former, you
must imagine, that the whole Nation of the Jews, and all the other Nations who
had the Greek Translation of the Jewish Bible in their Hands, must be persuaded
to believe, that they always had and always read those Things in their Bible,
which were never there; or else all of them to a Man must be prevailed upon,
out of Complaisance to their greatest Adversaries, to interpolate their Bibles,
by inserting these Predictions; and not leave to Posterity a single Copy
unadulterated, to discover and correct the Fraud. -- But if you choose the
latter of those Supposals, that these Prophecies were added to the Jewish
Bibles by a joint Confederacy of Christians and Jews, you must imagine, that
the whole Jewish Nation in all their most distant Dispersions, united in a
Confederacy to furnish the World with Armor against their own Infidelity; and
to represent themselves as the most unreasonable and wicked of all Mankind. --
These Absurdities are (I am sure) too gross for you to entertain; and yet I may
venture to challenge you to think of any other Way, in which it is possible
this could be done.

But you tell me, It yet appears the greatest Difficulty to you, to come at any
Certainty of the Truth of those Facts, upon which the Evidence of Christianity
depends. And I readily acknowledge, that if these Facts are not true, all our
Reasonings from Prophecy, and Miracles too, will come to Nothing. It is
therefore proper, to consider this Case more particularly. -- And in Order that
this may be brought into the closest View, and the Conclusion necessarily force
it self upon our Minds; let us consider what Consequences must follow upon the
Supposal, that these Facts are not true. -- You can have no rational Doubt of
these Things, but upon one of these Suppositions: either,

1. That the Apostles, and other Reporters of these Facts, did themselves
certainly know that their Narratives of these Miracles were all of them mere
Fictions and Falsehoods: and that they never did in Fact see any such miraculous
Works performed by Jesus Christ; that they never did see and converse with him
after his Resurrection; and that they never had those miraculous Gifts and
Powers themselves; nor ever instrumentally conveyed them to others. -- Or,

2. That the Reporters of these Facts, and many Thousands of others, had their
Senses and Imaginations imposed upon; and were made to believe that they did
see, hear, and feel, such miraculous Operations, as were never performed. -- Or
else,

3. That this whole History was an After-Game; and a mere Piece of Forgery
obtruded upon the World, after the Facts were pretended to be done.

These are all the Suppositions, that can possibly be made in this Case. And I
have already in my second Letter offered you some Proof, that they are all of
them unreasonable and absurd. -- However, for your Satisfaction, I will
endeavor to show you under each of these Suppositions, some of those
Absurdities that will necessarily follow from them.

In the first Place, If it be supposed, that the Reporters of these Facts did
themselves certainly know that they were false, then it will follow, that
Thousands of others, before whom these Miracles were said to be done, did also
certainly know that they were mere Fictions and Fables. For they were as
capable of Certainty, whether they had seen those Multitudes of plain open
visible Facts, which are reported, as the Apostles were themselves. -- Upon
this Supposal, all Judea and Jerusalem must certainly know, that they never saw
any such Descent of the Holy Ghost in cloven Tongues upon the Apostles and
Company; and that they knew Nothing of those Gifts of Languages, which were
pretended. -- The several Churches throughout the World, among whom the
Apostles went, did certainly know, that they saw no Miracles wrought by them in
Confirmation of their Mission; that they never had nor knew any Thing about
those miraculous Gifts, which were said to be so common among them. And yet
that all these conspired in the Deceit ( Jews, as well as Gentiles) to the
utter Subversion of the Religion in which they had been educated; and
Multitudes of them at the Expense of their Honors, Estates, and Lives, not one
Person among them all appearing to detect the Villainy. The Jews tamely
submitting to the Loss of their Religion, and to the Imputation of the blackest
Crime, that ever was committed; and the Christian Churches as tamely submitting
to all that is shocking and terrible to Nature, rather than contradict and
disprove what they knew to be false. -- Nay, what is more surprising still, all
of these even the greatest Enemies of Christianity among them have not only
allowed, but actually asserted the Truth of these Facts; which, upon this
Supposal, they might have so easily disproved, to the utter Ruin of the
Christian Cause. And to crown all, there can be no Motive in the World
imagined, to put any of them upon acknowledging such notorious and abominable
Falsehoods. -- As I know, on the one Hand, that you cannot swallow such gross
Absurdities as these; so I also know, on the other Hand, that you have no Way
to avoid them, upon the Supposition before us.

It may be further observed, that if the Reporters of these Miracles did
themselves know, that their Narratives were fictitious and false, it will also
follow, that the most vile and wicked Men that ever were in the World, and the
most abandoned to all Sense of Virtue and Piety, did draw up the best System of
practical Religion, the most worthy of God and Man, that ever was known; that
they, contrary to their inward Principles, sat the best Examples, and walked
according to the Rules of this Religion themselves; yea, without any known
Motive, spent their whole Lives in a continued Course of the greatest Toil,
Fatigue, and Misery, that ever Men did, to promote this Religion, to impress it
upon the Minds of others, and to teach them, according to it, to live in the
Love and Fear of God. -- It will also follow, that these Enemies of God and
Godliness (who were so profane, as against their own Light to propagate this
Imposture, in the Name of God Almighty) did not only give up the Hopes of
future Happiness, but all the Comforts of this Life also, in Vindication of
this known Falsehood; that to this End they ventured upon every Thing that is
most terrible and affrightning to human Nature, and even upon the most cruel
and barbarous Death, without the least possible Hopes of Advantage, either in
this World or that to come. -- For they did know, and could not but know, that
they were going themselves, and leading their Followers, upon the Pikes of
their numerous and potent Adversaries, without any Prospect beyond the Grave
(upon the Supposition before us) but of eternal Damnation. -- And what still
increases the Absurdity of this Supposition, is, that not one of these ever
retracted this known Falsehood, even in the Article of Death: but boldly
encountered the most shameful and painful Death their Adversaries could inflict,
rather than confess the Truth. -- What, Sir, can you possibly imagine of such
Conduct as this? -- That these Men were not mad and distracted, appears
evidently by their Works; which, though plain and familiar, were the most
consistent, divine, and rational, that ever appeared in the World. -- Here must
therefore be a continued Scene of Miracles, one Way or other. It must at least
be allowed miraculous, for so many Men knowingly and continually to act in
direct Opposition to all their Interests, Comforts and Hopes; and run counter
to all the Principles of Humanity, to all the Springs of Action, that were ever
known among Men.

Let us now try the second Supposal; and inquire whether it is possible, that
the Reporters of these Facts, and all other Spectators of them, had their
Senses imposed upon, by any legerdemain Trick, Juggle or Deceit? -- Whether,
for Instance, the Senses of the Apostles were imposed upon for some Years
together, while there were daily Miracles wrought by their Master, before their
Eyes? Whether the Senses of whole Multitudes were imposed upon, that they
really thought they saw the sick healed, the dead raised, etc; and these Things
repeated again and again for a long Tract of Time, when there was indeed
nothing at all in it? -- Whether the Witnesses of our Lord's Resurrection were
imposed upon, when they supposed they saw him after his Death, ate and drank
and conversed familiarly with him for forty Days together, and beheld him taken
up to Heaven before their Eyes? -- And whether all the first Churches were
imposed upon, when they imagined that they saw Miracles repeatedly wrought
among them; and had themselves miraculous Gifts and Powers? -- If these
extravagant Suppositions are allowed, of what Service can our Senses be to us;
and how can we any Way be certain of any Thing whatsoever? -- We may as
reasonably imagine, that our whole Life has been one continued Dream; and that
in Reality we never saw, heard, felt, thought, spoke, or acted any Thing at
all. -- Here likewise you must necessarily allow a continued Course of
Miracles, one Way or other. At least it must be allowed miraculous, that so
great a Part of the World should all lose their Senses together; and yet all of
them imagine that they had all this Time their Senses in their full Exercise.

Let us next consider, whether the last of the Suppositions, that the whole
History of the Miracles wrought by our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles, was
an After-Game, a mere Piece of Forgery, obtruded upon the World in some distant
Time after the Facts were pretended to be done, will appear more reasonable,
than the others already considered.

I have spoken something to this in my second Letter, to which I refer you: and
shall now only add some Hints further to illustrate the Case before us. -- If
this last Case be supposed, the Forgery must be palm'd upon the World, either
before or after Christianity had generally obtained. If this false History was
thrust upon the World in some distant Age after the Facts were pretended to be
done, before Christianity had generally obtained, it will then follow, that all
the Historians of those Times (Christian, Jewish, and Pagan) have united in
Confederacy, to give us a false Account of Christianity's immediately
succeeding the Crucifixion of Christ, not only in Judea, but in all Parts of
the Roman Empire. -- That they do all agree in this Report, is what you must
acknowledge: but how they came to unite in relating such Matters of Fact, which
they all (upon this Supposition) must know to be false, is what no Man can
possibly imagine. -- If this was done after Christianity had obtained, it will
follow, that a great Part of the World renounced the Religion in which they had
been educated, for the despised Doctrine of the Cross, and for a Life of
continued Contempt, Misery, and Peril, without knowing the Reason why; and
altogether ignorant of the Foundation upon which their new Religion was built.
For, if they professed Christianity, before they knew the History of Christ's
Life, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and before they had heard of
the Apostle's Progress and miraculous Works, with the miraculous Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, which accompanied their Ministry; they then all agreed to sacrifice
their most valuable temporal Interests, and Multitudes of them endured the most
terrible Deaths, in a Cause which they knew nothing about, and none of them
knew any Manner of Reason why they should do so. -- That is, in plain English,
a great Part of the World run mad at once, most unaccountably; and from these
mad Men, Christianity is descended down to the present Time.

It may be further observed, that upon the Supposition before us, it will also
follow, that in whatever distant Age from these pretended Facts, this History
was palm'd upon the World, All Men at once must be persuaded to believe for
Truth, what they knew to be false. -- These Histories declare, that they were
written by the Apostles and immediate Disciples of our Lord, that the Authors
of these Histories did propagate the Gospel through the World, did send these
Writings to the Churches, to be kept in their Hands, as the Rule of their
Lives, and the Directory of their Conduct; and that in Fact, Multitudes of the
several Nations were proselyted unto, and baptized into the Faith of
Christianity. -- Now was it possible, at any Time whatsoever, after those
pretended Facts, that these Nations could be ignorant, whether these Books and
this Religion were handed down to them by their Progenitors? Could not every
one of the Nations, who are in these Books said to be converted to
Christianity, at once conclude that they had never heard any Thing of this
Nature before; and therefore, that these Histories were all false and spurious;
and consequently not worthy of the least Notice? -- Is it possible, that the
World should agree to venture both Time and Eternity upon such a known
Falsehood? Could all the World at once be gulled by such gla^ing and open
Forgery and Deceit? -- In a Word, these Books were many of them directed to
large Societies of Men, in different Parts of the World, were early translated
into diverse Languages, in which they are still extant, have been publicly kept
and publicly read in the Churches, have been appealed to by all Parties and
Sects; and never called in Question as a Forgery, either by the Friends or
Enemies of the Christian Cause. -- All these Things put together, we have as
much Certainty, that these Histories are not, cannot be Forgery or Imposture,
as we can have of any Thing whatsoever, not immediately open to our Senses.

Now, Sir, let us sum up this Evidence; and see what the Conclusion must be.

All Mankind must own, that if the History of these Facts be true; if the Lord
Jesus Christ did perform so many astonishing Miracles for so long a Time
together, in Justification of his divine Mission; If he did himself rise from
the dead, commission his Apostles to their Work, endow them with the miraculous
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and empower them, by the Imposition of their Hands, to
communicate the same miraculous Gifts to others, here was certainly the
greatest Interposition of Heaven in Favor of the Christian Institution, that
can possibly be imagined or conceived. -- The Power and Veracity of God himself
were at Stake in this Cause: for they were both appealed to, in Confirmation of
the Truth; and both in the most amazing Manner displayed, in Answer to that
Appeal. -- All Doubting in this Case is therefore a Calling in Question the
Truth and Faithfulness of God himself, as well his Power.

If this History be not true, then all the known Laws of Nature were changed:
All the Motives and Incentives to human Actions, that ever had obtained in the
World, have been entirely inverted: The wickedest Men in the World have taken
the greatest Pains, and endured the greatest Hardship and Misery, to invent,
practice, and propagate the most holy Religion that ever was: and not only the
Apostles and first Preachers of the Gospel, but whole Nations of Men, and all
Sorts of Men, Christian, Jew, and Pagan, were (no Body can imagine how or why)
confederated to propagate a known Cheat, against their own Honor, Interest and
Safety: and Multitudes of Men, without any Prospect of Advantage here or
hereafter, were brought most constantly and tenaciously to profess what they
knew to be false, to exchange all the Comforts and Pleasures of Life for Shame
and Contempt, for Banishments, Scourgings, Imprisonments, and Death; in a Word,
voluntarily to expose themselves to be hated both of God and Man, and that
without any known Motive whatsoever. -- This must be allowed, or else you must
allow, that no Man ever was, or ever can be certain of any Thing; as is more
particularly considered above.

There now remains one of these three Things a necessary Conclusion from what
has been said; Either (1) That these Consequences may be justified; Or (2) That
they are not regularly deduced from the Premises; Or (3) That the Christian
Religion is true, and of divine Authority. -- I am persuaded, you will not assume
either of the two former of these Conclusions: the latter therefore forces it
self upon you.

That the Lord may direct you in the Way of Truth and Path of Life, is the
Prayer of,

Sir, Your etc.

LETTER V. Wherein some of the internal Evidences of Christianity are
considered.
SIR,
ACcording to the Direction given in your last, I shall use the greatest
Freedom in my Answer, and laying aside all Reserves, shall presume on your
Candor.

You cannot see (you tell me) how these Arguments of mine for the Truth of
Christianity, can admit of a rational and consistent Answer. How then can you
be, but "almost persuaded to be a Christian"? How can you want some general and
easy Directions, how to get rid of those Doubts, which still hang upon your
Mind, from the various Difficulties which are continually casting themselves in
your Way? Do you deal thus with your self in other Cases, of infinitely less
Importance? Do you harrass your Mind with Doubts about other Things which are
clearly evident to you, only because you meet with some Difficulties which you
cannot readily solve? -- This were the Way to downright Skepticism, in every
Thing which falls under your Consideration, whether natural or moral. And at
this Rate, you may call into Question your own Being and all your rational
Powers; as well as every Thing you see, hear, or feel. For I dare say, there
are Difficulties enough in any or all of these, to puzzle the most sagacious
Philosopher that ever breathed; and to nonplus the Inquiries of all the Men in
the World.

The Question before you is, Whether the Facts upon which the Evidence of
Christianity depends, are clearly proved, and necessarily true? If so, there
certainly must be some Way to solve all those Difficulties, whether you have
found out the Method to do it or not. -- You should likewise consider, that
it is of no Importance to the Safety of your Soul, whether you are, or are not,
capable to obviate all the Objections which fall in your Way: but it is of
eternal Importance, that you build on a sure Foundation; and that you believe
in the only begotten Son of God. -- This then should be your Method in the Case
before you. First, see to your Foundation; examine thoroughly, seriously and
impartially, whether the Evidence for the Truth of Christianity be such, that
you have Reason to believe it; and that it would be unreasonable, not to
believe it true. And then whatever Difficulties may occur, don't dig up your
Foundation; and undermine your Faith and Hope. Don't give your Adversary the
Advantage ^o keep you in a continued Suspense, left you live and die an
Unbeliever; and so have your Objections removed when it is too late, when your
Conviction will but prove your Confusion. -- I don't speak this to deter you
from examining the most subtle Objections, which the greatest Enemies of
Christianity are able to throw in your Way. The Cause will bear the strictest
Scrutiny, the severest Trial. And you can hardly imagine any Difficulty, but
what has been clearly and judiciously resolved, by one or other of the late
Defenders of this glorious Cause. -- But are you convinced, that the Arguments
to prove the Truth of Christianity, admit of no rational Answer? Take then the
Apostle's Advice, in all the further Inquiries you shall make, to hold fast the
Beginning of your Confidence, steadfast unto the End.

This then is Part of that general Advice I would give you, that you may get
rid of those Doubts which still hang upon your Mind. -- Follow it, and it will
at least lessen your Difficulties, and may make your Way plain before you. --
But this is not the principal Direction, necessary to be taken in this Case.
It Is of special Consequence, to see to it, that you experience the Power of
Christianity in your own Heart. -- Reject this Advice; and it is impossible,
that you should be rooted and built up in Christ, and established in the Faith.
But comply with it; and it is impossible, that Hell and Earth can finally
subvert your Faith, and separate between Christ and your Soul. -- By this
Means, this great Affair will be no longer with you a Matter of mere
Speculation, or empty Opinion, but convincing Experience: and Nothing, but your
Imperfections and Temptations, can ever make you hesitate about the Truth of
those Things, which you sensibly and continually feel the Influence of, upon
all the Powers and Faculties of your Mind. -- By this you will have the Witness
in your self, a Transcript of the Gospel upon your Heart, such a Transcript as
will answer to the Original, like as the Impress upon the Wax, to the Signet;
or as a well-drawn Picture, to the Lineaments of the Face, from whence it was
taken. -- By this have Multitudes of Souls been established in the Faith, who
have never been able critically to examine the external Evidence, upon which
Christianity is founded. -- They have not been able to dispute for Christ: but
they have dared to die for him. -- They have found the Image of God imprinted
on their Souls, by the Gospel of God our Savior: and therefore could not doubt
the Power of that Cause, which had produced so glorious an Effect upon them. --
Make the Experiment, Sir; and you will be forced to acknowledge the Lord Jesus
Christ to be indeed your Savior, when you feel that he has actually saved you.

Let me therefore set before you some of the Marks given of a real Christian,
in the New Testament; that when you come to discover the Lineaments of this
divine Image upon your Soul, you may know the Cause from the Effect. In doing
this, I shall not descend into all the minute Particulars of the Christian's
Character: but only set before you a few of the most plain and intelligible
Marks, by which a Christian indeed may be distinguished from all others; and by
which he may most clearly discern, that Christ is a Savior indeed.

And first, the most general Mark, by which this may be known, is, that if any
Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; old Things are passed away; behold, all
Things are become new. (2 Cor. v. 17.) That he is renewed in the Spirit of his
Mind; and that he puts on the new Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. (Ephesians. iv. 23, 24.) -- Here, you may see, is
represented a very remarkable and distinguishing Change of State; a Change,
which may be known by those who have had the blessed Experience; and a Change,
that has been felt by all those, and none but those, who are Christians indeed.
-- Could you then find this blessed Effect of your committing your Soul and
your eternal Interests into the Hands of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all the
Powers, Passions and Appetites of your Soul are renewed, you could not doubt
the Author of the wonderful Change. -- You must own it to be from Him, that you
are brought to hate what you before loved; and to love what you before hated.
Can you help but acknowledge this, when you find, that the Thoughts and
Dispositions of your Mind are new; and the chief Subjects of your Care and
Meditation are the Things unseen and eternal: That the Desires and Affections
of your Soul are new; and placed upon the Things that are above, where Christ
Jesus sits at the right Hand of God: That your Views and Apprehensions of your
self are new; and your haughty and selfish Imaginations are changed, to a
humble and contrite Spirit, that trembles at God's Word: That your Confidence
and Dependence is new; and instead of depending upon your good Seize,
Purposes, Promises, Reformations, or Duties, you are endeavoring to be found
in Christ Jesus, not having on your own Righteousness which is of the Law, but
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith. That your Joys and Satisfactions are new; and instead of rejoicing in
your temporal and sensual Acquisitions, you rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have
no Confidence in the Flesh. That the Objects of your Love and Complacency are
new; and instead of loving the World and your Idols, you esteem God's Favor to
be Life, and his Lovingkindness to be better than Life; and instead of loving
the Company of worldly and sensual Persons, you have your only Delight and
Complacency in Men of serious vital Piety; and have this Evidence that you are
passed from Death to Life, that you love the Brethren. That your Appetites and
Passions are new; and instead of those boundless Desires you were before acted
by, you are brought into a humble Subjection to the Will of God; and instead of
those turbulent Passions which before had the Ascendant, you experience the
blessed Fruits of the Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. -- And to sum up all, that
your Conversation is new; and that you live a Life of Holiness toward God; and
of Righteousness, Charity, and Beneficence toward Men; endeavoring to fill up
every Station, Relation, and Capacity of Life with Duty; and striving to have
your whole Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

This, Sir, is a brief Summary of the true Christian Character. This the
Salvation (in its moral View) which our Lord Jesus Christ bestows in this
World, upon all his sincere Followers. -- No Man ever failed of obtaining this,
who by Faith unfeigned brought his Soul to Christ, and depended upon him, for
his sanctifying renewing Influences.

Now Secondly, Another Thing which all true Christians experience, and none but
they, is the spiritual Warfare. They have a Warfare with their remaining
Corruptions. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit; and the Spirit against the
Flesh. (Gal. v. 17.) And they see another Law in their Members, warring against
the Law of their Minds, in order to bring them into Captivity, to the Law of
Sin and Death. (Romans vii. 23.) They have still so many Imperfections remaining
in their Hearts, in their Duties, and in their Conversations, as make them
groan, being burdened; and cry out, O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the Body of this Death! -- When therefore you are heartily
engaged in this War, and feel in your self that you are continually led on to
Victory, can you doubt, who it is that approves himself the Captain of your
Salvation? -- Can you doubt this, when you sensibly feel in your self a Hatred
to all Sin, without any Reserve, even to those Sins which by Constitution, or
Custom, are so nearly and intimately united to your Affections, as to become
your Members, even a right Hand, a right Foot or a right Eye? -- Can you doubt
this, when you feel that you even hate vain Thoughts; and that the
Irregularities of your Hearts and Affections, as well as of your outward
Conduct, are Matter of your continual Grief and Burden: what you continually
watch, and pray, and strive against? -- Can you doubt this, when it is your
constant Experience, that there is Nothing more grievous to you, Nothing more
contrary to the governing Desires of your Soul, than the Prevalence of these
Corruptions, and the Deadness, Formality and Distractions, which accompany your
holy Duties; and when you experience that it is your most ardent and impatient
Pursuit, to gain further Victory over the Imperfections of your Heart and Life;
and to obtain more uninterrupted Communion with God, in your religious
Approaches to him? -- Or, to sum up all in a Word, can this be doubted, when
(under the sharpest Conflict, you can meet with from this Quarter) you are able
sincerely to say, that though when you would do Good, Evil is present with you;
yet you delight in the Law of the Lord, after the inward Man?

You must, beside this intestine War, have the Trial of another Campaign. You
will find Enemies from without, as well as within, to maintain a continual
Conflict with. For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood only, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World; and against spiritual Wickednesses in high Places. (Ephesians. 6. 12.) -- This
is what you have probably had no Experience of. A Prisoner in the Hands of his
Enemies, led Captive by them at their Pleasure, has no Acquaintance with the
Progress of Wars and Conflicts, Battles and Sieges; makes no Attempts for
Victory and Triumph: But submits to the Injunctions of his Conquerors; and the
more cheerful his Submission, the more Ease and Comfort he will find. -- This
you must acknowledge to be eminently true of such who without Opposition,
resign themselves voluntary Prisoners into their Enemies Hands; as all careless
and secure Sinners do into the Hands of Sin and Satan. -- But when once Persons
come to be, in good Earnest, engaged in the Cause of Christ, what violent
Opposition do they meet with? What dreadful Temptations do they often
encounter, which carry their own Evidence with them, from what Quarter they
come? -- This I warn you of beforehand, that when you come to the Experience,
you may not be discouraged; but established in the Faith of that Revelation,
which you find experimentally true.

How frequently are Christians indeed called into this Field of Battle? How
frequently are they assaulted with most violent and impetuous Temptations,
which will follow and hurry them, and sometimes foil them, notwithstanding all
their good Desires, godly Resolutions, and most active Endeavors after
Holiness? -- What horrendous blasphemous Thoughts are often injected into the
Minds of such, which though the greatest Burden and Abhorrence of their
distressed Souls, yet follow and haunt them wherever they go, and whatever they
do, and especially at the Seasons of their nearest Approaches to God? -- What
doubting Apprehensions, what subtle surprising Reasonings, will be darted into
the Minds of some, even the most established Christians, against the very Being
of God; and the Truth of Christianity, notwithstanding their highest rational
Conviction, and fullest Satisfaction of the Truth of these great Fundamentals
of Religion? -- What horrible and amazing Dispositions and Affections will seem
to arise in the Minds of some of the most devout and heavenly Persons in the
World; who, in the dreadful Conflict, are sometimes made to roar by Reason of
the Disquietness of their Hearts? -- What distressing Darkness, Dejections, and
Despondings will some Christians be exercised with, after clear and satisfying
Evidences of God's Favor, against all the comforting Considerations which can
be proposed; and notwithstanding all the former Manifestations of the Love of
God to their Souls? -- And do not these, and such like fiery Darts of the
wicked One, as clearly discover the Agency of Satan, as if we saw him make his
Attacks in a visible Appearance?

I Am sensible, that many of these Temptations are ordinarily imputed to bodily
Disease; because Satan frequently makes the fiercest Attacks upon the weakest
Walls, where there is the greatest Prospect of Success -- But though bodily
Disorder may expose us to Darkness of every Kind, yet what Blasphemy can there
be in the Spleen? How came Infidelity by a Lodging in the Humors of the Body?
Or how can any disordered Temperature of the Body produce in the Mind (contrary
to the habitual Bent and Biass of the renewed Soul) such fierce impetuous and
irresistible Blasphemies against the glorious God, and the blessed Redeemer of
the World? If this be only from bodily Disease, how comes it to pass, that many
Persons of vigorous Health of Body, have met with the same distressing Trials?
-- Herein then the Truth of Christianity is confirmed by Experience, when the
Christian meets with the very same Trials, which the Scripture forewarns him
of: and the Fierceness of the Combat may not only establish him in the Faith,
but strengthen his Hopes of Victory. He sees the divine Original of the
Christian Institution, by the Enmity and Opposition of the infernal Powers
against it. He feels the Warfare just such as the Scriptures describe: and may
therefore conclude, that he has no Temptation but what is common to Men; and
may conside in the Captain of his Salvation, that he is leading him on to
Victory.

Thirdly, Another Instance, wherein the Truth of Christianity is brought to be
a Matter of sensible Experience, is the Comfort, Peace and Joy of a religious
Life. Our blessed Lord has told us, that his Yoke is easy, and his Burden
Light. (Mat. xi. 30.) Peace he leaves with his Disciples, his Peace he gives
unto them, and this in a Manner which the World cannot given. (Joh. xiv. 27.)
And the Apostle represents Christians, as rejoicing in Christ Jesus, without
Confidence in the Flesh (Phil. iii. 3.) and as having the Love of God shed
abroad in their Hearts, by the Holy Ghost, who is given unto them. (Romans v. 5.)
-- Now what Doubt can remain in the Heart of a Christian, of the Truth and
Faithfulness of these Promises, when he feels them actually fulfilled unto him;
when he sensibly feels, that Christ does not leave him comfortless, but
manifests himself to him, so as He does not unto the World; and when he
joyfully feels the Spirit of God witnessing with his Spirit, that he is a Child
of God?

You may perhaps esteem this to be all Cant and Delusion, Enthusiasm or heated
Imagination: But is it reasonable in a Man that was born blind, to conclude,
that because he himself has no Idea of Light and Colors, therefore no Man ever
saw the Sun; but all Pretenses of Delight from the beautiful Appearances of the
Creation, are mere Chicanry and Deceit?

I hope, Sir, you will quickly be led forward by the Spirit of God into these
blessed Paths of Joy and Peace: and then you will need no other Argument, to
convince you of these glorious Truths, than your own happy Experience. -- Then
with surprising Delight, you will be able to feel the Exercise of Faith in the
Son of God; and to apply the gracious Promise, that him who comes to Christ, he
will in no wise cast out. -- Then you will feel a most humbling and Soul-abasing
Sense of your own Vileness and Unworthiness; and with sacred Rapture, admire,
adore and praise the Riches of that sovereign Grace, by which you are plucked
out of the Hands of Sin and Infidelity, and out of the Jaws of Death and Hell;
and become accepted in the Beloved. -- Then a Ray of (before unexperienced)
Light will break into your Soul, and give you such a spiritual View of the
divine Perfections, as you never before had, such a Discovery of redeeming
Love, as will fill you with Wonder and Praise. -- Then the World with all its
empty Pageantry will vanish out of Sight; and you will be no longer emulous of
the Riches and Grandeur of the greatest Men in the World; nor of the Pleasures
of the most sensual Epicure. -- Your Soul will then be solaced with more pure
and substantial Joys, with Delights more answerable to its Desires, and more
satisfying to its Taste, than its possible it should find from any of the vain
Amusements of Time and Sense. -- Then you will obtain such a sensible and
affecting Discovery of the future Glory, as will put your Soul upon the Wing;
and excite your most ardent Desires after the more intimate and eternal
Enjoyment of that blessed Hope. -- In a Word, then the Light will shine out of
Darkness, and give you the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the
Face of Jesus Christ. And if you are favored with this delightful View, when
you come to encounter the King of Terrors, you will be able to stand the Shock
with Courage, with Comfort and Joy (as I have seen many do) from a delightful
Prospect of your future Inheritance; and breathe out your last Breath with that
triumphant Song, O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave, where is thy Victory!

It is true, this is not always the happy Frame of every sincere Christian. --
We are here in a militant State, and must often meet with fore Conflicts from
our spiritual Enemies, as was before observed: but when these more exalted Joys
and Comforts are wanting, Believers have yet Meat to eat, which the World knows
not of. -- The Promises will still prove an Anchor for their Souls, to keep
them sure and steadfast, in the most tempestuous Seasons. -- They will find
Delight and Comfort from the Ordinances of God; and at least find occasional
Returns of sensible Communion with him, which will make them rejoice more than
when Corn and Wine and Oil increase. -- And often, in the midst of their
greatest Darkness, they will have sudden and surprising Gleams of Light and Joy
break into their Souls, by which they will before they are aware, become like
the Chariots of Amminadib. -- At least they will be able to look unto Jesus, as
the Author and Finisher of their Faith; and comfort themselves by committing
their Souls to him, and venturing their eternal Interests in his Hand.

The Scriptures speak much of these Sealings of the Spirit, the Earnest of our
future Inheritance. -- The Spirit of God helps his Children to sensible
Experience of their undoubted Truth and Reality; whereby they are established
in the Faith, strengthened for their spiritual Encounters, and supported under
all the Difficulties and Trials they meet with, in their Way to the future
Inheritance. -- How light soever you may make of what has been said, I hope
(Sir) you will live to rejoice in the delightful Experience, as Thousands of
others have done; and thereby find Occasion to say with them, We are Witnesses
of these Things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God has given to them
that obey him.

Fourthly, I may yet add another Instance, wherein the Truth of Christianity is
made Matter of Experience, which is the Manner how the great Change is wrought,
and carried on, in the Heart of every sincere Christian. -- There is, I
confess, a vast Difference, with Respect to a Variety of incidental
Circumstances, in the Methods of the divine Operaon, in turning Sinners from
the Power of Satan to God: and yet the Scripture-Account of this Change, as to
the Substance of it, is always found to be exactly verified in all those, who
at adult Years are the happy Subjects of God's converting Grace. -- This has
been continually confirmed, by the blessed Experience of the Children of God,
in all the successive Ages of the Church.

How agreeably are we surprised, to see a careless and secure Sinner, who was
going on in the Pursuit of his Lusts, hardened against all the solemn Warnings,
which he had continually received from the Word and Ordinances and Providence
of God; and deaf to all the pathetick Admonitions of his godly Friends; to see
such an one (I say) at once, by some ordinary Passage in a Sermon, in a Book,
or in Conversation, thoroughly awakened out of his Security, and put upon a
serious and lasting Inquiry, What he should do to be saved. -- His Conscience
can no more now, as at other Times, wear off the Impression; nor dare he return
to his Mirth and Jollity, to his sensual and worldly Pursuits. -- He can no
more speak Peace to his Soul, from his general Hopes, or his good Designs; nor
rest in any Thing short of an Interest in Christ. -- Thus we see the Promise
verified, that Christ would send the Comforter to convince the World of Sin;
and find it most evidently true, that the Word of God is quick and powerful,
sharper than any two-edged Sword. -- We see a Change made, that no Means, no
Endeavors could ever Effect, till a divine Power was exerted to bring it about.

How constantly does the thoroughly awakened Sinner find, by Experience, the
Deficiency of all his legal Attempts, to quiet his Conscience, and to establish
his Hopes of the Favor of God? -- He sees his Sins too great and numerous, to
be expiated by his imperfect Performances. -- He feels his corrupt Affections,
Appetites and Passions too strong for his good Purposes and Resolutions. -- He
is deeply sensible of so much Defect and Impurity in the best of his religious
Duties, as render them utterly unworthy the Acceptance of an infinitely pure
and holy God. -- He feels his Heart so hard, and his Affections so dead and
carnal, that Nothing but an Almighty Power can quicken them. -- He knows by
Experience, that he lies at Mercy; and that all his own Refuges, and all
Endeavors in his own Strength to relieve his distressed Soul, are fruitless
and vain. -- He finds it indeed the Case of fallen Man, that Nothing but coming
to Christ, with Faith in Him, and Dependence upon him for Righteousness and
Strength, can give Rest to his laboring and weary Soul. -- True it is, there
are some convinced Sinners that wear off their religious Impressions, and stop
short of these Effects, which I have now described: but these Consequences are
always found in all those whose Convictions are abiding and effectual. By these
they are always necessitated to fly for Refuge to Christ, and look to Him for
that Life and Peace, which they can find no where else. -- You will readily
allow, that my Station puts me under the Advantage of a particular Acquaintance
with the Circumstances of distressed Souls: and having conversed with very many
under Convictions, from Time to Time, I have always found the above
Observations exactly verified.

How surprising is the Change, made in convinced Sinners, when a Ray of divine
Light shines into their Souls; and enables them to act Faith in Christ, and to
behold the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ! -- Now these Mourners in
Zion have appointed unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning,
and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness, that they may be called
Trees of Righteousness. From this Time, they become indeed new Creatures, in
all spiritual Respects. -- Their Discovery of the Excellency and Sufficiency of
Christ, whereby they were enabled cheerfully to trust their eternal Interests
in his Hands, proves a continued Source of Love to God and Man, and a Principle
that constantly inclines them to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present World. -- We see this experimentally true, as the Scriptures represent
it, that their Faith works by Love, purifies their Hearts, and overcomes the
World. -- There are indeed some hypocritical Pretenders to Faith in Christ, in
whom we don't find these Fruits and Effects of it: But then there are (through
the Goodness of God) Numbers of others, the Tenor of whose future Lives does
fully evidence, that their Faith is sincere; and that it produces all the
Effects which the Scriptures ascribe to it.

There is no Room to impute this Work to the irregular Sallies of an
overheated Imagination, when we see a thorough and lasting Change both of
Heart and Life. -- There is no Room to suppose, that Enthusiasm or Fanaticism
can have any Hand in this Change, when we see the blessed Effects of Faith in
Christ every Way answer the Description given thereof in the Gospel; and when
the Believer visibly and in Reality is become a new Man, from the Time of his
Receiving and Relying upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for Righteousness and
Strength.

And as bad as the Times are, as stupid and unbelieving as the World in general
appear, we have yet repeated Examples of the blessed Effects of Faith, which I
have now described; and of the Verification of that precious Truth, that to as
many as receive the Lord Jesus Christ, to them is given Power to become the
Children of God, even to them who believe in his Name.

And now, Sir, if you will review what has been said, don't it evidently appear,
that he who believes on the Son of God, has the Witness in himself, when he
finds the same Change of Heart, the same spiritual Conflicts, the same Joy,
Peace, and Comfort of Soul, and all these wrought in the very same Way and
Method, which the Scriptures so plainly and particularly describe? -- Can I
doubt of the Skill of that Physician, or the Efficacy of that Medicine, whereby
I am recovered from a dangerous Disease, to Health and Comfort, exactly in the
same Method, and by the same sensible and progressive Steps, as was foretold me?

And is not this Truth made most clearly evident, not only to the Persons
themselves, but to all diligent Observers, when they find the same Experiences
reported by all true Believers in Christ, and all the same external and visible
Effects of their Faith, conspicuous and open to every one's Observation, not in
one or two Instances only, but in Thousands of those who profess to have had
these Experiences? -- As we must necessarily acknowledge the Skill of that
Physician, who effectually cures all that submit to his Directions and
Applications: so are we constrained to acknowledge him for our Savior, who in
the very same Way and Manner, which he has proposed and promised, does actually
and effectually save all those who believe in him, and in the Way of his
Appointments trust to him for Salvation.

In my former Letters, I have laid before you some of the external Evidences of
Christianity: In this I have given you a very brief Sketch of those internal
Evidences, which serve to confirm and illustrate the same important Cause. --
By the former, the Truth of the Christian Religion is laid open to the
Understanding: by the latter it is made Matter of sensible Experience in the
Heart. -- That the glorious Redeemer may enable you to feel the Force of this
Reasoning, to your unspeakable Comfort here and Happiness hereafter, is the
Prayer of,

Sir, Your etc.

LETTER VI. Wherein some Objections against the internal Evidences of
Christianity, are considered and answered.
SIR,
I Don't wonder to find you prejudiced against the extravagant Claim to
extraordinary Experiences in Religion, lately made by some who are evidently
under enthusiastic Heats and Delusions. But I cannot see any Force at all in
your Reasoning, that Because there are many eminent Professors of late, who
really have nothing in them but Heat and Show, and yet make as high Pretensions
to the divine Influences, and to special Experience of the Operations of the
Spirit of God in their Hearts, as any others can do; therefore all Pretenses of
that Kind may justly be suspected to flow from the same Cause, and to be the
Offspring of a like irregular Fancy and heated Imagination.

Do you indeed think it just arguing, because some Men make vain and false
Shows of what they really are not, that therefore all other Professors of
Religion are Hypocrites, as well as they? -- Will it follow, because some Men
pretend to Literature which they have not, that therefore there are no Men of
Learning in the World? -- Your Discovery of false Pretenders to religious
Experiences, does indeed give you just Reason to presume, that some others may,
but no Reason to conclude, that all others must, in the same Manner impose upon
the World, by mere delusive Appearances. -- If you have discovered any to be
false and deceitful, in their Profession of religious Experiences, it must be
because you see something in their Conduct, which contradicts their Profession.
But what Reason does this give you, to suspect those in whose Conduct you see
nothing which contradicts their Profession. -- If you have Reason to conclude
the Hypocrisy of the former Sort, from the Evidences which appear against them;
you have also Reason to conclude the Sincerity of the latter Sort, from the
Evidences which appear in their Favor, and which testify the Reality of the
Change they profess. -- If you have Ground to suspect the careless, the loose,
the sensual Professor, because he is such: By the same Way of Reasoning, you
have Ground to conclude in Favor of the serious, the watchful and mortified
Professor of Religion, because he is such. -- If the licentious and profane,
the fraudulent and unjust, the censorious and uncharitable, the Despisers and
Calumniators of their Brethren, are therefore to be suspected of a false
Pretense to the divine Influences: By the same Argument, they who are so
changed as to become remarkably holy and righteous, meek and humble,
charitable, benevolent and beneficent, have a just Claim to be esteemed
sincere, and to be credited in their Profession of religious Experiences. --
There are (through the Mercy of God) Numbers of such yet among us, all of whom
have this Change in its visible Effects obvious to the World: and though some
of them may be doubtful of their own State, yet all of them declare, that they
have received all their Seize from the Lord Jesus Christ; they have
looked to him, and depended upon him for them all; and have always found, that
their Progress in Piety toward God, and in Justice, Kindness, and Charity
toward Men, has born Proportion to their cheerful Dependence upon Christ for
Righteousness and Strength. -- If some Men are Liars, yet others are credible,
and may be trusted, especially when they give us undoubted Evidence of their
Truth and Fidelity. -- Even so in the present Case, if some Men are Hypocrites,
and evidence themselves to be such, we have no Reason from thence to suspect
the Truth of others Profession and Experiences, whose wonderful Change of Life,
and whole future Conversation, are a continual Testimony to the Sincerity of
the Profession they make, and to the Credibility of the Experiences which they
relate.

But it seems, you are especially prejudiced against religious Experiences, by
the irregular Fancy and heated Imagination, which you have observed in some
Pretenders to extraordinary Seize in Religion; from whence you seem to
argue, that because some of their pretended Experiences are extravagant Flights
of a disturbed Brain, and evidently flow from Pride, Self-Esteem, and
Uncharitableness toward others, and end in Faction, Division and Alienation of
Affection, that therefore, since some of their Pretenses are manifestly false
and Airy Imaginations, you have just Reason to conclude, that all the rest of
their Pretenses are of the same Sort, and flow from the same depraved Mind.

I acknowledge, Sir, this is one of the most plausible Objections, that ever I
have heard of, against the internal Evidences of Christianity. -- And no Doubt,
our grand Adversary the Devil has had an especial Hand in blowing up this false
Fire, that he may turn away our Eyes from the Glory of the Lord arisen upon
Zion. -- No Doubt, Satan has transformed himself into an Angel of Light, in
the late extravagant Heats which have appeared in some Places, that so by
overdoing, he might undo, and might bring Reproach on the wonderful Work of
divine Grace, which has made such a glorious Progress in these Parts of the
World. -- A Permission of these dreadful Delusions may be esteemed a just
Judgment of God upon such as have remained careless and secure in a remarkable
Season of Grace, who have resisted the Calls of the Gospel, the Convictions of
their Consciences, and the Strivings of the Holy Spirit; that they might
thereby be hardened in their Prejudices against vital and experimental
Religion, and perhaps finally stumble and fall.

But how plausible soever your Objection may be, your Reasoning is far from
conclusive. -- WhatInconsistency is there in the Supposal, that a true Convert
may have some very false Apprehensions and Imaginations? that the same Person
may have a sanctified Heart, and a confused Head? and that he may build upon
the true Foundation, such Wood, Hay and Stubble, as must be burnt up? -- Our
blessed Savior has undertaken to sanctify the Hearts of all those who
sincerely trust in him: but has never promised to make them infallible in all
their Conduct. -- If therefore, from a Principle of Love to God, these Men
should zealously endeavor to serve him, and yet through heated Imaginations,
or erroneous Apprehensions of their Duty, in some Cases, they should mistake
their Way, and suppose that they are doing God good Service, when they are
acting counter to the true Interests of Christ's Kingdom, what then? Is it any
Absurdity, to suppose they may act from a right Principle, though in a wrong
Manner? -- The Error is in their Opinions; but not in their Wills. Their Hearts
are engaged in God's Service, though their Heads mislead them. -- They may have
experienced a real Change (in the Manner described in my last Letter) though
through Ignorance and Mistake, their Endeavors to serve God are in some
Instances irregular and sinful. -- They may have had real Experiences in true
and vital Piety, at present though their Imaginations are imposed on by
Enthusiasm, and Delusion. -- These Allowances may be made, and ought to be
made, for those who hold fast the fundamental Principles of Christianity and
practical Godliness; and for none but those -- There ought to be such
Allowances made for those; because there is Nothing in their Character
inconsistent with true and vital Piety: Yet there ought not to be such
Allowances made for any but those; because Christ has undertaken to lead his
sincere Followers into all necessary Truth. -- I think, I have good Reason to
conclude, that the Case is truly, and in Fact, just as I have here described
it, with Respect to Numbers of those, who have run into some of those, who have
been convinced of and penitently bewailed those Mistakes, do yet (their former
Irregularities notwithstanding) walk worthy their professed Experience of a
saving Changes; and approve themselves holy, humble, and charitable Christians.
And I have the more Hopes of others, who have not yet been convinced of their
Mistakes, upon Account of their having been seduced into these Errors, by such
zealous Leaders, of whose Piety they have so great an Opinion. -- But you will
perhaps inquire, what I can say for those Leaders, who have influenced others
to these irregular Heats? To which I must answer, that as far as I am
acquainted with them, I have Reason for a much better Opinion of the Hearts of
some of them, than of their Heads; and must bear them Witness, that they have a
Zeal of God, though not in every Thing according to Knowledge.

But supposing, as you suppose, that some of the chief of these Preachers were
very wicked Men, who cloaked their evil Intentions under a Show of Zeal and
extraordinary Piety, the better to insure poor unwary Souls into their
Delusions, to promote Divisions and Contentions in the Land, and to compass
their covert Designs: My Argument is, on this Supposal, so much the stronger.
Herein the Power and Love of the great Redeemer are so much the more
conspicuous, that he has out shot Satan with his own Bow; and overruled those
Attempts, for the Promotion of his ownKingdom and Interest, which were levelled
against it. -- Nothing is more visible, than that great Numbers of poor Sinners
have been awakened; and brought to fly to Christ for Refuge. Nothing is more
apparent, than that the Consequence of this has (in numerous Instances) been
the Renovation of their Lives, and their Conversion from a careless, sinful,
sensual Life, to a Life of Holiness, Righteousness, Kindness and Charity. -- In
these therefore the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is become glorious; whatever
covered Designs any of the Instruments were acted by. If these preached Christ
even of Envy and Strife, What then? notwithstanding every Way whether in
Pretense or in Truth, Christ was preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and
will rejoice. -- It is remarkable, that the great Doctrines of the Gospel,
particularly touching the Misery of our natural State, the Necessity of an
Interest in Christ, and the Way of Salvation by Faith in him, were preached by
them all (whatever human Imaginations were mixed with them) and these had their
Effect in a peculiar Manner. Our blessed Savior has therein blessed his own
Institutions; and accomplished the Designs of his Grace, whoever and whatever
were the Instruments, by whom these glorious Effects have been produced. As far
therefore as a sanctifying Change in the Hearts and Lives of Men has been
effected, so far must we acknowledge this to be a Work of God; and a Display of
the divine Power of our blessed Savior. -- The Miracles of divine Grace, which
might be wrought by Judas, were as bright a Discovery of the Redeemer's Power
and Goodness, as those were which were wrought by the other Apostles.

But you tell me, that many of these new Converts pretend to mighty Experiences
of divine Impulses, Raptures, Ecstasies; and the like: But show forth no moral
Virtues, nor true Love either to God or Man. Well, Sir, what follows from this?
Are there not many others, who make no Pretension to such mighty Experiences of
divine Impulses, Raptures, etc. that do show forth all moral Virtues; and have
a true Love both to God and Man? -- Is it a good Argument, that because there
are some mere Enthusiasts, who pretend to such Experiences which the Scriptures
do not make the Character of true Christians, therefore they are all mere
Enthusiasts, even who pretend to such Experiences as the Scriptures do make the
Character of all true Christians? -- What is Christianity concerned with the
Ecstasies and Heats of such Men as you speak of? Where are these extatical Heats
described in the Gospel, as the Marks of the Children of God? Be their
Experiences allowed to be according to their Pretenses, what follows from
thence, but that if they have no moral Virtues, these Men's Religion is vain;
It is all enthusiastical, unscriptural, and without any Foundation? -- But then
on the other Hand, the Experiences which I have before described, are such as
the Scriptures do make the Marks and Characters of the Children of God: and
many there are, that make no Pretenses to divine Impulses, Raptures or
Ecstasies, who profess to have had these Experiences, and justify their
Profession, by living in the Love both of God and Man. Now, I pray, how are
such concerned in the Enthusiasm, of which you complain? Don't the Experiences
of these witness for them, as much as the Experiences of the other witness
against them? -- Here is a visible and effectual Change wrought in them (just
such a Change as the Scriptures describe) by which they are brought into a
Conformity to the divine Nature, and live worthy their Profession and
Character. -- Christ has Promised the Sanctification of the Spirit to his
People, who depend upon him for it: and what greater Evidence can there be of
the Faithfulness of the Promise, than to see and feel its Accomplishment?

But you further observe, that the Demeanor of many of these Pretenders to
religious Experiences, is directly contrary to that Morality, Beneficence and
Charity, which are the Ornament and Glory of human Nature. -- And is not this a
strong Confirmation of my Argument? I appeal to you your self, Sir, whether you
be not acquainted with many others, that pretend to the religious Experiences
which I have described, who are the brightest Patterns of those Graces and
Virtues, which are the Ornament and Glory of human Nature. -- Here then is a
plain and visible Criterion, by which it may be known whose Experiences are,
and whose are not, from the Spirit of God. --

They are (you say) indeed converted, but it is to Pride and Vanity, to
Self-Esteem and Self-Applause. -- But are there not many others, who are
converted to deep Humility, self-loathing and selfcondemning?

They are changed (you say) but it is to Bitterness, Reviling, Censuring, and
judging their Neighbors, who are much better than they. -- I allow this Charge
to be agreeable to their pretended Experiences: But then, don't you see
(blessed be God, I am sure I have seen) many others changed to Meekness,
Kindness and Love, and brought to esteem others much better than themselves?

Their boasted Experiences (you add) only animate them to Divisions, Factions
and Separations. But is this the Case of all, who make a Profession of
religious Experiences? No: we have Cause to be thankful, the Case is quite
otherwise.

They are (you say) often elated with rapturous Joys and Exults, which seem to
be the Product of Nothing but Self-Esteem, and an irregular beaten Imagination.
-- Here you inquite, Must I esteem these to be the Joy of the Holy Ghost, of
which your last Letter speaks? If not, how shall I know, that all Pretenses of
this Kind are not equally fictitious and imaginary? -- This (I confess)
deserves some Attention. For perhaps no one Thing has raised such Prejudices in
the Minds of Men against spiritual and religious Experiences, as those Airy
Raptures and causeless Exults, that in some Instances have been seen of late.

I would therefore observe to you, that your own Representation of those joyful
Transports, of which you complain, is sufficient to distinguish them from those
Joys of the Holy Ghost, of which I wrote to you. -- You rightly observe, that
these false Raptures are the Product of an exalted Imagination. -- But you have
no Room to conclude this to be the Case with Respect to those spiritual Joys
and Comforts, of which I wrote in my last. -- I have known a wretched
despicable Beggar, covered with Rags and Vermin, who imagined himself a King's
Son; and expected to be treated accordingly: But how vain and ludicrous soever
his Imaginations were, I never thought it an Argument, that there are no King's
Sons in the World. He might probably entertain more transporting Apprehensions
of his imagined Royalty, than they who really possess that Dignity, which he so
vainly pretended to. But must these latter be rejected as vain Pretenders,
because of the crazed Imagination of such a miserable Vagary!

To apply this to the present Case, I readily allow, that all those Joys and
Comforts which flow from the Imagination only, are always but airy and
chimerical, false and delusive. -- Thus, for Instance, some will rejoice and
triumph, from only imagining themselves Favorites of Heaven; some from being
able to paint upon their Imaginations the Miracles, Sufferings, Resurrection,
or Ascension of Christ; some from an imaginary Idea of the final Appearing of
Christ, and their own future Glory; and the like: yet all this while the poor
Souls forget, that there is one Thing wanting, in Order to make their Joys
reasonable and substantial; and that is good Evidence of their Interest in that
Savior, and his glorious Salvation, of which they entertain such pleasing
Imaginations. -- They who have this Evidence (in the Manner described in my
last) have a substantial Foundation of Comfort and Joy, from having that
Salvation actually begun in their Souls, which is the Pledge and Earnest of
their eternal Inheritance: while the others are like to find themselves as much
deluded in their Expectation of future Happiness, as they are in the Foundation
of their Hopes.

You further represent these rapturous Joys to be the Effect of Self-Esteem.
And I readily acknowledge, that where it is so, it is always deceitful and
vain. The divine Influences are always humbling to the Soul which enjoys them.
-- They therefore are horribly profane, who impute their own Pride and Vanity
to the Spirit of God: and consequently they are miserably deceiving themselves,
whose Joy and Comfort flows from an high Opinion of their imaginary Seize
in Religion. They are a Smoke in God's Nostrils, who are saving, Stand by thy
self, come not nigh me: for I am bolier than thou. -- But then on the contrary,
when the humble Soul is lying at God's Foot, self-abasing and self-condemning,
adoring the infinite Riches of God's free Grace to such a vile, worthless Worm;
and rejoicing in Christ Jesus, without Confidence in the Flesh; these blessed
Effects are worthy of the Spirit of God, by whom they are wrought. -- And it is
always true, that the Believer's Sense of his own Vileness, Pollution and
Unworthiness, bears Proportion to his joyful Evidences of the divine Favor.

You further object against the false Pretenders you mention, that their
Conduct don't justify their joyful Assurance. -- This is indeed a good Evidence
against their high Pretensions to extraordinary Seize in Religion. -- For
I believe, every Christian does certainly make the same Progress in Holiness,
as he does in well-grounded Comfort and Joy. The Objection therefore can no
Ways affect those with whom this is an experienced Truth; who always find, that
their Hope and Joy quicken them in their spiritual Course, invigorate their
Duties, and enlarge their Desires and Endeavors after a Conformity to the
whole Will of God.

I must now leave this Matter to your own Reflections; you your self must judge
the Validity of your Exceptions. -- Compare the Picture you have drawn of some
empty, enthusiastical Pretenders to religious Experiences, with the Description
I have given you of those, who have indeed experienced the divine Life: and
consider whether there be any real Similitude, in any Marks and Lineaments of
their Countenances. -- In those is found Pride and Petulance: but in these,
Humility and Self-Abasement. -- In those, Censoriousness and Uncharitableness
are the distinguishing Characters: in those, a charitable preferring others to
themselves. -- There you see Schism, Contention, and Faction: Here is Kindness,
Peace, and brotherly Love. -- There imaginary Impulse, but here the Word of God
alone, is considered as the Rule of Life. -- There Joy and Comfort are
considered as the Evidence of a good State: Here they are considered as the
Fruit of good Evidence of Faith in Christ, and of a renewed Nature. -- There
Religion is supposed to consist in Rapture and Ecstasy: Here in spiritual
Affections, and in a heavenly Conversation. -- There we find Men building their
Hope and Comfort upon their imaginary Seize: But here we find them making
Christ Jesus their only Refuge and Hope. -- And to sum up all in a Word, There
are high Pretenses to religious Experiences without the Fruits of Holiness: But
here the happy Effects of this Change appear in the Heart and Life; and justify
the Profession to be true, and the Experiences to be indeed what (...) are
pretended to be.

Upon the whole, there is Nothing more certain, than that the Scriptures do
represent what I have set before you, as the real Characters of the Children of
God. -- It is equally certain, that as an actual Experience of the renewing
Change is, from the Nature of Things, absolutely necessary to Salvation, so a
Sense of this Change wrought in us is requisite to true Peace and Comfort: And
there can be Nothing but a Want of due Attention to this Experience, or
Ignorance of the Quality of that Change they have sensibly experienced, which
keeps Believers in Darkness and Doubts about their State. -- The Subjects of
this Work can therefore have no greater Evidence that it is from God, than
sensibly to feel that it every. Way answers the original Description. -- What
greater Evidence can they have of the Truth of the Gospel, than a Sensible
Experience of the Reality of its Doctrines, and the Truth of its Promises, by
this wonderful Work of Grace in their own Hearts, which so visibly carries the
divine Signature both in its Operation and Effects; and is so manifestly
distinguished from all false Appearances and Pretenses? -- For my own Part, I
cannot but look upon the irregular Heats, you speak of, as affording some
convincing Evidence in Favor of the Cause I am pleading. -- These Things are
foretold in the Scriptures. -- By these Things Satan is endeavoring to support
his own Kingdom, as we may reasonably expect he would do. He knows, that he is
most likely to play the surest Game, when he transforms himself into an Angel
of Light. -- And these false Appearances serve for a Foil, to discover the
greater Luster in a true and real Work of divine Grace.

The only Objection against all this, which I can foresee, is that I am
philosophizing upon the golden Tooth, and that the Persons I am characterizing,
exist no where, save in my Descriptions of them. -- But I need add no more to
what I have said upon this already, than my Attestation, that I have the
Comfort of an inward and intimate Acquaintance with considerably Numbers of
such as those whose I have described. -- And if you (Sir) would seek out such
for your chosen Companions, your Objections would die of themselves; and the
Argument I have insisted upon, would appear in its proper Light and Strength.

I know not what more can be needful to be added upon this Subject, but my
hearty Prayers, that the Spirit of Truth would lead us both into all Truth; and
that we may know by sensible Experience what is the Hope of Christ's Calling,
and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints; Which has
been justly, though but weakly and very imperfectly represented, in these
Letters from,

Sir, Your etc.

LETTER VII. Wherein the Doctrine of GOD's Sovereign Grace is vindicated; and
some Exceptions against it considered and answered.
SIR,
YOU cannot imagine how much Comfort you have minister'd to me by your last. I
greatly rejoice to hear, that the more strictly you examine the Cause, the
greater Evidence you find of the undoubted Truth and Certainty of the Christian
Religion: But that you are filled with Confusion, to think how long you have
lived at a Distance from that blessed Savior, who has wrought out such a
glorious Redemption for us. And I am not at all surprised, to hear you
complain, That you cannot entertain clear Apprehensions of if any Discourse of
experimental Religion: That although your last Objections are silenced, there
are others which fill your Mind with greater Difficulty; and are of much
greater Importance, if I have given you a just View of the Case. And that you
cannot tell how you can ever be brought to a feeling Sense of the Doctrines of
sovereign Grace, which I so much insist on, while they appear to you so
inconsistent with Truth, and so unreasonable. -- I am not (I say) surprised at
this; for we are naturally prejudiced against these Doctrines; and are not
easily brought to receive them, by Reason of the strong Biass there is upon our
Minds to the contrary Principles. -- I shall therefore endeavor to consider
your several Objections; and how strong and plausible soever they may appear, I
don't despair of giving you Satisfaction.

You object, that if we are of ourselves capable of no qualifying Conditions of
the divine Favor, or (to use my own Words) if we must feel that we lie at
Mercy, and that all our own Refuges, and all our Endeavors in our own Strength
to relieve our distressed Souls, are fruitless and vain, you cannot tell to what
Purpose any of our Endeavors are; or what Good it will do us to use any Means
at all for our Salvation.

In Order to a clear Solution of this Difficulty, it seems needful to convince
you, that this lost, impotent, deplorable State is the Case in Fact, of every
unrenewed Sinner, whatever Objections we may frame in our Minds against it: and
therefore it is necessary, that he should sensibly perceive the Case to be as
it truly is. -- And then, it will be proper to show you, that the Consequence
you draw from this Doctrine is unjust; and even directly contrary to the
Improvement you ought to make of it.

I begin with the first of these; and shall endeavor to convince you, that Man
is indeed in such a lost and helpless State, that he lies at mere Mercy; and
cannot bring himself into a Claim to the divine Favor, by any Power or Ability
of his own. -- I shall not run into the scholastic Controverfies and subtle
Distinctions, with which this Doctrine has been clouded by many of our
wrangling Disputers: but shall endeavor to set it in the most plain, easy and
practical Light, that I am able.

I think, you must readily grant, that you cannot make an Atonement for your
Sins, by any Performances within your Power. -- You are (Sir) to consider your
self as a Sinner, as a Criminal and Delinquent in the Sight of God. -- Your
Nature is corrupt and defiled. -- Your actual Transgressions of the Law of God
have been very numerous; and perhaps some of them attended with special
Aggravations. -- All your Sins are directly repugnant to the Perfections of the
divine Nature; and consequently offensive to a pure and holy God. -- And what
greatly increases the Difficulty and Danger of your Case, is, that you are
still continuing to act contrary to God in all you do, while your Nature is
unrenewed; and while you are without a Principle of Love to God. (I am sure,
you will pardon this Freedom; for it is necessary you should know the Disease,
in Order to the Cure.) -- Judge then your self, whether it can be supposed,
that an omniscient Heart-searching God can be pleased with any, even the most
devout of your overt Actions, when he knows that your Heart is estranged from
him, and your Nature has no Conformity to him; but your Affections are glew'd
to your several Idols. -- How then can you be reconciled to God, by of your own
Performances and Seize? Can you pay ten Thousand Talents, with less than
Nothing? -- Can you please God by offending him, as you do by the Obliquity of
all your Duties, the Defects of your best Devotions, and the sinful Affections
from whence they all flow? -- Or can you have those unworthy Thoughts of an
infinite, unchangeable God, as to hope you can make such Impressions upon his
Affections, by acknowledging your Offenses, and imploring his Mercy, as to
excite his Compassion and Sympathy; and to make your impure and unholy Nature
agreeable to his infinite Purity and Holiness? -- Can your insincere and
hypocritical Duties (for such they are all at best, while they proceed from an
unsanctified Heart) bring the glorious God to take Complacency in what is
directly contrary to his own Nature? -- You cannot but see, that these
Proposals are most unreasonable and absurd. One of these Things must certainly
be true; either, first, that you have naturally whilst in an unrenewed State, a
Principle of Holiness and Love to God: or secondly, that Works flowing from an
impure Fountain, and from a Principle of Opposition and Alienation to God, are
yet pleasing to God, will serve to appease him, and will entitle you to his
Favor: or thirdly, that you cannot, by any Thing you do, have a Claim to God's
Favor, until your Nature is renewed, and you can act from a Principle of
Holiness and Love to God. I think, every Man's Experience will confute the
first of these, who gives any Attention at all to the natural Dispositions of
his own Soul: The second is altogether inconsistent both with the Nature of
Things, and with the Nature of an infinitely pure and holy God: and therefore
the third is necessarily true. -- It will not at all help the Case, to allege in
Bar of what is here said, that Christ Jesus has made an Atonement for us. For
what is that to you, while you remain without an Interest in him? -- Did Christ
purchase for you a Capacity to make an Atonement for your self? -- Did he die,
that God might be pleased with what is contrary to his own Nature; and pacified
with such Duties as can be no better than impure Streams from a corrupt
Fountain?

Let Reason sit Judge in the Case before us; and you must allow your Case to be
as I have described it. And it is equally evident, that you have no Power to
change your own Heart, and to produce in your self a new Principle of Love to
God and Conformity to him, by any Endeavors of your own. -- It is visible from
what has been already said, that our Hearts and Affections must be renewed and
sanctified, before either our Persons or Services can be acceptable in the
Sight of God. And which Way can this be compassed? If you take up Resolutions,
these will no longer stand you in Stead, than the Principle of Fear, from which
they proceed, is kept in Act. -- If you execute these Resolutions in some
external Reformations, this is but lopping off the Branches, while the Stock
and the Root of the Tree are still alive; the Affections and Dispositions of
the Soul being still the same. -- If by Fear, or other selfish Motive, you
something restrain the present more sensible Exercise of your sinful Appetites
or Passions, this is but damming up the Stream, and forcing it into another
Channel; pull down the Dam, and it will run where it did before. -- Certain it
is, that every Man naturally loves the World, and the Things of the World, the
Objects of his sensual Appetites; and loves his Lusts and Idols, more than God:
and it is equally certain, that whatever Restraints he may sometimes put upon
these Dispositions, an omniscient Eye beholds the same Principle in him
notwithstanding: and consequently he can never please God, till there be in
this Respect a real and through Change wrought in all the Powers of his Soul;
such a Change as the Scriptures describe by a Translation from Darkness unto
Light, from Death to Life, and from the Power of Satan unto God. -- And to
suppose, that any but. He who first gave Being to our Souls, can give them a
new Being, in all spiritual on moral Respects; and make their Dispositions,
Appetites, Passions, Contemplations, Desires and Delights, not only differing
from, but directly and lastingly contrary to what they were, is to ascribe to
the Creature what is the peculiar Property and Prerogative of the glorious God
himself. -- Do you (Sir) but make the Trial, and you will find after all your
Endeavors, that the Violation of your Promises and Resolutions, the Deadness
and Hypocrisy of your Duties, the Prevalence of your Sins, and the continued
Estrangement of your Affections from God and Godliness, will give you more
sensible Conviction, than any Methods of Reasoning can do, that there is a
greater Power needful, than your own, to make you a New Creature.

It must therefore necessarily follow, that there is Nothing you are able to
do, can give you a Claim to the renewing Influences of the Holy Spirit. -- If
any Thing you can do, can give you a Claim to the renewing and sanctifying
Influences of the divine Grace, your Claim must be either from Merit, or
Promise. -- Not of Merit; when you cannot of your self so much as leave off
sining, and thereby running further into Debt to the Justice of God; and this,
even in and by the best of your Duties. Your highest Seize therefore can
merit Nothing but the divine Displeasure. -- Not of Promise: for where, I
beseech you, has God promised to reward your Insincerity, with his saving
Mercy? And how vain are all Pretenses to Serve God Sincerely, where there is
not one Grain of true Holiness in the Heart? Whatever moral Honesty Men in a
State of Nature may boast of, it is all but Spiritual Hypocrisy in the Sight of
a Heart-Searching God: And can bring none under the Promise; which is made to
Faith unfeigned, the only Simplicity and godly Sincerity, in the Account of the
Gospel.

But I return, to consider your Objection more distinctly. -- The Scriptures
(you tell me) promise, that he who seeks, shall find. -- But (Sir) do not the
Scriptures also inform us, that many shall seek to enter in at the strait Gate,
and shall not be able: that some ask, and receive not, because they ask amiss:
And that he who does not ask in Faith, nothing wavering, must not think he
shall receive any Thing of the Lord? -- There is indeed a Promise to him who
seeks in Faith and Sincerity: but what Claim can he have to that Promise, who
has neither true Faith nor Sincerity? -- Will mocking God, and flattering him
with you Lips, while your Heart is estranged from him, entitle you to the
Promise?

But you say, All our Divines tell us, that the most sinful and unworthy may
have Access to God through Christ; and this is the Purport of all my Reasoning
with you. -- True, by Faith in Christ they may: But God is a consuming Fire to
Unbelievers. He that believes not, is condemned already, -- What Claim
therefore can they have to the Favor of God upon Christ's Account, who have
never received him by Faith; and consequently have no Interest in him, nor in
any of his saving Benefits? -- Can they claim the Benefits of the Covenant of
Grace, who are themselves under the Covenant of Works, which curses them, for
their not continuing in all Things written in the Book of the Law, to do them?
-- I entreat you, Sir, to consider this Case: it is of vast Importance to you.
-- If you have not good Evidence of an Interest in Christ, how can you pretend
to the Privileges purchased with his precious Blood? How can you pretend to
Access to God through him; and a Claim to the blessed Influences of his Holy
Spirit? -- How can Unbelievers have a Claim to the Favor of God by Christ,
when he himself assures us, that the Wrath of God abides on them?

But Will not God have Compassion on his Creatures, when they do what they can
to serve him? -- What Answer would a Prince make to a condemned Rebel in his
Shackles and Dungeon, that should make this Plea for Pardon? Would the
Criminal's doing what he can to serve his Prince (which, in his present State,
is nothing at all to any good Purpose) atone for his past Rebellion? Or would
this qualify him for his Prince's Favor, while he yet retains the same Enmity
in his Heart against him, and will not so much as submit to his sovereign good
Pleasure and mere Mercy? The Application is easy. And it belongs to you (Sir)
to consider seriously, whether a Sinner, who is dead in Trespasses and Sins,
who is in a State of Rebellion against God, and therefore under the condemning
Sentence of the Law, can any more atone for his Sins, or make a reasonable Plea
for Grace and Pardon, than the Traitor aforesaid? -- But were your Reasoning
ever so just, it would afford you no Grounds of Comfort. For there never was,
nor ever shall be any Man, that can fairly make this Plea in his own Favor;
and truly say, he has done all he can, in the mortifying his Lusts, and in his
Endeavors to serve God. There will, after all his Attempts, remain enough
neglected, even of the external Part of his Duty, that was most in his own
Power, to condemn both his Person and his Services.

You complain, that the Arguments in the Book I sent you, don't give you
Satisfaction The true Scripture-Doctrine,etc.
. -- Well, I have here added some further Evidence, to what was there offered;
and would now call upon you to consider, whether all these Things put together
don't make it evident, that you lie at Mercy, and convince you of those
Scripture-Truths, that it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs,
him in God that shows Mercy; and that God gives his saving Grace only
because it has so seemed good in his Sight. -- Consider, whether you can alone
for past Sins by present Duties, by Duties which are so polluted by the
Principle from which they flow: and which have so much Carnality, selfishness,
Hypocrisy, and sinful Defects cleaving to them, that if the Iniquity of your
mostholy Things be imputed, it must greatly increase the moral Distance between
God and you. -- Consider, whether while you are under the Law, or Covenant of
Works, you are capable not only to fulfill all its preceptive Demands, and so
not further expose your self to its Curses; but also to do something toward
making Satisfaction to God's Justice for what you have already done amiss, and
to merit his Favor. -- Or consider, whether you have any Claim to God's
Acceptance of your Person upon Christ's Account, without an Interest in him,
and whilst condemned already by his own Mouth, and under the Wrath of God for
your Unbelief. -- Consider, whether you can have any Promise of Acceptance to
plead, while you remain under the Curse, both of the Law and Gospel. --
Consider, whether an omniscient and holy God can be either deluded or gratified
with mere external Shows of Religion, when he knows you have an Heart in you
that is far from Him. -- Consider, whether you can ever make the Case better,
by all your Endeavors to change your own Heart, and to create your self anew
in Christ Jesus, any more than you can produce a new World. -- Consider,
whether you dare venture your Eternity upon this Issue, that you sincerely do
what you can to serve God; and whether there be not such sinful Defects
cleaving to your best Performances, as may justly condemn both you and them. --
Consider again, whether if you should do all you can in the Service of God, you
would do any Thing that would either fully come up to the Terms of the Covenant
of Grace; or bear the least Proportion to that Salvation which the Gospel
requires. -- Consider once more, whether the glorious God has not an absolute
Right to dispose of his own Favors, just how, when, and where he pleases; and
whether he has not assured us, that he will bestow his everlasting Mercy upon
none but those who are really conformable to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace.

Now, Sir, if you while unregenerate can neither make Atonement for your past
Sin and Guilt, nor come up to the Demands of the Law of Nature: If you can
neither please God by your sinful Performances, nor, impose upon him by your
hypocritical Shows: If you run further in Debt by the Sin in your very Duties,
in stead of paying any Things of the old Score: If you have no Claim to
Acceptance on Christ's Account, without a special Interest in him; nor any
Claim to the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, till you actually comply with
the Terms of it: If both Law and Gospel condemn you in your present State; and
nothing but Omnipotence can change your Heart, and make your State better: If
God be a sovereign Donor of his own Favors; and you can have no Promise to
plead, while you remain under the Curse and Wrath of God, and a Stranger to the
Covenants of Promise: If even you your self must allow all these Things to be
undoubted Truths, it must then be true, even to Demonstration, that (while in
such a State) you are capable of no Qualifying Condition of the divine Favor;
and had need therefore to feel that you lie at Mercy.

To conclude this Head, if God himself may be believed in the Case, He will
have Mercy upon whom be will have Mercy; and whom he will, he hardens. Romans
ix. 18. -- It Is not for our Sakes, that he bestows Grace upon us. but for his
holy Name's Sake, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 22, 31. -- He Predestinates us unto the Adoption
of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good Pleasure of his
Will, to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted
in the Beloved. Ephesians. i. 5, 6. -- He acts in this Case according to his own
sovereign Pleasure, as a Potter that has Power over his Clay, to make one
Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor; and we have no Liberty to reply
against God: it is insufferable Arrogance for the Thing formed to say to him
that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Romans ix. 20, 21. -- Sir, as you
your self claim a Sovereignty in the Dispensation of your Favors, surely you
will not dare to deny a like Sovereignty in the eternal God. -- Believe it, the
glorious God is a Sovereign Benefactor; and he will be acknowledged as such, by
all that ever partake of his saving Mercy.

And now I am prepared to show you, that the Consequence which you draw from
this Doctrine, is unjust; and even directly contrary to the Improvement you
ought to make of it.

And the Reason I offer for this, is, that a realizing Belief of the Truth
before us directly tends to bring most Glory to God; and most Safety, Comfort,
and Happiness to your self. -- It is easy to conceive how it conduces most to
God's Glory, for us to consider him as the Fountain and Foundation of all Grace
and Mercy; and to consider all the Favors we enjoy or hope for, as flowing
from the mere Goodness of his Nature; and not from any Motive or Inducement
which we can possibly lay before him. -- In this View of the Case we do that
Honor to an infinite and eternal Being, as to suppose him a self-existent,
independent, and immutable Sovereign: while, on the contrary, to imagine our
selves capable by any Thing we can do, to change his Purposes, engage his
Affections, or excite and move his Compassions toward us, is to conceive him
to be altogether such an one as our selves, liable to new Impressions from our
Complaints or Persuasions, mutable in his Affections, and dependant upon our
Duties for the Exercise of his Grace. -- And I leave it to you to judge, which
of these Apprehensions are most worthy of that God, who is infinitely exalted
above us; and is without any Variation or Shadow of turning. I leave it
likewise to you to judge, which Principle is most likely to subserve our best
Interests, that which does most Honor, or that which does the most Dishonor
to God.

If we apply this to the present Case, I ask, In which Way can we find most
Encouragement to seek or strive for Mercy? In which Way have we the best
Prospect of Success? By entertaining false and dishonorable Conceptions of the
divine Being, and denying to God the Glory which is due to his Name? Or else by
lying at the Foot of a Sovereign; and thereby ascribing to him the infinite
Perfections of his excellent Nature? -- Though in this latter Way, you can make
no Change in God, you will nevertheless have the Evidence that he has made a
Change in you, and a comfortable Prospect, that by bringing you to a Submission
to his Sovereignty, he has a Design of special Favor to your Soul.

If we should yet further continue our View of this Case, it will appear, that
a Submission to the mere sovereign Mercy of God is most conducive to your own
Comfort, Safety, and Happiness. -- This Consideration is a just Foundation of
Comfort and Hope, in that it obviates the Darkness and Discouragements that
would otherwise arise, from a Sense of your Guilt and Unworthiness, and from
your Impotence and unavoidable Infirmity and Imperfection in the Service of
God. -- What Hope could you find from your Duties; when after your best
Endeavors, you would see so much Deadness, Formality and Hypocrisy, in your
highest Seize? -- What Hope from your Reformations; when you find so much
Sin and Corruption gaining Ground against all your good Purposes and
Resolutions? -- What Hope from your good Affections, when so much Hardness of
Heart, Worldlymindedness, Sensuality, and carnal Dispositions are separating
between God and you? -- Can you quiet your Soul by imposing upon an omniscient
God, with your vain Shows and flattering Pretenses? No, Sir, if you have any
true Discovery of your own Heart, these Considerations must continually perplex
and distress your Soul, with distracting Fears and Despondencies, as long as
you are thus compassing your self about with Sparks of your own kindling. For
these Defects and Imperfections will certainly accompany your best Resolutions,
Endeavors and Seize. -- But then, on the other Hand, if you lie at
Mercy, and submit to God as the sovereign Disposer of his own Favors, you have
good Grounds of Encouragement and Hope. -- Are your Sins great, and greatly
aggrav^^ed? The mercy of God exceeds them all. -- Have you no agreeable
Qualifications, to recommend you to the Favor of God? Multitudes of others
have found Mercy, who had no better Qualifications than you have. -- Have you
no special Promise to depend upon, as belonging to you, while in an unconverted
State? Yet is it not sufficient, that you have gracious Encouragement to leave
all in the Hands of that Mercy, which infinitely exceeds your highest
Apprehensions or Imaginations? -- Are you incapable to come up to the Terms of
Grace, proposed in the Gospel? There is yet Hope in God's omnipotent Mercy,
that he will work in you both to will and to do, of his own good Pleasure. He
has done it for Thousands of Sinners, no better than you.

Now, Sir, look around you; and see what Refuge you can possibly betake your
self to. -- You are in the Hands of Justice; and which Way can you make your
Escape? If you attempt to fly from God, you perish: but if you fly to him,
there is Hope. -- He is Sovereign in the Donation of his Favors; you have
therefore as good a Prospect of obtaining Salvation (in the Use of appointed
Means) as any unregenerate Person in the World. -- Your Defects and Demerits
need not be any Discouragement: For his Mercy triumphs over the Guilt and
Unworthiness of the greatest Sinners. -- Is it therefore not your greatest
Safety to lie at his Foot, in the Way of his Appointments, where there is a
blessed Hope set before you? -- In this Way you have the infinite Mercy of God,
the gracious Encouragements of the Gospel, the glorious Success of so many
Thousands who have tried this Method, to animate your Diligence and Hope. And
there is no other Way, in which you have any Encouragement to expect renewing
Grace and pardoning saving Mercy.

Since you wholly depend upon God's free sovereign Mercy, you should use the
more diligent and earnest Application, in all the Ways of his Appointment, that
you may obtain it. -- Since you must obtain Mercy of God, or perish, O with
what Diligence and Importunity, with what Ardou^ of Soul, should you address
the Throne of Grace, for Deliverance from your Guilt and Danger? -- Since in a
Way of Sovereignty, God is pleased to bestow his special Grace, with an
Interest in his Son and his great Salvation, at what Time and by what Means it
shall seem best in his Sight, you should therefore at all Times, and in the Use
of all the Means of Grace, be Seeking the Lord, while He may be found, and
calling upon Him while he is near.

Can it be thought just Reasoning, that because you cannot help your self, and
there is none but God can help you, it is therefore in vain to apply to him for
Help? That because you have no Claim to his Favor, but sly at his Mercy, you
will not therefore seek Mercy at his Hands? -- Does not this, at the first
View, appear contrary to all the Methods of Reasoning we should use in any
other Case? -- Can you promise your self Comfort, from such Reasonings and such
Conclusions as these, in your last expiring Moments, when your Soul is entering
upon its eternal and unchangeable State?

But you object, If God in Sovereignty designs Mercy for us, we shall obtain
it, whether we seek, or no: and if not, it is in vain to Strive. -- To this it is
sufficient Answer, that God never does in Sovereignty appoint Salvation for
any, in the final wilful Neglect of Gospel-Means. -- He is sovereign in the
Appointment of the Means, as well as of the End. The same glorious Sovereign,
who assures us, it is not for our Sakes that he bestows his special Grace upon
us, but for his own Name's Sake, does also let us know, that he will be
inquired of by the House of Israel, to do this for them. -- Whence it follows,
that if we have not a Heart to seek with earnest Diligence, for the gracious
Influences of the Spirit of God, there is no Prospect we shall ever obtain. For
God will make us feel the Want of his Mercy, and will make us esteem his
Salvation worthy of our Care and Pains; or leave us to the unhappy Effects of
our own Madness and Folly. -- But if we have Hearts given us, to be humbly and
earnestly attending upon the Means of Grace, it is an encouraging Sign, that he
who has excited our Diligence, intends to crown it with Success.

You see, Sir, I have obeyed your Commands; and have addressed you with as much
Plainness and Familiarity as the Cause requires, and you yourself have demanded.

That God may effectually bring you to submit to the Terms of his Grace, and
enable you so to run, as that you may obtain, is the Prayer of

Your and c.

LETTER VIII. Wherein the Difference between a true saving Faith, and a dead
temporary Faith, is distinctly considered.
SIR,
YOUR Complaints do exactly answer my Expectations. It is not your Case alone,
to have unworthy Apprehensions of God, vain trifling Imaginations, and strange
Confusion of Mind, accompanying the Exercises of Religion. It is no new Thing
for those who are setting out in earnest in a religious Course, to find by
Experience, that their Progress in Religion bears no Proportion to their
Purposes.: And that their good Designs and Resolutions, come to but little more
than outside Appearances, and no Way answer their Hopes. -- It Is Matter of
Thankfulness, that you have a feeling Sense of this. -- I hope, if no other
Arguments will convince you of the Truth of what was insisted on in my last,
you will at least be convinced by your own Experience, that you lie at Mercy.

You thank me for my Plainness and Faithfulness to a poor wretched Insidel, who
yet breathes, out of Hell, by the mere Patience of an affronted Savior. -- I
had not only the Warrant of your Commands, but the vast Importance of the
Concern before us, to embolden me to lay by all Reserves; and even to
transgress the common Rules of Decorum and Respect, in my former Letters. And
you need not conjure me to retain the same Freedom. I am no Courtier; nor am I
at all acquainted with the fashionable Methods of the Beau Monde. I shall
therefore apply my self, according to my Capacity, in my accustomed Methods of
Address, to answer your Desires.

You Observe, that I insinuate as if Men may believe the Truth of the Gospel,
without a saving Faith in Christ, without an Interest in him, or a Claim to the
Benefits of his Redemption. You therefore desire I would give you the
distinguishing Characters of a saving Faith; and show you wherein the
Difference lies, between a true Faith, and that which is common to Hypocrites,
as well as to Christians indeed.

I do indeed insist upon it, that Men may notionally and doctrinally believe
the Truth of the Gospel, without a saving Faith in Christ, and without an
Interest in him, or a Claim to the Benefits of his Redemption. -- This is a
Truth clearly taught in the Scriptures; and abundantly evident from the Reason
and Nature of Things. -- If any therefore should expect Salvation, from a mere
doctrinal and historical Faith in Christ, they will in the Conclusion find
themselves disappointed, and ashamed of their Hope.

We read (Joh. xii. 42, 43.) of many of the chief Rulers who believed in
Christ, but dared not confess him; for they loved the Praise of Men, more than
the Praise of God. -- And will any Man imagine, that such Believers who dare
not confess Christ before Men, shall be confessed by him before his Heavenly
Father and his holy Angels, in the great Day of Retribution? -- Will any Man
imagine, that our blessed Lord will own such for his sincere Disciples and
Followers, who love the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God? -- Here
then is a clear Instance of a doctrinal and historical Faith, which was not
saving; and could give no Claim to the Promise made to true Believers. -- We
have this Matter further illustrated and confirmed by the Apostle James, in the
second Chapter of his Epistle; where we are shown, that such a Faith is dead,
being alone; that it is but a Carcass without Breath. As the Body without the
Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works, is dead also. Of such a Faith we may
therefore say with the same Apostle, What does it profit, though a Man say that
he has Faith? Can Faith save him?

But I need not multiply Scripture Quotations in this Case. It is what is
continually confirmed to us by our own Observation. -- How many do we see every
Day, who acknowledge the Truth of the Gospel, and yet live worldly, sensual and
vicious Lives; who profess they know Christ, but in Works deny him; who call
themselves by his Name, and yet value their Lusts and Idols above all the Hopes
of his Salvation; and even run the Venture of eternal Perdition, rather than
deny themselves, take up their Cross, and follow him? -- Now there can be
nothing more certain, than that these Men are utterly unqualified for the
Kingdom of God; and that they can have no special Interest in Him who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

As, on the one Hand, there is a gracious Promise of final Salvation, to all
who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. He that believes, and is baptized, shall
be saved: He that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life: -- So, on the
other Hand, there is a Sort of Believers, who can have no Claim to this
Promise, nor any Interest in the Salvation by Christ. -- It must therefore be
of infinite Consequence, that we have indeed the Faith of God's Elect, that we
may become the Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ; and therefore that our
Faith be distinct, in its Nature and Operations, from such an empty, lifeless
and fruitless Belief, with which the formal, worldly and sensual Professor may
deceive and destroy his own Soul -- From whence in appears, that your Question
is most important; and deserves a most careful and distinct Answer: which I
shall endeavor in the following Particulars.

1. A true and saving Faith, is a realizing and sensible Impression of the
Truth of the Gospel: whereas a dead Faith is but a mere notional and
speculative Belief of it. -- Faith is by the Apostle described, the Substance
of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not seen: That which brings
eternal Things into a near View; and represents them unto the Soul as undoubted
Realities. Whence it is, that the true Believer, when he has experienced the
Defect of his own Purposes and Endeavors, when he is wearied out of all his
false Refuges, emptied of all Hope in himself, and is brought to see and feel
the Danger and Misery of his State by Nature, he is then brought in earnest to
look to Jesus, as the only Refuge and Safety of his Soul. -- He then sees the
incomparable Excellency of a precious Savior, breathes with ardent Desire
after him, repairs to him as the only Foundation of his Hope; and
proportionably to the Evidence of his Interest in him, rejoices in Christ
Jesus, having no Confidence in the Flesh. -- Now, the blessed Savior and his
glorious Salvation is the Subject of his serious, frequent and delightful
Contemplation. -- Now, an Interest in Christ is valued by him above all the
World; and he is in earnest to obtain and maintain good Evidence, that his Hope
in Christ is well founded. -- Now, the Favor of God, and the Concerns of the
unseen and eternal World, appear of greater Importance than every Thing else.
-- He now mourns under a Sense of his former Sins; he groans under the Burden
of his remaining Corruptions and Imperfections; and with earnest Diligence
follows after Holiness, endeavoring to work out his own Salvation with Fear
and Trembling. -- And in a Word, he has such an Impression of these invisible
Realities, that whatever Temptations, Desertions, or prevailing Corruptions he
may conflict with, nothing can so banish the great Concern from his Breast, as
to make him habitually slothful and indifferent about it: Nothing can quiet
him, short of having his Heart and Affections engaged in the Things of God and
Godliness; and his Appetites and Passions under the Restraint and governing
Influence of the Law of the Spirit of Life.

But now, on the other Hand, if we take a View of the Influence which a dead
Faith has upon the Soul, it is visible, that this usually leaves the Subjects
of it secure and careless, trifling and indifferent, in the Concerns of the
eternal World. These appear to such a Person but distant Futurities, which
don't engage his solemn Attention, and make him in earnest solicitous about the
Event; nor give any effectual Check to his inordinate Appetites and Passions.
-- Or if (as it sometimes happens) any awakning Dispensation alarms the
Conscience of such a Person, to a distressing Apprehension of his Guilt and
Danger, drives him to Duties and external Reformations, and makes him more
careful and watchful in his Conduct, he has yet no sensible impressive View of
the Way of Salvation by Jesus Christ. -- He either endeavors to pacify the
Justice of God, and his own Conscience, by his Duties and religious
Performances; and so lulls himself asleep again in his former Security: or else
continues to agonize under most dark, dreadful and unworthy Apprehensions of
the glorious God, as if he were implacable and irreconcilable to such Sinners
as he, -- Such a Person would readily acknowledge, but he cannot feel this
blessed Truth, that Christ Jesus is a sufficient Savior. -- He allows it to be
Truth; but it is to him such a Truth, as has no effectual Influence upon his
Heart and Life. Though he owns this to be true: Yet he can never comfortably
venture his Soul and his eternal Interests upon it, unless a Ray of divine
Light shine into his Soul, and give him a lively and sensible View of what he
could before have but a slight and superficial Apprehension of.

Here then you see an apparent Difference between a true and a false Faith. The
one realizes the great Truths of the Gospel, by a lively and feeling Discovery
of them; giving the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ. The other gives but a lifeless and unactive Assent to these
important Truths. -- The one influences the Heart and Affections, and by
beholding with open Face, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, changes the
Soul into the same Image, from Glory to Glory: The other only swims in the
Head, and leaves the Heart in a State either of Security or Despondency. -- The
one is an abiding Principle of divine Life, from which there flow Rivers of
living Water: The other is transient and unsteady, and leaves the Soul short of
any spiritual Principle of Life and Activity.

2. A saving Faith is an hearty Consent to the Terms of the Gospel: while a
dead Faith is but a cold Assent to the Truth of it. -- Accordingly a true Faith
is in the Gospel described to be a receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ. -- To as
many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Children of God. --
Our blessed Redeemer is freely offering himself and his saving Benefits to poor
perishing Sinners, in the Gospel. Our Compliance with and Acceptance of the
Gospel Offer, are the Terms of our Interest in him, and constitute the Faith of
God's Elect. -- They therefore, and they only, are true Believers in Christ,
who heartily acquiesce in the glorious Method of a Sinner's Recovery from Ruin
by Jesus Christ; and heartily accept an offered Savior, in all his Offices and
Benefits. -- A true Believer, convinced of his natural Blindness and Ignorance,
repairs to the Lord Jesus Christ, to enlighten his Mind, to make his Way plain
before him, and to give him a clear sensible and spiritual Acquaintance with
the great Things of his eternal Peace. -- The true Believer has found by
Experience his utter Incapacity to procure the divine Favor by the best of his
Duties, Reformations, or moral Performances, and that he has Cause to be
ashamed and confounded in his own Sight, for the great Defects of his highest
Seize in Religion: and therefore welcomes the Lord Jesus Christ to his
Soul, as the Lord his Righteousness, repairs to him, and to him only, for
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; and builds all his Hope
of Acceptance with God, upon what Christ has done and suffered for him. -- The
trueBeliever labors and is heavyladen with the Sinfulness of his Nature; and
longs for a further Victory over his corrupt Affections, Appetites and
Passions, for more Spirituality in his Duties, and for a further Progress in
Piety and Holiness; and therefore heartily desires and accepts the Lord Jesus
Christ, as his Sanctifier, as well as Savior; and earnestly seeks after the
renewing, strengthening, and quickening Influences of his blessed Spirit. --
The true Believer feels the Necessity of this blessed Savior in all his
Offices, Relations, and Characters. He sees him to be just such a Savior as
his Soul wants; and therefore cheerfully accepts a whole Christ, with his whole
Heart, without any Reserve, without any Desire of other Terms of Acceptance
with God. -- He may entertain dark Apprehensions of himself, and complain
heavily of the great Defects of his Faith and Holiness: but he can never
entertain hard Thoughts of the Gospel-Scheme; nor complain of the Terms of
Salvation therein proposed. These appear to him the Wisdom of God, and the
Power of God; and every Way answer the Exigen^^^ of his State, and the Desires
of his Soul.

But if, on the contrary, we consider the Character of a dead Faith, it is what
never brings the Soul to a full Consent to the Terms of the Gospel, without
some Exception and Reserve. -- The unfound Believer may imagine, that he
accepts of the Lord Jesus Christ as his Savior: But what is the Foundation and
encouraging Motive of his imaginary Compliance with the Gospel-Offer? Upon an
impartial Inquiry, it will always be found to be something in himself: His good
Affections, Duties, Moralities, Reformations, Promises, or Purposes. He
endeavors by these to recommend himself to God; and on the Account of these,
he hopes to find Acceptance through Christ. -- Or if he feels ever so strong a
Desire of Salvation by Christ, yet he is driven to it only by Fear and
Self-Love; and will renew his Affection to his other Lords, as soon as his
awakning Apprehensions are worn off. -- He don't feel his Want of Christ's
enlightening and enlivening Influences: For he knows not what they mean. -- He
submits not to the Righteousness of Christ. For he is still endeavoring to
procure Acceptance with God from some good Qualifications of his own, some
Duties which he performs, or some Progress which he makes or designs to make in
his religious Course. -- He cannot submit to Christ as his Lord. For there is
some ^lothful Indulgence, which he cannot forego, some darling Lust which he
cannot part with, some (...) which his Heart is set upon, or some difficult
Duty which he must excuse himself from.

There is nothing more apparent, than the Distinction between these two Sorts
of Believers. The one comes to Christ destitute of all Hope and Help in
himself; but sees enough in Christ to answer all his Wants. The other is full
in himself. -- The one looks to Christ to be his Light. The other leans to his
own Understanding -- The one makes Mention of Christ's Righteousness, and that
only. The other hopes for an Interest in Christ and his Salvation, on Account
of his own Seize; and in Effect, expects Justification by his own
Righteousness, for Christ's Sake. -- The one brings a guilty, polluted,
unworthy Soul to the blessed Redeemer, without any Qualification to recommend
it: expecting from him alone all the Supplies he wants, repairing to him for
Gold tried in the Fire, that he may be rich; for Eye Salve, that he may see;
and for white Raiment, that he may be clothed. The other ordinarily raises his
Expectations from Christ, in Proportion to his own imaginary Qualifications and
good Disposition. -- The one as well desires Salvation by Christ from
Pollution, as from Guilt. The other has a Reserve of some deceitful Lust; and
huggs some Delilah in his Bosom, which he cannot be willing to part with. -- In
fine, the one is willing to accept of the Lord Jesus Christ upon any Terms. The
other will not come to Christ, but upon Terms of his own Stating. -- But I
shall find Occasion to speak further to some of these Things under the
following Head.

3. A saving Faith is a humble Trust in, and Dependence upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the Author of our eternal Salvation: But a dead Faith always builds
upon some false Foundation, or upon none at all. -- A saving Faith is often
described in Scripture by a trusting in the Lord, committing our Way to him,
resting in him, and other such like Expressions; which suppose a humble
Confidence in the abundant Sufficiency of the Redeemer's Merits, and the
boundless Riches of God's Mercy in him. -- Accordingly the true Believer, in
his greatest Darkness and Discouragement, ventures his Soul and eternal
Interests in the Hands of Christ with at least a supporting and encouraging
Hope. -- His past Sins may appear in a most affrightning Forms vastly numerous,
dreadfully aggravated: However, he yet keeps his Hope alive with this
comforting Consideration, that the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all
Sin. -- He may be oppressed with a Sense of the horrible Defects of his Duties
and religious Seize: but he yet sees Righteousness enough in Christ, for
a safe Foundation of Confidence, though he find none in himself. -- This, and
this alone, keeps his Soul from sinking, answers the Clamours of Conscience,
and disposes him to rely upon the free Grace and Mercy of God. -- He may be
distressed with the Prevalence of his inward Corruptions; He may in an
unguarded Hour, be surprised and soiled by the Power of his sinful Appetites or
Passions, or by some unexpected Temptation: but even in this Case, his Refuge
is in that blessed Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. -- And
though from sad Experience of his own dreadful Imperfections, he may be ready
to question his State, and to fear lest he be deceived, and lest he should
finally be ashamed of his Hope, nevertheless he ventures that also in the Hands
of Christ, and depends upon him, that he will not leave him to a Soul-ruining
Deceit, but will guide him by his Counsel, and afterward bring him to Glory. --
Such a Dependence upon Christ the Believer ordinarily exercises in his darkest
Hours and dullest Frames. -- But when in the more lively Exercise of Grace, and
when Christ is pleased to shine into the Soul with clearer Communications of
his Love, his Confidence (like a Rock in the Sea) stands unmoved in the
greatest Tempests; and he knows whom he has believed, that he is able to keep
that which he has committed to him, against that Day. With this Confidence he
can even glory in Tribulation; he can cheerfully look Death it self in the
Face, and triumph over the King of Terrors.

But now, if we take a View of a dead Faith, we shall find in it the quite
contrary Properties. -- The unsincere Professor (as has been observed already)
ordinarily raises his Expectations and Encouragements from something in
himself. His good Frames, his Joys and Comforts, his Endeavors or Designs to
serve God, are what he has to depend upon: And upon these he does and will
depend; and perhaps will never see his Mistake, 'till it be too late. -- Some
of these indeed don't find even this false Foundation to build upon: but quiet
their Souls with a loose and general Hope. -- They believe, that God is
merciful, and that Jesus Christ came to save Sinners; or they hope, they shall
some Time or another obtain Grace, though they find none at present. Thus too
many of them go on quietly in their Sins, dwell at Ease, and cry Peace to their
Souls, 'till the Flood of God's Displeasure sweeps away their Refuges of Lies.
-- Others there be, who by Means of a better Education, or from some awakning
Sense of their Guilt and Danger, cannot but see, that these Beds are too short
to stretch themselves upon; and therefore their Faith is their Torment. They
believe in Christ as their Judge; but not as their Savior. They spend their
Lives in Fears and Anxieties, in Disquietude and Uneasiness of Mind, as often
as their Consciences are awake, to entertain any serious Apprehensions of a
future and eternal World. -- Thus they live under a Spirit of Bondage; not
being able to venture their guilty Souls upon the pardoning Mercy of God, and
the infinite Merit of the Redeemer's Blood.

Nothing can be more apparent, than the Distinction and Difference here
represented, between these two Sorts of Believers. -- The one, in all his
Straits, Fears, Difficulties and Dangers, looks unto Christ as to a sure
Foundation of Safety, Confidence and Hope: And though he may at some Times
doubt his Interest in Christ, he can at no Time deliberately place his
Confidence or expect Safety for his Soul any where else, but in the mere Mercy
of God in Christ. The other leaves the Soul asleep; or else seeks Rest only
from the Righteousness of the Law, from Desires and Endeavors of his own, and
must either find Comfort there, or no where. -- The one ventures all his
Interests, and all his Hopes of Grace and Glory, upon the Faithfulness of the
Gospel-Promises, and the infinite Mercy of God in Christ. The other sees no Way
to quiet the Accusations of his Conscience, and to obtain Qualifications for
Salvation, by depending upon a naked Promise. -- In a Word, the one can see
Safety and Security, in leaving all the Concerns both of Time and Eternity in
the Hands of Christ. The other being ignorant of the Righteousness of God, must
make the Righteousness of the Law his Refuge, or else live without the Comfort
of Hope.

4. A saving Faith subjects the Soul to the Scepter and Yoke of Christ: but a
dead Faith leaves the Soul unrenewed and disobedient. -- A true Faith purifies
the Heart, and overcomes the World; and he that has this Hope in Christ,
purifieth himself even as He is pure. A true Faith unites the Soul to Christ,
as the Branch is united to the Vine; and thereby enables the Man to bring forth
much Fruit. -- The true Believer hates every false Way; he mourns over, and
watches, strives, and prays against all the Corruptions of his Nature, and all
the Imperfections of his Heart and Life. -- There is no known Sin, which he
indulges himself in; no known Duty, which he willingly neglects; no Difficulty,
which can deter him from following Christ; no Temptation, which can allure him
from endeavoring a Conformity to the whole Will of God. -- Not as though he had
already attained; or were already perfect. He has dailyCause to lament his
Defects: but yet, he can truly say, that he delights in the Law of the Lord,
after the inward Man; and accordingly endeavors in every Station and Relation,
in all his Conduct both to God and Man, as well in secret as openly, to live a
Life of Conformity to God, in all the Duties he requires of him. -- And wherein
he cannot attain, he is yet pressing toward Perfection, and groaning after a
further Progress in Holiness, even in all Instances, without Reserve; nor yet
satisfied without a final Perseverance, to crown his Sincerity.

But on the otherHand, the Obedience of an unsincere Professor is very partial,
defective, temporary; and but a Matter of Force and Constraint upon the
Appetites and Affections. If with Herod he reforms and does many Things, he yet
retains his Herodias, some darling Corruption unmortified; or leaves some
unpleasant Duty neglected. Or if by the Lashes of an awakened Conscience, he is
driven for a Time to a more general Reformation from all known Sin, and to
outward Attendance upon all known Duty, he finds no inward Complacency in it;
and therefore is like a dull Horse, that will be kept on his Way no longer than
he feels a Spur in his Side.

Here then is a conspicuous Difference between a true and a false Believer. The
one has a Principle of Holiness, a Delight in it, and an earnest and continuing
Desire after further Proficiency in the divine Life. The other aims only at so
much Holiness as he thinks will save him from Hell, but cares for nothing more;
and what he has, is excited by Fear, or constrained by Force, contrary to the
natural Tendency and Biass of his Soul. -- In Fine, the one makes it the
Endeavor of his Life, to approve himself to a pure, holy and omniscient God.
The other rests in Endeavors to quiet his Conscience, and to silence its
Clamours and Accusations.

5. A saving Faith works by Love to God and Man: but a dead Faith always falls
short of both. -- The Apostle assures us, that if we have all Faith, so that we
could remove Mountains, and have not Charity, we are Nothing. -- Faith works
by Love; and the true Believer keeps himself in the Love of God, looking to the
Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ for eternal Life. -- He delights in
contemplating the glorious Perfections of the divine Nature. His Meditations
upon God are sweet, and the Thoughts of Him precious to his Soul. -- He values
the Favor of God as Life, and his Loving Kindness as better than Life. If he
can have the glorious God for his Portion, and live in the Light of his
Countenance, he can be content with Straits and Difficulties, Trials and
Afflictions, here in the World. -- He takes peculiar Pleasure in the Ordinances
of God, and all the appointed Means of a near Approach into his special
Presence; and is especially pleased, when favored with sensible Communion with
God. -- Though he cannot always walk so near to God, and find such sensible
Delight in him; yet he laments his Absence, when he withdraws; heavily
complains of his own Deadness, Worldliness, or Sensuality, which separates
between God and his Soul; and can find no true Rest or Satisfaction, till he
return to God, and God to him. -- This is at least the ordinary Course and
Tenor of the Believer's Life: and if at any Time he should be so left of God
as to grow forgetful of him, and have any continuing 66Prevalence of a dead
carnal worldly Frame in his Soul, this darkens the Evidence of his State, robs
him of his Comfort and Peace, and will at Length put him upon vigorous and
active Endeavors for obtaining a Revival of his languishing Graces, by a fresh
Supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Thus, the true Believer has the Love of God dwelling in him; and from the
same Principle, he likewise loves his Neighbor as himself. -- He maintains a
Life of Justice, Meekness, Kindness and Beneficence toward all Men, bears
Injuries, is ready to forgive, entertains the best Opinion of Men's State and
Actions, that the Case will allow; and endeavors to live in the Exercise of
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faithfulness, Meekness.
And as he thus maintains a Love of Benevolence to all Men, he has in a special
Manner a Love of Complacence toward those who bear the Marks of the divine
Image. -- These he delights in, on Account of their being (or at least
appearing to be) the Children of God. He loves them for their heavenly Father's
Sake, as well as for those gracious Qualifications, which make the Righteous
more excellent than his Neighbor. He loves the Company of the Saints. These
are the excellent, in whom is all his Delight. He loves their Piety; and
studies an Imitation of them, wherein they follow Christ; and studies to equal
(if not excel) them in their highest Improvements in Religion. He loves their
Persons; and hopes to join in Consort with them in the eternal Praises of God.

This is the real and genuine Character of every true Believer: while the
highest Seize of a dead Faith do fall short of every Part of this
Description. -- The false Professor may imagine, that he has something of the
Love of GOD in him: but upon a just View of the Case it will appear, that it is
only to an Idol, the Creature of his own Imagination. If he seems to love God
under an Apprehension of his Goodness and Mercy, he yet dreads him on Account
of his Justice, and has an inward Aversation to his Purity and Holiness; so
that the Object of his Love is an imaginary Being, of infinite Goodness and
Mercy, without either Justice or Holiness. -- If from the Alarms of Conscience,
or some Emotions of his natural Affections, he may take some Pleasure in
religious Exercises, this Pleasure is short and transient, like the Principle
from whence it flows; he soon returns to Carelessness and Forgetfulness of God,
and has his Affections quickly engaged in worldly and sensual Pursuits. -- And
however he may deceive himself, in any supposed Progress in Religion, he can
never satisfy his Soul with having God for his Portion. He can never in Course
keep up a Life of Spiritual Mindedness, and Delight in God, and in a Way of
Obedience to him, and Communion with him.

The same Defects are likewise found in the unfound Believer with Respect to
his Love to his Neighbor. -- If he be not (as it is too commonly found) unjust
and deceitful, wrathful and contentious, hard-hearted and unkind, bitter and
censorious, revengeful and implacable: Yet he never loves the Children of God
as such. -- Whatever Love he may have to any such from special intimate
Acquaintance, or from their being in the same Cause, Party or Persuasion with
himself (which is indeed no more than the Exercise of Self-Love or Self-Esteem)
he never loves the Image of Christ in every Sect or Party, in whom he finds it,
nor can he love a Conformity to the Children of God in the Holiness of their
Hearts and Lives.

Here then you see an apparent Difference in these two Sorts of Believers. --
The one loves God above all Things: and indeed he that does not love him with a
supreme Love, does not love him as God; and consequently don't love him at all.
But the other seeks the Favor of God, from no other Motive but Fear of his
Displeasure, or some Desire of Happiness; and not from a Sense of the
Excellency of his glorious Perfections, and the Blessedness of an Interest in
his Favor. -- The one loves what God loves; hates what he hates; and loves and
esteems himself but in Proportion to his Conformity unto God. The other retains
his Delight in his Lusts and Idols; and repairs to God because he durst not do
otherwise. -- The one, like God himself, takes Pleasure in doing Good to all
Men; and takes special Delight in all without Distinction, who are Partakers of
the divine Nature. -- The other at the best has his Love to Man influenced by
selfish Principles; and therefore takes most Delight in those, who are most
conformable to his own Sentiments or Dispositions.

Lest I should weary out your Patience, I shall just mention but this one
Particular more --

6. A saving Faith humbles the Soul, and makes it low and vile in its own Eyes:
Whereas a dead Faith tends to exalt the Mind with vain Apprehensions of, or
Endeavors after, some Sufficiency or Excellency of its own. -- The true
Believer has a deep Sense of the Greatness and Aggravations of his Sins,
loathes himself on Account of them; and adores the Patience and Long-suffering
of God toward him, that has kept him out of Hell. He is so sensible of the
great Defects of his Duties, of the Sinfulness of his Heart, the Imperfections
of his Life, and his utter Unworthiness of any Favor from God, that he cannot
but entertain a most deep and sensible Impression, that it must be a wonderful
Display of mere sovereign Grace, if ever he obtains Salvation. -- It is always
true, that the greater Manifestation of God's Love is made to his Soul, the
greater Sense he has of his own Nothingness and Unworthiness, and the more he
admi^es and adores the astonishing Riches of free distinguishing Grace to such
a guilty polluted Creature as he is. -- Though the true Believer lives in the
Exercise of that Charity toward others, which thinks no Evil, but believes
all Things and hops all Things; he yet always finds Occasion to condemn
himself, and to censure his own inward Affections, and outward Performances,
religious Duties and moral Conduct; and therefore cannot but esteem others
better than himself. -- In short, the true Believer always, while in this
Tabernacle, groans being burdened. He finds Occasions of a renewed Repentance
every Day: He every Day finds new Cause to complain of himself; and new Cause
to commit a sinful and unworthy Soul to the mere Mercy of God in Christ.

On the contrary, a dead Faith always either puffs up the vain Mind with a
haughty pleasing Apprehension of its own Seize, makes it censorious and
uncharitable, and inspires it with that proud pharisaical Language, I thank
God, I am not as other Men: or else from the same haughty Principle, either
leaves the Soul secure and easy, in its good Designs and Purposes of future
Repentance; or impatient and desponding, through Want of those good
Qualifications which it supposes necessary.

I think, I need not enlarge upon this Distinction; it is so apparent and
manifest, and the Characters so easy to be known.

And now, Sir, to sum up the whole in a short and easy View. -- If you have
good Evidence of a saving Faith in Christ, you must have such a sensible
Impression of the Truth of the Gospel, as makes you feel the Importance of your
eternal Concerns, and your Necessity of an Interest in Christ; and puts your
Soul upon earnest and active Desires after him, as your only Hope and Safety.
-- You must heartily approve the Way of Salvation which the Gospel reveals; and
heartily consent to the Terms on which it is offered. -- You must accept of
Christ as a free Gift; bringing Nothing with you of your own, to recommend you
to his Acceptance. -- You must accept of him as your only Righteousness to
justify you before God; and as your Prince, as well as Savior; consenting as
well to be governed as to be saved, to be sanctified as to be justified by him.
-- And as you must receive him, so you must confidently trust in him alone, as
a sure Foundation of Safety and Hope; and as a continuing Fountain of all
Supplies of Grace to your Soul, whatever Difficulties and Discouragements you
may meet with. -- And you must have this standing Evidence of the Sincerity of
your Faith, that it purifies your Heart; and brings you to an earnest Desire of
and Endeavor after habitual Holiness of Heart and Life; that it works by Love
to God and Man; and keeps up in your Soul an abasing Sense of your own Vileness
and utter Unworthiness, after all. -- This is that precious Faith, to which the
Promises of the Gospel are made, and to which no false Professor can make any
just Pretense.

To conclude with a still shorter View of this Case. -- When a realizing Belief
of the Gospel; and a Despair of all Help in your self brings you to repair to
Christ as your only Safety; and to venture your Soul, guilty as it is, upon the
Merit of his Obedience, the Sufficiency of his Grace and Strength, and the
Faithfulness of his Promise; and heartily to submit to his Rule and Government,
now you cannot fail of the sanctifying Influences of his Spirit, to qualify you
for the eternal Inheritance: For the Amen, the true and faithful Witness, has
given you his Word for it, that if you thus come to him, he will in no Wise
cast you out.

I might sum up this important Point in a yet shorter View. -- If you so
heartily approve of, and delight in the Gospel-Way of Salvation by Christ
alone, that you can cheerfully venture your Soul and your eternal Interests
upon it, as the sure and only Foundation of Hope and Safety, you have then the
Faith of God's Elect. And in this Case he that has bestowed such Grace upon
you, will carry on his own Work in your Soul, will give you those several
Qualifications and Evidences of a gracious State, which I have above described;
and will at last present you faultless before his Throne, with exceeding Joy.
-- That you may have the delightful Experience of such a Progress of Grace in
your Soul, is the Prayer of

Your and c.

LETTER IX. Wherein the Difference between a legal and an evangelical
Repentance is distinctly considered.
SIR,
YOU justly observe, It is of infinite Concern, that your Repentance toward
God (as well as your Faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ) be sincere; and that
you have therefore Cause to be solicitous, not to be deceived with a Repentance
which must be repented of. And you have therefore just Reason to desire a clear
Apprehension of the Difference, between a legal and an evangelical Repentance.
I shall therefore endeavor according to your Desire, to show you the
Difference, in as easy and familiar a Light as I can. -- And perhaps it may
give you a clearer View of the Case, if I should show you first negatively,
wherein the Destinction does not consist, under a few Particulars, before I
proceed to a direct Illustration of it.

It may then be observed, that a deep Distress of Mind on Account of sinning
against God, is common both to a legal and evangelical Repentance. -- Even
Judas could cry out with Agony of Soul, I have sinned in betraying innocent
Blood; as well as the Psalmist groans out his Complaint, that there was no Rest
in his Bones because of his Sins. -- A distressing Sense of Sin, in it self
considered, is therefore no Evidence for, nor against, the Truth and Sincerity
of Repentance.

Moreover a fearful Apprehension of the divine Displeasure, may be common to
both Sorts of Penitents. -- Mere legal Convictions may make Sinners in Zion
afraid, and Fearfulness surprise the Hypocrite; And Destruction from God may be
a Terror to a holy Job, in as great Reality, though not with such despairing
Infidelity, as to a Cain or Judas; that this can be no distinguishing Mark of a
true or false Repentance.

I may add, Dread of, and a temporary Reformation from outward and known
Courses of sinning, may likewise be the Consequence of both a legal and
evangelical Repentance. -- Ahab humbled himself, lay in Sackcloth, and went
softly; and Herod reformed many Things, as well as David refrained his Feet
from every evil Way. -- It Is impossible for a Sinner to give the Reins to his
Lusts, while under the severe Lashes of an awakened Conscience: that a mere
legal Conviction must, while it lasts, procure an external Reformation. -- Such
a Reformation, of it self, can therefore be no Evidence of a sincere
Repentance, how great soever it may appear; and before it can be no Evidence
against it.

Besides, Men may be put upon Diligence and Activity in Duty, by both a legal
and evangelical Repentance. -- An unsincere Repentance may bring Men with the
hypocritical Jews, to seek the Lord daily; and delight to know his Ways, as a
Nation that did Righteousness. In their Afflictions they may seek him early.
They may seek him and return; and enquire early after God. -- This may be the
Fruit of a legal Repentance; as well as that a true Repentance may and always
does, bring Men to lift up their Hearts and their Hands to God in the Heavens.
-- This therefore can be no distinguishing Criterion, in the Case before us.

Once more, a comforting Persuasion of having obtained pardoning Mercy, is
common to both Kinds of Penitents. -- God's ancient People when most
incorrigible in their Impiety, would trust in lying Words, come and stand
before him in the House that was called by his Name; and say, We are delivered
to do all these Abominations. The Israelites in the Wilderness concluded, that
God was their Rock, and the most high God their Redeemer, when they flattered
him with their Lips and lied to him with their Tongues; and their Hearts were
not right with him. -- And on the other Hand, the true Penitent may say with
David, I said I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord; and thou
forgavest me the Iniquity of my Sin. -- A mere Persuasion of Forgiveness
therefore, how comfortable or joyful soever, don't distinguish the Nature of
that Repentance, on which such a Persuasion is founded.

In short, it is not the deepest Sense of Sin or Guilt; nor the most
distressing Sorrow on that Account; it is not the Fear of God's Wrath, nor the
greatest external Reformation of Life; it is not the most diligent external
Attendance upon all known Duty; nor the most quieting Persuasion of having made
our Peace with God; nor all these together, that will denominate a Man
sincerely penitent. -- For all these may be, and have been, attained by mere
Hypocrites; and often are found with the false, as well as the true Professor.

Having, by Way of Precaution, given you these Remarks, I now proceed directly
to consider the important Case before us. And,

1. A legal Repentance flows only from a Sense of Danger, and Fear of Wrath:
But an evangelical Repentance is a true Mourning for Sin; and an earnest Desire
of Deliverance from it. -- When the Conscience of a Sinner is alarmed with a
Sense of his dreadful Guilt and Danger, it must necessarily remonstrate against
those Impieties, which threaten him with Destruction and Ruin. Thence those
Frights and Terrors, which we so commonly see in awakened Sinners. -- Their
Sins (especially some grosser Enormities of their Lives) stare them in the
Face, with their peculiar Aggravations. Conscience draws up the Indictment; and
sets home Charge against them. The Law passes the Sentence; and condemns them
without Mercy. -- And what have they now in Prospect? But a fearful looking for
of fiery Indignation to consume them! -- Now with what Distress will they cry
out, of the Greatness and Aggravations of their Sins? -- With what Amazement
will they expect the dreadful Issue of a sinful Course? -- How ready are they
now to take up Resolutions of a more watchful and holy Life? -- Now they are
brought upon their Knees before God, to acknowledge their Sins and to cry for
Mercy; and now Conference like a flaming Sword, keeps them from their former
Course of Impiety and sensual Gratifications. -- And what is all this
Repentance, but mere Terror and Fear of Hell? Let but Conscience be pacified,
and their Fear blown over; and the Dug will quick return to his Vomit again,
'till some new Alarm revive the Conviction of their Sin and Danger, and their
former Process of Repentance. Thus some will sin and repent, and repent and
sin, all their Lives; and yet lie open to eternal Repentance after all. -- Or
if the Distress of Conscience make so deep an Impression, and fix such an
abiding Awe of particular Sins upon the Mind, that there remains a visible and
continuing Reformation: Yet their Lusts are but dammed up by their Fears, and
were but the Dam broken down, they would run again in their former Channel with
renewed Force. -- It is true, the Law sometimes proves a Schoolmaster to drive
Sinners to Christ; and Conviction of Sin and a legal Repentance is a necessary
Preparative to a saving Conversion; but this alone gives no Claim to the
Promise of the Gospel. -- The House may be thus empty, swept and garnished, but
for the Reception of seven worse Spirits than were driven out of it; and a
Sinner may thus escape the Pollutions of the World, and yet have his latter End
worse than his Beginning.

If on the other Hand, we consider the Character of a sincere
Gospel-Repentance, though such legal Terrors may lead to its Exercise, they
don't belong to its Nature; nor are they any Part of its Description. Sin, it
self, becomes the greatest Burden and Aversation to a truly penitent Soul. --
I hate (says the Psalmist) every false Way. -- O wretched Man that I am (says
the Apostle) who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! -- Thus the
Penitent groans being burdened; not for Fear of Hell, such Fear being no Part
of a true Repentance, though it may sometimes accompany a sincere and godly
Sorrow for Sin. But this Sorrow arises from an affecting, humbling, mourning
Sense of Sin, from a View of the Sin of Nature, with the Hardness of the Heart,
and universal Depravity of the Affections which flow from it; and from a View
of the numerous Sins of Practice, with their special Aggravations. This is the
Grief, this the Distress of a repenting Sinner. -- It is necessary from the
Nature of a true Repentance, that it must have Respect both to the Sin of
Nature and Practice: though both of these are not at all Times actually in the
Mind; and particularly thought of, and mourned for by the repenting Sinner. --
The Language of a true Repentance is such as that. I acknowledge my
Transgressions; and my Sin is ever before me. Mine Iniquities are gone over
mine Heal, as an heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me. Deliver me from all
my Transgressions. Let not my Sins have Dominion over me. Innumerable Evils
have compassed me about, mine Iniquities have taken Hold upon me, so that I am
not able to look up: they are more than the Hairs of mine Head; therefore my
Heart fails me. Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me O Lord make Haste to help
me. -- As the true Penitent longs for more and more Victory over his
Corruptions, so is he most watchful, prayerful and in earnest to mortify his
Lusts, and to cut off all Supplies of Sin. He mourns for all, he hates all his
Lusts; and is willing to spare none, no not so much as a right Hand, or a right
Eye. -- As there is nothing so grievous to him as Sin, so there is Nothing
which he so earnestly desires and pursues, as a nearer Approach to that blessed
State, where Nothing can enter which defiles or works Abomination.

Here you see an apparent Difference, between being struck with Fear,
restrained by Terror, and driven from a Course of sinning by the Lashes of an
awakned Conscience, between this (I say) and Loathing our selves in our own
Sight, for all our Iniquities and Abominations, with a Groaning after Grace and
Strength to conquer and mortify our Corruptions, and be free from the Empire of
Sin. -- That is merely the Fruit of Self-Love, which prompts the Soul to fly
from Danger. This is the Exercise of a vital Principle, which separates the
Soul from Sin; and engages the whole Man in a continued Opposition against it.

2. A legal Repentance flows from Unbelief: But an Evangelical Repentance is
always the Fruit and Consequence of a saving Faith. I have shown you already,
that a legal Repentance is effected by fearful Apprehensions of Hell and
Damnation. And whence is this amazing and distracting Fear and Terror? -- Has
not the Gospel provided a glorious Relief for such Distresses; and opened a
blessed Door of Hope for the greatest Sinners? Is not Pardon and Salvation
freely offered to all, that will accept a blessed Savior and his saving
Benefits? Is not the Blood of Christ sufficient to cleanse from all Sins,
however circumstanced, and however aggravated they may be? Why then don't they
cheerfully fly for Refuge to this Hope set before them? -- Alas, they can see
no Safety in it! The Law of God challenges their Obedience; and condemns their
Disobedience. Conscience joins in, both with the Precept and Sentence of the
Law: and thence their only Refuge is Resolutions, Reformations, Duties, Penance
or some such self-righteous Methods to pacify God's Justice, to quiet their
Consciences; and to lay a Foundation of future Hope. -- The Defect of their
Endeavors and Seize, creates new Terrors. Their Terrors excite new
Endeavors. And thus they go on without attaining the Law of Righteousness;
because they seek it not of Faith: but as it were by the Works of the Law. --
They may, it is true, have some Respect to Christ, in this their legal Progress.
They may hope, that God will accept them for Christ's Sake. They may use his
Name in their Prayers for Pardon, while they dare not depend upon the Merits of
his Blood for the Remission of their Sins and a Freedom from Condemnation. And
what is all this, but a secret Hope, that the Redemption of Christ will add
such Merit to their Frights and Fears, Reformations and Duties, as to make them
effectual to atone for their Sins; and purchase the Favor of God? -- So that
all their penitential Shows and Appearances are Nothing but the Workings of
Unbelief.

Let us now take a View of an evangelical Repentance; and we shall find the
Characters of it directly repugnant to what has been considered. This must
always be the Consequence of a saving Faith; and can never go before it. -- The
Sinner must have a realizing Apprehension of the Purity and Holiness of the
divine Nature, before he can loathe and hate his Sins, on the Account of their
Contrariety to God. -- He must have a feeling Sense, that there is pardoning
Mercy with God for Sinners, before he can with Courage and Sincerity apply for
Forgiveness to a just and holy God. -- He must have a believing Discovery of
the Way in which God is accessible by Sinners, before he can have Access with
Boldness to the Throne of Grace. He must see and feel, that there is Safety in
venturing a guilty Soul in the Hands of Christ and no where else, before he can
look to his Blood for cleansing from Guilt; and to his Grace and Strength for
Victory over his Corruptions. He must be united to Christ as a Branch to the
Vine, before he can bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance. -- Without this he
may be driven into desponding Fears and to legal Attempts for Safety: but he
cannot fly for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set before him. -- The true
Penitent therefore approaches God's Presence with a deep Impression of his
Guilt, and Unworthiness; and of his just Desert of an eternal Rejection from
God. But then he comes before a Mercy-Seat. -- Though he is forced to
acknowledge that if God should mark Iniquity, he could not stand before him; he
yet remembers, that with God there is Forgiveness that he may be feared; and
that with him there is plenteous Redemption. -- The true Penitent looks to the
Blood of Christ, as what alone can cleanse away his numerous and aggravated
Sins; and from thence he takes Encouragement, (...) out the (...) Language,
Wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity; and cleanse me from my Sin. Purge me with
Hyssop and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than the Snow. --
This is the Prospect, which both encourages and invigorates his Cries for
Mercy; and embitters his Sins to him; and which makes him loath them all, and
long for Deliverance from them all. -- Is God infinitely merciful and ready to
forgive (says the penitent Soul) and have I been so basely ungrateful, as to
sin against such astonishing Goodness, to affront and abuse such Mercy and
Love! -- Is Sin so hateful to God, that he has so severely punished it in the
Person of his own dear Son, how vile, how polluted and abominable must I then
appear, in the Eyes of his Holiness and Justice, that am Nothing but Defilement
and Guilt; from the Crown of my Head to the Soles of my Feet, Nothing but
Wounds and Bruises and putrefying Sores! -- Has the blessed Savior suffered
his Father's Wrath for my Sins! Have they nailed him to the Cross; and brought
him under the Agonies of an accursed Death; and shall I be ever reconciled to
my Lusts any more; and go on to crucify the Son of God afresh! -- Is there
pardoning Mercy to be had, and shall I flight the Blood of Christ, set light by
the gracious Offer, and perish in Sight of a Savior! -- May I obtain Strength
from the Lord Jesus Christ, for Victory and Dominion over my Corruptions; and
shall I not both resolve in his Strength against them; and lie at his Foot,
that the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, may make me free from the
Law of Sin and Death! -- Have I dishonored God so much already, loaded my
precious Savior with so many horrible Indignities; and brought such a Weight
of Guilt upon my self; and is it not now high Time to bid an utter Defiance to
my most darling Lusts, the greatest Enemies to God and my own Soul? -- Such as
this is the Language of a Gospel-Repentance. -- And though there may be a sincere
Repentance without full Evidence of an Interest in Christ, there can be none
without a believing View of the infinite Merit of his Blood; and the Safety of
bringing a guilty Soul to that Fountain for Pardon and Cleansing, as I will
endeavor to show you more particularly.

You cannot but see the great Distinction, and even Contrariety, between a
guilty Flight of Soul from God, like Adam after his Fall; and a humbling,
self-condemning Flight to God's pardoning Mercy, like the Prodigal when
returning to his Father's House: -- Between legal, slavish, self-righteous
Endeavors to atone for our Sins, and make our Peace with God; and repairing
only to the Blood of Christ for Cleansing from all our Sins: -- Between
mourning for our Guilt and Danger; and mourning for our Sins, as they are
against God, against a precious Savior, against infinite Mercy and Love: --
And in a Word, between attempting a new Life by the Strength of our own
Resolutions and Endeavors; and looking only to the Mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ for Grace and Strength, as well as Pardon and Preedom from Condemnation.

3. A legal Repentance flows from an Aversation to God and to his holy Law: But
an evangelical Repentance from Love to both. -- The Distress, the Terror and
Amazement, that awakened Sinners are under, arises from their dreadful
Apprehensions of God, and his terrible Justice. They know that they have
greatly provoked him, are afraid of his Wrath; and therefore want some Covert,
where they may hide themselves from his Presence. -- They might before,
perhaps, have some pleasing Apprehensions of God, while they considered him as
being all Mercy without Justice; and while they could hope for Pardon, and yet
live in their Sins. But now, they have some Sense of his Holiness and Justice,
he appears an infinite Enemy; and therefore most terrible to their Souls. They
are consulting indeed some Way to be at Peace with him; because they are afraid
the Controversy will issue in their Destruction. They resolve upon new
Obedience, from the same Motives that Slaves obey their severe tyrannical
Masters; while the Rule of their Obedience is directly contrary to the Bent,
Biass, and Disposition of their Souls. -- Were the Penalty of the Law taken
away, their Aversion to it would quickly appear, and they would soon embrace
their beloved Lusts, with the same Pleasure and Delight as formerly. -- This is
frequently exemplified in (...) who wear off their Convictions and Reformations
together, and notwithstanding all their former religious Appearances, discover
the Alienation of their Hearts to God and his Laws, by their sinful and sensual
Lives; and (as the Apostle expresses it) show themselves Enemies in their
Minds, by their wicked Works.

But on the contrary, the sincere Gospel-Penitent, sees as admirable Beauty and
Excellency in a Life of Holiness; and therefore groans after higher Seize
in it. -- He is sensible how much he has transgressed the Law of God, how very
far he is departed from the Purity and Holiness of the divine Nature. This is
the Burden of his Soul. Hence it is, that he walks in Heaviness, and waters his
Couch with Tears. -- He mourns, not because the Law is so strict or the Penalty
so severe, for he esteems the Law to be holy; and the Commandment holy, just
and good: but he mourns, that though the Law be spiritual, he is carnal, sold
under Sin. -- He mourns, that his Nature is so contrary to God, that his
Practice is so contrary to his Will; and that he can make no better Progress in
mortifying the Deeds of the Flesh, in regulating his Affections, Appetites and
Passions, and in living to God. So that with the Mind he himself serves the Law
of God, though in much Imperfection; and though by Reason of his remaining
Carnality, he is forced to acknowledge and lament, that with the Flesh he
serves the Law of Sin. -- The true Penitent is breathing with the same
Earnestness after Sanctification, as after Freedom from Wrath. He don't want to
have the Law bend to his Corruptions: but to have his Heart and Life fully
subjected to the Law and Will of God. There is Nothing he so much desires,
besides an Interest in Christ and the Favor of God, as a Freedom from Sin, a
Proficiency in Faith and Holiness; and a Life of Communion and Fellowship with
God. -- Oh (says the penitent Believer) what a wicked Heart have I, that is so
estranged from the holy Nature of God; and from his righteous Law! What a
guilty Wretch have I been, who have walked so contrary to the glorious God,
have trampled upon his excellent Perfections, violated his holy Law; and made
so near an Approach even to the Nature of the Devil! -- O for the cleansing
Efficacy of the Blood of Christ; and the renewing Influences of his holy
Spirit, to purify this Sink of Pollution; and to sanctify these depraved
Affections of my Soul! -- Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right
Spirit within me! Let this separating Wall between God and my Soul be broken
down! -- Let me be Partaker of the divine Nature; and be brought near to God,
whatever else be denied me! -- O that my Ways were directed, that I might keep
thy Statutes! O let me not wander from thy Commandments: but deal bountifully
with thy Servant, that I may live (...) keep thy Word. -- Such as these are the
Aspirations of a sincere Repentance. A Language which flows from a true Love to
God and his Law; and an earnest Desire of Conformity to both.

But you will enquire (perhaps) Is there no Difference between Repentance and
Love to God? -- Are not these different Graces of the Spirit; and have they not
their different Exercises and Operations? -- I answer, Yes; they are truly
different and distinct: but they always have a joint-Exercise, in a truly
gracious Soul. As Faith is truly distinct from Repentance; and yet every Child
of God is a penitent Believer: so is Love likewise distinct from Repentance;
and yet neither of these Graces can exist without the other. We cannot truly
love God, unless our Sins are made hateful to us in Repentance. We cannot
sincerely turn to God, until we value his Favor; and take Pleasure in a
Conformity to his Will. -- As these Graces therefore are joint-Productions of
the blessed Spirit in our Regeneration, so are they joint-Companions in the
Exercise of the divine Love. -- From this Reflection you may see the Reason why
some of the same Things necessarily occur in this Discourse of Repentance,
which you met with in my last Letter, when treating upon the Difference of a
true and false Faith.

By these Hints, you may plainly see the very great Difference, between a legal
and an evangelical Penitent. -- The one looks upon God with Dread, Terror and
Aversation of Soul. The other mourns his Distance from him; and longs to be
more transformed into his Image and Likeness. -- The one still loves his Sins
in his Heart, though he mourns that there is a Law to punish them. The other
hates all his Sins without Reserve; and groans under the Burden of them;
because they are contrary to God and his holy Law. -- The Obedience of the one
is by mere Constraint. The Imperfections of the other are Matter of continual
Grief; and he is constantly longing and striving after greater Degrees of Grace
and Holiness. -- The one can find no inward and abiding Complacency in the
Service of God. The other runs the Ways of his Commandments with Delight; and
takes more Pleasure in Obedience, than in any Thing else.

4. A legal Repentance ordinarily flows from Discouragement and Despondency:
But an evangelical Repentance from encouraging Hope. -- I have already
considered, how a legal Repentance is excited and maintained by Terrors of
Conscience; and fearful Apprehensions of the Wrath of God. -- Some indeed by
their external Reformations pacify their Consciences, get settled upon their
Lees, and cry Peace to their Souls; and so their Repentance and Discouragements
both come to an End. But whilst their Concern continues, their desponding Fears
are the very Life of it. -- Their Sins, both for Number and Nature, appear
dreadful to their affrightned Consciences, as they frequently violate their
Purposes and Promises of new Obedience. They are therefore afraid, that God
will never pardon and accept such Rebels as they have been; and though they
dare not neglect Duty, they come with Horror into the Presence of God, as to an
inexorable Judge; and have nothing to keep their Souls from sinking into
Despair, but their good Designs and Endeavors, which yet are too defective to
give them comfortable Hope. -- And what is all this, but a most ungrateful
undervaluing the Blood of Christ, limiting the Goodness and Mercy of God; and
an implicit denying the Truth of the whole Gospel of God our Savior? -- Thus
they are flying from the Mercy of God, while they pretend to fly to it. -- But
I need not enlarge upon this Head, it being so near of Kin to what was observed
under the last.

I proceed therefore to show on the other Hand, that though the true
Gospel-Penitent may have a deeper Impression of the Greatness and atrocious
Nature of his Sin and Guilt, than even the awakened terrified Legalist himself:
Yet he dares not yield to any despairing Thoughts of God's Mercy. -- Faith
opens the Door of Hope; and therefore the Door of Repentance, as I have
observed before. True it is, that the Gospel-Penitent may meet with many
discouraging Doubts and Fears: but these are his Infirmity, not his Repentance.
-- The Apostle tells us, we are saved by Hope. That Is what gives Life and
Activity to every Grace; and to Repentance in particular, as I Have had Occasion
to hint before. And it is yet needful to further observe, that though a Fear and
Jealousy of our own Sincerity may be consistent with a true Repentance; and
perhaps sometimes serves to further its Progress: Yet all Doubts of the
Faithfulness of the Gospel-Promises, of the Extensiveness of the divine Mercy;
or of our Exemption from the Gospel-Offer: All Apprehensions of our not being
elected, of our having sinned away the Day of Grace; or of our having sinned
against the Holy Ghost: All Imaginations that our Sins are so circumstanced, as
not to admit of pardoning Mercy or the like, these are directly destructive of
or inconsistent (...) the Actings of a true Repentance. -- A sincere Penitent
looks over the highest Mountains, which are raised before him, by the Greatness
of his Sins, his own misgiving Heart, or the Temptations of Satan, into an
Ocean of infinite Goodness and Mercy. Thither he will fly; and there he will
hope, let his Case appear never so dark; and though every Thing seems to make
against him. And the more lively and comfortable his Hope is, the more he is
humbled and abased for his Sins; and the more vigorous are his Endeavors after
a Life of New Obedience. -- As Repentance is a Hatred of and Separation from
all Sin without Reserve, it must certainly be a Flight from and an Abhorrence
of Unbelief and Despair, the greatest of all Sins. And the further the Soul
flies from these, the more is it conformed to the Gospel of Christ; and the
more is it in the Way of Mercy. -- It is not therefore sufficient, for the
sincere Penitent to be sensible, that God is infinitely gracious; and that the
Blood of Christ is infinitely meritorious; and that there is Forgiveness with
God for the greatest Sinners, if he still maintains some Reserve in his Mind,
with Respect to his own Case. But he must be likewise persuaded, that he either
already has, or that he may obtain, a personal Interest in this redeeming
pardoning Mercy, in Order to his approaching to God as a Father; and in Order
to his being in Love with the Ways of God; and to his serving him with
Cheerfulness and Delight. -- This is not only necessary, in Order to the first
Exercise of a true Repentance: but the sincere Christian will always find, that
by whatever Darkness, Difficulty, or Temptation, he is brought into a really
discouraged desponding Frame, he is thereby rendered so much the more incapable
of godly Sorrow for Sin, of delighting in God, or of a spiritual Performance of
any Duty of Religion. -- We may be jealous and distrustful of ourselves: but we
must not despond and be jealous of God, if we would maintain the Exercise of
any saving Grace. -- I confess (says the truly penitent Soul) that my Sins are
like the Stars in the Firmament, and like the Sand on the Seashore, for
Multitude; that they are of a scarlet and crimson-Dye; and that it is of the
infinite Patience of God, that such a guilty Wretch is out of Hell: But yet as
great, as dreadfully aggravated as my Sins be, the Merit of a Redeemer's Blood
is sufficient to atone for them all; and infinite Mercy is still greater than
my greatest Sins. -- Though my Iniquities have abounded, God has encouraged me
to hope, that his Grace shall abound much more, to the returning Sinner. It
must be astonishing Mercy indeed, if I am saved: but such Mercy is offered in
the Gospel: And blessed be God, I am not excluded from that gracious Offer. --
Though I have naturally no Power to comply with the Terms, upon which pardoning
Mercy is set before me: Yet the Gospel provides a Remedy in that Case also; and
I am encouraged to trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, for all Supplies of Grace.
-- I will therefore cast my guilty Soul at the Footstool of a sovereign God,
and rely on infinite Mercy through a Redeemer. I will depend upon the Blood of
Christ, which cleanses from all Sin. I will constantly repair to his Fullness,
that from thence I may receive, even Grace for Grace; and in that Way, I will
hope for that blessed Sentence from his gracious Mouth, Thy Sins which be many,
are forgiven thee. -- O how will Mercy triumph over such Sins as mine! How
great Glory will God bring to the Riches of his infinite Grace in the Salvation
of such a Sinner as I, if ever I am saved! How will Heaven ring with eternal
Hallelujahs on my Account! -- Surely I have sinned enough already. Let me no
more add to the Number and Guilt of my Sins, by Distrust of God's Mercy, or by
doubting the Faithfulness of his Invitations and Promises. -- Whether I have
already obtained a saving Interest in Christ or not, I am resolved to hope in
his Mercy; and to ly at his Feet, whatever the Issue be.

So great is the Difference between a legal and an evangelical Repentance: as
great as between desponding Fear and encouraging Hope, as between being
affrighted by a Sight of our Sins, into an Incapacity to trust God or serve him
with Delight, and being allured by his infinite Mercy to seek his Favor,
expect Forgiveness through the Blood of his Son; and to serve him with the
Disposition of Children.

5. A legal Repentance is temporary; wearing off with the Convictions of
Conscience, which occasion it: but an evangelical Repentance is the daily
Exercise of the true Christian. -- We have too sad and numerous Instances of
such, who will for a while appear under the greatest Remorse for their Sins;
and yet quickly wear off all their Impressions, and return to the same Course
of Impiety and Sensuality, which occasioned their Distress and Terror; and
thereby declare to the World, that their Goodness like Ephraim's, was but a
Morning Cloud and an early Dew. -- And besides these, there seem to be some who
quiet their Consciences, and speak Peace to their Souls, from their having been
in Distress and Terror for their Sins, from their Reformation of some grosser
Immoralities, and from a formal Course of Duty. They have repented, they think,
and therefore conclude themselves at Peace with God; and seem to have no great
Care and Concern about, either their former Impieties, or their daily
Transgressions. They conclude themselves in a converted State; and are
therefore easy, careless and secure. -- These may think and perhaps speak
loftily of their Experiences, they may be blown up with joyful Apprehensions of
their safe State: but have no Impressions of their Sins, no Mourning after
Pardon, no Groaning under the Burden of a wicked Heart, imperfect Duties, and
renewed Provocations against God, I fear, we have too many such in the present
Times, who will go on flattering themselves in their own Eyes, until their
Iniquities are found hateful. -- I might add, there are many that while under
the Stings of an awakened Conscience, will be driven to maintain a solemn Watch
over their Hearts and Lives, to be afraid of every Sin, to be conscienciously
careful to attend every known Duty; and to be serious and in earnest in the
Performance of it. Now, By this imaginary Progress in Religion they gradually
wear off their Convictions, and get from under the Terrors of the Law; and then
their Watchfulness and Tenderness of Conscience are forgot: They attend their
Duties in a careless Manner, with a trifling remiss Frame of Soul, while the
great Concerns of an unseen eternal World are but little in their Minds; and
all their Religion is reduced to a mere cold Formality. They still maintain the
Form; but are unconcerned about the Power of Godliness. -- In some such Manner,
a legal Repentance always leaves the Soul short of a real sanctifying saving
Change.

On the other Hand, a saving evangelical Repentance is a lasting Principle of
humble, self-abasing, self-condemning Mourning for, and Abhorrence of all the
Sins which the Penitent discovers, both in his Heart and Life. -- The true
Penitent don't forget his past Sins; and grow careless and unconcerned about
them, as soon as he obtains Peace in his Conscience, and a comforting Hope that
he is reconciled to God: but the clearer Evidences he obtains of the divine
Favor, the more does he loathe, abhor, and condemn himself for his Sins, the
more vile does he appear in his own Eyes; and the more aggravated and enormous
do his past Sins represent themselves to him. -- A Sense of pardoning Mercy
makes Paul appear to himself the chief of Sinners, and speak of himself as a
Pattern of Hope, to all that shall come after him. -- The true Penitent not
only continues to abhor himself on Account of his past Guilt and Defilement:
but finds daily Cause to renew his Repentance before God. He finds so much
Deadness, Formality and Hypocrisy in his Duties, so much Carnality,
Worldly-mindedness; and Unbelief in his Heart, so much Prevalence of his sinful
Affections, Appetites and Passions; and so many Foils by the Sin that easily
besets him; that he cannot but groan, being burdened, while he is in this
Tabernacle. Repentance therefore is the daily continued Exercise of the
Christian indeed, until he puts off Mortality. -- He will not leave off
repenting, till he leaves off sinning; which is not attainable on this Side
Heaven. -- Have I Hope (says the penitent Soul) that God has pardoned my Sins?
What an Instance of pardoning Mercy is this! How adorable is that wonderful
Grace, which has plucked such a Brand out of the Fire! And am I still daily
offending against such Mercy and Love! Am I still so formal, lifeless and
hypocritical! Am I yet doing so little for him, who has done so much for me! Ah
vile sinful Heart! Ah base Ingratitude to such amazing Goodness! Oh for more
Victory over my Corruptions; for more Thankfulness for such Mercies, for more
Spirituality and Heavenly-mindedness! -- How often have I been mourning my
Infirmities; and must I yet have Cause to mourn over the same Defects! How
often pursuing and designing a closer Walk with God; but what a poor Progress
do I yet make, save in Desires and Endeavors! -- How would the Iniquities of
my best Duties separate between God and my Soul ever, had I not the Redeemer's
Merit to plead! What need have I, every Day, to have this polluted Soul washed
in the Blood of Christ; and to repair to the glorious Advocate with the Father,
for the Benefit of his Intercession! -- Not a Step can I take in my spiritual
Progress, without fresh Supplies from the Fountain of Grace and Strength; and
yet how often am I provoking him to withdraw his Influences, in whom is all my
Hope and Confidence! O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death! -- Thus the true Penitent goes with his Face Zion-ward,
mourning as he goes. And thus in his highest Seize of Comfort and Joy,
will he find Cause to be deeply humbled before God; and to wrestle with him for
renewed Pardon; and new Supplies of strengthening and quickening Grace.

The Difference between these two Sorts of Penitents is very apparent. -- There
is the same Difference, as between the running of Water in the Paths after a
Shower, and the Streams flowing from a living Fountain of Water: A legal
Repentance lasting no longer than the Terrors which occasion it, but an
evangelical Repentance being a continued War with Sin, till Death sounds the
Retreat. -- Once more,

6. A legal Repentance does at most produce, only a partial and external
Reformation: but an evangelical Repentance is a total Change of Heart and Life,
and universal turning from Sin to God. -- As some particular more gross
Iniquities most commonly lead the Way to that Distress and Terror, which is the
Life of a legal and insincere Repentance: so a Reformation of those Sins too
frequently wears off the Impression, and gives Peace and Rest to the troubled
Conscience, without any further Change. -- Or at best, there will be some
darling Lusts retained some right Hand or right Eye spared, some sweet Morsel
rolled under the Tongue. -- If the legal Penitent be afraid of the Sins of
Commission, he may still live in the Omission or the careless Performance of
known Duty. -- Or if he be more forward in the Duties of God's immediate
Worship, he may still live in Acts of Injustice, Strife, and Uncharitableness
toward Men. -- If he shows some Zeal and Activity in the Service of God, he
will yet (perhaps) have his Heart and Affections inordinately glewed to the
World; and pursue it as the Object of his chief Desire and Delight. -- If he
makes Conscience of all open actual Sins, he yet little regards the Sins of his
Heart, but lives in Envy, Malice, Pride, Carnal-mindedness, Unbelief; or some
other such Heart-defiling Sin. -- To finish his Character, whatever seeming
Progress he may make in Religion, his Heart is not right with God: but is still
going after his Idols, still estranged from vital Christianity and the Power of
Godliness. Like Ephraim, he is as a Cake not turned, neither Bread nor Dough;
or like Laodicea, Lukewarm, neither hot nor cold.

If we proceed to view the Character of the sincere Penitent, it is directly
contrary to this. -- He finds indeed (as has been observed) continual Occasion
to lament the great Imperfections of his Heart and Life; and accordingly seeks
renewed Pardon and Cleansing in the Blood of Christ. But though he has not
already attained, nor is already perfect, he is yet pressing toward
Perfection. He is yet watching, striving against all his Corruptions; yet
aiming at and endeavoring after further Conformity to God, in all holy
Conversation and Godliness. -- He is never satisfied with a partial
Reformation, with external Duty; or with any Thing short of a Life of vital
Piety. -- He does not renounce one Lust, and retain another; content himself
with first-Table-Duties, in the Neglect of the second; nor quiet himself in a
Life of mere formal Godliness; nor can he rest, till he rejoices in the
Testimony of his Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with
fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, he has his Conversation in the World.
-- All the Actings of his Mind, as well as his external Conduct, fall under his
strictest Cognizance and Inspection; and he is awfully careful to approve
himself to him, who knows his Thoughts afar off. -- His Reformation extends not
only to the Devotions of the Church, but of his Family and Closets; not only to
his Conversation, but to his Thoughts and Affections; not only to the Worship
of God, but to the Duties of every Relation he sustains among Men; and in a
Word, his Repentance produces Heavenly-mindedness, Humility, Meekness, Charity,
Patience, Forgiving of Injuries, Self-Denial; and is accompanied with all other
Fruits and Graces of the blessed Spirit. -- It is the Desire of my Soul (says
the sincere Penitent) to keep the Way of the Lord; and not wickedly to depart
from my God. I would refrain my Feet from every evil Way; and walk within my
House with a perfect Heart. -- I know I have to do with a God who tries the
Heart; and has Pleasure in Uprightness; I would therefore set the Lord always
before me; and serve him with a perfect Heart and with a willing Mind. -- I
know that my Heart is deceitful above all Things; and desperately wicked. I
know that mine Iniquities are ascended over mine Head; for which I am bowed
down greatly; and go mourning all the Day long. But yet my Desire is before the
Lord; and my Groaning is not hid from him. -- I can truly say, that I even hate
vain Thoughts: but God's Law do I love. O that God would give me Understanding,
that I may keep his Law, and observe it with my whole Heart! -- I would be for
God without any Reserve: for I esteem his Precepts concerning all Things to be
right, and I have inclined my Heart to keep his Statutes always, even unto the
End.

To conclude, herein lies the great Difference between a legal and an
evangelical Repentance: The one is an external Reformation only, destitute of
all the Graces of the blessed Spirit. The other is an internal Change, a Change
of the Heart, of the Will and Affections, as well as of the outward
Conversation; a Change which is accompanied with all the Fruits and Graces of
the Spirit of God. -- The one aims at just so much Religion as will keep the
Mind easy; and calm the Ruffles of an awakened Conscience. The other aims at a
holy, humble, watchful, and spiritual Walk with God; and rests in no Degree of
Seize whatsoever.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a general View of the Difference between a legal
and an evangelical Repentance. -- You have not demanded this of me out of mere
Curiosity; or as a Matter of Speculation only: but in Order to the Exercise and
Practice of a Repentance unto Life, not to be repented of.

You should therefore remember Who is exalted at God's right Hand, to give
Repentance, as well as Forgiveness of Sins. Remember that you must depend only
upon the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; and must accordingly ly at his
Footstool, to have this great and important Change wrought in your Heart. --
And therefore, since you depend upon the mere sovereign Grace of God in Christ,
for the renewing Influences of his Holy Spirit, you should be the more
importunate in your Cries to him, in the Language of Ephraim, Turn thou me, and
I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God.

You should endeavor to review your past Sins, and as particularly as you can,
acknowledge them before God with all their heinous Circumstances and peculiar
Aggravations; and you should with peculiar Ardor of Soul wrestle with him, for
Pardon and Cleansing in the Blood of Christ.

You should endeavor to see and be affected with the Sin of your Nature, as
well as of your Practice, of your Heart as well as of your Life; and with
constant Fervency cry to God for a new Heart and a right Spirit, for Victory
over your Corruptions; and for Grace to approve your self to God in a Life of
new Obedience, as well as for Pardon and Reconciliation to him.

You should be daily calling your self to an Account for your daily Sins and
Imperfections; and daily confessing and lamenting them before God, that you may
never have so much as the Sins of one Day unrepented of.

Though it be impossible, that you can be sufficiently humbled before God,
under an abasing Sense of your great Sinfulness, Unworthiness, and Ingratitude
to him: Yet remember that faithful Saying, which is worthy of all Acceptance,
that Christ Jesus came to save Sinners. -- Don't dishonor the infinite Merit
of the Redeemer's Blood by being afraid to trust to it, for Pardon and
Sanctification. Don't dishonor the infinite Compassion of the divine Nature,
by calling into Question his being as ready to grant, as you heartily to seek
Pardon and Forgiveness of all your Sins, how many and great soever they be. --
Be therefore humbled: but not discouraged. While you lament your Sin and
Imperfection, adore the infinite Riches of that Grace and Love, which has
opened a Fountain for Sin and Uncleanness.

And to sum up the whole in a Word: You must remember, that it is the Essence
of a true Repentance, to turn to God; and therefore if you would evidence the
Sincerity of your Repentance, you must give up your self to God. You must choose
him for your God and Portion. You must watch at his Gates; and wait at the
Posts of his Doors. You must make a Business of Religion; and in a Life of most
active and earnest Diligence, expect Acceptance through the Merits of Christ;
and continued Supplies of Grace and Strength from his Fullness, to bring forth
Fruits meet for Repentance.

That the Lord would carry on his own Work in your Soul; and lead you from
Grace to Grace, and from Strength to Strength, till you arrive where your Faith
will be turned into Vision, and your Repentance into eternal Praises, is the
Prayer of

Your and c.

LETTER X. Wherein is proved, that the Seventh Chapter to the Romans contains
the Description and Character of a converted State.
SIR,
I Cannot but take Comfort, from your melancholy Complaint of the Corruptions
you are struggling with; and your Sense of the Vileness and Sinfulness of your
Heart, which makes you groan being burdened: because you therein breathe the
Language of a broken and a contrite Spirit; and give me Hopes that you are
offering to God the Sacrifice, which he will not despise. -- You took Comfort
(you tell me) from the Seventh Chapter to the Romans, finding there, the like
Complaints with yours, in so eminent and exalted a Christian as the Apostle
Paul himself: But that Prop is knocked from under you, by Conversation with
some Persons of a superior Reputation for Religion, who assure you, that St.
Paul is there giving the Character of an unconverted Person, under a Conflict
between his Corruptions and the Alarms of an awakened Conscience; and that all
those Places of Scripture are to be interpreted in the same Manner, which
represent the like Conflict in the Soul. -- Upon which you desire my Sentiments.

What strange Efforts are of late made against evangelical, vital and
experimental Piety! How inconsistent are the Methods used by those, who are so
earnestly laboring in this Undertaking! Is it not enough, to put Mankind into
a dangerous Security, by flattering them with a Prospect of Safety, without any
Experience of a Work of Grace in their Hearts; but they must also torment and
disquiet the Minds of those who have been favored with those blessed
Experiences, by persuading them, that remaining disallowed Corruptions and
Imperfections are inconsistent with a State of Grace, and with the Favor of
God! -- What do these Men mean! Have they no feeling Perception, no affecting
Sense of the Imperfections of their Hearts and Lives! Or do they make it their
Practice, and esteem it their Duty, to give their Corruptions a quiet Residence
in their Hearts, and to maintain no Conflict or Struggle with them!

But it is my Business to answer your Demand; and to endeavor to convince you,
that the Apostle in the seventh Chapter to the ROMANS, is describing the
Conflict, which every true Christian experiences, while he walks with God and
lives near to him.

In Order to a fair and clear Decision, it will be proper to take some (very
brief) Notice of the general Scope and Design of this Epistle, in the first
seven Chapters. -- This seems to be summarily proposed in the first Chapter v.
17. Therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith, as it is
written, The Just shall live by Faith. That is, we are justified before God,
only by the Righteousness of Christ received by Faith: We continue in a
justified State, by the renewed Exercise of Faith: And the whole Life of a
justified Person is a Life of Faith in the Son of God, as well as his whole
Hope of eternal Life is through Faith in Christ. -- This Doctrine is proved, by
a Representation of the atrocious Impiety and Wickedness of the whole Gentile
World; that even they who make the highest Pretenses to Innocence, and who
judge and censure others for such horrid Impieties, as are commonly practiced
among them, are all inexcusable and self-condemned, on Account of the
Wickedness perpetrated and indulged by themselves; being all of them such
Violaters of the Law and Light of Nature, as will leave them without Excuse in
the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ. -- This is
plainly the Apostle's Argument, from the 18th Verse of the first Chapter, to
the 17th Verse of the second Chapter. Whence it follows, that the Gentile World
cannot possibly have any Claim to Justification, by their own personal
Obedience; nor any other Way, but by the Righteousness of Christ received by
Faith.

The Apostle next proceeds to show, that the Jew has no better Plea to make for
his Acceptance with God, on Account of his own personal Righteousness, than the
Gentile, though he rests in the Law, and makes his Boast of God, knows his
Will, and approves the Things that are most excellent. For be also, in his
highest natural Seize, breaks the Law, dishonours GOD, and at the best
performs but an external Obedience, and reaches not to the Spirituality, which
the Law requires. -- The Jew has indeed much every Way the Advantage, in Point
of external Privilege: But in Point of justifying Righteousness, he cannot be
said to be better than the Gentile; no, in no wise! -- This is the Argument
from the 17th Verse of the second, to the 9th Verse of the third Chapter. In
which Verse and those following, the Apostle sums up the Argument, in these
remarkable Words, which fully justify my Interpretation of his Scope and
Design: For we have before proved, both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all
under Sin. As it is written, there is none righteous; no, not one, etc. -- That
every Mouth may be stopped, and all the World may become guilty before God. --
From these Premises, he draws this Conclusion in the 20th Verse of the iiid
Chapter, and c. Therefore by the Deeds of the Law shall no Flesh living be
justified in his Sight. For by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. But now the
Righteousness of God, without the Law, is manifested, being witnessed by the
Law and the Prophets; even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no Difference.
Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ
Jesus. -- Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the
Deeds of the Law. -- Which was the Point to be proved.

But here may arise a Question: What Law is it, that the Apostle excludes from
having any Hand in our Justification? To which it is answered: All the Law,
that was obligatory both upon Jews and Gentiles. For they were both obnoxious
to Wrath, by their Violation of the respective Laws they were under; had all
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. -- And God deals with them all
alike. He will justify them all by their Faith in Jesus Christ; and no
otherwise: and thereby show, that he is not the God of the Jews only, but of
the Gentiles also.

Having thus concluded his first Argument; and proved from the Guilt and
Impotence both of Jew and Gentile, that no Man can be justified by the Law of
Nature, by the Law which was given to the Jews; nor any other Way, but by the
Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ. -- The Apostle
proceeds to prove the same Thing from ABRAHAM'S Faith being imputed to him for
Righteousness; and from DAVID'S describing the Blessedness of the Man, to whom
God imputes Righteousness without Works, throughtout the fourth Chapter.

He then begins the fifth Chapter, by describing the glorious Privileges of
those, who are thus justified by Faith; and ends it by showing in what Manner
we partake of the Righteousness of Christ, for our Justification: That it is in
the same Manner, as we are Partakers of the Sin and Guilt of Adam, to our
Condemnation. -- As Adam's Sin was imputed to all whom he represented, unto
their Condemnation: so the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to all whom he
represented, and who believe in him, unto Justification of Life. As by one
Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners: so by the Obedience of one, many
shall be made Righteous.

After a solemn Caution unto all, not to turn the Grace of God into Wantonness,
and not to continue in Sin, that Grace may abound; and after enforcing this
Caution, from the Obligation we are under by our Baptism, to die unto Sin, and
walk in Newness of Life, as Christ died for us, and rose again from the dead,
(as in the first Part of the sixth Chapter) the Apostle goes on to show (in the
latter Part of that Chapter) what was the privileged happy State of these
Romans, to whom he wrote: That Sin had not Dominion over them; for they were
not under the Law, but under Grace: That they were made free from Sin, and were
become the Servants of Righteousness. -- And then throughout the whole seventh
Chapter, and the Beginning of the eighth, he illustrates this Matter; and shows
in what Respect they are not under the Law, and how, or in what Respects they
are made free from Sin.

This, Sir, appears plainly to be the Scope and Connection of the first seven
Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans; as may be easily observed by any one,
that will impartially look into the Case, without Prejudice in Favor of a
Party; or a preconceived Opinion, which he is resolved to maintain.

And thus I am come to a more particular Consideration of this seventh Chapter;
which (as was observed) is designed to clear up these two Things, How we are
made free from the Law, and, How we are made free from Sin, and become the
Servants of Righteousness.

The first Thing considered by the Apostle in this Chapter is, in what Respects
these believing Romans were under Grace, and not under the Law. -- But previous
to a direct Attendance to this, it will be necessary to remove a
Stumbling Block out of the Way, by considering again, what Law it is that the
Apostle refers to, when he declares these Romans not to be under the Law, but
under Grace; to be dead to the Law; and to be delivered from the Law, that
being dead wherein they were held. Does he herein speak of the Ceremonial Law,
or of the Moral Law; or of both?

To this I answer: The Apostle here speaks of the Law in the same Sense, and
uses the Word in the same Extent of Signification, as in the foregoing Parts of
this Epistle. -- It Is the Scope and Design of this Epistle (as I have shown
you) to prove that both Jew and Gentile must be justified only by the
Righteousness of CHRIST, received by Faith; and not by their own Observance of
any Law, which they are under. -- The Law therefore in Question is that Law,
which the Gentiles have written in their Hearts; and that Law, which the Jews
rest in, boasting themselves of God. Chap. ii. 14, 15, 17. -- It is that Law,
by the Violation whereof both Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin; and against
which all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. Chap. iii. 9, 23. --
It is that Law, without which there could be no Transgression. Chap. iv. 15. --
And in a Word, that Law, by which every Mouth may be stopped, and all the World
become guilty before God. Chap. iii. 19. -- The Law therefore here must be
taken in the largest Extent of the Word, including the whole Will of GOD, any
Manner of Way manifested, to any and every Part of Mankind, whether Jew or
Gentile. Though it is evident, that the Apostle has in this seventh Chapter a
special Reference to the moral Law. -- This appears,

1. Because the Law here referred to, is what these believing Romans had been
married to, and been held by; as appears in the 4th and 6th Verses. Now these
Romans to whom the Apostle wrote, were most of them (if not all of them)
Gentiles; as he expressly declares, Chap. i. 13. and Chap. xi. 13. and were
therefore never married to the Levitical or ceremonial Law, never held by it;
and consequently never delivered from it. It was the moral Law only to which
they had been married; and from that only they were therefore made free: and
that, consequently, must be what the Apostle especially refers to, in this
Chapter.

2. Because the Apostle, in Exemplification of his Meaning, instances in the
moral Law, and no other: The Law, by which Concupiscence is known, and which
forbids coveting, Verse 7th. The Law, which is spiritual, Verse 14th. Whereas,
the ceremonial Law, considered in it self, was not spiritual, but made up of
carnal Ordinances, Heb. ix. 10. -- It is the Law, in which the Apostle
delighted, after the inward Man, Verse 22d. But he was so far from taking
Delight in the Ceremonial Law, that he strongly and pathetically exclaims
against the Observation of it now that Christ is come, and represents the
Ordinances of this Law, to be become now beggarly Elements, Gal. iv. 9, and
forward.

In Fine, he instances in that Law of God, which he himself served with his
Mind, Verse 25th. But his Heart was not so set upon the Observation of the
ceremonial Law, as to desire to be again brought into Bondage to it. -- From
all which it is evident, if Demonstration may be taken for Evidence, that it is
the moral Law, which is principally designed by the Apostle in this Chapter and
Context, when he tells us, that no Man can be justified by the Law; and that
Believers are made free from the Law, by their Interest in Christ.

I am now prepared to consider, in what Respects the Apostle here represents
Believers to be freed from the Law, or to be not under the Law. -- And to set
this Matter in the clearest Light, it will be proper to consider it,

1. Negatively: Showing in what Sense they are not here represented, as being
freed from the Law. Particularly then,

They are not represented to be freed from the Law, as it is a Rule of (...)
Conduct. No! The Law is holy; and the Commandment holy, and just and good,
Verse 12th. Believers consent to the Law, that it is good, Verse 16th. And with
their Mind they serve the Law of God, Verse 25th.

They are not freed from Endeavors after, and Delight in Obedience to the Law
of God. To will is present with them, even beyond their Capacity of
Performance, Verse 18th. They would do good, even when Evil is present with
them; and they delight in the Law of God, after the inward Man, Ver. 21st, and
22d.

I add, they are not freed from being grieved and burdened, on the Account of
the Imperfection of their Obedience to the Law of God: but must, on that
Account, groan being burdened, while they are here in this Tabernacle; and
must cry out with the Apostle, O wretched Man, that I am: who shall deliver me
from the Body of this Death! Verse 24th. And now let us attend,

2. To the affirmative Description here given, of the Believer's Freedom from
the Law of God.

They are here represented as freed from their Marriage Relation to the Law; or
from the Obligations of it, as a Covena^^ of Life. -- While in their carnal and
unregenerate State, they were under the strictest Bonds of Subjection to the
Law of Nature, or the moral Law. It rigorously exacted perfect Obedience of
'em, as the only Condition of their Acceptance with God: and continuing in that
State, they could have no Righteousness at all to plead, but their own
Conformity to the whole Demands of the Law; and they must obtain eternal Life
by perfect Obedience, or not at all. -- But now that Marriage-Covenant is
dissolved, by their Faith in Christ. They are become dead to the Law, by the
Body of Christ, that they should be married to another, even to him who is
raised from the dead. They are delivered from the Law, that being dead in which
they were held. Verses 4th and 6th. -- They have therefore another
Righteousness to plead, without a perfect personal Conformity to the Law; and
their Hope of Salvation is held by another Tenure, built upon another
Foundation, an Espousal to CHRIST, the one only Husband, that is able to pay
their Debts to offended Justice, and save them to the uttermost. -- They may
now serve God in Newness of Spirit, from a new Principle, from new Motives,
with new Affections, and with new Hopes: and not in the Oldness of the Letter.
Ver. 6th. -- Not from any Expectation, that by doing these Things they should
live in them; nor under the Terror of the dreadful Curses, pronounced against
every one who continues not in all Things, written in the Book of the Law, to
do them. This is evidently the Design of the first six Verses of this Chapter.

Moreover, they are freed from that Spirit of Bondage, which they were once
under, when their Guilt, Danger and Misery were brought to their View by the
Law. This the Apostle exemplifies, by representing his own State, when under a
LawWork. -- For I was alive without the Law once: but when the Commandment
came, Sin revived, and I died; and the Commandment which was ordained to Life,
I found to be unto Death, Verses 9th, and 10th. That is, I thought my self once
alive, was in a State of Safety and without the Curse in my own Apprehension,
while ignorant or thoughtless of the Spirituality, Extent, and Terror of the
Law of God: but when the Commandment came home to my Conscience, and I found
what my State truly was, Sin revived, rose up against me in its condemning
Power, or appeared to me in its own Nature and Aggravations, exceeding sinful;
for by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin: and so I found my self to be a guilty
Creature, a dead Man, indeed under the Law, under its Curse and damning
Sentence; and died to self-slattering Hope, and Confidence in the Flesh. Now
this is the very Case of all awakened Sinners, when the Law comes near to
Conscience, lays the Weight of their Guilt upon them, and sets their Danger of
everlasting Punishment before them. -- But now these believing Romans were
delivered from this Bondage to the Law; there being no Condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus; and that being dead, wherein they were held.

I may add to this, that they were also freed from the irritating Power of the
Law. -- When an awakned Sinner first obtains a sensible View of the Strictness,
Purity, and Spirituality of the Law, so of the vast Number and dreadful
Aggravations of his Sins, with the amazing Wrath that hangs over his Head; this
fills his Soul not only with Horror and Amazement, but with an impatient
disquieting Anxiety, which unhinges his Mind for Duty, inflames his
Corruptions; and gives them the Advantage against all his good Purposes,
Resolves, and Endeavors. So that the Law, inhibiting Sin, without giving Power
to avoid it, does but make the Sinner's Lusts (like a Torrent damm'd up) to
swell the more, and to run with greater Force, when they get Vent: and Sin
taking Occasion by the Commandment, works in the Soul all Manner of
Concupiscence, deceives the Sinner, and flays him, as it is expressed, Verses
8th, and 11th. -- But these believing Romans were delivered from the Law in
this Respect also. Having a Discovery of the glorious Way of Salvation by
Christ, and the Safety of depending upon his Righteousness, they were quickened
by adoring Views of redeeming Mercy; acted by a Principle of Love to God; and
strengthened, by the divine Influences of the Spirit of Grace, to mortify their
Lusts, and to live a Life of sincere and spiritual Obedience; or as the Apostle
expresses it (Verse 6.) to serve God in Newness of Spirit; and not in the
Oldness of the Letter.

These three Things are most certainly represented in the Context, as the
Servitude, that unregenerate Men are under to the Law. -- This is too evident
to be disputed. Believers are certainly represented, as being delivered from
the Servitude of the Law: Whence it follows, that their Freedom from the Law,
here treated of, must consist in these Particulars which I have considered.

And now, I am further to observe to you, that there is another glorious
Privilege of Believers, distinctly insisted upon in the sixth Chapter, which is
(as I hinted before) particularly illustrated in this. And that is, that they
are dead unto Sin; and alive unto God. Sin has no more Dominion over them, they
being not under the Law, but under Grace. They are made free from Sin, and
become the Servants of Righteousness: And being made free from Sin, they are
become Servants of God, have their Fruit unto Holiness, and the End everlasting
Life. Chap. vi. 11, 14, 18, 22. -- This Character of Believers depends upon the
other already considered. They being made free from the Law, they are of
Consequence made free from Sin likewise. A Freedom from Sin is the Fruit of our
Freedom from the Law; which is therefore first considered, and the
Consideration of this superadded as an Appendage to it, or a necessary
Consequence from it.

But how are we to understand these strong Exressions? Are Believers wholly
freed from all Sin? Are they arrived to a sinless State of Perfection! Or in
what other Sense are they free from Sin, and become Servants of Righteousness?
This Question the Apostle answers, from the 14th Verse of the seventh, to the
3d Verse of the eighth Chapter; and particularly exemplifies the Case, by
representing to us the State of his own Soul, with Respect to his Freedom from
Sin; and the remaining Conflict he yet had with his Corruptions. -- In the
foregoing Verses he had shown us, what he once was, when in a carnal State, and
under the Tyranny of the Law. -- I was alive without the Law once, etc. And
throughout that Discourse, he speaks wholly in the Preterperfect Tense, as of
former Matters, Things already passed. -- From the 14th Verse and forward, he
shows us what he now is; and speaks therefore only in the present Tense, as
being to describe his new State of Freedom from Sin. -- By altering thus his
Form of Expression, in this Change of Tenses, we may plainly see, that there is
such a Transition, as I am now supposing; and may easily know where it begins.

Thus, Sir, I have endeavored to set before you in the briefest and plainest
Manner I could, the Scope and Connection of the first seven Chapters of this
Epistle to the Romans. By a due Attendance to which, you cannot but discover,
how groundless and impertinent all the Reasoning of those Gentlemen are, of
whom you speak.

However, that this may appear in a yet stronger Light, I will now proceed to a
direct Refutation of the Opinion, that the Apostle is here personating and
giving the Character of an unconverted or unregenerate Person, struggling under
the Convictions of an awakened Conscience. And,

1. It is undeniably certain, that the most holy of all the natural Descendants
of Adam, that ever were in the World, have had Cause to make the same
Complaints of their remaining Corruptions, as the Apostle here does; and have
all in like Manner experienced what the Apostle elsewhere calls the Flesh
lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh. Gal. v. 17. --
Have they not all of them some remaining Carnality? The most improved Saints,
comparatively but Babes in Christ, and not so spiritual as they should be? Nay,
are they not even sold under Sin? It is true, that they do not voluntarily with
Ahab, sell themselves to do wickedly; this would denote the full Dominion and
Power of Sin: but they are sold, as Captives are sold, against their Wills.
Though for the general they make ever so great Resistance, they have yet
Corruptions that do and will at Times prevail against them, and bring them into
Captivity. -- Have they not all Cause to acknowledge, that they do what they
allow not, what they would not, and even what they hate? That they fall short
of what they would do? And that when they would do Good, Evil is present with
them? That they find a Law in their Members, warring against the Law of their
Mind? And don't they groan, being burdened, under a Sense of what wretched Men
they are on these Accounts? In other Words, Are there any of them that don't
feel in themselves sinful Affections, sinful Imperfections, and sinful Actions,
that are the Grief and Burden of their Souls? Here let the Appeal be made to
all the Generation of God's Children, whether they do not find these Things in
themselves, even in their most watchful Periods. -- I must needs say, it argues
a dreadful Ignorance of, or an unaccountable Inattention to, the Plague of
their own Heart, in them who have not a feeling and experimental Apprehension
of these Things. -- It may therefore be justly presumed, that the Apostle here
complains of what every true Christian feels and laments. -- Or at least I may
confidently say, that the Experience of all the Children of God is a Refutation
of the principal Arguments against my Interpretation of this Chapter.

It may be added, in the Language of Another, "Those Objections are chiefly
owing to a mistaken Notion of the Case described here, from Ver. 14 th; as if
the Apostle spoke of gross sinning in Practice, with only some feeble
Reluctance of his Will, and habitually transgressing, in a Course of outward
Actions, through the power of some conquering and ruling Lust, against the
Dictates of his natural Conscience. -- Whereas, in Truth, he does not own a
customary Indulgence to any the least Sin in external Practice; much less to
any great Wickedness, and gross Sins of Presumption. But he evidently speaks in
his Complaint, of unallowed Frailties, or Sins of Infirmity, incident to the
best of Men. -- And if his Language in representing the Case seems too
expressive and emphatical, we may fairly resolve this into his Humility; a
Grace, that always makes the Christian willing to see the worst of his Case,
and to lay himself low before God and Man. From this Principle, we must
conceive it was, that this same Apostle elsewhere describes himself under those
debasing Characters, The least of the Apostles, -- Less than the least of all
Saints, -- yea, The Chief of Sinners. -- Though an eminent Example of Holiness,
yet being not already perfect, he readily confesses it: And under a humbling,
affecting Sense of his Imperfections and remaining Corruptions, he breathes out
his Complaints in very animated and striking Forms of Speech. However, his
self-abasing Expressions (taken in this View) do all of them well consist with
the brighter and commendatory Representations he sometimes makes of himself,
when considering his Case in another Light: and they are all reconcilable with
every Scripture-Character of regenerate Professors, as well as with the
universal Experience of real Christians, even the best upon Earth. For don't
they all own themselves conscious of indwelling Sin, and fleshly Lusts that war
against the Soul? Don't they all confess themselves not as yet perfectly
spiritual? their Hearts not as yet perfectly enlarged to run the Way of God's
Commandments; their Graces not as yet perfectly free in their Exercise, but
often under a very sensible Restraint, so that they cannot produce them into
Act, as they would and ought; their Corruptions insinuating and intermingling
with their best Performances of Duty; their Lusts, though by Divine Grace
conquered within them, yet striving still for the Mastery, yea, sometimes
usurping the Throne seemingly, and acting the Tyrant over them for a Season,
against the fixed Judgment and settled Bent of their Mind and Heart, which in
the Account of Gospel Grace is the Man? -- Now, looking upon themselves, if
tried by the Law and Justice, as liable to be condemned with the World, they
have therefore no Hope of being saved by any Works of Righteousness, which they
have done, but only look for Mercy, the Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be
magnified in their Deliverance out of the present State of Imperfection. In the
mean Time their Sins, yea, their unavoidable Infirmities, are their Burden,
under which they sigh and bemoan themselves; ashamed and grieved even for
disallowed Frailties, more than unregenerate Sinners for their wilful and
scandalous Enormities. -- Is it any uncommon Case, for a Child of God, in a
repenting Frame, passionately to lament in the Strain of Romans vii -- judging
himself for Carnality, complaining of spiritual Captivity, and crying out, O
wretched Man that I am! Who shall deliver me! nor finding any Refuge, but the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ? -- Where Is any Injustice done the inspired
Writer, or the least Injury to Christianity, by supposing this to be the very
Case the Apostle had in View? Or what one Word is there in all his Description
of the Case before him, but is fairly accommodable to this Interpretation? --
And what Occasion then to suppose the Apostle uses such a Metaschematism here,
as some suppose; transferring to Himself those odious Things which belonged
only to an unregenerate Legalist, and putting them in his own Case, merely out
of Modesty, and to avoid giving Offense to the Party reproved?"

2. We find the Apostle here giving Characters of himself that are the
distinguishing Marks of a regenerate State; Characters, that do not, that
cannot, agree to any unconverted Person in the World. -- It is, for Instance,
the peculiar Property of a Child of God, to hate that which is evil; and to
have a Will present with him to that which is good. -- No unregenerate Person
is able truly to say, that he would do that which is good; and would not do
that which is evil. -- The Conscience indeed, and the Judgment of an
unregenerate Man, may in some Sense be said to be against the Sin: but his Will
is for it, and the Lusts of a depraved Will habitually govern the Man; so that
he always inclines to Sin, in one kind or another, in one Degree or another,
and does always actually indulge himself in Sin, except only when under some
special Restraints by Shame or Fear of Punishment. He can never be said to hate
Sin; though he hate the Misery that is like to be the Consequence of it: but he
rather hates the Law, that punishes Sin. -- And to be sure, it cannot be said
of any unregenerate Man, that he hates Evil and would do Good, indefinitely:
that is, that he hates all Evil, and would do all Good, without any Distinction
or Reserve; as the Apostle here affirms of himself. -- No! there is some
Delilah in Reserve, some Bosom-Lust retained, some Methods of vital Piety
(either of Heart or Life) rejected, by the greatest Proficients in Morality
among the unconverted World. None but the truly regenerate can say with David,
I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all Things, to be right; and I hate every
false Way. Psalm. cxix. 128.

To this I may add, that it is the distinguishing Character of a Child of God,
to delight in the Law of the Lord, after the inward Man. -- An unregenerate Man
may by the Lashes of an awakened Conscience, and Terrors of the Law, be kept
under some slavish Restraints, and be forced to some servile Endeavors of
Obedience: But could he with a quiet Conscience, and Hopes of Salvation, enjoy
his Choice, he would break through all these Restraints, and always gratify his
sinful and sensual Inclinations. -- To have our inward Man, our very Mind and
Heart delighted in the Law of God, is to have our Souls delighted in a
Conformity to God; the Law being but a Transcript of his moral Perfections.
That is, in other Words, it is to love GOD himself, to delight our selves in
his Nature and Government, to love to be like him in the inward Man, having the
Law written on the Tables of our Heart, which is the Sum of all Religion, the
whole and only Evidence of vital Christianity, all other Marks and Characters
of a Christian indeed being contained in it. -- Whence it is, that the Psalmist
so often mentions his Delight in God's Commandments, which he had loved, as a
Mark of his Uprightness. No unregenerate Professor does really delight in God,
as the holy and righteous Governor and Judge of the World: And therefore no
unregenerate Person can truly say, as the Apostle here, I delight in the Law of
God, after the inward Man.

I may likewise add, that it is the distinguishing Character of a Child of God,
to groan under the Burden of the Body of Death, to long for Deliverance from
it, and to have a War maintained between the Law of his Members, and the Law of
his Mind. -- Awakened Sinners may groan under a Sense of Guilt and Danger; and
have a War between their Consciences and their Lusts. But they are Believers,
and none but they, who groan under the Burden of their Heart-Corruptions; and
after a further Progress in Holiness. -- Unrenewed Sinners may have a Law in
their Members, warring against their awakned Consciences: but they have no
contrary Law in their Minds, no such habitual Bent of Soul, or stated and
settled Disposition of their Affections, as has the Force of a Law with them,
and maintains a constant War with their inward Corruptions, their vain
Imaginations, sinful Appetites and Passions. -- They do indeed love the Lord,
that thus hate evil. Psalm. xcvii. 10. And they who thus fight the good Fight of
Faith, will lay hold on eternal Life. I Tim. vi. 12. It Is one Characteristick
of a true Believer, that he resists Sin, in all the Lusts thereof, even the
most secret, and hidden from the Eye of the World. -- Every Creature has its
Antipathies: the new Creature, as well as any other; and as Sin is the greatest
Contrariety to its Temper and Taste, to its Interests and Comforts, the Divine
Nature always is disposed to exert it self in an Opposition to indwelling Sin,
studying to mortify it more and more.

3. The Apostle is here giving the Character of a Person who has a twofold
Principle in him: The one a governing Principle, that may be called himself:
the other a subdued Principle, which is not he, but Sin that dwells in him.
-- Now can any unconverted Person in the World truly say, it is not he, that
transgresses the Law, when the natural Bent and Disposition of his Soul is to
Evil, only to Evil, and that continually, notwithstanding all the Restraints of
the Law and Checks of Conscience; and when all the Sins of his Heart and Life
are imputed to him, and will be punished upon him, if he remain in his present
State? -- Can any unconverted Person in the World say, that he himself (all in
him which in God's Account can be called himself) serves the Law of God, though
with his Flesh (his remaining carnal Affections and Appetites) the Law of Sin;
when it is certain, that every unconverted Man is, both with his Mind and
Flesh, a Servant to Sin, and free from Righteousness, as the Apostle assures
us, in the sixth Chapter of this Epistle, Verses 16, 17, 20.

4. What justifies my Interpretation beyond all reasonable Opposition, is, that
the Apostle draws that Conclusion from those very Characters here given of
himself, There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: For the Law of the
Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and
Death. Chap. viii. 1, 2. -- Two Things do here appear to me certain and
unquestionable. One is, that the first Verse of this viiith Chapter is here
represented (as plainly as any Thing can be represented by Words) as a
necessary Consequence or just Inference from the Premises, and from the
Characters the Apostle had there given of himself; and is therefore a full
Proof, that every one in the same spiritual State described in the latter Part
of the preceding Chapter, is in Christ Jesus, and freed from Condemnation. --
There is THEREFORE now no Condemnation, etc. Wherefore? Because they who are in
Christ Jesus are freed from Sin, and do not walk after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, as before described: and particularly because they themselves do serve
the Law of God, as expressed in the Verse immediately foregoing. This
Construction is necessary, to make the Connection of this Verse with what went
before, congruous and rational. Nay, it is the Construction which the Apostle
himself purposely leads us to, in the 2d Verse. FOR the Law of the Spirit of
Life, in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. As if
he had said, They who are in Christ Jesus cannot be under Condemnation, since
they are made free from the Law (from the Dominion, though not from the Remains)
of Sin and Death; which I have already shown you to be my Case, in the
foregoing Description of my spiritual State and Experience, and in the
Characters I have given of my self. -- Another Thing that appears to me most
certain and evident is, that the Apostle speaks of himself here (in this 2d
Verse of Chapter viii) in the same Manner, and to the same Purpose, as he spoke
of himself in the latter Part of the foregoing Chapter: And that these Words,
with the following Verses, are the Sum and Conclusion of that whole Discourse.
This was the Point the Apostle was undertaking to explain; this the Subject of
the preceding Chapter, as I have already shown; in this he speaks in the first
Person, as in the former Chapter; this is a natural and rational summing up or
drawing the Conclusion of the whole, The Law of the Spirit of Life, in Christ
Jesus, has made ME free from the Law of Sin and Death. -- Whence it follows,
that those Characters in the latter Part of the seventh Chapter, belong to none
but such who are in Christ Jesus; and by him freed from Condemnation, and from
the Law of Sin and Death.

And now, I leave it to you (Sir) to judge, whether we have not Reason to
conclude, that the Apostle is here speaking of himself when in a renewed or
regenerate State; and thereby representing the Conflict, which the Children of
God in their highest Seize have with their remaining Corruptions: Since
there is so plain a Transition (by the Change of the Tense) from considering
what he once had been, to a Representation of what he now was, at the Time of
writing this Epistle. -- Have we not Reason to conclude this, when all (the
very best) of the Children of God, do always experience the same Struggle with
their Corruptions, as is here described? -- May we not confidently draw this
Conclusion, when we find, that the Characters here given are applicable to none
but the regenerate only? None but they hate that which is evil; and have a Will
present with them to that which is good. To be sure none but they hate all
evil; and have a Will to all good, without Reserve or Distinction. None but
they delight in the Law of the Lord, after the inward Man. None but they groan
under the Burden of the Body of Death; and maintain a constant War with the
Law of Sin in their Members. -- May we not safely maintain this Conclusion
against all Opposition, when we find a Person described under the Influence of
a two sold Principle, Corruption and Grace? The former so brought into
Subjection, that its Actings are not to be attributed, strictly speaking, to
HIM (being so contrary to the new Man, his predominant Principle, according to
which God accounts of us, and denominates us) but are imputable only to the
Remains of the old Man, or indwelling Sin. The latter having such an Empire in
his Soul, as to be called himself, so that (notwithstanding his Corruptions and
the Out-breakings of them) he can say, I my self serve the Law of God. -- In
Fine, this Conclusion most certainly appears to be necessary and
unquestionable, that they must be in a regenerate State, who are delivered from
Condemnation, and who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and who
are by the Law of the Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, made free from the Law
of Sin and Death; as the Apostle shows to be his own Case, according to the
Description he had before given of himself. To suppose that he here personates
a Professor unregenerate, must upon the whole appear utterly inconsistent with
the Case described in these Passages: and therefore such an Exposition, as
altogether forced, is not to be received.

But after all you will perhaps object, that my Interpretation tends to make Men
secure and careless, bold and presumptuous, in a State and Course of Sin.

I answer, It is so far from this, that it has a direct contrary Tendency. It
is a solemn Admonition to the Children of God, to be upon their Guard, since
they have such a domestic Enemy to deal with: And a like Admonition it is to
all careless secure habitual Sinners, not to flatter themselves with a vain
presumptuous Hope of their regenerate State, on any Pretenses whatsoever.

It is here the Character of a Christian indeed, that he hates Evil, all Evil,
without Reserve. IF therefore they who retain any Favourite-Lust, and roll it
as a sweet Morsel under their Tongue, cry Peace to their Souls, they are
sleeping upon the Top of a Mast: There is no Peace, faith my God, to the
Wicked. The Peace of such is all a Delusion; a most false, absurd and dangerous
Peace.

It is here likewise the Character of a true Christian, that he does not allow
so much as his Imperfections; that when these obtain, they are without his
Consent, and against his Will. These are what he would not, and among the
Evils, which he hates. They therefore are entertaining but a vain Dream of a
safe State, who are knowingly and deliberately living in any Way of Sinning,
and who customarily allow any moral Imperfection. They will certainly in the
Conclusion be rejected, among the Workers of Iniquity.

It is here also represented as the Property of every sincere Christian, that
he has a Will present with him to that which is good; that he consents to the
Law that it is good; and that he delights in the Law of God after the inward
Man; that is, in other Words (as I have shown) he truly loves God and
Godliness. -- Here is therefore no Foundation for them to think well of their
State, whose whole Religion is constrained by Fear; and whose Hearts and
Affections are not sincerely engaged in the Service of God. As for them who
love the World and their Idols, more than God and a Life of sincere universal
Obedience to Him, such are in the Bonds of Iniquity, and have no Part or Lot in
this Matter.

It is moreover given as the Mark of a true Christian, that he groans after
Deliverance from the Body of Death; not only from Guilt and Danger, but from
the Remainders of his Corruption; and maintains a constant War against the Law
of Sin in his Members. What Encouragement is there therefore for such an one to
hope well of his State, that don't make it his Business to keep his Heart, and
to watch over his Lips and Life; that done wrestle with God for Deliverance
from, and greater Victory over his Corruptions; and that don't look upon his
remaining Imperfections, as the great Burden of his Life?

It is furthermore given in Character of the true Christian, that he thankfully
expects this Deliverance only by Jesus Christ. The Apostle's Answer to the
Question, Who shall deliver me? is, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. q.
d. I thankfully look unto God, in and through Jesus Christ, as a sure Refuge in
this Difficulty; and as the Fountain of Life, from whence I may safely expect
my needed Supplies. -- All Unbelievers therefore, as excluded from any
justifiable Pretense to this Character, have no Room left them to think well of
their State.

In fine, the Christian here described, is one who with his Mind does himself
serve the Law of God. -- He has had God's Law put into his Mind, and he serves
God with his Spirit. His whole Man, all that can be called himself, is engaged
in a Life of Gospel-Obedience. -- What can they therefore have to do with the
Peace and Comfort, which is here offered to Christians indeed, who are grossly
defective, partial, and unsteady in their Obedience; whose Minds are wavering,
and whose Hearts are divided between the Service of God and their Idols? A
double-minded Man is unstable in all his Ways: and let not that Man think that
he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Jam. i. 7, 8.

Now, to conclude this long Letter, I will only further observe, that you may
here find, in a summary and concise Representation, the true Characters of the
Children of God; as well as Matter of Conviction to those who cannot, and of
Consolation to those who can, apply these Marks to themselves. If upon an
impartial Examination you can justify your Claim to the Characters here given,
let no Man rob you of the Comfort and Hope thereby set before you But if you
cannot find such Marks in yourself, never rest till you obtain these Evidences
of a converted State.

That the Lord may comfort your Heart, and stablish you in every good Word and
Work, to do his Will, is the Prayer of,

SIR, Your and c.

LETTER XI. Wherein the Moravian and Antinomian Doctrine of Justification, in
some of its peculiar Points, is considered and refuted.
SIR,
IT is true, that I do agree with the Antinomians and Moravians in this, that
The Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ is the alone Matter of our
Justification before God. But I am notwithstanding very far from agreeing with
them, in the whole of their Doctrine on that important Article of a Sinner's
Justification by Faith in Christ. -- The Person you have conversed with, has
imposed upon you, in pretending, that they and we are of the same Sentiments,
with Respect to the Doctrine of Justification. -- In Compliance with ^our
Demands, I shall therefore endeavor to show you What is the Difference between
them and those of our Profession, in this great Point; and what are the Reasons
of our differing from them. -- I presume, you don't expect from me a particular
Detection of all the Moravian and Antinomian Errors: this would require a
larger Volume, than I have Leisure to write, or you would have Patience to
read. I shall therefore limit myself to the Subject, which you have proposed.

There are these two Things especially in the Doctrine of our Justification by
Faith, which are to be condemned, as most dangerous Errors in the Sects you
speak of. The first is, their Notion of the Nature of a saving Faith. The
second is, the Part which they assign to Faith in our Justification. It is
necessary in Order to set the Affair in a proper Light, that I be something
particular upon each of these.

The first Thing then to be considered, is their Notion of the Nature of a
saving Faith. This they suppose to consist in a joyful Persuasion of our
Interest in Christ, and of our Title to his purchased Salvation. And
accordingly Count Zinzendorf frequently gives us this View of a saving Faith.
Believe then (says he) that Jesus has atoned and paid a Ransom for you all;
and that you may experience it this very Moment; and know, that ye have been
healed by his Wounds and by his Stripes. Discourses on the Redemption of Man.
p. 120.
-- And the Antinomians in general agree with him in this, that saving Faith
consists in a comfortable Persuasion of our personal Interest in the Lord Jesus
Christ. -- But then on the contrary, you may perceive by what I have written to
you on this Subject, that I don't suppose this Persuasion to enter into the
Definition of a saving Faith; nor to be any Part of it. It is what a true
Believer may want; and an unbelieving and impenitent Sinner may entertain, in
an high Degree.

This is an Affair of vast Consequence, and therefore deserves a more distinct
and particular Consideration, than I can now have Opportunity for. I shall
however attempt to set it in as plain and familiar a Light as I can. In Order
to this, it will be proper (previous to my Reasoning against this wild Opinion)
to premise these Observations.

1. That Believers may have good Satisfaction of their safe Estate, and full
Persuasion of their Interest in Christ, from their Experience of a Work of
Grace in their Hearts; and from the Fruits of Faith, in their Affections and
Conversations. It is just Reasoning, from the Nature of the Fruit, to the
Quality of the Tree that bears it. If therefore a Man finds in himself an
habitual, predominant Desire after the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Portion of his
Soul, and the Foundation of his Hope; if he feels his Sins to be the Burden of
his Soul, what he hates without Reserve, what he strives, watches and prays
against, and never willingly and deliberately indulges; if he delights himself
in the Lord, in near Approaches to him, and Communion with him in his
Ordinances; if he knows it to be the Bent and Disposition of his Soul, to
approve himself to God in a Life of Spiritual-Mindedness, and in all holy
Conversation and Godliness, in Selfdenial, in Piety toward God, in
Righteousness, and Charity toward Men: Though he may yet groan under many
disallowed Imperfections, he nevertheless may be, and ought to be persuaded of
his Interest in Christ; and give the Praise and Glory of these divine
Influences upon his Soul, to the blessed Author of them. This is the ordinary
and standing Evidence to the Children of God, of the Safety of their State. --
By this they have a comfortable and joyful Persuasion, that he who has begun a
good Work in them, will perform it to the Day of Christ. -- By this the
Children of God are manifest, both to themselves and others. In this Sense
then, I don't deny to Believers a Persuasion, or Manifestation of their own
good Estate. This Persuasion is what they should by no Means contentedly rest
short of. It is greatly needful, not only to their Comfort and Hope, but to
their serving God with the Dispositions becoming Children, with Enlargement of
Soul, and with Cheerfulness and Delight. -- But then you must remember, that
this Persuasion is not Faith: but arises from the Fruits and Effects of Faith
upon the Soul, and is what may (sometimes at least) be wanting in the best of
the Children of God. -- I must still further observe,

2. That God is sometimes pleased, in a more special and peculiar Manner, to
shed abroad his Love in the Hearts of Believers, by his Holy Spirit, with such
superior Light and Evidence, that their gracious Sincerity, so consequently
their Interest in Christ, and their Title to the eternal Inheritance, can at
such Times be no Ways doubtful and questionable to them. -- The Spirit of God
witnesses with their Spirits, that they are his Children. And they are sealed
with the Holy Spirit of Promise. -- In this Case, as in the other before
mentioned, their comfortable Persuasion of their Interest in Christ arises from
an evident Discovery of the Exercise of the Graces of his blessed Spirit.
Herein this joyful Persuasion in both Cases agrees, that it is reasonable and
wellgrounded. The Spirit of God never persuades the Soul to believe a Truth
without its proper Evidence; nor causes the Believer to rejoice without
rational Grounds and Motives. -- But then this latter Persuasion differs from
that beforementioned, in these following Respects. -- It is produced in the
Soul with an incomparably stronger and clearer Light. -- In the other Case,
Satisfaction is obtained by a Series of Reasoning, Reflection, and
Self-Examination; distinctly considering the Scripture-Rule, and comparing it
with the State, Circumstances, and settled Habit of the Soul. Whereas, in this
Case, the Soul has so clear a View and Consciousness of its present Exercise of
Faith in Christ, and Love to God, that all Clouds are dispersed, all Mists and
Darkness vanish; and there is no Room left for Doubts and misgiving Thoughts:
But the Soul sees it self safe in the Hands of Christ; and can rest there with
the greatest Alacrity and Pleasure. -- Moreover, as this Persuasion, which I am
now speaking of, makes its Way into the Soul with much greater Light, so it has
a much quicker and more sudden Production. The Soul is not exercised in this
Case, for Months or Years together, with difficult Inquiries into its own State
but at once, before its aware, overcomes all its Fears, by feeling the
Possession and Influence of the Graces and Consolations of the Spirit of God.
-- I may yet add, that this Persuasion is accompanied with such unspeakable
Joy, as those (even Believers themselves) cannot have any Idea of, who have not
thus tasted that the Lord is gracious. The divine Light shines into the Soul
with a transporting and ravishing Energy, till it is as it were lost in a
joyful Astonishment. By this the World vanishes out of Sight, and Death it self
loses its Terrors; by this the Martyrs have been enabled to sing in the Flames,
and most joyfully to triumph over all that is most frightful and distressing to
Nature. -- To which I may also add, that this joyful Persuasion, of which I now
speak, has a transforming Efficacy on the Soul, who is the happy Subject of it.
It purifies the Heart, and promotes Conformity to God: It humbles the Soul to
Nothing in its own Eyes; bows it to an absolute Subjection to the Will of God:
and excites in it the most vigorous Exercise of the (...) of the Spirit, and
the Duties of Christianity: Effects, which at least are not so sensibly
produced, and in such a Degree, by the Satisfaction which the Soul obtains of
(...) good State, in the: Method first mentioned. -- I have insisted the longer
upon these Heads, to obviate all Misapprehensions of what I have yet to offer:
And to the same Purpose I must add once more, --

3. That we can have no other Claim to Acceptance with GOD, but by the
Righteousness of CHRIST imputed to us, and received by Faith: And therefore,
that we can have no jus^ Persuasion of our being in Favor with God, but from
our Interest in and Dependence upon his Righteousness, as the Matter of our
Justification. It is only on Account of what Christ has done and suffered for
us, that we are justified before God and entitled to eternal Salvation. -- It
is only by Faith, that we are interested in this Righteousness. -- And it is
only by the Evidence of our having a true unfeigned Faith, that we can safely
enjoy the (...) and Comfort of a justified State. -- That we cannot be
justified before God by our own sincere Obedience, either to the Law of Nature
or to any imaginary Law of Grace, or even by Faith it self, as it is an Act of
Obedience, or any other Way whatsoever, but by the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ to us, and on the Account of what he did and suffered
for us, will appear from the following Considerations.

This appears evidently true, in that Nothing can be the Matter of our
Justification before God, but what is a proper and adequate Atonement and
Propitiation for our Sins. -- That we have all sinned, and come short of the
Glory of God, is a Truth evident, both from the Light of Nature and (...). --
That God will by no Means clear (...) Guilty, has the same Evidence and (...).
Infinite Justice and Holiness cannot look upon those to be just, who are under
the Guilt of Sin, and the damning Sentence of the Law. -- There is therefore a
Necessity, that the Dishonor done to God by our Sins be repaired, and the
penal Demands of his broken Law be fulfilled; that our Guilt may be removed
from us, and God be just, in justifying the Ungodly. How else would the Judge
of all the Earth do right, in declaring the Sinner righteous, while he remains
under the Pollution and Guilt, both of original and actual Sin? -- As far then
as our Obedience, considered in it self, can answer those Ends, so far it may
conduce to our Justification before God; and no farther -- If we can answer the
Demands of the Justice and Law of God for our past Sins; if we can pay ten
Thousand Talents with less than Nothing; and if by committing new Sin (as we
always do in the best of our imperfect Obedience) we can satisfy for our former
Sin and Guilt, and so discharge the old Score; then may our Obedience be
considered as the Condition of our Justification before God. -- Whereas, if
neither our legal nor our evangelical Obedience can do any Thing at all toward
this; but (as coming from a sinful Nature, and mixed with sinful Imperfection)
will add to the Debt, and increase the Weight of our Guilt, then it is certain,
that that cannot be the Matter of a Sinner's Justification, nor the Condition
of our Acceptance with God. -- Whence we may conclude with the Apostle, that
Christ Jesus is set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, that
his Righteousness may be declared, for the Remission of our Sins, in Order that
God may be just, and the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Romans iii.
25, 26.

Here can therefore be no Room at all for that Pretense, That the Obedience of
Christ has purchased forus a dispensing Act of Grace, that our sincere
Obedience shall on his Account be accepted instead of the perfect Obedience
demanded by the Law of Nature: And that we are accordingly justified by our
evangelical Obedience, our Faith and Repentance, and our sincere Endeavors
after a Conformity to the Will of God. For by whatever Price these Terms of our
Justification be procured for us, that Obedience, immediately by which
(according to that Notion) we are justified, is our own Righteousness: and
therefore cannot entitle us to any Justification before God, mentioned in
Scripture. Not to that respected by the Law: For that is only proposed on
Condition of perfect Obedience. Not to that respected by the Gospel: For that
is the Justification of the Ungodly, by a not imputing their Iniquity, but
imputing to them Righteousness, without Works. (Romans iv.) Whereas, according to
this Imagination, it must be by a Vindication of our own Sincerity; and in
Virtue of our own evangelical Righteousness, which must therefore be
proportioned to the Demands of Justice, or leave us open to the Curses of the
Law. -- How much safer therefore would it be (with the Apostle) to disclaim all
our own Righteousness, that we may be vested with that Righteousness which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith! Phil.
iii. 9.

Besides, how can our sincere Obedience justify us, when we can have no
gracious Sincerity, and therefore no true Obedience, until the Moment in which
we are actually justified? -- I think, all must allow, that he who is united to
Christ by Faith, is at the same time justified in the Sight of God. For we are
accepted in the Beloved: -- There is no Condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus. -- And it is most certain, that we can have no gracious
Sincerity, before we are united to Christ by Faith unfeigned. As the Branch
cannot hear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. He that abides in me, and I in him, brings forth much
Fruit: For without me ye can do nothing. Joh. xiv. 4, 5. -- From whence it is
evident, that no Man can exercise gracious Sincerity in performing any good
Works, until he be in a justified State: and consequently sincere Obedience,
either to the Law or Gospel, cannot be the Condition of our Justification
before God. -- The first Exercise of saving Faith unites us to Christ; and is
the immediate Foundation both of our Justification and of our sincere
Obedience. -- There is not a Moment of Time passes between the first Act of
true Faith, and our Justification: and consequently not a Moment of Time for
the Practice of sincere Obedience, before we are united to Christ, and thereby
justified in the Sight of God. Now it is impossible, that our sincere Obedience
should be both the Condition and the Consequence of our Justification.

I might add to this, that if the Scriptures ascribe all the spiritual Benefits
we are partakers of, either in this World or that to come, to the Righteousness
of CHRIST only, then our Obedience, either to the Law or Gospel, can have no
Hand in our Justification before God. If all saving Mercy flow to us from that
Fountain only, there can none flow to us from any other. And it appears plainly
the whole Design and Tenor of the Gospel, to illustrate this blessed Truth to
us. Though I cannot now enlarge upon this Head, I will just mention a few
Instances to exemplify it. -- It is from Christ's Righteousness alone, that we
receive the complete Forgiveness of our Sins. Romans iv. 6, 7, 8. Even as David
also describes the Blessedness of the Man, unto whom God imputes
Righteousness WITHOUT WORKS, saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are
forgiven, whose Sins are covered. Blessed is the Man, to whom the Lord will not
impute Sin. -- By this alone we are made righteous. Romans v. 19. By the
Obedience of One, shall many be made righteous. -- By this alone we are
acquitted from Guilt, and freed from Condemnation. Romans viii. 1. There is
therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. -- By this we
are reconciled to God. 2 Cor. v. 18. For all Things are of God, who has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. -- By this we have Peace with God,
Access into his gracious Presence, and joyful Hopes of eternal Glory. Romans v.
1, 2. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have Access into this Grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. -- By this we are Heirs of
eternal Life. Romans v. 21. That as Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might
Grace reign through Righteousness, unto eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.
-- The blessed Hope we are looking for, is therefore called the Hope of
Righteousness. Gal. v. 5.

I will only add, that if the Scriptures do expressly exclude all our own
Righteousness, and all our own Works, from any Hand in our Justification, we
also should renounce them all; and depend upon the Righteousness of Christ
only. For this see Tit. iii. 5. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have
done, but according to his Mercy he saved us. Romans iv. 5. To him that works
not, but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. These Things are so plainly and evidently the Scope and Design
of the whole New Testament, that all the artful Evasions of those, who would go
about to establish their own Righteousness, and rob Christ of the Honor of
their Justification and Salvation, should be rejected with Abhorrence. -- In
fine, Let me entreat you, Sir, always to remember, that both the Law and the
Prophets witness the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ,
unto all and upon all them that believe. Romans iii. 21, 22. -- That Christ is
the End of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes. Romans x. 4.
-- And that being justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath through
him. Romans v. 9.

You Will pardon me, that I have so long delayed your Expectations. -- I thought
it necessary, not only to clear the Way before me, that you may see in what
Sense I oppose the Antinomian Dreams and Moravian Dotages: but also to offer
some Precautions, that you may not fall upon Scylla, while you avoid Charybdis;
but steer your Way safe between the two Extremes.

By all that I have now said you may perceive, that the Question between us and
the Moravians or Antinomians is not, -- Whether Believers may have, and should
seek to have, a comfortable Persuasion of their Interest in Christ? To doubt of
this, would be at once to contradict the strongest Attestations thereto in the
Word of God, and the happy Experience of his Children. -- Nor is it the
Question, Whether we are justified by any Seize of our own? To suppose
this, were to counteract the whole Design of the Gospel; and to bring greatest
Contempt upon the Redeemer's Merits and Righteousness. -- But the Question is,
Whether a true saving Faith consists in a Persuasion of our personal actual
Interest in Christ, and that he will bestow his eternal Salvation upon us in
particular? Whether there may not be a strong Persuasion of a justified State,
without any true saving Faith; and a true saving Faith, without this particular
Persuasion of a justified State? -- If this be so, if Men may have this
Persuasion while in a State of Guilt and Condemnation, and if God's own dear
Children may be in Doubts and Darkness, with Respect to their State, it
necessarily follows, that this Moravian and Antinomian Doctrine is a most
dangerous Mistake and Delusion. This Matter therefore deserves to be
particularly considered.

That Men may be strongly persuaded of the Safety of their State, while
remaining under Guilt and Condemnation, appears from such Considerations as
these.

If this Persuasion may be entertained by those who have never been emptied of
their Self-Sufficiency, nor ever had any sensible Discovery of their lost,
impotent, and helpless State, it certainly cannot be a true saving Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ. -- That this may be, is evident from the Nature of Things.
There can be no Reason assigned, why such may not be capable to entertain a
strong Opinion of their own good State, who have never discovered how bad, how
dangerous and miserable their State by Nature is. -- That this has been, is
evident from Scripture. Laodicea thought her self rich and increased in Goods;
and to have Need of Nothing, when she was poor and miserable, and wretched and
blind and naked; and such there have always been, who think themselves
something, when they are nothing, and deceive themselves. -- And that such have
not a true Faith in Christ, whatever Persuasion they entertain, is evident, in
that Men cannot come to Christ for that which they don't feel the Want of; nor
can they feel the Want of Deliverance from that lost and miserable State, which
they have never had a sensible Discovery of. The whole need not the Physician.
-- It is also evident, in that saving Faith is a Dependence upon Christ alone
for Salvation. For it is impossible to depend upon Christ alone, and yet to
depend partly upon our selves for Salvation; as all such necessarily do, that
have never felt their own impotent and lost Condition. The Antinomians, I know,
disclaim all Pretensions to Self-Dependance. But whence, I beseech 'em, are the
towering Imaginations of the divine Favor, which some of them entertain, while
they have never been broken under the Sense of their Sin and Misery, never
humbled nor lost, nor driven to Christ as a Refuge for guilty Sinners; but from
an high Opinion of themselves? Whence do they thank God, that they are not as
other Men; but from some imaginary Qualifications of their own? If they pretend
to no other, they may still build upon this, that they have a Persuasion Christ
will save them; and so they make that Persuasion their Righteousness, and the
Foundation of their Hope of Salvation. And this is still further evident, from
the express Declaration of our blessed Savior, that he came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. -- Inasmuch therefore as such
self-righteous Persons may have the strongest Persuasion of their own
Justification by Christ, and yet have no Interest in him, whatever Persuasion
they entertain, since he came not to call them while such to Repentance, it is
most evident, that this Persuasion cannot be a saving Faith. -- Moreover,

If this Persuasion may be entertained by those who are under the Power and
Dominion of their Sins, it cannot be a saving Faith. -- That this may be, is
too evident from our constant Observation. -- Who can be more tenaciously
persuaded of their obtaining Salvation by Christ, than many of our careless and
secure Sinners, who profess to know Christ, but in Works deny him, and are to
every good Work reprobate? -- That these cannot have a saving Faith, is
evident. For Faith purifies the Heart: and he that commits Sin, is of the
Devil. -- Furthermore,

If this Persuasion may arise from Pride and SelfEsteem, it cannot be a saving
Faith. -- I think, no Man will pretend, that the Productions of our own proud
and haughty Self-Esteem will interest us in the Favor of God; and give us a
Claim to the Promises of the Gospel. -- And we have numerous Instances of such
in Scripture, who entertained this Persuasion from their own haughty Opinion of
themselves. Such were Korah and his Company. All the Congregation are holy (say
they) every one of them. Such were they in the Prophet, who said, Stand by thy
self, come not near me; for I am holier than thou. -- Such was the Pharisee,
who thanked God, that he was not as other Men. -- And such were the Body of the
Jewish Rulers in our Savior's Time. We have one Father (say they) even God. --
And I wish we had not constant Occasion to observe, that there are at this Time
too many such among ourselves, who boast of this strong Persuasion of their
justified State, and of their rapturous Joys, whose highest Attainment in
Religion is, that they trust in themselves, that they are righteous; and
despise others. -- Their false Apprehension of their own Seize begets
this Persuasion of their good State: And this Persuasion heightens their
Apprehension of their great Seize in Religion: And thus they go on in an
unhappy Round of Pride and Self-Exaltation. Now can any pretend, that a saving
Faith consists in Pride, and supercilious Vanity of Mind! -- I may yet add,

If such a Persuasion may be a Diabolical Suggestion and Hellish Delusion, it
cannot be a saving Faith. -- This Consequence cannot be disputed by any, that
allow a Difference between Light and Darkness, between CHRIST and Belial,
between the Influences of the Spirit of God, and the Delusions of the Devil. --
And I think, it will be allowed by all, that the Devil has Power, Craft, and
Malice enough, thus to impose upon poor unwary Sinners, and delude them into
Transports of Joy, for which they have no solid Grounds. That he may do so, is
confirmed by the Apostle, who tells us, that Satan himself is transformed into
an Angel of Light. -- -- That he does so in Fact, is too often exemplified in
the high rapturous Joys of some, who are openly and visibly irreligious. -- I
subjoin once more,

If such a Persuasion may be entertained by those who embrace the most
dangerous and damnable Heresies, it cannot be a saving Faith. -- That there may
be such Heresies as are utterly inconsistent with saving Faith, we are certain,
both from the Nature of Things, and from the express Words of the Apostle, who
informs us of such who shall be left to strong Delusions, to believe a Lie,
that they may all be damned. -- And constant Experience has convinced us, that
the worst Heretics, which have ever afflicted and infected the Church, have
had the most undoubting Persuasion of their Interest in Christ; and of the Love
and Favor of God to them. Now, can such as these have a saving Faith?

From every one of these Particulars it appears, that Men may entertain such a
Persuasion of their Interest in Christ, as is false in Fact. And I think, there
cannot need any Arguments to convince you, that believing a Lie is not the Faith
of God's Elect, which gives a Title to Salvation. -- This then appears
unquestionably true, that there may be a strong Persuasion of a justified
State, WITHOUT saving Faith.

And it is equally certain, that there may be a saving Faith, WITHOUT this
Persuasion of an actual Interest in Christ. -- I need not say much, to make
this appear in a convincing Light.

If this Persuasion be no where found, in Scripture, to belong to the
Description of a saving Faith, a Man may be a true Believer without it. -- This
must be allowed to be a necessary Consequence, if there be any true and just
Description of a saving Faith in the Bible. -- And I think, I may confidently
affirm, that this Persuasion of our Interest in Christ, that he will save us in
particular, or that we are actually justified by his Righteousness, is no where
found in Scripture, to be any Part of the Description of a saving Faith. And
there may consequently be a true Faith without it. -- Besides,

This joyful Persuasion of our Interest in Christ and our justified State, is
considered in the Scriptures as the Fruit and Consequence of a saving Faith. --
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God. -- Believing, we rejoice with
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Whence it follows, that Faith may and must
exist before it can bring forth Fruit; and that this Persuasion cannot be both
Faith it self, and the Fruit or Effect of it too; and consequently, that there
may be a true Faith without this Persuasion, whereof I am treating. -- I
further add,

The Instances of dark and deserted Believers, in Scripture, and the many
Promises and Encouragements given to such, do plainly and fully prove, that a
true Faith may exist without this Persuasion. -- There may be true Believers,
who fear the Lord, and obey the Voice of his Servant, that walk in Darkness and
see no Light, that are ready to conclude, the Lord has forsaken them, and
their God has forgotten them; who are yet graven upon the Palms of his Hands;
and encouraged to hope in the Lord, as the Health of their Countenance and
their God.

In fine, if we may receive the Lord Jesus Christ upon the Terms of the Gospel,
without a joyful Persuasion of our own good State, we may have a saving Faith
without it. -- This Consequence cannot be opposed, because receiving the Lord
Jesus Christ, is the Gospel-Description of a saving Faith. -- And that we may
thus receive the Lord Jesus Christ without this joyful Persuasion of our own
Interest in him, may be evidenced by a Variety of Arguments.

This is evident from the Nature of Things, in that the Act must necessarily
precede the Evidence of it: And consequently our first Receiving the Lord Jesus
Christ must necessarily preceed our Knowledge or grounded Persuasion of it; or
else we must be persuaded of a Nonentity, of what is false in Fact, and just
as different from a saving Faith, as any other Falsehood whatsoever.

This is likewise evident, that our receiving the Lord Jesus Christ, and our
Persuasion of an Interest in him, are two very different Acts of the Mind,
which no Ways imply each other. -- It is one Act of the Mind, heartily to
consent to the GospelOffer; and another Act of the Mind, quite different and
distinct, to entertain a joyful Persuasion, that this Consent flows from
gracious Sincerity. The former may and often does exist without the latter: and
therefore Christ may be received by Faith, without the Persuasion of an
Interest in him.

This is also evident, in that a true Faith may consist with a great Deal of
remaining Unbelief. -- He may sincerely receive Christ by Faith, who has
Occasion to make that Exclamation, Lord, help my Unbelief! This may therefore
so much darken the Mind, as to make the Believer incapable of discerning and
being fully persuaded of the Sincerity of his Faith: And consequently true
Faith may exist without this Persuasion; and a Man may have received the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is in great Doubts and Darkness about it.

This is moreover evident, in that such an One may truly receive the Lord Jesus
Christ upon his own Terms, who has no clear Idea of the Nature of justifying
Faith. -- He may have a believing Heart, who has but a weak and cloudy Head. He
may despair of all Help in himself, most earnestly desire an Interest in
Christ, be heartily willing to comply with the Gospel-Offer, resolved to have
Christ upon any Terms, and may trust in Christ alone for Salvation; who,
notwithstanding, may have but very confused Apprehensions of the Nature of
these Exercises of Soul, and of the Gospel-Promises made to those who have
attained them: And consequently may receive Christ by Faith, without this
Persuasion of an Interest in him. -- I may add once more,

This is also evident, in that all who receive the Lord Jesus Christ, have the
Power or Privilege to become the Sons of God, whether they are persuaded of
their Interest in Christ, or not. But all who are persuaded of their own good
Estate, have not that Power or Privilege; for many of these are presumptuous
Sinners. Whence it follows, that to receive the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, is
one Thing; and to be persuaded of our Interest in him, is another Thing, quite
distinct in its Nature and Consequences.

The second Thing which I mentioned, as a most dangerous Error in the Moravians
and Antinomians, is the Part they assign to Faith in our Justification.

The most of the Antinomians suppose, that our Justification, considered as a
Freedom from Guilt or Condemnation and a Title to the Favor of God, was from
Eternity. All of 'em suppose, at least we were thus justified from the Time of
Christ's Death, before we had any actual existence. -- Though the most of the
Antinomians limit this Justification to the Elect only, the Moravians herein
differ from their other Antinomian Brethren; and suppose, that all the World of
Mankind, without Difference, were actually justified, when Christ pronounced
those Words upon the Cross, It is finished. Accordingly Count Zinzendorf in the
forecited Book tells us, "On the Cross he made a Confession for all the World,
when he said, Father, forgive them; and when he cried out, It is finished, be
gave Absolution to all wicked Rebels^. Discourses on the Redemption of Man. p.
31.
-- Whence it appears, that according to them, Faith it Christ has no Part at
all in our Justification, considering this as a judicial Sentence of our Judge.
-- This Justification was not only precedent to our Faith, but to our very
Existence: and according to the Moravian Divinity, Multitudes are thus
justified, who never had, nor ever will have, any true Faith in Jesus Christ.
-- According to the Doctrine of all the Antinomians, the Elect are all
justified before Faith; as already has been observed.

When these therefore speak of Justification by Faith, they mean no more, than
that Faith gives us the comfortable Evidence of that State of Peace and Favor
with God, which we were in before: Or that it enables our Consciences now to
pronounce the same Sentence concerning our State, which our Judge had
pronounced before we were born.

I Am sure, I need no Arguments to convince you, that these Principles are
diametrically contrary (...) the Sentiments set before you, in some of my
former Letters. -- All that is therefore needful to give you a Surfeit of these
Antinomian and Moravian Tenets, is only to give you a very brief View of the
Scripture-Doctrine with Respect to our Justification before God; and then, set
before you some of the dreadful Consequences, that must necessarily follow from
the wild and extravagant Scheme I am opposing.

The Scriptures every where show us, that we are justified through Faith; that
Christ's Righteousness is received by Faith; and that Righteousness shall be
imputed to us, if we believe. But no where do they make mention of our
Justification as prior to our believing in Christ. Thus we are taught, that the
Righteousness of God is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them
that believe; that God has set forth Christ to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins. Romans iii.
22, 25. Now then can it possibly be true, that we are justified in the Sight of
God before we believe in Christ; and yet interested in the Righteousness of God
by the Faith of Jesus Christ? Can it be true, that Christ is our Propitiation,
and declares his Righteousness for the Remission of our Sins, through Faith in
his Blood; and yet that his Propitiation and his Righteousness for the
Remission of our Sins, are applied to us before and without and Faith in his
Blood? -- The Scriptures teach us, that the Righteousness of God is revealed
from Faith to Faith, Romans i. 17. and that there is one God who shall justify
the Circumcision by Faith, and Uncircumcision 'thro' Faith. Romans iii. 30. Can
there be a greater Inconsistency and Contradiction imagined, than is between
the following Propositions, viz. That the Beginning, the Continuance, and the
Accomplishment of our actual Interest in the Righteousness of Christ for our
Justification is by Faith, or that both the Circumcision and the Uncircumcision
(that is, all Men without Difference) are justified by and through Faith; And
yet, that the Righteousness of Christ was actually imputed to us, and we
accepted as righteous in the Sight of God, not only before we did believe, but
before it was possible for us to believe, in the Lord Jesus Christ? -- The
Scriptures teach us, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the
Law, Romans iii. 28. that God imputes Righteousness without Works, Romans iv. 6.
that we are justified by the Faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. ii. 16. that we are
justified by his Grace, Titus iii. 7. that we are saved by Grace, through
Faith, Ephesians. ii. 8. that Righteousness is imputed to all that believe, Romans iv.
II. and that we must be found in Christ, not having our own Righteousness which
is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith, Phil. iii. 9. -- But I should weary your Patience,
should I go on to enumerate Quotations of this Kind. This is the constant
Language of the Word of God. -- These wild Notions of the Antinomians are
therefore as repugnant to the whole Tenor of the Scriptures, as they are to
Reason and common Sense.

I am aware, that they have an Evasion at Hand, by which they pretend to solve
this Difficulty: and that is, That our Justification by Faith means no more
than the Manifestation of our Justification to our own Consciences; or an
inward Persuasion and Satisfaction of our justified State. -- But this is too
trifling, to deserve any serious Consideration. -- Is not Faith, according to
them, a Persuasion of our justified State? And are Faith and Justification the
same Thing? Are we justified by Faith; and yet are we to consider Faith as our
Justification itself? If Faith be a Persuasion of our Interest in Christ and
our actual Salvation by him, and if Justification likewise be a Persuasion of
our Interest in Christ and our actual Salvation by him, then Faith is
Justification, and Justification is Faith; the Terms are convertible, and
mutually imply each other: and consequently we can, with no Propriety of
Expression, be said to be justified by Faith. -- This Gloss of theirs is not
therefore to explain Scripture; but to render it obscure, inconsistent, and
unintelligible. There is nothing more plainly, expressly, and repeatedly
affirmed in Scripture, than that we are justified by Faith, and through Faith;
and that the Righteousness of Christ becomes ours by or through Faith: and if
this means no more, than that we have the Knowledge, the Manifestation or
Persuasion of our Justification, by Faith, then Language can be no longer
useful to convey Ideas: for the Words may be interpreted in any other Sense,
with as much Propriety as in this, forced upon 'em by our Antinomian
Interpreters. -- If it be but the Knowledge or Persuasion of our Justification,
that is ascribed to Faith, then we may as properly be said to be elected by
Faith, to be created by Faith, or to be redeemed by Faith, as to be justified
by Faith. For we have the Knowledge or Persuasion of those Things by Faith; as
well as of this: And the Expression (so understood) is just as absurd and
ridiculous in this Case, as in the other.

Besides, Declarative or manifestative Justification is not by Faith alone, but
by Works also; as the Apostle James largely shows us, throughout the second
Chapter of his Epistle. It is therefore evident and certain, that where the
Scripture speaks of our Justification by Faith alone, without the Deeds of the
Law, it cannot intend a mere declarative or manifestative, but an actual
sentential Justification: unless we would put the Scripture into highest
Opposition and Contrariety to it self.

But it is high Time I should proceed to the second Thing proposed; which is, to
consider some of the horrible Consequences, that must necessarily flow from
this Antinomian Scheme.

It must follow from this Doctrine of theirs, that there are many Unbelievers,
who are not in a State of Condemnation, and are not the Objects of GOD's Wrath
and Displeasure; though our Lord himself assures us, that he who believes not,
is condemned already; and has the Wrath of God abiding on him. John iii. 18,
36. For there can be no greater Repugnancy, than to be justified and condemned
at the same Time. And this may probably be Count Zinzendorf's Meaning, in that
odd Saying of his: "He that will condemn natural Men, who neither have nor can
have the Lord Jesus in their Hearts, -- meddles with an Affair, that does not
at all belong to him. Discourses on the Redemption of Man. p. 70.


It will also follow from hence, that there is no Need of any Care or Pains, to
get into a State of Peace or Favor with God. For why should I take Pains to
obtain, what I have already; or else what it is impossible that I ever should
have? -- It is enough upon this Supposal, to attend the Count's Advice. "Here
one should do Nothing, but quietly attend the Voice of the Lord. Page 29.
-- There can be no Need to excite any to the Use of Means; but according to
another Direction of his, "As long as People pursue their sinful Course with
Pleasure, and do not see their Danger, one must have Patience with them. Page
90.


It will likewise follow, that the more Confidence the greatest Sinner in the
World entertains, of the Safety of his State by the Merits of Christ, the more
acceptable will he be to God; and the more will he promote his own Happiness.
Thus Presumption is so far from being sinful or dangerous, that it is our
greatest Duty and Safety. -- This Consequence the Count seems to allow. There
is (says he) no Sinner to whom Satan has not lost all his Claim. ^e
Whoremongers and Thieves, ye revengeful and Murderers, yet Liars and whoever ye
are, ye Fearful and Unbelieving, that hear and read this, will ye be saved?
Believe then, that Jesus has atoned and paid a Ransom for you all; and that you
may experience it this very Moment; and know that ye have been healed by his
Wounds, and by his Stripes. -- Take the Absolution, look upon him, believe and
rejoice; arise, gird your selves, and run. Page 120.
-- How pleasing must such Doctrine as this be to bold careless impenitent
Sinners!

It will moreover follow, that no Man need to have any Apprehensions of Danger,
from any Course of Sinning, be he as bold in Impiety, as daring and impenitent
in his Sins, as he please. For if he be justified already, and all he has to do
is to be persuaded of it, and to take Comfort in the Reflection, his Conscience
may be easy and pleasant. Or if he be not justified already, he never will; and
it is in vain to fright himself about it. He may therefore safely agree with the
Count, that "Sin is the most miserable and mean Thing under the Sun, not worth
our Thoughts. Sin has no Right nor Power; nor is worthy of our least Regards.
He need not so much as look upon Sin; nor think it worthy of one Cast of his
Eyes. Page 137.
-- For it is also true, that Sinning is not the Cause of Rejection, according
to the New Testament. Page 16.
-- What is the natural Language of this Doctrine, but an Exhortation to
Sinners to go on courageously in their Sins, without Care or Fear?

It will in like Manner follow from this Doctrine, that as there is no Duty
necessary for our Safety, being justified before we were born, so that there
can be no Duty but a Persuasion of our good State, necessary for our Comfort.
-- This the Count fully acknowledges. There is (says he) but one Duty, which is
that of believing. Page 193.
Holiness is a Nature; but not a Duty, as Morality dreams. Page 165.
-- What Sort of a World would there quickly be, if Mankind could generally
suppose themselves released from all Duty, either to God, to our Neighbor, or
to ourselves!

You may perhaps imagine, that we are not to take an Estimate of the
Antinomians Principles, from the Count's Concessions. But as their Doctrines in
the Point under Consideration, are the same, so the Consequences from them all
are the same; whether they do so readily see, or so ingenuously own these
Consequences, or not. -- I hope, by this Time you are convinced of the horrible
Inconsistency of this Scheme; and even of its Repugnancy to the very first
Principles of Reason and common Sense.

How extravagant is the Pretense of the actual Justification of a Nonentity;
of Pardon to those who never offended; or of Reconciliation to God, before
there was any Distance or Alienation from him! -- But this was done in the
eternal Counsel of God. Very well! Let these Antinomians also publish for
historical Truth, that the Man Christ Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary, and
suffered under Pontius Pilate, even before Adam was created; that the Day of
Judgment is already come; that all the Children of God in the World are now
actually shining in their Robes of Glory, and triumphing at the right Hand of
Christ: -- Or, if you will, that I wrote this Letter to you before the World
began; or at least above seventeen Hundred Years ago. There is just the same
Foundation of Truth in the one, as in the other. For all these Things were as
truly the Objects of the divine Counsel, as our Justification; and in that
Respect as actually true from Eternity, or from the Time of Christ's Death, as
that would be.

How inconsistent and absurd is the strange Apprehension, that Sinners are
actually justified, reconciled to God, and instated in his Favor, while yet
habitually indulging their Lusts, and going on boldly and impenitently in Sin
and Enmity to God; as is the Case of all Men before Conversion and Faith in
Christ! -- Are Men's Hearts and Lives contrary to God; and yet God pleased with
them at the same Time? -- Are they condemned already, the Children of Wrath;
and yet reconciled to God, and at Peace with him? -- Are they of their Father
the Devil, whose Works they do; and yet the Children of God, and Heirs of
eternal Glory? -- Can Heaven and Hell be blended together? -- Is the Service of
Christ and of Belial equally agreeable to a pure and holy God? and the greatest
practical, as well as speculative Contradictions, reconcilable to Truth? What a
strange Medley is here! What a Door to all Licentiousness is here set open!

In short, How wild and chimerical are their Notions on the article of our
Justification by Faith! -- If we are indeed in the Favor of God, our Souls are
in the same Degree of Safety, whether we are persuaded of this, or not. -- If
we are not in the Favor of God, our Persuasion of a State of Safety will not
influence Him to treat us as his Favorites; nor to consider that as true,
which in its own Nature is false. -- All therefore that is left for Faith to
do, according to them, is to give us Ease and Comfort in our own Minds. -- And
is this all we are to understand by our being justified by Faith? Is this all
we are to understand by the repeated Declarations in holy Scripture, that the
Believer shall be saved; while the Unbeliever shall be damned? If so, the
Gospel-Salvation is no more than merely the Comfort flowing from a Persuasion
of the Safety of our present State. -- But I need not enlarge in Opposition to
a Doctrine so apparently repugnant to the whole Design of the Gospel, so
manifestly unreasonable, and so directly subversive of all practical Godliness.
-- Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid! yea, we establish
the Law. Romans iii. 31.

It is infinitely your Concern (Sir) to experience in your own Heart something
more than a mere Antinomian or Moravian Faith. -- It is of infinite Importance,
that you receive the Lord Jesus Christ, and that you walk in him; that you
experience the sanctifying Efficacy of Faith, and exemplify the Obedience of
Faith, in the Exercise of all the Graces and Fruits of the Holy Spirit; and
thereby evidence to your self, at once, the Sincerity of your Faith, and the
Reality of your Justification before God.

Now, that the Lord may direct you safe in the Way of Truth and Righteousness,
to the Kingdom of his Glory, is the Prayer of

SIR, Your and c.

LETTER XII. Wherein the Doctrine of a Sinner's Justification, by the imputed
Righteousness of CHRIST, is explained and vindicated.
SIR,
IT is indeed as you represent it, A Matter of greatest Consequence, to have a
right View of the Way and Means by which God will be reconciled to you, and by
which you may have a Title to Life eternal. I am glad, that you so kindly
accept the Pains I Have taken, to set the Antinomian Doctrine of Justification in
its proper Colors. For though You did not give me that Trouble (as you are
pleased to express it) because you had any favorable Opinion of their Schemes,
but to know whether I was (as is pretended) of their Opinion; and to know how I
could, consistent with my declared Sentiments, steer clear of their wild
Notions: Yet I rejoice, that your Desires are gratified, and that you are set
right in that Matter.

But you yet are, as you have all along been, in great Difficulties on the
other Side of the Question: And cannot see into the Doctrine of a Sinner's
Justification by the imputed Righteousness of CHRIST. You have been lately
reading upon that Subject; and find many Arguments against it, that you cannot
get over. Your Author represents it as unscriptural, and unreasonable: You
therefore desire me to give you a right View of that Doctrine, and to answer
your Objections against it.

There is indeed, Sir, no Cause for you to suspect, that you shall wear out my
Patience. I gladly embrace the Opportunity, to do any Thing in my Power to give
you Satisfaction; and to assist you in your greatest Concern, which you have
Reason to be most solicitous about. I shall therefore according to your Desire,
endeavor in the first Place to give you a brief View of the Doctrine of our
Justification by the imputed Righteousness of CHRIST; before I proceed to
consider your Objections against it.

I shall first consider what we are to understand by Justification; and in what
Sense that Expression is used in Scripture. -- Should I herein follow some of
our wrangling Disputants, I know not how many distinct Meanings of the Word
Justification I might set before you. But this would be to darken Counsel, by
Words without Knowledge; the Term having one invariable Meaning, throughout the
whole Bible. -- It always (as far as I have been able to observe) constantly
signifies being esteemed, declared, manifested, or pronounced righteous. This
is what the original Word, both in the old and new Testament, naturally
signifies: And in this Sense only, it is always used. I need not therefore
undertake, to give Instances of the Use of the Word in this Sense, since in all
Instances it is used in this Sense only. This, I believe, must be acknowledged
by every one, that will thoroughly and impartially examine the Case. I think,
there can no Text be found, where Justification is used for making us
in^crently righteous.

But though this Word has one invariable Signification, it is used in Scripture
in a threefold Respect: either for our present Justification in the Sight of
God, for our Justification before Men and our own Consciences, or for our
Justification at the Tribunal of our Judge at the last Day. -- It is the first
of these, that falls under our present Consideration: which is to be considered
as our Acquittance from Guilt, and our Acceptance with God as righteous in his
Sight. It is to be considered as a Sentence of Absolution and Acceptance, by
the great Judge of the World. -- As Justification therefore is always
considered in Scripture as a forensick or juridical Sentence, it should be
carefully distinguished from the Infusion of a Principle of Grace, or inherent
Righteousness. -- Justification is usually in Scripture opposed to
Condemnation. As this latter therefore does not imply the rendering Men wicked
and guilty, but pronouncing them so: Even so the former likewise cannot mean
rendering Men righteous, but sententially declaring and pronouncing them so.
Were this duly attended to, many of the Objections made against our Doctrine of
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, would vanish of Course. You Will be
pleased therefore all along to carry this in your Mind, that I am not
considering how we should become inherently righteous, by a Renovation of our
Nature: but how we may be acquitted from Guilt, and accepted as righteous, by
the Sentence of our glorious Judge.

I proceed to consider what we are to understand by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness.

To impute, is to judge or esteem any Matter, Character or Quality, whether
good or evil, to belong to a Person as his. And (...) either refer to what was
originally his, antecedently to such Imputation; or to what was not
antecedently his, but becomes so by Virtue of such Imputation only. The
Scriptures abound with Instances of both these Sorts of Imputation.

We have many Instances in Scripture of imputing that to a Person, which was
originally his own, and performed by him antecedently to such Imputation. Thus,
Sin is said to be imputed to the Sinner, when he is judged or treated as an
Offender. Let not my Lord (says Shimei) impute Iniquity into me. 2 Samuel xix.
19. And thus Righteousness is imputed to the Saint, when he is judged or
acknowledged Righteous (in a qualified Sense) with Relation to a particular
Fact, done in Conformity to the preceptive Part of the Divine Law. Then stood
up Phinehas, and executed Judgment, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness. Psalm. cvi. 31. But this is not the Imputation now to be
considered, which respects a Justification, that is proposed as the Relief as a
sinful perishing World, against the Penalty of the condemning Law, and implies
a Change of the Sinner's State, from Guilt to Grace, from Death to Life, in a
relative Sense.

I proceed then to observe, that also may be said to be imputed to a Person,
which was not his own originally or antecedently; but is judged and esteemed to
belong to him, and is his on Account of such Imputation only. Thus, a Debt is
imputed to a Surety; and the Surety's Payment of a Debt is imputed to the
principal Debtor, and is pleadable by him in Discharge from his Creditor's
Demands. -- If he have wronged thee, or owes thee ought, (says Paul of
Onesimus) put that on my Account (To^ TO EMOIEAAOTI) impute it unto me. Thus
our Sins are imputed unto Christ; inasmuch as he in the Character of our
Surety, has undertaken to discharge those Debts to the Justice of God. And thus
his Righteousness is imputed unto us; it having been wrought out in our Place
and Stead, and given to God in Payment on our Behalf.

These Things being premised, we are to understand the Imputation in Question,
to be God's gracious Donation of the perfect Righteousness of Christ to
Believers, and his Acceptance of their Persons as righteous, on the Account
thereof. -- Their Sins being imputed to him, and his Obedience being imputed to
them, they are in Virtue hereof both acquitted from Guilt and accepted as
righteous before God.

We are not therefore to understand our Justification by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ as implying and supposing, that God does esteem
Believers to be what indeed they are not. He esteems them to be poor sinful
imperfect Men, who have no otherwise satisfied the Claims of his Justice, and
the Demands of the Law, than by the Obedience of their Surety: Which is really
by a gracious Imputation become theirs, and they are on the Account thereof
become indeed righteous in God's Sight; although antecedent to that Imputation,
they were legally condemned Criminals, and though they yet remain inherently
imperfect and sinful Creatures.

We are further to consider, that this Righteousness of Christ is imputed to
none but Believers; but is (as the Apostle expresses it) revealed from Faith to
Faith. It is not imputed before we have Faith, as the Antinomians dream; nor is
the Imputation delayed, till the Fruits and Effects of Faith in an obedient
Life appear, as some others seem to suppose: but it is imputed at and upon our
believing. It shall be imputed, if we believe, Romans iv. 24. Faith is the
Receiving an offered Savior (Job. i. 12.) in his Person, his Offices, and all
his Benefits; and therefore it is a Receiving his Righteousness, which is one
of his Benefits, freely offered in the Gospel, to all that will accept it.

So I Am prepared to observe to you, that we are to understand our Justification
by the imputed Righteousness of Christ, to signify and imply, A gracious
Sentence of God, whereby a Sinner antecedently guilty in his Sight, is upon his
believing in Christ, acquitted from Guilt, accepted as righteous, and entitled
to all the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, on Account of what Christ has
done and suffered for him.

Thus, Sir, I have endeavored in as few Words as possible, to give you a just
and clear View of the Doctrine before us; and am now ready to consider your
Objections.

You first object, that the Imputation of our Sins to Christ, or the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness to us, are no where mentioned in the Word of God;
that the Terms and Expressions used in this Case, are certainly of human
Invention; and the Doctrine therefore to be suspected, as having its Original
rather from our scholastic Divines, than from the Oracles of God.

Your first Supposal is, that the Imputation of our Sins to CHRIST, is no where
mentioned in the Word of God. -- If you mean by this, that we no where in
Scripture find that Proposition, in so many express Words, that our Sins are
imputed to Christ, this is true: but I hope to show you it is altogether
impertinent. -- But if you mean by this, that we can no where find full, clear
and undeniable Evidence from Scripture, of the Imputation of the Sins of
Believers to Christ, I will endeavor immediately to convince you of your
Mistake.

The whole Levitical Dispensation was purposely designed to represent this
comfortable Truth to us. This was the End of all their Sacrifices, and bloody
Oblations for the Remissions of their Sins. -- They did not imagine, or at
least God did not design they should imagine, that their Sin and Guilt was
actually, to all Intents and Purposes, transferred from the Offender to the
Victim: but they were hereby led to look to Christ, the Antitype of all their
Sin Offerings, in Faith and Hope, that their Sins should all be imputed to him;
and themselves through the Merit of his Sacrifice, be acquitted from Guilt. --
This Design of all their expiatory Sacrifices was more clearly exhibited to
them, in the Institution of the Scapegoat; where the Imputation of our Sins to
Christ was in the most lively Manner represented. And Aaron shall lay both his
Hands upon the Head of the live Goat; and confess over him all the Iniquities
of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions in all their Sins,
putting them upon the Head of the Goat; and shall send him away, by the Hand of
a fit Man, into the Wilderness; and the Goat shall bear upon him all their
Iniquities, unto the Land not inhabited. Lev. xvi. 21, 22. -- Here was a plain
and express Commutation, or transferring of Guilt from God's People to the
Scapegoat. All the Iniquities of God's People, all their Transgressions in all
their Sins, were laid upon his Head. -- He bore upon him all their Iniquities:
Or in other Words, their Sins were imputed to him. Now you cannot suppose, that
all the Hopes of the Children of Israel terminated upon this Goat. You must
suppose, that they looked to the great Antitype, to whom their Guilt was indeed
to be transferred, and their Sins imputed; and from whom they expected their
Discharge and Justification. -- Hence it plainly appears, that all the Hopes,
which the Church of God in all the Ages and Dispensations thereof have
entertained, of the Forgiveness of Sin and Reconciliation to God, was through
the Imputation of their Sins to Christ, the Substance of all the Levitical
Shadows, and the only true SinOffering.

The same Doctrine, which was so plainly pointed out by these typical Rites, is
fully and abundantly confirmed, by very many plain and clear Passages of
Scripture, which cannot, with any Appearance of Propriety, be construed in any
other Sense, than that I am pleading for. -- Thus, Isai. liii. 6, 11. The Lord
has laid upon him the Iniquity of us all. -- For he shall bear their
Iniquities. -- 2. Cor. v. 21. For he has made him to be Sin for us, who knew
no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Gal. iii. 13,
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. 1
Pet. ii. 24. Who his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree. --
Many other Texts to the like Purpose might be quoted: but these are every Way
sufficient to decide this Point.

If the Iniquity of us all could be laid upon Christ, and he bear our
Iniquities, no other Way but by Imputation, it then appears from Isa. liii.
that our Iniquities were imputed to him. And I think, the Adversaries of this
Doctrine can make no rational Pretense to any other Way, in which our Sins can
be said to be laid upon Christ, and he be said to bear our Iniquities.

If Christ has been made Sin for us, according to 2. Cor. v. he must be made
Sin for us (and treated as a Sinner) either by his own personal Fault, or by
the Imputation of our Sin to him. I can think of no other possible Way, in
which this can be supposed, but one of these two. Now the Blasphemy of the
former Supposition obliges us to reject it with Abhorrence: and therefore the
latter must be allowed.

If Christ has been made a Curse for us, according to Gal. iii. he must then
have the Violation of the Law imputed to him; otherwise the Curse of it could
not in Justice have been inflicted upon him. To inflict the Curse, or Penalty
of a Law, upon one no Ways chargeable with the Violation of it, is contrary to
the Justice both of God and Man. And I can imag^^e no other Way, by which our
blessed Savior could be chargeable with the Violation of the Law of God, and
thereby be obnoxious to the Curse of it; but through the Imputation of our Sin
and Guilt to him.

If our blessed Savior bare our Sins in his own Body, and was punished for our
Sins, upon the Cross, according to I Pet. ii. Our Sins then must be laid to his
Charge, and punished upon him, either by Imputation, or some other Way. -- Here
then let our Adversaries speak Sense, and tell us, if they can, what other Way
this could possibly be done.

Pardon me, Sir, if I am forced to tell you, that it is too trifling an Evasion
to be adopted by Men of Learning and Sense, to urge against us, that the Word
Imputation is not used in this Case in Scripture, when so many Expressions are
used in Scripture, which fully and necessarily imply it, and are of the same
Significancy. -- True, we do not read in express Words, that our Sins were
imputed to Christ: But we do read in express Words, that our Iniquities were
laid upon him; that he bare them; that he was made Sin, or legally reputed a
Sinner, on the Account of them: that he bare them in his own Body, or was
punished for them, upon the Cross; and bore the Curse of the Law, which we had
violated. -- And if all this don't amount to the same Thing, as the Imputation
of our Sins to Christ, I must forever despair of understanding the Meaning of
the most plain and familiar Expressions.

Dear Sir, allow me the Freedom to observe to you, that you have been guilty of
innumerable Sins: If these have not been imputed to Christ, if he has not born
your Sins, if he has not satisfied the divine Justice on Account of them, they
must yet be imputed to you, and you must bear your Iniquity yourself: You must
yet be under the Guilt of all your Sins, and under all the Curses of the broken
Law. -- A Thought, which will administer but little Comfort here; and less at
the Tribunal of Christ, if this should then be found to be your Case. A Thought
big with Horror!

I now proceed to consider, whether the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
us, is no where mentioned in the Word of God. I must here again acknowledge,
that this Proposition, Christ's Righteousness is imputed to Believers, is no
where to be found in the Scriptures, in express Terms. But then we have so many
full and clear Testimonies in Scripture, to the Doctrine contained in that
Proposition, that there can be no Reason to call the Truth of it into Question.
Thus, Jer. xxiii. 6. This is the Name whereby he shall be called. The Lord our
Righteousness. -- Romans iii. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sins, -- to declare at this Time his Righteousness; that be might
be just, and the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus. -- Romans v. 18, 19.
Therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation:
even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men unto
Justification of Life. For as by one Man's Disobedience, many were made
Sinners: So by the Obedience of One, shall many be made righteous. -- Romans
viii. 3, 4. God sending his own Son, in the Likeness of sinful Flesh and for
Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us. -- Romans x. 4. For Christ is the End of the Law for
Righteousness, to every one that Believes. -- I Cor. i. 30. But of him are ye
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption. -- 2. Cor. v. 21. That we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him.

I might have added very many more Texts of Scripture to the same Purpose: but
how can more be needful, to satisfy any Man, in the Truth of our Justification
by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, who attentively reads, and
impartially weighs these cited Texts, without Prejudice against the Doctrine,
or a Biass to some favorite Scheme? -- Let it be considered, Here we are
expressly assured, that Christ is the Lord our Righteousness; that it is by his
Righteousness we obtain Remission of Sins; that by his Righteousness God is the
Justifier of him which believes in Jesus; that by his Righteousness we have
Justification of Life; and by his Obedience we are made righteous; that by his
being sent for Sin, and condemning Sin, the Righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in us; that he is the End of the Law for Righteousness to the
Believer; that he is of God made unto us Righteousness; and we are made the
Righteousness of God in him. -- Is it possible, that the Doctrine I am pleading
for, should be expressed in plainer and stronger Terms? -- The Word Impute, or
Imputation, is not indeed found in these Texts; but the Thing intended by it,
is plainly found there. Let that be allowed; and I shall maintain no
Controversy with you about the Meaning or Use of a Word. -- Let it be allowed,
That Christ has fulfilled the Righteousness of the Law for Believers, That his
Righteousness is become theirs, That they have thereby Remission of Sins, are
justified before God, and made righteous: let these Things be owned; and it
will not be of so great Importance, whether you consent to the Propriety of the
Word Imputation, in this Case, or not. Now these Things you must allow, or deny
the very Language of the quoted Texts: And by allowing these Things, you will
allow all that is intended by those who plead for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. -- But why must the Word Impute, or Imputation, be found Fault
with? Be pleased to read the fourth Chapter to the Romans, and observe how
often Righteousness is there said to be imputed to them that believe. Though
the Righteousness there said to be imputed, is not expressly called the
Righteousness of Christ; yet that is fully implied. For it was a Righteousness,
whereby Abraham was justified. ( v. 2.) A Righteousness without Works. ( v. 6.)
A Righteousness, by which our Sins are covered, that the Lord will not impute
them. ( v. 6, 7.) A Righteousness, by which God is the Father of all them that
believe. ( v. 11.) And a Righteousness, through which Abraham had the Promise,
that he should be the Heir of the World. ( v. 13.) -- Now can any Man pretend
to a personal Righteousness, which all these Characters are fairly applicable
to? Or can these Characters justly be applied to any other, save the
Righteousness of Christ only?

I hope, by this Time, you are convinced, that the Scripture is not a Stranger
to the Doctrine of Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ. I
would therefore (Sir) entreat you to consider, it is of infinite Consequence,
that you your self be not a Stranger to that Faith, by which you may receive
this Righteousness, may have this imputed to you, and may in Virtue of this be
accepted (your Person and your sincere Performances) as righteous before God.

But I have been too tedious in my Answer to your first Objection. I therefore
hasten to consider what you have further to object against this important Truth.

Your Author (you tell me) argues, that if Faith be imputed for Righteousness,
unto the Justification of a Sinner, then CHRIST'S Obedience cannot be imputed
to that End; unless our Faith and CHRIST'S Righteousness be supposed to be the
same Thing: That there is nothing more evident, than that Faith (which is so
often said to be imputed for Righteousness, Romans iv.) is properly our own
personal Righteousness: That the Word, Faith ((...)) signifies Faithfulness, as
well as believing; and includes evangelical Obedience in the Nature of it: That
God deals with us as moral Agents; and imputes to us the Righteousness which we
personally have, and not that which we personally have not.

I take this to be the most plausible, and the most weighty Objection against
the Doctrine under Consideration, that has ever been made: And it therefore
deserves to be distinctly taken Notice of. I shall accordingly endeavor to
show, that the Faith, which is imputed UNTO Righteousness (for so, I think,
should the Words be rendered) does not include Obedience in the Nature of it. I
shall proceed to prove, that the Faith which is imputed to Believers unto their
Justification, is not their own personal Righteousness. And then endeavor to
make it evident, that if your Construction of those Passages in Romans iv. were
granted, it would make Nothing against the Doctrine of our Justification by the
imputed Righteousness of Christ.

I am first to show, that the Faith, which is imputed unto Righteousness, does
not include Obedience in the Nature of it; considering Faith in its Reference
to Justification, or (as some express themselves) in its Office of justifying.
-- For, though a true and lively Faith has its Influence in purifying the
Hearts and Lives of Men, and producing Obedience; yet it is of the very Nature
of Faith, to exclude all Opinion of Merit in our selves, to respect the Promise
of God's Mercy, and directly send us to CHRIST for Justification and Acceptance
with God, through his Merits and Righteousness. So that justifying Faith, as
such, does not include in its Nature, Works of Obedience. -- I need not use
many Arguments to prove this; the Apostle having in the plainest and strongest
Terms declared it. It is the very Scope and Design of the Apostle's Argument in
this fourth Chapter to the Romans, to prove, that we are justified by Faith,
without Works. This was the Argument of the preceding Chapter; which is
confirmed and illustrated in this, by the Examples of Abraham and David. For if
Abraham were justified by Works, he has whereof to glory: but not before God.
For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God; and it was counted unto him
for Righteousness. Now to him that works, is the Reward reckoned, not of
Grace, but of Debt. But to him that works not, but believes o^ him that
justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. Even as David
also describes the Blessedness of the Man, unto whom God imputes
Righteousness, without Works. Romans v. 2, -- 6.

The Apostle is here using a Variety of unanswerable Arguments, against the
Doctrine I am now impleading. He argues, that if Abraham's Faith had included
Works or Obedience in it, he would have had whereof to glory. All Works, all
Acts of Obedience whatsoever, are formally our own, being done by our selves;
and therefore may be gloried of, as such: but Abraham had not whereof to glory
before God; and therefore Abraham's Faith did not include Works of Obedience in
the Nature of it, considering it as counted to him for Righteousness. -- He
next shows us, that if we had the Benefit of Justification, as a Reward, upon
the Account of any Works, of any Obedience whatsoever, the Reward would not be
of Grace, but of Debt. For by whatever Law, by whatever Covenant-Transaction, a
Reward becomes due to any Sort of Works, or Obedience, it is however become
due; and may be claimed as a Debt, upon the Performance of such Works, or
Obedience. Whence it follows, that no Sort of Obedience, either legal or
evangelical, can be included in the Nature of a justifying Faith, as such, if
we are justified of Grace and not of Debt. -- He shows us, that where Faith is
imputed, unto Righteousness, it is imputed to him that works not, that does
no Works of Righteousness at all, depends upon none at all of his own doing,
in Order to his Justification: And therefore it cannot possibly be, that such
Faith has any Sort of Works, any Sort of Obedience, included in the Nature of
it, as it is a justifying Faith. It justifies only as it receives a Divine
Gift, freely offered; or in the Apostle's Language, as it believes on him who
justifies the Ungodly. Here is no Room left for any Evasion. After never so
many critical Distinctions are made, Him that works not, is Him that works
not. -- He moreover shows us, that the Faith under Consideration is a Believing
on him that justifies the Ungodly: and therefore cannot include evangelical
Obedience in the Nature of it; unless evangelical Obedience, and Ungodliness,
be the same Thing. -- It is true, that a Person when justified, or when
exercising that Faith through which he is justified, ceases to be in his State
and habitual Course ungodly; for he has a Faith which not only sends him to
CHRIST for Justification, but for Sanctification too, and which not only
embraces the Promise, but the Precept too, and is a vital active. Principle of
all Obedience. But then there is no Moment of Time intervenes between his State
of Ungodliness and his Justification. -- He further shows, that God imputes
Righteousness, for our Justification, without Works: And therefore Obedience
cannot be included in the Nature of justifying Faith, as such; unless Obedience
be without Works also. -- Here likewise the Expressions are strong and plain.
There is no Room for Shift, or Cavil. When all the most plausible Pretenses in
the World are made to avoid the Force of these Expressions, without Works, is
without Works still.

How admirable does the Pretense, which I am opposing, appear, when the Apostle
does with his own Pen, in as strong and pointed Language as can be used,
obviate the Pretense, reject it, and confute it; and that too, in the very
Context, upon which it is founded. -- I need therefore offer no other Arguments
to clear this Point: it is effectually done to my Hand by the Apostle himself:
And his Reasoning ought to take Place, against all Objections. Could we be
justified by any Sort of Works or Obedience, personally performed by us, we
should have whereof to glory: And were our Justification a Reward given on
Account of any Works of Obedience of ours, it would be of Debt, and not of
Grace. But both these Things are inconsistent with God's gracious Dispensation
toward us. He imputes Righteousness to him that works not; He justifies
the Ungodly; He imputes Righteousness without Works: And therefore the Faith,
which is imputed unto Righteousness, does not, cannot, as such, include any
Sort of Obedience in the Nature of it.

I proceed now to prove to you, that the Faith, which is imputed to Believers
unto their Justification, is not their own personal Righteousness. This will
evidently appear, if you duly consider these following Arguments.

That Righteousness, by which a Sinner is justified, is the Righteousness of
God. -- The Righteousness of GOD is revealed from Faith to Faith. Romans i. 17.
-- We are made the Righteousness of GOD in him. 2. Cor. v. 21. -- The
Righteousness of GOD, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all
them that believe. Romans iii. 22. -- Now it cannot be true, that the
Righteousness of God, and our own inherent personal Righteousness, are the same
Thing. -- If it be pretended, that Faith is the Gift of GOD, and as such it is
the Righteousness of GOD, the Answer is easy. Faith, considered in itself, as a
Principle, is our's subjectively, and considered in its Exercise, it is ours
formally, or our own personal Act; and in that Respect, so far as it is any
Righteousness at all, it is our own personal Righteousness: And therefore as it
is our own personal Righteousness, it can no more properly be said to be the
Righteousness of God, than our Breath can be said to be the Breath of God, our
Words to be the Words of God, or our Loco-motion to be the Motion of God. For
our Power to breathe, to speak, or to move, is as truly the Gift of God, as our
Power to believe. -- Besides, all Pretenses of this Kind are utterly excluded
by the quoted Texts. For if Faith cannot with any Propriety be said to be
revealed from Faith to Faith; if we cannot with any Propriety say, that Faith
is a Righteousness by Faith of Jesus Christ; then Faith is not the
Righteousness of God, by which we are justified: And therefore we cannot be
justified by Faith, as it is our own inherent personal Righteousness, and yet
be justified by the Righteousness of God.

Moreover, we are said to be made righteous by the Obedience of Christ, Romans v.
19. and to be justified by the Blood of Christ, Romans v. 9. -- But Faith, as it
is our personal inherent Righteousness, is in no Respect the Obedience of
Christ, or the Blood of Christ: And therefore Faith, as it is our personal
inherent Righteousness, can in no Respect be that Righteousness, by which we
are justified, or made righteous before God.

Furthermore, Faith as it is our personal inherent Righteousness, is our own:
But the Righteousness by which we are justified, is not our own. Not having my
own Righteousness, Phil. iii. 9. And therefore, Faith, as our personal inherent
Righteousness, does not justify us before God.

I will only add, If Faith, as it is our inherent personal Righteousness,
cannot answer the Demands of the moral Law, it cannot justify us, consistently
with the Perfections of the Divine Nature: but the former is true, and
therefore the latter. If there had been a Law given, which could have given
Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. 3. 21. But this
was impossible in the Case of fallen Man, as being utterly inconsistent with
the Divine Perfections. -- I think, no Man will pretend, that our personal
inherent Righteousness can answer the Demands of the moral Law. I shall
therefore only endeavor to show you, how it is utterly inconsistent with the
Divine Perfections, that Sinners should be justified by any Righteousness,
which will not answer the Demands of the moral Law.

It cannot be agreeable to the Justice of God, that we should be justified by
any Righteousness, which will not answer the Demands of the moral Law. For
which Reason, God sending his own Son, in the Likeness of sinful Flesh and for
Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us. Romans viii. 3, 4. It is by declaring Christ's Righteousness (by
which the Demands of the moral Law are satisfied) that God can be just, and yet
the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Romans iii. 26. -- The glorious
God justly gave us the Law, as the Rule of our Obedience; justly required our
perfect Conformity to it; and justly annexed the Penalties to it in Case of
Disobedience. This Law was founded upon, and flowed from the Justice of the
divine Nature. Obedience to it was required, and the Penalties of it were
annexed, by the rectoral Justice of the great Governor of the World. And the
Justice of God is now the same that it was when this Law was first given; and
with the same inflexible Severity requires, that it be fulfilled, and not a
Tittle of it pass away, or be destroyed. The same Justice, which annexed the
Penalties, must be satisfied for the Violation of the Law, in such Manner as
that the Honor of a righteous Judge may be secured, and the Penalty of the Law
fulfilled. -- Whence it follows, that no personal inherent Righteousness of
ours whatsoever can justify us before God, consistent with his rectoral
Justice; because it cannot answer the Demands of the Moral Law.

It is altogether impertinent, to pretend, that CHRIST has procured easier
Terms, than Obedience to the Law of Nature. And that our sincere Obedience to
the Gospel is now the Condition of our Justification. For the Question still
recurs, Which Way is the moral Law fulfilled? Has Christ fulfilled that for us,
and in our Place and Stead; or has he not? If he has, we then have a better
Righteousness, to plead for our Justification, than any personal inherent
Righteousness of our own. But if he has not, the Law has still its full
Challenges upon us (Penal, as well as Preceptive) notwithstanding any
Righteousness of our own, and we cannot be justified upon this Bottom,
consistently with the governing Justice of God.

I must further observe, it cannot be agreeable to the Holiness of God, that
Sinners should be justified by any Righteousness whatsoever, which don't fully
answer the Demands of the moral Law. The moral Law is (as it were) a Copy or
Transcript of the Holiness of God; and must therefore be a perpetual and
unalterable Rule of Righteousness to Man. There can strictly be no
Righteousness, but by a complete Conformity to this Law: And hence none can,
consistent with God's Holiness, be accepted by him as righteous, who have not a
full Conformity to this original and only Rule of Righteousness, to plead in
their Favor. If therefore, we can have no such perfect Conformity to the moral
Law, to plead before God, on Account of our own personal inherent
Righteousness, or any other Way, but on the Account of the imputed
Righteousness of CHRIST only; then Faith, as it is our own personal inherent
Righteousness, cannot justify us, consistently with the rectoral Holiness of
God.

I may add, it cannot be agreeable to the Truth of God, that we should be
justified by any Righteousness, which will not fully answer the Demands of the
moral Law. God has pronounced every one cursed, who continues not in all
Things, written in the Book of the Law, to do them. If therefore we have not a
full Conformity to all Things written in the Book of the Law, if we have not a
perfect Obedience to its Precepts, nor a full Satisfaction for the Violation of
them, to plead in our Favor, then either we must lie under the Curse, or God
must break his Word. The latter you dare not suppose: and the former is, in its
Nature, absolutely inconsistent with our Justification.

I know of but one Answer, that can with any Color of Reason be made to these
Arguments: And that is, That CHRIST'S fulfilling the Law for us is our Legal
Righteousness; as freeing us from the rigorous Demands; and from the Curses of
the moral Law: But that our Faith including sincere Obedience in its Nature, is
our (...) Righteousness, whereby we ourselves personally fulfill the Gospel, and
are hereby justified before God. According to this Distinction, Christ's
Righteousness is the Matter or Ground of our Justification, taken Negatively,
as it lies in absolving us from the Curse of the Law, and declaring our Sins
forgiven: but our own Righteousness is the Matter or Ground of our
Justification, considered Positively, as it lies in pronouncing us Righteous,
and so entitled to the Blessing. -- Now the least that can be said against this
Notion, is, that it eclipses the Honor of Christ, as the Lord our
Righteousness, and leaves Man whereof to glory. -- But the Consideration of
this will of Course bring me to the last Thing I proposed in Answer to your
Objection,

If your own Construction of those Passages in the fourth Chapter to the Romans
were granted; and Faith, as including evangelical Obedience in it, is imputed
to us for Righteousness, yet this would make nothing against our Justification
by the imputed Righteousness of CHRIST. For allowing, that Faith be our
personal evangelical Righteousness, and that as such it will justify us, or
render us acceptable to God, as far as it goes, we must yet have CHRIST'S
Righteousness imputed to us, or else lie under the Curse of the moral Law, as I
have already proved.

If Faith, including sincere Obedience in it, be imputed to us for
Righteousness, this our personal Righteousness must be imputed to us, not for
what it is not, but for what in Truth it is, that is, an imperfect
Righteousness. God cannot judge that to be perfect, which is really imperfect.
For his judgment ever is according to Truth. And a weak, imperfect Faith (as
that of the best is) cannot constitute a perfect Righteousness. -- Whence it
follows, that we cannot on Account of this our personal Righteousness be
effectually and thoroughly justified; we cannot be perfectly acquitted from
Guilt and Condemnation, we cannot be entitled to complete Happiness and eternal
Life, by Virtue of our own Righteousness: And therefore it is of the last
Necessity, that we have some other and better Righteousness, even a perfect
one, to plead; or else we must perish eternally. -- At least, we cannot at
present be justified, on the Foot of our own Righteousness, so long as we are
in this imperfect State: but must wait for Justification of Life, as a distant
future Benefit, not to be received till we are made perfect in Holiness.
Whereas, by the whole Current of Scripture it appears, that Justification is a
present Benefit, taking Place in the Life which now is. Believers have not a
mere Promise, that they shall be justified: But such are in the most express
Terms represented in Scripture as already justified, as actually pardoned and
made accepted in the Beloved, as passed from Death to Life, and re-instated in
God's special Favor, so that there is now no Condemnation to them, but they
are now the Heirs of Salvation.

Thus, Sir, I have given you some of the Reasons I have against your Author's
Interpretation of those Passages in the fourth Chapter to the Romans. Many
other Arguments might be added, further to illustrate the Truth; and to refute
all Pretenses of this Kind. But I am afraid I have been already too tedious;
and I hope, what is already said may prove sufficient for your Satisfaction.

You desire me to give you a brief View of my Sentiments of those Passages; and
to show you, in what Sense I understand Faith to be imputed to us for
Righteousness. You tell me, that you cannot understand how Faith's being
imputed to us for Righteousness, can intend that Christ's Righteousness is
imputed to us.

The common Interpretation of these Passages by our Protestant Divines, from
the Beginning of the Reformation, is, that Faith is imputed for Righteousness,
not subjectively, or as it is an Act of our own, and our own personal
Righteousness: but objectively, or as it has Respect to its Object, and
apprehends the Righteousness of CHRIST. That is, as Faith is the Band of Union
between Christ and the Soul, and interests us in him and his justifying
Righteousness, it is imputed to us for Righteousness. Thus, it is the
Righteousness of Faith, as Faith is the Term or Mean of our Interest in
Christ's Righteousness: And yet it is the Righteousness of Christ, as He was
the immediate Subject and Author of it, or as it was wrought out by him. -- Our
Faith is in a like Manner said to be the Faith of Jesus Christ (Romans iii. 22.)
as Christ's Righteousness is here said to be the Righteousness of Faith. Our
Faith is not called the Faith of Christ, as it is his personal Act, (Christ
does not believe for us) but as it receives the Lord Jesus Christ, and gives us
an Interest in him. Nor is our Faith our Righteousness, as it is our personal
Act (our Faith has not fulfilled the Law, nor answered the Demands of
vindictive Justice) but it is our Righteousness, as it interests us in what
Christ has done and suffered for us, whereby the Law is fulfilled, and Justice
satisfied. -- In the former Case, the Object is put for the Act: The Faith of
Christ, for Believing in Christ. -- And there can no Reason be given, why with
the same Propriety, in the latter Case, the Act may not be put for the Object;
The Righteousness of Faith, for Righteousness by or through Faith: and why
Faith may not be counted for the Righteousness obtained by believing. -- It is
remarkable, that the Apostle expressly speaks of Faith in this View, every where
else besides this Context: And therefore he ought to be here also understood in
this Sense, to make his Doctrine consistent. -- In this Sense, Faith is our
justifying Righteousness, as a condemned Malefactor's accepting his Prince's
Pardon is his Deliverance from Execution: Or as a Beggar's accepting an Alms is
his Preservative from starving. As in these Cases it is not the Act of
receiving, but the Benefit received, that is the Preservation: So in that Case
it is not the Act of receiving Christ, but the Benefit received by Faith, that
is the Believer's Righteousness.

But you cannot understand how Faith's being imputed to us for Righteousness can
intend that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us. -- Well then, let it be
even supposed, that Faith is here taken subjectively; and that it was Abraham's
Faith itself, considered as an Act of his own, that was imputed to him. It may
notwithstanding be set in such a View, as will secure the Truth of the Doctrine
I am pleading for, if the Text be considered as it is in the Original. His
Faith was imputed UNTO Righteousness ('EIM AIKAIO M YNHN) That is, as he was
reckoned, judged or esteemed of God to be a sound Believer, so the Faith which
was imputed or reckoned to him, was unto Righteousness; was instrumental to his
attaining of Righteousness; was the Means that by the Righteousness of One the
free Gift came upon him, unto Justification of Life; or, in other Words, was
the Means of his Interest in that Righteousness of CHRIST, by which he was
justified. -- In this Sense, the Imputation respects his Faith; and intends an
Approbation and Acknowledgement of it as true and sincere, and effectual to its
proper Purposes. He was approved of God, as having a true and sound Faith, a
Faith effectual, as an applying Means, unto Righteousness, and thereby unto
Justification; a Faith, which interested him in Christ and his Righteousness,
and thereby entitled him unto Acceptance with God, and eternal Life. -- He was
judged to be such a Believer, as to have a Right according to the Terms of the
Covenant of Grace, to have Righteousness imputed to him, without Works, as it is
expressed in Ver. 6th. -- According to this View of the Case, Imputation is
considered in this Context in both the Senses, before explained. Abraham was
reckoned or esteemed a true Believer: in Consequence whereof, a justifying
Righteousness was imputed to him, even the Righteousness of God without the Law.

I think, I have before sufficiently proved to you, that we are justified by
the Righteousness of Christ received by Faith, and cannot be justified by any
personal inherent Righteousness of our own. This has been illustrated from the
Nature of Things, and confirmed by full and plain Scripture-Testimony: And this
upon an impartial Search and Inquiry, I think, would appear to you to be the
whole Scope and Design of the Gospel of Christ. -- I have now removed your
great Difficulty out of the Way, and shown you how this Doctrine, so plainly
taught every where else, may be true in a full Consistence with those Texts,
which in your Apprehension seemed to make against it. -- I would now propose
one Method more, to confirm you in the important Truth under Consideration: and
that, if duly attended to, cannot fail.

Allow me, Sir, the Freedom to advise you, that you place yourself in the
Presence of the infinitely great and glorious God, and give your self to
Meditation, on such Subjects particularly as may tend to enlighten and
establish you in the present Truth. With this View solemnly contemplate God's
infinite Justice, his infinite Purity and Holiness, his infinite Abhorrence of
Sin and Sinners, especially as to be seen in the Glass of Christ's Sufferings.
Also contemplate your own State and moral Character, both by Nature and
Practice. Contemplate the sinful Defects of the best Works of Righteousness
that ever you have done, the Pollutions mingled with the best Duties that ever
you performed. Contemplate the Unbelief, which accompanied the highest Actings
of Faith you were ever capable of; the Formality and Hypocrisy, which has mixed
with your devoutest Prayers; the desultory Thoughts and dead Frames, which have
accompanied you to the most sacred Ordinances of God's House; the frequent
Violations of the most solemn Resolutions and Covenant-Obligations by which you
have bound your Soul to the Lord. And in a Word, Contemplate the Greatness of
your Sins, their vast Number and dreadful Aggravations; with the Nothingness of
your best Performances and highest Seize in Religion; how much you have
done against God, and how little for him. -- And then consider, what Plea you
have to make before this infinitely great, this absolutely just, this perfectly
pure and holy God, for Justification in his Sight, and Acceptance with him. --
Will you plead your Acting of Faith in him and his Promises? Alas, how will
your prevailing Unbelief fly in your Face, and put you to Silence! -- Will you
plead your personal Obedience, and Works of Righteousness, that you have done?
Alas how will a vast Degree of Sin and Unrighteousness cover and confound you!
-- Will you plead your Sincerity before God? But what will you do with that
prevalent Formality and Hypocrisy, which your own Conscience will accuse and
convince you of! -- Will Not you be forced at last to cry out with David, -- If
thou, Lord, should mark Iniquity. O Lord, who shall stand! and with Job, --
Behold, I am vile! What shall I answer thee? I will lay ^ine Hand upon (...)
Mouth. Once have I spoken: but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed
no further. -- Will Not you then see your Necessity of a more perfect
Righteousness, to plead before God, than any personal inherent Righteousness of
your own, to cover your dreadful Sinfulness and infinite Defects; and to render
you acceptable to God, notwithstanding all the Challenges, which the Justice,
the Holiness, and the Law of God, together with your own Conscience^ have
against you? Surely, on due Reflection, you must see yourself in perishing
Necessity of Christ, and his Righteousness, to recommend you to the divine
Favor.

Dear Sir, I entreat you to consider in Season, what you must consider first or
last: And let you and I be now solemnly careful to lay our Foundation sure,
that we may meet with Comfort at the great Trial, and receive the Euge of our
Judge, in that awful and great Day: Which is the Prayer of,

SIR, Your and c.

LETTER XIII. Wherein it is considered, whether we are justified by Faith and
Obedience to the Gospel, as a new Law of Grace.
SIR,
I CAN with greater Encouragement use my Endeavors to remove your
Difficulties; and to satisfy your Desires, since you don't throw Difficulties,
either in your own Way or in mine, out of any conceived Prejudice, or from
Ostentation, or wrangling Disposition: But from a sincere Desire of building
your Hope upon the sure Foundation laid in Zion. Would all Men act from Views
so worthy of this great Concern, it would be a likely Means, not only to put an
End to the prevailing Confusions among us: But to give a triumphant Progress to
the Truth; and to establish Men in the Faith delivered to the Saints.

You have (you say) been so sensibly affected by my last; and are so fully
convinced of the Danger of mistaking your Way, that you are the more
sollicitous to be set right; and to have your remaining Difficulties removed:
and therefore you entreat me to bear with you, while you propose your strongest
Objection against the Doctrine, I suppose to be of so great Importance. -- Your
Author (you say) tells you, that our blessed Savior has purchased for us new
and easier Conditions of Life; and instead of the sinless Obedience required by
the moral La^, he has now given us a new Law of Grace, which only requires
Faith, with sincere Obedience to the Gospel, as the Condition of our
Justification and Acceptance with God. -- Whence it is a necessary Consequence,
that our Justification, or Title to eternal Life, depends not upon CHRIST'S
Righteousness imputed to us; but upon our Faith, including sincere Obedience to
the Gospel, as the Condition to which it is promised: and that as our Obedience
is imperfect, so our State of Justification is imperfect also; and we shall not
be perfectly justified, till our Obedience be perfected.

That I may distinctly consider this Case, I shall endeavor in the first
Place, to make some proper Inquiries and Reflections upon this Scheme; and
offer some Objections against it; and then take Notice of the Arguments which
you have brought to support it.

I would first inquire, where you find any Thing in Scripture of our Savior's
purchasing this new Law of Grace, whereby Faith and sincere Obedience are made
the Conditions of our Justification? -- Perhaps your Author is silent upon that
Head: and for my Part, I don't know that I have ever read any Thing at all
about it, in the Word of God. We read often, of our blessed Savior's giving
himself a Ransom for us; of his being a Propitiation for our Sins; of his being
the Lord our Righteousness; of his having brought in everlasting Righteousness;
of his being the End of the Law for Righteousness, unto every one that
believes; and of his being of God made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption; with many other like Representations of his
procuring a justifying Righteousness for us. But of his purchasing this new Law
of Grace, not one Word is to be found in the Scriptures. -- May we not justly
suppose, that if this Scheme were right, we should have it plainly represented
to us in the Oracles of God; and not be left to grope in the Dark, and to find
out by far-fetcht Consequences, what is the Foundation of our Practice and
Hope? -- How vast is the Difference, between the one and the other Side of this
Question! On the one Side, we have (or at least we think we have) very
numerous, plain, express Scripture-Authorities, for our Justification by the
Righteousness of Christ. -- On the other Side, there is a deep Silence
throughout the whole Word of God, about any Purchase of a new Law, such a Law
of favorable Terms; and about those new Conditions of our Justification, those
easier Terms, our Faith and sincere Obedience. -- This Scheme therefore may be
presumed to be at best but of human Invention.

I would further inquire, whether in the Nature of Things there can be any
Justification at all, upon such Conditions as you speak of? -- I have shown
you, that Justification is always to be understood of our being esteemed,
declared, manifested, or pronounced Righteous. Now then, if our evangelical
Obedience be imperfect, we are still unrighteous, by our remaining Sin and
Disobedience against this (imaginary) new Law of Grace; and consequently God
cannot judge and declare us righteous by Virtue of our Obedience. For his
Judgment is according to Truth, as I observed to you in my last Letter. --
Certain it is, that no Man upon Earth is or can be perfectly sincere, perfectly
believing, or perfectly obedient to the Gospel. His Defects will be greater
than his Seize, and his Disobedience will be greater than his Obedience,
under his highest Improvements, as long as he lives. He knows nothing of
himself, that don't know this to be Fact. He must therefore ever be more
unrighteous, than righteous, as long as he lives: And accordingly He that can
make no wrong Judgment of Things, will judge and esteem him to be as he is: so
that the Man must live and die unjustified, and appear at the Bar of Christ in
the same State.

To speak of an imperfect or defective State of Justification, seems to be a
most egregious Trifling in this awful Concern. We either are justified, or we
are not: either God does pronounce us righteous, or he does not. Now, if he
does, we are free from Guilt, and fully accepted of him; but if he does not, we
are under Guilt, and a Sentence of Condemnation. There can be no Medium, no
middle State between that of Justification and that of Condemnation. --
However, were it even granted, that we might be imperfectly justified, in
Proportion to our Conformity to this supposed new Law, we must at the best live
and die but imperfectly justified; and (as I before observed) must appear at
the Bar of Christ in the same State in which we die; and consequently be but
imperfectly justified for ever, without some further Remedy be provided beyond
the Grave. Thus, this Doctrine of Justification upon the Foot of personal
Obedience to a new Law, is better adapted to a Popish Purgatory, than to the
Protestant Profession and Hope.

I would again inquire, whether it be possible in the Nature of Things, that we
may have any sincere Obedience to this new Law of Grace, before we are
justified; and consequently whether it is possible that we may be justified by
sincere Obedience, before we have any Acting of gracious Sincerity, or any true
Obedience at all? -- Faith indeed does preceed our Justification, in Order of
Nature; but not in Time. There is no Moment of Time, wherein a Man is a true
Believer, and yet not justified before God: and therefore, there cannot be a
Moment of Time for Faith to be operative, and bring forth the Fruits of new
Obedience, prior to our Justification. -- The Righteousness of God is by Faith
of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe; for there is no
Difference. Romans iii. 22. This is the constant Language of the Scripture, We
are justified by Faith; and he that believes, is not condemned. Therefore, as
there can be no condemned, no unjustified Believer, at any Time whatsoever, nor
any Time at all for either legal or evangelical Obedience between the first Act
of Faith and our passing out of a State of Condemnation into a State of
Justification, hence our sincere Obedience must be the Consequence, and
therefore cannot be the Condition of our Justification.

Besides, as there can be no sincere Obedience antecedent to our Interest in
Christ and Union to him, it hence appears that our sincere Obedience must
necessarily be the Consequence of our Justification; and therefore cannot be
the Condition of it. -- I think, every Body will allow that Man to be in a
justified State, who is interested in Christ, and united to him. Now, our Lord
himself assures us, that we cannot bring forth the Fruits of new Obedience,
till we are united to him. Job. xv. 4, 5. Abide in me, and I in you. As the
Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine: So no more
can ye, except ye abide in me. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much Fruit: for without me, ye can do Nothing. Or, as it may be
rendered, Severed from me ye can bear none, can bring forth no Fruit at all.
Compare the Original with Joh. xx. 7. and Jam. iii. 12.
There cannot be a greater Solecism, than to speak of a sincerely obedient
christless Sinner: and therefore there cannot be a greater Inconsistency, than
for that to be the Condition of our Justification, which is the Fruit and
Effect of our Interest in Christ, and so the Consequence of our justified State.

These, Sir, are some of the many Inconveniences, that attend this your Scheme:
which one would think should awaken your Attention, and make you look well
about you, before you venture your eternal Interests upon such an unscriptural
and inconsistent Foundation.

I proceed now to offer some other Objections against the Doctrine you propose.
-- And here one obvious Exception against this Doctrine is, that it perverts
the Gospel of the Grace of God, and makes it properly and strictly a Covenant
of Works. -- The Condition of the Covenant of Works was this: The Man that does
these Things, shall live by them. Romans x. 5. And the Condition of our
Justification, according to this new Scheme is this: The Man that does these
Things (i. e. that performs sincere Obedience to this new Law of Grace) shall
live by them. Where then is the Difference, between the old Covenant of Works,
and this new imaginary Law of Grace? What gave Denomination to the Covenant of
Works, was, that it required Works or Obedience as the Condition of it. And
don't this pretended new Law of Grace require Works or Obedience as a
Covenant-Condition; and don't it therefore deserve the Denomination of a
Covenant of Works, as much as the other? -- If we run a Parallel between the
first Covenant and this imaginary new Law of Grace, they will be found in all
Things to agree, as a Covenant of Works. Thus, the old Covenant of Works was a
Law with Sanctions, requiring Obedience, as the Matter of that Righteousness,
by which Man was to be justified. And this imaginary new Covenant is likewise
styled a Law of Grace, which requires sincere Obedience, as the Condition of
our Justification. -- Justification, according to the Tenor of the old Covenant
of Works, was of Debt: And thus it is likewise according to the Tenor of this
pretended new Law of Grace. An Obligation to give a Reward for Service
performed, makes it a Debt, upon the Service being performed; and it can be
claimed as such, whatever Proportion there is between the Reward, and the
Service by which it becomes due. -- The old Covenant of Works, when it exacted
Obedience, yet gave no new Strength for the Performance of it: And thus it is
likewise in the present Case. For unless we are united to CHRIST, and
interested in his Righteousness, we can have no Security of new Supplies of
Grace and Strength as we need them. Whatever Pretenses to gracious Assistance,
the Patrons of this new Law of Grace may make; they don't pretend, that God has
by Covenant secured to us fresh Supplies of Grace, for persevering Obedience.
-- According to the Tenor of the old Covenant of Works, Justification was
suspended, forfeited and lost, upon the Nonperformance of the required
Obedience: And just thus it is likewise according to the Tenor of this
pretended new Law of Grace. -- I must therefore again demand, wherein this new
Law does any Way differ from a proper Covenant of Works?

If it be pretended, that the Conditions of this new Covenant are much easier
than the Conditions of the old Covenant of Works; which required perfect, and
this but imperfect Obedience, as the Term of our Acceptance with God: I answer,
This Supposal would Nothing alter the general Nature of the Covenant. Works are
Works, Obedience is Obedience, whether perfect or imperfect. The Condition of
each Covenant is Works; and Works come into the very formal Nature of each, as
they are Covenants. And therefore how the one can be either more or less a
Covenant of Works, than the other, I know not. Besides, it is a great Mistake,
to suppose, that the Conditions of this imaginary new Law or Covenant are
easier, than the Conditions of the old Covenant of Works. The Case is much
otherwise. He with whom the first Covenant was made, had sufficient Power and
Ability to fulfill all its Conditions, and fully to come up to all its Demands.
But fallen Creatures are utterly incapable to perform sincere, though
imperfect, Obedience: they have naturally no Sincerity, no Truth in the inward
Parts, no Principle of new Obedience; nor does this pretended Covenant supply
them with any, as before observed. And therefore whatever Pretenses are made,
that these Conditions are easier, they are indeed rather harder to be be
complied with, than the Conditions of the first Covenant. It is more difficult
for a Man without Legs to walk, than for a perfect vigorous lively Man to run.

If it be further pretended, that this Law of Grace differs from the Covenant
of Works, in that Faith is, according to this Scheme, made the principal
Condition of the new Covenant: This is but an empty Pretense. For Faith is here
considered but as an Act of Obedience, and as being seminally or virtually all
evangelical Obedience, including the same in the Nature of it; so that this
Faith is nothing else but a constitutive Part and active Principle of the Works
required, and not distinct from them in the Office of Justifying. And was not
Adam as much obliged by the Covenant of Works, to act Faith in the conditional
Promise of Life, and to subject himself to the Authority of the Legislator, as
we can be by this new Law of Grace? -- Let the case therefore be looked upon in
any View, in every View; and this pretended new Law, or Covenant, of mild and
favorable Terms, will be found to be as truly a Covenant of Works, as the
first Covenant, made with Adam. -- There will indeed appear some Circumstantial
Differences, between that Covenant and this. For Instance, That Covenant was
appointed and enjoined by God as a Sovereign: Whereas this (as is pretended)
was purchased by the Blood of Christ, and is the Law of a Mediator. -- That
Covenant admitted no Renovation, when violated; But this leaves Room for
Recovery, upon Condition of Repentance and future Obedience, to such
Transgressors, as don't happen to die in the sad Interval of Unbelief and
Insincerity. -- And that Covenant required perfect: This accepts of imperfect
Obedience. -- But these Things are only Circumstances; and enter not into the
Nature of a Covenant-Condition. From whatever Inducement God was pleased to
propose these Conditions; whatever be the Consequence of their Violation; and
whatever Degree of Obedience be required in Order to our Justification; yet
(according to this new Divinity) sincere persevering Obedience is the stated
Condition of each of these Covenants. This, and this only, was what rendered
the first Covenant a Covenant of Works: And therefore when all the Pretenses
are made, that can be made, the second Covenant, upon this Scheme, is as
strictly and properly a Covenant of Works, as the first was.

You seem to be aware of this Consequence; and therefore demand of me, Why it
may not be supposed agreeable to the divine Perfections, to require of Man a Life
of Obedience now, proportioned to his present Abilities, as the Condition of
his Justification, as well as to make with him a Covenant of Works at first,
proportioned to his primitive Powers and Capacities? To which I answer,

I have already shown you, that it is impossible that any Covenant requiring
sincere Obedience, as the Condition of our Justification, can be proportioned
to our present Abilities. For we have no natural Ability for any sincere
Obedience at all. We are dead in Trespasses and Sins. Ephesians. ii. 1. The carnal
Mind in us is Enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law of God; neither
indeed can be. Romans viii. 7. -- But this is what I may have further Occasion to
inculcate, before I have finished this Letter.

I would now only add, that the Scriptures represent to us an irreconcilable
Opposition, between our being saved by Works, and our being saved by the Grace
revealed in the Gospel. I have shown you in my last, how strongly Faith and
Works are opposed to each other, with Respect to our Justification. And I must
also observe, that Works and Grace are in like Manner opposed, as
irreconcilably inconsistent with each other, in this grand Concern. -- And if
by Grace, then it is no more of Works: otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if
it be of Works, then it is no more Grace: Otherwise Work is no more Work. Romans
xi. 6. -- By Grace are ye saved through Faith; and that not of your selves, is
is the Gift of God. Not of Works, lest any Man should boast. Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. --
Now to him that works, is the Reward reckoned, not of Grace, but of Debt.
Romans iv. 4. -- Here are the most plain, express and peremptory Declarations,
that can be made in human Language, of the utter Inconsistency of Works and
Grace, the Impossibility of their concurring in the Affair of our Justification
and Interest in God's saving Mercy. Whence it plainly appears, that we must be
saved by Grace alone; or by Works alone. And if the former, it must be by the
first Covenant of Works. But if the latter, then not by any Works, by no
Obedience at all, as the Condition of our Justification and Acceptance with God.

You have indeed undertaken to obviate all such Arguments against your Scheme,
by pretending that Where Works are rejected as having no Hand in our
Justification, and as being inconsistent with the Grace of the Gospel, it must
be legal Obedience which is there intended; whereas, the Obedience pleaded for,
is Evangelical. It is not supposed, that we are justified by Obedience to the
moral Law: but by sincere Obedience to the Gospel-Institution.

But I entreat you to consider, that if we are indeed justified by sincere
Obedience to the Gospel, we must be justified by the Works of the Law, by
Obedience to the moral Law; and therefore not by the Faith of Christ, as
revealed in the Gospel. This appears evident from such Considerations as these.
-- The moral Law is the very Rule and Standard of all our Obedience to God: if
therefore we obtain Justification by sincere Obedience, we must obtain it by a
Conformity to the moral Law, without which there can be no Obedience at all,
and therefore no sincere Obedience. All the Duty and Obedience which we can owe
to God as rational Creatures, is comprised in that comprehensive Summary of the
moral Law, to love the Lord our God, with all our Heart, Mind and Strength, and
to love our Neighbor as ourselves: and there neither is, nor can be any
Obedience sincere and acceptable to God, but what flows from this Principle of
Love, the Source of all practical Conformity to the moral Law. Besides, the
Gospel don't make void the Law, as a Rule of Obedience; but establishes it: And
therefore our Justification by sincere Obedience to the Gospel, is a
Justification by the Deeds of the Law, or by a Conformity to it as the Rule of
Life. It is no just Objection against this, that there are some positive
Precepts in the Gospel, which are not discoverable by the Light of Nature, nor
directly required by the moral Law; For though these positive Duties, such as
receiving Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and Faith in Jesus Christ, the
Mediator, considered as an Act of Obedience to a Gospel-Command, be not
directly required, yet they are by necessary Consequence enjoined in that
fundamental Statute of the moral Law, Thou shall worship the Lord they God, and
him only shall thou serve. -- Moreover, our Lord Jesus Christ wrought out the
Work of Redemption for us, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in us. Romans viii. 4. If therefore he wrought out our Redemption in order to
procure Justification for us on the Condition of sincere Obedience, then our
sincere Obedience is a fulfilling the Righteousness of the Law in us: For it
can no other Way be fulfilled in us, upon that Supposal. This then, I think is
a plain Case, that we must upon this Scheme be justified by the Works of the
Law, by a personal Conformity to it, and by our own fulfilling the
Righteousness of it. -- Here is no Place for your Distinction of legal and
evangelical Obedience. All Obedience is legal, when performed from legal
Motives and to a legal End, as it is if performed in Order to our obtaining
Justification and Acceptance with God, upon like Conditions with those proposed
in the moral Law; which I have already shown to be the Case before us,
according to this Scheme of a new Law of Grace.

Here it will therefore be proper to pause a little, and consider whether a
depending upon such legal Obedience for a Claim to God's Favor, can be
consistent with our Salvation by the Faith of Christ, as revealed in the
Gospel. -- The Apostle is full and plain upon this Head. Therefore by the Deeds
of the Law shall no Flesh living be justified in his Sight. But now the
Righteousness without the Law is manifest, being witnessed by the Law and the
Prophets. Romans iii. 20, 21. -- Knowing that a Man is not justified by the Works
of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works
of the Law: for by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified. Gal. ii.
16. -- But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not
attained to the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it, not by
Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. Romans ix. 31, 32. -- And be found
in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law: But that which
is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.
Phil. iii. 9.

But you have another Answer to make to such Texts as these, which are so
strongly pointed against any Dependence upon legal Obedience. There are some
(you tell me) who plead, that the legal Obedience, or the Works of the Law,
which the Apostle opposes to the Grace and Faith of the Gospel, intends no
more, than a Conformity to the ceremonial Law: and in that View of the Case,
those Texts of Scripture, wherein such Legality is condemned, are no Ways
inconsistent with, or opposite to, the Doctrine you are pleading for.

I thought, I had fully obviated this Objection, in one of my former Letters to
you, wherein I endeavored to set before you the Apostle's Scope and Design in
his Epistle to the Romans, especially in the seventh Chapter: And if you will
review that Letter with proper Attention, I think, you will find sufficient
Matter of Satisfaction. -- It is strange, that any Man who has ever read that
Epistle to the Romans, wherein the Case before us is so distinctly considered,
can espouse such a trifling Pretense, as this to me most evidently is. -- The
Apostle there speaks of a Law, by which the Doers (supposing there were any)
shall be justified before God (Chap. ii. 13.) of a Law, which the Gentiles may
(in Part, at least) discover by the Light of Nature; and thereby be in some
Measure a Law to themselves. ( v. 14.) But can any Man pretend, that we could
be justified before God by an Observance of the Ceremonial Law? or that the
Gentiles, without Revelation, could have understood the Ceremonial Law, so as
to have been a Law to themselves? -- The Apostle is there treating of a Law, by
which both Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin; and by which they had the
Knowledge of Sin. (Chap. iii. 9, 20. and vii. 7.) But could the Gentiles be
under Sin, or have the Knowledge of Sin, by the Ceremonial Law, which was no
Law to them? How then could they be capable of any Transgression of it? -- The
Apostle there treats of a Law, whereby every Mouth shall be stopped; and all
the World become guilty before God: and a Law, which is established by Faith.
(Chap. iii. 19, 31.) Neither of which, can in any Sense be true of the
ceremonial Law. -- The Apostle instances in moral Precepts, as belonging to the
Law, which he treats of. (Chap. ii. 21, 22. and vii. 7.) The Apostle
exemplifies the Works of the Law, of which he treats, in the Case of Abraham
(Chap. iv.) who lived Hundreds of Years before the Exhibition of the Ceremonial
Law: and therefore they could not be the Works of the Ceremonial Law, that are
there opposed to Faith. -- I may add, the Apostle treats of a Law, to which the
believing Romans had been married (Chap. vii. 4.) A Law, the Righteousness of
which must be fulfilled in us. (Chap. viii. 4.) A Law, according to which the
Man that does these Things, shall live by them. (Chap. x. 5. Gal. iii. 12.) A
Law, which if the Uncircumcision keep the Righteousness of, his Uncircumcision
shall be counted for Circumcision (Chap. ii. 26.) A Law which works Wrath
(Chap. iv. 15.) And a Law, by which we are under the Curse for Sin. (Gal. iii.
10.) None of which Characters are properly applicable to the Ceremonial Law. --
Upon the whole then it is evident, even to Demonstration, that it is the moral
Law, of which he concludes, that a Man is justified by Faith without the Works
of the Law; that a Man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the
Faith of Jesus Christ: And if Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is
dead in vain. In a Word, all Dependence for Justification upon any Works,
either of the ceremonial or moral Law, is directly opposite to the Grace of the
Gospel, and to the Way of Salvation by the Faith of Jesus Christ.

But you tell me, that if it be allowed to be the Works of the moral Law, to
which the Apostle refers, it must imply an Apprehension and vain Imagination of
a perfect Conformity to that Law. And that the Apostle only condemned the Hope
of those, who imagined that they had merited Salvation, by their perfect
Obedience to the moral Law.

This (if possible) is a more trifling Pretense than the former, for which
there is not the least Shadow of a Foundation. -- The Jews and Judaizing
Christians, knew themselves to be Sinners. They had the Bible, which every
where caught them their imperfect and sinful State. -- Their continual
expiatory Sacrifices, their laying their Sins upon the Head of the Scapegoat,
their annual confessing themselves Sinners on the Day of Atonement, with all
their legal Purifications, were continual Monitors to them of the Imperfection
of their Obedience. And as this was the Case of the Jews, we may more strongly
conclude, that the Gentiles newly converted from their Devil-Worship, could
make no such Pretense. -- So that had the Apostle only disputed against this
Pretense, he had only contended with his own Shadow. He condemns our Dependence
upon the Works of the Law; and is not our imperfect Obedience, as truly the
Works of the Law, as perfect Obedience could be? Can it be supposed, that
depending upon perfect Obedience, which fulfills the Law, will condemn us: but
that to depend upon imperfect Obedience, which does not fulfill the Law, will
not condemn us in the Sight of God!

Indeed, Sir, I cannot but compassionate the Case of those Men, who by so many
artful Shifts and Evasions are putting some Gloss or other upon such numerous
clear and plain Texts of Scripture, to make them consistent with their beloved
Schemes; and perhaps to keep their Consciences easy, in a Dependence upon their
own Obedience for their Justification. -- But I have been too long upon this
Head. I must therefore more briefly mention some other just Prejudices against
this Scheme.

Another Exception then to this Scheme is, that it is inconsistent with, and
repugnant to, the various Representations which the Scriptures give us of the
Redemption by CHRIST, and of the Method in which our Salvation is wrought out
by him. -- He was made to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. v. 21. He his own self bare our Sins,
in his own Body on the Tree. 1 Pet. ii. 24. Now how can it in any Sense
whatsoever be possibly true, that our Lord Jesus Christ was made Sin for us,
unless it be understood in the imputative Sense? Or, that he bare our Sins in
his own Body, if he only undertook to purchase for us a Grant of Pardon and
Reconciliation with God, upon the Condition of our sincere Obedience; and
unless our Sins were imputed to him? -- He is likewise said to give his Life a
Ransom for us. Mat. xx. 28. And can Prisoners be said to be ransomed out of
their Enemy's Hands, who are only put under Advantages to work out their own
Liberty and Deliverance? Upon the Payment of a Ransom, the consenting Captive
is immediately released; and as the Prophet expresses it with Respect to the
Case before us, Liberty is proclaimed to the Captives. -- He is moreover
represented as an Atonement for our Sins; and an Atonement which Believers have
actually received. By whom we have received the Atonement. Romans v. II. And can
Divine Justice be atoned for our Sins; and we not freely acquitted and
justified? Can we have received the Atonement by Faith, when it yet depends
upon our future Conduct, and upon our sincere Obedience, whether we shall ever
receive the Benefit of it? -- He is also represented, as having redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Gal. iii. 13. And how can
it with any Propriety be said, that Believers are actually redeemed from the
Curse, when they are still under the Curse, and must continue so until by a
Course of sincere persevering Obedience, they get themselves acquitted and
justified? Or how could our blessed Savior be made a Curse for us, when
neither our Guilt was imputed to him; nor his Sufferings were imputed to us? He
might indeed upon this Supposal be said to suffer for our Advantage and
Benefit: but he could not be made a Curse for us, in our stead, when no Curse
due to us was laid upon him: nor we freed from any Curse by his Sufferings,
without procuring our Deliverance by our own sincere persevering Obedience. --
He is likewise represented as our Surety, A Surety of a better Testament, Heb.
vii. 22. And has the Surety paid the Debt; but the Bond not cancelled, nor the
Debtor released from Payment? Does divine Justice demand the Payment of the
Debt in Order to Satisfaction, and the Performance of the Conditions in Order
to our Justification, of both the Surety and the principal Debtor? -- He is
moreover represented as the Lord our Righteousness. Jer. xxiii. 6. And is said
to be made of God unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption. I Cor. i. 31. He is our Peace. Ephesians. ii. 14. But I know not how
Christ can be ours for any of these Purposes, unless upon our receiving him by
Faith, these Benefits are with him freely given us, actually imputed or
imparted to us, and we considered as vested with them, and Partakers of them.
For Instance, can Christ be our Righteousness; and we, notwithstanding, have no
Righteousness that will justify us before God, till we have wrought out a
Righteousness of our own, by a persevering Course of sincere Obedience? Can he
be our Peace; and we not be at Peace with God upon our Faith in him, until by a
Course of sincere Obedience we are justified and interested in the divine
Favor? -- The Time would fail me, should I particularly insist upon all the
various Representations of CHRIST'S Redemption in Scripture; and show they are
all directly repugnant to this Scheme of yours. I shall therefore mention but
an Instance or two more; and then submit it to your own serious Reflection. We
are said to be justified by his Blood; and reconciled to God by his Death. Romans
v. 9, 10. But can we be justified by his Blood, and yet justified by our own
Obedience! Are we reconciled to God by the Death of Christ, and yet not
reconciled to God, but by a continued Progress of our own Obedience! Dare you,
Sir, adventure to attribute that to your own Obedience, which is attributed by
the Spirit of God to the Blood and Death of Christ?

But perhaps you will make the same Remarks upon what I have now offered, as
you did upon my last, and tell me, that Your Author does indeed suppose some
Conditions of our Interest in the Benefits procured by Christ for us; and do
not they who are of the other Side of the Question also suppose our Interest
therein to be conditional? Don't they suppose Faith to be the Condition of our
Interest in Christ, and all the Benefits he has purchased for us? Where then is
the Difference? Why is a conditional Interest in the Benefits purchased by
Christ, so very offensive in the one Scheme; and so innocent and inoffensive in
the other?

In Answer to this, you must allow me the Freedom to tell you, that this Plea
takes its Rise from a very great Inattention to the Subject before us. You
know, Sir, that I have in my former Letters, largely and particularly shown
you, that Faith is no otherwise a Condition of our Interest in Christ, and the
Benefits of his Redemption, than a Beggar's receiving an Alms is a Condition of
his having the Benefit of it; or than a condemned Malefactor's accepting a free
Pardon is the Condition of his Reprieve from Execution, and Restoration to his
Prince's Favor. And is there no Difference between partaking of a free Gift,
on no other Condition than a thankful Acceptance; and having the Offer of a
Favor on the Condition of long continued Services, of very difficult and
uncertain Performance? -- Is there no Difference between expecting
Justification from no Righteousness of our own, but only from the Righteousness
of Christ, received by Faith; and our supposing this alone an insufficient
Foundation of Confidence, and therefore looking to some Righteousness of our
own as the Condition of our Acceptance with God? -- The Difference is just as
great, as between any other contradictory Propositions. Upon the one Supposal,
Christ himself has performed all the proper Conditions of our Justification,
and freely bestows the Benefit, on our grateful Acceptance: Whereas upon the
other Supposal, Christ has not performed the Conditions of our Justification,
but only procured for us the Privilege to perform them ourselves. -- Upon the
one Supposal, we are justified on Account of Christ's Obedience: but on the
other Supposal, we are justified on the Account of our own Obedience. -- Upon
the one Supposal, Christ has merited Justification for us without Works: but
upon the other Supposal, he has merited Justification for us by our Works. --
And in fine, Upon the one Supposal, the first Act of saving Faith gives an
immediate and continuing Interest in the Favor of God: But upon the other
Supposal, Faith is but the Introduction of that Life of sincere Obedience,
which is properly the Condition of out obtaining and enjoying the divine Favor.

Sir, It belongs now to you, seriously and impartially to reflect and consider,
which Opinion is most likely to be true; Whether, That which renounces all
Confidence in the Flesh, and proposes no Condition of Justification, but our
hearty Approbation and Acceptance of, and Dependence upon the Lord Jesus Christ
alone, as the Way wherein the Glory of the Righteousness, Wisdom, Love and
Mercy of GOD is exalted, and sinful Man justly debased, and brought to the Foot
of an infinite Sovereign: Or, That Opinion, which denies this Honor to the
Redeemer's Merits and to sovereign Grace, and proposes our own Performances and
Seize, as Conditions of our Justification and Acceptance with God. -- I
have now been showing you, that the former is the Scripture-Representation of
the Case: And methinks, any one that has had a just and sensible Discovery of
his own Depravity and spiritual Impotence, must know by Experience that it is
the only Way, in which he can entertain comfortable Expectations of Safety and
Happiness.

Another Objection against this Opinion is, that it is destructive of practical
Religion, subversive to a Life of true Holiness. -- Whatever Sentiments we
entertain, and whatever Principles we espouse, we must yet remember, that
without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord; and he that has this Hope in him,
purifieth himself as He is pure. The Doctrine of Christ is, in all its Parts, a
Doctrine according to Godliness. If it therefore appears, upon an impartial
Examination of this Case, that these Principles of your Author are inconsistent
with, and repugnant to that Holiness, which is a necessary Qualification for
the Kingdom of Heaven, there can no other Argument be wanting against this
Scheme, to convince us, that it cannot be agreeable to him, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar People; zealous of good Works. -- But lest I be misunderstood, and
exposed to your Censure for Uncharitableness, I would premise, that I cannot
but hope, that there are some who adhere to these Principles, whose Hearts are
sounder than their Heads; and who are truly holy in Body and Spirit, by a
Dependence very different from their Profession. This is what may be reasonably
hoped, not only from the exemplary Lives of some who embrace these Tenets, but
from their Prayers, of a truly evangelical Strain, which we ought to suppose
the Language of their Hearts, and which we ought to hope, will find Audience
with God, notwithstanding the Error of their Judgments. I must nevertheless
insist upon it, that such cannot be truly holy, whose Hearts and Lives are
conformable to the Principles I am opposing. -- Not all their religious
Purposes, Promises, Resolutions, Reformations, not all their Fastings, external
Mortifications Macerations of their Bodies, Vows, Meditations, Prayers, or
other Endeavors they may use, can be productive of Holiness, upon these
Principles. Men may by such Means put some Restraint upon their Corruptions,
they may in a slavish Manner perform some hypocritical Duties, and thereby may
quiet their Consciences, obtain a Reputation amongst Men, and entertain Hopes
of Heaven: But they must yet remain Strangers to any true Love to God, Delight
in him, and Conformity of Heart and Affections to him; wherein the Essence of
Holiness consists. -- This will appear, from such Considerations as these. --
It is an incontestable Truth, that we cannot be holy, before we have a
Principle of Holiness: that we cannot perform vital Actions, without a Source
and Principle of Life. -- It is equally certain, that we naturally have not
this Principle of spiritual Life: But the Imagination of Man's Heart is evil
from his Youth, only evil continually. -- It is also certain, that Faith in
Christ is contemporary with (though in Order of Nature it flows from and is
successive to) the first Principle of spiritual Life; and it is from our Union
to Christ by Faith, that we derive from him Supplies of Grace and Strength, and
that the whole Progress of Holiness is carried on in the Soul. -- It is
therefore necessary, that we be first united to Christ the Head of Influences
and Fountain of all Holiness, and so be habitually alive to God, before we can
actually live to God, as I have observed before. All our Seize in
Religion without a vital Principle within, will be but as a Carcass without
Breath; or as Streams from a corrupt Fountain. -- Whence it follows, that they
who are looking to sincere Obedience for Justification, must be Strangers to
true Holiness; they not having first committed their Souls to Christ, depended
upon him alone for Righteousness and Strength, and thereby obtained Supplies of
Grace for a Life of Holiness, from that only Fountain of Life. -- To seek
Justification from our Sanctification, is to invert the Order and Method of our
Salvation: it is to produce the Cause from the Effect, to fetch the Fountain
from the Streams. We must first by a new living Principle be enabled to act
Faith in Christ, to receive him, and thereby be united to him, and be justified
in the Sight of God; otherwise all our religious and moral Duties will be vain^
a Sacrifice without a Heart, mere legal or slavish Performances, that have
nothing of true Holiness in them. We must be created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, if we would walk in them. Ephesians. ii. 10. We must be renewed in the Spirit
of our Mind, if we would put on the new Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. iv. 23, 24. We must be quickened together
with him. Col. ii. 13. We are sanctified through the offering of the Body of
Jesus Christ, once for all. Heb. x. 10. It is of Christ's Fullness, that we all
receive, even Grace for Grace. Joh. i. 16. And as the Branch cannot bear Fruit
of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can we, except we abide in
Christ. Joh. xv. 4.

Moreover, I think, it will be readily allowed, that we cannot live a Life of
Holiness, while we remain Children and Servants of Sin and Satan. It must also
be allowed, that the whole World of Mankind are either the Children of God, or
the Children of the Devil. This Distribution divides the whole human Race. I
Joh. iii. 10. -- Now then, if we are the Children of God, we are already in a
justified State; and therefore cannot depend upon our sincere Obedience for our
Justification: But if the Children of the Devil, we cannot be holy, whatever
Pretenses to sincere Obedience we may make. -- An unjustified Child of God, or
a holy Child of the Devil, are each of them the greatest Solecism, that can be
thought of. -- We become Children of God by the same Means, by which we are
justified. We are justified by Faith, Romans iii. 24. And we are Children of God
by Faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. iii. 26. But all they which have not this Faith,
and are not thereby become the Children of God, and justified in his Sight, are
so blinded by the God of this World, that they are utterly incapable, in their
present State, of a Life of true Holiness. The God of this World has 'blinded
the Minds of them which believe not; left the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them. 2 Cor. iv. 4.

I may add to this, that the natural Disposition of every one, while without an
Interest in Christ and in an unjustified State, is utterly repugnant to, and
inconsistent with a Life of Holiness. The Character and State of all such is,
that they are Servants of Sin, and free from Righteousness. Romans vi. 17, 20.
They are dead in Trespasses and Sins. Ephesians. ii. 1. They are after the Flesh, and
mind the Things of the Flesh. Romans viii. 5. Their carnal Mind is Enmity to God;
and is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans viii. 7. This
is the Case of every Man, while in a natural State; a Case, which can never be
remedied, 'till the Law of the Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, make us free
from the Law of Sin and Death. Romans viii. 2. -- And I even appeal to your self
to determine, whether Life and Death, Light and Darkness, God and Belial, cannot
as well be reconciled, as these Characters made consistent with a Life of
Holiness. -- It is therefore evident, that we can have no sincere Obedience
until we are justified; and that we cannot live a holy Life, while we depend
upon sincere Obedience for Justification.

I will only subjoin, that we may not expect the renewing and sanctifying
Influences of the Spirit of Christ, while we depend upon our own sincere
Obedience for Justification. He has indeed made us gracious Promises, that if
we receive him, we shall have the Privilege to become the Children of God, and
if we trust in him, we shall never be ashamed. -- But we must expect no better,
than to follow after the Law of Righteousness, and not attain to it, if we seek
it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. Romans ix. 31, 32. -- I
have already shown you, Christ did not undertake our Redemption to the End that
he might assist us in working out a Righteousness of our own, for our
Justification; nor may we expect any saving Grace from him, 'till we depend
upon him alone to do all in us and for us. When he is of God made unto us
Righteousness, through Faith, we may then, but not till then, expect from him
the Supply of the Spirit, for progressive Sanctification, and Redemption. --
They may rejoice in Christ Jesus (and none but they) who have no Confidence in
the Flesh. -- Look (Sir) through the whole Bible, and see if you can any where
find Encouragement to expect a Progress of quickening and Sanctifying Influences
from Christ, without an Interest in him, or Dependence upon him; and while
repairing to your own personal Obedience as your Refuge and Hope. -- In Fine,
as you can have no Principle of Holiness in your self, but are under the
Influence of Sin and Satan, and under the Power of Affections and Dispositions
utterly inconsistent with true Holiness, so are you without any grounded
Expectations of the divine Influences to renew and sanctify you, while you are
building upon this false Foundation; I mean, while you are doing so
practically, as well as speculatively.

I cannot but hope, Sir, notwithstanding your present wavering and unsettled
Posture, you have had some Experience, of the Truth of what I am now setting
before you, in your own Soul. -- Look back and consider, how often you have
found all your self-righteous Resolutions, self-confident Promises, and
Endeavors in your own Strength, to mortify your Corruptions, and to maintain a
closer Walk with God, too weak a Foundation to build upon, and how insufficient
they have been to produce that new Obedience, which you have purposed and
expected: But how often you have found, on the contrary, that a humble and
cheerful Dependence upon Christ for Righteousness and Strength, has invigorated
your Soul in your spiritual Progress. -- How often have you found, a legal
Frame has clipped the Wings of your Devotion: while a believing Dependence upon
the Riches of God's infinite Mercy in Christ, has enabled you to mount up with
Wings as the Eagle, to run and not be weary, to walk and not faint! -- Reflect
upon your own Experience; and consider how often you have found, that even the
Restraints of the Law, when you have acted upon no higher Motive, have rather
irritated and strengthened those Corruptions, which you have endeavored to
mortify: How often you have found, that nothing but Faith in Christ, and a
realising Sense of the Love of God in him, could give you the Victory, engage
your Heart to the Service of God, and make the Ways of Holiness pleasant and
delightful to you. -- These Things are the common Experience of the Children of
God; and a standing Evidence to them, of the Truth, which I am representing to
you.

Have Patience with me, while I mention one Exception more to the Scheme you
have proposed, which is, that this Doctrine is highly destructive to the
Comfort of a Life of Religion; and subversive of that Joy and Peace, which may
be found in Believing. -- The Scriptures inform us, that the Ways of Wisdom are
Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace; and exhort us to rejoice
evermore, to rejoice in Christ Jesus, without Confidence in the Flesh. This was
one End of Christ's coming into the World, that we might serve him without
Fear, in Righteousness and Holiness before him all the Days of our Life. They
who are justified by Faith, have Peace with God; and should rejoice in Hope of
his Glory. -- This, the Calvinist-Principles, or (if you will allow me the
Expression) the Scripture-Principles lay a good Foundation for. True scriptural
Joy is the Joy of Faith. We may have strong Consolation, who have fled for
Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set before us. We know whom we have trusted,
that he is able to keep that which we have committed to him, against that Day.
Though our Frames may be very mutable, Jesus Christ is the same, Yesterday, to
Day and for ever. In whom, though now we see him not, yet believing, we
rejoice. He has undertaken for us; He will never leave us nor forsake us; and
therefore we may hold fast our Confidence, unto the End. The more cheerfully
and firmly we trust in him, the more shall we increase in Holiness and in
Comfort; and the more sure will be the Foundation of our eternal Hope. This the
Scripture teaches; this our own Experience confirms: we may therefore go on our
Way rejoicing. -- But now let us look on the other Side of the Question.

We depend upon our sincere Obedience for Justification: But, alas! how shall
we know, whether we have any gracious Sincerity, or not? We have yet many
Corruptions remaining, great Defects in our Duties, frequent Violations of our
good Purposes and Designs: And the Doubt is, Can these Things be consistent
with Sincerity? Our Consciences upbraid us, that we don't do what we can, in
our Endeavors after sincere Obedience. And hence what a dreadful Perplexity,
what Diffidence, Darkness, and legal Terrors, must every serious Person be
thrown into, by these Principles? Here is no Place (as upon the other
Principles) to commit this Case also to Christ, and in a Way of cheerful
Dependence and Diligence to expect Grace and Sincerity from him: for, upon
these Principles, we must be well assured of our actual Sincerity, before we
can look to Christ for Acceptance. And therefore there is no Place for Comfort,
or for Quiet, but from a careless Inadvertency. -- However, supposing we may
find some satisfying Evidence of our Sincerity, at certain Seasons, under
special Reformations and Enlargements, what will become of our Hopes, when a
contrary Frame prevails? Can we then ^latter our selves with our Sincerity?
Must not our Hopes and Fears keep Pace with our Frames; and our whole Life be a
dreadful Fluctuating between both, with Respect to the infinite eternal Concern
before us? And is not this, to be called to the Spirit of Bondage again to fear?

What Room can there be upon this Plan, for the Spirit of Adoption? How can the
Spirit witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God? How can we
experience the Sealings of the Holy Spirit; or the Earnest of our future
Inheritance? How can we have the full Assurance of Hope? or how can we make our
Calling and Election sure? -- We must upon those Principles give up all
Pretensions to these glorious Comforts, Benefits, and Privileges of the
Children of God, while our Hope is built upon this precarious Foundation, and
depends upon the doubtful and uncertain Performance of persevering sincere
Obedience. -- Let us suppose the best which can be supposed, that we should
make a comforting and encouraging Progress in a Life of sincere Obedience; yet
how do we yet know, but Death may seize us in an unguarded Hour, and find us
actually playing the Hypocrite? In this Case, what will become of all our
religious Duties and all our Hopes? And what will become of our Souls to all
Eternity? -- I must confess, Sir, I could see Nothing before me but Horror and
Despair, if I had no better Foundation of Confidence and Hope toward God, than
my own Righteousness.

Every experienced Christian must acknowledge, that the chief Comfort of a
religious Life flows from the lively Actings of Love to God in Christ. But how
can there be the Comfort of Love, when at the best we are in an awful Suspense,
whether God be our Friend, or our Enemy? -- What Grounds of Horror (instead of
the pleasing Exercise of Love) must we constantly experience, while we are
afraid we have an infinite Enemy to deal with? -- What Strangers, in this Case,
must we be to the Joy, which flows from a refreshing View, that this God is our
God, and will be our Guide even to Death, and our Portion for ever? -- How
unacquainted must we be with the sublime Pleasures of Communion with God, while
we approach his Presence under such an uncertain Prospect of his Favor, and
under Grounds for prevailing Fear of an eternal Separation from him? -- And
what aggravates the Case is, that this not only now is, but must continue to be
our dark and disconsolate Circumstance, as long as we live, if we remain under
the governing Influence of these Principles I am impleading.

I may add to this, that a cheerful Progress in all Gospel-Holiness is
necessary to our true Comfort and Happiness, while we are here in this Vale of
Tears. In keeping of God's Commands there is great Reward. This is our
Rejoicing, the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity and godly
Sincerity, not by fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our
Conversation in the World. -- But I have shown you already, that this Scheme, I
am opposing, affords no Principle of new Obedience, allows no Foundation for a
comfortable Progress in the divine Life. Here is no Certainty of Forgiveness to
be obtained: And therefore no delightful Incentive to the Mortification of our
Lusts and Corruptions. -- Upon this Plan, we are in perpetual Danger of the
Curse of the Law, on Account of our Defects; and there is therefore no Room for
that Pleasure, which would otherwise be found in running the Way of God's
Commands. -- Here can be no assured Confidence in the divine Assistance or
Acceptance, no absolute Assistance in the Riches of God's free Grace in Christ:
And therefore nothing to melt the Heart and Conscience into Love and
Subjection; nothing to inflame our Affections and fill us with Gratitude to God
for blessing us with all spiritual Blessings, in heavenly Things in Christ
Jesus; Nothing to excite us to live to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved. -- The Principles of the
Scheme you proposed, are slavish; and the Obedience must be of the same Kind
with the Principles from whence it flows: And consequently we must be utter
Strangers to that Love, Delight, and Satisfaction, which Children might find in
the Service of their heavenly Father, so long as our Obedience is thus excited
from Fear, and Constraint; or at best only from such uncertain Hopes, as wholly
depend upon our own Righteousness, as the Condition of Acceptance with God. --
Blessed be God, the Gospel teaches us a more pleasant and delighful Religion,
the Service of Love, and the Obedience of Faith, which is truly its own Reward.

And now Sir, suffer me something freely to expostulate with you on this
Subject. Do not you know, that the Doctrine which you and your Author plead
for, is (substantially) the same with the Popish Doctrine upon the Head of
Remission of Sins, and Acceptance with God; and that this very Doctrine was one
of the greatest Occasions of our glorious Reformation from Popery? Read, Sir,
the many elaborate Treatises written by our first Reformers; and you will find
this Doctrine set in its proper Light. You Will find all your Author's Cavils,
Shifts, and Evasions justly exposed: all his Arguments distinctly answered; and
the dangerous Error stripped of all that plausible Dress, with which it now again
makes its Appearance. You will find, that the Doctrine of Justification was
esteemed by all our excellent Reformers, as well as by Luther, Art^^ulus
stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae, the Article by which the Church must either
stand or full. -- And shall we again build up those Things, which that glorious
Army of Martyrs destroyed? Shall we again revive Popery in one of its most
considerable Branches? -- Is not this to open the Door to other Popish
Delusions and practical Errors, as Periances, Pilgrimages, a monastic Life,
(...) and other Austerities, to supply the Defects of our sincere Obedience,
and patch up a Righteousness of our own to justify us? I wish there were not
too much Occasion given for this Apprehension, by some in the present Times,
who would fain be reputed Protestants. (...) Call. Books, that would be
deservedly 'esteem'd and (...), were it not for this popish (...).
-- You Will perhaps think me too severe in this Discourse; but search into the
Cause, as I have done, and you will find it otherwise.

And why must this Hydra be dug out of its Grave, and revived? What
Advantage can be hoped for by this Scheme? Were this Doctrine true, will not
sincere Obedience, done from a Principle of spiritual Life and Holiness, and a
Dependence upon Christ alone, to do all in us and for us, and to recommend us
to the divine Favor, be accepted of God, as well, as if it had been done in
our own Strength, and with a View to establish our own Righteousness? -- Will
Christ reject us at last, for doing too much Honor to his infinite Merit, and
to the rich and free Grace of God in him? -- What if you should find your
Reasoning false and deceitful, when it comes to the great Trial? Dare you
venture your Eternity upon it, that in this Case, you cannot be deceived? -- If
the Reformation in' general, and the most excellent Men for Learning, Sagacity
and Piety, that the reformed Churches could ever boast of, should be found on
the Side of Truth at the Day of Judgment, in determining, that we cannot be
justified on the Foot of a moderated Covenant of Works, or the easy Terms you
plead for, what will become of all those, who have built their eternal Hope on
that Foundation; not only notionally, I mean, but practically!

But I have outgone my intended Limits; and shall therefore only add (after my
hearty Prayers, that your Hope may be built upon a sure Foundation) -- I am
with great Respect,

Sir, Your etc.

LETTER XIV. Wherein the Notion of a first Justification by Faith, and a
secondary Justification by sincere Obedience, is discussed and confuted.
SIR,
YOU must conclude, I have spent my Time but idly, if I should yet be
unacqu^inted with your Author's Meaning; and not fully understand, in what
Sense he supposes our sincere Obedience to be the Condition of our
Justification. -- It is scarcely possible, that he should with any Appearance
of Plausibility offer any Thing new in Defense of these Principles, or that has
not been often advanced, and often refuted, long before either you or I were
born. -- And in particular, what you now propose, is but the old Popish
Doctrine-new vampt; which has been repeatedly answered by all our old
Protestant Writers.

You tell me, Your Author acknowledges, that our first Justification is by
Faith alone, that is, God accepts us as being meet Probationers for Salvation,
upon our hearty Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and our being heartily
willing to take Christ's Yoke upon us, and obey him: And this is the
Justification of which the Apostle Paul speaks, that it is by Faith without the
Works of the Law. -- But our secondary Justification, or continued Title to the
Favor of God, is by our Works, or by a Course of sincere Obedience to the
Gospel. Of this the Apostle James speaks, when he tells us, that a Man is
justified by Works, and not by Faith only.

Sir, You cannot be insensible, that this Plea is utterly inconsistent with the
Evasions before offered. We are therefore now to hear no more of your former
Distinctions, that the Apostle Paul refers to legal, and not ^vangelical Works,
when he excludes all Works from having any Part in our Justification. We are to
hear no more of the Apostle's referring to the ceremonial Law, when he opposes
the Law to Grace, and tells us, that if Righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain. -- You now acknowledge, that the Justification, of
which the Apostle Paul speaks, is by Faith alone. -- All other Pleas for the
Scheme, which I oppose, must consequently be given up; and it must be put upon
this single Issue. -- I shall now therefore proceed to consider, whether this
Foundation will bear the Weight, which you are putting upon it.

It Is worthy of Consideration, that there is Nothing of this new Distinction,
of a first and a secondary Justification, to be found in the Scriptures. I look
upon it an arbitrary Distinction, coined to serve a Purpose, and to help out a
tottering Scheme, which could no other Way be supported. -- The Apostle Paul,
it is true, speaks of our Justification in one Respect, and the Apostle James
in another, as I have formerly observed to you: But each of them retain one
invariable View of their Subject, and continue the same Idea of the
Justification about which they treat. There is not a Word Spoken by either of
them, of a first and Second, of an original and additional Justification.
Indeed the Scriptures know Nothing at all of this Distinction. The Children of
God learn Nothing of it from their own Experience. And you must pardon me, Sir,
if I must demand some better Foundation of my eternal Hope, than the subtle
Inventions of such Men, who would establish and vindicate their Principles by
new and, unscriptural Doctrines of Religion, which have no Foundation at all,
but, their own teeming Imagination. This is the common Source of all the
Errors, which obtain among us. Men of Learning and Parts, sufficiently
apprehensive of their own Capacities, instead of a humble subjecting their
Reason to the Wisdom of God in his Word, are first for forming Schemes, which
appear to them most reasonable; these they take for Principles: And then they
must force some Construction or other upon the most opposite Texts of
Scripture, and invent some arbitrary Distinctions, to obviate the Difficulties,
that lie in their Way. -- This is plainly the Case before us. It does not look
reasonable to the Papists, to the Socinians, to the Arminians, and to the
Neonomians, that our Obedience should be wholly excluded a Part in our
Justification. It is true, the Scripture does in Multitudes of Most plain and
familiar Expressions, in the most express and strongest Language, utterly
exclude it. But there must be one unnatural Construction, or another, forced
upon these texts of Scripture, to make them consistent with their Scheme; which
they take for a Postulatum, whatever is said in the Scripture to the contrary.
-- When this Refuge fails, the present Distinction is coined, to support the
sinking Cause. It were a sufficient Answer to all these Pretenses, to say, The
Foolishness of God is wiser than Men, and the Weakness of God is stronger than
Men. And he that seems to be wise in this World, let him become a Fool, that
he may be wise.

But I have this further Objection against the Distinction you mention, that it
is not only a human Device, without any Appearance of Scripture-Warrant; but is
utterly Inconsistent with the Scripture-Doctrine of Justification. -- There is
so much ascribed, in the Scripture, to what they call our first Justification,
as leaves no possible Room for a Second. -- I have observed something of this
to you, upon another Occasion, in a former Letter; and you must bear with me,
if you here meet with some Repetition, in Order to set the present Case in a
true and proper Light. -- By Virtue of the Righteousness imputed to us and
received through Faith, we have a free Pardon of all our Sins. Romans iv. 5, 6, 7.
To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his
Faith is counted for Righteousness. Even as David also describes the
Blessedness of the Man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works,
saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven; and whose Sins are
covered. Blessed is the Man, to whom the Lord will not impute Sin. -- BY Virtue
of this Justification we are freed from the Wrath of God, and actually
reconciled to him. Romans v. 9, 10. Much more then being justified by his Blood,
we shall be saved from Wrath through him. For if when we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his Life. -- By this Justification we are made Righteous in the
Sight of God. Romans v. 18, 19. By the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came
upon all Men unto Justification of Life. For as by one Man's Disobedience, many
were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of One, shall many be made Righteous. --
By this Justification, we have the Adoption of Children. Joh. i. 12. As many as
received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God; even to them
that believe on his Name. -- By this Justification, we have the Spirit of
Adoption, Peace with God, and a joyful Prospect of our eternal Inheritance.
Romans v. 1, 2. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, -- and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. --
By this Justification, we are sanctified, and receive needed Supplies of Grace.
Heb. x. 10. By the which Will we are sanctified, through the offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ once for all. Romans v. 17. For if by one Man's Offense,
Death reigned by one; much more they who receive Abundance of Grace, and of the
Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in Life, by one Jesus Christ. -- By this
Justification, we are secured of Perseverance in Grace, against all Charges,
Accusations, Persecutions, and malignant Endeavors of Hell and Earth to the
contrary. Romans viii. 33, 35. Who shall lay any Thing to the Charge of God's
Elect? It is God that justifies. -- Who shall separate us from the Love of
Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? -- And in a Word, by this Justification, we are
entitled to, and shall finally be possessed of, eternal Glory. -- Romans viii.
30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified. -- And now, Sir, what is there
left for your secondary Justification to do? We have God himself, Pardon,
Peace, with all the Benefits, Comforts and Privileges of the Children of God in
this Life, and eternal Glory hereafter, bestowed upon us, or made over to us,
in Consequence of what you call the first Justification. Your secondary
Justification must therefore be a mere imaginary Thing, an unaccountable
Fiction: which has as little Foundation in the Nature of Things, as it has in
the Word of God.

I may add to this, that our Continuance in a justified State is by the same
Means, by which we were first justified. -- It is true, Believers (as well as
others) are daily sinning, in Thought, Word, and Deed: And there may therefore
appear some Difficulty in conceiving, how our once being justified by Faith,
can secure to us a Remission of future Sins. It cannot be supposed, that our
Sins are actually pardoned, before they are committed; or our Guilt canceled,
before it was contracted. How then can one single Justification stand us in
stead, through a future Scene of Sin and Guilt, and entitle us to eternal
Glory, notwithstanding a repeated Forfeiture of the divine Favor, and
notwithstanding our renewed Deserts of God's Wrath and Displeasure? -- This
deserves some particulars Consideration. I shall therefore endeavor, in a few
Words, to solve this Difficulty, before I proceed distinctly to consider in
what Manner our Justification is continued.

Let it then be observed, that as the meritorious procuring Cause of our
Justification, with all its Benefits, of Grace here and Glory hereafter, was at
once completed; the Body of Christ was offered once for all, and by his
Obedience unto Death he brought in Everlasting Righteousness: So the Believer,
upon his first being actually interested in the Redemption by Christ, and
receiving his Righteousness, through Faith, is at once unalterably acquitted
from Condemnation, re-instated in the paternal Favor of God, and secured in
such a continuing Progress of Grace and Holiness, as will end in eternal Glory.
For by one Offering, Christ has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
(Heb. x. xiv.) As our Lord Jesus Christ by bearing our Sins in his own Body on
the Tree, has finished Transgression, made an End of Sin, made Reconciliation
for Iniquity, and brought in everlasting Righteousness (Dan. ix. 24.) -- So by
Faith that is in him, we receive the Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance
among them that are Sanctified (Act. xxvi. 18.) and are complete in him. (Col.
ii. 10.) He therefore that believes, has everlasting Life, and shall not come
into Condemnation: but is passed from Death to Life (Joh. v. 24.) and is
blessed with all spiritual Blessings, in heavenly Things in Christ. (Ephesians. i. 3.)

But this notwithstanding, though our Justification, as to the meritorious
procuring Cause of it, be at once perfected and completed; and by Virtue of
the Immutability of God's Counsel, the infinite Merit of the Righteousness
imputed, the Stability of the Covenant of Grace, and the Faithfulness of the
Promises, the Believer immutably remains a Child of God, and an Heir of eternal
Glory: He nevertheless by Reason of his daily Sins and Imperfections, stands in
daily Need of a renewed Application of the Benefits of Christ's Redemption to
his Soul, and in daily Need of Pardon and Justification. -- But then it should
be remembered, that this is not a secondary Justification, distinct from the
former^ but the same renewed and confirmed. If the Believer Sins, he has an
Advocate with the Father, to make continual Intercession for him, for renewed
Pardon and Grace, and for a Continuance of his justified State. He ever lives
to make Intercession for them; Who needs not daily as those high Priests,
after the Order of Aaron, to offer Sacrifice first for his own Sins, and then
for the People's: for this he did once, when he offered up himself. Heb. vii.
25, 27.

These Things being premised, the Question now recurs, By what Means are
Believers continued in a justified State? To which I answer as before, by the
Same Means by which they were at first brought into it. The Righteousness of
God is revealed from Faith to Faith (Romans i. 17.) that is, as a noted
Commentator expounds these Words, the Beginning, the Continuance, and the
Consummation of our Justification, is by Faith. -- Now the Just shall live by
Faith. Heb. x. 38. Not only are the Ungodly justified by Faith; but the Just,
or those that are in a justified State, shall live by Faith, shall obtain new
Supplies of pardoning and sanctifying Grace through Faith. And thence the Life
which the Believer lives in the Flesh, is said to be by the Faith of the Son of
God. Gal. ii. 20.

Let any serious Christian consider, what Refuge he can betake himself to, in
Order to quiet the Accusations of his Conscience for Sin committed; and to
obtain renewed Pardon of his frequent Transgressions and constant
Imperfections. -- Dare he venture into the Presence of God, and challenge.
Pardon on Account of his own sincere Obedience? Will he plead before the
eternal Majesty, the milder Terms of this (imaginary) new Law of Grace, and
tell the Almighty, this easy Condition was purchased for him by the Blood of
Christ, that his own Works should justify him; that he sincerely desires and
endeavors to obey God, and therefore pleads the Benefit of that new Covenant
of Works; and entreats Pardon and Acceptance, for his sincere Obedience,
according to the Tenor of it? If this be an Article of our Creed, why should
it not be likewise an Article of our Devotion? But yet, I think, the Patrons of
this Scheme cannot be so hardy, as to plead it before the Throne of God. And I
may venture to say, that every sensible humble Christian will use a quite
contrary Argument in Prayer for Pardon and Acceptance with God. Such a Man will
find no Plea to make at the Throne of Grace, but the infinite Merits of the
glorious Redeemer, with the boundless Riches of God's free Mercy in Christ. --
He can find no other Source of continuing Peace and Hope, but a humble Trust
and Confidence in the Merit and Righteousness of Christ. He durst not plead his
own Seize before God, not trust in them, as justly recommending and
intitling him to his Favor: but repairs by Faith immediately to the
Righteousness of Christ alone, for renewed Pardon and Acceptance. Thus you see,
that as the Scriptures propose a Way very different from that of our own
Obedience, for the Continuance of our Justification, so the Children of God
have a quite contrary Refuge for Peace and Pardon; and it would even shock a
Christian Ear, to hear any Devotions exactly adjusted and proportioned to these
Principles. It is therefore evident, that all Pretenses of this Kind should be
rejected, by those who would not be finally ashamed of their Hope.

That we may have a further View of the Absurdity of this Distinction, let us
consider a little how this Scheme will hang together; and see whether it will not
necessarily destroy it self.

The Patrons of this Distinction do so much Honor to the Scriptures, which
every where attribute our Justification to Faith, as to allow, that our first
Justification is by Faith alone. But what are we understand by that Faith, by
which this first Justification is obtained? -- The Papists tell us, that it is
an Infusion of a new Principle of Grace and Charity. -- The Socinians and
Arminians (at least some of them) teach, that it is the To credere, or an
Assent to the Gospel-Revelation, which justifies as it is an Act of our own,
and an Instance of Obedience to the divine Command. -- Some of our more modern
Refiners upon this Scheme choose to define this Faith, by which we obtain our
first Justification, to be a receiving Christ as our Lord and Savior; and tell
us, that a submitting to his Government, has as great a Hand in our
Justification, as our relying upon his Merit, or hoping for Salvation on
Account of what he has done and suffered for us. I think, all of them agree in
this, that Faith justifies as it an Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and an
Entrance upon a Life of Obedience. None of them suppose this first
Justification to be our Acceptance with God, as Righteous, by the Righteousness
of Jesus Christ imputed to us, and received by Faith alone.

Now then, what Room is there for this Distinction? Is not Faith, in this
Consideration of it, as much an Act of Obedience, as any other Point of
Conformity to the divine Command, which we are capable of? And is it not
supposed to justify us, as it is our Subjection to the new Law of Grace, and as
it is our first Act of Obedience? What then do they mean, by telling us of a
first Justification by Faith alone, and of a secondary Justification by Works;
when they really intend, that the Beginning, the Progress, and the Conclusion
of our Justification is by Obedience only! -- This may easily be brought to a
short and determinate Issue. Either Faith does justify us as it is a Work of
ours, and an Act of Obedience; or it justifies us as it is the Means of our
receiving Christ's Righteousness, and having the same actually applied to us,
for our Justification and Acceptance with God. -- There is no other Way, in
which we can be supposed to be justified by Faith. All the Distinctions, that
the most exuberant Fancies of Men can light upon, are reducible to one of these
two. -- Now if the latter of these be assumed, the Controversy is ended: We
have a Righteousness to plead, that is sufficiently perfect, and that will
stand us in Stead; there is no Need of our new Obedience, in Order to make up
its Defects, and procure a secondary Justification. -- But if the former of
these be assured, then our first Justification is as truly by Works, as the
second; and the whole is by Obedience only. -- How much more fair and ingenuous
would it therefore be, for the Abettors of these Principles to speak out, and
tell us plainly, that we are justified only by Works, and that Faith has
nothing to do in our Justification, but as it is our own Work, and an Act of
Obedience; than thus to endeavor to hide the Deformity of their Scheme, as
contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, by the Paint and Varnish of this
plausible, but groundless Distinction?

If we should proceed to consider the Nature of their secondary Justification,
and the Obedience by which it is obtained, there will appear to be as little
Foundation for this new Distinction from thence, as from the former View. Will
every Act of our sincere Obedience justify us? Or must it be a Progress of
Obedience to the End of our Lives? If the former, we have not only a first and
second, but a thousand-fold Justification. If the latter, we can have no
Justification at all, so long as we live; and have therefore very little Reason
to expect it after we are dead. For as Death leaves us, Judgment will find ^s;
as I have observed to you in another Letter. -- Should you suppose, that our
Justification is progressive, and bears Proportion to our Sanctification, you
must then allow, that we cannot be completely justified, till we are completely
sanctified; which we are not to expect in this Life. -- Should you suppose, we
shall be justified in our expiring Moments, just as we are breathing our last,
even this will be before our Obedience is finished, or our Sanctification
perfected: and therefore there can be no more Reason assigned for it, at that
Period, either from Scripture or the Nature of Things, than there could have
been perhaps a Thousand Times before. -- So that in whatever View we consider
the Case, this Distinction, and the whole Scheme founded on it, is a mere Scene
of Confusion, in the highest Degree repugnant both to Scripture and Reason.

And now I Am ready to attend to your Reasoning, in Favor of these Principles.

I must acknowledge (you say) that we are justified upon Covenant-Terms. Now a
Covenant must have Conditions, to be fulfilled by both Parties: And
consequently the Benefits of the Covenant must depend upon the Performance of
those Conditions, and be suspended, when the Conditions are violated. Whence
it is necessary to suppose, that there are some continuing Conditions required
of us, in Order to our complete Justification.

There is no Need to debate with you the Propriety of the Word [Conditions] in
this Case; because it may be used in a sound Sense. But I know Nothing in the
Nature of any Covenant, except a Covenant of Works, that makes such Conditions
as you speak of, necessary to it. Whereas, if you consider the Covenant of
Grace in all the Exhibitions of it, it is a Covenant of Promise, as styled Ephesians.
ii. 12. Thence those who are interested in this Covenant, are called the
Children of the Promise. Romans ix. 8. And the Heirs of the Promise. Heb. vi. 17.
-- Thus the Tenor of this Covenant, when made with Adam, was, that the Seed of
the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head. Genesis iii. 15. And thus when made
with Abraham, it consisted of a Promise, that in him all the Families of the
Earth should be blessed. Genesis xii. 3. In neither of these Cases, was there any
Condition added: it was barely a Declaration of Mercy to guilty Sinners. And
yet the Apostle expressly calls this a Covenant, which was confirmed of God in
Christ, and says, The Inheritance God gave to Abraham by Promise. Gal. iii. 17,
18. -- And what is there that should make this inconsistent with the Nature of
a Covenant? Cannot you (Sir) covenant with a Beggar, to bestow upon him what
Treasure you please, upon the only Condition of his thankful Acceptance? Cannot
a Prince, Covenant with his Rebel-Subjects, to pardon them and receive them
into his Favor, upon the only Condition of their acknowledging his Sovereignty
and accepting his Pardon? Would not this be truly and formally a Covenant; and
a Covenant with strongest Obligations to the Performance, especially if
confirmed by an Oath, as the glorious God has condescended to confirm the
Covenant of Grace? Heb. vi. 18.

You further argue, that good works and a Life of sincere Obedience are
absolutely necessary to Salvation, without which no Man can see the Lord, and
therefore necessary to our Justification, which is but our Title to eternal
Life. And a Right or Title to eternal Life is promised to Obedience. Rev. xxii.
14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the
Tree of Life; and enter in through the Gates into the City. -- Heaven is a
Recompense of Reward. And God has particularly promised to his People, that he
will proportion the Dispensations of this (...), to the good or evil Behavior
of his People, in the eighteenth and thirty third Chapters of Ezekiel.

Do you indeed, Sir, suppose, that there is no Difference between Justification
and Sanctification? They are both, it is true, necessary to Salvation: but are
they both necessary in the same Respect^, in the same Place, and Order, and to
the same Ends? Are they both necessary, as what equally entitle us to the
continuing Favor of God, to Grace here and Glory hereafter? Holiness or new
Obedience is necessary, as a Qualification, disposing or fitting us for the
Enjoyment of God, and Possession of the heavenly Glory. But how will it follow
from hence, that it is necessary, as the Condition of our Reconciliation to
God, and of our being kept by his Power, through Faith unto Salvation? How will
it follow, that because we cannot be saved without Holiness, that therefore we
must be saved for it, and upon the Account of it? It is necessary to an Heir's
Possession of an Estate, given him by his Father's Will, that he live and enjoy
his Reason: Yet it is not his Life and Reason, but his Father's Donation, which
gives him the Title. Even so in the present Case, our Life and Activity are
necessary to our possessing the eternal Inheritance: But it is the free Grace
of God in Christ, which gives us the Title. By Grace are ye saved through
Faith, and that not of your selves: it is the Gift of God. Ephesians. ii. 8.

As to the Scriptures cited by you, they are altogether impertinent to your
Purpose. You should prove, if you would confirm your Point in View, that we are
justified by Works; and that our Works give us the Title to Salvation. But all
that you do prove by the cited Scriptures is, that good Works are necessary to
Salvation; which is a Truth equally allowed by both Parties in the present
Controversy, and a Consequence equally resulting from the Principles of both.

The first Text indeed which you quote, does in the English Translation, seem
to look something in your Favor. But when read in the Original, all that
Appearance is lost. I think, it should thus be read, Blessed are they who do
his Commandments, that they may have Power, Privilege, or Liberty (EZOYZIA) for
the Tree of Life. -- And it is on all Hands granted, that none will ever have
the Power, Privilege or Liberty, to enter the eternal Inheritance, but those
who are sanctified. The whole Question is, From whence this Power is derived;
upon what Title this Liberty or Privilege is founded? Whether only from the
Righteousness of Christ imputed? Or from their sincere Conformity to the
(pretended) new Law of Grace? To this the Text says nothing at all: Nor can any
Argument be drawn from it, either on the one or the other Side of the Question.

But Heaven is a Recompense of Reward. What then? -- May Not a Reward be given,
not of Debt, but of mere Grace; without any Claim by personal Merit, without
any Motive from Covenant-Conditions performed, or any other Incentive at all,
but the mere Goodness and Kindness of the Donor? How then does this prove the
Covenant-Conditions, you are pleading for? You may (Sir) if you please, without
any previous Covenant, reward your Slave's Towardliness, with Freedom and with
a good Estate; though this be what he can have no Claim to by his Obedience.
His Person and Services being your Property, the Reward must flow wholly from
your Kindness and Bounty. -- And thus in the present Case, though eternal Life
be a Reward, it is a Reward of mere Bounty and Goodness, it is the Gift of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans vi. 23.

What you urge from the 18th and 33d Chapters of Ezekiel, is as little to your
Purpose. This will evidently appear, if you consider, that these Chapters have
a special Reference to a temporal Salvation, from the Calamities that Israel
either felt or feared from the Chaldean War. They were part of them already in
Captivity; and the Remainder in dreadful Expectation of the succeeding Carnage
and Desolation, which made a swift Approach upon them. They on this Account
complain of God's Dispensations as unequal, and of their own Misery as
remediless. In Answer to which Complaints, God is pleased by the Prophet to
justify his Dispensations toward them; and to let them know, that his Dealings
with them were according to their own Doings: that their Reformation would
avert his Judgments; but their Apostasy and Declension from his Service, would
both heighten his Displeasure, and their Punishment. -- That this was the
Design of the 18 th Chapter, appears evident from the whole foregoing Context;
where their dreadful Destruction by the Babylonians was expressly predicted and
threatened; which gave Occasion to obviate their Objections against God's
Dealings with them, and to give them a just View of the true Source and Cause
of their Misery and Ruin. That this was also the Design of the 33 d Chapter, is
most evident from the express Words of the Context, as every one may see, that
will read from the 26th to the 29th Verse, where Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and
utter Desolation are expressly denounced, and declared to be the Evils referred
to in this Discourse. -- Now what just Argument can be drawn from hence? Will
it follow, because God proportions his providential dispensations to the
external Conduct of his professing CovenantPeople, that therefore we are
justified by Works; or that our eternal Salvation is the immediate Fruit of our
own Obedience? Will it follow, that because A^a^'s threatened temporal
Destruction was prevented by his external Reformation, that therefore he was
justified and eternally saved upon the Account of it? No, it is plain, that
all, Arguments to the present Purpose, from these Chapters, are altogether
impertinent. And the Pleas Commonly taken from hence against Perseverance in
Grace, because the Righteous are represented as turning from their
Righteousness, are nothing at all to the Purpose, for which they are used.

But after all, were it even supposed, that these Chapters referred to God's
Dispensations toward Men in Relation to their eternal State, How would they
confirm the Principles you are pleading for? They would indeed show us, that
there is a necessary Connection between a Life of Obedience and our Salvation,
and between a Life of Disobedience and our Perdition, which is a Truth allowed
on both Sides of the present Question. But as to the meritorious, procuring,
and intitling Cause of our Salvation, or the Foundation of our Right and Title
to eternal Life, here is nothing spoken in these Chapters. If you would find
these Things explained by the Prophet Ezekiel, read the 36th Chapter of his
Prophecy, where the Doctrine which you oppose, is strongly asserted, and
particularly illustrated. You will there find, it is God that takes away the
Heart of Stone from his People, and gives them a Heart of Flesh; that causes
them to walk in his Statutes, and keep his Judgments, and do them; and that it
is not for their Sakes that he does this, but for his own Name's Sake; and that
when this is done for them, they will have Cause to be ashamed and confounded
for their own Ways; and to loath themselves in their own Sight, for their
Iniquities, and Abominations. You will there find, that though God will be
inquired of by the House of Israel to do this for them: Yet this is not the
Condition of their Acceptance, he will bestow his special Grace for his own
Name's Sake, and not for their Sakes. -- Now you will acknowledge, that the
other Chapters must be take in the same View with this; and then though it will
appear, that he who repents and continues in Obedience to the End, and none
but he, shall obtain Salvation at (...): Yet that this Repentance and new
Obedience flows from God's sovereign Grace, and is the Fruit of a justified
State. -- The same Thing may be observed concerning any other Texts of
Scripture, which you can possibly cite, to the like Purpose. -- And I must here
observe to you, it is a sure Evidence of the Weakness of that Cause, that can
be no better defended. There are Multitudes of plain and positive Texts of
Scripture, which ascribe our Justification to Faith, and to the Righteousness
of Christ alone; as I have had Occasion to show you already. These must be
interpreted away at any Rate; because they don't agree with this scheme, which
must by all Means be supported. -- But then, what Evidence have we from
Scripture for this Doctrine, which is so strenuously contended for? None but
this, that Holiness and New Obedience are necessary to Salvation; which is just
so much (and no more) to the Purpose, as if you should attempt to prove your
Point from the first Verse in Genesis.

You proceed to argue, that Repentance for Sin, which includes new Obedience in
the Nature of it, is not only made absolutely necessary to Salvation, but has
the Promise of Pardon annexed to it; and is therefore plainly proposed in
Scripture, as the Condition of our Justification.

This is but a Repetition of the former Argument, in other Words. The Question
before us is not, what is necessary to our Salvation: but what is the Condition
of our Justification? It is not the Question, whether Pardon and Salvation be
necessarily connected to Repentance and new Obedience: but what it is that
gives us a Title to this Pardon and Salvation; and whence it is, that this
Repentance and new Obedience flows, by which we are qualified to partake of
saving Benefits. -- The Scriptures assure us, that this is the Righteousness of
Christ received by Faith; and what you now offer, is no Ways inconsistent with
the many Declarations of this Kind, throughout the whole Word of God. -- If it
were granted, that whatever are the Requisites in them that shall be saved, and
whatever Qualifications have the Promise of Pardon and Salvation annexed to
them, are the Conditions of our Justification, it would then follow that
Perseverance is a Condition of our Justification; and consequently all Dispute
about being justified in this present Life, is at an End, as I have observed
before. For the Benefit is suspended, 'till the Condition on which it depends,
is accomplished. -- Besides, I think, all Men must allow, that if Repentance be
the Fruit and Consequence of our Justification, if cannot be the Condition of
it. There can be nothing more preposterous, than to suppose an Effect to be a
Condition of the Cause producing it. And the Scriptures assure us, that
Repentance is the Fruit and Consequence of our Justification. Thus is it
particularly represented to us. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 28, 31. A new Heart also will
I give you; and a new Spirit will I put within you; -- And ye shall be my
People; and I will he your God -- Then shall ye remember your own evil Ways,
and your Doings that were not good; and shall loathe your selves in your own
Sight, for your Iniquities and for your Abominations. Thus likewise, Zech. xii.
10. And I will pour out upon the House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplications; and they shall look upon
me whom they have pierced; and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for
his only Son, and shall be in Bitterness for him, as one that is in Bitterness
for his firstborn. -- In which Texts you see, there is first a new Heart and a
new Spirit; they are first in a justified State, they are God's People, and he
is their God; they are first renewed and have a Spirit of Grace and
Supplication; they have first the Exercise of Faith, they look upon him whom
they have pierced:And then follows their Repentance, as an immediate and
necessary Consequence of their regenerate justified State. -- This Truth is
most evident, not only from the ScriptureRepresentation of this Matter; but
also from the Nature of a true and sincere Repentance. -- We must be united to
Christ and have a Principle of Life, before we can perform vital Actions. -- We
must have the Dispostions of our Souls renewed, before we can hate Sin, and
heartily mourn after a Deliverance from what is naturally pleasant and
delightful to us. We must first have Faith in Christ's Blood, before we can
repair to it for Cleansing from Pollution and Guilt. -- We must first have a
Principle of Love to Holiness, before we can live a Life of new Obedience. --
The legal Terrors, Resolutions and Endeavors, which preceed our Justification,
are very far short of a true Repentance; and therefore can have no Promise of
Pardon and Salvation made to them. -- It is therefore evident, that though an
evangelical Repentance does immediately succeed (and in its Beginnings is even
contenporary with) a true justifying Faith: Yet it is in Order of Nature an
Effect and Fruit of it; and consequently cannot be the Condition of our
Justification.

And now I proceed to the Consideration of your last Argument, for the
Vindication of these Principles. It seems (you say) that our Obedience must be
the Condition of our Justification, because the Process of the final Judgment
will be put upon that Issue; and every Man will be judged in that awful Day
according to his Works.

To which I answer, that I can see no Manner of Consequence in this Reasoning,
because God of his infinite Grace and Bounty will be ple^sed to reward the
Obedience of Believers at the eternal Judgment, that therefore our Obedience is
the Condition of our present Justification. You your self (Sir) have been so
good to the young Gentleman, your Sister's Son, as to take him out of Prison,
to pay his Debts, to adopt him into your Family, to call him by your own Name,
and to treat him as your own Child: And I am told, that you intend to reward
his Dutifulness to you, by giving him the Preference to your Daughters, and by
making him the Heir of your solid Estate. If it should be so, would it from
thence appear, that his dutiful Behavior was the Condition of your taking him
out of Prison, and adopting him into y^^r Family? No, Sir, you know that this
was an Act of more Compassion and Kindness. -- Apply this to the Case before
us; and you will see the Fate of your Argument. -- You are besides to consider,
that it is no where said in Scripture, that we are at the last Day to be
rewarded for our good Works, but according to them. The Reward which Believers
shall receive, will be a Reward of mere Grace; and will of God's infinite
Goodness be proportioned to, but not merited by their Obedience. -- Let it also
be considered, In our Justification in this Life, Christ is considered in the
special Character of our Redeemer, our Propitiation, and High Priest; and
accordingly applies the Benefits of his Redemption to our Souls, that we may be
accepted in him: But in the great Day of Accounts, he will appear in the
special Character of our Judge, publicly owning and rewarding those Graces,
which he has enabled us to exercise, and that Obedience which he has excited
and strengthened us to perform. -- In our Justification here, he is glorifying
the Riches of his redeeming Mercy and Love: In the Day of Judgment, he will
glorify his rectoral Holiness and Equity, as well as his infinite Bounty; and
let the intelligent World see, that the Judge of all the Earth will do right.
-- Here, he justifies the Ungodly, by acquitting them from Guilt, and imputing
Righteousness without Works: there, he will reward the Godly, by crowning their
Piety and Holiness with eternal Life. -- Here, our Justification is the
Foundation and Fountain of our new Obedience; as I have before shown you:
there, we are to receive the Reward of our Obedience already performed and
finished -- In our Justification here, Christ acts from the Motives only of his
sovereign Grace and Love: in the final Sentence, he will proceed according to
the Rules of distributive remunerative Justice, in adjusting and proportioning
Rewards. -- So that from the Nature of Things it is agreeable, that we should
here be justified by Faith only: but there judged according to our Works.

And now, Sir, will you indulge me the same Freedom, which you have hitherto
born with; and allow me to be your faithful Monitor, in an Instance or two?

I would first put you in Mind, that it is of much greater Consequence to your
highest Interests, to make it evident to your self, that you are indeed
justified in the Sight of God, than to exercise your Mind with this arbitrary
Distinction of a first and second Justification. If you are indeed interested
in Christ by Faith, if you do indeed experience a Change of Heart and Life in
Consequence of your Faith in him; and make a Progress in the divine Life, in
the Mortification of your Corruptions, in Love to God and your Neighbor, and
in heavenly Mindedness and Spirituality, you will not be examined at the Bar of
your Judge, about your Acquaintance with these modern Distinctions; or, whether
those Qualifications which will then be gloriously rewarded, are the Fruits of
the first, or the Conditions of a secondary Justification.

I would again entreat you to consider, that the Life of a Christian is a Life
of Faith in the Son of God. We are not only justified by Faith; but we are
saved by Faith; and the Just must live by Faith. Whatever becomes of this
Debate, you may be therefore certain, that you can be no longer (...), than
while you are humbly committing your Soul to Christ as to the Author of your
eternal Salvation, depending upon him as the Lord your Righteousness; and
expecting all Supplies of Grace from his Fullness. -- And believe me, Sir, a
lively Exercise of Faith in Christ will afford you more present Comfort, will
much more quicken you in Devotion and true Holiness; and more strengthen and
establish you in every good Work, in your Progress to the heavenly Kingdom,
than all your Studies in these fruitless Doctrines, about a first and secondary
Justification.

I will take Leave to add once more, that the Way to Heaven is certainly a Way
of Holiness; and without Holiness you can never see God. It therefore concerns
you to look to the Fountain of Holiness for all Supplies of Grace, to watch
over your Heart and Life, to endeavor and pray for a holy Conformity to the
whole Will of God; and amidst and after all, to bring your great Defects to the
Blood of Christ for Pardon; and continually implore the divine Influences, that
the Work of Grace may be carried on in your Soul with Power, 'till you arrive
without Spot and blameless, before the Throne of your sovereign and righteous
Judge.

That you may thus be directed safe amidst all the Snares and Delusions in your
Way, is the Prayer of,

Sir, Your etc.

LETTER XV. Wherein the Apostle JAMES'S Doctrine of Justification by Works, in
his second Chapter, is distinctly reviewed, and set in its genuine Light, by a
Comparison with the Apostle PAUL'S Doctrine of Justification by Faith.
SIR,
YOU acknowledge, that if it were not for one Difficulty in your Way, you
should think the Evidence offered against the Doctrine you have proposed, must
be conclusive: But you don't know how to give into a Scheme, that is not only
expressly contradicted, but particularly refuted, in the Word of God. -- The
Apostle Paul (you say) does indeed seem to speak in Favor of my Principles:
but he ought to be interpreted by the Apostle James, who expressly rejects my
Interpretation of St. Paul's Discourses on the Subject before us. -- What
Appearance therefore soever there may be, in Favor of my Principles, in St.
Paul's Epistles, these must not be understood in direct Contradiction to the
express Declarations of another inspired Writer. -- You therefore desire me to
show, how it is possible to reconcile my Scheme with the Doctrine of St. James,
in the second Chapter of his Epistle, from the fourteenth Verse to the End.

If this be all your remaining Difficulty, I hope, it will not prove an hard
Matter to give you full Satisfaction, that the Doctrine of the Apostle James in
the Place referred to, is no Ways inconsistent with the Doctrine of our
Justification by Faith. so plainly and fully taught by the Apostle Paul in all
his Epistles; and therefore, that our Justification by Works (in the Sense that
I oppose it) has no Foundation at all in the whole Word of God.

That this may be set in a proper Light, there are two or three Things
necessary to be premised, and distinctly considered, previous to a direct and
immediate View of the Consistency and Concurrence of these two Apostles, in the
Doctrine of a Sinner's Justification by Faith, notwithstanding their seeming
Disagreement and Repugnancy.

It should first be premised, that these two Apostles must be understood in
such a Sense, as will make them consistent. We must take this for a Principle,
that whatever becomes of our Schemes, on one Side or the other, the Spirit of
God cannot be inconsistent with himself, nor teach contrary Doctrines. -- That
Interpretation therefore must be right, which will make them consistent; and
that must be rejected, which sets them at Variance, and makes their Doctrines
utterly irreconcilable.

It should be likewise premised, that the Apostle James must be understood in
such a Sense, as will make him consistent with himself. We may not suppose,
that he teaches such a Doctrine in this Part of the second Chapter, as is
repugnant to the Doctrine which he himself teaches elsewhere, in the same
Epistle. -- Let us then see if we cannot find the Doctrine I am pleading for,
taught in this very Epistle of James. Particularly in Chap. i. v. 5, 6, 7. If
any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all Men liberally and
upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in Faith, nothing
wavering. For he that wavereth, is like a Wave of the Sea, driven of the Wind,
and tossed. For let not that Man think, that he shall receive any Thing of the
Lord. From whence I argue, If Faith be the Way to divine Acceptance and
Audience of our Prayers, the Means by which our Duties will find a gracious
Reception with God, and without which they will be rejected; then we are
justified by Faith, and not by Works. For it is undoubtedly true, that what
justifies our Obedience, and renders that acceptable to God, does likewise
justify our Persons, and render them acceptable to him. And our Works can have
no Hand in justifying our Persons, if our Works themselves are justified by
Faith; but condemned and rejected without it, as the Apostle teaches us in the
cited Text. So we learn from Chap. v. 15, 16. that the effectual fervent Prayer
of the righteous Man is the Prayer of Faith.

Moreover, If spiritual Wisdom, or practical Holiness, be the Fruit and Effect
of Faith (as we are told that it is, in the quoted Text) then our Justification
and Acceptance with God (by which we do, and without which we cannot obtain the
divine Influences to our progressive Sanctification) is by Faith, and not by
Works. I think, no Man will pretend, that we are so acceptable to God, as to
obtain his sanctifying Influences, in a Progress of Wisdom and Grace, before we
are justified: or that we are sanctified by Faith, and justified by Works.
Whence it follows, that Faith is the Mean or Term of our Justification, because
it is the Mean or Term of our Sanctification; and that a holy Life cannot be
the Condition of our Acceptance with God, because it is the Consequence and
Fruit of that Faith, by which we find Acceptance with him.

Another Text to the same Purpose, we find, in Chap. ii. 5. Hearken, my beloved
Brethren, has not God chosen the Poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs
of the Kingdom, which God has promised to them that love him? -- It might be
read, Has not God chosen the Poor -- to be Rich (as a similar Phrase is
translated Romans viii. 29.) to be rich with or by Faith, and Heirs. -- Does it
not plainly teach us, as that the End of God's choosing the Poor, was that they
might be spiritually Rich, so that it is Faith which enriches them, and
constitutes them Heirs of the Kingdom? And you will readily own, that if we are
Heirs of the Kingdom by Faith, we are justified by Faith. -- The Kingdom is
prepared for them that love God: And Faith is the Source of that Love to God,
by which we are qualified for the Kingdom. Faith works by Love, Gal. v. 6.
And therefore Faith is the Term or Medium of our Acceptance with God and Title
to the Kingdom. -- These Texts must therefore be remembered, in our Explication
of the Context you refer to, that we may not represent the Apostle as teaching
Contradictions or Inconsistencies.

It must also be premised, that we should understand the Reasonings and
Conclusions of the two Apostles Paul and James, according to the professed
Scope and Design of their Discourses, and according to the Subject they are
professedly treating upon: And we should consider the Expressions they each of
them use upon the Point in View, not as Words occasionally and transiently
spoken; but as what relate to, and are connected with the Subject Matter
professedly undertaken to be explained. -- This must be always allowed to be a
natural and rational Rule, which ought to be strictly adhered to, in the
Interpretation of Scripture. -- Now then, let us look a little into this Case;
and see if we don't find the Scope and Design of these two Apostles very
different, where they speak so very differently of Justification by Faith, and
by Works.

Paul designedly handles this Question, How a guilty, condemned and convinced
Sinner shall get reconciled to God, find Acceptance with him, and have a Title
to the heavenly Inheritance? -- He treats of such who are under Sin, whose
Mouths must (...) stopped, who are all become guilty bef^^e God; and who have
all sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. Romans iii. 9, 19, 23. He
considers the Impossibility in the Nature of the Thing, that such as these can
^e justified by Works: because when they have (...) all they can do, they yet
in their highest Seize continue Sinners, and remain under Guilt. This is
the plain and manifest Scope of the two first and Part of the third Chapters to
the Romans. He thence proceeds to show which Way, and which only, they may hope
for Acceptance with God; in the remaining Part of the third, and in the
following Chapters of that Epistle. This cannot be by the Deeds of the Law.
Therefore by the Deeds of the Law, shall no Flesh he justified in his Sight.
Chap. iii. 20. But it must be by the Righteousness of God without the Law, by
the Righteousness of God without the Law, by the Righteousness of God by Faith
of Jesus Christ; and by Faith without the Deeds of the Law. v. 21, 22, 28. --
This is the Subject, that the Apostle Paul keeps constantly in View, in his
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians.

But then on the contrary, the Apostle James designedly handles this Question,
Whether careless licentious Professors of Christianity may presume upon their
obtaining Salvation, from their doctrinal Faith, or from their notional and
historical Assent to the Truth of the Gospel? And thence he takes Occasion
distinctly to consider, which Way a Christian's Faith may be justified, his
Profession vindicated and evidenced to be sincere and true. He discourses of a
Man that faith he has Faith, and has not Works, ( v. 14.) of one that has a
Faith without Charity, ( v. 15, 16.) of a Faith that has not Works, but is
dead being alone, ( v. 17.) a Faith, that is but like a Body without Spirit, or
a Carcass without Breath, ( v. 26.)

These are the respective Questions handled by these two Apostles; and their
Answers are adapted to the Subjects professedly handled by them. They give the
very same Answers to each of these Questions, that a judicious Calvinist-Divine
would now give. -- Should an awakened Sinner, under a Sense of his Guilt and
Danger, inquire of one of our Divines, how he may obtain a Pardon of his Sins,
a Reconciliation to God, and a Title to eternal Life, would he not answer, with
the Apostle Paul, that he must seek Righteousness by Faith, and not as it were
by the Works of the Law: for by the Deeds of the Law, no Flesh shall be
justified in his Sight: that he must be found in Christ, not having his own
Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. -- But then, on the other
Hand, should any vain Professor, that turns the Grace of God into wantonness,
yet say that he has Faith, and flatter himself with Salvation, from his
historical or doctrinal Belief of the Gospel, while living a careless and
sensual Life; would he not be told in the Language of the Apostle James, that
such a Faith will not save him; that the very Devils have such a Faith, as well as
he; that Faith without Works is a dead Faith, and but a Carcass without Breath;
that he must have Works to justify his Pretense to Faith; and must show his
Faith by his Works, or his Hopes are vain, and he a vain Man to entertain such
Hopes. -- Now, what Shadow of Disagreement would appear in these different
Answers, to such very different Subjects in Question?

After this View of the Case, it is now to be considered, from which of these
Apostles we may expect to have the Doctrine of a Sinner's Justification before
God explained and set in its proper Light: whether from him who is purposely
handling this Subject; or from him who is not purposely handling this Matter,
but treating on a very different Subject? This is an Inquiry verily easily
answered and being answered, the whole Difficulty vanishes of Course.

These Things being premised, I proceed to consider the Subject before us more
directly and particularly: And by taking Notice of the Doctrines respectively
taught by these Apostles, shall endeavor to show you, that there is no
Disagreement at all between them; nor any Thing at all in this Discourse of the
Apostle James, which you refer to, that is in the least repugnant to our
Justification by Faith, without Works of Righteousness done by us.

This will appear evident, if we consider in the first Place, that these
Apostles are treating of a different Faith. The one of them has not the same
Idea, and does not mean the same Thing with the other, when they discourse of
Faith and its Influence upon our Justification. -- You remember, I have
formerly shown you at large, in a Letter purposely written on that Subject,
that there are two Sorts of Faith mentioned and described in the Scripture. By
the one we are, and by the other we are not, justified before God. Now the
Apostle Paul speaks of the former of these; and the Apostle James of the
latter. There is therefore the greatest Truth and Propriety in what each of
these Apostles speak of Faith, taking it in the Notion which they respectively
intend. It Is true, that by the Faith of God's Elect we are justified and saved:
It Is also true, that the Faith of the vain Man, or empty Professor, a bare
notional historical fruitless Faith, will not save us. -- The Apostle Paul
speaks of a living Faith, by which the Just shall live. (Romans i. 17.) The
Apostle James speaks of a dead Faith, which is but as a Body without the
Spirit. v. 17, 26. -- The Apostle Paul speaks of a Faith which works by Love.
(Gal. v. 6.) The Apostle James speaks of a Faith which has not Works; and
which is destitute of Mercy or Charity. v. 16, 17. -- Paul treats of a special
Faith, by which we are the Children of God. (Gal. iii. 26.) James of a Faith,
which is common to the Devils. v. 19. -- Paul treats of a Faith, by which we
shall be saved. (Romans x. 9.) James of a Faith, which cannot save us. v. 14. --
Paul treats of a Faith, by which we are justified, without the Deeds of the
Law. (Romans iii. 28.) James, on the contrary, speaks of a Faith, which being
alone, without Works, is such as will not justify us. v. 24. -- Now can it
possibly be true of the same Faith, that it is both alive, and dead; that it
works by Love, and yet has not Works, but is without Love and Mercy; that by
it we are the Children of God, and yet not distinguished from the Devil by it;
that we are saved by it, and not saved by it; that we are justified by it
without Works, and are not justified by this alone, without Works? If these are
not some of the highest Contradictions, I know not what in the World either is
or can be so. The Consequence therefore is inevitable, either that these
contrary Characters and Accounts of Faith cannot be both true; or else that it
is a different Faith, which these Apostles speak of. You dare not assume the
former of these Consequences; and therefore must allow the latter to be
necessarily true. You must allow it to be true, that Paul speaks of one Kind of
Faith, and James of another. -- And what Argument can now be fairly drawn from
this Discourse of the Apostle James, but this only, that a lifeless, fruitless,
unoperative Faith will not justify or save us? And who, but sensual Libertines,
ever thought that it would? -- If you suppose James to be here speaking of a
true lively Faith, you must suppose him to contradict, not only the Apostle
Paul, but our blessed Lord himself, and the Holy Ghost, in Multitudes of plain
and express Passages of Scripture, which are every where dispersed through the
Bible, that ascribe our Justification before God to Faith only. Here then the
Controversy is brought to a Point. And what Conclusion will you now come into?
Is it not Time to give up your Scheme, and ingenuously acknowledge, that as the
Apostle James is here saying nothing to the Subject before us, there can
nothing be inferred from what he says, against the Doctrine which you oppose.

It is also further evident, that the Apostle James in the Context referred to,
is saying Nothing contrary to the Doctrine so constantly taught by the Apostle
Paul, of our being justified before God by Faith alone, without the Deeds of
the Law, nor any Thing in Favor of our Justification before God by our own
Works; This, I say, is further evident, because he is not there treating of
Justification, as it is the Relief of a guilty World, and imports the Acceptance
of our Persons before God; nor is he saying any Thing at all about this, one
Way or another. But he is treating of the Justification of our Faith, or
Demonstration of the Sincerity of our Profession by its proper Evidences: Which
Justification, he shows us, is by Works. -- Whereas the Apostle Paul is always
treating only of Justification as it is the Relief of an awakened Sinner, and
imports the Acceptance of our Persons, when he tells us that we are justified
by Faith, without Works. -- I have formerly shown you, that tho the Word
Justification (in its general Notion) has always one unvaried Meaning and
uniform Signification in Scripture, yet it is frequently applied in both these
Respects. It is indeed most usually to be understood for the Acceptance of our
Persons with God, and respects our Interest in his Favor: but it sometimes
also intends a Vindication of our Character as Believers, and such a
Manifestation of the Sincerity of our Faith and Profession, by the necessary
practical Evidences, as will give them a just Estimation and Acceptance with
our own Consciences, or with our Fellow Creatures. Thus the Word is used, Deuteronomy.
xxv. 1. Job xxxiii. 32. Luke vii. 35. Romans iii. 4. and elsewhere. And I am now
to show you, that the Apostle Paul understands the Word in the former of these
Senses; but the Apostle James in the latter.

By Justification, the Apostle Paul intends the Remission of Sins. Romans iii.
25. Our receiving the Gift of Righteousness, Romans v. 17. And our being entitled
thereby to Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Romans v. 1, 2.

But by Justification, the Apostle James intends no more than the approving our
selves found Believers, evidencing the Sincerity of our Faith, or manifesting
the Truth of our Profession, and so the Safety of our State. -- If this appears
to be so, upon a particular Examination of the Case, you must own, that there
is no Place for any Argument in Favor of your Scheme, from this Context. --
Let us then consider this Matter distinctly and impartially.

It may be presumed, that the Apostle James is not treating of the
Justification of our Persons in the Sight of God, in that there is not one
Character of such Justification, to be seen in his whole Discourse. There is
nothing spoken about our obtaining Pardon of Sin, nothing of our Persons being
made righteous in the Sight of God, nothing of our being entitled to future
Glory, by the Works unto which our Justification is ascribed. No more can
therefore be proved from this Apostle, but that we are in some Respect
justified by Works: Yet not so justified, as to obtain Remission of Sins and
Reconciliation to God, or to be entitled to an Inheritance in the future Glory,
by our Works. For of these Things, or of any Thing else which implies them, he
says Nothing at all. -- But this may be more fully and clearly evinced, by the
following Considerations.

It is evident in the first Place, from the Occasion of this Discourse, as it
is represented to us in the first sixteen Verses of this Chapter. They
professed Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, and yet had
Respect of Persons; making a Criminal Distinction between the Rich and Poor, of
the same Christian Faith and Profession with themselves; as appears from the
four first Verses of the Chapter. They despised the Poor; and thereby violated
that royal Law, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. ver. 6, 8. They
respected Persons, they committed Sin, and were convinced of the Law as
Transgressors. v. 9. They exposed themselves to have Judgment without Mercy, if
they thus showed no Mercy. v. 13. -- And would such as these pretend to Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ? What does it profit, if a Man say, that he has
Faith, but has not Works? Can that Faith save him? What Profit can that Faith
be to them, which leaves them so uncharitable and unmerciful, that they can see
a Brother or Sister naked, or destitute of daily Food, and only say to them,
Depart in Peace, be you warmed and filled: but not withstanding, they give them
not those Things which are needful to the Body. v. 14, 15, 16. -- This is
plainly the Occasion of this Discourse. They pretended to Faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ: but bro't forth Fruit quite contrary to their Pretensions. -- How
then could they justify their Pretensions? How could they justify their
Profession of Faith, against the Charge of Hypocrisy, and prove it to be
sincere and saving? They could never in this Sense be justified any Way, but in
that of Evidence by a Life correspondent to their Profession. Their Faith must
be justified or evidenced by their Works. I may allude to that, Isai. xliii. 9,
Let them bring forth their Witnesses, that they may be justified. Otherwise let
them pretend what they would to Faith, while they lived without brotherly Love
and good Works, it was but an empty Pretense; and their Profession wanted the
proper Witnesses to justify it. Thus the Argument is natural and easy: and the
Conclusion necessarily follows. -- But then, on the other Hand, if we consider
Justification as meaning our Reconciliation to God, and our personal Acceptance
with him; the Apostle's Argument will appear very lame and defective, and the
Conclusion will never follow from the Premises. For it will by no Means follow,
because a lifeless fruitless Faith, destitute of Mercy and Obedience to the
royal Law of Love, will not justify us before God; that therefore good Works in
Truth will jusfy us before God. It will by no Means follow, because we cannot be
accepted of God and saved, by a false and unsincere Profession of Faith; that
therefore we can be accepted of God and saved, by such Obedience as we are
capable to perform. -- The Inference is therefore necessary, that the Apostle
must be so understood, as will secure the Connection of his Discourse, and the
Force of his Argument: Which cannot be done, if we consider him as speaking of
Justification in any other Sense, than that which I am now pleading for.

Further, that the Justification here treated of, is the Justification of our
Faith and Sincerity, but not of our Persons, is evident likewise from the
Consequence, the Apostle draws from the foregoing Premises, which he undertakes
to prove and vindicate in the following Verses: Which is, Even so Faith, if it
has not Works, is dead being alone. v. 17. This is the Point, which he
undertakes to prove: And accordingly this is the Conclusion of the whole, when
he has finished his Reasoning on the Subject. For as the Body without the
Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works, is dead also. v. 26. As a breathless
spiritless Corpse that cannot act or move, is evidently dead, so a speculative
Belief, that does not influence a Man's Life and Actions, is evidently dead; a
dead Thing in it self, argues a dead Soul, and is dead as to the Purposes and
Offices of Gospel-Faith. -- We must therefore understand all the Arguments here
used, to refer to this Point only. They are all brought to prove, that Faith
which is without [or severed from) Works, is dead: And that therefore there is
a Necessity of Works to justify our Faith, or to make it manifest that it is
not a dead Faith. Were Justification here taken in the other Sense, his
Arguments would not only be utterly inconclusive: but his Reasoning quite
foreign to to his Subject, which may not be supposed: And therefore it
necessarily is the Justification of our Faith, or Christian Profession, and not
of our Persons, which the Apostle James is here treating of.

This is also evident from every one of the Arguments, used by the Apostle in
this Context. -- Every one of them will bring out the Conclusion now mentioned:
But neither of them separately considered, nor all of them connected, have any
Appearance of an Argument in Proof of our personal Justification (or our
Persons being made righteous) before God, by our good Works.

The first Argument seems but ironically proposed. Yea, a Man may say, Thou
have Faith, and I have Works: Show me thy Faith, without thy Works; and I will
show thee my Faith by my Works. ( v. 18) As if he should have said: Have you
indeed Faith without Works! I pray, show me your Faith without Works, if you
can. For my Part, I know of no such Way of manifesting the Truth of Faith; I
resolve to take a contrary Method; and will show you my Faith, will evidence
the Sincerity of it, and justify my Profession of Faith, by my Works. Here the
Argument is very clear and full, in Favor of the Interpretation I am pleading
for. And here we have an Index, to point out the Meaning of the Word
Justification, in the subsequent Discourse. It cannot import more than a
manifestative Justification. Indeed it signifies the same Thing with showing
our Faith, or evidencing the Truth of our Profession, and so of our justified
State. -- But now let us see how this Argument will conclude for the other Side
of the Question. The Argument ought to be thus stated. Our Faith must be shown
and manifested by our Works: therefore our good Works will justify our Persons
before God, and render us righteous and acceptable in his Sight. -- I think,
every Body will own, that the Spirit of God don't reason at that Rate; and
therefore that Justification before God, which is the Sinner's Relief against
the Challenges of his Law and Justice, cannot be the Subject here treated of.

The second Argument here used, is, that a fruitless and unoperative Faith,
though it be good as far as it goes, yet is no other than what the Devils have;
she is therefore a vain Man, who depends upon Acceptance with God by such a
dead Faith. Thou believe there is one God; thou do well; the Devils also
believe, and tremble. But will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith without Works,
is dead. v. 19, 20. -- Here the Apostle expressly shows us, what it is he had
undertaken to prove: Which is, that a bare, fruitless, historical Faith cannot
save us, because it is common to the very Devils. -- Here he expressly shows,
who it is he is disputing with: it a vain Man, who vainly expects to be saved
by an idle Faith, and empty Profession of the Gospel, without any Fruit of
Obedience. -- And here he does again expressly assert the Principle, which was
the Subject of his Discourse, and the only Point to be proved, that Faith
without Works, is dead. -- So that there is no Room to debate, what was the
Design of this Argument. By this he effectually proves, that the Faith which
justifies our Persons, must be justified by good Works; otherwise we are but
vain Men, and our Hope is but a vain Hope, which will leave us among unpardoned
Devils at last. -- But not so much as the least Color of an Argument can be
found here, that our Persons are justified before God by good Works: Whence
follows, that the Justification here treated of, must necessarily be the
Justification of our Faith, of our Christian Character and Profession; and not
of our Persons, in Regard of their State, before God.

A third Argument here brought by the Apostle to prove his Point, is Abraham's
being justified by Works, when he had offerred Isaac his Son upon the Altar. v.
21. -- Now it appears from a Variety of the strongest and clearest Evidences,
that the Apostle did not (could not) refer to the Justification of Abraham's
Person in the Sight of God, but to the Justification of his Faith and Sincerity
only, in this Instance before us.

This appears, in the first Place, because Abraham was in a justified State, by
an everlasting Covenant, thirty Years before his offering his Son Isaac upon
the Altar. It was so long, or near so long before this, that the glorious God
himself made the Promise to him, in Genesis xvii. 7. And I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee and thy Seed after thee in their Generations, for
an everlasting Covenant, to be a GOD unto thee and to thy Seed after thee. --
And it was more than so long before this, that Abraham had this Testimony given
him in Genesis xv. 6. That he believed in the Lord; and he counted it to him for
Righteousness. Yea, he was a Believer so long before, as his first leaving his
Father's House. By Faith Abraham, when he was called, -- obeyed and went out.
Heb. xi. 8. How then could his offering his Son Isaac be the Mean or Term of
the Justification of his Person before God, when he had Faith unseigned, had
Righteousness imputed to him, and an everlasting Covenant made with him so long
a Time before? -- Besides, if Works could have justified his Person, he would
have been justified by Works long before this. For his whole Story shows, that
he had lived in a Course of holy fruitful Obedience, from the Time of his
Justification till this Time. -- There cannot therefore be any fair Pretense
made, that the Justification of his Person is here referred to. No, this good
Work was not in the least constitutive, but only evidential, of his Personal
Justification before God.

Further, it appears by the Story it self, to which the Apostle refers, that it
was only a manifestative Justification, a Justification of his Faith and
Sincerity, and so declarative of the justified State of his Person, that
Abraham obtained by offering his Son Isaac upon the Altar. -- The glorious God
condescends to treat with him after the Manner of Men; and by an Assumption of
human Affections, to declare concerning him, Now I know that thou fear God,
seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, from me. Genesis xxii. 12.
This then was the Justification, of which the Apostle treats, Abraham's making
it known, that he feared God, and that his Faith and Profession were sincere.
-- For this is all the Justification, which can be proved from this Text in
Genesis, to which he refers. -- We may not suppose, that an inspired Apostle
quoted Scripture impertinently: And yet we cannot suppose the Scripture
referred to, was any Thing at all to his Purpose, unless we understand him to
be speaking of Justification in the Sense I am pleading for. In this Sense
therefore, and this only, did the Apostle design to prove our Justification by
Works, by the Argument now before us. Abraham's Obedience witnessed to the
Truth of his Faith: And so his real State of Justification before God was made
apparent.

This also appears by the Apostle's Illustration of this Argument, in v. 22.
See thou how Faith wro't with his Works, and by Works was Faith made perfect?
-- How was it that Faith wrought with his Works? Not as a Joint-Condition of
his Justification before God. He was justified in the Sight of God long before
this, as I have shown you already: And the Apostle Paul assures us, that his
Justification was by Faith, without Works, Romans iv. 4, 5. Therefore Faith could
not cooperate with his Works, to the Justification of his Person, when
Righteousness was imputed to him that worked not, but believed on him that
justifies the Ungodly. This Sense being rejected and contradicted by the
Spirit of God himself, must consequently by no Means be admitted: Nor is there
any other Interpretation, which can (with the least Show of Reason) be given to
these Words, but that which I am pleading for. Agreeably we read, Heb. 11. 17.
By Faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Issac: and he that had received
the Promises, offered up his only begotten Son. His Faith was signally
operative; not a dead Faith; and therefore sincere. This was visibly
demonstrated by the good Works, which it produced, Such Works must be the
Productions of a true and lively Faith. And we may see in this Instance, how
Faith wrought with his Works, exciting, directing, assisting him in them: And
thereby may see, that it was not such a Faith, as the Apostle is here
complaining of. -- By Works was his Faith made perfect. How was it made
perfect? The Grace of Faith, considered in it self, was neither the better nor
the worse, neither more nor less perfect, for the Works which followed it:
Save, as the Exercise of Faith in doing them might tend to strengthen and
improve the Habit. But the Meaning seems to be, that it was discovered, and
proved to be a p^^fect (true and lively) Faith, by its practical Consequences
and Effects. -- His Faith was a perfect or sincere Faith, when it was imputed
to him for Righteousness, thirty Years before this. But this noble Act of
Obedience evidenced the Truth of his Faith, justified his Profession and
Character, witnessed to his being a true Believer; and made it known, that he
indeed feared God, seeing he withheld not his Son, his only Son, from him. --
In this View of the Case, the Argument is clear and pertinent; and the Evidence
full and convincing: but considered according to the other Construction of the
Words, it affords no Conclusion to the Purpose. It is no Consequence, that
because Abraham's Faith was operative, therefore his good Works made him
righteous, or had any Hand in the Justification of his Person before God: Or,
that because his good Works were an Evidence that his Faith was perfect and
upright, therefore his good Works were a Condition of his Justification in the
Sight of God, with Respect to his Person and State.

The same Thing likewise appears from the 23d Verse. And the Scripture was
fulfilled, which faith, Abraham believed God; and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness: And he was called the Friend of God. -- There can be Nothing
more pertinent, natural and easy, than the Application of these Words to the
Purpose which I have proposed. That eminent Instance of Abraham's Obedience did
most convincingly evidence the Truth and Sincerity of his Faith; and abundantly
verify the Report in the Scripture, that Abraham did believe God; and that he
had indeed such a Faith, as was the Means rendering him righteous and accepted
with God. -- Thus the Scripture was fulfilled, and clearly manifested to be
true. -- But then on the other Hand, if Justification be considered in the
Sense which you plead for, this Argument would be so far from concluding in
Favor of the Point to be proved, that it would be directly opposite and
contradictory to it. For how could Abraham's being justified by Works, fulfill
the Scripture, which faith, he was justified by Faith; if Justification be in
both Places taken in the same Sense, for absolute Justification of the Person
before God? How could his Works being imputed for Righteousness, fulfill that
Scripture which assures us that his Faith was imputed for Righteousness; unless
Faith and Works are the same Thing, and there be no Difference at all between
believing and obeying? -- Certain it is, that the Apostle Paul understood the
Argument to conclude the quite contrary Way, when he undertook to prove from
this very Text, that Righteousness is imputed to him that works not; and that
it is imputed without Works: And therefore the Apostle James must be understood
in such a Sense, as will make both his Argument conclusive, and his Doctrine
consistent with the other inspired Writings. -- I shall only add, as to that
Clause, And he was called the Friend of God, this does not mean, that Abraham's
Works made him the Friend of God: But they declared him so. His Obedience did
not put him in the State of a Friend: but being upon Trial found faithful, he
obtained this Testimony, that he was the Friend of God, a justified Believer.
-- Now Abraham being the Father of all them that believe, an eminent Example of
Faith, and Pattern of Justification, the Apostle subjoins ( v. 24.) You see
then how that by Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only. -- In a like
Sense, even as Christ is said to be justified in [or by] the Spirit, so a
Christian Man is justified by the Fruit of the Spirit, in a holy Life, i. e.
declared approved of God. By Works a Man that says he has Faith, is thus
justified, and not by Faith only; not by a Faith that has not Works attending
it; not by a Faith which is alone, or by it self, destitute of its proper
Fruits and Evidences. Some of the best Critics in the Greek Language tell us,
the exclusive Particle MONON ( v. 24.) as here placed after the Word Faith, has
the Force of an Adjective; and they read it, Fide solitaria, Faith which is
alone.

A fourth Argument is taken from the Instance of Rahab, v. 25. Likewise also
was not Rahab the Harlot justified by Works, when she had received the
Messengers, and had sent them out another Way? -- Upon which the same Remarks
may be made, as on the Instance of Abraham. -- Rahab feared the God of Israel,
and was a true Believer, and therefore personally justified in the Sight of
God, before her sending out the Spies another Way. For she had received the
Spies by Faith. (Heb. xi. 31.) And consequently she certainly had Faith, before
she received them. A noble Confession whereof we find her making to these
Spies, before she dismissed them. See Josh. ii. 10, 11. What Justification
therefore could she possibly obtain by these Works, but the Justification of
her Faith, since she was really in a justified State before?

And now I am come to the Conclusion of this whole Dissertation, which is, For
as the Body without [or severed from] the Spirit is dead, so Faith without [or
severed from] Works is dead also. v. 26. This, as I observed before, clearly
shows what was the Apostle's Design in his whole Discourse. For every
Conclusion of an Argument justly prosecuted, must be naturally deduced from the
Premises, and consist of the principal Subject Matter to be proved, as we see
is the Case before us. But if Justification were here taken in the Sense which
you espouse, the Arguments would all of them be inconclusive: And that
Conclusion would be quite foreign to the Purpose. -- This Consequence therefore
of my foregoing Discourse necessarily forces itself upon you, that the Apostle
was not here treating of the Justification of our Persons before God, in Regard
to their State; but of our Faith, in Point of Sincerity: And therefore there
can no Argument be brought from this Context, for our Justification by Works,
in the Sense you plead for.

Thus, Sir, you have seen, that the Apostles Paul and James were treating of
very different Subjects, and their Determinations were adapted to the
Doctrines, which they undertook to explain. And thence it is a just Inference
made by an eminent Divine upon this Subject, that the principal Designs of the
two Apostles being so distant, there is no Repugnancy in their Assertions, though
their Words make an Appearance thereof. For they do not speak ad idem; nor of
Things eodem Respectu. James does not once inquire, How a guilty convinced
Sinner, cast and condemned by the Law, should be justified before God? And Paul
speaks to nothing else. Wherefore apply the Expressions of each of them to
their proper Design and Scope, (as we must do, or we depart from all sober
Rules of Interpretation, and make it impossible to understand either of them
aright,) and there is no Disagreement, or Appearance of it between them.

And it may be yet further remarked that these Apostles had very different
Persons to deal with, in their respective Epistles: And their Addresses were
accordingly accommodated to the State of the Parties to whom they wrote. -- The
Apostle Paul's Business either lay with such, who being newly converted from
Heathenism, were biassed by the Principles taught by the Light of Nature, and
always received by them, to indulge the vain Thought, that they must render
themselves acceptable to God, and be justified in his Sight, by their own
personal Righteousness and Obedience to the Law. An Opinion greatly strengthened
by the numerous false Teachers, who were desirous to be Teachers of the Law,
though they understood neither what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. Or
else his Business lay with Judaizing Christians, who being zealous of the
Levitical Dispensation and Constitution, expected Justification by their
Conformity to it. -- Of these Sorts of Professors the Apostle observes, that
they were soon removed, from him that called them into the Grace of Christ,
unto another Gospel. Gal. i. 6. And that being ignorant of God's Righteousness,
and going about to establish their own Righteousness, they had not submitted
themselves unto the Righteousness of God. Romans x. 3. His Concern was therefore
to discover their dangerous and destructive Mistake; and to represent to them
the Way, the true and only Way, in which they might hope for Justification in
the Sight of God. That it is not by Works of Righteousness which they had done,
but of God's Mercy, they must be saved; that they must be justified freely by
God's Grace, through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus; and that in the
Justification of a Sinner, Righteousness is imputed without Works, and received
by Faith only.

On the contrary, James being concerned with carnal Professors of Christianity,
who perverted the Doctrines of Grace to encourage themselves in a careless
licentious Life, does at large convince them of the Necessity of Holiness, as
the Fruit and Evidence of a true and saving Faith, and the Means to qualify
them for the Kingdom of Heaven. -- He therefore puts them upon examining into
the Truth of their Faith, and Foundation of their Hope, and shows them by the
Arguments already considered, what alone will justify their Profession of
Faith, and give 'em good Grounds to conclude the Safety of their State.

They therefore who over-magnify Works, and depend upon 'em as the Condition of
their Justification before God, are admonished by the Apostle Paul to consider,
that they are building upon the Sand, and that they must renounce their false
Confidence, or perish. For by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified:
And if Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. ii. 16,
27. This solemn Truth does indeed (Sir) call for your earnest Attention.

On the other Hand, They who depreciate good Works, and neglect them as no
Consequence to eternal Salvation, are called upon by the Apostle James to
consider, how empty their Profession, how dead their Faith, and how vain their
Hope of Salvation is. For if Men may go to Heaven without Holiness, why may not
the Devils go there too, who have Faith (such as it is) as well as they? We
must have a living Faith, or a dead Hope. Our Faith must purify our Hearts, and
renew our Conversations; or leave us among the impure and ungodly for ever. It
concerns every one therefore, so to speak and so to do, as they that shall be
judged by the Law of Liberty. (Jam. ii. 12.)

Upon the whole then, as you are taught by the one Apostle how dangerous it is
to build upon any other Foundation, than Christ only; for Christ Jesus is our
Hope, and other Foundation can no Man lay, than that is laid, which is Christ
Jesus: so are you admonished by the other Apostle, that you can have no
Interest in Christ nor Title to his Salvation, but by a Faith which purifies
the Heart, works by Love, and is justified by a subsequent Life of Holiness and
new Obedience.

The Extremes, on both Sides of the Question, are equally dangerous. He that
joins good Works with Faith, as equally the Terms of Justification before God,
virtually rejects the Savior's Sufficiency; substitutes his own Righteousness
in the Room of the Righteousness of God; and consequently his Expectations must
perish. -- He that separates good Works from Faith, in his Life and
Conversation, as though they were not requisite to Salvation, will be found very
unfit for the Heavenly World, when the Decree brings forth, He that is filthy,
let him be filthy still.

Suffer me then to conclude (Sir) with an earnest Entreaty, that, as you love
your Soul, you would leave off unprofitable Disputes; and not distract your
Mind, and carry away your Thoughts from practical Godliness, by such an earnest
Application to these controverted Points: but see to it, that you come to the
Footstool of divine Grace, as a lost unworthy perishing Sinner; that you depend
only upon the Riches of God's free sovereign Grace, to draw you to Christ, and
give you an Interest in him; that you look to Christ Jesus alone for
Righteousness and Strength; and cheerfully trust in him as a safe Foundation of
Confidence and Hope. -- See to it, that the Life which you live in the Flesh,
be by the Faith of the Son of God: and as you look to his Righteousness only
for the Safety of your State, so likewise repair by Faith to his Fullness for
all Supplies of Grace, whereby you may make a Progress in Holiness. -- See to
it, that you don't quiet your Conscience with a dead Faith: but always
remember, that he who has this Hope in Christ, purifies himself even as he is
pure; and that as your Person cannot be justified, but by Faith in Christ, so
your Faith cannot be justified, but by a careful Diligence in maintaining good
Works. -- Having therefore with the Heart believed unto Righteousness, be you
in a humble Dependence upon Christ, steadfast and unmovable, always abounding
in the Work of the Lord: and your Labor will not be in vain in the Lord.

That you may be kept by the Power of God through Faith, and receive the End of
your Faith, the Salvation of your Soul, is the Prayer of,

SIR, Your etc.

LETTER XVI. Wherein is considered in what Respects good Works are necessary;
and our Obligations to them represented and urged.
SIR,
YOUR Observation is just, that it would be unsuitable and unseasonable to make
Apologies for this further Trouble [as you are pleased to call it] after I have
given you so many Assurances of my cheerful Readiness, to contribute all in my
Power to your best Interest. -- Indeed Sir, I have found nothing troublesome in
the whole Progress of our Correspondence, excepting some dark Apprehensions of
late, left you would frustrate the Grace of God, in seeking Righteousness, not
by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. But it now greatly animates
my Endeavors to serve you, to find those Fears on my Part so happily removed,
by finding the Difficulties on your Part obviated, in that important Point, and
you satisfied with Respect to the Foundation of your Hope. I am sensible, that
the Principles, which I have been pleading for, are commonly loaded with
opprobrious Invectives, as being destructive of an holy Life, and subversive of
Morality and Godliness. But I think I have already given you sufficient
Evidence, that all these Insinuations are mere Calumnies; and that there is no
other possible Foundation, than what I have represented to you, for a Life of
true Holiness and Piety. I appeal to your own Observation and Experience,
whether in general there be any that live more holy Lives, and more honor
their Profession, than they who most strictly adhere to the Doctrines of
special Grace, and depend upon Christ alone for Righteousness and Strength: And
whether they, on the contrary, who depend upon their good Works for a Title to
the divine Favor, don't too commonly show the Weakness of their Foundation, by
the Carelessness and Unfruitfulness of their Lives.

The Question which you propose, is however worthy of a distinct Consideration.
-- How far and in what Respects are our good Works necessary to Salvation?

In Order to give you a proper View of this Case, it will be needful to answer
this Question both negatively and positively: Or to show you wherein our good
Works ought to have no Place, nor be at all looked to or depended upon; and
then to show you wherein good Works ought to have Place, and in what Respect
they are necessary to every Christian indeed, that would entertain a
well-grounded Hope of eternal Life.

In my negative Answer to this Question, I must first observe, that we are not
to do good Works, in Order to change God's Purposes and Designs toward us; or
to excite his Benevolence and Compassion to us. -- I suspect, it is too common a
Case, for Men to depend upon their penitent Frames, their Duties, their
Reformations, their Works of Charity, or other religious Exercises, as what
will excite Affections, Passions, or Compassions in the glorious God,
correspondent to what they find in themselves. And thence, when Conscience
upbraids the Sinner for his past Provocations to God, he hopes to appease his
Displeasure by his Remorse, by his Duties, or by his more careful future
Conduct: And now he is delivered to do all these Abominations, his Account is
balanced, and he begins upon a new Score. Thence it is, that his Hopes and
Fears bear Proportion to his Frames and Carriages. Every serious Pang, every
religious Duty, or moral Practice, which his Conscience approves, will raise
his dejected Hopes; and give him comforting Expectations of the divine Favor.
But it should always be remembered, that the Change to be hoped for by our
Duties, religious Frames, or moral Conduct, must be in our selves, and not in
God. He is of one Mind, and who can turn him? He is the Lord, he changes not.
We are therefore not to look to our good Works, but to the Redeemer's Merits,
and the infinite Mercy of the divine Nature, as what will render God propitious
to us. -- Though we are only to hope for Mercy in a Way of Duty, it is not
because this will render God more willing to bestow it; but because it is the
Way, which God has appointed, to render us more disposed and ready to receive
it. -- It is an Imagination very unworthy of God, to suppose, that we can move
him to the Exercise of Compassion, whose very Nature is Goodness and Love it
self; that we can excite any Mercy in him, whose infinite Mercy endures
forever: or that we can procure any Change of Purpose in him who is without any
Variableness, or Shadow of turning. -- When the glorious God treats with us, as
if he were a Partaker of human Affections and Passions, this is in mere
Condescension to our Weakness; we being incapable to behold him as he is.
Surely it is not to lead us into Apprehensions, that he is altogether such an
one as our selves. Our Business therefore is, to come to Christ, and learn of
him, to bow our Necks to his Yoke, to do good Works from Faith in Christ, and
out of Love and Obedience to him; and in that Way to hope in God for Mercy, for
Christ's Sake, and for his own Sake; and not for ours. We are to obey him as a
gracious Sovereign; and to hope in him as the sovereign Author and Donor of his
own Favors. We are to hope in his Mercy, not because we can allure him to the
Exercise of it, or recommend our selves to him, by any Thing we can do: But
because he is infinite in Goodness, and delights in Mercy. The Gifts and
Calling of God are without Repentance. Romans xi. 29.

I may add, we are not to do good Works with a View to qualify us for our
Reception of Christ by Faith, or for our Interest in him. -- Multitudes seem
most dangerously to deceive their Souls in this Matter. It Is but too common a
Case for Men to quiet their Consciences, and to entertain Hopes of Salvation,
from Apprehensions, that they endeavor to be found in a Way of Duty, they
endeavor to mortify their Lusts, and to live a holy Life; and therefore,
though guilty of many Defects both in their Duties and Conversations, they hope
God will accept them upon Christ's Account, that the Merits of Christ will make
up the Defects of their Performances, and his Blood cleanse them from the Guilt
of their Sins. -- If they should fall into some more gross and enormous Sin, or
grow careless and remiss in Duty, they will then perhaps fell into a Panick, and
terrify themselves with Apprehensions, that Christ will not accept such as they
are: but when they have reformed their Conduct, their Fears blow over, and they
revive their Hopes, that they shall yet obtain Mercy for Christ's Sake. And
what is the natural Language of all this, but that they shall obtain an
Interest in Christ by their good Works; and when they have done their Part, he
will do the rest, will make up the Defects of their Seize, and give such
a Value to their sincere (though imperfect) Obedience, that this shall
recommend them to the Favor and Acceptance of God. -- As though the glorious
Redeemer undertook our Ransom, for no other End, than to render our deficient
Duties meritorious: and our Sins innocent and inoffensive. -- This legal and
selfrighteous Principle seems generally to obtain with the careless carnal
World. And when Sinners come under Conviction of their Guilt and Danger, they
are yet influenced by the same legal Disposition, though it appear in another
Form. What distressing Fears and Terrors do they usually agonize under! How
impossible is it to give them any sensible View of the Hope that is set before
them! But what stands in the Way? Their Sins are great, their Hearts are hard,
their Duties formal and hypocritical, their Corruptions prevalent, that they
cannot think Christ will accept such as they are; and therefore they dare not
venture their Souls and their eternal Interests upon him. -- Were the Case
otherwise, could they subdue these stubborn Hearts, could they get a Victory
over these Corruptions, sanctify these depraved Affections, and be more
spiritual in their Duties; or in other Words, could they themselves, begin
their own Salvation, then they could depend upon Christ to carry on the Work in
their Souls; and then they could hope, that God would accept them for Christ's
Sake. -- But all this is to substitute our own Righteousness in the Place and
Stead of the Righteousness of Christ; or at best, to divide the Work of our
Salvation between Christ and our selves.

Will you bear with me, Sir, if I am forced to express my Fears, that you are
yet under too great Remainders of this unhappy Disposition. -- I rejoice in
your Recovery from your late dangerous Mistake. I cannot but hope, that you have
chosen the good Part, which shall not be taken from you. -- But what mean the
frequent Returns of your desponding Hours? Whence do your Hopes and Fears bear
Proportion to your present Frames? What occasions those many dark
Apprehensions, not only that you have not yet an Interest in Christ; but that
you shall never attain to it? -- I entreat you to consider, that Christ came to
save Sinners; and that we must come to him and trust in him as Sinners, having
no valuable Qualification of our own to entitle us to his Favor, Nothing but
our Guilt and Pollution and his Sufficiency to plead, for our Acceptance with
and Interest in him. -- In Proportion as you look to your own Qualifications to
recommend you to Christ, so far you practically make a Savior of your good
Works; and reject the Terms of Salvation by Jesus Christ. -- As it is certain,
that you can have no good Works, which are acceptable to God for any saving
Purposes, till you have Faith, in Christ: so it is also certain, that you need
not seek for any in Order to your cheerful Trust in him and Dependence upon
him, to justify you by his Righteousness, to sanctify you by his Spirit, and to
make you an Heir according to the Hope of eternal Life. -- The Gospel brings
glorious Tidings of Salvation to perishing Sinners. It exempts and excludes
none who will come to Christ for Life, who will come to him as lost Sinners,
under a Sense of their Guilt and Unworthiness; who will buy of Him Wine and
Milk, without Money and without Price; and who will take the Water of Life
freely. Be their Sins ever so great, his Blood will cleanse them from all their
Sins. Be their Hearts ever so hard, he will take away their Hearts of Stone,
and give them Hearts of Flesh. Be they ever so destitute of any gracious
Qualification, of his Fullness they shall receive, even Grace for Grace.
Whatever their Case be, they may safely trust in him, as the Author of eternal
Salvation. -- But this alas! is the Misery and Ruin of Multitudes, who are
pretending to seek Salvation by Christ, that they are for dividing the Work of
their Salvation between him and them: And by substracting the Honor of their
Salvation from him, who will do all or nothing for them, though they follow
after the Law of Righteousness, they don't obtain it; because they seek it, not
by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. -- Here then you see, that
good Works have no Place at all. We are to look after no recommending
Qualifications for an Interest in Christ: but to come to him guilty and
miserable as we are, that he may be all and in all, be all to us, and do all in
us and for us. He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.
Mat. ix. 13.

I must further add, that we are not to do good Works, in Expectation that we
shall by them obtain a Title to the future Inheritance. -- Heaven is a
purchased Possession. Our Title to it, our Qualification for it, our
Perseverance in the Way that leads thither, and our eternal Enjoyment of the
glorious Inheritance, are all purchased by the Blood of Christ. In all these
Respects, Christ Jesus is our Hope; and when we rejoice in Hope of the Glory of
God, we must rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no Confidence in the Flesh. It
cannot be too deeply impressed upon our Hearts, that it is not by Works of
Righteousness, which we have done, but of his Mercy, that God saves us. It is
mere Mercy in the eternal Contrivance of our Salvation by Christ; mere Mercy in
his Incarnation, Humiliation, Obedience and Sufferings for us; mere Mercy in
the Application of his Redemption to our Souls; mere Mercy, that we are kept by
the Power of God, through Faith to Salvation; and mere Mercy, that Christ will
at last present us faultless before the Throne of God, with exceeding Joy. It
is to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein we are made accepted in the
Beloved. -- Our good Works cannot have any Share in purchasing our Title to
this Salvation. They cannot make Atonement for our Sins; because the Iniquity
of our most holy Things stands in Need of Atonement. They cannot give us a
Covenant-Right to Mercy; because we are antecedently Sinners, and obnoxious to
the Curses of the broken Law. They cannot make us meet for Salvation; because
by their Imperfections they still leave us open to the Curse; and because they
cannot sanctify our Nature, and give us new Hearts. Nor can they give us any
Claim to the special Influences of the Spirit of God; because then our
Sanctification would be of Debt, and not of Grace. What then can they do? No
more, than to bring us to the Foot of a sovereign God, to wait upon him in the
Way of his Appointments, that he would work in us both to will and to do, of
his good Pleasure.

You Will remember, that I am here speaking of our being entitled to Salvation by
our good Works; and not of their Usefulness to our spiritual and eternal
Welfare. In the former Sense, they must be utterly disclaimed; and all our
Righteousnesses esteemed but as filthy Rags; as I have particularly shown you
in some former Letters. In the latter Sense, they must be diligently and
painfully pursued, and attended to; as I shall more fully set before you. --
Our Business therefore is, with most earnest Application to w^^ch daily ^t
(...) Gates, and wait at the Posts of his Doors, to use our most active
Endeavors in all the Ways of Godliness, Righteousness, and Charity, doing all
in the Name of Christ, and when we have done all we can, to come still as lost,
guilty, worthless and helpless Sinners, self-loathing and self-condemning, to
the Throne of Mercy, acknowledging that to us belongs Shame and Confusion of
Face; and that we have Nothing to plead, but the Riches of redeeming Love, and
the boundless Grace of God in Christ, for the Acceptance either of our Persons
or Services. In our highest Seize, we should come before God with that
Language of Faith, Dan. ix. 18. We do not present our Supplications before
thee, for our Righteousnesses, but for thy great Mercies.

I shall only subjoin, that we must not depend upon our good Works for a
progressive Sanctification, for renewed Supplies of Grace, and for a continued
Progress in Holiness and Comfort, unto God's heavenly Kingdom. It is a
dangerous Mistake, which too many seem to fall into, that we are to depend upon
Christ alone for justifying Righteousness: but trust to our own active
Endeavors for inherent Righteousness, for a Victory over our Corruptions, and
for a Conformity of Heart and Life unto the divine Nature and Will. Thence it
is that although they carry on a dreadful Struggle with their Corruptions, yet
these, notwithstanding all their Purposes, Promises, Vows, Watchings, Fastings
and other mechanical Endeavors, will still prevail, and often throw them into
great Perplexity and Confusion. -- They are sensible, that God demands their
Hearts; and that it is impossible, their external Reformations should be
acceptable, while their Hearts are far from him, and led away with diverse
Lusts. With what Agony and Toil do they therefore worry with their carnal and
sensual Affections, their impetuous Appetites and Passions; using various
Methods of Mortification and Discipline, to correct the Disorders of their
Nature: And are but still rolling a Stone up Hill, which as soon as they let
go, it is at the Bottom again. -- They are sensible, that God requires
Sincerity in the inward Man, in all the Duties of religious Worship. They
therefore groan under the Burden of their religious Defects, their Deadness,
Formality and wandering Thoughts in their Approaches to God; condemn every Duty
they perform, and resolve upon more Watchfulness and Care for the future: but
alas! the Difficulty remains; and they are ready to sink under discouraging
Apprehensions of their Hypocrisy. Indeed, when they gain a little Ground, their
Hopes are revived and their Endeavors animated: but when Deadness and
Corruption prevail, their Distress and Fear return and prevail with them, their
Spirits sink, and they are ready to be quite discouraged. How many poor Souls
are thus laboring in the very Fire, making a toilsome and melancholy Drudgery
of Religion, by their legal Attempts and their Spirit of Bondage?

How far these Characters are applicable to your self, Sir, you can best tell.
But this I know by Experience, that so far as this legal Disposition prevails
in us, it will not only darken our Way, but check our Progress in Grace and
Holiness. -- If you would make any Proficiency in your spiritual Course, you
ought to remember, that the divine Life must be carried on in the Soul, in the
same Manner, and by the same Means, that it was begun there. We are not only
justified by Faith: but we must be sanctified by Faith too; and of Christ's
Fullness must receive, even Grace for Grace. A cheerful Dependence upon Christ
for all Supplies of Grace and Strength is the Way to obtain his quickening,
comforting, and strengthening Influences; to have our Hearts enlarged in the
Service of God; and to run the Way of his Commandments with Delight. -- We must
be dead to the Law (to all Dependence upon it and Hope from it) if we would
live unto God. Gal.ii.19. -- Though we must discharge the Duties of the Law,
and live in Conformity to it: Yet these must be done with a Gospel Spirit, from
Gospel-Principles and Motives. What the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the Flesh, God sending his own Son, in the Likeness of sinful Flesh and
for Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh. Would you then maintain a truly spiritual
Life, The Life which you live in the Flesh, must be by the Faith of the Son of
God. Gal. ii. 20. Would you maintain a Conversation worthy of your holy
Profession, your good Conversation must be in Christ. I Pet. iii. 16. Would you
live in the Love of God and your Neighbor, it is Faith which works by Love.
Gal. v. 6. Would you get a Victory over the World, and all its Allurements,
This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. I Joh. v. 4.
Would you be able to withstand Temptations, It is the Shield of Faith, by which
you will be able to quench the fiery Darts of the Wicked. Ephesians. vi. 16. Would
you walk honestly as in the Day, you must put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Romans
xiii. 13, 14. Would you be strengthened in the Service of God against all
Opposition, you must be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. Ephesians.
vi. 10. Would you have your Heart purified from sinful Lusts, Appetites and
Passions, you must get your Heart purified by Faith. Acts xv. 9. Would you go
on in your Way rejoicing, you must rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no
Confidence in the Flesh. Phil. iii. 3. Would you persevere in the Fear and
Service of God, you must be kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation. I Pet. i. 5. -- Sir, it is not your Business to run without Legs, or
fly without Wings: But to go forth in the Strength of the Lord God. Despair of
all Sufficiency of your own, to mortify your Corruptions, and quicken your Soul
in the Ways of God and Godliness. Humbly repair to the Lord Jesus Christ, and
cheerfully trust in him for Grace and Strength, to make a successful Progress
in your spiritual Course. Let not your Imperfections or Corruptions discourage
you; nor let your good Purposes or Performances be the Ground of your Hopes:
but in a diligent Use of Gospel-Means, commit you^ Way to the Lord, trust also
in him, and be will bring it to pass. I think, you cannot so far misunderstand
me, as to suppose I am exhorting you to depend on Christ for Holiness, in the
careless Neglect of good Works. This would be Presumption, and not Faith. No! I
am exhorting you to a realizing Impression, that your good Works will not
sanctify your Heart, your Affections, or Conversation; when you have done all
you can, that you must rely wholly upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and that you may
rely confidently upon him, to fulfill the good Pleasure of his Goodness in your
Soul; and carry you on from Grace to Grace, and from Strength to Strength, till
you come to the Measure of the Stature of a perfect Man in Christ Jesus. --
Thus I have shown you negatively in some Instances, to what Purposes our good
Works are not necessary, and in what Respects they may not be depended upon.

I proceed in the next Place to show you affirmatively, in what Respects they
are of Necessity; and to what Purposes they must be done, by all those who
would approve themselves Christians indeed.

1. Then good Works are necessary, as being one Design of our Election,
Redemption, and effectual Vocation. -- They are one End of our Election. God
has chosen us in Christ, before the Foundation of the World, that we should be
holy and without Blame before him in Love. Ephesians. i. 4. And it is by a Life of
good Works, and a Progress in Holiness, that we are to make it evident to our
selves, that we were chosen unto Salvation, through Sanctification of the
Spirit, and (...) of the Truth. And accordingly we ar^ ^^horted, in this Way,
to give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. -- 2 Pet. i. 10. --
Good Works are likewise one End and Design of our Redemption in Christ. He gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. Tit. ii. 14. And they who are
indeed interested in this Redemption, who indeed have believed in God our
Savior, who sincerely trust in Christ for needed Supplies, will feel the Power
of his Grace, quickening their Souls, and exciting in them a zealous Carefulness
to maintain good Works: and therefore such have no Grounds to conclude upon
their Interest in Christ, who live careless sensual Lives, in the Neglect of
Duty to God, of Righteousness or Charity to Men; or in a willing Indulgence of
any Way of Sinning. -- I may add, good Works are also the End of our Vocation.
God has called us unto Holiness. I These. iv. 7. We are accordingly
instructed, that as he which has called us is holy, so we should be holy in
all Manner of Conversation. I Pet. i. 15. None therefore have any Grounds to
flatter themselves with the Dream of a regenerate State, while they indulge
themselves in any sinful Way, or live in the Neglect of good Works; whatever
Experiences they may pretend to, or whatever Joys and Comforts they may
entertain. This we are to affirm constantly, that they which believe in God,
must be and will be careful to maintain good Works. Tit. iii. 8. Though good
Works are not the Fountain and Foundation of a renewed Nature, they are always
the Streams that flow from that Fountain, and the Superstructure upon that
Foundation. Though they don't sanctify us, they are the natural and necessary
Actings and Operations of a sanctified Heart. An unholy Life gives the Lie to
our Profession of an holy State: and infers on us the just Denomination of
Liars. (I. Joh. 2. 4.) -- It defeats all Pretensions to effectual Calling; it
contradicts the very End of Conversion; and is contrary to the unalterable
Tendency of the new Nature. Grace is given for Exercise; and is a vital,
operative Principle. We shall therefore receive the Grace of God in vain, if
the Principle be not exerted in agreeable Practice.

2. Good Works are necessary, as they belong to the Way leading to Heaven, and
are preparative for the Possession of it. They are so necessary in this
Respect, that it is certain, that no Man who has the Opportunity after his
Conversion for a Life of good Works, will ever get to Heaven in any other Way.
Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. Heb. xii. 14. -- We must not only
enter in at the strait Gate, but walk in the narrow Way which leads unto
Life. Christ is the supreme and comprehensive Way: but Holiness is a
subordinate and subservient Way. Neither do any walk in Christ, unless they
walk before him in true Holiness. -- They who would hope for (...) hereafter,
must have it begun in their Souls here. Their Hearts must be in some Measure
conformed to the divine Nature and Will, that they may be attempered and
qualified for the Enjoyments and Employments of the heavenly World. How could
such Men find Comfort and Pleasure in the eternal Service of God, to whom his
Service here is ungrateful and burdensome? None therefore are in the Way to
Heaven, but they who by a Life of Holiness are preparing, and laboring after a
Meetness to be Partakers of an Inheritance among the Saints in Light. -- There
is nothing more certain, than that a Life of Sin and Impiety, Sloth and
Irreligion, leads down to the Chambers of Death: And it is therefore equally
certain, that Christ Jesus leads none to Heaven in that Road. It is true
indeed, that we may be in the Way to Heaven, while compassed with many
Infirmities, while groaning under much Deadness and Formality in Duty, while
liable to many involuntary Surprises into Sin, while greatly defective in our
religious Seize, and in our Conduct, both toward God and Man. But they
have not this Hope, who live in the wilful Neglect of known Duty, who
deliberately indulge themselves in known Ways of sinning against God, who roll
any Iniquity as a sweet Morsel under their Tongue; or live in an allowed
Violation of the Laws of Righteousness, Charity, and Peace toward Men. If any
Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if any Man have the
Spirit of Christ, the Fruit of the Spirit in him will be Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: And they who
live in the Spirit, will also walk in the Spirit. We must by a patient
Continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, Honor, and Immortality, if we would
inherit eternal Life.

3. Good Works are necessary as Acts of Obedience to God's Commands; and a just
Acknowledgment of his Dominion over us. -- By Right of Creation, the blessed
God has an unalienable Claim to Homage and Honor from us. By the immutable
Laws of our very Being and Nature, as his Creatures and Dependents, we are
under Bonds of Subjection and Obedience to Him. The Grace of the Gospel does
not cancel those natural Obligations, or lessen the Force of them. Christ came
not to destroy the Law: Nor do we make void the Law through Faith, but rather
establish it. The great God has not laid down his Right of Sovereignty and
Dominion over us, by affording us a Medium of Reconciliation to himself, and a
Title to eternal Happiness: But rather has that Way laid us under further and
stronger Obligations to Obedience. Our Freedom from the Curses and severe
Demands of the moral Law, as a Covenant of Life, is so far from freeing us of
our Duty toward it as a Rule of Practice, or excusing us from a careful
Observance of its Precepts, that the glorious Liberty we are made Partakers of,
is given us for this very End, that we may serve God without Fear, in Holiness
and Righteousness before him, all the Days of our Lives. Though the moral Law
be presented to us now under some different Respects and Considerations, from
what it was originally, yet the same Law remains the Rule of Obedience,
confirmed and enforced (as such) by the Gospel it self. Whence it follows, that
to live a careless, sinful, sensual, worldly Life, in the Neglect of our Duty
toward God and our Neighbor and our selves, is more aggravated Rebellion
against God, than the same Life of Impiety would have been under the Covenant
of Works. For now a Life of Impiety is not only a Violation of the Precepts of
the Law, but of the Gospel too. And the greater Discoveries God has been
pleased to make of his glorious Perfections, the greater Manifestations he has
made of his Goodness and Mercy, the greater are our Obligations to Obedience,
and consequently the greater will be our Rebellion, as well as Ingratitude, if
we continue disobedient. -- We are therefore to consider, that instead of God's
suspending his Right of Dominion, or abating our Obligations to Obedience,
under the present Dispensation of Gospel Light and Love, he requires and
expects of us greater Watchfulness and Care to please and honor him, greater
Purity and Holiness, than under the more legal and imperfect Dispensation of
Moses. It is undoubtedly true, that those Sins and Imperfections, which were
consistent with a State of Grace, under the Mosaic Dispensation, are not so now
under the Christian Dispensation; wherein not only we have more Light and
Knowledge, but Christians indeed do obtain more purifying and quickening
Influences of the Spirit, than they then ordinarily did. -- There is therefore
no Room to extenuate our Falls into Sin, by the Examples of the Jewish Saints.
For though that Ministration was glorious, yet the Ministration of the Spirit
is more glorious, has a Glory that vastly excels. (2 Cor. iii. 8, 9, 10.) By
the Beholding of which Glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same Image,
from Glory to Glory. ( v. 18.) Our enjoying the Promises of the Gospel lays us
under the strongest and most indispensable Obligations, to cleanse our selves
from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the Fear of
God. 2. Cor. vii. I. -- God forbid, that any of us should continue in Sin, that
Grace may abound; or turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness. This would
determine us to be ungodly Men, who deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. (Jude 4.) Thence it is, that the Disobedience of Gospel-Sinners will
bring upon them the greatest and most dreadful Damnation. See Heb. 10. 29.

4. Good Works are necessary, as Expressions of our Gratitude to God for all
his Goodness to us, more especially for Gospel Grace, and most especially for
the gracious Influences of his blessed Spirit. -- Impossible it is, for us to
have any due Conception, how great our Debt of Gratitude is, to our infinite
Benefactor. He has made us, and not we our selves, his Hands have framed and
fashioned us round about. He has preserved us through innumerable Difficulties
and Dangers; and all our Lives continually followed us with Loving Kindness and
tender Mercies. He has made this mighty Globe for our Use, with all its amazing
Variety of Furniture, fitted to supply us with whatever is necessary,
convenient, comfortable or delightful. He has distinguished us from very much
the greatest Part of our Fellow Creatures, by the Abundance of our Enjoyments,
and the Greatness of our Privileges. -- And if all these, and the innumerable
other Instances of the inexpressible Kindness and Goodness of God to us, be not
sufficient to excite our Gratitude, and to attract our Affections to such an
infinite Fountain of Benevolence, yet certainly our Redemption by Jesus Christ,
our Enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances, our Advantages to live to God in this
World, and to be eternally happy in the Enjoyment of him in the future State of
everlasting Light and Love, are enough to carry our Minds beyond Admiration,
and even to overwhelm them with Astonishment. And what Returns does the
glorious God expect from us, for all this? No more, than the Love and Obedience
of our thankful Hearts and fruitful Lives: No more than to live to him, and
delight in him, gratefully to receive, and faithfully to improve the Benefits
he is bestowing upon us. He requires Nothing of us, but that we should be ready
to every good Work, out of Love and Gratitude to God. -- How unworthy shall we
therefore be for ever, of one Smile of his Countenance, or the least Favor and
Kindness, if the infinite Goodness of God, his infinite Love and Compassion in
Christ, don't constrain us, to renounce our Lusts and Idols, and make it our
delightful Endeavor to seek and serve him! -- He may well expostulate with
such, as with his an^ient People, Will ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish
People, and unwise! He justly may, and certainly will exclude such from the
Glory and Blessedness of his eternal Praises, who han't Hearts to love him, and
serve him, and praise him here. -- They who have ever tasted that the Lord is
gracious, and have any becoming Sense of their Obligations to him, will study
what they shall render to the Lord, for all his Benefits; they will delight in
Endeavors to glorify him; they will be solicitously careful of a constant
Conformity to his Will, and take a peculiar Pleasure and Pains in following
after Holiness.

5. As I have distinctly considered in my last, Good Works are necessary
Evidences of the Truth and Sincerity of our Faith in Christ. And I need only
add here, It is a faithful Saying, which cannot be too much insisted upon, that
they who pretend to have believed in God, must be careful to maintain good
Works. All their Profession of Religion, all their imaginary Faith in Christ,
all their Peace and Joy, all their Appearance in the Cause of Truth, all their
seeming Zeal for the Glory of God, the Interest of Religion, and the Conversion
and Salvation of Sinners, or whatever else they may suppose Evidences of their
renewed State, will prove but as sounding Brass and a tinkling Cymbal, without
a real Life of good Works. -- Such are greatly to be pitied, who can have Peace
from any supposed Experiences of Grace, while they walk in the Imaginations of
their own Hearts. The Lord Jesus Christ will own none as belonging to him, but
those who are a peculiar People, in some Measure, zealous of good Works. He
will in the Day of Accounts declare to all others, that he never knew them; and
sentence them to depart from him, as Workers of Iniquity. -- But to this I have
spoken particularly already. -- And therefore shall only subjoin here, that
Obedience is the genuine Exercise, and therefore a necessary Evidence of Faith
unfeigned. What are good Works, but Works of Faith; or Faith in Operation,
exciting other Graces to their proper Action and Exercise? Without we exemplify
the Obedience of Faith, our Faith is vain.

6. Good Works are necessary to honor our Profession, to adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior, and to bring Glory to his Name. -- There is Nothing infers a
greater Scandal upon our holy Religion, than the unsanctified Lives of its
Professors. This gives Occasion to the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, to
blaspheme his Name, and speak Evil of the Way of Truth; to call Religion itself
a Cheat; and judge all that make an Appearance of Holiness, to be Hypocrites
and false Pretenders. This casts a Stumbling Block in the Way of poor Souls,
that are beginning to look Zion ward; and proves a sad Temptation to Apostasy.
This hardens secure Sinners in their sinful Courses; and pacifies their
Consciences, from the Thought that such who make Pretenses to Religion, are
impious and Wicked, as well as they. And what is still worse, if while we seek
to be justified by Christ, we our selves also are found Sinners, this brings
great Dishonor upon our blessed Savior, as though he were the Minister of
Sin; and has a dreadful Tendency to render the Means of Grace ineffectual, to
quench the Spirit, and to drive the very Form, as well as Power of Godliness
out of the World. -- You therefore see the Necessity of good Works and of a
holy Life, if we have any Value for the Interests of Christ's Kingdom in the
World, any Pity to the precious Souls of Men, any Regard to the Honor of our
blessed Savior, and the holy Religion which we profess; and any Desire to
escape having the Guilt of other Men's Sins, as well as our own, charged to our
Account in the Day of Christ. -- If there be any Force in these and many other
like Motives, to prompt us to a Life of Holiness, we who profess our selves
Christians, should approve our selves a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood,
an holy Nation, a peculiar People, to show forth the Praises of him, who has
called us out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. I Pet. ii. 9. -- Indeed
the chief End of Man is to glorify God! It Is the Design of our Creation: and
it is the Design of our Redemption. For ye are bought with a Price; therefore
glorify God, in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's. I Cor. vi. 20.
It Is the Design of our Baptism and Profession, and of all our Experience of the
Operations of the Spirit of Grace; and should be the Scope of all our
Conversation and Practice. -- But, how shall we act in Correspondence to this
Design, unless we care for the Things of the Lord, that we may be holy, both in
Body and Spirit; diligently following every good Work? We should study,
whatever we do, to do all to the Glory of God. I Cor. x. 31. And to this
Purpose it is necessary, that we follow not that which is evil, but that which
is good. For by breaking the Law, we dishonor God; but herein is he glorified,
that we bear much Fruit, in an exemplary and useful Life.

7. Good Works are likewise necessary to our inward Peace and Comfort. -- We
often see that Observation verified, that the Wicked are like a troubled Sea
when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt; and that there is no
Peace to the Wicked. They must have seared Consciences indeed, who can have
peaceable Minds in a Progress of Sin, and in the Neglect of practical
Godliness. A truly tender Conscience will always remonstrate against the
Indulgence of any Sin, either of Omission or Commission. And how unhappy and
uncomfortable a Life is it, to have our own Hearts condemning us; to have a
Worm gnawing in our Breasts, to have Conscience applying the Terrors of the
Law, and representing to us our Guilt and Danger? And yet this cannot be
avoided without a Life of good Works. We cannot have Grounds of Rejoicing, but
from the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity,
not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God we have had our Conversation
in the World. 2 Cor. i. 12. -- As they who live careless and sensual Lives,
cannot have good Evidences of a renewed Nature and a safe State, they must
necessarily be Strangers to that Joy and Comfort, which flows from the
refreshing Views of an Interest in the Covenant of Grace, and from the Sense of
our having the eternal God for our Father and Friend, compassionately to
provide for us here, and to make us eternally happy in the Enjoyment of
himself. -- They must likewise be altogether Strangers to the unspeakable
Consolation, which flows from a Life of Communion with God. For this is never
obtained without a Progress of Holiness and good Works. -- If therefore we
would have the continual Feast of a peaceful Conscience; if we would enjoy a
comfortable View of the divine Favor, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God;
if we would find by blessed Experience, that the Ways of Wisdom are Ways of
Pleasantness and all her Paths Peace; if we would obtain the Sealings of the
blessed Spirit, the Earnest of our eternal Inheritance, and the Foretaste of
heavenly Happiness, which Enjoyments vastly preferable to all the Pleasures of
Sense, we must add to our Faith Virtue, and maintain a Life of Holiness and
good Works. For if we say, that we have Fellowship with him, and walk in
Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth, 1 John i. 6. But then shall I not be
ashamed, when I have Respect to all God's Commandments. Great Peace have they
which love his Law; and nothing shall offend them. Psalm. cxix. 6, 165.

I might in several other Particulars exemplify to you the Necessity of good
Works: but you will probably acknowledge, that I have said enough already, to
take off the Odium cast upon us, as if we denied the Necessity of good Works in
reference to Salvation. I shall therefore only add, --

8. Good Works are necessary in Order to our escaping eternal Ruin and Misery.
-- I have shown you indeed, and I think sufficiently proved, that they are not
necessary as an Atonement for our Sins, or as what will appease the Wrath of
God, and procure us an Acquittance from Guilt, and a Right to be freed from
Condemnation. But still it is nevertheless certain, that in Fact no Man will
escape the amazing Horrors of eternal Perdition, who has had Opportunity for a
religious Life, and yet has not been fruitful in good Works. -- This will be
the final Test, to prove our Sincerity toward God: and the eternal Judgment
will turn upon this Evidence. -- The great Judge of the World will quickly
appear, and his Reward will be with him, to render unto every Man according as
his Works have been; and then he will inflict on those who are contentious and
do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish. Romans ii. 8, 9.

As therefore it is not a small Matter to inhabit the dreadful Flames of Hell,
the Seat of enraged Justice and burning Vengeance, through eternal Ages, it
cannot but be of the greatest Importance to take Pains to escape it; to repent
and obey the Gospel, to watch and pray, to be active and diligent in all the
Ways of Religion, if so be we may be accounted worthy to escape that tremendous
Misery, and made meet to stand before the Son of Man. -- We have no other
Choice before us, but to be holy here, or unhappy for ever. We must obtain
Grace from God, and live to him in the Exercise of Grace, or be separated from
his Presence for ever, as unmeet Objects of his Favor. And will not all
readily acknowledge, that the former is infinitely to be preferred by every
one, who has any just value for his present Interest, or for his eternal
Happiness! -- How absurd is it in the View of common Reason, to love Death, or
choose an evident Token of Perdition, by being the Servants of Sin, and obeying
it in the Lusts thereof!

I hope, Sir, I have now answered not only your Question, but your Expectation.
And yet that I may obviate all Mistakes, I will endeavor to give you a Review
of the whole, in some plain familiar and practical Directions.

If you suppose your self in an unregenerate State, be found most earnestly
diligent in the Duties of Religion, in the Use of the Means of Grace, and in
Endeavors of a Conformity of Life to the Will of God, as the Way in which God
will be enquired of by you, that he may bestow his converting and sanctifying
Grace upon you. -- It is true, that God is the sovereign Author and Donor of
his own special Favors: but it is also true, that he has given you no
Encouragement to hope for them, in any other Way but that of Duty. -- In this
Way therefore do you be found; pleading with him for the Influences of his Holy
Spirit, to draw you to Christ, and to work the Work of Faith with Power in your
Soul. In this Way you may hope in his Mercy, not indeed for the Sake of your
Duties, but for the Sake of Christ's infinite Merits, and the boundless Grace
and Goodness of the divine Nature. But in the Neglect of this Way of Duty, you
have not the least Encouragement from the Word of God, to hope for the renewing
Influences of the blessed Spirit; without which you are undone eternally.

However, though even an unregenerate Man must thus strive to enter in at the
strait Gate, you must yet consider and realize to your self, that you are
utterly incapable of that Obedience which the Gospel requires, without Faith in
Christ. -- Faith is the first Act of evangelical Obedience, the Root of all
other Graces, and the Principle of all such religious Duties as God will own
and accept. For without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. xi. 6. You
must live in the Spirit, before you can walk in the Spirit. -- Your first
Business therefore is, not only earnestly to pray to God, that he would draw
you to Christ: but you must endeavor to look to this precious Savior, as to a
sufficient Fountain of all Grace, trusting your Soul in his Hands, with
encouraging Hope of Justification by his Righteousness, and Sanctification by
his Spirit. If your Faith be sincere, you thereby lay a Foundation of spiritual
and acceptable Obedience: but if not, the best Works that you can perform, will
be only external, hypocritical, legal, and slavish Performances. -- You must
therefore be bro't to act Faith in Christ for Holiness, as the Beginning of
that Salvation which you hope to obtain from him. You are not to look upon a
Life of Holiness and spiritual Obedience, as the Condition of your Salvation,
but as the Salvation it self, which you hope for, actually begun in your Soul;
and you have as much Warrant from the Invitations and Promises of the Gospel,
to trust in the Lord Jesus Christ for this Renovation of your Nature by his
Spirit, as for the Justification of your Person by his Blood, or for an eternal
Inheritance with the Saints in Light. And you must accordingly depend upon him
for it, and ask it of him in Faith, or never obtain it.

I have proposed these Things to you, upon the Supposition that you have not
satisfying Evidences of a converted State. -- Let us now then suppose the Case
to be otherwise; and you comfortably persuaded, that you have experienced the
happy Change. An humble and cheerful Dependence upon Christ for new Supplies of
Grace, must still be the Source of your persevering Obedience. Go on then to
trust in him; and you will find that he will not fail your Expectations. You Will
find, that his Grace is sufficient for you.

But don't deceive your self with an Imagination of your trusting in Christ,
amidst a Course of sinful Negligence and Inactivity. Remember, that good Works
are of indispensable Obligation, and of absolute Necessity in the Respects
beforementioned. You must not only trust in Christ to fulfill his good Pleasure
in you: but you must live to him, in the Exercise of that Grace and Strength,
which you derive from him. -- In a humble Confidence in his sanctifying and
quickening Influences, you must take Heed to your self, and keep your Soul with
all Diligence; you must see to it, that your Heart be right with God; that you
delight in the Law of the Lord after the inward Man; that you maintain a strict
Watch over your Affections, as well as Conversation; that you neglect no known
Duty, toward God or Man; that you carefully improve your Time, and other
Talents committed to your Trust; and endeavor, in a constant Course, to
maintain a holy, humble, fruitful, thankful Life. And remember, that one
Instance of Good Works, which God requires of you, is a daily Repentance of
your sinful Defects; and a daily Mourning after a further Progress in Holiness.
-- After an Espousal to Christ by Faith, this is the Way, and the only Way of
Comfort here and Happiness hereafter.

That I might set this important Point in as clear a Light as possible, I have
labored to represent it in different Views; and thereby have necessarily run
into some Repetitions, for which I depend upon your Candor: -- Now, That the
Lord would bless my Endeavors for your best Good, is the Prayer of,

Sir, Your etc.

LETTER XVII. Wherein the Nature of the Believer's Union to CHRIST is briefly
explained, and the Necessity of it asserted and defended.
SIR,
IF you mean no more by your Ignorance of the Nature of that Union to Christ,
which I so often mentioned, but that you cannot form any adequate Idea of this
incomprehensible Mystery, it is nothing wonderful. There are Multitudes of
Things, whose Existence you are most intimately acquainted with, yet of whose
special Manner of Existence you can have no Idea. -- You have no Reason
therefore to doubt of the Believer's Union to Christ, because you don't
understand the Mode of it, any more than you have to doubt of the Union of your
own Soul and Body, because you don't understand the Mode of it. It Is a
sufficient Confirmation of the Truth of this Doctrine, that it is revealed in
the Word of God. It Is sufficient for our present imperfect State, to know so
much of the Nature of this Union as God has been pleased to reveal in the
blessed Oracles of Truth. -- It is your Mistake, to suppose, that our Divines
do but occasionally mention this Doctrine; but don't pretend to explain it.
Numbers of Divines have written well upon the delightful Subject: though, I
confess, it is too little considered by many of our practical Writers (as it
ought to be considered) as being the Foundation of both our Practice and Hope.
Were it more distinctly considered, more particularly explained, and more
frequently insisted upon, improved and applied, both from the Pulpit and the
Press, than it is, it would be a probable Means to check the Growth of those
dangerous Errors, which prevail among us; and to give Men a deeper Sense of the
Necessity of experimental vital Piety, in Order to a well-grounded Hope of the
Favor of God. -- You have therefore Reason to desire "a just, plain and
familiar View of this Doctrine." And I shall endeavor according to your
Desire, in as plain and easy a Manner as I can, to give a brief and distinct
Answer to your several Questions.

Your first Question is, What is the Nature of that Union to Christ, which the
Scriptures speak of; and what are we to understand by it?

In Answer to this Question, it may be proper in the first Place, to give you a
brief View of the various Representations of this Union, in the Word of God;
and from thence proceed to take some Notice of the special Nature of it, as it
is represented in the Scriptures.

It is sometimes represented in Scripture, by the strongest Expressions that
human Language can admit, and even compared to the Union between God the Father
and God the Son. -- Thus, Jo^. xvii. 11, 21, 22, 23. Holy Father, keep through
thine own Name those whom thou have given me, that they may be one, as We are.
-- That they all may be one, as thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that they
also may be one in Us. -- That they may be one, even as We are one. I in them,
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.

This Union is sometimes represented in Scripture by lively Metaphors and
Resemblances.

It is compared to the Union of a Vine and its Branches. Thus, Job. xv. 4, 5.
Abide in me, and I in you. As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except
it abide in the Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, and
ye are the Branches. He that abides in me and I in him, the same brings
forth much Fruit: For without me ye can do Nothing.

It is compared to the Union of our Meat and Drink with our Bodies. Thus, Job.
vi. 56, 57. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and
I in him. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he
that eats me, even he shall live by me.

It is frequently compared to the Union of the Body to the Head. Thus, Ephesians. iv.
15, 16. But speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all Things,
which is the Head, even Christ: From whom the whole Body fitly joined together,
and compacted by that which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the Measure of every Part, makes Increase of the Body, unto the
edifying it self in Love.

It is sometimes compared to the conjugal Union. Thus, Ephesians. v. 23, 30. For the
Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church, and
he is the Savior of the Body. -- For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh
and of his Bones. Romans vii. 4. Wherefore my Brethren, ye also are become dead
to the Law by the Body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to
him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth Fruit unto God.

It is likewise compared to the Union of a Building, whereof Christ is
considered as the Foundation or chief Cornerstone. Thus, 1 Pet. ii. 4, 5, 6.
To whom coming as unto a living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of
God and precious, ye also are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood,
to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore
also it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief
Cornerstone, elect, precious.

I might add, that this Union is sometimes represented in Scripture by an
Identify or Sameness of Spirit. Thus, 1 Cor. vi. 17. He that is joined unto the
Lord is one Spirit.

It is sometimes represented by an Identity of Body. Thus, 1 Cor. xii. 12, 27.
For as the Body is one, and has many Members; and all the Members of that Body
being many, are one Body; so also is Christ. -- Now ye are the Body of Christ,
and Members in particular.

It is also represented by an Identity of Interest. Mat. xxv. 40. Verily I say
unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me. -- Christ and Believers have one common
Father. Joh. xx. 17. I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God,
and your God. They have one common Inheritance. Romans viii. 17. Heirs of God,
and Joint-Heirs with Christ. And they have one common Place of eternal
Residence. Joh. xiv. 3. And if I go and prepare a Place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

From this brief and general View of the scriptural Representations of our
Union with Christ, I now proceed to consider, something distinctly, what is the
special Nature of this Union, and what we are to understand by it. Now it may
not be improper, in the first Place, to consider it negatively, and say what it
is not, before I enter upon an affirmative Explication and Illustration of it.

I need not take any Pains to convince you, that this Union is not an essential
or personal Union. -- The Union of the Trinity in the Godhead, is essential:
The Union of the divine and human Nature in Christ, is personal. But it were
Blasphemy, to suppose either of these Kinds of Union, in the Case before us.
Should we suppose the former, we should attribute divine Perfection to our
selves. Should we suppose the latter, we should make our selves Joint-Mediators
of the Covenant, with the glorious Redeemer. Either of which are too horribly
profane, to find any Admission into our Minds. -- Though Christ and Believers
are one, as He and the Father are one, this is to be understood with Respect to
the Resemblance there is, in Point of Reality and Nearness of Union; and not
with Respect to the Nature and Kind of it.

It is likewise unnecessary to endeavor to prove to you, that this Union is
not of the same Kind with those natural and local Unions, with which we are
acquainted. -- Though the Word UNION is apt to carry away our Minds into an
Imagination of a Contact, Mixture, Inhesion, or the like, we are to remember,
that these are too gross and low Conceptions of this astonishing Mystery, to be
entertained by us. We are to remember, that our Union is to Him, who is by the
right Hand of God exalted, and who is sat down on the right Hand of the Majesty
on high.

These Things need not be insisted upon; the mere proposing of 'em compels your
Assent. But it seems there is another Thing requires more particular
Consideration, which is, that the Union I am treating of, is not to be
considered as a mere civil or political Union. -- It is through Want of a right
View of this Gospel-Mystery, that you tell me, You can understand no more by
our being united to Christ, than a near Relation to him as our Lord and
Savior; and if there be any more implied in it than a relative and political
Union (you confess) you have no Idea of it. -- I hope, Sir, your internal
Experience has in this Case gone beyond your Speculation: Your State (I think)
must otherwise be most dangerous and miserable. If you will view the scriptural
Representations, which I have already given of this Matter, you must see, that
there is much more, than a mere relative, civil, or political Union, implied in
those emphatical Expressions, of being one with Christ, as he is one with the
Father; of abiding in him and he in us; of being united as the Vine and the
Branches; of being so joined to the Lord, as to be one Spirit with him; of
being the Body of Christ, and Members in particular; with others of the like
Nature. It is impossible to give any rational Construction of these and the
like Passages of Scripture, upon the Supposition of a mere political Union. --
And you must acknowledge, that a political or relative Union is not peculiar to
Believers. All Power is given to Christ, both in Heaven and Earth. Angels, Men,
and Devils are in this Sense united under the Kingdom and Government of the
Lord Jesus Christ; and shall accordingly be all accountable to him, in the Day
of Retribution. This therefore cannot be the Meaning of the Union in Question.

I shall now proceed to consider affirmatively (according to the Light given us
in the Scripture) what the Nature of this Union is. And here,

1. It must be considered as a mystical Union. This (says the Apostle) is a
great Mystery. Ephesians. v. 32. So great, as to admit of no clear and full
Illustration, at least in this imperfect State. From whence we have a further
Evidence, that it is not a mere relative and political Union, in which there is
nothing mysterious, Nothing but what is familiar and easy enough to be
understood; while the Union under Consideration, is altogether
incomprehensible. -- The Reality and Certainty of this Union is clearly
revealed, and the blessed Effects of it are experienced by all the Children of
God: but the Manner of it (like the Divine Person, God incarnate, to whom we
are united) is not only above our Knowledge, but above our Search and Inquiry.
This may perhaps be Matter of Prejudice in ^he Minds of some, against the
Doctrine before us, that it is inscrutable and unintelligible: But the same
Objection lies against the most important Articles of our Faith and Hope; and
even against many undoubted Certainties in the Kingdom of Nature, as well as of
Grace. There is the same Reason to doubt of the Union of the three Persons in
the Godhead, of the Union of the divine and human Natures in the Person of the
Son of God, and even of the Union of our own Souls and Bodies. -- We may have
Reason to believe, what our Reason cannot search out, nor inquire into: And
when that is the Case, the more mysterious and unsearchable is the Modus of any
Thing, which God has revealed, the more should it be the Subject of our
Acknowledgement and Admiration. Thus in the present Case, because this is the
Lord's Doing, and mavelous in our Eyes; therefore should we adore the
wonderful Dispensation of Grace, and rejoice and be glad in it.

2. I must also observe to you, that this is a spiritual Union. Such an Union
whereby being joined to the Lord, we are one Spirit with him. 1 Cor. vi. 17. By
which we may understand, that Believers partake of the same Divine Spirit, and
the same Divine Influences and Operations, with our blessed Mediator and
Master: This Difference being excepted, that we have only lower Degrees of the
Divine Communications; but to him God gives not the Spirit by Measure. We
partake of the Rays; he of the full Sun of divine Light and Grace; and in him
are all the Treasures of Grace, as in the Repository or Fountain, from whence
we derive those Supplies, which we are Partakers of. -- The blessed Spirit, who
is in Christ an infinite Fountain of all Grace, communicates some Emanations of
the same Grace to us, whereby we are (though in a low and imperfect Degree)
conformed to the divine Will, made Partakers of the Divine Nature, have Christ
dwelling in us, and we in him. -- I confess, I am afraid, in this mysterious
Depth of divine Wisdom and Grace, of darkening Counsel by Words without
Knowledge. I shall therefore not adventure to inquire into the Modality of this
Unity of Spirit in Christ and Believers; but only endeavor to consider it in a
scriptural and practical Light: in such a Light, as it is necessary it should
be considered and understood, by all that would obtain a sure Foundation of
Hope, and needed Supplies of Grace and Strength, for a holy and spiritual Walk
with God.

Let it then be first observed, that by this Union Believers have all needful
Supplies of Grace treasured up for them in Christ. In which Respect, it is
said, All Things are theirs: for they are Christ's; and Christ is God's. 1 Cor.
iii. 21, 23. -- IN Christ are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge:
and we are complete IN him, who is the Head of all Principality and Power. Col.
ii. 3, 10. By which Means Believers are blessed with all spiritual Blessings in
heavenly Places IN Christ. Ephesians. i. 3. And Christ is made of God unto them
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. 1. Cor. i. 30.
-- By these and other like Texts of Scripture, Believers have Matter of great
Consolation, even in their sharpest Temptations and lowest Frames; in that how
dead soever their Affections may be, and how dark soever their Circumstances
may appear, they have an inexhaustible Fountain of Grace treasured up for 'em
in Christ; and by Virtue of their Union to him, they have an Interest in his
Person, they have an Interest in his Graces, and are secure of all necessary
Communications of Grace as he shall see their Case require. -- The Believer's
Refuge therefore, in all his Trials, in all his prevailing Darkness, Deadness,
Temptation and Imperfection, is to act Faith in Christ, for Grace to help in
Time of Need. There is a sufficient Stock laid up for him in the Hands of
Christ; and if he will reach forth the Hand of the Soul, and by a believing
View of the Fullness of Christ be ready to receive, he shall surely find the
Grace of Christ sufficient for him; and the Strength of Christ made perfect in
his Weakness. If he will eat Christ's Flesh and drink his Blood, that is, if he
will exercise a lively Faith in him, he shall by Virtue of this Communication
of the Spirit of Grace, dwell in Christ and Christ in him. Joh. vi. 56.

Hence also Believers by being joined to the Lord, are one Spirit with him in
another Respect. They have the same Mind in them, that is in Christ Jesus. --
They have the Interest of the Redeemer's Kingdom at Heart, as their own
Interest. -- They have their Wills in some measure subjected to the Will of
Christ. -- They who abide in him, do carefully endeavor to walk even as he
walked, to make him their Exemplar, in the Regulation of their Affections,
Appetites, Passions, and of their whole Conduct and Conversation; in their
Aims, Desires, Delights, Love to, and Zeal for the Service of God, in Love to
the Brethren; and in their Diligence and Activity in doing the Work he has
appointed them, while it is Day. -- He that thus keeps his Commandments,
dwells in Christ and Christ in him: and hereby we know that he abides in us,
by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John iii. 24. But be that has not thus
the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. Romans viii. 9.

And hence Believers shall finally be perfected, when they come to receive the
full Communications of his Grace, in the future World -- It is by their Union
to Christ, and Supplies derived from the Fullness which is in him, that
glorified Saints attain to the Perfection of Knowledge and Grace. By this are
they perfectly delivered from all Remainders of Sin and Corruption: By this are
all the Powers and Faculties of their Souls brought into a glorious Conformity
unto Christ himself, that they shall be like him, when they see him as be is:
and by this they are completely qualified for the ravishing Joys of the
heavenly State; and the eternal Praises of redeeming Love. In the Dispensation
of the Fullness of Times, God will gather together in one, all Things in Christ,
both which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in him. That we should
be to the Praise of his Glory, who first trusted in Christ. Ephesians. i. 10, 12. --
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. -- Father, I
will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my Glory, which thou have given me. Joh. xvii. 23, 24.

Here, Sir, it will be proper to make a Pause; and to consider this with a
special Application to your own State. -- It is proper to consider, where it is
that you are looking for Supplies of Grace; to your own good Purposes and
Endeavors, to your Prayers, Meditations, good Affections, and Resolutions; or
to this inexhaustible Treasury of Grace, that there is in Christ, to be
obtained by the renewed Exercise of Faith in him. -- It is proper to consider,
whether you are indeed joined to the Lord; and have one Spirit with him.
Whether you have a sensible Experience of the blessed Operations of the Holy
Spirit, divorcing you from your Idols, mortifying your corrupt Appetites and
Passions, quickening your Graces; and inflaming your Affections to God and
Godliness. At least, whether you are groaning under the Burden of your
Imperfections; and groaning after the quickening Influences of the divine Spirit
in your Soul, to bring and keep you nearer to God; and whether the Spirit does
thus help your Infirmities, with Groanings which cannot be attered. -- It is
proper to consider, whether you have the Evidence of your Union to Christ, by
your being a Partaker of the divine Nature, by your steady Desire and Endeavor
of Conformity and Subjection to the divine Will, by your having the Interest of
the Redeemer's Kingdom at Heart, and by keeping your Eye upon his glorious
Example, that you may follow his Steps; and whether you are still looking to
him by Faith, for his quickening Influences, and for an Interest in his
Intercession, whenever you find your self come short in these Seize. --
You will pardon this Digression, when you consider by what Motive it is
occasioned. You will remember, that I am not explaining this fundamental
Principle of Christanity, as a mere Matter of Speculation, or to entertain your
Curiosity; but that you may know what is the Hope of your Calling, what the
Foundation of your Confidence; and where the Returns are to be made for all
your Experience of Grace and Life. -- But it is Time I should proceed to some
further Description of the Nature of that Union to Christ under Consideration.
I shall but briefly hint at a few Particulars more.

3. Then there is such an Union between Christ and Believers, whereby the whole
Church becomes the Body of Christ; and all true Believers are Members in
particular. -- He is given to be the Head over all Things to his Church, which
is his Body, the Fullness of him that fills all in all. Ephesians. i. 22, 23. Now ye
are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular. 1 Cor. xiii. 27. Of whom the
whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named. Ephesians. iii. 15. -- The whole Church,
whether militant or triumphant, are by their Union to Christ one Church, one
Family, and one Body, whereof Christ himself is the Head. The Family in Heaven
indeed, as adult Children, have their Inheritance in Possession, while the
Family on Earth as Minors in their Nonage, have only necessary Supplies for
their Support, Comfort and Growth, 'till they come unto a perfect Man, unto the
Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ. But then the Fullness of the
Glory in the one, and the gradual Progress of Grace in the other, are both the
Product of their Union to Christ. And as the whole Church is the Body of
Christ, so each particular Believer is a Member of that Body; and has both his
Body and Soul united unto the Person of Christ; by an Union that can never be
dissolved, by an Union that will not only continue with the Soul, in its
separate and intermediate State: but will also continue with the Body, in its
State of Dissolution, whereby its glorious Resurrection and final Renovation
will be secured; and them which sleep IN Jesus, will God being with him.

4. This Union is such, that Christ and Believers have one common Interest. --
I have hinted at this before: but it requires some more particular
Illustration. It should then be observed, that in the great Design of
reconciling Sinners to God, and preparing a chosen Number for eternal Glory,
Christ and the Church were one mystical Person: so One, that what he did was
imputed to them, as if done by them; and what they deserved was imputed to him,
as if he had been personally obnoxious. -- Thus the Lord Jesus Christ is called
the LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Jer. xxiii. 6. And the Church by Virtue of this
Union to Christ, is considered as the same Person, and has the same Characters
ascribed to her. This is the Name wherewith SHE shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness. Jer. xxxiii. 16. -- This Identity of Person was founded on the
eternal Covenant of Redemption. The Lord Jesus Christ was foreordain'd, to the
Office and Work of a Savior and Mediator, before the Foundation of the World.
I Pet. i. 20. And we were chosen in him, before the Foundation of the World;
and predestined unto the Adoption of Children by him: And thus we become
accepted IN the Beloved. Ephesians. i. 4, 5, 6. And as he was foreordained to the
Work and Office of a Redeemer, so likewise to all that Grace, Righteousness,
Strength, and Glory required thereunto; not only to that which was peculiar to
himself: but to that also, which was needful to be communicated to the Church,
and to all that should ever believe on him, in their State of Probation here,
or Perfection hereafter. -- And on the other Hand, as Believers were chosen in
him, so they were chosen to be Partakers with him, in that common Stock or
Depositum committed to him, for both their present and eternal Interest and
Happiness. -- Thus the Obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ becomes our
Righteousness, his Sufferings our Atonement; and he is a Fountain opened, for
all Supplies of Grace, upon our Union to him by Faith. He bore our Sins in his
own Body, upon the Tree. I. Pet. ii. 24. And we are complete in him. Col. ii.
10. Thus likewise, the Believer's Sufferings in his Cause are the Sufferings of
Christ. Col. i. 24. -- In all their Afflictions, he is afflicted. Isa. lxiii.
9. The Believer's Graces are the Graces of Christ, owned by and derived from
him; and of his Fullness they all receive, and Grace for Grace. Joh. i. 16. And
the Believer's good Conversation is in Christ. I Pet. iii. 16. In fine, the
whole Interest of the Church is the Interest of Christ, and is by him taken
Care of, and provided for, as his own: And the whole Interest of Christ is the
Interest of the Church; and the Believer is most nearly affected with the
Interest of Christ's Kingdom, as what most nearly concerns him. -- Thus is the
Church united to Christ; and thus has he graven her upon the Palms of his
Hands, and her Walls are continually before him.

5. The Union between Christ and Believers is such as that they have thereby
one common Relation. He is their everlasting Father, their Head, their Husband,
their Brother, their Friend, theirs by all Relations of nearest Intimacy. His
Father is their Father, his Brethren are their Brethren; and his God is their
God. Go to my Brethren; and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your
Father; and to my God and your God. Joh. xx. 17. -- Thus are Believers
distinguished from the rest of the World, dignified and exalted above all those
who are esteemed great and honorable among Men, by their near Relation to him
who is higher than the highest, and is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth.

6. The Union between Christ and Believers is such, that they have thereby one
common Inheritance. -- They being Children, are Heirs, Heirs of God and
Joint-Heirs with Christ. Romans viii. 7. And if I go (says the blessed Savior)
and prepare a Place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself,
that where I am ye may be also. Joh. xiv. 3. There is Nothing can break the
Band of Union between Christ and Believers: the Union will not be dissolved,
but perfected by Death. Neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor
Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from
the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans viii. 38, 39. -- This
is the Hope of their Calling, This the Inheritance of the Saints, that when
they have a little longer struggled with the Temptations and Imperfections,
Distresses and Calamities of this militant State, they shall arrive safe to the
End of their Desires and Hopes; and be ever with the Lord. They shall be like
to Christ, when they see him as he is. They shall dwell in his Presence; and
partake of the Joys at his right Hand for evermore.

Thus I have given you a very brief and general View of the Believer's Union to
Christ, according to the Representation of it in the Scriptures; and am now
prepared to consider your second Question.

You next enquire, How "this Union is effected and accomplished?

To this it is a sufficient Answer, that this Union is accomplished by the
omnipotent Agency of the Spirit of God, as the Author and Efficient: and by
Faith, as the Bond of Union. -- Vain therefore are their Pretenses, and they
have but a delusive and destructive Hope, who ascribe all the Change in
Conversion, to mere moral Suasion; or to the Exercise of our own natural Powers
or Endeavors only. It is beyond the Power of Men or Means, to persuade a
Sinner into this strict and intimate Union with Christ. It infinitely exceeds
the Capacity of any such sinful Worms as we are, to make our selves one with
the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Father and he are one. No! We dwell in him and he
in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. I Joh. iv. 13. And by one Spirit
we are all baptized into one Body. I Cor. xii. 13. -- Vain likewise is the
Pretense of an eternal Union to Christ, or of an Union to him, from the Time of
his Passion, or of his finishing the Work of our Redemption. For it is to them,
and none but them, who receive him and believe on his Name, that he gives Power
to become the Sons of God. Joh. i. 12. And Christ dwells in our Hearts by
Faith. Ephesians. iii. 17. -- The blessed Spirit shining with a Ray of divine Light
into the Soul of a Sinner, thereby discovers to him his own Misery and
Impotence; and shows him the Fullness and Excellency of Christ, the Freeness of
the Gospel. Offer, the Faithfulness of the Promises; and the Readiness of this
precious Savior to accept and save such guilty perishing Sinners as he is.
This divine Light enkindles the Sinner's Desires after Christ, represents him
worthy to be chosen and trusted; by which his Will is brought into a hearty
Compliance with the Gospel-Offer. Thus this admirable Union is accomplished.
Thus by the om^ipotent Power of divine Grace, the Sinner is drawn to Christ and
made one with him, in a Way most agreeable and delightful to himself, with the
concurring Act of his own Will; and with his full and free Consent and Choice.

I now proceed unto your third Question; Of what Necessity or Usefulness unto
practical Godliness, is it, that we should have a just Acquaintance with this
Doctrine of our Union to Jesus Christ?

In Answer to this, I must observe, that I have already something anticipated
this Enquiry. You may perceive by what has been already said upon this Subject,
that it is not a Point of mere unnecessary Speculation, of no Use or Influence
upon practical and vital Religion. -- And I would now endeavor to show you,
that this is the Foundation of all practical Godliness; and that it is from
Ignorance of, or Inattention to this Foundation of our Practice and Hope, that
so many dangerous Errors have obtained in the Christian Church. -- This may be
represented to you in the first Place, by considering this Matter with a
special Application to the Subject, upon which I have lately written so
particularly and largely to you.

I am first then to show you, that our Justification before God does
necessarily and immediately depend upon our vital Union to Jesus Christ. -- It
must be confessed by all Men, who know any Thing of human Nature, and have any
Belief of a divine Revelation, that we have all sinned; and that we are all
become guilty before God. And which Way shall guilty Sinners be reconciled to
God? -- This, Sir, is the most important Concern in the World. Consider the
Question, with an Attention worthy of its infinite Consequence. -- Can you
quiet your Conscience, with Hopes of appeasing the divine Justice by your
Reformations, good Endeavors, or Duties? Alas they are all so defective and
sinful, that the Iniquity of your holy Things will greatly increase the Score;
and add to the Weight of your Guilt. -- Will you flatter your Hopes, from the
Mercy and Goodness of the divine Nature? But what Claim can you have to Mercy,
when open to the inexorable Demands of Justice! -- Do you expect Acceptance
with God upon Christ's Account? This is indeed a sure Foundation of Hope, for
all who are interested in Christ and united to him. But what Pretense can you
make to the Righteousness of Christ and the Benefits of his Redemption, if you
have no Interest in him; or in any of his saving Benefits. -- If you have an
Interest in him, you are united to him, as I have already demonstrated. If you
have not an Interest in him, you have no Plea to make for Justification and
Acceptance with God upon his Account. Our Lord Jesus Christ has indeed made a
sufficient At^nement for Sin. He has wrought out a perfect Righteousness for
Sinners, whereby they may be acquitted from Guilt, reconciled to God; and
freely justified in his Sight. But what is this to impenitent Unbelievers, who
have never been drawn to Christ by the powerful Influences of his Holy Spirit,
who have never received him by Faith, so have never belonged to him; and
therefore could never have any Part in either his active or passive Obedience.
If a Man abide not in me (says our blessed Lord) he is cast forth as a Branch
and is withered; and Men gather them, and cast them into the Fire, and they are
burned. Joh. xv. 6. -- This therefore is a sufficient Evidence of the Truth of
what I have before written to you upon the Doctrine of Justification. We cannot
be justified by Works. We cannot be justified by a Conformity to any imaginary
Law of Grace, without a vital Union to Christ by Faith. For he that believes
not is condemned already. Joh. iii. 18. And he that has not the Son of God,
has not Life. 1 John v. 12. -- But then on the other Hand, being united to his
Person, we are united to his Benefits; and partake with him in all the Merits
of his Obedience, in his Righteousness, Victories, Graces, and Inheritance. --
This then shows you, what Necessity there is of your Acquaintance with the
Doctrine of our Union to Christ. There is a Necessity of it, that you may know
what is the Foundation of your eternal Hope, how you may find Acceptance with
God, and how you may know Christ, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the
Fellowship of his Sufferings; and be made conformable to his Death.

Moreover, our Sanctification does likewise immediately and necessarily depend
upon a vital Union unto the Lord Jesus Christ. -- The Scriptures do indeed
exhort us to be holy, as our Father which is in Heaven is holy; and to that End
exhort us, to watch and pray, to crucify our Flesh with its Affections and
Lusts, to mortify our Members which are upon Earth; and to place our Affections
upon Things that are above; and to the like Exercises of religious Duty. But
they no where exhort us to attempt these in our own Strength; or to expect a
renewed Nature by any Performance of them within our Power. -- To attempt our
Sanctification merely by our own Endeavors, were to press Oil out of a Flint.
For in the Lord, shall Men say, we have Righteousness and Strength: his Grace
and that only is sufficient for us; and without him we can do Nothing. -- I
have shown you, that all Supplies of Grace are treasured up in Christ for us;
and that we are to receive them all out of his Fullness. How then can we partake
of them, whilst estranged and disunited from him? Can a Branch cut off from the
Vine, bring forth Fruit? No more can we except we abide in him. Joh. xv. 4. Can
the Branches of an Olive Tree flourish, without the Root? Surely we cannot bear
the Root: but the Root must bear us; and we must therefore be grassed in, if we
would partake of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree. Romans xi. 17. -- Can we
live and act, when separated from our Life? Christ is our Life. Col. iii. 4.
And until he quicken us, we are dead in Trespasses and Sins. Ephesians. ii. 1. -- In
a Word, our carnal Minds are Enmity to God, we are altogether as an unclean
Thing: And when Love to God can be the Production of Enmity it self; and Purity
and Holiness, of Nothing but Defilement and Uncleanness, then, but not till
then, can we be holy without an Union to Jesus Christ. -- If therefore, you
would obtain that Holiness without which no Man can see the Lord, you must with
active Diligence repair to him for it. You must by Faith depend upon him, as
the Fountain of all Grace. You must receive all from him; and give him the
Glory of all you receive.

Our Communion with God does likewise wholly depend upon our Union to Jesus
Christ. -- I have already shown you, that all sanctifying Grace is derived from
our Union to Jesus Christ; and I think, I need not use Arguments to prove, that
we cannot exercise Grace before we have it. All quickening, comforting,
strengthening Grace must derive from the same Source, as converting and
sanctifying Grace does. -- Would you be humbled and abased before God, you must
learn of Christ to be meek and lovely of Heart. Mat. xi. 29. -- Would you have
your Affections placed upon Things above, you must remember, that you are dead,
and that your Life is hid with Christ in God. Col. iii. 2, 3. -- Would you have
Enlargement of Soul, and cheerful Hope in God's Mercy, when you approach his
Presence. Christ in you is your Hope of Glory. Col. i. 27. In whom you may have
Boldness and Access with Confidence by the Faith of him. Ephesians. iii. 12. And be
accepted in the Beloved. Ephesians. i. 6. Would you enjoy the Earnest of your future
Inheritance, it must be upon your believing in him, that you are sealed with
that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of your Inheritance. Ephesians. i.
13, 14. -- Would you have Joy and Peace in believing, you must rejoice in
Christ Jesus, without Confidence in the Flesh. Phil. iii. 3. -- Would you have
the Communications of the divine Love to your Soul, it must be from Christ's
loving you; and manifesting himself to you. Joh. xiv. 22. To conclude, certain
it is that without Union there can be no Communion; and it therefore concerns
you not only to consider, whether you are indeed united to Christ; and have
Access to God through Faith in him: but also, whether your Deadness, Formality,
and Distractions in Duty, which you so often complain of, are not owing to the
Want of a cheerful Dependence upon Christ, as the Head of Influences; or else
to your vain Attempts to quicken your Soul by some Endeavors of your own,
without looking to him for the Incomes of his Spirit and Grace.

I may add once more, Our Perseverance in Grace here, and out Perfection of
Grace in Glory, do necessarily depend upon our Union to Christ. -- As we are
accepted in the beloved, so it is by Christ's dwelling in our Hearts by Faith,
that we are rooted and grounded in Love. Ephesians. iii. 17. We stand by Faith in
him. Romans xi. 20. It is because Christ lives, that we live also. Joh. xiv. 19.
And if we do live, it is not we, but Christ lives in us. Gal. i. 20. -- We
have no Source of spiritual Life, but in him: No Stability in the Exercises of
the spiritual Life, but by continual Supplies of Grace from him. It is because
none can pluck us out of Christ's Hand, that we shall have eternal Life; and
never perish. Joh. x. 28. -- Here, and here only is the Believer's Stability
and Security, he belongs to Christ, is a Member of his Body, of his Flesh and
of his Bones and will the blessed Savior neglect his own Body? Will he leave
any of his Members to perish? Is it in the Power of Hell or Earth, of Sin or
Satan, to prevail against him? Or can he who is the same yesterday to Day and
for ever, change the Purposes of Love and eternal Kindness toward those whom
he has once loved and united to himself? And are not all the Promises of the
Believer's Perseverance, yea, and a men in Christ, with whom the Believer is
one mystical and spiritual Person? -- Sooner shall Heaven and Earth pass away,
than the blessed Redeemer shall forget or neglect the Members of his Body, and
the Objects of his Love: they were eternally chosen in him, they are his by
Covenant, they are united to him by Faith, their Interest is his, and he is
gone to take possession of their Inheritance, that where he is they may be
also. -- Thus are we kept by the Power of God through Faith, unto Salvation.
But how could we stand one Day or Hour against the Efforts of our own
Corruptions, the Craft, Malice, and Power of Satan's Temptations; and the
Snares and Entanglements of a wicked World, if we were not founded upon this
Rock?

And now, Sir, you are to judge, whether there be not more than a doctrinal
Acquaintance with our Union to Christ necessary for us, if we would either be
justified in the Sight of God, obtain that Holiness without which no Man can
see the Lord, live near to God; or hold the Beginning of our Confidence
steadfast to the End.

By what has been said, you cannot but see, that it should be your great
Enquiry, how this Union may be obtained, if you have not the Evidence of it, or
how it should be evidenced to your self, if you are in Doubt about it.

If you have no Evidence of your Union to Christ, it concerns you to realize
your natural Enmity of Heart to God, deeply to affect your Soul with a Sense of
the dreadful Misery of a Christless State; and to lament before God the
Pollution of your Nature, the Hardness of your Heart, the Guilt of your Sins;
and the amazing Destruction and Perdition, unto which you are thereby exposed.
-- It concerns you (as I have often advised you) to lie at Mercy, to come to
the footstool of sovereign Grace, self-loathing and self-condemning, pleading
with importunate Ardour, for the powerful Influences of the blessed Spirit to
draw and unite you to Christ. -- It concerns you, to be careful and diligent in
your Attendance upon all the Duties of religious Worship; and to be steadfast
and immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, if you would not have
your Labor in vain in the Lord. -- It concerns you, though watchful active and
diligent, yet utterly to despair of all Help in your self; and to maintain a
lively Impression, that all the Progress of spiritual Life must flow from your
Union to Jesus Christ: And that you must therefore rely upon him only, to do
all in you and for you. It likewise concerns you, to look unto Jesus Christ,
not only as a sufficient but a compassionate Savior, willing to receive you to
Mercy in your present State, how bad soever; and therefore to endeavor a
cheerful and immediate Compliance with the Gospel-Offer, without waiting for
moral Qualifications to recommend you to the Redeemer's Acceptance; and let
Christ Jesus be your steady Hope and Confidence, whatever Darkness,
Difficulties, Trials or Temptations, you may meet withal in your Way.

If you are in Doubt about your State; and in an uncomfortable Suspense whether
you are united to Christ or not, don't rest satisfied in such a Case, wherein
your eternal ALL is at Stake and in a precarious Uncertainty. -- But labor to
resolve your Doubts, by the lively Exercise of Faith; and by a humble cheerful
Confidence and Delight in the blessed Savior. Then may you know that he dwells
in your Heart by Faith, when you are rooted and grounded in Love. Ephesians. iii. 17.
-- Labor to evidence your Union to Christ, by having your Heart purified by
Faith; and your Affections spiritual and heavenly. Then may you know that you
are risen with Christ, when you seek those Things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right Hand of God; and when you place your Affections on Things
above, and not on Things on the Earth. Col. iii. I, 2. -- Labor to clear up
this Doubt, by the Exercise of all the several Graces of the Spirit of Life. If
you live in the Exercise of Faith, Repentance, Love to God, Humility, Hope in
Christ, Desire after and Delight in him; If you bring forth the Fruits of the
Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, hereby may you know that he abides in you, by the
Spirit which he has given you. I Joh. iii. 24. -- Labor likewise to clear up
this Difficulty, not only by the Life, but by the Growth of Grace. If you grow
more humble, self-abasing and self-condemning: If you grow more penitent; and
more passionately groan under the Burden of, and mourn after Deliverance from
all your Sins: If your Love to God increases, and you take more Delight in him
and in his Ways; or at least long after a Life of nearer Communion with him,
with more ardent Desire: If you are more spiritual in your Thoughts,
Meditations and Affections, more heavenly in your Conversation; and more
careful of your respective Duties both to God and Man, then may you know that
Christ abides in you and you in him; in that you bring forth much Fruit. Joh.
xv. 5.

If you get satisfying Evidences of your Union to Christ, adore, admire, and
praise the infinite Condescension, and the astonishing Love of the glorious
Redeemer, in taking such Dust and Ashes, such Sin and Pollution, into Union
with himself. Contemplate the amazing Transaction of Love with Admiration; and
let the Love of Christ constrain you, to live to the Praise of the Glory of
that Grace, by which you become accepted in the Beloved.

That Christ may abide in you and you in him, that you may win Christ, and be
found in him at his Appearance and Kingdom, and that you may reign with him for
ever, is the Prayer of,

SIR, Your etc.

LETTER XVIII. Wherein some Antinomian Abuses of the Doctrine of Believers
Union to CHRIST, or Pleas from it for Licentiousness and Security in sinning,
are considered and obviated.
SIR,
ALlow me the Freedom to tell you, that the Consequences you draw from the
Doctrine of our Union to Christ, as I have represented it, are without any
Foundation; and that a just View of the Case must convince you, that this
Doctrine gives no Advantage to licentious and latitudinarian Principles, but
the direct contrary. -- I shall therefore endeavor, according to your Desire,
to consider the Antinomian Principles you are pleased to propose; and see
whether they naturally follow from what I taught in my last.

You don't see (you tell me) if the Principles I teach are allowed, how the
Antinomians can be charged with Error, in supposing that the true Believer has
no Cause to repent of his Sins, or to entertain any Disquietment of Mind with
Respect to them, since he is united to Christ, and all his Sins are charged to
Christ's Account, whereby he has satisfied for 'em all. Why therefore should
the Believer be concerned about a Debt, which is fully discharged? -- Justice
is satisfied with Respect to him; Christ delights in him, as a Member of his
own Body; the Spirit of God dwells in him, notwithstanding any of his Sins and
Imperfections. Why may be not therefore be perfectly easy with Respect to Sin;
and look upon it (as a modern Antinomian expresses himself) unworthy of our
least Regards? -- To this I answer,

1. That no Man who is practically conformed to this Antinomian Principle, can
know himself to be a Believer; and therefore there can be no Foundation for
this Reasoning, in any Person whatsoever. Were your arguing allowed to be just,
it can take Place with none, but those who have infallible Evidence of their
Union to Christ; which it is impossible any Man should have, who is not
burdened with his Sins, who does not hate them, and groan after Deliverance
from them. -- Repentance is the genuine and necessary Fruit of a true Faith.
They shall look upon Me whom they have pierced, and shall mourn. (Zech. xii.
10.) That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy Mouth any
more, because of thy Shame, when I am PACIFIED toward thee for all that thou
have done, faith the Lord God. (Ezekiel. xvi. 63.) And ye shall be my People, and
I will be your God. Then shall ye remember your own evil Ways and your Doings
that were not good; and shall loath your selves in your own Sight, for your
Iniquities and for your Abominations. (Ezekiel. xxxvi. 28, 31.) -- It is the true
Believer, and he only, that is capable aright to mourn for Sin, truly to hate
it, and to groan under the Burden of it. Unbelievers may mourn under a Sense
of their Guilt and Danger: but this is not to repent of Sin. It is the Believer
only, who sorrows for Sin as Sin; who hates all Sin; who groans, being
burdened, from a Sense of his Sinfulness; and who cries out with the Apostle,
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! --
What Room can there then be for those licentious Conclusions you speak of? Who
is the Person that can thus rock his Conscience to Sleep, under the Prevalence
of his Lusts, from the Doctrine of our Union to Christ, as I have described it?
Must it be supposed to be one who is united to Christ; or one who is not united
to Christ? -- Surely not the former; for how can he be indolent, careless and
secure in the Commission of Sin, from the Doctrine of our Union to Christ, who
has no Evidence of this being his Case; nor can have any such Evidence, 'till
he is poor in Spirit, and is thereby qualified for the Kingdom of Heaven
(Matthew. v. 3.) 'till he is one that mourns for his Sins, and comes under the
Promise of Comfort ( v. 4.) and 'till he is of a contrite and humble Spirit;
for with such, and only with such, has the high and lofty One who inhabits
Eternity, promised to dwell? (Isai. lvii. 15.) -- And I think, I need not
endeavor to prove, that he who is not united to Christ, has no Shadow of a
Plea or Pretense to make for Carelessness and Security in Sin, from the
Doctrine before us. Whence it follows, that all Pretenses of this Kind are
without any rational Foundation. They only proceed from Men's Delight in Sin,
in a Life of sensual Ease and carnal Security: and not at all from the precious
Truth before us. -- This sacred Truth may indeed be perverted and abused; and
so may all the other Doctrines of the Gospel. (2. Pet. iii. 16.) But they who
thus turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, do it at the Peril of their Souls;
and will find but little Comfort in it, when they come to make up their
Accounts. -- Whatever extravagant Pretenses Men's licentious Dispositions may
prompt them to, they must in the Conclusion find it true, that a Life of
continued Repentance of Sin, a Life of continued Self-Abasement and
Self-Judging, and a Life of repeated and renewed Mourning after Pardon of and
Victory over our remaining Corruptions, is a necessary Fruit and Evidence of
our Union to Christ; and belongs to the Way which leads to Life eternal, and
in which the Saints walk to Heaven. If therefore we would not too late be found
with a Lie in our right Hand, we must, with Daniel, pray to the Lord, and make
our Confession. (Dan. ix. 4.) We must, with the Church, acknowledge our selves
as an unclean Thing. (Isa. lxiv. 6.) We must, with Job, even abhor our selves
and repent in Dust and Ashes, (Job xlii. 6.) We must, with Ephraim, bemoan our
selves (Jer. xxxi. 18.) And with David, have our Hearts fail us, on Account of
the Number and Aggravations of our Sins, (Psalm. xl. 12.) For these are the
Characters, these the Dispositions of such, who are indeed united to Christ.

2. There is greater Guilt in the Sins of Believers, than in the Sins of
others. They have therefore greater Cause to be humbled for them, and to lament
'em before God. -- They are indeed united to Christ, reconciled to God, freed
from all Condemnation, and made Heirs according the Hope of eternal Life: The
satisfying Evidences of which blessed State must carry them above any
tormenting Fears of Hell and eternal Perdition; and deliver them from that
legal Repentance, which is the Product of desponding Thoughts, and a Fear of
Amazement. But is there no other Motive to Repentance, but slavish Fears of
Hell? Does not a true Repentance and a genuine Sorrow for Sin, always flow from
an affecting Sense of the Contrariety of Sin to the Nature and Will of God;
from a Sense of the Ingratitude there is in Sin, to a bountiful Benefactor and
a compassionate Savior; and from a Sense of the Dishonor to God's Name, the
Violation of his Law, the Abuse of his Mercy and Love, the Affront and
Provocation to his Holy Spirit, the Distance procured between God and us; and
the Prejudice to others, as well as to our own Souls, occasioned by our sinning
against God. -- Now in all these Respects, the Sins of Believers are more
aggravated than the Sins of other Men. -- They are distinguished from the most
of the World, by renewing and saving Grace: and must it not cut them to the
Heart, to think of their vile Ingratitude to such an infinitely kind and
beneficent Friend; and of their horrid Abuse of such unmerited Mercy and Love!
-- They are united to Christ, washed in his precious Blood, and justified by
his Righteousness; and can they be content to load him with Indignities, who
has not thought his own Blood too dear a Ransom for their Souls; and who has by
the Power of his Grace plucked them out of the Guilt and Danger of a perishing
World, and made them Heirs of the eternal Inheritance! -- They have felt the
divine Influences and Consolations of the blessed Spirit; and have tasted that
the Lord is gracious: and shall they by their Sins grieve the Spirit of God,
provoke him to withdraw, and to withold his quickening and comforting
Influences from them! -- They are the Friends and Children of God, the sworn
Subjects of the eternal Majesty; yea, even the Spouse of Jesus Christ. And
shall such make little Account of Sin! Is this thy Kindness to thy Friend! Is
it a light Thing for a Child to rebel against his compassionate Father; for a
Subject to take up Arms against his Prince; or for a Wife to violate her
MarriageVows? -- Certainly the Sins of Believers are aggravated, in Proportion
to the various Obligations they are under: and though they have no Cause of
desponding and discouraging Fears, they have the greatest Cause to groan under
the Burden of their Sins, and to groan after Deliverance from them. Their Union
to Christ is so far from extenuating their Sins, that it renders them more
heinous in the Sight of God; and is the strongest Reason why they should watch
against them, lament and hate them. For this Reason, God may justly expostulate
with them upon their sinning against him, as in Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6. Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise! Is not he thy Father, that has
bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee?

3. It is true of Believers, as well as of others, that except they repent they
shall surely perish. -- They are indeed safe in the Hands of Christ; and none
shall pluck them out of his Hands: He will preserve them to his heavenly
Kingdom. But then, he will save them in his own Way, in the Way of a repeated
renewed Exercise of Repentance, as well as Faith, and in no other Way. If any
are not in that Way, they are not in Christ's Way: And have therefore Reason to
suspect their Union to Christ, and to conclude, that they are not in the Path
of Life. -- Their eternal Interest does therefore loudly call upon them, to
mourn for their Sins, to hate and forsake them, left they perish eternally.
True Believers will not indeed finally perish; for whom God justifies, he will
also glorify. But then the Believer's Perseverance is subserved by a Fear of
Caution; nor are there any true Believers, but penitent Believers: And
therefore, whoever are habitually careless in their Walk, and impenitent for
their Sins, will fall short of Salvation, whatever Pretenses to Faith in Christ
they may make. -- There is but one Way to Heaven; and whoever gets there, must
attain the glorious Salvation, by obtaining Assistance, from the powerful
Influences of divine Grace, to keep that Way. They must be enabled to go
weeping and mourning, with their Faces toward Zion. They must offer to God the
Sacrifice of a humble and contrite Spirit. They must loath themselves in their
own Sight, for their Iniquities and Abominations. -- Every other Road but this,
leads down to the Chambers of Death. Believers therefore as well as others,
have Cause to pass the Time of their Sojourning here in Fear. -- They have not
Cause indeed (as is before observed) of a legal and slavish Fear: but they have
Cause of a Jealousy of themselves, left they miss their Way and fall short of
their Hope. -- They have Cause to watch and pray, that they enter not into
Temptation. (Mat. xxvi. 41.) They have Cause to keep under their Body, and
bring it into Subjection, left by any Means they themselves should be
Castaways. (1 Cor. ix. 27.) And to judge themselves, that so they may not be
condemned with the World. (Chap. xi. 31, 32.) They have Cause to follow Peace
with all Men and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. (Heb. xii.
14.) They have Cause to repent and turn themselves from all their
Transgressions, that their Iniquity do not prove their Ruin. (Ezekiel. xviii. 30.)
-- Believers themselves would fall into Condemnation, and their Iniquities be
their Ruin, should they live careless, sinful, impenitent Lives. There is no
Salvation promised, there is no Salvation possible, to any who live such Lives.
-- They who are kept by the Power of God, are kept through Faith (an operative
Faith, which is accompanied with all the Graces of the blessed Spirit) unto the
Salvation which shall be revealed in the last Time. (1. Pet. i. 5.) -- The
Doctrine of our Union to Christ does therefore allow no Plea for
Licentiousness, since Christ is a Prince, as well as a Savior, to all who are
in him, to give the^ Repentance, as well as Forgiveness of Sins. (Acts v. 31.)
And they who do not live in the Exercise of Repentance, whatever Pretenses they
may make unto an Union to Christ by Faith, have not the Faith of God's Elect,
are none of his; nor are they likely ever to partake of his Salvation. -- It
therefore concerns such filthy Dreamers, to awake, and consider their Danger,
who are at Ease in Zion, who flatter themselves in their own Eyes: for their
Iniquities must first or last be found hateful.

You go on to argue; It appears a Contradiction, to teach, that the Believer is
perfectly righteous in the Sight of God, by Virtue of his Union to Christ and
by the Imputation of his Righteousness; and yet that he is sinful and polluted
in God's Sight, at the same Time. If he be united to Christ and interested in
his Righteousness, he (...) righteous: And if he be perfectly righteous, he
cannot be sinful; and therefore cannot have Cause to repent of his Sins, to
grieve for them, or seek Pardon of them. In Answer to this I would entreat you
to consider,

1. That this is to blend together Justification and Sanctification, as if they
were the same Thing. -- There is not the least Shadow of a Consequence, that
because Believers are interested in a perfect Righteousness, and are thereby
perfectly justified in the Sight of God, therefore their Sanctification is
complete, and they perfectly holy. -- God may blot out our Transgressions as a
Cloud, and cast our Iniquities into the Depths of the Sea, by a gracious
Pardon, when yet we have Cause to acknowledge our selves altogether as an
unclean Thing, and that if he should mark Iniquity, we could not stand; that if
he should contend with us, we could not answer him one of a Thousand. And is
that an Argument why we should be bold and careless in sinning, because God has
been infinitely gracious in pardoning our Sin? Is it an Argument why we should
securely and ungreatefully abuse our heavenly Father, because he has laid us
under the strongest Obligations to love and serve him? -- But it seems to be
the Drift of those whom you would personate in this Argument, that the
Believer's Violation of the Law of God is no Sin, that their not being under
the Law, but under Grace, makes it no Ways criminal in them to transgress the
Law; and their being united to Christ legitimates even the grossest
Transgressions both of the Law and Gospel. -- If this be intended, I must
observe to you, that in Order to a just deducing of this Conclusion, it must be
supposed, that the Law of God is wholly vacated, and ceases to be a Rule of
Life; though the Apostle assures us, that the Law is not made void by Faith, but
established. Romans iii. 31. It must also be supposed, that Holiness of Life is
not required by the Gospel of Christ; though the whole Design of the Gospel is to
promote Holiness; and we are expressly told, that the Grace of God which brings
Salvation, teaches us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. Tit. ii. 11, 12.
And it must even be supposed, that the Nature of the glorious God himself must
be changed; that he can look upon Sin with Approbation; and be pleased with
what is most opposite to his own Purity and Rectitude. It must be supposed that
David's Murder and Adultery, that Peter's denying his Lord, with Cursing and
Swearing etc. were acceptable to God. What Blasphemy, what Subversions of the
very Light and Law of Nature are contained in such Principles as these! -- But
you will say perhaps, that it does not obviate the Difficulty, to show the
Inconsistency and Incongruity of these Principles, while the Question yet
remains, whether they don't (how wicked soever) necessarily follow from my
Doctrine of our Union to Christ. -- To which it is sufficient Answer, that by
virtue of a Believer's Union to Christ, his Righteousness is imputed, to answer
the Demands of the Justice and Law of God; and thereby to reconcile the
Believer to God: but not to legitimate his sinful Actions. It is to procure him
a Pardon for past Sins; and not a License for future Transgressions. It is to
free him from the Guilt and condemning Power of Sin: but not to change the
Nature, and destroy the inseparable essential Desert of Sin. -- It is true,
that the Believer is hereby interested in God's Covenant-Mercy and Love; and
therefore secure of a gradual Sanctification, whereof his Repentance, Hatred of
and Sorrow for Sin, is a peculiar and principal Part. Whence it follows, that
we must mourn for our Sins, repent of and hate them, in Order to evidence our
Union to Christ and Interest in him; and not live contentedly in Sin from a
vain Dream of our Union to him. There can be no such Thing in Nature, as an
impenitent true Believer; and therefore all Conclusions of this Kind are
groundless and impious.

2. It is a Fact most notorious, and admits of no Dispute, that Believers have
not a perfect personal and inherent Righteousness in the Sight of God; and
therefore the Doctrine under Consideration affords no Handle for such
licentious Pleas, as you have suggested. -- Christ's Righteousness imputed to
us, it is true, is perfect; and therefore our Justification is perfect too by
Virtue of our Interest in it, so that on that Account we have no Cause of any
Disquietment and Uneasiness. But what is our own personal Righteousness? It is
filthy Rags. Isai. lxiv. 6. It is Loss and Dung. Phil. iii. 8. And if we say,
we have no Sin, we deceive our selves; and the Truth is not in us. I Joh. i. 8.
-- Have we no Cause therefore to lament the Imperfection of our own
Righteousness, because Christ's Righteousness is perfect? Have we no Cause to
lament the great Defects of our Sanctification, because our Justification is
perfect? Have we no Matter of Uneasiness on Account of our Non-confo^mity to
the Holiness of God, because his vindietive Justice is satisfied? Have we no
Occasion to lament, that we are no more prepared and ripened for Heaven,
because we hope to escape Hell^ Have we no Reason to lament the Dishonor ^e do
to God, because he has in infinite Mercy been pleased to pardon our Sins, and
make us Heirs of Glory? And in fine, have we no Sins to repent of, when in many
Things we all offend, and when our Offenses are peculiarly aggravated, by our
distinguishing Privileges and Obligations? -- I speak these Things upon the
Supposition that we have an Assurance of a justified State; which (as I have
before proved) no Man ever had, or can have, while he makes light of sinning.
It Is little likely, that they are true Believers, who believe in Christ for a
Pardon only; or that they are true Penitents, whose only Motive is the Penalty,
and not the Turpitude of Sin, which should make us loath it, and our selves for
it, though conscious of a Pardon.

You further observe, that The Antinomians argue from the Doctrine of our Union
to Christ, as I have proposed it, that the Sins of Believers do really belong
to Christ, as the Sins of the Hand really belong to the Head, unto which those
Hands are united. Accordingly be actually bare our Sins, suffered for us, and
God laid upon him the Iniquities of us all. The Sins that the Believer commits,
do therefore truly belong to Christ; and not to the Believer himself. They are
his Sins, not ours. They are already accounted for by him; and consequently are
not now to be repented of by us. -- You suspect (you say) that there are too
many among us, which quiet themselves with such dangerous Pretenses, while
going on in sinful Practices; that these seem to found their erroneous
Principles upon the Doctrine taught in my last: And you desire me to consider,
whether they don't naturally flow from it.

There needs no other Answer to this, than to show you, that our Sins are to be
considered in a threefold Respect. -- They are to be considered with Respect to
their Pollution, or Contrariety to the Holiness of God; with Respect to their
innate Guilt, or Contrariety to the preceptive Will of God; and with Respect to
their Desert, or Relation to the Penalty denounced against them by the Justice
and Law of God. -- It is in the latter Sense only, that our blessed Savior
bare our Sins, and was made Sin for us; and that our Sins are by Virtue of our
Union to Christ imputed to him, and esteemed as his. -- If this be distinctly
considered, the Case will appear most plain and evident.

If we consider Sin with Respect to its Blot or Pollution, it is the abominable
Thing, which God's Soul hates. It is what he is of purer Eyes than to behold;
and what he cannot look on but with Abhorrence and Detestation. -- Now it were
the greatest Blasphemy, to suppose, that our Lord Jesus Christ did in this
Sense take our Sins upon him, so as to be polluted and defiled with them. He
was holy, harmless, undefiled; and (in this Respect) separate from Sinners. He
was a Lamb without Spot and without Blemish. He was God's beloved Son, in whom
he was well pleased. -- In this Sense then, Sin belongs even to the Believer
himself, notwithstanding his Union to Christ. The Pollution of his Sin was
never transferred to Christ. But every Sin he commits, pollutes and defiles his
Soul, gives him new Cause of Humiliation and Repentance, new Cause to fly by
Faith to the Blood of Christ for Cleansing; and to the Grace of Christ for the
sanctifying, renewing and quickening Influences of his Holy Spirit. -- Hence we
find David complaining, that his Wounds stink and are corrupt, because of his
Foolishness; that his Loins are filled with a loathsome Disease; and there is
no Soundness in his Flesh. Psalm. xxxviii. 5, 7. And hence we likewise find him
so humbly and earnestly praying, that he may be purged with Hyssop and made
clean, washed and made whiter than the Snow. Psalm li. 7. -- It is not the
Privilege of Believers, that their Sins have less Pollution in them, than the
Sins of others; or that they are less displeasing to God: But their Privilege
is, that they being united to Christ, they have Grace given them to apply for
Cleansing to the Fountain set open for Sin and for Uncleanness; and that they
have an Advocate with the Father, to make Intercession for them. -- It is
therefore certain, that all such who do not improve this Privilege, who do not
repair to the Blood of Christ for Cleansing, but remain careless and secure in
their Sins, were never yet united to Christ, never cleansed from their
Filthiness: But are notwithstanding all their vain Dreams of an Union to
Christ, liable to meet with that final Sentence, He which is filthy, let him be
filthy still.

If we consider Sin with Respect to its innate Guilt, or Contrariety to the Law
of God, the Sins of Believers, as well as others, are a Transgression of God's
Law, a Contempt of his Dominion and Authority, a Repugnancy to his Nature and
Wi^^, a Dishonor to his Name, and an Injury to his Kingdom and Interest in the
World; in all which Respects, they bring Gui^^ upon the Souls of the Offenders,
in Proportion to the Nature and Aggravations of the Transgressions. -- Now I
hope, none will be so daringly blasphemous, as to suppose, that our Sins are in
this Respect transferred to Christ; that the blessed Savior of the World has
transgressed the Law of God, or dishonored his holy Name. For he did no Sin,
neither was Guile found in his Mouth. He always did those Things which pleased
his heavenly Father. -- There is no Possibility from the Nature of Things, that
the innate Guilt of Sin, or the Reat^s Culpae (as the Schools express it) can
be transferred from one Person to another. Whoever represents the Person of the
Offender, and as his Surety bears the Punishment he deserved; yet the original
Guilt, the Obliquity, the Enormity, Fault or Crime of the Offense, lies at the
Offender's Door; and can lie no where else. -- Whence it follows, that the
Believer's Union to Christ can no Way change the Nature of his sinful Actions,
and make that guiltless and innocent, whilst repugnant to the Nature and Law of
God. Though it deliver from the Penalty, it cannot remove the native Enormity of
Sin: it still remains, and cannot but remain abominable to God, and worthy of
eternal Death. Whence God is displeased with Believers, when they sin against
him. The Thing that David had done, displeased the Lord. (1 Samuel xi. 27.) The
Lord was angry with Moses. (Deuteronomy. iv. 21.) He was very angry with Aaron. (Deuteronomy.
ix. 20.) Though he be a Father, he is a provoked Father, when his Children
forsake his Law, and walk not in his Judgments; and therefore he visits their
Transgression with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes; though he don't
utterly take away his Loving Kindness from them; nor suffer his Faithfulness to
fail. (Psalm lxxxix. 30, 31, 32.) Have not Believers therefore Cause to be
deeply affected with their Sins, to lament them before God; and penitently to
fly to the Blood of Christ for Pardon, when they render them guilty in the
Sight of God, are provoking and displeasing to him; and justly deserve his
eternal Wrath?

But if we proceed in the last Place, to consider Sin with Respect to its
Law-Desert, or Demerit with Regard to the Penalty annexed to it, by the Justice
and Law of God, in this Sense Christ bare our Sins, for us; and took upon him
all the Iniquities of those, who are interested in and united to him. -- He
bare our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree: that is, he bare the Punishment
due to us for Sin, when he offered himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross. He was
made a Curse for us; and underwent the Curse that was due to us. He was made a
Surety of the better Testament; and so the dreadful Debt was transferred, from
the principal Debtors, to him; and he being a Surety for Strangers, was made to
smart for it. -- Thus Believers partake of the Blessedness ascribed to him,
whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered; and unto whom the Lord
imputes not Iniquity. And there is now no Condemnation to them who are in
Christ Jesus. They are acquitted from the Guilt of all their former Sins, upon
their exercising Faith in Christ. Through Faith in his Blood, Christ's
Righteousness is declared, for the Remission of their Sins THAT ARE PAST. Romans
iii. 25. -- But how will their State of Justification be continued, and their
Sins pardoned, but in the Way of renewed Exercise of Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, and Repentance toward God? How will they make any Progress in
the divine Life, but by a renewed Flight to the Fountain of Grace, for new
Supplies of spiritual Life and Strength? -- From whence then can any Man fetch
Arguments, for a careless Indifference about his Sins, unless he be also
careless and indifferent about the Favor of God, and his own eternal Welfare?
Let no Man deceive himself with vain Words; nor dream of any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ and of God. while he can sin without Care or Fear. For,
because of these Things comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of
Disobedience. Ephesians. v. 5, 6.

You go on to argue, If Believers are united to Christ, in the Manner
described, so that his Obedience to the Law was performed on their Behalf, and
is become their Obedience, it then follows, that they have in Christ fulfilled
the Law in all Respects; and it can therefore have no more Demands upon them;
and consequently they can be no more chargeable with Sin; nor have Occasion to
be concerned about it. -- For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression.

In Answer to this Objection, I shall first endeavor to show you, in what
Respects our blessed Savior has in our Place and Stead answered the Demands of
the Law, and thereby delivered the Believer from its Power and Dominion: And
then proceed to show, in what Respects the Law has still a Claim to the
Believer's Observance, notwithstanding his Interest in and Union to the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Our blessed Redeemer has these several Ways fulfilled the Law for Believers.
He has fulfilled all the penal Demands of it; and has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Gal. iii. 13. We being guilty
Criminals, the Law condemns us to deserved Punishment; and the Justice of God
demands Satisfaction. The blessed Savior has therefore stepped in between us and
the avenging Justice of God; and has received the flaming Sword into his own
Bowels. Justice is satisfied; and the guilty Offender released; upon his acting
Faith in this blessed Surety. -- The Law does moreover require of us a perfect
active Obedience, as we are rational and moral Agents; and accordingly the
original Terms of our Acceptance with God were, Do this and live. The Man which
does these Things, shall live by them. But cursed is every one, that continues
not in all Things of the Law to do them. Now Christ has in this Respect also
answered the Demands of the Law. -- He has fulfilled all Righteousness; and
taken away the Power of the Law, as it is the Strength of Sin, as it is a
killing Letter, and Ministration of Death, on the Behalf of all that believe in
him; that it no longer demands perfect personal Obedience as the Condition of
their Acceptance with God. In this Respect Believers are not under the Law, but
under Grace. Romans vi. 14. -- Thus Christ has performed a passive Obedience, to
answer the Penalty of the Law, and an active Obedience, to fulfill the Precept
of it, whereby Justice is satisfied, God reconciled, and the Believer made
accepted in the Beloved. -- I may add to this, that there is an infinite Merit
in this twofold Obedience of our blessed Mediator. -- He being an infinite
Person, the Value of his Obedience was proportioned to the Glory and D^gnity of
his divine Nature; and he has therefore by his fulfilling the Law, purchased
all Grace here and Glory hereafter, for all who shall believe in him, and be
thereby united to him. -- Thus then, the Believers first Husband is dead; that
they are loosed from the Law of their Husband: And they are become dead to the
Law by the Body of Christ, that they may be married to another, even to him who
is raised from the Dead; as the Apostle argues, Romans vii. 2, 4.

And now in Order to answer the second Part of my Promise, and show you in what
Respect the Law has still a Claim to the Believer's Observance; I must remind
you of what I have formerly observed to you, that the moral Law is also to be
considered as a Rule of Living, as the Standard or Directory of our Conduct. As
such, it is a Copy or Transcript of the divine Perfections, in particular of
his Rectitude, Justice, and Holiness; and therefore is immutable, like the
infinitely glorious Nature from whence it was derived. -- It is utterly
inconsistent with the infinite Perfections of the glorious God, for him to give
us a Rule of Life, contrary to what is contained in the moral Law. Should the
Law in this Sense be abrogated and buried, the Holiness and Justice of God must
be buried in the Ruins of it. -- Now though our blessed Savior has in this
Sense also fulfilled the Law, he has fulfilled it to establish it, and not to
vacate or destroy it. He has fulfilled it as our Exemplar, to give us a Pattern
of Obedience, that we may walk in his Steps. He has fulfilled it to glorify
his heavenly Father, that in Imitation of him we also may glorify him, by
bringing forth much Fruit. -- In this Respect then, the Law retains its full
Demand upon us. Do we then make void the Law by Faith? God forbid! Yea, we
establish the Law. Romans iii. 31. With Respect to the Law, as a Rule of Life,
our blessed Savior assures us, that it is easier for Heaven, and Earth to pass
away, than one Tittle of the Law to fail. Luke xvi. 17. -- How vile and
abominable therefore are those Pretenses, that there remains no Law, to
regulate our Conduct; that we are under no Bonds to Obedience, that we have no
Law to transgress; and therefore no Sins to lament! Has the blessed Savior
shed his precious Blood, to open a Door to Licentiousness? Has he come to
legitimate a lawless, careless, worldly and sensual Life? No surely, he came
with a quite contrary View; to redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify unto
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. Tit. ii. 14. The Law must
certainly be either the Rule of our Conduct, while we live; or the Rule of our
final Trial and Condemnation, in the Day of Christ. -- Though our Conformity to
the Law, as a Rule of Life, be neither an Atonement for our Sins, nor a
Purchase of the divine Favor, nor the Covenant-Condition of our Pardon and
Acceptance with God: Yet it is in the Nature of Things, and in the Doctrine of
the Gospel, the Believer's PathWay to eternal Life. He that faith, I know him,
and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him. I
Joh. ii. 4. He that faith, he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk,
even as be walked. I Joh. ii. 6. Whosoever commits Sin, transgresses also
the Law. I Joh. iii. 4. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his
Commandments. I Joh. v. 3. If ye fulfill the royal Law according to the
Scripture, Thou s^alt love thy Neighbor as they self, ye do well. Jam. ii. 8.

And now, Sir, it belongs to you to consider, whether the Antinomians have any
Handle at all for their licentious Principles, from the Doctrine of our Union
to Christ, rightly considered and understood. If no Man can have any good
Evidence of his Union to Christ, without a Repentance and Humiliation for his
Offenses against God, then no Man can have Reason to be easy and secure in
sinning, from a Presumption of his Union to Christ. -- If the Sins of Believers
are by Virtue of their Union to Christ more aggravated, than the Sins of other
Men, they have more Cause than others to lament their Sins before God, and to
be deeply humbled on the Account of them. -- If Believers, as well as others,
must repent of their Sins, or perish, they have then the same Cause, which
others have to mourn for their Sins, and with the greatest Detestation to
renounce and forsake them. -- If Believers by Means of their Union to Christ,
though perfectly justified, are yet not perfectly sanctified, but in many
Things, doall offend; if Christ has not taken away the Pollution of Sin, and
personal innate Guilt, though he has born the Curse, and taken away the Penalty
of Sin from Believers; if the Law still remains a Rule of Obedience to
Believers; and if their Deviation from, or Violation of that Rule, be of the
Nature of Sin, and brings them under Guilt and Defilement, they have then Cause
to be humbled for their Sins, to groan under the Burden of them, and ardently
to pant after Deliverance from their remaining Body of Death. -- All these
Premises are (I think) fully proved; and the Consequences cannot therefore be
fairly denied. -- Whence it follows, that whoever quiet their Conscience with
such vain Pretenses, expose themselves to the dreadful Consequences of a
licentious Life, Divine Rejection, and a Wrath unto the uttermost.

Thus I have briefly answered your several Pleas, in favor of the Libertines
of the present Age, by Reasonings, which cannot fail of giving you Satisfaction,
if duly considered. -- You Will be pleased to bear with me, whilst I offer one
Answer more, which will equally obviate all your Objections; and discover them
all to be groundless, unreasonable, and irreligious.

You will readily allow, if it be impossible from the Nature of Things, that
any one who is truly united to Jesus Christ, should be habitually careless and
at ease, indifferent and indolent in a Way of sinning, that your Objections are
then all groundless, and without any rational Foundation. And that this is so,
may be made abundantly clear and evident.

If a true and sincere Love to God be a necessary Consequence of our Union to
Jesus Christ, and be also utterly inconsistent with those licentious
Conclusions, which you have mentioned; it will then follow, that it is
impossible from the Nature of Things, that any one who is truly united to Jesus
Christ, should be careless, easy, and indifferent in a Way of sinning. -- That
all who are united to Jesus Christ, do habitually love God, and dwell in the
Love of God, is expressly asserted by the Apostle, 1 John iv. 16. God is Love;
and be that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. And it is also
necessary from the very Nature of our Union to Christ. Being united to Christ,
we shall partake of all the Graces of the blessed Spirit, which are in Christ,
as in a Fountain or Repository to be communicated unto us; as I have shown you
before, that this need not be insisted on.

Let us therefore proceed to consider, whether the Love of God be, from the
Nature of it, compatible or consistent with a Carelessness and Indifference
about sinning against him. -- Can we love God, and be careless and indifferent
about affronting him, and loading him with Indignity, at the same Time? Can we
love God, and yet be content to dishonor his Name, violate his Laws, and
trample his sacred Authority and Attributes under the Feet of our Lusts? This
cannot be, till Love and Hatred, Friendship and Enmity, become the same Thing,
no Ways to be distinguished. -- Our Profession of Love would hardly be voted
sincere by one of our Fellow Creatures, who should find us easy and indifferent
about injuring his Interest and Reputation, and loading him with Contempt and
Indignity. -- Does not the Love of God especially consist in a Desire of, and
Delight in a Conformity to the divine Nature and Will? That they who love God,
dwell in God and God in them; that as he is, so are they in this World. I Joh.
iv. 16, 17. And can they delight in a Conformity to God, and yet be easy and
content when they act most contrary to his Will, and in the highest Repugnancy
to all his glorious and infinite Perfections? -- Does not the Love of God
consist in a Hatred of Sin, and of whatever is displeasing in his Sight? Ye
that love the Lord, hate evil. Psalm. xcvii. 10. And can there be any Thing more
inconsistent, than being careless and indifferent about falling into such
Circumstances as are peculiarly hateful and abhorrent to us? -- Does not the
Love of God imply a Love to his Law; and a Delight in complying with his holy
Will in all Things? O how love I thy Law! it is my Meditation all the Day.
Psalm. cxix. 97. For I delight in the Law of God after the inward Man. Romans vii.
22. And is it consistent, is it not the highest Contradiction, to love the Law
of God, to delight in an Observation of it and Conformity to it, and yet be
indifferent and unconcerned about a Violation of it, or a Nonconformity to it?
-- Does not the Love of God, in the Nature of it, imply a Life of actual
Obedience? If ye love me, keep my Commandments. Joh. xiv. 15. If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love. Joh. xv. 10. And can any Thing be more
contradictory, than keeping God's Commandments, and a careless Indifferency
about breaking them? -- Is there no Gratitude in our Love to God, no Sense of
our Obligations to his infinite Goodness and Compassion; and no Sense of our
ungrateful Abuse of his amazing Dispensations of Benignity and Mercy, in our
Ransom from Hell by the Blood of his Son, in our Gospel-Privileges and
Advantages, in our Participation of his special distinguishing Grace, and in
our Hopes of Glory? -- Is the Love of the Father a light Thing with us, in
choosing us before others from the Foundation of the World, in giving his own
Son to redeem and save us; and in sending his holy Spirit to fulfill his good
Pleasure in our Souls; and fit us for Heaven? -- Is the Blood of a Savior a
light Thing with us, whereby we are ransomed from Death and Hell; and made
Heirs of the future Glory? -- Is the sanctifying comforting and quickening
Influence of the blessed Spirit a light Thing with us, whereby we are brought
near to God, enabled to maintain Communion with him, and are qualified for the
eternal Inheritance? Can we dishonor the Father, trample upon the Blood of the
Son, and grieve the Holy Spirit, without Care, Concern or Fear; and yet make
Pretenses to an Union to Christ, and to the Love of God? A vain Dream! A most
inconsistent and contradictory Pretense!

I hope, I have by this Time given you sufficient Evidence, of the Weakness and
Impiety of those Objections, you have alleged in Favor of the Antinomians:
And would therefore only just add this further Remark, That though we should
never dishonor our blessed Savior by doubting of his Sufficiency for us, be
our Case what it will; though we should never indulge distracting Doubts and
Fears, which will drive us from God, unfit us for Duty, and bring Dishonor
upon that infinite Mercy, in which we hope; and though we should not presently
dig up our Foundations, and call all our Hopes and Experiences into Question,
because of our disallowed Infirmities: Yet if we are united to Christ, we cannot
fail of mourning for our Sins, and bringing them to the Blood of Christ for
Pardon; we cannot fail to groan being burdened, and to esteem our Sins the
heaviest Burden we have in the World: Though we may and ought to rejoice
always, in the Riches of redeeming Mercy and Love; yet we cannot but lament and
groan always after Deliverance from the remaining Body of Death.

You proceed to object, that if my Doctrine of the Believers Union to Christ be
true, you cannot see how we can prove our Justification by our Sanctification.
For according to that Scheme, our Justification depends wholly upon our Union
to Christ: but nothing at all upon our Sanctification. -- Is it not then the
most rational Proceeding, to prove our Justification by that on which it does
depend, rather than by that on which it does not depend; by that which does
justify us, rather than by that which does not justify us? How can we prove our
Justification, by that which procures no Freedom from Guilt, no Title to the
Favor of God, no Claim to eternal Salvation?

In Answer to which I must entreat you to consider, whether there be any Way so
certain to prove the Existence of the Cause, as by the Production of the
Effect: and whether there be any Way whatsoever to evidence that there is a
Cause, if there be no Effect; or if the Effect be utterly unknown. -- How do we
know the Existence of God; but by his Word and Works, which are visible Effects
of his Being; and thereby visible Evidences and Discoveries of his glorious
Perfections? -- To apply this to the present Case. How can we evidence our
Union to Christ, and our Acceptance with God thereby, but by the Actings of
Grace, and the Fruits of Righteousness, which are the Effects of it? -- The
Subject Matter to be made evident to our Consciences, is this, that we have
received the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, are so united to him; and thereby
justified in the Sight of God. Well, if this be so, the Life which we now live
in the Flesh, we live by the Faith of the Son of God Gal. ii. 20. We are
purifying our selves, even as he is pure. I Joh. iii. 3. If we have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, we also walk in him. Col. ii. 6. -- And do we, upon an
impartial Trial, find this so? Do we live in a humble constant Dependence upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Fountain of all Grace; and the Author of our
eternal Salvation? Do we hate every false Way; and crucify our Flesh with its
Affections and Lusts? Do we live in the Love of God, and carefully and
seriously attend every Way of known Duty toward him? Do we live in the Love of
our Neighbor; and are we Conscientious in the performing the Duties of every
Relation and Character we sustain? And do we lament before God the
Imperfections we find in these Seize; and earnestly pray and strive for a
further Progress in Holiness? -- This, all this, is the necessary Fruit of our
Union to Christ, and of our Justification before God thereby: Is not this
therefore the proper and only Evidence thereof? And is there any Thing without
this, which can give us any Scripture-Evidence of our Justification? -- The
Antinomians may pretend to evidence their Justification by their Joy and
Comfort: But how come they by their Joy and Comfort, if they have not previous
Evidence of their justified State? How can they rejoice in the Favor of God,
before they have good Evidence of their Interest in it? Without this, their Joy
is groundless, and is an Evidence of Nothing in the present Case, but their
Willingness to deceive themselves. With this, there is no need of Joy for an
Evidence, of what is already confirmed by a much better Witness. -- I therefore
conclude, that as the Scripture no where makes, and as the Reason and Order of
Things no Way allows, Joy and Comfort to be Evidences of our justified State,
we should see to it, that we clear up our Title to the divine Favor, by better
Evidence. And what other can we possibly find, but what I am now pleading for?
This, the Apostle assures us, is the proper Evidence, by which the Children of
God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil. Whosoever is born of God, does
not commit Sin; and whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God. 1 John
iii. 9, 10. They therefore, who reject this Evidence, would do well to
consider, whose Children they be, according to this Determination of the
Apostle.

Upon the whole then, our Union to Christ is so far from affording the least
Plea for Licentiousness, that it should be considered as the strongest
Argument, and the most powerful Incentive to a humble, penitent, watchful, holy
and heavenly Life. -- Are we united to Christ? Are we Members of his Body, of
his Flesh and of his Bones? Surely then we must derive vital Influences from
such a Fountain of spiritual Life; and be Partakers of his Holiness. If we find
not this blessed Effect in some good Degree, in vain are our Pretenses to an
Interest in Christ, or Union to him. -- Are we united to Christ, and thereby
made Partakers of his inestimable Benefits? Surely then it concerns us to
endeavor to live answerable to so high a Dignity, and such an honorable
Relation. Surely it concerns us to testify our Gratitude to such an infinite
Benefactor, by living to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace and Love. -- With
what Abhorrence therefore should such licentious Thoughts, as you have
suggested, be entertained by all the true Disciples of the holy JESUS, as not
fit to be so much as once named among Saints!

If you can have Patience with me, I would briefly offer one Argument more, in
Favor of the Doctrine I have insisted upon; which must recommend it as
infinitely preferable in Point of Safety, to either of the contrary Extremes.
-- By acting up to these Principles of mine, you can be in no Danger, as to the
future and final Event, since you will be built upon Christ Jesus the sure
Foundation of Hope, and by Grace derived from him, bring forth those Fruits of
Holiness and Righteousness, which must end in eternal Life. -- If the Arminians
are right, you also are right. For you have the same Sincerity, the same good
Works, which any of them may have to depend upon for Justification and
Salvation. And it can be no Prejudice to your Salvation, that you obtained
these in a Way of Dependence upon Christ only, as well as in a Way of diligent
Activity. -- If the Antinomians are right, you also are right. For you depend
only upon Christ for Righteousness and Strength, as well as they; and it can no
Ways be injurious to you, that you have insisted upon the Necessity of
Holiness, as the Way leading to eternal Life. -- But now, to turn the Tables,
if they who plead for Justification by Works, are at last found in a Mistake;
and instead of building upon Christ Jesus and the sovereign Grace of God in
him, are built upon the Sand: Or if they who disclaim the Necessity of
Holiness, are too late found in a Mistake, and sorted among the Workers of
Iniquity, what will become of their Hopes! How dreadful will their
Disappointments be!

That you may be found united to Christ, and may be built up in Faith and
Holiness, with Peace and Comfort, unto God's heavenly Kingdom, is the earnest
Desire and Prayer of,

SIR, Your etc.

LETTER XIX. Containing particular Advices and Directions, for a close and
comfortable Walk with GOD.
SIR,
YOU justly observe, that according to my former Letters, a religious Life must
be a Course of serious, earnest, and assiduous Application. And you have
therefore good Reason to be solicitous in your Inquiry, How you must give
Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; and how you shall find that
Peace and Pleasure I speak of, in your Walk with God? -- But there is no Cause
at all of any Apprehension, that you shall weary me out, with the continual
burdensome Tasks you are imposing upon me. -- Indeed, Sir, you can no Way
gratify me more, than by putting it in my Power, to be any Way serviceable to
your best Interests. -- I sincerely thank you, that you are now giving me the
Satisfaction, of proposing some Directions for a close Walk with God. -- It Is
an Affair of the utmost Consequence to my self, as well as to you; An Affair
too little considered, even by those of whom we must hope the better Things,
that accompany Salvation; And an Affair, in which I have Cause with Shame to
confess, that my Remisness has turned to my unspeakable Disadvantage. -- Let us
then, as in the Presence of God, resolve by the Assistance of his Spirit and
Grace, not only to consult, but to practice such Methods of Piety, as may be
likely Means to sweeten the Fatigues of Life, prepare us to encounter the last
Enemy, and give us a refreshing Prospect of our future Inheritance.

I shall endeavor (according to your Desire) to be plain, familiar and
practical, in the Directions and Counsels which I am now to lay before you.

And here my Advice to you is,

1. That you endeavor to obtain and maintain a deep Impression of this
important Truth, that you have but one Business to do; and that every Affair
and Conduct of human Life must be calculated for, and subservient to, that one
great End of your Being. God has made us for himself, to glorify and enjoy Him.
We are but Pilgrims and Strangers upon Earth; and have here no continuing City.
There is another State before us, a State of our everlasting Residence, a State
where we must be unspeakably and inconceivably happy or miserable, to all
Eternity. Our whole Work therefore is, to be pressing toward the Mark for the
Prize of our high Calling; to be looking to, and preparing for, another and
better Country, even an heavenly. -- This, I say, is our whole Business; and
therefore not to be enterprized as a secondary Concern; not to be crowded into
a Corner, to make Room for more agreeable Entertainments; nor to be attended
only at our vacant Hours, when disencumber'd from our worldly Business and
sensual Gratifications. To fear God and keep his Commandments, is the whole of
Man. -- You will not so far misunderstand me, as to suppose, that I am inculcating
the Necessity of a recluse Life, wholly taken up in Devotion, wholly separated
from the common Business and Society of the World. No! I am only recommending
to you and to my self, a due Sense, that we are under Obligations, in Point of
Duty and Interest, to serve God, and thereby to promote our eternal Welfare, as
well at one Time, as another; and as much in one Business of Life, as another;
as much in our secular Affairs, domestic Concerns, Company, and Diversions, as
in the special Duties of Religion and Devotion. Though these call for the more
solemn Engagement of the whole Soul in their Performance, being immediately
directed to God himself; yet the other also are to be done in Obedience to God,
and with an Eye to his Glory. So that we have but one Business; though we have
a great many Duties of various Kinds belonging to it.

Resolve then, to engage in, and to endeavor to manage every Affair of common
Life, out of Duty to God, with a spiritual Frame of Soul, and with a hearty
Desire therein to show your self approved unto God. Whether you eat or drink,
or whatever you do, do all to the Glory of God. -- Consider therefore, that you
have the same God to deal with, the same omniscient Eye to observe and remember
your Tho'ts, Views, Affections, Frames, Language and Behavior, while
conversant in the common Affairs of Life, as when upon your Knees in your
Closet or Family, or in the public Worship of God's House: And that the same
upright Views, the same holy Desires, the same Faith in Christ, are necessary
in the one, as in the other, if you would have them acceptable to God. -- This
Consideration duly impressed, is the true Philosopher's Stone, that turns all
to Gold. -- This will make every Thing serve as a fresh Gale, to waft us
forward to our desired Harbor.

2. Be solemnly careful to attend upon all the Ordinances of God, without any
Reserve. -- The Duties and Ordinances of Religion belong to the Way, which God
has appointed us to walk in, in Order to our Salvation: and we must be found in
his Way, as we would expect his Presence and Blessing. -- Herein be therefore
careful to have no Reserve. Let every Duty, whether of the Closet, the Family,
or public Worship, be diligently and constantly maintained, each in its proper
Season. Live in the Omission of none of them; nor let any ordinary Occurrence
or Excuse divert and put you by, when the proper Season and Opportunity calls
for your Attendance on them. -- You are under the same Obligations at all
Times, as at any Times, to perform Duty; and to observe all Duties, as to
observe any. For they are all required by the same Authority; and to be
performed to the same Object, and for the same End. -- He therefore who lives
in the wilful Neglect of any known Duty, does thereby turn his Back upon God
and his Salvation. Herein then, the greatest Care should be exercised, that we
may prove (or know and do) what is the good, and perfect, and acceptable Will
of God concerning us.

You should also remember, that the Duties of religious Worship are to be
performed to an omniscient and Heart-searching God; a God who cannot be
deceived, and will not be mocked; a God, who will be sanctified in all them
that come night him, and who will highly resent our flattering him with our
Lips, and lying to him with our Tongues, when our Hearts are far from him. --
You should therefore be careful, by previous Meditation, to obtain a lively
Sense of the infinite Perfections of the glorious God to be worshipped, of the
Nature and Importance of the Duty to be attended; and to have your Affections
inflamed and much engaged, when you come into God's immediate Presence, in any
Ordinance of religious Worship. You should keep your Heart with all Diligence;
watch against, and carefully suppress every roving and wandering Thought,
endeavor to retain a lively Impression of the divine Presence; and to keep up
a devout spiritual Frame of Soul, while in the Performance of the Worship of
God. -- Our Transactions with God, in the Duties of religious Worship, above
all Things call for the greatest Seriousness, Watchfulness and Care. And all
the Pains we can take in this Matter, will prove too little; we shall still
have Cause to lament our great Defects; and to mourn after the Pardon of the
Iniquity of our holy Things, through the Blood of Christ.

3. Remember, that as you lie at Mercy, so you have a Mercy-Seat to repair to;
and that you may sow in Hope. -- It is true, that we neither have nor can have
any Claim to the Mercy of God, on Account of any Thing that we do or are able
to do in Religion. Not for your Sakes do I this, faith the Lord God, be it
known unto you, Be ashamed and confounded for your own Ways, O House of Israel.
-- But yet it is also true, that the infinite Mercy of God is more than equal
to all our Unworthiness, to all our Difficulties, and to all our Wants. --
There is Forgiveness with God, that he may be feared; and with him is plenteous
Redemption. And God is in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing
their Trespasses. -- You should approach the Presence of God, not only with a
most abasing Sense of your Sinfulness, Pollution, and Unworthiness; and with
most earnest Importunity for the Influences of his Spirit and Grace: but also
with a humble Confidence in the Riches of his infinite Mercy; and with a
supporting Hope, that for his own sake and for his Son's sake, (though not for
yours) he will accept, pardon, sanctify, and save you. -- While you are
entertaining hard Thoughts of God, giving into desponding Frames, and
nourishing your distracting discouraging Fears, you are dishonouring God our
Savior, grieving the Holy Spirit, hardening your own Heart, and going further
and further from Mercy. -- Come therefore before God, self-loathing and
self-condemning, yet not with a distrustful Dread: But come to him with
Expectation and Dependence. Plead the Merits of his Son; plead the Riches of
his boundless Grace; yea, plead your own Misery and Want before him: hope in
his Mercy, and wait for his Salvation.

4. Review your past Life; and be as particular as you can, in your Repentance
toward God, as also in setting all Things right with your Neighbor. -- It is
our Duty particularly to confess and lament our Sins before God; those
especially which are peculiarly aggravated, or have been willingly and
customarily indulged. -- It is our Duty to make up all Breaches with our
Neighbor, and to repair all Injuries we have done him, as far as possible. --
It is therefore necessary, to call our selves to an Account for all the past
Conduct of our Lives, both toward God and Man.

Look back then to your early Age, and bring the Sins of your Youth to
Remembrance. Confess them particularly, lament them before God, and lift up
your ardent and frequent Petitions to him, that he would not remember the Sins
of your Youth, nor your Transgressions. -- Continue your View, to the
successive Periods of your Life. Consider what Duties you have omitted, whether
personal or relative; what Parts of instituted Worship you have neglected, or
by a careless, hypocritical, and trifling Performance, have slighted and
profaned, whether in your Closet, in the Family, or in the House of God. --
Consider what Relations you have sustained, and what have been your special
Defects in each of them. Humble your selves in the Sight of God, on Account of
them all: Cry to him for Pardon, in the Blood of Christ; and for Grace and
Strength to serve him acceptably by a right Discharge of your respective
Duties, in each Station and Circumstance of Life, as well as by a due
Performance of the several Offices of Devotion. -- Consider your many Sins of
Commission, according to their respective Natures and Aggravations. Confess
them before God; and confess the innumerable Multitude which were unobserved
when committed, or forgotten since. -- Endeavor to impress a just Sense of
their Number, Enormity, and Guilt upon your Conscience, till you are forced to
groan out that Language of a repenting Soul: Innumerable Evils have compassed
me about, mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me, they are more than the Hairs
of my Head, therefore my Heart fails me. Endeavor to bring them all (those
which you can remember, by a particular Enumeration; those which you cannot
remember, by a general Confession) to the Fountain set open for Sin and for
Uncleanness. Pray for Faith, and endeavor to trust in the infinite Merits of
the Redeemer's Blood, and the infinite Mercy of the God of all Grace, for a
free Pardon of all your Sins, how extensive soever in their Number, how great
soever in their Aggravations. -- Thus endeavor to have your past Account
balanced by the Blood of Christ.

In like Manner be careful to review the Defects of the Duties, and the
Violations of the Precepts, of the second Table of the moral Law. -- Consider
whether there be none who have offered you Injuries and Indignities; and see to
it, that from your Heart you forgive them their Trespasses, and that you
remember each of them at the Throne of Grace, seeking Mercy for them, as for
your own Soul. -- Consider what Differences and Controversies you have
maintained with any Man; and in the most kind and condescending Manner attempt
all reasonable Methods of Reconciliation, committing the Case to God by Prayer.
-- Consider whether in the Course of your Life you have not some Way or other
been injurious to your Neighbor, by Word or Deed, in your Commerce or
Conversation; and never rest, till you have made Reparation and Satisfaction,
if any Thing of that Kind can be remembered. -- Consider whether there be no
Enmity, or Rancour of Spirit, no Prejudice or ill Will, harbored in your
Breast against any Man; and never rest till you can feel an universal
Benevolence to every Individual of the human Race, and have that Love in
Exercise, which is the fulfilling of the Law. -- Consider whether you have
learned of Christ to be meek and lowly of Heart, to live in Peace and Kindness;
and be excited by the Gentleness of Christ, to maintain the Exercise of those
Fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Meekness, Temperance. -- Consider whether you have practiced sufficient
Liberality toward the Poor and Indigent; and consult how you may now so cast
your Bread upon the Water, as to find it again after many Days. -- And in a
Word, seek Pardon through the Blood of Christ for all your past Defects; and
consult how you may, for the future, render your self the most extensive
Blessing to the World, while you live in it.

5. Be very careful, faithfully to discharge the respective Duties of the
several Relations you sustain. -- God having placed you (Sir) in a Station of
public Trust, He calls upon you in the Language of Je^oshaphat to his Judges:
Take Head what ye do, for you judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with
you in the Judgment; therefore now let the Fear of the Lord be upon you, take
Heed and do it. -- It would be Arrogance in me, to pretend to direct you in the
particular Duties of your honorable Station; and the particular Methods of
discharging them. -- It is your Concern, in the Execution of your Trust, to
approve your self a Minister of God to his People for their Good; a Terror, not
to good Works, but to the evil; the Patron and Defender of the oppressed and
injured, and an impartial Restrainer and Punisher of the vicious and immoral; a
shining Pattern of a regular Life; and one that seeks the Welfare of your
People.

Allow me further to observe,

As you are likewise remarkably blessed in your conjugal Relation, that a full
Compliance with the Laws of Christianity will greatly add to your mutual
Happiness. -- I don't mean by this, to recommend to you that Love, tender
Affection, and most obliging Kindness, which the Word of God injoins upon all
in that Relation; and which is so absolutely necessary to all such, in order to
their present Comfort or future Happiness: Since in these Things, you have
practically declared to the World, that you stand in no Need of a Monitor. --
But what I would particularly offer to your Consideration, is, that the Soul is
the principal Part of humane Nature; and consequently the principal Object of
Love and Regard, in that near and intimate Relation. -- It should therefore be
the chief Care of those (...) are thus nearly united, to live together as
Fellow-Heirs of the Grace of Life, to assist, counsel, quicken and comfort one
another, in the Ways of God and Godliness; and to consult all proper Methods to
promote each other's spiritual and eternal Welfare. -- Thus the Bands of Union
and Motives of dearest Affection will be more than doubled. This will render
such Persons Blessings to each other indeed; and lay a Foundation for Joy to
all Eternity.

You are peculiarly favored with Regard to a pleasant and delightful
Offspring. And upon the Birth of each of your Children, the Lord does (as it
were) say unto you, as Pharaoh's Daughter to Moses's Mother, Take this Child,
and nurse it for Me. -- You should accordingly take early Care, to endeavor
the forming their Minds to the Knowledge, Fear, and Service of God. -- You
should not only teach them their Catechism, whereby a Summary of christian
Doctrines may be laid up in their Memories; but study in a plain, easy, and
familiar Manner, to adapt your Instructions to their Understandings, and
endeavor to acquaint them with the great Things of their eternal Peace. -- You
should endeavor not only to give them a doctrinal, but a practical
Acquaintance with the Duties of Christianity; and as soon as possible, put them
upon the stated Exercise of religious Duty. -- You should in the most kind and
affectionate Manner possible, endeavor to restrain their vicious Inclinations
and Practices, and instill into them Principles of Reverence to the Aged, of
Honor and Gratitude to their Parents, of Kindness and Love to one another, and
of Piety and Mercy to the indigent and distressed. -- You should with constant
and importunate Ardour of Soul, wrestle with God for their spiritual Welfare;
and even travel in Birth, to see Christ formed in their Souls. -- This is the
Way to make them indeed Blessings in their Generation, to make them happy while
they live, happy when they die, and happy for ever. By this Means therefore,
show that you love them indeed.

To this I must add, that you are under a like Obligation to take Care of the
Souls of your Servants, as of your Children; and in like Manner to instruct
them, and to impress upon their Minds the vast Concerns of Eternity. For you
should always remember, that the Soul of your meanest Slave is of more Value
than this whole World.

I shall only subjoin under this Head, that you sustain the Character of a
Neighbor, unto which are many Duties annexed. -- The Poor you have always with
you, to whom you owe charitable and compassionate Relief. -- You have frequent
Occasions of Conversation, which should be good to the Use of edifying, that
you may administer Grace to the Hearers. -- You have special Interest in and
Influence upon many; this you should improve with Care, for their spiritual
Advantage. -- You will find frequent Occasion to exhort and to reprove others,
which should be done with such unaffected Seriousness and Kindness,
Condescension and Humility, as will both touch the Conscience, and engage the
Affections; and thereby have a Prospect of Success. -- In fine, you should
watch for Opportunity to do what Service you can, both to the Bodies and Souls
of your Neighbors; and thereby fulfill the royal Law of Love.

6. Walk by Rule, in an exact Observance of stated Devotions. -- We are
exhorted to walk circumspectly, redeeming the Time; to be always abounding in
the Work of the Lord; doing the Duty of every Day, in its Day; of every Season,
in its Season. And to time Things to best Advantage, to methodize Things well,
and be steady to some certain Rules of proceeding, will very much befriend a
Life of Religion. -- We are counseled, to be in the Fear of the Lord all the
Day long; to pray without ceasing, and to meditate in God's Law Day and Night.
Nothing can be of greater Importance to our present or future Happiness, than a
careful Compliance with these divine Precepts.

You should therefore begin the Day with GOD. When you wake in the Morning, let
God have your first Thoughts. Lift up your Heart to him, with Thankfulness for
the Preservations of the Night; and in Supplication to him for his Presence
with you, in the Duties of the succeeding Day. -- After such Ejaculations,
before you rise from Bed, you will do well to consider with your self, what are
the Duties before you this Day, whereby God may be most glorified, your
spiritual Interests best subserved, and you most useful in your Generation. --
Whist arising from Bed and dressing your self, entertain Meditations upon
Subjects suited to the Occasion, such as the Necessity of your Resurrection
from spiritual Death, or the Certainty and Consequences of the final
Resurrection at the great Day of Christ's Appearing and Kingdom; the Necessity
of your being clothed with the Righteousness of Christ; or the glorious
Livery, in which you hope to appear before the Tribunal of your Judge, when you
shall shine as the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever. These, or
such like Meditations, a Variety whereof will readily offer to your Mind, may
be an excellent Means to put your Soul into a proper Frame for the Duties
before you.

When risen from Bed, retire as soon as you conveniently can into your Closet.
-- Read some Portion of the Word of God; mixing it with Faith, giving a close
Attention, making devout Reflections, and occasional Ejaculations of Prayer and
Praise, according to the Subject Matter you are entertained with. -- After
reading, pause a while, and endeavor to affect your Mind with lively
Impressions of the infinite Perfections of the glorious Majesty, before whom
you are approaching. Lift up your Eyes to God, with fervent Aspirations after
the Influences of his blessed Spirit, to help your Infirmities, to teach you to
pray, as you ought; and to make Intercessions for you, with Groanings which
cannot be uttered. -- Thus in the Name of Christ bow your Knees before God,
with an awful Sense of the infinite Distance between him and you, and of your
entire Unworthiness of his Favor; yet with a humble Hope and Confidence in his
infinite Grace and Mercy in Christ: and keep up a strict and continual Guard
over your Thoughts and Affections, that they don't wander from the Business
before you, and render the Duty a mere superficial Lip-Service.

From your Closet proceed to the Duties of FamilyWorship. Call your whole
Household together; let none be absent. Read a Chapter in the sacred Bible: and
I would advise you commonly to read in Course, that the whole Word of God may
be read in your Family. Perhaps it may be an agreeable Practice, and most for
Edification, to read in the old Testament one Part of the Day, and in the New
Testament the other. -- I would advise you to sing Part of a Psalm; and then
pray with your Family. Which done, gravely dismiss them, to their respective
secular Occasions.

Having thus carried your self and Family through the Morning-Sacrifices, don't
suppose, that you are now discharged from all religious and spiritual Concerns,
until the Return of the stated Times of divine Worship; but keep your Soul
diligently, study to preserve and cherish still a spiritual Frame. -- Intermix
frequent occasional Meditations and Ejaculations, with all the Business you are
engaged in. -- After Dinner, I would advise you to retire again into your
Closet for some Exercises of Devotion. -- Imitate David and Daniel in the
Frequency of your secret Retirements; and make it your stated Rule, at Evening,
in the Morning, and at Noon to pray, and to let God hear your Voice.

Choose some convenient Time every Day for religious Meditation, and Solemn
Reflection. Daily spend half an Hour, at least, in this useful and delightful
Employment; and more, when your Circumstances will allow it. Let the Time be
stated; and let no ordinary Avocations prevent your duly attending upon this
Exercise, at the Return of the appointed Season. Perhaps Experience will teach
you, with the Patriarch Isaac, to choose the Evening for this Service. -- But
this depends upon the respective Business and Circumstances of Life, and
Dispositions of Mind, of each particular Person. -- The whole Word of God will
afford you Matter for your Meditation; that you have a large Field before you,
enough to keep you happily employed to all Eternity: But the Perfections of the
divine Nature, the astonishing Work of Redemption by Jesus Christ, the glorious
Excellency of his Person, and the wonderful Benefits of his Salvation, the
incomparable Glories of the heavenly World, the Preciousness of your Soul, with
its various Wants, and the like, should be the most common, as they are the
most important Subjects of your Contemplation. -- Engage in this Business, as
in the Presence of God, call in your Thoughts from every foreign Concern, and
keep them closely engaged. Deeply muse, until the Fire burns: Meditate on
divine and eternal Things, till they become real and visible to the Eyes of
your Mind; even till your Soul is brought (if it pleases God) to the Top of
Pisgah, and to a View of the heavenly Canaan. -- But I need not insist upon the
Methods of performing this Duty. By a faithful and steady Attendance upon it,
your Experience will quickly teach you the best Manner of its Performance.

And now being brought to the Close of the Day, end it as you began it, with
Respect to the Duties both of your Closet and Family. -- And when you betake
your self to your Rest, review the Conduct of the Day past; and consider what
Matter of Repentance, or of Thanksgiving, is thereby before you. -- Solemnly
interrogate your self, whether you are fit to die; and what your State is like
to prove, if you this Night should awake in the eternal World. Your Answer to
this momentous Question must either excite your Diligence to flee from the
Wrath to come; or animate your Love and Gratitude to God, and your Zeal for his
Service, in Hope of the Glory to be revealed. To conclude, endeavor to improve
your waking Minutes on your Bed (whether before you first fall asleep, or when
you shall awake in the Night) in religious and divine Meditation. -- So, when
you wake and rise in the Morning, still be with God.

Thus I have set before you a Method of filling up your Time with Duty; with
such Duties, as will every one of them tend to promote your Progress to eternal
Bliss. -- And I need now only further put you in Mind, that besides these daily
Exercises of Religion, there are Seasons wherein the whole Day should be taken
up in the immediate Service of God; excepting when we are called off by Works
of Necessity and Mercy. -- Such is the Lord's Day, which ought to be so
strictly sanctified, that we should not so much as allow our selves to think
our own Tho'ts, or to speak our own Words. -- Such are likewise occasional Days
of Humiliation and Thanksgiving, which the Scripture calls our Sabbaths. The
frequent and devout Celebration of these Days may prove of eminent Usefulness
to promote the Life and Power of Godliness. -- The Scriptures do not indeed
direct how often these should be attended. They are a FreeWill-Offering: And
the State of your Soul, with the Dispensations of Providence toward your self,
your Family, or the Church of God; and the respective Business, whether
temporal or spiritual, which you have before you, will be a sufficient
Direction, as to the Time and Manner of performing these Duties.

I would suggest here one Thing more: you would do wisely to keep an exact
Account in Writing, of your daily Expense of Time. -- Before you go to Bed,
recollect and record (at least in some brief Hints) the Business you have done,
the Duties performed, the Mercies received, the Frames of your Soul, the
Dispensations of Providence, with the Sins and Imperfections of the Day past.
Let this be done so, that you your self upon a Review can understand it; though
there may be some Occurrences requiring a Veil of Obscurity to be thrown over
them, that they may not be understood by others, if ever your Papers should
fall into their Hands. -- By this Means, you may have always before you, what
special Reformation is wanting, what special Obligations you are under to God;
and what Proficiency you make in the School of Christ.

7. Walk by Faith in the Son of God. Whatever you do, let Faith in Christ be
kept in daily Exercise, and run through all your Duties, from first to last. --
I have adapted my former Directions to that State of Suspense, which you are
in, with Respect to your Conversio^ to God. You have some Times (you tell me)
refreshing and encouraging Hope, that you have had some Experience of those
Marks of converting Grace, which I have described. -- Be it then supposed (as I
trust there is ground to suppose) that the Hope you have at Times, is well
founded; in this Case, your Compliance with those Directions is the best Means
of a successful and delightful Progress toward your heavenly Inheritance. --
But you complain, that You often conflict with distressing Doubts and Fears,
that the Prevalence of your Corruptions, the Formality and Hypocrisy of your
Duties, and the dead carnal Frames, which you feel in your self too frequently,
are utterly inconsistent with well-grounded Hopes of a renewed and sanctified
Soul. -- Were your Case indeed according to your Fears, what better Method
could be proposed, than to attend the Directions here given, in Order to seek
after the renewing Influences of the Spirit of God?

But I must observe to you, there is one Thing that is eminently of Importance,
and which seems yet wanting in Order to your maintaining a heavenly
Conversation, and a comfortable Walk with God. To walk with God, is to walk in
Christ; and to have the Life which we live in the Flesh, be by the Faith of the
Son of God. It is by Faith in Christ, that we have Access to the Throne of
Grace. By whom also we have Access by Faith, into this Grace wherein we stand.
Romans v. 2. -- It is by Faith in Christ, that our Persons and Services find
Acceptance with God. Who has made us accepted in the Beloved. Ephesians. i. 6. -- It
is by Faith in Christ, that our Corruptions are mortified, and our Hearts
cleansed. Purifying their Hearts by Faith. Acts xv. 9. -- It is by Faith in
Christ, that we are enabled to tread the World and its Idol-Vanities under our
Feet. And this is the Victory that over comes the World, even our Faith. I
Joh. v. 4. -- It is by Faith, that we enjoy the Consolations and Pleasures of a
religious Life. We have Joy and Peace in believing. Romans xv. 13. -- It is by
Faith in Christ, and by our holding fast our Confidence firm unto the End, that
we are rendered stable and steadfast in our religious Course, and enabled to
persevere to the End. Thou stand by Faith: Be not high-minded, but fear.
Romans xi. 20. -- It is by Faith, that we obtain the Sealings of the blessed
Spirit, and the Earnests of our future Inheritance. In whom also, after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest
of our Inheritance. Ephesians. i. 13, 14. -- And in a Word, it is by Faith, that we
keep the Mark for the Prize of our high Calling in View, and are actuated to
the diligent Pursuit of the Recompense of Reward. Faith is the Substance of
Things hoped for; and the Evidence of Things not seen. Heb. xi. 1. -- Thus you
see, that if you would walk with God, you must walk by Faith in the Son of God.
-- Here therefore it seems needful to give you some plain and familiar
Directions.

And I would first direct you, to look to Jesus as the Author and Finisher of
your Faith. -- "You are (you say) uncertain, whether you have a true Faith, or
not?" Look then to this Fountain of all Grace, to get your Doubts removed, to
be freed from this uncomfortable Suspense of Mind, and to be sensibly, as well
as really, united to that glorious Head of all spiritual Influences. -- Be
frequently lifting up your Soul to him, with such Aspirations as these. Blessed
JESUS! Thou know the distracting Doubts and Fears, I am exercised with; and
my perplexing Uncertainty of an Interest in and Union unto Thee by Faith. A
Difficulty, which Thou only can remove, by the Operations of thy holy Spirit.
Thou have invited me to come unto thee, to buy Wine and Milk without Money and
without Price; and to take of the Waters of Life freely. O Lord, I desire, I
resolve to comply with the gracious Invitation. Lord, I would believe: Help
Thou mine Unbelief. -- Thou have promised, that if I come unto thee, thou will
in no wise cast me out. Lord, I would come at thy Call. Draw me, and I shall
run after thee. -- Thou did come to seek and to save that which was lost; and
to call Sinners to Repentance. As a lost perishing Sinner, I would therefore
look unto Thee for Pardon, Sanctification, and eternal Salvation. Thou only
have the Words of eternal Life. To thee therefore I repair, as to the Fountain
of Life, and the Foundation of all my Hope, that of thy Fullness I may receive,
even Grace for Grace. -- Here is my last Refuge. Look, blessed Lord, upon a
poor guilty polluted Soul! Replenish me with thy Grace. Give me that Faith,
whereby I may comply with thy gracious Invitations, rely upon thy precious
Promises; and derive all Supplies of Grace from the inexhaustible Treasury of
they Grace and Goodness.

You must endeavor likewise, to act Faith in Christ for your Justification,
and for your Acceptance with God in the Duties of Religion; to rely upon him as
the Lord your Righteousness; and to make Mention of his Righteousness, even of
that only. -- I have spoken particularly to this in some of my formet Letters;
to which I shall only add, -- You must approach the Presence of God under a
deep Impression of your Guilt, Pollution and Unworthiness, and yet with a
humble Dependence upon the infinite Merit and Righteousness of Christ, for
Access unto God the Father, and Acceptance in the Beloved. -- You must live in
a humble Confidence in Christ, as the Propitiation for your Sins, as your
continual Advocate with the Father; and as a constant Source of Righteousness
and Strength to your Soul. And all your Expectations of pardoning, sanctifying,
and saving Mercy must be derived only from Jesus Christ, who is our Hope, the
Hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof.

You must also act Faith in Christ for quickening, and strengthing, as well as
justifying Grace. -- Do your Corruptions prevail? Bring them to the Cross of
Christ. Look to and humbly depend upon the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, to make you free from the Law of Sin and Death. -- Do dead, carnal or
formal Frames prevail upon you? Strive to quicken your Soul by enlivening
Meditations on the amazing Transactions of redeeming Love; and firmly rely upon
Christ, for the quickening Influences of his Spirit. You will always find your
Soul enlivened, your Graces invigorated, and your Affections spiritualized, in
Proportion to your humble, steady, cheerful Dependence upon Christ, for all
those Supplies of Grace you stand in Need of. -- Thus then wait upon the Lord
Jesus Christ: and be of good Courage; and he shall strengthen thine Heart.
Wait, I say, on the Lord. So shall you mount up with Wings as the Eagle, you
shall run, and not be weary; you shall walk, and not faint.

I will only subjoin, that you must live by Faith, under all your various
Circumstances of Life, and under all the different Dispensations of God's holy
Providence. -- Are you in the dark, and under inward Trials? Remember, that we
walk by Faith, not by Sight. Be humbled, but not discouraged, by your Deadness,
Darkness, Temptations, or Corruptions: For, however your spiritual Frames,
Affections, or Dispositions of Soul may change, yet Christ Jesus is the same
Yesterday, to Day, and for ever; and may be safely trusted for Deliverance, how
distressing soever your Condition. Hence, when you walk in Darkness, and see no
Light; yet trust in the Name of the Lord, and (by Faith in Christ) stay your
self upon your God. -- Are you under outward Afflictions, and adverse
Dispensations of Providence? Act Faith in the Promises; all of which are in
Christ Yea, and in him Amen, to the Glory of God: And humbly hope, that
according to God's gracious Promise all Things shall work together for your
Good; and that your light Affliction which is but for a Moment, will work for
you a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. -- But you are in Doubt
about your Interest in the Promises: Well, let your hearty Acceptance of
Christ, and your humble Dependence upon the Promises in him, remove your
Doubts. Act always under the Influence of this Maxim, that you cannot trust too
little to your self, nor too much to Christ. -- To conclude, If you want
spiritual Life, Christ Jesus is our Life: You must look to and depend upon him
for it. -- If you want Light, he also is the Light of Men; and his Spirit must
be a Word behind you, saying, This is the Way, walk you in it. -- If you want
Comfort, your Consolation must be in Christ; and you must rejoice in Christ
Jesus, without Confidence in the Flesh. -- Would you live near to God? Draw
near with a full Assurance of Faith. -- Would you have a Victory over the Sting
and Terror of Death? You must be delivered from this Bondage, and obtain the
Victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. -- Would you live in the Prospect of a
blessed Immortality? Christ in you is the Hope of Glory. -- Thus to live, is
Christ, and then to die is Gain: Gain unspeakable! To depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better than to abide in the Flesh, under the happiest
Circumstances of Life, even a^idst all the Honors, Pleasures, and Riches of
this vain, perishing World.

Thus I have given you some brief general Hints concerning that Walk with God,
which he who would be a Christian indeed, and would possess the Peace of God in
his Soul, should endeavor to maintain. -- Your own Experience in the divine
Life will teach you how to improve upon these Directions; and to make a
continued Progress, from Grace to Grace, and from Strength to Strength, till
you come to the Perfection of Grace in Glory.

Now, that the God of all Grace may grant you the Supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, in his sanctifying, quickening, and comforting Influences; and that he
would guide you by his Counsel, and keep you by his Power through faith unto
Salvation, is the Prayer of,

SIR, Your sincere Friend, And Servant --

FINIS.

