AN Expostulatory Letter From the Rev. Mr. Edwards of Northampton, TO THE Rev.
Mr. Clap, Rector of Yale College in New Haven, In Reply to his late printed
Letter to him, relating to what he reported concerning the Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD,
at Boston and Cambridge and elsewhere, as from Mr. Edwards; making the Falsity
of that Report yet much more manifest.

Job. 34.4. Let us choose to ourselves Judgment; let us know among ourselves
what is good.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Kneeland and Green in Queenstreet. 1745.

A Letter, etc.
Rev. Sir,
I Have seen the Pamphlet you lately published, in Form of a Letter to me,
relating to the Controversy that has been between us, about what you have
reported that I told you, concerning Mr. Whitefield, viz. that He told me he
designed to turn the generality of Ministers in the Country out of their
Places, and bring over Ministers from England, Scotland, and Ireland, and place
them in their Room.

And concerning this Letter of yours, which is your pretended Answer to what I
have published about that Matter, in Answer to your printed Letter to a Friend
in Boston, wherein you asserted, that I had in two private Letters to you, in
Effect, in very full and strong Terms owned the whole Matter to you that you
had reported; I say, concerning this Letter of yours, I would observe, that you
don't deny the Genuineness of the Copies of my Letters that I have published;
nor do you produce any Attestations of what you have reported of me, which you
say was in a Journey to Boston, in May 1743: Although there were many Persons in
Company with us in that Journey, at the Time you speak of, viz. the Rev. Mr.
Breck of Springfield, and the Rev. Mr. Gay of Suffield and his Wife, and Mrs.
Clap your own Lady, (who, I am confident, was not wont to be at so great a
Distance from you as to be out of hearing of Conversation) and your Son in Law
that waited on you, and one with me on the same Horse, viz. my eldest Daughter,
at the very Time when you say I told you this remarkable Story, who has lived
at New Haven all the Time of this Controversy between us, and most of the Time
at Mr. Noyes's House, where you are very conversant, and she was often in your
Way; and not only so, but she was very conversant at your own House, with your
Daughters; and if you had seen Cause to have enquired of her, would have
informed you, that she well remembered other Conversation that we had in that
Journey, particularly the long Dispute we had about some Things you found Fault
with in my Book, concerning the late Revival of Religion; but that she
remembered not a Word said about Mr. Whitefield in that Journey. Nor did you in
your Letter produce one Person that you have found any where, who ever heard me
say any such Thing as you have reported, or any Thing like it at any Time; though
I have publicly declared that I was willing all my Acquaintance, and those
that I have been most conversant with, Ministers or others, in this Town and
elsewhere, should be enquired of; and have openly challenged the whole World,
besides you, to declare if they ever heard me report any such Thing. But all
the World besides you are wholly silent: Though there are many Hundreds to whom
it is every Way more likely I should reveal such a Secret, than to you, if I
had it to reveal.

Nor is any Body produced in your Letter that says he heard you speak of my
saying this to you, soon after the Time you say I said it; though in your first
Letter you say, you took good Notice of my Words, and laid them up in your
Mind, and soon related them to others* so that by your own Account, you was
under no Restraint or Difficulty as to speaking of this grand Secret I revealed
to you. But however, it is something remarkable, that you was then in a Journey
to Boston and Cambridge, at that Time when you say I told you this, and was in
those Parts at the Time of the Election, and Convention of Ministers; and yet
it seems you was wholly silent about it then, nothing was said or heard about
it in Boston or Cambridge; though one would think, if I had indeed declared so
extraordinary a Thing to you, it would upon every Account have been most likely
that you should speak of it then, when we must suppose your Mind was most
affected with it, and your Heart fullest of it, having but just received it
from my Mouth; and then the Country was fuller of Talk about Mr. Whitefield,
his Coming, and the remarkable Consequences of it were more recent and fresh in
Memory: Yet not a Word is heard of it in those Parts that Year. But when you go
to Boston, the Year following, even the last Summer, more than a Twelvemonth
after, then you are prepared to tell the Story, and tell it abundantly, in
Cambridge and Boston, and surprise Ministers and others with the remarkable
Report; and those Parts, and the Country in general, are quickly filled with
it. -- The Title Page of your first printed Letter, dated last December, speaks
of the Report, as what you declared when in Boston last, which was the last
Summer; though the Time when we were going to Boston together, when you say I
told you the Story, was the Year before. And it is public, and apparent, that
the Report was new in those Parts then; every one spoke of it, as well as you
yourself, as coming from you when you was in Boston last Summer.

And though it be true, that I had a Suspicion of Mr. Whitefield's aiming at
People's forsaking unconverted Ministers; and so it was not wholly impossible
that I should mention it to you, going to Boston; and therefore I cannot
absolutely deny that, and have hitherto strained my Charity toward you to the
utmost, with Respect to that Matter (though as I often said before, I had no
Remembrance of it) yet the more I think of it, the more improbable it appears
to me that I should; my Daughter, that was with me at the particular Time you
fix upon, remembers nothing of it; and besides there is that in particular,
that makes it very unlikely that I should say any Thing to you at that Time, of
so much as that Suspicion, viz. That presently after Mr. Whitefield went from
these Parts, being in Conversation with the Rev. Mr. Hopkins of Springfield,
even the next Day after we parted with Mr. Whitefield at Windsor, Mr. Hopkins
being my Brother-in-Law, and then appearing friendly to Mr. Whitefield, I
mentioned that Suspicion to him (which is the only Time that I know of that I
ever mentioned it to any Body, any otherwise than on its being reported from
him, I might give an Account what I said to him) I gave him several Reasons of
my Suspicion: (But that Mr. Whitefield had told me any such Thing, was not
among these Reasons.) After this, before our forementioned Journey to Boston, I
heard that Mr. Hopkins had reported it to others, and that the Report was
carried to New Haven to you and others there, and much taken Notice of by you;
which gave me no small Uneasiness: I was not a little concerned, that what I
had thus said privately to my Brother Hopkins, should be thus carried abroad,
and especially that it should be handed to you. Now after this, it is not very
likely that I should go, and more fully declare the same Thing to you myself;
and especially that I should tell you much more than that; and that, which if
it was true, I closely concealed from my Brother Hopkins. Some of the Ministers
of this County, that have lately signed a Testimony against Mr. Whitefield, had
before heard Mr. Hopkins relate what I told him of my Suspicion, with the
Reasons I gave him; and since this Controversy between you and me, have
declared freely that it is a convincing Argument with them, that I never told
you, that Mr. Whitefield informed me that he had any such Design as you
mention, because it is to them inconceivable, that I should signify my
Suspicion to Mr. Hopkins, and gather up these and those Arguments to confirm
it, without saying any Thing to him, as if Mr. Whitefield had told me, that it
was his Design, when it was so indeed, and though I afterward freely declared it
to you.

And now I have mentioned this, I would pray you, Sir, seriously to consider,
whether that Report you had as coming from Mr. Hopkins, of what I told him of
my Suspicion, was not the sole Foundation, on which you in Length of Time
gradually framed in your Imagination the whole Story, which you afterward
reported, as being told immediately by me to you, in our Journey to Boston.

But you, Sir, have said it, in your first printed Letter, and you will stand
to it still, that I have in Effect owned the very same Thing that you have
reported, in a Variety of Terms that are equally full and strong; yea, that you
may be sure not to be wanting to yourself, you go further now than before, and
say that my Terms are fuller and stronger than yours; and are abundant in
affirming it, that what I have said of MY OPINION of Mr. Whitefield's aiming at
People's forsaking unconverted Ministers, and at converted ones being
introduced, is most plainly, and manifestly, and fully the same Thing as
saying, that Mr. Whitefield TOLD ME that he designed to turn the generality of
Ministers in the Country out of their Places, and bring over Ministers from
England, Scotland and Ireland, and place them in their Room; so that for me to
own the Former, and deny the Latter, is a most plain, flat, amazing
self-Contradiction; and represent it (p. 7.) as an absurd Thing to make any
Distinction between expressing what I supposed of Mr. Whitefield, as my
Opinion, and expressing it as a declared Design of Mr. Whitefield; and cry out,
What can you mean by this Distinction? If I had only heard this of you from
others, I should hardly have believed it: But if I may believe my own Eyes, I
have seen a Gentleman of your Understanding, not in Jest or only to make Sport,
but gravely and seriously and in great earnest, go about to show that these two
Things are exactly the same, and to make it plain, even to a Demonstration, by
rehearsing over Words on both Sides, and elaborately finding out, and cutting
off Evasions, and placing the Words one against another in parallel Columns,
that the World might see the exact Identity; and the astonishing Contradiction
there is in owning one and denying the other.

This cannot be accounted for, any other Way, than that you was driven to great
Straits. You had before reported to the World, in Print, that I, in two private
Letters that I had written to you, had in Effect owned the whole Matter that
you had said concerning me: But now those entire Letters were published to the
World, wherein the contrary, to the highest Degree, appears to be true; that
although therein I own it had been my Opinion, that Mr. Whitefield would
endeavor to promote the forsaking unconverted Ministers, and the introducing
of converted ones, yet say expressly, that I never mentioned this as a declared
Design of Mr. Whitefield, but only my Opinion; and do in many Ways, over and
over, and in a great Variety of Expressions, strenuously and solemnly deny the
whole Fact that you had reported of me. You therefore doubtless easily saw that
there was nothing that you could do to justify yourself, no other Way in the
World that you could take to maintain the Credit of your Uprightness and
Veracity in what you had reported of those private Letters, but only stiffly to
stand to it (however ridiculously) that for me to say that it was my Opinion
that Mr. Whitefield intended what I spoke of, was to all Intents and Purposes
telling you, that Mr. Whitefield told me that he intended that which you have
reported.

But dear Sir, though your Circumstances are difficult, and your Temptations
great, yet let me entreat you once to look back on what you have laid down; and
after all your Positiveness and high Charges, to suffer in yourself a little
Reflection and Exercise of Reason.

If I had told you that it was my Opinion that Mr. Whitefield intended to do
all that which you speak of, would this have been for me to tell you that Mr.
Whitefield TOLD ME that he intended it, so that you might truly from thence, in
Terms, report and affirm that I said the Latter, and so that it is a flat
contradicting my self for me to deny such a Report? Is it exactly the same
Thing for a Man to say he has such an Opinion of another's Designs, as to say
that that other Person told him they were his Designs? And is it indeed a
senseless Thing to make a Distinction between these two, as you signify? (p.
7.) I have been of Opinion that the Governor of Canada intended to send an
Army to Annapolis this Year, which I may possibly have told to others; may they
therefore go and report in Terms, without Hesitation, that I told them, that
the Governor of Canada told me, that he did intend this? And if I hear of it
afterward, and deny that I told 'em so, withal declaring what I did say,
making the Distinction, am I therefore guilty of the plainest and most
astonishing self-Contradiction, even in the very Relation I give myself, and of
the greatest Absurdity in making the Distinction?

Supposing me to be of Opinion that Rector Clap has had a Design to do his
utmost to ruin my Reputation, by artfully misleading the Minds of his unwary
cursory Readers, into a Belief that I have evidently perjured my self, by
flatly contradicting myself upon Oath, when he himself knew in his Heart that
there was no real Contradiction at all; I say, supposing this to be my Opinion,
I can declare it to be my Opinion with Truth: But can I therefore truly declare
to others, that Mr. Clap told me that this very Thing was his Design? And if I
should declare so, would not you resent it, as an injurious Falsehood and
Slander? And if I should excuse my self, and say, No, I had that Opinion of
you, and that was the same Thing as for me to hear you say so; would you then
think there was no Distinction, and that it was a senseless Thing to pretend
any?

And then besides, I not only don't say in my Letters, that Mr. Whitefield told
me that he intended to do those Things that you reported, but am far from
saying so much as that it was my Opinion that he intended those Things. My
saying, it was my Opinion that Mr. Whitefield did aim at People's forsaking
unconverted Ministers, and at the introducing of converted ones, is surely not
the same Thing as to say, it was my Opinion that Mr. Whitefield intended to
turn the bigger Part of the Ministers of the Country out of their Places, and
bring over Ministers from England, Scotland, and Ireland, and place them in
their Room. It is my Opinion of many Persons in the World, that I know of, that
they are in the Opinion and Scheme that Popish Ministers ought not to preach,
and that they would do their Endeavor, what in them lies, to have it
otherwise, that Protestant Ministers should be introduced. But is this the same
Thing as to say, that it is my Opinion that they intend to turn out all the
Popish Ministers in the World, and introduce Protestant Ministers into their
Places, mentioning the particular Countries whence they intend to bring them?
My saying that Mr. Whitefield told me, he intended to bring over a Number of
young Scholars into the Jerseys, to be ordained by the Tennents, don't imply
that it was my Opinion that he intended to bring Ministers from those three
Countries you mention, or any Country or Countries, to supply any Pulpits in
New England, or any where else, made vacant by others being turned out: Nor
ever was it my Opinion: Nor did ever a Thought enter into my Heart, of Mr.
Whitefield's meaning to bring over one tenth Part enough to supply the greater
Part of the Pulpits in New England; but only a few young Men, of the People
called Methodists, that were Scholars, to get Ordination.

But you say (p. 8 and 9.) It is an immaterial Circumstance what Countries the
Ministers were to be brought from, and that it matters not whether I said one
Word of Foreigners supplying the Pulpits of other Ministers, or no: And
therefore insist upon it, that for me to say, that it was my Opinion, that Mr.
Whitefield aimed at People's forsaking unconverted Ministers, and introducing
converted Ministers, was for me to say, that it was my Opinion Mr. Whitefield
intended all that you have represented; and not only this, but to say that Mr.
Whitefield told me so; insomuch that to say otherwise is a flat Contradiction;
and you represent that to make any Distinction is absurd.

Now Sir, if it be really so, I would ask, Why, instead of reporting that you
heard me say that Mr. Whitefield told me that he intended to turn out the
bigger Part of the Ministers in the Country etc. you did not rather declare
plainly and positively, at Boston and Cambridge and elsewhere, that Mr.
Whitefield told you this Story of his Intentions? For you signify over and over
in your two printed Letters, that it was your Opinion that he intended to turn
out unconverted Ministers and introduce others, before you talked with me. And
therefore by your own Account it is really true, that Mr. Whitefield told you
all that you reported as from me (at least every Thing that was material, or
worthy of any Notice in it) and you cannot deny it with Truth, and without
making absurd Distinctions, and strange Quibbling and Equivocation, yea, plain
and flat Self-Contradiction. Surely it would have been more to your Purpose to
have declared this Thing, as one that was an Ear-Witness; without having
Recourse to a Report you had heard from another. Yea, and not only so, but you
might have produced a great many Witnesses to vouch the Truth of the same, and
might have said that you heard a great many Persons say that Mr. Whitefield
told them so too. For you speak of the generality of others that were exactly
of the same Opinion with you and me in this Point. (Letter 1st. p. 6. Letter
2d. p. 5.)

And there is another Difficulty that needs to be cleared up, with Respect to
your Conduct in this Matter. -- When you first appeared in this Controversy in
Print you represent the Matter as though you and I were well agreed in our
private Letters, and said the same Thing; and signify as much as that it
appeared so to you on the Receipt of my Letters, and that therefore it appeared
unaccountable to you that any Contradiction should be insisted on between you
and me (Letter 2d. at the Beginning) And this is almost the only Argument you
have insisted on in both your printed Letters, that your Report is true. And
yet in the Controversy, as it was managed between us in private Letters, a
considerable Time before you appeared in public, this was never so much as
once mentioned, or pretended. There is no Appearance in your private Letters to
me, as though you supposed that you and I agreed in the least Measure, not a Lisp
of my unaccountably insisting on a Contradiction where there was none, no
Intimation of any Difficulty you found in my Letters of that Nature. Which is
something strange, if it was so, that you did really then think that there was
such an Agreement, and that I in Effect owned all, and you was then astonished
at a Pretense of a Contradiction between you and me where there was none, but
saw so great and manifest a Contradiction between the various Parts of my
Letters, as you speak of. You represent as though you wrote to me in a friendly
and pacific Manner; but then it was strange you did not mention that which you
took so much Notice of, that you must think would tend above all Things to my
Conviction. But there is not a Hint of any such Thing in your private pacific
Letters (as you call 'em) either for my Conviction, or your Vindication; but
when you come to appear in public, then you are full of it, for my Reproach,
and insist on scarce any Thing else.

If you deny this that I have said concerning your private Letters, I am
willing you should produce them to the World, for your Vindication: And if you have not kept Copies, I promise to lend you the Originals, on your Promise that
you will publish them.

Now Sir, I desire you to take a View of your Conduct in this Affair, in the
whole Series of it from the Beginning. You did publicly and abundantly report
that I told you, that Mr. Whitefield told me, that he intended to make that
forementioned general Change, and great Revolution in the Country, and
accomplish it in that particular Manner: A Report, in a peculiar Manner tending
to render Mr. Whitefield the Object of general Detestation and Abhorrence through
the Country; (and indeed you could have no other End in it) which Report had no
Foundation, because Mr. Whitefield never told me any Thing of that Nature, nor
did I ever tell you any such Thing: And therefore both of us were greatly
injured by it. -- If I had really handed this Report to you, yet for you to
make such an Use of it, so to ruin the Reputation of a Minister of the Gospel,
and make him the Object of general Odium, would have been directly in the Face
of that Rule, 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but
before two or three Witnesses. When I understood that you had thus reported, I
wrote to you in a friendly Manner, expostulating with you about it, declaring
to you your Mistake, and by all Means possible endeavoring to convince you of
it, mentioning many Things that showed the Unreasonableness of supposing it to
be true. And when still you did not seem to be convinced, I wrote to you again
more largely, mentioning all the Ways I could devise that the Mistake could
possibly arise, hoping some Way or other to lead you to a Sense of your
Mistake. But you still immoveably persisted in it; and not only so, but instead
of retracting, as Justice greatly required, and I much insisted in my Letters,
you on the contrary, against the most earnest Remonstrances, go on to declare
it more openly than ever, even in the midst of our private Correspondence about
it, and in a positive and peremptory Manner assert it and publish it to the
World from the Press; and not only so, but tell the World that I had in Effect
owned the whole Matter to you in those very private Letters, in which I had
been repeatedly and most solemnly denying it, and reasoning and expostulating
with you for so greatly injuring Mr. Whitefield and me in the Report, and
insisting that you should retract it; and which Letters were written for that
very End, and of which it was the whole Drift, as you was very sensible, as
appears by your Answers written to me, never once pretending to me in those
Letters, that I owned it, or agreed with you (as you tell the World) or said
any Thing looking that Way, but all along going wholly upon the Supposition
that I denied it only. When it came to this, I had no other Way left for me to
take, though it was very contrary to my Inclination, but to go into the Press
too, and from thence declare the Matter as it was, and publish those very
Letters of mine, and endeavor to convince the World that you had greatly
abused Mr. Whitefield and me. Upon this you go on still, and resolutely persist
in what you said before; and because I say that I once was of Opinion that Mr.
Whitefield endeavored to promote People's forsaking unconverted Ministers, and
the introducing of others, but deny that ever he told me what you have
reported, or that he ever hinted to me any Thing like it, You charge me before
the World with the most plain, flat, amazing, astonishing, unaccountable
Self-Contradiction, and strange and solemn Quibbling and Equivocating to amuse
and deceive the World; and intimate that I have been guilty of Jesuitical
Management in a solemn Oath (p. 6.) And then when you have done all this, you
finish with complaining that I have treated you with very unhandsome and
unchristian Reflections; yet say you will not render Evil for Evil, or Railing for
Railing; but that you are so far from it, that you will forgive me without my
asking it.

Here I forbear to add any Reflections; I trust that your own Conscience will
be full of those that are proper when you have read this: And if you don't
suitably reflect just now, yet I hope the Time will come when you will be
sedate, and will with Solemnity of Spirit think of these Things, and be enabled
to look on your own Conduct with real Seriousness, as in the Sight of God. That
you may obtain this Mercy is the Desire of,

Rev. Sir, your Brother and Servant, Jonathan Edwards.
Northampton, May 20. 1745.

