Mr. PRINCE'S SERMON Occasioned By the DEATH of His eldest Daughter.

The Sovereign GOD Acknowledged and Blessed, both in Giving and Taking away. A
SERMON Occasioned By the DECEASE of Mrs. Deborah Prince, On Friday July 20.
1744. In the 21st Year of her Age. Delivered At the South Church in BOSTON,
July 29. Being the LORD'S DAY after her Funeral. With A BRIEF ACCOUNT of the
Dealings of GOD toward Her; especially in the Time of her Sickness and Passing
through the Valley of the Shadow of Death.

By Her Father.

Psalm. xxxvi. 9. In thy Light shall we see Light.

Zech. xiv. 7. It shall come to pass, that at Evening Time it shall be Light.

Psalm. xxxiv. 2. The Humble shall hear thereof, and be glad.

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL for T. RAND in Cornhill. 1744.

The Sovereign GOD Acknowledged and Blessed, both in Giving and Taking away.
JOB I. 21. The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away; Blessed be the Name of
the LORD.


THIS is the latter Part of the first Speech of Job, on the surprising Loss,
not only of his Estate; but also and more especially his Children, who no doubt
were vastly the most dear to Him, and their awful and sudden Death by far the
most afflicting.

See how bitterly He bewails their Loss in Chapter xxix. 2 -- 5. Oh that I were
as in Months past, as in the Days when GOD preserved me! when his Candle shined
upon my Head, and when by his Light I walked through Darkness! as I was in the
Days of my Youth, when the Secret of GOD was upon my Tabernacle! when the
ALMIGHTY was yet with me! when MY CHILDREN were about me.

While one in haste was telling Him, the Sabaeans had taken away his Oxen and
Asses and slain his Servants working with them; another comes and tells Him,
the Fire of GOD had fallen from Heaven and burnt up both his Sheep and Servants
with them: while this was speaking, runs a third and tells Him, the Chaldaeans
had carried away his Camels and slain his Servants attending them: and while
this was speaking, comes a Fourth with more surprising News than all -- How a
Great Wind had blown down the House where his CHILDREN were making merry, and
killed them also.

This last Message, as a judicious Expositor observes, was by the Policy of
Satan reserved to the last, (1) Because the Tidings for the Loss of his Goods
would not have been so grievous, had He heard of his Children's Death before,
to whom He hoped to have left them: And indeed when a Man lies under a Great
Affliction, a Less is not much minded. (2) Because when he was more and more
surpised and pressed with the former heavy and successive Tidings, He would be
the less able to bear this most afflicting of all, the more likely to sink down
under it, and to brake forth into Impatience and evil Tho'ts and Speeches
against the sovereign GOD. ( A. Jackson.
)

But upon this immediately we read -- Then Job arose, and rent his Mantle, and
shaved his Head, and fell down upon the Ground, and worshipped, and said, Naked
came I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I return Thither; The LORD
gave, and the LORD has taken away; Blessed be the Name of the LORD.

Here we have (1) His affectionate and religious Carriage; and (2) His wise and
pious Speech on this Occasion.

1. His affectionate and religious Carriage.

Then JOB arose: as one that sunk not under his heavy Affliction; but that in a
suitable Manner He might behave Himself, and show his due Resentment of this
afflicting Providence.

And rent his Mantle and shaved his Head: This He did as a lively Expression,
both of his great Trouble, and of his penitent and contrite Frame of Spirit
under so grievous a Chastisement. As for these outward Rites observed in those
ancient Times and Places; they were particular Customs of a mere arbitrary
Nature, which People of other Countries or Ages are by no Means obliged to use:
But where those Rites prevailed, they were very significant and moving both to
the afflicted themselves and to those who saw them. So JACOB rent his Clothes
at the supposed Death of his beloved Joseph. Genesis xxxvii. 34: And the Intent
might be to signify, how his Heart was rent with Grief, and what little Comfort
He took in the Things about Him. So the shaving of the Head was also used in
Times of great Affliction: as in Jer. vii. 29. Cut off thine Hair O JERUSALEM,
and cast it away, and take up a Lamentation. And it seems to be done to
signify, that their Case was so deplorable, as it became them to lay by all
their Ornaments; the Hair being then accounted a principal Part of their
Ornament. ( A. Jackson.
)

And fell down upon the Ground, and worshipped. He either fell down on his
Knees, or rather prostrate on his Face; as Mercer and all the other Versions
represent Him See Mercer on Job, and the Polyglot Bible, etc.
. But He fell down on the Ground, to signify his low Humiliation under the
Stroke of GOD: and He fell down, to worship in a more lowly Manner, or as a
Token of the most profound Adoration and Submission. The Syriack and Arabic
render it; He fell down on the Earth adoring. And worshipped: i. e. with
religious Reverence He saw and humbly owned, paid Homage and submitted to that
DIVINE, sovereign and awful POWER which had so sorely smitten Him.

And here, his humble Worship is not merely mental, or wholly silent; but with
becoming outward Postures, it also b^^^^es forth in Expressions full of lowly
Sentiments about Himself, Acknowledgements of the holy Hand of GOD, and of
Honor to Him under all these grievous Dispensations.

2. We have then his wise and pious Speech, on this Occasion.

Short indeed, but extremely pertinent and pithy --

And said, 'Naked came I out of my Mother's Womb: with Self-abasement He looks
back to the Time of his Birth; when He came naked into the World, without the
Estate and Children He had since possessed, and is now without again. And naked
shall I return Thither: He now as humbly looks forward also to that certain
Time approaching when He must return as naked out of the World as when He came
into it. By a beautiful Turn of Speech, He seems now to look on the Earth to
which he was fallen either as his Original or Future MOTHER, and the Grave as
her Womb, to which e're long He should return as naked as He was Born. As if He
had said -- As I came naked from my Mother'sWomb; I shall return naked to This
Earth to which I am fallen. Yea by Returning Thither, He may seem to signify;
that when He should go out of this visible World, He should return to a State
in the Grave like that in the Womb of his Humane Mother: (that as There He was
once shut up in Darkness, waiting for a happy Deliverance; so when his Body
came to be shut up naked in the Grave or Womb of his Mother the Earth, it would
be There as an Embrio also, waiting for an happier Exit into a World of Glory.
( A. Jackson.
)

Nor are his Tho'ts confined to Himself, or the Earth, or his great Affliction:
But He looks up to GOD as the Orderer of whatever befell Him, and under all He
Blesses this sovereign Being. The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away;
Blessed be the Name of the LORD.

By the NAME of the LORD is meant THE LORD HIMSELF: as the Name is often taken
for Him who bears it Sanctius in Pol. Synopsi.
. The Words in the Original are -- JEHOVAH gave, and JEHOVAH has taken away;
Blessed be the Name of JEHOVAH: and in every Clause he repeats this venerable
Name JEHOVAH, to signify, how intently his Mind was fixed upon HIM in these
afflicting Dispensations, and what a sublime Pleasure the Idea gave Him.

In these Things we see his soaring Piety in the midst of his most grievous
Trials; and how by Faith it rises from the deep Resentments of Nature in
sinking Sorrows, to the Heights of Grace and Employment of Heaven in Blessing
the Name of the LORD.

First his natural Passions vent themselves in rending his Mantle and shaving
his Head, in spoiling Himself of his Ornaments and falling down to the Ground:
There He humbles Himself and worships: He owns his naked State as He came into
the World; that He had since received all his Enjoyments at the sovereign Hand
of GOD; that GOD had bestowed them as transient Comforts; that when He comes to
Die He must part with them all; that GOD had a Right to take them away before,
when He pleased; and that now they are gone, it is HE that has taken them: Yea
He owns his Obligations of Gratitude to this DIVINE DISPOSER, in Giving Him his
pleasant Enjoyments: and now GOD had only taken what He had kindly for a Time
bestowed; he not only humbly submits, but also retains the grateful Sense and
Blesses the Name of the LORD.

All these Things seem plainly exhibited in the Example before us; and were
doubtless written for our Imitation under the most heavy Bereavements, whether
of Children or Others, or of any Earthly Desire whatever.

But from this latter Part of the Speech of Job, we may raise this

GENERAL DOCTRINE, That in our most sore Bereavements, we should not only with
a humble Thankfulness and Submission own, that the LORD gave, and the LORD has
taken away; but also further labor after such raised and amiable Views of GOD,
as even to BLESS his Name. I. We should then with a humble Thankfulness and
Submission own, that the LORD has given, and the LORD has taken away.

The sovereign Hand and Will of GOD must needs be concerned in all Events. As
He made every Thing, every Spirit and every Atom in Heaven and Earth; He formed
them with wise Designs, to fill up all their Places in his unbroken and
consummate Scheme of Providence. For his wise Pleasure they were and are
created. And as He Preserves them all, for his wise Pleasure also they are
Preserved. His Kingdom likewise rules over all, and his Dominion from
Generation to Generation, even for ever. He made the whole Creation on Purpose
for Dominion. And He is always equally Present every where, both to uphold and
order even every Spirit of the smallest Animal, as well as the highest
Archangel; and every Atom, as well as the whole Globe of the Earth. It is
equally easy to Him to uphold and govern continually as well as create the one
as the other for wise Designs: and there is not the least among them but ever
has its Influence as well as Place in his wide Dominion.

The SON of GOD assures us, that not a Sparrow falls to the Ground, or Dies,
without Him, and that the Hairs of our Heads are all Numbered. Mat. x. Luke
xii. So universal and so perfect is his sovereign Providence. All our Comforts
and all our Troubles must be ordered by Him. And when our dear Enjoyments are
removed from us, we should then see and own his sovereign Hand both in Giving
them to us and in Taking away.

1. We should then with Thankfulness acknowledge, it is the LORD who Gave them.

As we came naked into the World, whatever Comfort we have enjoyed since, we
have received from Him; we have received it from his supreme Will and Hand; and
he has bestowed it on us as an undeserved Gift, with perfect Freeness and
Liberality. Many of our Earthly Goods may seem to come by our own Forecast,
Care and Industry, or the Hand of others; or by a great Variety of second
Causes: But these are all comprised within his Influence and Providence: It is
HE that gives us Forecast and Power to get worldly Wealth or Honors: It is HE
that orders those innumerable Circumstances that render our Contrivances, Cares
and Labors prosperous; or that sometimes prospers us without them. It is HE
also that gives us Children Psalm. cxxvii. 3.
and other Relatives: It is HE that formed them with their various Geniuses,
Powers and Pleasancies: And it is HE that gives them their Accomplishments,
their Moral Virtues, and their Christian Graces; and that makes them lovely and
delightful to us.

In short, whatever Creature-Comfort we have enjoyed, we have received from the
kind and giving Hand of GOD. And their Continuance to us also is as much his
Giving, as when at first Bestowed. We have been unworthy of them every Moment:
And as he has graciously continued them, his continuing them has been a
continued Giving them.

While He Gives them, we should then be constantly acknowledging his kind and
undeserved Gifts with Thankfulness: Nor should our Gratitude expire upon the
Removal of them. When they are taken away, we should still remember the Divine
Benignity in Giving them at first, and in Preserving them so long: And we
should also call to mind the Comfort we have received in them; not to increase
our Sorrow, but in the midst of Sorrows, to keep alive the Sense of our
Obligations and our due Thankfulness to him that Gave them.

And here we should consider the Gift of these Comforts to us, as related to
his wise Decree and Providence; that he Gave them in all their Kinds, their
Measures, and their Seasons; and in those that were most wise and fitting: that
he gave them to be just such Comforts to us, as he has made them actually to
be: and that he gave them to continue for such a Time as he has continued them,
and not a Moment longer. Job vii. 1. and xiv. 5.

In fine, that he had an absolute Right to Give them or not to Give them as he
pleased: that he might have chosen not to have Given them at all, or not to
have made them so agreeable, or not to have Given us so much Comfort in them, or
not to have Given them for so long a Season: But every Measure and Duration of
our Comfort in them is entirely owing to his sovereign Kindness.

2. We should then acknowledge with Submission also, that the same LORD who
Gave has Taken them away.

What ever be the Means of their Removal, yet every Kind of Means is
comprehended in his universal Providence. Shall there be Evil in the City, and
the LORD has not done it? Surely no. Amos iii. 6. I am the LORD, and there is
none else: I form the Light, and create Darkness: I make Peace, and create
Evil: I the LORD do all these Things. Isa. xlv. 6, 7. He does all these Things,
either by his immediate or mediate Influence: either by himself; or by the
inanimate Powers of Nature, which he ever upholds and governs; or by the holy
Angels, who are the ready Doers of his sovereign Pleasure; or by Men, or evil
Angels whom he restrains, exciteth or permits as he pleases.

In short, the whole Creation are his Instruments entirely at his Disposal:
They are ever under his wise Direction: And as He always does according to his
Will among them, so not any Comfort can be taken away without him. When they
are removed from us, it is the same GOD who Gave that does it. He is the
sovereign LORD who kindly Gave and made them such Comforts to us; who Gave them
for so long a Season, not a Moment longer; who had a Right to appoint the
Season, and therefore when that Season ends, to Take them away.

For as a learned Man observes; when Job confesses the LORD had Given, he
signifies that GOD had so Given as to reserve to Himself the full Propriety and
Power over them: that he does not Give us the Property of them from himself;
nor yet the Enjoyment of them in any other Way than in entire Dependence on his
sovereign Pleasure. ( Mercer in Job.
)

The most lowly Submission therefore is most clearly due to GOD, in the most
sore Bereavments of our Earthly Comforts. And in such Bereavements we should
eye his Sovereign Hand and Pleasure, bow down our Wills, and give up all our
Scheams, Delights and Affections to Him in these trying Dispensations. (The
Septuagint here adds -- as it pleased the LORD, so it is done.) It being the
LORD who takes away, is Reason enough to silence every murmurnig Disposition,
to calm our tumultuous Passions, and oblige us to resign Ourselves and our most
dear Enjoyments to his Sovereign Pleasure.

And we shall both clearly see this Reason and feel this happy Efficacy of it;
if we have believing Views of his adorable Perfections, his consummate Wisdom,
his spotless Holiness, and Justice, his abundant Kindness in and thorough
CHRIST, his inviolable Truth, and our Covenant Interest in him. For then in
Taking our dearest Comforts from us, we shall view him as acting in a
righteous, holy, wise, gracious and faithful Manner: Correcting us indeed in
his righteous, holy and fatherly Displeasure; but therewith in Wisdom,
Faithfulness and Loving Kindness, for our greater present and eternal Benefit.

Yea,

II. In our most grievous Bereavments, we should yet further labor after such
raised and amiable Views of GOD, as even to Bless his Name.

So Job appears to rise in his pious Exercise, upon his sore Bereavments. First
with low Abasement he looks backward, and then forward on his naked State, both
as he entered and is to leave the World: Then with Thankfulness he calls to
Mind and owns the Divine Favor to him in Giving and continuing his lost
Enjoyments: Then he passes on to a harder Work of Devotion still, viz.
Submissively to yield to the Hand of GOD in Taking them away: And now he rises
up to the Hight of Piety, even under his oppressive Grief, and with an elevated
Voice he closes his Adoration with Blessing the Name of the LORD.

In this exalted Point of Piety he seems to act, not only above, but even
contrary to the genuine Resentments of Nature; as to Bless the LORD who had
just Taken away both his Estate and Children, and this in a very sudden, awful
and aggravated Manner. One would think -- a low Submission to the Sovereign
Hand and Will that smote him, was as much as genuine Piety would require or
dispose him to. But immediately to Bless the SEVERE BEREAVER! -- How can heavy
Sorrow and cheerful Blessing rise from the same Heart and Mouth together?
Surely some heavenly Rays of Light must shine into his gloomy Mind; and he must
have those opening Views of GOD, as made him for a while forget his Sorrows,
and filled his Soul with Consolations.

A Mystery this seems to the carnal World: But a Scene the Sanctified are no
Strangers to: They often see it; they clearly understand it; and they can
easily unfold it to one another. Their Graces work in every Passion and
Affection: Their believing Views of GOD will easily set them all a moving: when
their Views of GOD are lively, their Graces and Affections grow lively too: And
a single View of his transcendent Glory in the Face of CHRIST and of their
Covenant Interest in Him; one such View as Job -- when he said, I know that MY
REDEEMER lives, will in a Moment raise the Heart from the Depths of Sorrow and
Mourning, above all the Views of Creatures, to the Heights of Joy and Praise.

Some such View of GOD as this, it seems was given to Job, while under his
oppressing Grief he is bowing down and worshipping his DIVINE CORRECTOR. While
this pious Man is viewing and owning the Hand of GOD in Giving and Taking away,
humbling himself before HIM, and bowing his Will to the Divine Pleasure; he
gains that exalted View of GOD, which moves him to break forth and Bless his
Name.

And indeed a low Submission to the Sovereign GOD in dark and trying
Dispensations, is the very next Door to Joy and Transport. Their great Design
is to subdue the Will to his. The more hard the Trial, the more complete the
Conquest: And the more complete the Conquest, the more submissive and calm the
Soul; the turbulent Passions laid; the End of the Trial accomplished; and the
peaceful and humble Soul prepared for those amiable and raised Views of GOD in
CHRIST, and especially as Ours, which will excite our Joy and move to Bless him.

How can the Soul disturbed with unsubmissive Passions under his afflictive
Hand, have amiable Apprehensions of him? It is indeed the Want of these
Apprehensions that make and keep us unsubmissive. He is in one Scheme of
Prospect, and we in another: We are presumptuously ready to think that ours is
better, and to prefer our Wisdom to his; or imagine he is not so kind or
merciful as we would have him to be, or as we are Ourselves: And these are some
of the principal Grounds of our Dissatisfaction or Quarrelling with HIM. O that
a diminutive Creature of his, infinitely inferior to HIM in Understanding and
Goodness, should be so horridly arrogant and audacions! --

But when we come to have such high Apprehensions of Him, as to silence our
complaining Thoughts and still our rolled Passions; the Soul subsides into a
pleasing Calmness and Serenity, a humble Satisfaction with his holy Will and
Hand: The very Sense of such a Submissiveness, Serenity and Satisfaction in us,
will raise our inward Gladness for this Grace bestowed, and move our Souls and
Tongues to Bless him. And then in such a State of inward Peace, there is nothing
to prevent us from rising higher in our Views of GOD: But even those
Contemplations of him which give us such a pleasing Satisfaction in his
grievous Dealings with us, will incline our Minds to the more intentive
Contemplations on him: And the more we view him, the more we shall discover of
his transcendant Excellence, and the higher will our Pleasure rise, to excite
our Thankfulness and Praises.

Now, we see his glorious Sovereignty, his absolute Authority, his unlimited
Dominion, his unspotted Holiness, his unblemished Justice, his unerring Wisdom,
his universal Providence, his boundless Goodness, his inviolable Truth, his
perpetual Mindfulness of his wellordered Covenant, his punctual Faithfulness to
fulfill it to us; in short, his absolute Unchangeableness, Eternity and All
sufficiency to be our perfect satisfying and endless Portion: We see such an
infinite Fullness of Glory and Blessedness in him, and such an infinite Freeness
to communicate of them to us through CHRIST the Mediator; that we entirely
close in with him, we most highly admire and love him, we rejoice in his Glory
and Happiness; we praise him for all that he is in himself, and for all that he
does in the World; we wish him only to be what he is, and to do whatever he is
pleased to do; we wish his Will may be the perpetual Rule of all his Actions;
we wish his Designs may be for ever accomplished; we wish him to fulfill his
most wise and universal Scheam, without the Omission of the smallest Branch or
the least Iota; and we wish his Glory may be the End of all: Yea we are
entirely satisfied, that all these Things shall be; we entirely acquiesce,
rejoice and praise him; and to him we freely yield the Dominion, Power and
Glory of all for ever.

This it is to Bless the Name of the LORD: And to these high Flights of Faith
and Piety should we labor to rise, even in our most sore Bereavements, and in
his darkest Dispensations.

For whatever be the outward Appearance of Things in this present State of
Probation; yet the most Glorious GOD is still ever the same: He is now as Holy,
Righteous, Gracious, Wise and Faithful, in all the seeming Disorders of this
lower World, as in all the Order and Blessedness of the Heavenly Places. The
present dark, mysterious Dispensation is only to exercise and try our Faith and
Patience: And when these are sufficiently tried, improved and brightened, we
shall then be exalted into the clear Vision; where all these puzling Mysteries
will open fully to the ravished Soul, to its superabundant Recompense for all
its present Pains and Perplexities, and to its endless Entertainment,
Admiration and Satisfaction. What I do (said CHRIST to Peter) Thou know not
Now, but Thou shall know Hereafter, Joh. xiii. 7. And the inspired Apostle
tells us, 1 Cor. xiii. 12. For now we see through a Glass darkly, (or in a
Riddle, as the Original signifies) But then Face to Face: Now I know in Part,
But then I shall know even also as I am known.

Thus have we made a few Reflections on the ancient and becoming Example here
exhibited, for our Instruction and Direction in our sore Bereavements. A great
Number of other Particulars might be observed: But the Subject is very copious,
and the Heads we have mentioned are comprehensive of them.

And now for such an IMPROVEMENT as these Things would lead us to. It would
easily spread into various Branches: But the Sum of them all may be reduced to
This --

Let us Labor in our Bereavements to Go and Do so likewise.

And in Order to such a Behavior, here we see the great Necessity of Faith,
even that vital Faith which is from a Divine Operation, and of the lively
Exercise thereof in our Contemplations on the Blessed GOD in the Times of our
Bereavements. For it is this Faith in Exercise that gives our Souls the Evidence
of HIM who is invisible. It gives the evident Discovery of his invisible
Glories in the Face of CHRIST, to the contemplating Mind: And when we come to
see them, they will raise our Souls above our most pressing Sorrows, they will
fill us with Contentment in Him: Yea they will inspire with Joy; they will make
the Soul exult, break forth in Praise and Bless his Name.

And the more mysterious and dark his Providence, the more we need to raise
our Minds from Things below to the believing Contemplations of this Highest and
most Glorious Being. When we look on Things Below, a thick and melancholy
Darkness encompasses us about, which affects our Minds with Sorrow and sinks
them in Dejection: But when we look up to GOD, and fix our Eyes on him, as he
appears in CHRIST; we see in him a glorious Light, to cheer our Spirits and
raise them up to a perfect Satisfaction in him. He was absolutely happy from
Eternity without any Creature; and surely in HIM we may be happy also, though
bereaved of every other Being. He need only unvail his Glories in the Face of
CHRIST, to convince us of it and make us feel it. All Things in Earth and
Heaven are nothing to him: As we come to know him, we clearly see it: And the
more we know him, the less we esteem the most lovely Creatures in Comparison
with him, and the higher we rise in our Admirations of him, and grow in
Happiness.

In fine, by the lively Exercise of Faith in the Contemplations of him, we
bring the delightful Vision of his Glories into our Minds; he opens them to us,
to our Wonder and Complacency; we come even here into the sensible Enjoyment of
him; we come into a satisfying Experience of our Interest in him; and our
Hearts and Tongues can Bless and Praise him in the Loss of all Things here
below.

Such a noble Flight the aspiring Asaph rose unto, and such a Satisfaction he
exulted in, when he cried out aloud as in Psalm. lxxiii. 25, 26. My Heart was
grieved, and I was pricked in my Reins -- Nevertheless, I am continually with
Thee: Thou have holden me by my Right Hand: Thou shall guide me by thy Counsel,
and afterward receive me to Glory. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is
none upon Earth that I desire besides Thee! my Flesh and my Heart fails; but
GOD is the Strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever.

To such a Flight of Faith should we aspire, when bereaved of the dearest of
our Earthly Comforts, whether it be of a Father, a Mother, a Wife, a Husband, a
Brother, a Sister, a Son or a Daughter; the Two last of which were in the
grievous Case of Job, when he made this humble Acknowledgment and Blessed the
Name of the LORD.

And in the Taking away of our Children, we have more especial Reason to Bless
him; when he has made them amiable and delightful, in their natural
Constitutions, acquired Endowments, and wise Behavior.

When he has given us Children of a lively and pleasant Spirit, a calm and even
Mind, a clear Understanding, an easy Apprehension, a ready Memory, an ingenious
Disposition: More especially when in the forming of their natural Constitution,
he has given a great Measure of common Grace: By which I mean, a sweet, mild
and kind Temper; a tender and honest Heart, Gentleness, Meekness, Modesty,
Humility; a Tho'tful Mind, a Thirst for Knowledge, an Aptness to observe and
learn, and a respectful Readiness to obey their Parents: And most of all, when
growing up, he has not only restrained them from Youthful Sins and Follies,
made them serious and considerate, discreet and circumspect, cautious of
offending others; but also excited their Thoughtfulness about their Souls and
Eternity, and given the lively Signs of sanctifying Grace; which in its genuine
Exercise is the Height of Loveliness on Earth, will grow to Glory in Heaven,
and render them most lovely in the Eyes of Saints, Angels and CHRIST, for ever.

When he has Given us such a Child as This, though mortal, for a transient
Season, and to expire before us; He undeservedly and highly favors us, and we
have additional Cause to Bless Him, though he takes it away.

And this brings me to the known Occasion of this Discourse, the Death of my
Dear and eldest Daughter: On which Account I have abundant Reason, not only to
bow down with low Humility and mourn my Great Loss, the awful Frown of GOD
therein, and my Sins among the provoking Causes of so heavy a Stroke; but also
to say with Job, and O that I might say it in a suitable Manner -- The LORD has
Given, and the LORD has Taken away; Blessed be the Name of the LORD. -- To
Bless Him in Giving so dear a Creature, who has been so Great a Part of the
Delight of my House these Twenty Years, seemed easy while she was continued
with us: But to Bless Him now upon Taking Her away in the Flower of Life; -- I
find it difficult, above the Power of Nature, I need the Grace of Job to do it,
and for this I earnestly desire your Prayers.

You have from her Childhood seen her grave Behavior in this House of GOD and
other Places. You have generally known her Character, and have sufficiently
given it; especially in her Sickness, at her Funeral, and in your common
Discourse. I need not therefore give it to this Assembly. And I am more
especially restrained, not only by my near Relation, but also by what she spoke
to me one Morning early and alone about three or four Days before she Died:
Said she, with all the Emotions of a grieved Heart, Dear Father! I have been
told, you speak to People in my Commendation: I beg you would not! I am a poor
miserable Sinner! I don't deserve to have one Word said in my Favor! Pray Sir
don't! I beg you would not. You cannot think how Grievous it is to me!

On these Accounts I must forbear her Character: Or I might truly represent it
in an amiable. Light, for the Excitation of the Children now before me: Or if I
were to say, I had just now drawn it; her Acquaintants would reply; I might
have justly said a great Deal more, and should Bless the Name of the LORD.

But because GOD's Dealings with Her both before and in her Sickness have been
so remarkable; I cannot but think it will be for his Glory and your Advantage,
to present you with some Relation of them. In which I shall chiefly show her
great Infirmities, and the surprising Display of his Sovereign Grace and Power
in her last Extremity.

It was on Dec. 23. 1723, when He Gave her to me: And just about ten Months
after, He first threatened to take Her away. This was one of the most
distressing Seasons both with my Family and this Congregation. For at the very
same Time lay exceeding ill, both She and her only Brother, and also your Rev.
Senior Pastor: And they were all apprehended in Danger. But the merciful GOD
was pleased to hear our Cries, and spare them all for near Twenty Years
together. I mention this to put us in Mind of our great Obligations, and excite
our Praises.

As she grew up, he was pleased to restrain her from youthful Vanities, to make
her serious, and move her to study the BIBLE and the best of Authors both of
History and Divinity: Among the latter of which, Dr. Watts and Mrs. Row's
Writings were very agreeable and familiar to Her. The SPIRIT of GOD was also
pleased to work on her Heart by, Dr. Sewall's Ministry, for whom she had a high
Esteem, and by other Means of Grace: Especially when she came to be about
Fourteen Years of Age; convincing and humbling her (as in a Paper of hers she
represents it) of all her Sins both Original and Actual, of their Greatness and
Heinousness, and of her Need of a SAVIOR; enabling her, as she hoped, to
repent of her Sins and forsake them; to look on CHRIST as a complete Redeemer;
to renounce her own Righteousness, and depend on his only; and making her
willing to accept Him as offered in the Gospel, as her Prophet, Priest and
King, to instruct, intercede for and rule over Her.

Upon this she was desirous of Renewing her Covenant in Public, and coming up
to all his Ordinances: But Apprehensions of her own Unworthiness and Fears of
Eating and Drinking Judgment to herself, discouraged and prevented her; till
July 18. 1739, when she narrowly escaped being drowned in her Father's Bosom.
For as I had just received her into my Arms in a Boat, in Order to go aboard a
Vessel in the Harbor bound to her Uncle Denny's at Arrowsick; the Boat shear'd
off, and I fell back with her into the Salt Water Ten foot Deep, with which she
was almost filled; and we Both continued under it out of Sight of her Brother
and second Sister looking on for about a Minute. And if a Couple of Strangers
from Connecticut had not been Providentially near at Hand to reach Her quickly;
in a Minute or two more she had been past Recovery. But now she lived Five
Years and two Days longer.

Being affected with this great Danger and Deliverance, she seemed to be
further awakened and stirred up to her Duty of Devoting Herself to her DIVINE
PRESERVER, of walking in all his Commandments, and living to his Glory. And in
Consequence of this, at her own Motion, she was on Lordsday the 5th of the
following Month, Propounded; and the 19th Publicly Gave Herself to GOD in
Covenant, and came into full Communion with us.

When Mr. Whitefield came and preached in the Fall of the Year ensuing; she,
with Multitudes of Others, was excited to a livelier View of Eternity, to a
greater Care of her immortal Soul, to a stricter Search into Herself, and a
more earnest Labor after vital Piety and the Power of Godliness, and to make
them more the Business of her Life. And how such Experimental and Searching
Writers as Mr. Shepard of Cambridge, Mr. William Guthry of Scotland, Mr. Flavel
and Mead of England, Mr. Stoddard of North-Hampton and Mr. Mather of Windsor in
New England, etc, were more diligently read and highly valued.

She now suspected all her former Experiences; that her Heart remained
unrenewed, and that she had not rightly received CHRIST; until Dec. 13. 1740:
When on a Day of Private Prayer and Fasting, those Divine Passages were set
home with surprising and overcoming Power on her distressed Soul in Mat. viii.
Mark i, and Luke v. And there came a Leper to Him, full of Leprosy, who seeing
JESUS, fell on his Face and besought Him, saying, LORD, if Thou WILL, Thou
CAN make me clean: And JESUS moved with Compassion, put forth his Hand, and
touched Him, and says unto Him, I WILL! -- Be Thou clean! And as soon as He
had spoken, immediately, the Leprosy departed from Him, and He was cleansed.
With those Passages of Grace, there came into her such a sweet and raised View
both of the Power, Willingness and Will of this Dear REDEEMER, to cleanse her
from the Leprosy of Sin and save Her; as to satisfy her of it, and draw her to
him in such a Manner as she never felt before. And she told her younger Sister,
that if ever she rightly embraced the SAVIOR and was converted; she thought it
was at that happy Season. Though this I never knew 'till since her Funeral: it
being one of her Infirmities to be too reserved.

Whether she had any particular Apprehension of the Shortness of her Life, I
cannot tell: But GOD who knew it, seemed to put Her on Redeeming her Time, and
eagerly improving Opportunities of Hearing his Word both Publicly and
Privately, in Season and out of Season, and in the stormiest Weather, as if she
had -- and every Opportunity would be the last. Some People blamed Her, as
being over-diligent and eager: But she had Salvation and Eternity in View, went
on steadily without regarding such Suggestions, seemed to grow dead to the
present World, and to mind nothing so much as to make her Calling and Election
sure.

Mr. Tennent's searching Preaching raised in Her, as in many Others, a great
and constant Jealousy of being Deceived: And upon every spiritual Declension, a
Cloud of Darkness overwhelmed her and inclined her to judge she was. His
insisting also that without sanctifying Grace, our BLESSED SAVIOR gives none a
Right to Partake at his Table, occasioned her much Perplexity. For from thence
she argued; that unless she knew she had sanctifying Grace, she could not
knowshe had a Right: And to Partake without knowing she had a Right, would be
not to Partake in Faith, but in Presumption, and this she had no Right to do.
And hence when Doubts of her State of Grace arose, she dare not Participate;
but onty attended with Desire, and I believe with deep Regret and
Self-abasement. So though her Jealousies and Fears were troublesome; I am apt
to think they were useful; not only to make her Look more into and see herself,
and make her more broken, humble, and careful, but also excite her Prayers and
Labors after livelier Degrees of Grace and the clearer Evidence of it.

Sometimes she had Light and Comfort: But I think oftener otherwise. And this
seemed to be another Infirmity; that she was afraid of Comfort, lest it
belonged not to her, and she should be thereby deluded. For I think she should
have humbly received every Comfort which the Sovereign GOD by the Scriptures
offered her; to excite her Thankfulness, Love, Praise and Zeal, Encouragement
to go on in her Christian Course, and Care to guard against ungrateful
Negligence and Security.

In her lively and pleasant Frames she wrote down her happy Idaeas, and they
were her choicest Writings; But afterward in a Time of Decay she burnt them:
And the Reason she gave to an intimate Companion and one of the Female Society
to which she joined for the most indearing Exercise of social Piety, was,
because, in Case she should be suddenly taken away, her Friends would think Her
to be as Good as those Writings represented.

But I now come to her Sickness.

On Tuesday, May 29, she was seized on a sudden with a slow Fever: And upon
going up to her Chamber dropped a Word, as if she should never come down alive.

From the Beginning she was much more apprehensive of Danger than any else: And
though concerned about her Soul; yet complained of her Stupidity, Hardness of
Heart, Blindness of Mind, Impenitence and Unbelief; censuring and condemning
herself of all Good, denying she had any sanctifying Grace, but judging she had
been deceiving Herself with the counterfeit Resemblance of it.

Her Fever continued without Intermission for about a Month: And then becoming
Hectical, persevered with some small Abatements in the former Part of the Day;
and then rising higher in the Afternoons and Nights to a terrible Degree until
she expired.

Though she had several surprising Turns when she thought she was Dying; yet I
saw no very dangerous Symptoms 'till Lord's Day, July 1, at my Returning Home
from the Afternoon Exercise: when she was grown so ill that we apprehended she
was hastening to her great Change, and her Mother thought Herself obliged in
Faithfulness to tell her our Apprehension. Upon which she thanked her for the
Kindness; but quickly fell into great Distress in the awakening Views of a near
Eternity and her being unprepared for it. With Agony she cried -- O I am just
going into ETERNITY! And I have no Interest in CHRIST, and I cannot Submit, I
cannot Believe! O what shall I do! O Dear Sir, What shall I do! etc. I told Her,
There was no other Way, but to condemn Herself at the Foot of the Allsufficient
and compassionate REDEEMER, and there to lie and die imploring the Mercy he
offered; and if she did so, I believed He would in no wise cast her off or let
her perish. -- It would brake a Heart of Stone to hear her! And O the Horror of
that Night! It was one of the most distressing I ever knew!

We were afraid of her Dying all that Night. When I was obliged to leave her
that she might get some Rest, I ordered the Watcher, as at other Times, to call
me, if there should be any Alteration: And when I came to Her early in the
Morning, I found her exceeding ill, weakened and discouraged; and that being
restless she had not slept a Wink, being afraid of closing her Eyes, least she
should suddenly open into Eternity. But after some Discourse and Prayers, she
was persuaded to resign Herself into the Arms of JESUS, composed herself to
rest, and slept: And upon awaking was a little refreshed; which I improved to
encourage her.

However, her awful Darkness still continued. And though I reasoned with her
about her former Experience, yet all in vain. O Dear Father, (said she) you
have better Apprehensions of me than you should have: You don't know what a
vile Creature I am: I have dreadfully apostatized from CHRIST, have grown
exceeding negligent of religious Duties, and was returning to the World again.
I told her, we did not perceive it; that I could not see those Decays she spoke
of, to be inconsistent with a regenerate State, though they were Matter of deep
Abasement, and she should have a Care she denied not the gracious Work of GOD
within Her. She begged me not to speak to her nor Pray for her as a converted
Person, but as a wretched, unconverted Sinner; who had closed with CHRIST from
merely sensitive and selfish Motives, as Fear of Hell, and not from the highest
Apprehension and Love of HIM as most desirable to see and enjoy.

I told Her CHRIST as a compassionate Savior had revealed Hell to us on
Purpose, that we might be afraid of it, and by the Fear be moved to fly to him
to save us from it; and this must therefore be a dutiful Compliance with his
gracious Purpose; that this Kindness in discovering Hell, with his Concern and
Willingness to save us from it, is a Part of his Amiableness, for which we
ought to love and embrace him; though we should indeed be excited also with the
higher Motives of his Personal Excellencies: But by her former Experience, it
seemed to me, she had closed with him from the Views of these as well as the
other. -- She could not deny that she had sometimes thought so; but could see
nothing of his Loveliness now, and concluded she had been deceived.

I also argued from her Love to the House and Word of GOD, and to his People
and Ministers; from her peculiar Love to Those whom she apprehended to be most
eminent for vital Piety; especially those Ministers who most laid open the
Hypocrisy of the Hearts of Men, who made the Hypocrites and Formalists the most
uneasy, and were most zealous for the Power of Godliness: From her bitter
Mourning we were Witnesses of for the Loss of the Rev. Mr. Cooper, though she
was neither related to, nor acquainted with Him any otherwise than by a
diligent Hearing his Lectures; but only because of his Eminence in Piety,
Preaching, and Activity in Promoting the Doctrines of Grace, the Conversion of
Sinners, Edification of Converts, and therein the Cause of CHRIST: Her younger
Sister had also just been telling me; that the Day after Mr. Cooper Died, this
Eldest Sister had such an awful View of the Anger of GOD therein, as she was
hardly able to bear up under it. I did not insist on her aggravated Sorrow for
the Loss of her Rev. Uncle Thacher, because of his Relation; though he was very
Dear to her on the like Accounts as Mr. Cooper.
As also from her Choice of pious Companions, and other hopeful Signs of Grace:
But all to no Purpose. And though the Rev. Dr. Sewall likewise labored to
resolve her Scruples, we found that none but the ALMIGHTY Himself could do it:
Though we believed her to be a Child of GOD, yet if HIS SPIRIT did not witness
with her Spirit that she was so, she could not see it, nor could we help her to
the View, and to Him we were obliged to leave it. Dr. Sewall observing to me,
from his former Acquaintance with her, that if she should die in Darkness, we
should have good Ground to hope, that GOD had given her Grace and would take
her to Glory.

I then changed the Tenor of my discoursing from Day to Day: And supposing she
were not converted, represented her Case as indeed very dreadful, but not as
desperate: And at several Times, as she was through grievous Illness able to
bear, endeavored to set before her the infinite Fountain of Mercy and Grace in
GOD; how this Fountain is open, free, and eternally overflowing thorough CHRIST
even to the chief of Sinners; how he delights in overflowing; how He thereby
glorifies every Person in the Godhead, both FATHER, SON, and SPIRIT; and how he
would be so far from loosing any Glory, that he would glorify more of his
Perfections in Forgiving and Saving her, than in Rejecting and Damning her. I
endeavored also to set before her the wondrous Pity, Condescension, Offices,
Humiliation, Sufferings, Sacrifice, Righteousness, Merits, Exaltation, Glory,
Power, Grace, Calls and Promises of CHRIST; how touched with a Fellow-Feeling
of her Infirmities and Miseries; how tenderly compassionate; how open his Arms;
how earnestly inviting and entreating; how ready to receive her, bestow his
Righteousness on her, intercede for and reconcile her to the HOLY GOD: That one
single Intercession of his would save her Eternally: He need only say, 'O
DIVINE FATHER! Here is a poor guilty, wretched, perishing and rained Sinner;
for my Sake be reconciled to her;' and GOD would be reconciled immediately,
that very Moment: That CHRIST only waited for her coming toward him; and as
the Father of the Prodigal, he would even run immediately to meet and embrace
her, intercede for and reconcile her, yea bestow HIMSELF, his SPIRIT and all
his Benefits and Graces on her.

She would reply -- 'O she could not come to CHRIST, 'she could not trust in
Him, she could not believe, etc. I told her, If she thought she could not come
to him, nor toward him; He was come to her; He was come in showing her, her
Sin, Danger, perishing Condition and absolute Necessity: He had done abundantly
for her already and was ready to do infinitely more: He was now at Hand, and
looked on her; and she need only look up to Him, and he would interceed and
save her: Or if he had given her a Heart to cast Herself down at his Feet, and
resolve if she perished, she would perish There: I believed He would never let
her perish There: He must have infinitely more Mercy than the Bowels of her own
Father for her. O but this Heart of mine (she said) is hard, and my Mind is
blind, and I can do nothing. I told her, that to feel her utter Impotence and
lost Condition, and condemn Herself at the Foot of the REDEEMER, was the
Gospel-Way to receive both Saving Strength and Righteousness from Him: What
could she wish for more than those most gracious Words in 1 Cor. xi. 31. For if
we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged. She seemed resolved to lie
at his Feet, though she perished There: But no Ray of Light or Comfort -- nor
was she able to Submit to Dye, 'till Death appeared.

My Dear People, You must needs be sensible of the great Distress of a Father's
Heart, putting his Soul in her Soul's Place, for so many Weeks together.

Incessant Prayers were made for her both in Public and Private by her
Relatives and pious Acquaintants who dearly loved her: But they all till the
last half Hour of her Life seemed unanswered.

Some were persuaded GOD would not remove her, till he gave her Light and Peace
and Joy in Believing. And these two Things especially, were Matter of
Thankfulness, of Hope and Comfort to us: (1.) That GOD was pleased to continue
to her all along, when she was quite awake, the clear Exercise of her
Understanding; as also great Calmness and Composure, unless now and then in
some sudden Apprehension of Dying: (2.) That he was also pleased to enable her
constantly to bare his Hand, with Meekness, Patience and Humility; condemning
and abasing herself, and Justifying him; yea almost continually, upon the
smallest Instances of Bodily Relief, or Kindness of others, tenderly repeating
it -- O how Good is GOD! -- O how Good is GOD! -- And so running up every
Comfort to HIM.

But in such perplexing Darkness she continued 'till Friday July 20 about
Sunset, when with Surprise she entered the Valley of the Shadow of Death.

About 5 in the Afternoon, I was hastily called up, and found her in great
Distress for Want of Breath: And no Doubt she was actually Dying, though it was
hidden from me. I first asked her, If she was yet enabled to Resign to the
Dispose and Arms of CHRIST? She Replied -- She hoped she was in a great
Measure: Which was more than I had yet heard from her. After Prayer and some
Discourse, she was a little relieved, and we left her to compose herself to
Sleep. But sleeping a few Minutes; about 6, she waked in the strong Agonies of
Death, and was in great Agonies all the while Dr. Sewall was Praying, and the
Physician was with Her: But Blessed be GOD, in her full Senses.

When they had left her I told her, the Physician said he could do no more: And
we must resign her to the Arms of Mercy. Upon this she surprizingly and calmly
composed herself to Die: But now had no Strength to speak; and her Breath
failing, she shut her Eyes, and seemed to be dying away. And now was the most
dismal Time of all! -- To see her depart in Darkness, without any Gleam of
Light or Comfort! -- And looking on her, I said; Dear Child! we shall never
hear her speak one Word more!

O the Distress in the Room! -- But in the Hight thereof, while I was holding
her Arm in my Hands; in 3 or 4 Minutes, to our great Surprise, she opened her
Eyes: And recovering a small Measure of Breath, with an inward interrupted
Speech, through great Difficulty for Want of Breath and Strength, she had just
Time to whisper to me in a new Language; which she expressed with great
Earnestness, exerting herself to the utmost, and so as to be plainly heard by 4
or 5 who were nearest to her. -- ' O I love the LORD JESUS with all my Heart! I
see such an Amiableness, such an AMIABLENESS in Him; I prize Him above a
Thousand Worlds! All the Delights and Pleasures of the World are nothing to
HIM! I asked her, If she could now Resign Herself to his Arms? She replied -- O
Yes! I Believe in Him! I Rejoice in Him! And I rejoice in all the Agonies I
have borne! And tell the young People of it: Tell such a one, and such a one,
and such a one, and all the Society, for the strengthening their Faith and
their Encouragement to go on! Tell such a one, Not to mind the Vanities of the
World, but seek to make her Hope stronger. Tell such a one, To live near^^ to
GOD, and live nearer to Him: Tell such a one, Not to be so careful about
worldly Matters, but to be more careful after CHRIST and Grace. And having
delivered the like pithy, pertinent and pathetick Messages for 5 others, I then
asked her -- 'Well my Dear Child! What have you to say to me?' O Sir, said she,
that you may be more fervent in your Ministry, and in exhorting and
expostulating with Sinners!

All the while she said these Things in the burning Exercise of Love to CHRIST
and Souls, I felt the strong Convulsions and trembling Agonies of Death in her
Arm: and as soon as ever she had finished her said Wish for me, finding her
Life a going, she had only so much Breath remaining as just to say -- and now
LORD JESUS! Receive my Spirit! and letting her Head fall back and dying away,
we Prayed; and while we were in Prayer Resigning her Soul to JESUS, she without
a Groan or Sob breathed it into his Bosom.

I repeated her Words as she delivered them, so as the Rest in the Room might
know them: And never did I see so much Distress, especially round a dying Bed,
on a sudden turn into so much Joy. I could scarce have thought it possible
before, that a Father, a Mother, a Brother and Sisters, could have been so
transported in the expiring Moments of one so near and dear to them.

O the mighty Power of GOD! O the Adorableness of his sovereign Pleasure! O the
amazing Depths of his Wisdom! O the Wonders of his Pity and Grace! O the
Tenderness and Loveliness of the Dear REDEEMER! What irresistible Reason is
here to admire and love and choose and seek Him, and relinquish every Creature
as Loss and Dross and Dung in Comparison with him! And O what enlivening
Arguments are here, in the midst of the thickest Darkness, like the Belly of
Hell, to hope and wait to the latest Breath of Life, for Mercy and Salvation!

Never let a poor, disconsolate Soul from this Time despair in the Mercy and
Power of GOD; while it feels nothing else but Guilt and Filth, and Impotence
and Wretchedness and Ruin within itself.

O the Glory and Divinity of the true Religion of the the Blessed JESUS! To see
even a feeble, tender, dark and self-condemned Soul, patiently and meekly
baring all the Anguishes of a constant Fever, with its restless Nights,
accompanied with Fears of Death and Eternal Misery, for 7 Weeks and a Half
together; humbly justifying the Holy GOD, and continually admiring his Goodness
to her: And after all her earnest Desires of Life, that she might have a
further Season of making sure of a happy Eternity, 'till she came into the
Agonies of Death; yet then at once to lose her Fears, and even Rejoice in those
very Agonies; yea chiefly to employ her few expiring Moments in expressing her
dying Concern for their Salvation who were outliving her: -- Is this in the
Power of Nature, or of any mere Creature? Or is it not the clearest Evidence of
a Power Divine, a bright Display of the Excellence of CHRIST, and his Religion,
and a pleasing Demonstration of its happy Reality.

O what abundant Cause for all her Relatives and Friends, yea for the People of
GOD who have heard of her Darkness and have pitied and prayed for her; now to
Thank and Praise him, and to encourage themselves and others to seek and hope
in him for the Time to come!

O what unrepliable Reasons for her nearest Friends and Relatives to submit
entirely to the Sovereign, righteous, holy and bereaving Hand of GOD,
especially when ending with such a Smile of Mercy! But alas! I find my latent
Enmity to GOD too often rising in secret Dissatisfactions with his Dealings
toward me, against the strongest Reasons and the highest Obligations! O the
Enmity of the Heart to GOD! And it may be none may so clearly see it, or so
much suspect it, 'till they fall under powerful Convictions, or come to be
tried with some very afflicting Providence.

My Dear People! With my most affectionate Thankfulness for your tender Pity
and Kindness to us under this heavy Affliction, and your great Respect to the
Dear Deceased; I desire your Prayers, that we may be supported, sanctified,
comforted and quickened; that we may so behave ourselves in such a trying
Dispensation, as to Glorify GOD; and so improve it, as to get and live in an
habitual and actual Readiness for Death and Eternity. For me in particular that
I may be excited to more earnest Labors for your eternal Salvation; May be
enabled to answer the affectionate Wish of my Dying Child; and that the SPIRIT
of GOD may greatly quicken and prosper me, with my Dear and Rev. Colleague in
the whole of our Ministry! And may the LORD abundantly Reward you both in
spiritual and temporal Blessings: And in particular give both to you and yours
the most desirable Light of his Countenance in your dying Moments.

But I can not tell how to end my Sermon without a plain Address to you all, in
the particular Characters of Parents and Children, upon this Occasion.

1. To those who are Parents.

O both now and constantly consider, your Children have immortal Souls, but
very frail and dying Bodies: That they are hastening to Death and Eternity:
That their present Life is the only Time of Preparation for them, and this Time
is utterly uncertain: That as GOD has graciously given them to you, He has
committed their most precious Souls to your special Care, He will require them
of you, and now is the only Season you are certain of, to labor in their
Preparation for that Eternity and Judgment they are hastening to.

O! do you not love your Children? Do you not pity them under their temporal
Afflictions? And are you not ready to do and suffer any Thing for their
temporal Comfort, which is but for a few uncertain Moments? And don't you love
their immortal Souls? Don't you pity them under the terrible Wrath and Curse of
GOD, and the destroying Power of Sin and Satan? And can you quietly see and let
them go on in Sin or Vanity, or Neglect of CHRIST, and so down to Hell? Are any
of you willing they should descend to that dreadful Place, and there among
Devils and damned Wretches, for ever cry and curse you, for your cruel
Negligence to save them from that Gulf of Horror.

If a Child of any among you be There already, or should be There hereafter
through your Neglect; O how horrible the Guilt, how bitter the Reflection! And
if you should be damned with them too; O what a horrid Welcome will they give
you, when you go down to them into the Infernal Regions! and how insufferably
upbraid you before the World in the long Day of Judgment, and the Eternity
thereafter!

O therefore, now stir up yourselves to improve the present Time to secure them
from endless Misery. Tell them of the glorious Perfections of GOD who made,
upholds, defends them; gives them every Comfort; observes, disposes of and will
surely judge them. Tell them of the Word of GOD, of his righteous, holy,
spiritual and extensive Law; of the fearful Threatenings and Curses in it; of
Death and Judgment, Heaven, Hell, Eternity. Tell them of their immortal Souls;
of their Sinfulness, Guilt and Impotence; and of their condemned, dangerous and
undone Condition. Tell them of the Nature and Necessity of Renovation by the
HOLY SPIRIT; of the All Sufficiency and Willingness of CHRIST to reconcile them
to GOD and save them. Tell them who CHRIST is, and what He has done and
suffered on Earth, and what He is Doing in Heaven for their Redemption and
Eternal Blessedness. Do what you can to set him forth in all his Offices, his
Benefits and Glories. Tell them of the Nature and Necessity of Repenting and
Believing in Him. Put them on Reading the Holy Scriptures, and the most
experimental and searching Writers: In all appointed Ways endeavor to lead
them to the Dear REDEEMER: And never cease to Pray and Labor, 'till you see
his Image formed in them.

2. To you the Children both Younger and Elder.

O Dear Children! You plainly see, you may Dye in Youth; and when you Dye you
go into Eternity. GOD has made you for Eternity; he will bring you to Eternity;
and when to bring you to it, wholly depends on his Sovereign Pleasure. Your
youngest Age, your greatest Strength and Health, your Merriment and Confidence,
are no Security: nor can the Skill of the best Physicians, nor the Power of
Medicines, nor your most piteous Cries, nor the most earnest Prayers of others,
secure you from Death or Eternity in your early Days. But those of you who now
think yourselves the furthest off, may be the nearest to them.

And O! If any of you should be surpised this Week, or in any other, when you
expect it not, with some fatal and distracting Sickness unprepared; O what can
you then do? It pleased GOD indeed to give my Child the Exercise of her
Understanding all the while: But O how many others are soon after they are
taken, deprived of theirs? And this may be the Case with you. In the Name of
CHRIST I warn you of it: And in his dear Name I warn you now to delay no
longer, but now and from this Time forward do your utmost to consider and see
your dreadful Sinfulness and Danger; and look and seek and cry unceasingly to
Him, to show them to you and by Renewing you to save you from them.

He sees you in all your Wretchedness: He pities you most tenderly: He is loath
that you should perish: His Arms are open ready to embrace you: He by me now
calls you to him: He calls aloud: He calls again. O if he were here in Flesh;
how kindly would he look upon you! How would he stretch his Hands out toward
you! How would he call you with a Flood of Tears! How rejoice in seeing you
moving toward Him! And how greatly would his Heart be grieved with your
refusing to come to Him, that you might be saved and be his forever!

O will you at length now hear him? Will you now resolve that you will slight him
no longer? Will you now yield to his melting Calls? Will you now Reply -- O
Dearest JESUS! I will slight Thee no more! I will deny Thee no longer! I am
willing to be thine! I desire to be thine, and that Thou may be mine,
entirely and for ever! O I look to Thee! I come to Thee! I try to come! I give
myself to thee! Thou LORD JESUS, have at last made me willing! Thou have raised
these Desires in me! And O now answer them! Now take me to be thine! O renew my
Heart, and come into it, and dwell and reign in it as thine own for ever! And I
will for ever Love and Praise Thee!

To conclude his present Calls -- If you thus comply, O then CHRIST is yours,
and all his Benefits are yours, and Death is yours, and Heaven is yours,
Eternity is yours, and GOD is yours; They are yours for ever.

APPENDIX. Containing Copies of some of her Papers.
THOUGH she unhappily burnt the choicest of them, for the Reason mentioned
before, and has only left some rough and unpolished Draughts of others, which
she would doubtless also have destroyed, if she had in the least suspected we
should thus improve them; yet in Hopes of their doing some Good, we shall
venture to give them to the Public in their natural Dress, without adding a
Word.

The Method I intend by GOD'S Grace to keep every Day.
In the Morning.
Rise at Five.

As soon as I am dressed, endeavor to Praise GOD for his Mercies the Night past,
and beg his Assistance in Reading his most holy Word.

Then Read some Portion of Scripture, and Meditate upon it, or read some
Expositor upon it.

Then endeavor to Praise GOD by singing Part of a Psalm to myself.

Then Address myself to GOD upon my Knees: Adore and Praise him for all his
Goodness to me; Confess my Sins, and utter Unworthiness of the Least of his
Mercies; beg for the Pardon of them in and through CHRIST, and for Grace and
Help against them for the Time to come, and to resist and overcome all the
Temptations of the Day. Beg for the Presence of GOD with me throughout the Day;
enabling me to do the Duties of it, and guiding me in all the Affairs of it,
enabling me to do all to his Glory.

Then set my self about my lawful Business; endeavoring all the Day to keep a
strict Watch over my Thoughts, Words and Actions.

At Noon.
About Twelve o'Clock, if I can, Retire to Praise GOD for his Goodness to the
whole World of Mankind, and to recommend them to him for his particular Favor.
Remember and interceed for Friends and Relations in a particular Manner.

Then read a Chapter.

At Night.
Retire into my Chamber as soon as possible: And 1st, Examine how I have spent
the Day: What Mercies I have enjoyed; What Sins I have committed; and What
Duties I have omitted.


Then,

Address my self to GOD through CHRIST, for Pardon, Peace and Cleansing:
Returning humble and hearty Thanks for the Mercies of the Day past: And
conclude with committing my Soul and Body into his Hands.

Read a Portion of holy Scripture; And if it is pretty seasonable, some other
good Book: And so go to Sleep.

There are some other rough Draughts of Letters and other Writings which might
be useful: But for Want of Room we must omit them. And here offer the Public
the following Lines which we found in her Pocket Book in her own Handwriting,
after her Decease: Though whether of her own Composure or transcribed from some
other, we are yet uncertain. However, when we found them, we could not but be
surpised to see how they had just been exemplified in her, and seemed to point
us to the Views she had in her own Mind of her Frailty and Mortality at the
very Time when her Fever seized her with these Lines about her.

GO careless Mortal, view that withered Flower;
Fresh in the Morn it bloomed, a beauteous Hue
Sat on its smiling Bosom; all around
Diffused, its chearing Odor filled the Air;
But 'ere the Sun reached the Meridian Height
And in full Glory shone, a Mortal Pale
Seized the fair Flower and robbed it of its Charms;
See how it fades, it droops, it bows, and dies!
We conclude with the following Papers of her own. viz.

A LETTER.
My Dear Cousin,
I Received your loving Letter April 2, and am much obliged to you for your
kind Counsels and Cautions. Indeed the Foundation on which we build our Hopes
of eternal Happiness being of the utmost Importance, deserves our greatest Care
and Solicitude.

Those Foundations which you rightly observed the most build upon, are equally
false and dangerous. No my dear Cousin, nothing but the most perfect
Righteousness of CHRIST, imputed to us and received by Faith alone, can justify
us in the Sight of GOD; and his inherent Righteousness wrought in us, can make
us capable of enjoying God in this or the next World. It Is on this Foundation I
build all my Hope of Happiness.

All my own Righteousnesses are but as filthy Rags. My best Duties are specious
Sins, gilded Iniquities. Every Action an unregenerate Man performs is Sin. I
used very much to wonder what was meant by such Expressions as these: But since
GOD has of his sovereign Grace and Mercy been pleased to open mine Eyes, and
shown me the Vileness of mine own Heart, that corrupt Fountain from whence all
the Streams of evil Actions flow; I have seen that (as Mr. Whitefield says) by
Nature I am half a Devil and half a Beast; I know that in me, that is in my
Flesh, dwells no good Thing. No, the Heart of Man is evil, and only evil
continually, 'till it is changed by Divine Grace: And a corrupt Tree cannot
bring forth good Fruit. No, every Action of a natural Man, however good in it
self; yet in the Manner of Performance, is stained and defiled with so much
Sin, as must needs render it abominable to the pure and holy GOD. I wonder how
any Body can think to merit by any Thing they can do; when all is polluted with
Sin. Alas, we are not sufficient of ourselves so much as to think a good
Thought, but all our Sufficiency is of GOD. And if we could perform any one
Action after a perfect Manner, we could not merit by it, because it is our Duty
to do so: Much less when we can do nothing without Sin. O what Need have we to
fly to the perfect Righteousness of CHRIST, and lay hold upon it by Faith!
This, this will cover all our Nakedness. But we must throw away all our filthy
Rags, before we can be clad with this white Raiment. We must part not only with
our Sins, but with our Duties as to putting our Trust in them, and placing our
Dependence on them. Yea, this must be upon CHRIST alone. This alone will stand
the Storms of Persecution. O my dear Cousin! Let us build upon this Rock, and
the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against us. And we must be sure not to
make a Christ of our Duties. How apt are we to do it? But if we are not willing
to part with every Thing for CHRIST, we cannot be his Disciples.

O my dear Cousin! Pray, pray, pray for me; that my Faith fail not; that I may
be willing to part with every Thing for his Sake when he calls me to it. I am
sure one Moment's Sense of his Love will make amends for all. What then will an
Eternity do? O when I think of Eternity, I am lost! After Ten Thousand Thousand
Thousand Years are past, it is but begun. -- But I must conclude with my hearty
Prayers for the Welfare of your immortal Soul; and desiring yours in Return,
Your loving Cousin,

D. P.

Another LETTER.
My dear Cousin,
What Is the Matter you will not say one Word to me? Are you offended? at what?
Come my Cousin, let us live in Love and Peace, that so the GOD of Love and
Peace may dwell with us. I Will assure you I am so far from being offended with
you, that I love you better than ever, and would do any Thing in my Power for
your Good, especially for the Good of your Soul.

O my dear, I am afraid you set your Heart too much upon the Vanities of this
World. O what are all Things under the Sun? Nothing but Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit. Here Is nothing capable of satisfying the Desires of an humane Soul. No
here is nothing but Husks: But in our Father's House is Bread enough and to
spare. Let us then arise and go to our Father for this Bread of Life; without
which we must eternally perish.

O my dear, let me earnestly entreat you to come to CHRIST. O you cannot think
what a compassionate and tender Father he is, unless you have felt his Love. If
you have, you have felt the Meaning of those tender Expressions of the Spouse;
My Beloved is white and ruddy the Chiefest among Ten Thousand, and he is
altogether lovely: You know what it is to rejoice in him, and in his Love. How
much better is thy Love than Wine, O most dear REDEEMER! What Is all the
Pleasures of Sense, when compared to these exalted Pleasures that flow from his
Right Hand? One Smile of his Face is worth ten Thousand Worlds. One Moment's
Taste of his Love is more pleasant than an Eternity spent in sensual Pleasures.
O sometimes I long to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST. I would not live
here always if I might in this World of Sin. But I desire to submit to my
heavenly Father's Will: if I may but be kept from the Pollutions of this World,
and have Grace to resist and overcome the Temptations of it.

O I most earnestly beg your Prayers for me: that GOD by his SPIRIT would
sanctify me wholly in Spirit Soul and Body; that so I may be prepared to
glorify him here, and enjoy him for ever in Heaven In which blessed Place may
you and I meet and rejoice together forever Amen. I conclude, praying the best
of Blessings may rest upon you, Your loving Cousin,

Deborah Prince.

CORRECTIONS.
Page 15. Line ^^. Read Conquest, 16. (...) 28. Scheme, ^^ (...) but 1 sore
Bereaveme^^^, ^^. ^0. buried out of Sight ^4. last but ^ ungrateful Negligence
^5. ^7. emptying her self of all Good, ^8. ^^ Sacrifice.


