TO THE READER.
IT was neither Thirst after Gain, nor the Desire of Applause, but the Welfare
of Mankind alone, which excited me to publish this Essay. I have therefore
frankly and honestly laid before the World such Observations as may, I hope, be
of Service to my Fellow Creatures.

I Have, however, always observed, that when a Treatise or Essay upon any of
the liberal Aris and Sciences makes its first Appearance, it gives Employment
to Cavillers. Horace, in the following Lines, distinguishes a Critic from a
Caviller, and heartily declares, that he is not offended with those little
Faults, which may be imputed to Inadvertency, or to the Imperfection of Human
Nature: -- Non ego paucis
Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura.


A Caviller, on the contrary, being on all Occasions more attentive to what is
wrong than what is right, is jealous and cautious in bestowing Applause, but
rather wants, by his shrewd Observations, to acquire a pretty Figure to
himself. The Truth of it is, there can be no more a perfect Work in the World,
than a perfect Man. To say therefore of any Performance, that there are Faults
in it, is in Effect to say no more, than that the Author of it is a Man.

I Would not however be understood to insinuate, that the following Piece is in
any Degree as perfect in its Kind as Man could make it. I am sensible, that,
like other Arts, the Faculty of writing well is only to be acquired by writing
much. If any thing is here taught that may be useful to Mankind, the candid
Reader will, for its sake, excuse Faults of Method, Style and Expression: But
if I have inculcated any Mistake that may be of pernicious Consequence, let the
Public be set right, whatever Opinion they may afterward entertain of me.

I Must not omit this Opportunity of returning Thanks to my learned and worthy
Friend, Dr. A. Spencer, of Philadelphia, ( who is justly recommended by the
famous Dr. MEAD, and several eminent Gentlemen of the Faculty in London, as a
most judicious and experienced Physician and Man-midwife) for his Trouble in
revising this Essay, as well as for embellishing it with some curious and
useful Observations, which he would not suffer me to point out to the Reader.

New Jersey, Trenton, March 25, 1745. Tho. Cadwalader.

AN ESSAY On the WEST INDIA DRY-GRIPES; WITH THE METHOD of Preventing and
Curing THAT CRUEL DISTEMPER.

To which is added, An Extraordinary CASE in Physic.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by B. FRANKLIN

M.DCC.XLV.

TO THE READER.
I HAVE long been of Opinion, that it is the Duty of Physicians frankly to
communicate to the World, any particular Method of treating Diseases, which
they have found to be successful in the Course of their Experience, and not
generally known or practiced by others. By this the Medicinal Art has been, and
may still be greatly improved. Many are the Advantages the present Age reaps
from such a disinterested Conduct in our Predecessors; and where we have freely
received, surely we should freely give.

THIS has induced me to write the following Essay on the Dry-Gripes, and to
recommend a Method of Cure which appears to me to be drawn from the Nature and
Cause of that grievous Distemper, and which has approved itself to me by a very
extraordinary Success.

AND though the Method here laid down may be new to the Generality of the
Profession, it has been practiced some Years, with great Approbation, by
several Gentlemen of distinguished Characters in Philadelphia.

FROM their Judgment of this Method, as well as my own, I am inclined to hope
the following Piece may contribute, in some Degree, to the Welfare of Mankind.
With this View I h^^e caused it to be printed, and submit it to the candid
Consideration of the Public.

I Must not here omit acknowledging myself particularly obliged to my learned
and worthy Friend, Dr. A. Spencer, of Philadelphia ( who is recommended by the
famous Dr. MEAD, and several eminent Gentlemen of the Faculty in London, as a
most judicious and experienced Physician and Man-midwife) for his Trouble in
revising this Essay, as well as for embellishing it with some curious and
useful Observations, which he would not suffer me to point out to the Reader.

New Jersey, Trenton, March 25, 1745. Tho. Cadwalader.

AN ESSAY On the WEST INDIA DRY-GRIPES.
THE European Physicians give an Account of a Disease similar to the
Dry-Gripes, calling it Cholic^ Pictonum, because most frequent at Poictiers.
They are both attended with excessive griping Pains in the Pit of the Stomach
and Bowels, which are much distended with Wind; violent and frequent Reachings
to vomit, sometimes bringing up small Quantities of bilious Matter; at other
times there is a Sensation, as if the Bowels were drawn together by Ropes;
great Costiveness, and frequently a continual Inclination to go to Stool
without voiding any Thing.

The Ducts which open into the Intestines, and excern a Mucus to moisten and
lubricate them, are obstructed and glewed up with a Viscosity not easily
resolvable; and through the whole Course of the Distemper, the Faeces are
extremely dry and hard, in small Lumps like Bullets. The Intestines are drawn
up toward the Back with almost continual convulsive Twitches. The Pains are
frequently so sharp, that the Patient will fall on the Floor, and cry out
violently in the greatest Agony.

The Alcaline Acrimony impacted on the Stomach and Intestines, is so great in
many Cases, as to communicate its malign Influence to the whole nervous System,
causing violent Convulsions, which are very dangerous Symptoms; though I have
known many recover after having a Number of them. But if the excessive Pain
continues any considerable Time, the Peristaltic Motion of the Intestines
becomes inverted, and the Iliac Passion ensues.

This sore Malady usually degenerates into the Palsy, and a Deprivation of all
Sort of Motion in the Hands and Feet. -- Doctor Willis conjectured, that the
Transition of a Cholic to a Palsy, was a Sign that the Morbific Matter was
transmitted not by the Arteries, but the Nerves, and that its Seat was not in
the Coats of the Intestines, but the nervous Plexus of the Mesentery; which is
very sensible, and obnoxious to an Afflux of Humors of the nervous Kind. But
this Remark of Dr. Willis can only relate to the Hysteric Cholic, which
sometimes counterfeits the Bilious; being accompanied with a Pain about the
Scrobiculum Cordis, the Region of the Stomach, and a little lower, which is
followed with a Vomiting of Humors of a green or yellow Color, and a great
Sinking of the Spirits; after a Day or two the Pain goes off, but upon the
slightest Commotion or Perturbation of the Mind, it soon returns again. In this
Case, neither Cathartics nor Clysters have any Place, as they exasperate the
Distemper; so that this Disease seems to proceed rather from the Disorder of
the Spirits, than the Fault of the Humors. Physicians, therefore, ought above
all things to be cautious, that they mistake not the Diagnostic, by imagining
that the Symptoms which attend Hysteric Women, do arise from such Distempers as
they frequently counterfeit.

The remote Cause is supposed to be an obstructed Perspiration, by being too
much exposed to a moist Night Air, and cold raw Winds; hard Drinking,
especially Drams or strong Punch; and Want of a good Digestion, which renders
the Chyle crude and viscid; but the proximate Cause is an acrimonious Bile.

It is, indeed, the Opinion of several ingenious and worthy modern Authors,
that this Distemper is caused by taking large Quantities of Lime-juice; but I
must beg Leave to differ from their Sentiments in this Case: For seeing the
Humors which vellicate and fret the Coats of the Stomach and Intestines are
entirely alcaline, Acids must be (and Experience confirms it) the most
effectual Remedies. Thus the Negroes, in some Parts of the West Indies, ease
their excessive Pains in the Dry-Gripes by eating Limes, or drinking the Juice.
It has likewise been observed, that since the People of America have drank
Punch with more Water (which moistens the Faeces, and dilutes the acrid Salts
of the Bile) and made of old Spirit (which has less of the hot fiery Particles
than when new from the Still) yet with much more Lime-juice than formerly, the
Dry-Gripes is not near so common as before this Custom prevailed.

In all Kinds of Diseases it is absolutely necessary to know the Cause; for
otherwise to attempt a Cure, is like a blind Man shooting at a Mark; the
Remedies in one Case being directly opposite and destructive in another. Thus
if a Fever, proceeding from a hot, inflammatory, alcaline Cause, be treated
with a hot Regimen, and not with an acid cooling One, the Patient must
inevitably perish; but, on the contrary, if Acidity is the Cause (as it
commonly is in Children) the alcaline Method is to be preferred. As therefore a
Physician, not carefully regarding the Symptoms and the Cause of a Fever, may
prove the Destruction of the Patient; so in all Cholics the Symptoms and the
Cause are to be principally regarded; and for want of a nice and exact
Attendance thereto, a too general Method of Cure very seldom meets with Success
in either Case.

But before I enter upon the Cure of the Dry-Gripes, Humanity obliges me to
observe, that the Persons who are most liable to it are generally lean, and
much emaciated, by their excessive Perspiration in the West Indies; and
consequently the aqueous Parts of the Blood being thus evaporated, the saline
Particles must necessarily become exceeding acrid. The Method, therefore, to
prevent this Malady in such Constitutions, is obvious, viz. To abstain, in the
West Indies, and in Summer on the Continent, from Drams and strong Punch;
salted and high seasoned Meats; immoderate Exercise, which raises Sweat; and
profuse Venery: To rise early in a Mornings; to take Chocolate for Breakfast
and Supper; make frequent use of Broths and boiled Meats, emollient and acid
Herbs and Fruits; dilute plentifully with tepid, small, and subacid Liquors;
and when costive, to take a small saponaceous Purge, so as to procure one Stool
a Day.

The following Method I have found, by many Years Experience, successful in the
Dry-Gripes, and were it more generally practiced, I believe the Lives and Limbs
of great Numbers might be saved.

To mitigate the Violence of the Pains, and prevent Vomiting, I order,

Opii, Grana una vel duo, sive Laudan. liquid. Sydenham. Guttas triginta,
quadraginta, vel quinquaginta, et repetend. pro re nata, in majori vel minori
Dosi, donec Aeger se sensit in statu tolerabili.

If the Vomiting be so bad that the Stomach can hardly retain any Thing, the
following Powders scarce ever fail of succeeding:

R. Tartari Vitriolati, Grana december; Olei Cinnamomi Guttam unam. M. F. Pulvis
sumendus in Haustu Theae Menthae omni (vel secunda quaque) Hora.

The Vomiting being stopped, I have Recourse to the following Prescription,
till three or four Stools are obtained:

R. Cremoris Tartari Grana triginta; Olei Caryophyllorum Guttam unam. M. F.
Pulvis sumendus in Haustu T*heae Menthae (vel Decocti avenacei) omni Hora.

As an obstinate Costiveness, and most violent Pain of the Bowels, are
perpetual Symptoms in this Disease, Opiates are to be administered through its
whole Course at proper Intervals. When, therefore, the Pain is very excessive,
I give Opiates even at the same time with the purging Powders, that the Pain
may be rendered tolerable, that a Relaxation of the Intestines may thence
follow, and that their Peristaltic Motion may become constant and regular, and
be neither interrupted nor perverted.

Every Pain acts as a Stimulus, or rather, a Stimulus excites a Sense of Pain:
But every Stimulus provokes the Fibers to Contractions, and, if violent, throws
them into Spasms. When, therefore, a Cholic Pain is very vehement, the
Intestines are in some Places affected with Convulsions, and are as if bound
hard with a Swathe; insomuch, that unless the Pain is lulled asleep, neither
the Faeces nor Wind can be transmitted downwards: It is for this Reason, that
every violent Cholic Pain is almost always attended with a great Costiveness.
It is, therefore, very rational to add Anodynes to Purges in very vehement
Cholics; nor is this any new Practice, seeing the most experienced Riverius, in
Capite de Dolor Cholico, prescribed Aloes Drachmam unam, Scammonei Grana sex;
to which he added two Grains of Opium, and in one of his Observations even five
Grains.

This Course, steadily pursued, gives sometimes three or four Stools in
Twenty-four Hours; but if no such End is obtained, as it often happens
(especially if the Distemper is of long Standing) I order the Abdomen to be
cherished with an emollient Fomentation, and that more particularly when the
Belly is very tense and hard, or excessively contracted by a Spasm: For the
Fomentation penetrating the Integuments of the Abdomen, softens and relaxes the
too tense and rigid Fibers. I have often experienced the good Effects of the
following Fomentation:

R. Florum Chamaemeli Manipulos tres; Radicis Althaeae, Seminum Lini et
Faenugraeci, ana Uncias tres; Capitum Papaveris albi Uncias quatuor. Cum Aquae
et Lactis recentis, ana Q. S. Vase decoque clauso.

But I am apt to believe, that far better Effects might be expected, if the
Patient made use of a Semicupium prepared from the same Ingredients. Every One
who has observed the very happy Effects of an emollient Bath in Nephritic
Pains, will very readily agree to what I say. -- I have, indeed, frequently
seen the most cruel Nephritic Paroxysm suddenly vanish by the Use of a Bath
only, when neither plentiful Bleeding, nor Opiates given freely, gave the least
Relief: Nay, I have learned, by many Experiments, that nothing conduces so much
to ease the Pain, and send the Stone down the Ureters, as a warm and emollient
Bath.

I am likewise of Opinion, that it would very much conduce to a speedy and
perfect Cure, if the Patient, through the whole Course of the Distemper, made
frequent use of oleaginous Mixtures, which would not only lubricate and relax
the Intestines, but also, by sheathing the lixivial Salts of the Bile, prevent
their Points from acting with so much Force and Energy upon the Stomach and
Intestines. For in this Distemper, the Secretion of the acrid Salts of the
Bile, in the Hepatic Glands, seems to be in an over Proportion to the oily
Parts.

Where there is no Vomiting, and the Pain not very acute, the Powders of Crem.
Tartar may, after giving one Opiate, be used as directed, without any Delay.
The Effects of which, after some Time, will be a sensible Perception of the
Pain falling gradually downwards, from the Pit of the Stomach toward the
Rectum. When, therefore, the Pain is settled in the lower Parts of the Abdomen,
you may, in case the Patient is uneasy for want of a Stool, prescribe the
following Purge.

R. Cremoris Tartari Drachmam unam; Radicis Jalapii Grana sex; Olei
Caryophyllorum Guttam unam. M. f. Pulvis sumendus in Haustu Decocti avenacei
secunda (vel tertia) quaque Hora.

If this does not, in six or seven Hours, procure a Stool, I order an
oleaginous and emollient Clyster; which not only lubricates the Intestines, but
also softens the indurated Faeces.

When the hardened Excrements are carried downwards, the Patient begins to
break Wind backwards, which is sometimes exceeding offensive. In the first
three or four Stools, the Faeces are often very faetid, and abounding with a
ropy viscid Substance, resembling membranous Filaments.

It is a necessary Caution not to be too hasty in gaining a Passage through the
Body; for if larger Quantities of the same Medicines, or others more
stimulating, should be given, you will be often foiled in your Expectations,
and make good a common Saying, The more Haste, the worse Speed: For sharp
stimulating Purges and Clysters have very bad Effects on the Nerves in this
Disease, and endanger a Deprivation of Motion in the Patient's Limbs.

Though the Patient generally recovers upon procuring a free Passage through the
Intetestines, by the prudent Use of the already mentioned Medicines; yet it is
necessary to keep the Body still temperately open for a Week, or more, by the
last prescribed Purge; to which may be added Calomel. Grana sex: For otherwise
the Patient becomes very costive, and the excessive Pains return, by the acrid
Humors perpetually flowing into the Intestines. -- But if notwithstanding all
this the Pains should return, which perhaps may be owing to a greater Degree of
Viscidity in the Fluids, I have known a Dram of the Tartar. Solubil. taken
every three Hours to perfect the Cure; and when that failed, the following has
generally succeeded:

R. Aquilae albae Grana sex; Conservae Rosarum rubrarum Q. S. ut fiat Bolus
omni Mane et Vesperi sumendus donec Ptyalismus excitetur lenissimus.

The Calomel, by its Gravity, and the acid adhering to the metalline Part,
attenuates the Fluids, and forcing open the secretory and excretory Passages,
answers the Intention in such obstinate Cases.

When Convulsions happen, strong Stimulants are to be avoided; but Anodynes
generally relieve, with the Method already described.

In this Distemper the poor Patient being desirous of a Moment's Ease, even at
any Rate, has too commonly a Recourse to Drams, and other spirituous Liquors.
But though a Moment's Ease may, by such Means, be obtained, yet the Disease is
more strongly rivetted, the Pains return with double Force, and all the
Symptoms are vastly aggravated.

The proper Drinks in this Distemper are, Water Gruel, Barley-Water, and such
others as are of the demulcent Kind; which dilute, obtund and dissolve, the
acrimonious Salts of the Blood.

Till the Stomach and Intestines have perfectly recovered their proper Tone,
the Patient is very liable to a Relapse, either by taking Cold, drinking too
freely of spirituous Liquors, or not keeping strictly to Aliments which are
light and easy of Digestion: To strengthen, therefore, the Stomach and Bowels
after the Patient's Recovery, I order the following Medicines:

R. Elixir proprietatis Guttas sexaginta, ter de Die sumendas in quovis
Vehiculo.

Vel,

R. Corticis Peruviani Uncias duas; Radicis Serpentariae Virginianae, Florum
Chamaemeli, ana sesquidrachmam; Radicis Gentianae, Corticis Aurantiorum, ana
Drachmas tres; Radicis Rhei Drachmas duas. Infundantur cum Vini Maderensis
Libris quatuor. Capiat AEger Uncias duas ter de Die.

Vel,

R. Saponis Veneti semiunciam, Extracti Gentianae, Chalybis cum Sulphur
praeparati, ana Drachmas duas; Pulveris Radicis serpentariae Virginianae,
Aloes, ana Drachmam unam; Syrupi Zinziberis, Q. S. ut fiant Pilulae mediocres.
Capiat tres omni Mane et Vesperi.

To complete the Cure, let the Patient, as soon as able, use constant and
moderate Exercise on Horseback, than which there is not a better Thing to
strengthen the Viscera and Intestines; for the Fibers of the Mesentery and
Intestines having been with the long Pains much weakened and relaxed, are by
this Means brought to recover their proper Tone, and reassume their former
Oscillations, so as to shake off and expel the morbific Impurities: For riding
on Horseback, by the very frequent Jogging of the Body, gently shakes the whole
Abdomen; and, therefore, by a continual Pressure and Agitation, it throws off
whatever adheres to the Intestines, overcomes any Lentor remaining in the small
Vessels, and very much promotes the Circulation of the Blood through the
Mesenteric Vessels, and little Branches of the Vena Porta, where the
circulating Fluids move the slowest. Hence this Exercise, by its almost
continual jolting of the Body, dissolves the Blood, concreted partly by the
Force of the Disease, and partly by its sluggish Motion in those Parts; opens
the Obstructions formed in the Hepatic, Pancreatic, Mesenteric, and Intestinal
Glands; and greatly contributes to the Action of the Spleen, which is assisting
to that of the Liver. Lastly, as it is evident, from many Experiments, that
Perspiration is very much increased by Riding, it is of vast Advantage not only
in this, but in almost every Chronical Disease, by driving the noxious Humors
from the Center to the Circumference, and expelling them through the Ducts of
the Milliary Glands. Riding only, has indeed restored many, on whom the most
operose Medicines have not had the least good Effect. Let then the Patient
enjoy Health by Riding, and daily acquire Strength by this noble Exercise. --
The Use of the Flesh-Brush, and other Frictions, are likewise necessary,
especially about the Joints and Limbs, which will promote a brisker Circulation
of the Fluids in those Parts. In fine, every Thing is to be used which will
increase the Elasticity of the Fibers, attenuate the Fluids, and promote a good
Digestion.

If this Disease is complicated with any other, the Judgment of the Physician
may then vary the Method, according to the different Circumstances of the Case.
Thus when the Dry-Gripes is only the Symptom of a spurious, intermitting Fever,
the Peruvian Bark, prudently administered, is then the only proper Remedy: For
the spurious Intermittents create a great Variety of direful Symptoms, their
true Characteristicks being disguised under the Appearance of some other
Distemper; as enormous Vomitings, griping Loosenesses, Cholera Morbus, Cholics,
pricking Pains in the Side like a Pleurisy, Ophthalmies, Apoplexies, Pains on
one Side of the Head, or Hemicranies universal or particular, Spasms or Cramps,
Nephritic Pains, etc. also Pains like those of Women in Labor.

The Bark is certainly a most noble Remedy in many Cases; and notwithstanding
some ingenious Gentlemen have pointed out a Way to answer all its Uses by other
Remedies, endued (as they say) with as good, if not better, Properties; yet I
believe, every Practitioner, who has had a thorough Experience of its Efficacy
in many Diseases, will readily acknowledge, that nothing has hitherto been
discovered equal to it: And that late Discovery, in the Philosophical
Transactions, of its most admirable Effect in Mortifications, may be sufficient
to convince such Skeptics, that their darling Hypotheses not agreeing with
Facts, are but Cobweb Schemes, calculated rather to amuse, than to establish a
solid and lasting Practice.

All Hypotheses, unless they agree with Facts, are delusive and vain; and I
believe it will be readily granted, that had the Writers of this and former
Ages confined themselves more to practical Observations, some Diseases, now the
Opprobria Medicorum, would have been better understood, and perhaps as easily
cured as an intermitting Fever by the Bark judiciously administered.

What I have said is not to derogate from the Theory of Physic, which is
founded on Facts and proper Observations; and by which every particular
Distemper, with all its Symptoms and Accidents, may be accounted for; because
it is impossible for any Man to judge from such and such Symptoms, what the
Method of Cure ought to be in this or that Disease, unless he has an Idea of
the Causes and Manner of their Production. A true Physician, therefore, goes
always warily to Work, and proceeds upon a just and solid Foundation; for he
first gets a Knowledge of the Seat and Cause of a Disorder, and at these he
levels his Prescription. If the Case proves obstinate, he augments the Force of
his Medicines, and varies them as Circumstances alter, without acknowledging an
End to his Art, where the Disease is curable: For he has always some promising
Remedy in Reserve, and can, from Rules of Analogy, directly attempt the Removal
of Diseases unseen before. A Person, on the contrary, who is ignorant of the
Animal Economy, and the many other Requisites in Physic, is puzzled and
confounded at every Accident which turns up, and a new Case throws him quite
out of his Biass; for having but few Remedies to trust to, he directs them at
all Adventures, without pursuing any formed Design, or without regarding the
Seat, the Cause, or Stage of the Disease, and the Circumstances of the Patient.
If happily his Medicines succeed, it is well; but if they fail, he is at the
Extent of his Cord, he has done his utmost, and your Case is desperate: But
thrice happy is the Patient, if he escapes without having either his
Constitution or Life destroyed, through the Pretender's Ignorance and Rashness.

I shall now after this Digression give a few Cases of Persons who have been
under my Care, to illustrate the foregoing Method of curing the Dry-Gripes.

CASE I.

A young Man, of eighteen or nineteen Years of Age, having been seized with the
Dry-Gripes, was treated in the usual (...) with strong stimulating Purges and
^^^sters, for about a Week before I was called to his Assistance; but instead
of relieving him, they had strongly aggravated all the Symptoms. At my coming
he had a racking Pain in his Stomach and Bowels, and such frequent Strainings
to vomit, as to cast up every Thing he took. His Pains were sometimes so
exceeding sharp, that two or three Persons could scarcely keep him in Bed; and
after every such sharp Fit, he could not see for near a Quarter of an Hour. As,
therefore, Opiates could not be kept in his Stomach, I ordered him to take the
already mentioned Powder of vitriolated Tartar every Hour in Mint-Tea, which
always suppresses the Vomiting, where Anodynes fail.

After taking three Doses his Stomach became so well settled, as to take the
following Draught.

R. Aquae Menthae Uncias duas; Laudani liquidi Sydenhammi Guttas quadraginta.
M. f. Haustus.

About an Hour afterward I prescribed the Powders of Cream of Tartar; and at
the same time ordered his Abdomen to be well fomented with the Fomentation.

After using the Fomentation, and taking several Doses of the Powders, the
Pains fell down into the lower Parts of the Abdomen; I, therefore, ordered him
to take the purging Powder with Jalap every two Hours in any Vehicle.

But after taking three of those Powders, he became so impatient for Want of a
Stool, that I ordered the following Clyster:

R. Decocti communis pro Clystere, Uncias duodecim; Electuarii lenitivi,
Drachmas sex; Tartari solubilis Drachmas tres; Olei Cham^^^elini, Syrupi
Rosarum pallidarum, ana s^squiunciam, Olei Baccarum Junipe^^ ^^illatitii Grana
december. M. ^. Enema.

This operating three of four times, brought away a large Quantity of
Excrements.

To keep him tolerably easy the Anodynes were repeated three of four times
every Twenty-four Hours, though in smaller Doses.

To keep his Body temperately open, the last Powders were continued five or six
Days. At length, by the Assistance of the Elixir Proprietatis, and the bitter
Infusion, he was perfectly recovered.

CASE II.

An old Man, near Seventy, was seized with this Distemper about a Month before
I was sent for: He had no Vomiting, and his Pains, though very sharp, were not so
acute as usual.

I gave him, as soon as I came, Opii sesquigranum, and afterward the Powders
of Cream of Tartar. Next Morning I was sent for very early, and found him in a
Convulsion; but as it went off, I repeated the Opiate, and continued the Use of
the Powders. In the Evening of the following Day, the Pains being removed to
the lower Parts of the Abdomen, I ordered a Clyster, and by observing the
Method mentioned in the last Case, he got well in a few Days.

CASE III.

A Man, about Twenty Years of Age, was attacked by the Dry-Gripes above three
Weeks before I saw him, and had taken (as I was informed) during that Time,
near Twenty Purges and Clysters. The Pains were excessively sharp in the Pit of
the Stomach, as well as in the Intestines; and he was frequently so convulsed,
that two or three Persons could scarcely keep him down. He was once so
distracted with the Violence of the Pain, that he was with Difficulty prevented
from throwing himself out of the Chamber Window.

I gave him Liquid. Laud. Syd. Guttas quinquaginta, which in a few Hours abated
the Violence of his Pains. In short, by pursuing the Method already laid down,
he got the better of the Disease in about three Days Time. But his Stomach and
Bowels were so very sore afterward, that he could hardly suffer any Thing to
touch them. This indeed I have commonly observed, where the Pains have been
very violent.

It is needless to recite any more Cases, these being sufficient to give a
perfect Idea of the Modus Medendi to Practitioners.

I shall now, to show the pernicious Consequence of giving Quicksilver in this
Distemper, relate the Case of a Person in one of the Hospitals in London.

A Man about forty Years old had the Dry-Gripes several Weeks, before he was
taken into the Hospital. He had continual Reachings to vomit, and violent Pains
in his Belly, which was prodigiously swelled and hard. The Physician attending
the Hospital prescribed very frequently Clysters and Purges of Aq. Purgant. cum
mana, et Sal. mirab. Glaub. and other Remedies. At last, when he found the
Patient not in the least relieved, but rather worse, he ordered him to take Six
Ounces of Quicksilver at a Time, which was repeated, till the Quantity amounted
to 18 Ounces. This Method, however, was so far from recovering the Patient,
that the Symptoms increasing, he died after enduring the most racking Pains,
for the space of eight Weeks.

Having opened his Body, the next Day after his Death, I found the Intestines
very much distended with Wind, but little or no Excrements. In his Stomach,
which was very much contracted and shrivel'd up, I found fourteen Ounces of the
Quicksilver he had taken eight Days before, mixed with about half a Pint of
viscid Matter.

Hence we learn, how long Quicksilver may remain in the Stomach, especially
when the Fibers have lost their proper Tone; since in this Case the contractile
Power of of the Stomach must have been exerted with a prodigious Force, in
order to have thrown such a Weight from the Bottom of the Stomach over such an
Ascent as the Pylorus.

As some Persons have a great Opinion of the Use of crude Quicksilver in curing
the Dry-Gripes, as well as many other Diseases, I shall here, to show how
unphilosophical such Gentlemen are, give you Dr. Quincey's Reasoning upon the
Article of Quicksilver: -- It is (says he) frequently talked of indeed, as good
in some Affections of the Bowels; but there are very few Instances of its Use
in such Cases. Nor can that at all appear reasonable, which is commonly
reported of its quick Passage through the Body; for the Arguments which the
Favorers of such Reports make use of, are quite against them; that is, its
prodigious Weight: For when it first comes into the Stomach, it cannot but fall
to the Bottom; which is so much below the Pylorus, that a vast Force must be
required to throw it over into the Intestines; and when it comes there, by
their manifold Convolutions, it very frequently must ascend, and particularly
while it passes the Colon: So that it is hardly conceivable, how a Body of so
great a Weight can be lifted over so many Ascents, as it necessarily comes at,
between the OEsophagus and the Rectum.

If Dr. Quincey's Reasons are convincing, how much stronger must be the
Objection against the Use of Quicksilver, in Cases where the Stomach and Bowels
are relaxed and weakened; the Fibers being then certainly less capable of
exerting their contractile Force to raise any Weight; which is certainly the
Case, when a Person has labored under such a violent Distemper as the
Dry-Gripes for a considerable Time.

I have seen in England two Instances of the Success attending the Method here
laid down for the Dry-Gripes in the Cholica Pictonum, arising from the Fumes of
White-lead; which gives me Reason to hope, that by a farther Trial of it in
Europe, it would be found as beneficial in the latter Distemper, as it is in
the former.

We frequently observe Persons in the Dry-Gripes to lose the Use of their Limbs
(the Ancles and Wrists becoming exceeding weak, and the Balls of their Thumbs
sinking) either by the Acrimony of the Humors, or the Use of strong
Stimulants; by which means the fine nervous System being wounded and
debilitated, the Equilibrium between the Solids and Fluids is destroyed. -- In
such a relaxed State of the Solids, the Blood must necessarily become viscid;
for the Fibers having lost their elastic Force, the Circulation of the Fluids
is diminished, and consequently they run into preternatural Cohesions. The
giving, therefore, a greater Degree of Fluidity to the Blood, and a proper
Tensity or Springiness to the Fibers, is absolutely necessary, to make all the
regular Secretions and Excretions; for otherwise some Parts of the Body will
want a suitable Supply of nutritious Juices, while others are overloaded with a
viscous Fluid.

All Persons of weak, relaxed Nerves, should avoid a moist and foggy Air, which
would necessarily render their Fibers still more lax and flaccid The Effects
produced in the human Body by a heavy or light Atmosphere, and according as it
is affected by Cold, Heat, Moisture, or Dryness, were fully and clearly
explained in the Philosophical Lectures exhibited by Dr. Spencer in
Philadelphia last Summer; which, as I am informed, will be speedily published.;
but let them reside in a cold, clear Air, which will give a greater Degree of
Tensity and Elasticity to the Solids. In such Cases, the Air of some Parts of
North America is far preferable to that of England, which is much moister, and
more foggy than the former. On this Account it is, that Chronical Distempers
are more frequent and obstinate in England than in North America. -- But when
they are in a cold Climate, they ought not to tarry too long in the cold Air,
for fear of chilling their Blood; and it would be of Service to such Persons to
wear the following Plaster on their Ancles and Wrists during the cold Weather:

R. Emplastri Oxycrocei, Galbani, ana Unciam unam; Opii, Camphorae, ana
Drachmas duas. M. f. Emplastrum.

The Opium and Camphor, by the Subtilty of their Parts, are very penetrating
and attenuating; and consequently will be the Means of preventing a Lodgment of
viscid Juices on the Joints; but the Plaster ought to be renewed every Eighth
or Tenth Day. The Linimentum Paralyticum, which is well known in England, ought
likewise to be well rubbed in, down the Back, and on the Limbs, twice a Day. It
is a most excellent Composition, and and were its great Efficacy in these Cases
more generally known, it would be deservedly esteemed, as a most noble Topic in
a relaxed State of the Nerves.

The Foods which they cat should be nourishing, and easy of Digestion; for
where the Fibers are weak, the Aliments ought to be such as are easily
converted into Animal Juices, and will give the least Resistance to the Action
of the Solids; Viz. New-laid Eggs, Jellies, Chickens, Lamb, Viper-Broth, etc.
All subacid Liquors are best, a^ Rhenish Wine, Madera Wine, in which
Rattle-Snakes are infused; sour and weak Punch, made with old Spirit, etc. But
both Meats and Drinks are to be taken only in small Quantities at a Time, though
oftener than usual; for hereby the Inconvenience of a disordered Stomach will
be avoided, and the Digestion rendered much lighter, and far easier. But, above
all Things, let them take care to chew their Victuals thoroughly, with a
sufficient Quantity of light and well baked Bread; for, according to the
Arabian Saying, He that does not take care to chew his Victuals thoroughly,
hates his own Soul. It is from the Neglect of this Duty, that frequently and
Indigestion arises, which creates Crudities, and a vicious Chyle; which is the
Forerunner of the Destruction of the whole Animal Economy. -- The Stomach may
be called the Kitchen of the Body, whose office is to digest and convert the
Aliments into a laudable Chyle; the more, therefore, the Food is attenuated and
divided by Mastication, so much the easier it is for the Stomach to perform its
Office. Temperance is, indeed, the greatest Preservative of Health; for it
prevents all Superfluities, and neither overloading nor straining the Vessels,
enables Nature to exert herself with the greatest Force and Vigor. Cupping,
Bleeding, Blistering, Purges, Clysters, etc. are seldom of Use, but to the
Slothful and Intemperate; and are, for the most part, only Expedients to make
Luxury consistent with Health. The Bodies of such Persons as indulge themselves
in all Sorts of Aliments, without regarding either the Quantity or Quality,
become frequently full of crude and vicious Humors; which, insensibly
increasing, at last begin to putrify, and grow malignant. Upon violent
Exercise, therefore, or the slightest Excess of either Heat or Cold, Moisture
or Dryness in the Air, or any little Inconvenience arising from the other
Non-naturals, a Dangerous Inflammation often ensues, and vents itself in acute
and mortal Diseases: For no Persuasion can prevail with some Men to use
purgative Evacuations to disburden oppressed Nature at proper Seasons, or
before the Disease begins to gather Strength; flattering themselves that all is
well and safe within, as long as nothing appears outwardly, or is felt by them
to the contrary. He, therefore, that is desirous of preserving his Senses and
rational Faculties in the greatest Perfection, and of being able to act with a
sprightly Vigor and lively Apprehension, must beware of spurring Nature on
beyond her Craving.

Lastly, Let such Valetudinarians use the Flesh-Brush, moderate Exercise,
without raising Sweat, and frequent polite and cheerful Company. Music may
likewise be of great Service in such Cases; for every Stroke of a musical
Instrument causes an Undulation of the Air, which giving some Degree of
Concussion to the Fibers of the Body, without overstraining them, produces a
brisker Circulation of the Blood; and consequently invigorates the Nerves, and
lessens the Viscidity of the Fluids. The extraordinary and almost incredible
Effects of Music in curing the Bite of the Tarantula, the World is no Stranger
to. If these Advantages from Music were more particularly considered, it might
perhaps be applied to very noble Purposes, and not (as some imagine) to
enervate the Mind; for as a distempered Body is often the Cause of a disordered
Mind, it may, by acting on the Solids, be the Means of regulating our Passions,
and bringing our Minds to a proper Degree of Calmness and Serenity. Thus Saul,
who was without Doubt of a melancholy Disposition, frequently soothed his
troubled Mind, and raised his drooping Spirits, by the Force of David's Music.

I will now subjoin a few Forms of Medicines, which I generally make use of in
a relaxed State of the Nerves, but more especially in Autumn, when we are most
subject to the Diseases arising from a debilitated Fiber; for in that Season of
the Year, our Bodies being relaxed by the Heat of the Day, are more liable to
the Mischiefs of the sudden Coldness of the Evenings, Nights and Mornings.
Besides, Sanctorius has observed, that from the Autumnal Equinox, to the
Winter-Solstice, our Perspiration is, one Day with another, about one Pound
less; and this Diminution is still so much the more, as our Vessels have been
more relaxed by the Summer's Heat; for they then cannot with Force enough
propel the contained Fluids, which consequently must every Day contract a
greater Degree of Lentor and Viscidity. -- It is, therefore, no Wonder, that
many unwary Persons are laboring under Diseases in Autumn, seeing their
Humors are then more than ordinary acrid, as well as their Perspiration very
much diminished.

It is, therefore, evident, that the Prophylactic Method in that Season of the
Year, is to strengthen the Fibers, and preserve a proper Fluidity in the Blood;
that the ordinary Perspiration may be kept up in a proper, constant, and
uniform Manner. -- The following Medicines answer such an Intention in this
Climate, and act as Alterants; for every Thing which does not operate in the
first, but farthest Passages, the Physicians commonly include under that
general Appellation. I think, however, that a few gentle and proper Purges
ought first to be taken, in order to evacuate the redundant acrid Bile, which
kind Nature frequently endeavors to do, by Diarrhaeas, Choleras, or
Dysenteries.

R. Corticis Peruviani semiunciam; Camphorae Grana triginta; Olei Cinnamomi
Guttas octo; Syrupi Zinziberis Q, S. ut fiat Electuarium. Capiat quantitatem
Nucis Moschatae omni Mane et Vesperi.

Vel,

R. Conservae Absinthii Romani, Corticis Peruviani, ana semiunciam; Chalybis
Tartarisati Drachmas duas; Pulveris Zedoariae Drachmam unam; Galangae minoris
Scrupula duo; Olei Cinnamomi Guttas octo; Syrupi Zinziberis Q. S. ut fiat
Electuarium. Dosis eadem.

Or, if a liquid Form is more agreeable, two or three Spoonfuls of the
following may be taken once or twice a Day.

R. Pulveris Corticis Peruviani Unciam unam, Radicis Rhei Drachmas duas;
Baccarum Juniperi, Corticis Aurantiorum, ana Drachmas tres; Radicis
Serpentariae Virginianae, acori very, ana Drachmam unam, Cochinillarum Grana
triginta. Macera per Triduum in Vini Maderensis libris duabus* Cola.

Vel,

R. Pulveris Corticis Peruviani Unciam unam; Radicum Rhei et Acori very,
Cinnamomi, ana Drachmam unam; Corticis Aurantiorum Drachmas duas; Cochinillarum
Grana triginta. Macera per Triduum in Vini Maderensis Libris duabus. Dein Cola.

The Ingredients joined with the Bark in these Tinctures give an agreeable
Warmth and Scent, which is very grateful to a Stomach weakened and palled by a
Fever and Medicines. The saline and resinous Parts of the Bark, being
intimately united with the Liquor, are thus given with much greater Advantage,
than can be by giving it in Substance: For when it is given in the finest
Powders, which can possibly be obtained from the Mortar and Sieve, it is yet
too coarse for a weakened Constitution, and therefore frequently brings on a
Diarrhaea by its Stimulus; but in Tincture or Decoction, it is too fine to give
any Disturbance in the first Passages, and not only passes, by the common
Course of Circulation, much farther, but gives a more uniform and general
Contraction to the debilitated and relaxed Fibers.

AN EXTRAORDINARY CASE IN PHYSIC.
THE following Account being attended with some very uncommon Circumstances, I
thought it would not be improper to make a full Enquiry into the Particulars,
of which I was first informed by several Persons of Credit.

The Wife of one B. S. who had been a healthy, lively Woman, and the Mother of
two Children, was seized, in the Year 1738, with a Diabetes, and the usual
Symptoms, viz. a frequent and copious Discharge by Urine, a gradual Wasting of
the Body, a Hectic Fever, with a quick, low Pulse, Thirst, great Pains in her
Shoulders, Back and Limbs, and Loss of Appetite. She continued in this Manner
two Years, notwithstanding the Use of Medicines usually prescribed in such
Cases, but much emaciated. She was then attacked with an Intermitting Fever,
which soon left her; and after this the Diabetes gradually decreased; so that
in a few Months she was entirely free from that Disorder; but the Pains in her
Limbs still continued. She recovered her Appetite very well, breathed freely,
and her Hectic Fever was very much lessened, though she sometimes had
Exacerbations of the same. About the Beginning of Winter, 1740, she had such a
Weakness and Pain in her Limbs, as to confine her to Bed altogether; and in a
few Months afterward the Bones in her Legs and Arms felt somewhat soft to the
Touch, and were so pliable, as to be bent into a Curve; nay, for several Months
before her Death, they were as limber as a Rag, and would bend any way with
less Difficulty than the muscular Parts of a healthy Person's Leg, without the
Interposition of the Bones.

The 12th of April, 1742, she died, being then near the Age of Forty; and,
having the Consent of her Friends, I had the Curiosity to examine the Body.
Upon raising the Cutis, I found the Membrana Adiposa much thicker than I
expected in a Person so much emaciated; the Sternum and Ribs, with their
Cartilages, very soft; and all the cartilaginous Productions of the Ribs on the
Left-side doubled over one another, about an Inch long, in this Form Z, but
flatter. Upon raising the Sternum, I found the Lungs adhering very close to the
Pleura on each Side, but more loose and flaccid, and much less in Size than
usual. Her Heart was of the common Bigness, and upon viewing her Liver, I found
it at least a third Part bigger than ordinary. Her Spleen was about an Inch and
a Half in the longest Part, and about a Quarter of an Inch thick, and the
Intestines were very much inflated.

She had Appearances of several Anchyloses formed in the small Joints, viz.
carpal and Metacarpal Bones, etc. which had been without Motion for several
Months; but upon laying them open, I found they were only like a thin Shell.
The cartilaginous Epiphyses of the Bones were entirely dissolved, and no Part
of the Heads remaining, but an Outside, not thicker than an Egg-shell. Upon
making Incisions in her Legs and Arms of five or six Inches long, I found the
outer Laminae of the Bones soft, and perfectly membranous, about the Thickness
of the Peritonaeum; and containing (instead of a boney Substance) a Fluid of
the Consistence of Honey when thick, and of a reddish Color, but not at all
disagreeble to the Smell. There was, however, an Appearance of Bones near the
Joints of her Legs and Arms, though in part dissolved; but what remained was very
soft, and full of large Holes, like a Honeycomb. The Bones of the Head yielded
easily to the Pressure of my Finger. It may seem surprising, that those Parts
of the Bones, which are the most compact and hard, should be dissolved, while
their Heads, which are more spongy and soft, had not altogether lost their
Substance. -- She was, when in Health, five Foot high, as I was informed by her
Husband; but having measured her after Death, she was no more than three Foot
seven Inches in Length, though all her Limbs were stretched out strait.

Quaere. Whether a corrosive, acid State of the Fluids, might not have been the
Cause of this uncommon Dissolution of the Bones? For had it been an alcaline
Acrimony, I am of Opinion, those Fluids, so long extravasated, would have
arrived to a great Degree of Putrefaction, and consequently must have been
extremely offensive to the Smell, as is usual in other Cases proceeding from
such a Cause.

Supposing therefore a corrosive, acid State of the Fluids, to have been the
proximate Cause; Quaere, Whether an alcaline Regimen, timely pursued, would not
have been the most likely Method to have succeeded in this poor Woman's Case?

The END.

