The Necessity of Thankfulness for Wonders of divine Mercies.

A SERMON Preached at PHILADELPHIA April 15th 1744. On Occasion of the
important and glorious Victory obtained by the British Arms in the
Mediterranean, under the Conduct of Admiral MATTHEWS, Over the united FLEETS of
FRANCE and SPAIN, And likewise the FRUSTRATING a detestable ATTEMT to INVADE
ENGLAND, BY A Popish PRETENDER.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

Isa. live. 17. No Weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of the Bible in
Second-Street. 1744.

PSALM cxxxvi. 3, 4. O give Thanks to the Lord of Lords, for his Mercy endures
forever.

To him who alone does great Wonders, for his Mercy endures forever.


THE Psalmist in our Text, with great Engagedness of Affection, excites and
summoneth all around him to give to God the Glory of his Goodness, to praise
and thank God for his wondrous enduring Mercy to his Church and People in
Particular: That God's Mercy endures forever is the Burden of this devout and
affectionate Song of Praise, which being frequently repeated, adds Beauty and
Energy to it, as well as serves to inform us of the thankful Notice we should
take of every Instance of divine Goodness, and to show how much we should be
filled with Wonder, and fired with Gratitude when we reflect upon the long
Continuance thereof, to us guilty worthless Creatures. But in the mean Time,
singular Instances of divine Mercy, loudly call for our most intense and
grateful Acknowledgments, and this seems to be the Sense and Scope of the Words
that I have now chosen to insist upon.

But to make them easier to be understood, and prepare them for Improvement,
let us enquire.

I. What are the Wonders of Mercy which Almighty God does sometimes work for
his Church and People. II. When he works them generally. III. Why. IV. What
that Thanksgiving is which we should offer to God upon such Occasions. V.
Wherein appears the Reasonableness thereof.
But before I proceed to answer the Questions proposed, I shall beg leave to
premise these few Words, viz. That Mercy, as to its general Nature, is Kindness
vouchsafed to the miserable, and that a Wonder of Mercy is some uncommon
Instance of Kindness; to Effect which the Almighty goes out of the ordinary
Road of his providential Proceedings with Mankind: They are therefore called
Wonders, because being of an extraordinary Nature, they deserve and are wont to
excite Wonder or Admiration in those that behold or hear of them. But I proceed
to answer the

1st. Enquiry, which is this, What are the Wonders of Mercy which Almighty God
works for his Church and People? And here more generally let it be observed,

1st, That the Almighty has disappointed great and deep Plots, artfully formed
against his Church. Thus when Haman as cunningly as cruelly contrived the utter
ruin of the Jewish Church and Nation, and that under the false Pretext of their
not keeping the King's Laws, it pleased Jehovah to baffle his Devise
effectually, and that by a small but surprising Incident, one Night the King
could not rest till he had read in the Book of the Chronicles of Mordecai's
Loyalty in discovering a treasonable Conspiracy against his Life ( Est. vi.)
This effectually overset the whole Scheme, which issued in the Destruction of
proud and invidious Haman, so that he was hanged on the Gallows he had prepared
for Mordecai, the mark of his Ambitious Rage. ( Est. vii. 10)

Another Instance much like this we have in the Case of Daniel, the Nobles that
wanted to ruin him, knowing that they could not find any Occasion against him,
excepting it were concerning the law of his God, they therefore contrived to
get a Law enacted which they knew he could not conscientiously comply with, in
order to represent him as a Rebel for Neglect: But how wonderfully did the
blessed God overturn this Devise, and make it a mean of promoting the Ruin of
its Contrivers: The Lord sent his Angel and shut the Lions Mouths that they
hurt not the Innocent, but they break the Bones of the Guilty. ( Dan. vi.)

The Deliverance of England from the Gunpowder Plot deserves everlasting
Remembrance. As cruel Nero wished that the whole City of Rome had but one Neck
that he might cut it off at a Stroke. So the bloody Papist's designed to burn
up at one dreadful Blast the Flowers and Strength of the English Nation, that
so the Bulwark of the Protestant Zion being destroyed, the whole might become
an easy Prey to their Teeth: But how wonderfully was this Hell hatched
sanguinary Scheme detected by a Letter sent to one of the Nobles, who was a
Member of Parliament, diswading him from going to Parliament by this Argument,
viz. That they should meet with a Blew and not see the Hand that gave it; which
the King reading, apprehended that there was a Design to blow them up by
Gunpowder, and therefore wisely ordered the Cellars under and near the
Parliament House to be searched, upon which the monstrous Traitor Faux, was
found with the dark Lanthorn in his Hand, ready to kindle the dreadful burning
Train. O amazing Mercy of God! O in^andous Cruelty of Papists!

2dly. God has wrought wonderful Deliverances for his Church and People in the
following Manner.

1st. By small Means, thus the Stars in their Courses fought against Sisera;
the Enemies of Joshua were slain by Hail, and the Meabites with the Sun shining
on Water: And did not the Almighty break to Pieces the Spanish Armado, which
they vainly called Invincible, after all their proud Boasts of bringing us into
a State of Slavery. Was not Deborah, though of the weaker Sex, raised up by the
Almighty for the Deliverance of the Jewish Church and Nation from a State of
Bondage? As King Asa justly observed, It is nothing to the Almighty to save by
many or by few. As the Mariner Turns a great Ship by a small Helm, so does the
Almighty sometimes perform great Works by inconsiderable Instruments. How
surprising, was the Victory which Gideon gained over the vast Host of Midian,
by a few Hundreds of Men lighting of Lamps and breaking of Pitchers? Surely the
Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong. He that girds on his
Harness should not boast as he that puts it off! All Events are under the
divine Control.

2dly. Sometimes God delivers his Church and People without Means, and this is
still more amazing: Behold when there is no Intercessor, then does his right
Arm bring Salvation! The very Night after Rabshakeh's Blasphemous Boasts, an
Angel slew one hundred and fourscore and five Thousand of the Assyrian Army, (2
Kings xix. 35.) After Julian the Apostate had made a Vow to sacrifice all the
Christians in the Empire upon his return from the Persian War, it pleased God
to give him a mortal Wound, which made him acknowledge that the Galilean had
overcome him.

3dly. Sometimes God compasses the Deliverance and Benefit of his Church by
contrary Means, out of the Eater comes forth Meat, and out of the Strong
Sweetness, which is an amazing Instance of his Almightiness. Thus the
Israelites Oppression in Egypt was a Mean of their Increase in it, and
Deliverance from it, the more they were afflicted the more they grew. ( Exo. i.
12) It is an old and a true Proverb, That the Blood of the Martyrs, is the Seed
of the Church. Julian was well aware of this, and therefore he left off
Persecuting the Church, not out of Mercy, but Envy, least she should be thereby
increased! But

3dly. The Almighty does sometimes restrain the Malice of Men against his
Church, that it shall not go that Length they would have it. Ps. lxxvi. 10.
Surely the Wrath of Man shall praise thee, and the Remainder of Wrath shall
thou restrain. The Almighty bounds the Envy of Men and Devils, as he does the
proud Surges of the angry Ocean, thus far they may come and no farther. The
Almighty put a Hook in the Jaws of Senacherib, and a Bridle in his Lips, so
that he was obliged to return by the Way he came ashamed, after all the
blasphemous Boasts of his insulting Minister Rabshakeh, (2 King. xix.)

4thly. Another Wonder of divine Mercy to the People of God is this, that the
Almighty sometimes stills the Rage of Wicked Men against them, Psalm. lxv. 7.
Which stilleth the Noise of the Seas, the Noise of their Waves, and the Tumult
of the People. And hence it is said elsewhere, that When a Man's Ways please
the Lord, he will make even his Enemies to be at Peace with him. Thus it was
with Jacob, when Esau came forth with an angry Intention against him, the
Almighty soon smoothed his surly Brow, that instead of killing him, he kissed
him; and therefore we are told that Jacob saw the Face of Esau as the Face of
God. i. e. He saw the gracious Hand of God in that sudden Alteration in his
Brothers Aspect.

5thly. The Almighty sometimes repays into the Bosoom of his Church's Enemies,
the Evils they designed and endeavored to do to her: Some Instances of this
Kind have been already given, to which let these be added, Pharaoh thought to
have destroyed Israel by pursuing them into the Red Sea, but instead of this,
he and his Host were drowned in the mighty Waters! Abithophel's Plot against
David, proved his own ruin. The cruel Emperor Maximinus, who endeavored to
destroy the Christians entirely, was consumed with Lice. Time would fail to
enumerate the particular Wonders of Mercy that have been showed to the People
of God, and that both as to Soul and Body.

What else is the Conversion of every Sinner to God, but a wonder of Mercy; and
especially of such as are of the grossest Kind? Hereby Brands are plucked out
of the Burning and made Monuments of pure and glorious Grace.

And is not the Preservation of every one, or their Perseverance in a State of
Grace, a Wonder of divine Mercy! Grace in the Heart, says Bishop Hopkins, is
like a Spark of Fire in the Ocean exposed to the Violence of the Winds and
Waves.

Yea Wonders of divine Mercy have appeared in the Preservation of the Lives of
Gods People. Famous Du Moulin in the Time of the Massacre at Paris, was
preserved by a Spiders weaving her Web across the Mouth of the Oven where he
lay hid. And the Protestants who were besieged in Beziers in France, were
delivered by a drunken Drummer, who going to his Quarters at Midnight rang the
Alarm Bell. But I proceed to the

2d. Proposed, which was to show when God generally works Wonders of Mercy. And
that is

1st. When a Spirit of Prayer is given to the People of God Psalm. cii. 13, 17.
Thou shall arise and have Mercy upon Zion, the set Time to favor her is come
(why) thy Servants favor the Dust thereof, thou shall regard the Prayer of the
destitute and not despise their Prayer. Before God confers Mercies, he gives a
Spirit of Prayer to ask them, but when this is removed it is an awful Sign of
approaching Judgments.

2dly. When Gods People are brought low, and all human Helps fail, Deuteronomy. xxxii.
36. The Lord shall judge his People, and repent himself concerning his
Servants, when he sees that their Power is gone, and that there is none shut
up or left, in the Mount of Extremity the Lord is seen; witness Isreal's
Deliverance out of Egypt, and at the Red Sea; after the Bricks were doubled
Moses came for their Relief, and when Israel were every way encompassed at the
Red Sea, they saw the Salvation of God!

3dly. When God's Truth and Glory are much concerned, then he will exert his
Almightiness, least his Name should be profaned, and his Honor insulted.
Ezekiel. xxxvi. 22. Not for your sakes do I do this, but for my Holy Names Sake.

4thly, When a complete Deliverance can be effected, an Instance of this we
have in the Story of Pharaoh, they were suffered to go into the great Deeps,
that there they might be buried in a watery Grave!

Again another Time is when the Enemies of God's People breath forth the
greatest Rage against the Church of God. When Saul was going on in this Plight
to Damascus, he was struck down at once to the Ground.

I may add that another Season is, when God can get most Honor upon his
Enemies, and most Honor from his Friends. Had Hamans Plot been crushed in the
Beginning of it, the Church would have been protected, but God's Glory would
not have been so much made manifest. And therefore the Lord suffers his Enemies
to go on sometimes a great Way, and bring their cruel Councils to ripeness for
Execution, before he blasts and breaks them!

And when the People of God are much distressed before they get Deliverance,
their Sense of the Mercy is heightened, and their Praises for it enlarged! The

3d. General Head comes now to be discoursed upon, which was to show, Why God
does sometimes work Wonders of Mercy for his Church and People. And

1st. One Reason is, that not only those to whom the Mercies are vouchsafed may
praise him; but also that the Generations to come may trust in him and obey
him. This was the happy Issue of Isreal's Deliverance at the Red Sea, They
feared and believed the Lord, Ex. xiv. 31. David improved his memorable
Deliverance from the Jaws of the Lion, and from the Paw of the Bear, to
strengthen his Expectation of future Mercies, and Deliverance from future
Dangers; and the Apostle used the same Method, 2 Cor. i. 10. He has delivered
us from so great a Death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us. And did not the Jewish Church tread in the same Path? Ps. xxii 4,
5. Our Fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them. And from this
blessed Topic she elsewhere pleads for Deliverance. Isa. li. 9, 10. Awake,
awake, put on Strength, awake as in the Ancient Days, art thou not he that
wounded the Dragon, who dried up the Sea, and made the Deeps a Way for the
ransomed to pass over?

2dly. To make his Glory illustrious, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 27. I said I would scatter
them into Corners and make the Rememberance of them cease among Men, were it
not that I feared the Wrath of the Enemy, lest they should behave themselves
strangely, and say our high Hand and not the Lord has done all this. Thus
vainly vaunted railing Rabshakeh! 2 Kings xviii. Where are the Gods of
Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah, of Hamath and Arpad? Have they delivered Samaria
out of my Hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem! This Argument Moses
urged to prevent the threatened Destruction of Israel. Number. xiv. If thou kill
this People, the Nations will charge thee with Weakness. Jehovah does great
Things because he is a great God, his Name and Nature are wonderful, and
therefore his Works are so! Every one does, or should do, Works suited to their
Quality and Character. Magnos magna decent. When Alexander met with a great
Difficulty he thus encountered it, jam periculum par animo Alexandri. Here is
Danger equal to Alexander's Bravery. And wondrous Works do not only suit a God,
but make his Name glorious among the Nations, thus it was in respect of the
Judgments inflicted upon Pharaoh. --

3dly. Another Reason is the Relation that God bears to his People, together
with the Promises he has made to promote their Benefit and their Dependence on
him. He is their Father and will he not have Compassion on his Children; surely
Property excites Care, he has promised to protect them, And that no Weapon
formed against them shall prosper. The Munition of Rocks shall be their
Defense, he that dwells in the Secret of the most High, shall be under the
Shadow of the Almighty. He has promised to support them, and to make their
Bread and Waters sure. He has promised to deliver them out of Trouble, Psalm. l.
15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. -- Isa. xliii. 3, 4. I gave Egypt for thy Ransom, Ethiopia and Seba
for thee, I have saved thee, therefore will I give Men for thee, and People for
thy Life. Jehovah will rather sink many Nations in Ruins, than suffer his poor
People to perish! Moreover they trust in God, and therefore shall not be
confounded, for Trust engages Jehovah's Care. I proceed to the

4th. Proposed, which was to show what Thankfullness for God's Mercies
includes, And

1st. It includes high and honorable Thoughts of them in our Minds, --
frequent reflecting upon them, and grateful Sensations for them. --

2dly. It includes our extolling God with our Lips, and giving him the whole
Glory of his Works of Mercy, without sacrificing to our own Net, but on the
contrary acknowledging our utter Unworthiness of them in the least Degree.

3dly. It includes our living the Praises of God, and hoping in his Word, for
future Mercies. The

5th. Proposed comes next to be considered, which was to show, wherein appears
the Reasonableness of Thanksgiving for every Mercy, and more especially for
signal Instances thereof? And

1st. There is some Disposition deeply engraven in the Human Nature to express
Gratitude for Benefits received. Do not the Publicans so, said our Lord?
Lycurgus observed, that it is a prodigious Thing not to repay a Benefit! Yea
even some of the Brute Creation express a kind of Gratitude, the Ox knows its
Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; and therefore we shall be worse than
Publicans, Pagans and Beasts if we neglect it!

2dly. It is most just and equal. He unjustly asks a Benefit, who is not
inclined to requite it. The least Mercy deserves Acknowledgment, and how much
more Wonders of Mercy. Seeing that our Being and all our Benefits are derived
from God, it is but reasonable that we should return a Tribute of Praise for
them.

3dly It is a delightful Duty, Ps. cxxxv. 3. Praise the Lord for it is good,
sing Praises to his Name for it is Pleasant. Indeed it is the sweetest Duty on
this side Heaven, and the nearest Resemblance of the continued Employment of
the glorious Inhabitants of that blessed Place.

4thly. It is profitable, and hence the Lord Jehovah says, that he that
offers Praise glorifieth him, and that to him who orders his Conversation
aright, will be shown the Salvation of God. I proceed to the Improvement of
this Subject, which shall be only in a use of Exhortation.

O give Thanks to the Lord of Lords, to him that is above all Princes and
Potentates, and earthly Nobles, for his Mercy endures ever. To him alone who
does great Wonders, for his Mercy endures for ever. Let God alone be the
supreme Object and Center of our Praise, for he it is that over rules all
Events. Let us reflect upon the past Mercies of God to the Protestant Churches
in general, and to the British Zion in Particular: Blessed be the Lord that he
has brought us out of the mystical Egypt of Popery, and that he has delivered
us from the Armies of Sihon King of Heshbon, and Og King of Bashan! All Glory
be to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for delivering England from the
Spanish Armado, and the Gunpowder Plot, that infernal Device! And for ever
Blessed be the Lord for delivering the Nations from Popery and Slavery, by the
coming of the Prince of Orange, afterward King WILLIAM, of glorious Memory! O
what a Blessed Display of marvelous Mercy was that! And let us my dear
Brethren, thank God with all our Hearts for the establishment of the
illustrious House of Hanover, upon the British Throne! What unspeakeable and
precious Privileges, dear Sirs! do we enjoy under the mild and auspicious
Reign of our present gracious Sovereign King GEORGE? And therefore what
Malignity and Madness must possess those Spirits who want to revolt from such a
Government, which is tempered with Lenity and Gentleness, and equally Protects
the civil and religious Liberties of all! Neither should the late memorable
Victory at Dettingen, which it pleased a gracious God to give to the British
Arms over the Forces of France, be passed over with Silence and Negligence. O
the unspeakable Kindness of Heaven in covering the Head of our indulgent
Sovereign in the Field of Battle, when with intrepid Bravery he exposed his
naked Bosom to the designed malignant Gallick Shot! What passionate Gratitude
do we owe to the King of Kings for preserving so important a Life, in so
perilous a Juncture! But that which has especially induced me to speak upon
this Subject at this Time, is the News we have of a Victory obtained in the
Mediterranean, by brave Admiral MATTHEWS, over the united Fleets of France and
Spain before the Port of Toulon! And the seasonable Discovery and Defeat of an
Attempt to invade England by a Popish Pretender, through the Assistance of the
Arms of France! Blessed be the glorious God! that he has made the Winds and
Waves to fight for us against our bloody Papal Enemies; as against the
Egyptians of Old, and as the Stars fought against Sisera! Blessed be God that
he has baffled the hellish Councils of the Romish Ahithophels, who want to rob
us of our Religion, our Liberties, and our Lives! It is God! it is God alone!
my Brethren, that has wrought this wondrous Mercy for us, and to him be all the
Glory! O give Thanks to the Lord, for his Mercy endures forever! Considering
our great abuse of Mercies both Spiritual and Temporal, it is a Wonder that God
has not given us up as a Prey to the Teeth of our Enemies! O let us exalt
Jehovah with all our Hearts, and not forget his precious Benefits! Let us Thank
him after the Psalmist's Example, and pray to God that he would be pleased to
perfect this begun Deliverance! Let us avoid Presumpsion on the one Hand, and
sinful Diffidence on the other; and hoping pray, that he who has and does
deliver, will yet deliver us from Popery and Slavery: And let us live agreeable
to these wondrous and important Mercies of God, which may God grant for
CHRIST'S sake!

Our God has disappointed the deep Plot of the Courts and Conclaves of France
and Spain, so artfully formed, and so closely concealed in order to destroy at
one fatal Stroke our civil and religious Liberties!

Jehovah has brought the Wind out of his Treasures, and scattered the
Squadrons of our Enemies; some he has buried in the mighty Waters, like their
Egyptian Predecessors, who were pursuing (...) Design against God's Israel, of
Cruelty, Oppression, and Blood! And some he has drove back with Dishonor to
their Native Shore! Our God has sought for us, and we will praise him! He has
delivered us as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler, and we will exalt him!

That mighty God who bounds the turbulent Ocean within its proper Limits by a
girdle of Sand, has graciously given Check to the Romish Rage by the Winds, and
put a Hook in the Jaws of those haughty and sanguinary Senacheribs, that they
should return by the Way they came, ashamed, without Success!

Our God has repaid, in some Measure, into the Bosoms of his Churchs Enemies,
the Evils they devised against her, as in the Cases of Pharaoh, Haman,
Ahithophel, Senacherib, Julian, and Domitian!

The Wind, that with auspicious Gales, gently wafted great WILLIAM, the
procurer of our Liberties, and the Patron of our Laws, to the longing British
Shore, has, with adverse Gust, mercifully blown Back the Son of Rome, of
Tyranny, and Blood, to the Gallick Coast!

O Brethren! we shall be some of the most ungrateful Mortals that ever the
Creation bore, if we do not thank God for these Wonders of his Mercy! Let us
speak then in the Psalmist's strains, Bless God O my Soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy Name! O give Thanks to the Lord of Lords, for his
Mercy endures forever! Who overthrew Pharaoh and his Host, for his Mercy
endures forever! See v. 15. Let us take up the Song of magnanimous Deborah and
say, Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel: Lord when thou wentest out
of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the Field of Edom, the Earth trembled, the
Heavens dropped, the Clouds also dropped Water, awake, awake Deborah, awake,
awake, utter a Song, arise Barak and lead captivity Captive, thou Son of
Abinoam. ( See Judge v.) O Let us with Ardour, Alacrity and all Humility,
express the Song of Moses after Israel's Deliverance at the Red Sea! Ex. xv.
Then Sang Moses and the Children of Israel this Song, unto the Lord, and spoke
saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse
and his rider has he thrown into Sea; the Lord is my Stength and Song, he is
also become my Salvation: He is my God, and I will prepare him an Habitation,
my Fathers God and I will exalt him. The Lord is a Man of War, the Lord is his
Name! Pharaoh 's Chariots and his Host he has cast into the Sea. -- The Depths
have covered them, they sunk into the Bottom as a Stone, thy right Hand O Lord
is become glorious in Power, thy Right Hand O Lord has dashed in Pieces the
Enemy, and in the Greatness of thine Excellency, thou have overthrown them that
rise up against thee: The Enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will
divide the Spoil, my Lust shall be satisfied upon them. Thou did blow with
thy Wind, the Sea covered them, they sunk as Lead in the mighty Waters, who is
like unto thee O Lord amongst the Gods, who is like unto thee, glorious in
Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders?


