Dr. Chauncy's Thanksgiving-SERMON For the Reduction of Cape Breton.

Mavelous Things done by the right Hand and holy Arm of God in getting him
the Victory. A SERMON Preached the 18th of July, 1745. Being a Day set apart
for Solemn Thanksgiving to almighty God, For the Reduction of CAPE-BRETON by
his Majesty's New England Forces, under the Command of the honorable William
Pepperrell, Esquire Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief, and covered by a
Squadron of his Majesty's Ships from Great Britain, commanded by PETER WARREN,
Esquire

By Charles Chauncy, D. D. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

Judge. V. 2, 20. Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the People
willingly offered themselves. They fought from Heaven, the Stars in their
Courses fought against Sisera.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill. 1745.

A Thanksgiving-SERMON For the Reduction of Cape Breton.
Psalm 98.1. O sing unto the Lord a new Song, for he has done mavelous
Things: His right Hand and his holy Arm has gotten him the Victory.


AS we are now together in the House of the Lord, to pay him our humble and
grateful Acknowledgments for the eminent Success which he has granted the New
England Arms against a neighboring powerful Enemy, I could think of no Words
more pertinent than those I have read to you to employ your Meditations on so
remarkable an Occasion.

SOME indeed refer them to the Messiah, and his spiritual Conquests in behalf
of a rebel World; but others think they were penned in commemoration of some
signal temporal Victory gained by the Troops of Israel, under the Command of
David, over their Enemies. In this View of them they are properly applicable to
the Design of this Day's Solemnity; for the Lord has done mavelous Things
for us; His right Hand and holy Arm has gotten him the Victory: And we are
hereupon obliged to sing a new song to the Praise of his great Name.

IN speaking to the Words,

I. I shall consider God as getting the Victory by his right Hand and holy Arm.

II. I shall take Notice of the mavelous Things which he sometimes does in
getting the Victory.

III. I shall show what Reason a People, for whom God has thus gotten the
Victory, have to sing a new Song of Praise to him.

THESE are the Heads we are naturally led to discourse to from the Text: And we
shall endeavor to speak to them in a Manner not unsuitable to the Occasion of
the Day, and Circumstances of divine Providence.

I. I am, in the first Place, to consider God as getting the Victory by his
right Hand and holy Arm. The inspired Psalmist ascribes this Glory to him. He
does not take it to himself, he does not bestow it on the Troops of Israel; but
acknowledges the Efficiency of God, and gives him the Honor due to his Name.
His right Hand and holy Arm has gotten him the Victory. Literally speaking it
cannot be said of God, that he has an Hand or Arm; for he is a pure Spirit,
without bodily Shape or Parts: But as it is by the right Hand and Arm that Men
are wont to put forth their Strength, these Parts of the human Body are
figuratively applied to God. So he is said in the Text to get him the Victory
by his right Hand and Arm. The Language is used by way of Accommodation to our
Capacities, and obviously leads us to conceive of Victory as obtained by God,
bro't about under the Direction and Influence of his powerwful and alwise
Providence.

AND this is a Truth every where acknowledged in the sacred Writings. They
speak of the great God as ruling in the Armies of Heaven and Earth; as
presiding over the Kingdoms of this lower World, governing all their Affairs,
and deciding all their Battles. The Names by which he is commonly known in the
Bible are these, the Lord of Hosts, the God of Armies, the Lord strong and
mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle; importing, that he directs, presides and
overrules in all Armies, so as to turn the Battle on which Side he pleases.
Nor is Victory ever obtained but under the divine Guidance and Blessing. It Is
in the Faith of this, that David, the General, as well as King of Israel, so
often applies to God to be his Shield and Help, and subdue the People under
him. It Is in the Faith of this, that the Israel of God do so often make their
religious thankful Acknowledgments to him for giving them the Necks of their
Enemies. And it is upon this same Account, that we meet with so many sacred
Hymns of Praise, in Commemoration of glorious Victory in a Day of Battle.

NOT that God, in getting the Victory, immediately exerts his right Hand and
holy Arm. He does it ordinarily by the intervention of second Causes, and of
such as are naturally fitted, in a humane Way, to accomplish his Purposes: Though
this ought not, in the least, to take from him the Glory of his Agency; for the
Victory is notwithstanding his. He raises up and qualifies those who are
employed in a Day of Battle, he Spirits them to the Service, arms them with
Resolution, directs their Conduct, and crowns their Valor with Success. The
greatest Generals are absolutely dependant on God. He gives them Presence of
mind, or confounds their Tho'ts; he directs their Counsels, or suffers them to
be led aside by a Spirit of Infatuation; he renders their Projections
prosperous, or frustrates their best concerted Measures: He gives Courage to
their Armies, or strikes them with Surprise: And if he intends to render them
victorious, he will order such a concurrence of Circumstances in their Favor,
as that they shall have the Advantage of their Enemies, and tread upon their
High Places.

AND now, if 'its by the right Hand and holy Arm of God; that victory is
obtained,

THIS shows us where our Dependence ought to be for Success against our
Enemies. Not on the best Means, or Instruments: Though we ought to make use of
these, and may depend on them, provided we don't place them in the Room of God.
For he is principally and ultimately to be confided in. And cursed is the Man,
the Nation, the Province, that makes Flesh their Arm. The Lord Jehovah, and he
only, is the Strength of his People; and whatever Trust is placed in Men or
Means, it ought always to be in subordination to his all-governing Will and
Providence.

AND it is owing, I would hope, to such a well-placed Trust in God, that we his
People in this Land have been favored with such remarkable Success against our
Enemies. We were not wanting in the Use of all suitable Means; and yet, I could
not but observe a general Disposition in all serious People, both high and low,
to own their Dependence on God, without the concurrent Blessing of whose
Providence, they had no Hope of Success. It was this that brought us once and
again publicly into the House of the Lord, under the Countenance of Authority,
to humble ourselves before him, to confess our Sins, and beg that his Presence
might be with our Brethren gone against the Enemy. And upon no Occasion do I
remember to have seen a Spirit of Prayer more generally prevailing among those
who profess a Regard to Religion. Fervent Prayers were continually going up to
God, from all Parts of the Country: And may it not be hoped, that God has heard
our Prayers of Faith and Trust in his Power and Goodness, and, in Answer to
them, crowned our Enterprise against the French Enemy with such signal Glory
and Victory?

WE are likewise taught from what has been discoursed, that the Glory of
Victories gained over Enemies is to be given unto God. To him therefore let us
ascribe the Glory of our late Conquest, so nearly connected with the Prosperity
of these Colonies. 'Twas by the right Hand and holy Arm of God that we got this
Victory: And to him be the Praise.

NOT that we are to be unmindful of those whom God has been pleased to use as
Instruments in this great Affair. It Is the Command of God, that we give Honor
to whom Honor is due. And shall we not think and speak of those, with all
decent Respect, and entertain a graceful Sense of their Service, who have
exposed themselves to Hardships, and ventured their Lives in the high Places of
the Field, for our Benefit; especially, when they have been honored by God in
being made victorious over our Enemies? All Nations have done Honor to their
Heroes, both living and after they were dead: And if they have sometimes
exceeded herein, giving that Glory to Man which was due to God, this is no
Reason why we should not make our grateful Acknowledgments to our Warriors,
and in Proportion to the Extent and Value of their Achievements on our Behalf,
and the greatness of the Hazards and Difficulties they have gone through for our
Sakes; always provided we keep within the Bounds of Religion, and honor not Man
in Opposition to God, but in subserviency to him, and ultimately reflecting
Glory on him.

IT has been remarked, the Song of Deborah, though it gives the principal Glory
of the eminent Victory it celebrates to God, whose is the Glory, and the Power,
and the Victory, and the Majesty; yet at the same Time it forgets not to give
all just Applause to the Officers and Troops that acquired it under the divine
Conduct and Blessing. A good Example this! and we may learn our Duty from it
both to God, and those he has employed as Instruments in the glorious Conquest
we are this Duty celebrating.

WE ought highly to esteem in Love and honor his Excellency, our Commander in
Chief, whose Wisdom projected this great and necessary Undertaking; whose
Prudence directed to all suitable Measures to conceal it from the Enemy; whose
indefatigable Labors, by Night and Day, carried it on with such surprising
Dispatch; and, in a Word, whose just Influence at Home, and seasonable
Applications there, procured those Ships of War, without which we could not
have succeeded in this noble Design. He has herein approved himself faithful to
his Royal Master, and a Father to NEW ENGLAND. The good Lord have respect to
his Servant! And may he long live at the head of this Province, in high Favor
with the King, and rejoicing in the Love Reverence and Obeisance of a loyal
People!

GREAT also are our Obligations to our wise and valorous General, who, from a
disinterested Love to his Country, laid by his own private Affairs, left his
honorable Seat at Court, and, what is more, his beloved Relatives and Friends,
under all Advantages to be happy in the enjoyment of them, to go at the head of
our Forces into the Enemies Land, and besiege their strongest Fortifications in
this part of the World, exposing himself to known Difficulties and Hardships,
and hazarding his Life, to make Acquisitions for the public Safety. Blessed be
the Lord his Strength, who taught his Hands to War, and his Fingers to fight;
who has been his Fortress and Deliverer; who has prospered his Counsels and
Arms, to the subduing the People under him, and leading him into the strong
City, and putting him in Possession of its strong Holds. May the great JEHOVAH
be still his Shield and Defense, and return him in Safety to his own Land, that
he may here speak of the mighty Acts of the Lord, and receive the just
Applauses of his People!

WE should likewise be ungrateful, if we did not take a thankful Notice of our
brave Commodore, to whose Prudence, and Vigilance, and active Courage, under
God, it was owing, that the Siege was covered. Relief for the Enemy cut off,
and a strong Ship of War taken, which might otherwise have obliged our Forces
to return with Disappointment and Damage. His readiness, had there been a
Necessity for it, to have gone into the Harbor with his Ships, to join the
Army in one general dreadful Attack upon the Town, ought always to be
rememembred to his Honor: Nor will it be denied, that the Terror of so many
Ships, under the Command of so brave an Officer, had a powerful Influence in
the Surrender of the Place. Upon these Accounts the Name of Warren will, I
trust, be ever treated with Respect in NEW ENGLAND.

NEITHER should we forget to make an honorable Mention of the other Officers,
yea, and of the Soldiers, who, in order to reduce the City of Louisbourg,
endured Hardships, cheerfully went through Fatigues and Hazards, fearing nothing,
and doing every thing Man could do!

AND shall we not love and honor these brave Instruments in the Shame that has
been bro't upon those who hated us, and the Salvation God has wrought out for
this his People? We shall be basely ungraceful, if we withold from them their
just Praise.

BUT our Acknowledgments must not be confined to Men, nor principally made to
them; but to the God of Armies, the God whose right Hand and holy Arm has
gotten us the Victory. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto any Skill, or Valor, or
Strength of our Army or Fleet, but to thy Name be the Glory. -- But I must not
anticipate what will more properly come in afterward. I therefore go on to the
next Thing proposed, which was,

II. To take Notice of the mavelous Things which God sometimes does in
getting the Victory for a People. Says David in the Text, Mavelous Things
has he done: His right Hand and holy Arm has gotten him the Victory. The
meaning is, that it was in a mavelous Way, by surprising Events, that God
gained this Victory for Israel.

NOR was this the only Instance in this Kind. God often appeared wonderfully
for that People, and made bare his holy Arm for the Destruction of those who
rose up against them. Sometimes he miraculously exerted his Almighty Power, and
did Things not only above, but contrary to the Course of Nature, and all humane
Contrivance, to give them the Advantage of their Enemies. Thus, he rebuked the
Red Sea, and it was dried up: He led his Israel through the Depth as through the
Wilderness; while the Waters swallowed up the Egyptians. The Walls of Jericho
marvellously fell down at the Sound of Rams-Horns; and the Lamps and Pitchers
of Gideon's three hundred Men struck the vast Army of the Midianites with
Consternation, so that they madly turned every Man his Sword against his
Fellow. The Sun stood still to favor Joshua in the pursuit of his Enemies,
while Hailstones from Heaven killed more than the Sword of Israel. And an
Angel was dispatched from the Armies above to raise the Siege at Jerusalem, by
destroying an hundred and eighty five thousand of the Assyrian Army in one
Night, which obliged the rest immediately to retire from the Walls of that City.

BUT, in the ordinary Course of Providence, God sometimes does mavelous
Things in favor of a People, and in order to their getting the Victory:
Either, by a secret and invisible Influence, disposing and ranging second
Causes in such a Manner as to operate beyond all humane Expectation; or by
interposing such a Coincidence of Events, as could not have been foreseen, and
when bro't to pass, draw the Attention of wise Observers, and force from them
an Acknowledgment, that God's Throne is in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules
over all.

AND of this we have had an illustrious Instance, in the memorable Conquest
that has brought us together this Day.

I scarce know of a Conquest, since the Days of Joshua and the Judges, wherein
the Finger of God is more visible. There has been such a Train of Providence,
such a Concurrence of favorable Circumstances, making Way for it, as are truly
wonderful; and, if considered in one collective View, render it proper to take
up the Language of the Text, and say, Mavelous Things has God done for us:
His right Hand, and his holy Arm has gotten us this Victory.

IT may seem strange, that such a Country as this, so weak in Strength, so
unskilled in the Use of military Weapons, so distressed for want of Money,
should make an Attempt upon so strong and fenced a City as Louisbourg, at
Cape-Breton: Nor should we have entertained the Though It, if it had not been
clearly pointed out to us by the Providence of God. It was apparently
Providence that gave Rise to this important Design; partly, by permitting the
French, last Year, to take Canso, and invade Annapolis, and form a Scheme to
invade it again this Year; hereby opening to our View, in the clearest Manner,
not only the Justice, but Necessity of reducing this Place, from whence we were
exposed to suffer so much, both on our Sea coasts, and Frontier-borders:
Partly, by sending a Number of rich East India Ships into the Harbor of
Louisbourg, for the supply and manning of which, in their Voyage to France, so
many of their Men, and such Quantities of their Stores, were taken off, and so
late in the Fall, as to render the Spring the Nick of Time (as we vulgarly
speak) the most favorable Opportunity we might ever expect, for an Enterprise
of this Nature: Though after all, it would probably have never been undertaken,
if the Providence of God, notwithstanding the most prudent Steps, under good
Advantages, to gain Intelligence, had not kept us strangely in Ignorance, both
as to the vast Strengh of the Place, an Number of Inhabitants that might
suddenly be called in to its Assistance. Many of our Officers and Soldiers, who
now know these Things, have frequently declared, had they known them before,
they should never have gone upon this Affair.

AND as it was by the Direction of Providence, we were led to form an
Enterprise of such vast Moment; to the same Cause must it be ascribed, that so
many Things were remarkably ordered all along in favor of it, and so as
finally to bring it to an happy Issue.

IT was apparently owing to a signal interposition in Providence, that so many
Persons, from all Parts of the Land, were spirited to offer themselves
willingly for this Service; and that, within two Months from the Resolution of
the Government to undertake this Design, the whole military Force was in
readiness for Embarkation, and under Sail for the Place they were intended to
go against. I believe, I may say, such an Armament for an infant Province, so
voluntarily raised, so well fitted for their Business, and so speedily
dispatched away, cannot be paralleled in History: Especially, if we take into
Consideration, together with our Inexperience in Affairs of this Nature, the
considerable naval Force equipped; the great Number of Transports provided; the
vast Quantity of Stores procured, both for the Support of our own Men, and the
Annoyance of the Enemy: And as to many of these necessary Stores, such as
Cannon-Shot, Shells of various Sizes, Mortars, Cohorns, Hand-Granadoes,
Scaling-Ladders, Field pieces, common Carriages for many of our Cannon, and
special ones accommodated for the Transportation of those Cannon that were to
be used in Battery; I say, as to these Stores, they were not only to be bought,
but to be made: And yet, to the Surprise of every Body, the whole Work of
Preparation, which was took in hand, after the Determination of the Court, Jan.
29th, was completed by March 21st. when the General gave his Signal for
sailing.

I may, not improperly, remark here to the Honor of this Province, that the
Men, so suddenly and strangely got together to go upon this Expedition, were of
a different Character from those, who are commonly sent upon such Occasions.
They were not the Scum of the Land, idle worthless Creatures, given to
Profaneness, Intemperance, and universally debauched in their Manners. A
Number of such there might be: But for the generality, they were Men who had
upon their Minds an Awe of God, and feared an Oath; they were Men industrious
in their Callings, and well able to provide for themselves and Families; in a
Word, they were Men of Life and Spirit, animated with love to their King and
Country, and willing to venture their Lives, not so much to serve themselves,
as to promote the public Good. It Is a rare Thing for so many Men, of such a
Character, to be engaged in a military Enterprise: And I cannot but think, there
was a special Hand of Providence in it.

IT was owing remarkably to the Government of Providence, that the Weather was
so ordered in Favor of this Enterprise. Perhaps, the oldest Man living does
not remember so long a Course of moderate fair Weather as we were blessed with,
while preparing for the Expedition. There was not the loss of a Day, either by
Snow, Rain, or Cold; which is wonderful, in this Climate, at this Time of the
Year. Some, who have preserved an Account of the Weather for more than twenty
Years back, have been surprised to behold the Difference between the Months of
February and March, this Year, and the foregoing ones; This, a continued Course
of good Weather; those, as continually intermixed with Storms of Snow, or Rain,
or severity of Cold.

AND the Weather was as remarkably favorable to our Design at Cape-Breton:
For, as some have observed in their Letters, there was scarce ever known, among
the French, such a Run of good Weather, as while they were laying Siege to
Louisbourg: Whereas, the very Afternoon they entered the City, the Rain came
on, filled their Trenches with Water, and continued for such a Number of Days,
that they must have gone through insufferable Difficulties, and been in danger of
raising the Siege. The French themselves took Notice of this Disposition of
Providence, and said, it was visible God fought for us.

IT was observably owing to Providence, that our Soldiers were preserved from
the Smallpox, as such Numbers of them were in this Town, in order to embark,
when that infectious Distemper broke out among us, threatening a universal
Spread. And, perhaps, the Time was never known, when so many Persons, in so
many different Parts of the Town, were taken ill with this Sickness, and it was
notwithstanding stopped in its Progress: Which is the more worthy of special
Notice, because, if it had prevailed, it would unavoidably have put an End to
the intended Expedition.

IT was owing to the wonderful Conduct of a kind Providence, that so
considerable a military Force, at such a Season of the Year, should be carried
in Safety to the Place they were bound for, without the loss of a Man, or
meeting with the least Disaster; and that their Design should be a perfect
Secret to the Enemy, till they were surprised with the Sight of our Fleet,
going into Chappereauge Bay. It was this that made way for landing our Men and
Stores without Annoyance, unless from a small Party of the French, some of whom
were taken, some killed, and the rest obliged to flee for their Lives.

IT was owing to the extraordinary favor of Providence, that the Enemy, so
soon after our landing, forsook their Grand-Battery; allowing us to enter and
take Possession of it without the least Opposition. This seems, on the one
Hand, to have been a most fatal Mistake to them, which can scarce be accounted
for, unless from a Spirit of Infatuation, or a mighty Terror seizing their
Hearts: And, on the other, the leading Advantage put into our Hands; as it
animated our Men with Life and Vigor, furnished them with the heaviest Cannon
made use of in the Siege, and enabled them with greater Speed, and less Danger,
to make their Attempt on the Town.

AND here was a Series of Things remarkably overrul'd in Providence.

Not only were our Men disposed and enabled to transport their Cannon (some of
which were of large Size and Weight) over Hills, and Rocks, and through Morasses,
in which sometimes they sunk with their Carriages so as to be buried in the
Mire; but, in sight of the Enemy, and within reach of their Shot, they erected
Batteries, mounted Guns, fixed Mortars, and soon got all Things in readiness,
both to cannonade and bombard the Town: And all without the Loss of scarce a
Man. And though they were nine and forty Days besieging the City, and had their
nearest advanced Battery within less than Thirty Rods of its Western Gate, (as
the Measure has since been taken) and were playing from it most of the Time,
and receiving the Enemies Fire; yet the Men slain were but an handful.

AND the like signal Preservation they met with at their Battery by the Light
House. This was the greatest Annoyance to the Enemy, and, under God, the
greatest Cause of their Surrender. And the whole Time they were erecting it,
and getting their heavy Cannon up the high and steep Rocks, to the Amazement of
the Enemy, they were continually played upon both by their Cannon and Bombs:
And yet, if I remember right, there was no more than one Man slain. The whole
Number indeed of Men lost, whether by the Sword, or Sickness, or Disaster,
during the Siege, did not amount to more than an hundred and Twenty. This is
the Doing of the Lord, and ought to be mavelous in our Eyes. The like has
scarce been known in the World.

BUT besides these Favors of Providence, there was a most seasonable
Coincidence of Events, all tending to point our View to God, and to lead us
into an apprehension of him as remarkably appearing to grant us Success.

SUCH was the coming in of a large Supply of those very Provisions which were
wanted, just as our Forces were ready to sail, and without which they must have
been delayed.

SUCH was the taking a Number of Store Ships going to the relief of the Enemy,
as well as intercepting a Packet from France to the Governor of Cape-Breton,
which might have contained Advices of great Importance to the French, and
Disservice to us.

AND such also was the taking a large Ship of War, with more than five hundred
Men, Provisions for eight Months, and about an hundred Barrels of Powder more
than her own proper Store. Had the Providence of God permitted her to go in
Safely, it might have defeated our Design. Such a Number of Men and such a
Quantity of Provision and Ammunition, would have given Heart as well as
Strength to the Enemy, and, some think, must have obliged us to raise the
Siege. But what a merciful Turn did her Capture give to our Affairs? Not only
were the Enemy weakened and dispirited, but a great part of their Strength put
into our Hands to be turned against them; besides that our Army received a
Supply of Powder, which was now so wanted, that our Canno must have been silent
without it.

AND this Event is the more worthy of Notice, because of the Incidents in
Providence remarkably leading to it. A Packet boat from Great Britain arrives
to Commodore Warren, in the West Indies, ordering him to Boston with several
Ships of War, to advise with Governor Shirley for the Protection of the
Northern Colonies; which is the more observable, as the Commodore, through the
Ignorance of his Pilot, had just before lost his own 60 Gun-Ship, by Means
whereof he could give our Governor, who had dispatched Letters to him,
advising him of the Design against Cape-Breton, no great Encouragement to
expect his Help; though being now acquainted with the Resolution of this
Government, he was prepared and disposed to hasten away with the greater Speed,
upon his Orders from Home. But had he come to Boston, as he intended, agreeable
to his Orders, he had probably been too late at Cape-Breton to have met with
this Ship of War. A Vessel therefore is accidently cast in his Way at Sea,
accidentally to Man, but intentionally by God, giving him certain Information,
that the New England Forces had been some time on their Voyage; upon which,
though in want of Water and Provisions, he altered his Course, and arrived before
the Harbor of Louisbourg, time enough to take the Vigilant, a fine new 64 Gun
Ship, designedly sent from France for the Protection of the French, and
Distress of the English.

BUT the most astonishing Article in the Conduct of Providence, was its
disposing the Enemy, by surrendering their City and Fortresses, to prevent that
general Assault, both by Sea and Land, which had been resolved upon, and must
have occasioned a most dreadful Effusion of Blood on both Sides: And God only
knows, what the Event would have been; as the French were so strongly
fortified, and had within their Walls 600 regular Troops, and, at least, 1400
of the Inhabitants, whom they had valled in to their Assistance.

UPON the whole, the Reduction of Louisbourg, considering the immense Sums of
Money that have been laid out, by the King of France, to render it impregnable;
and considering also that it was accomplished by inexperienced undisciplined
Troops from New England, is an Event truly surprising, and will be spoken of as
such at home, and handed down as such to the Children yet unborn.

WE may say, upon a review of the Providence obviously leading to undertake
this Affair, and visibly favoring it when undertaken, and all along remarkably
concurring to its being delivered up into our Hands, Mavelous Things have
thou done for us, O Lord; thy right Hand and holy Arm have gotten us this
Victory. And to thy Name be the Glory; which leads to the last Thing proposed,
viz.

III. To show what Reason a People, for whom God has thus marvellously gotten
the Victory, have to sing unto him a new Song of Praise. David, you see, calls
upon the People of Israel to sing unto the Lord a new Song, for the Victory his
holy Arm had gotten for them. This gave them new Matter for a new Song, and
just Occasion to sing it unto God.

AND the same may be said of us the People of God in this Land. He has given us
a new and great Occasion to sing Praise to his Name; and we shall be horribly
ungrateful, if we neglect to do so. And the Ingratitude will rise in its
Baseness, and Malignity, in proportion to the mavelous Things, which the
right Hand and holy Arm of God has done in getting for us such a glorious
Conquest; a Conquest, putting us in Possession of what may be called, the Key
of North America; and which, if wisely improved, may be of vast Service, not
only to this and all the neighboring Governments, but to Great Britain also,
by guarding our Navigation, and securing to the English the Cod-Fishery, the
value of which will be great, at present, and may, in Time, go beyond Account.

It Is observable, it was a common thing for God's People of old, when succeeded
against their Enemies, to celebrate the Praises of that God who appeared for
them, and gave them Victory. We have many Songs of Praise upon such Occasions
in the sacred Writings. Such was the Song of Moses for the Victory of Israel
over the Egyptians, recorded in the 15th Chapter of Exodus. Such was the Song
of Deborah and Barak for their entire Conquest of Jabin and Sisera, as we may
see in the 5th Chapter of Judges. And such also were several of the Songs of
David, for God's powerfully delivering him out of the Hands of his Enemies, as
they are to be met with in the Book of Psalms. All which Instances of
religiously acknowledging God, upon Occasion of Victories obtained, were
written for our Example, and call upon us, under the present Circumstances of
Providence, to enter into God's Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts
with praise.

AND as this is the Design of this Day's Solemnity, let us unite in praising
the Lord for the avenging of Israel. Let us sing Praises to the Lord God of
Israel. Let the inspired Language of Moses, and the whole Body of the Jewish
Nation, be our's upon this memorable Occasion, I will sing unto the Lord, for
he has triumphed gloriously. -- The Lord is my Strength and Song, and he is
become my Salvation: He is my God, and I will prepare him a Habitation; my
Father's God, and I will exalt him. -- The Lord is a Man of War, the Lord is
his Name. -- Thy right Hand, O Lord, is become glorious in Power. -- Who is
like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like unto thee, glorious in
Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders? Thou have stretched out thy right
Hand; -- Thou, in thy Mercy, have led forth the People which thou have
redeemed; -- thou have guided them in thy Strength --.

LET us recount the many Favors of God to our Brethren; the many wonderful
Interpositions of Providence, making way for the glorious Conquest they have
gained: And let us muse on these Things, till our Hearts are warmed, and our
Tongues opened to show forth the Divine Praises. Let us extol our God and King,
and bless his Name forever and over. Let us speak of the glorious Honor of his
Majesty, and of his wondrous Works. Let us speak of the might of his terrible
Acts, and declare his Greatness. Let us abundantly utter the Memory of his
great Goodness, and sing of his Righteousness.

AND let not the blessed God have Occasion to say of us, as of his People of
old, They sang his Praise, they soon forgot his Works. They forgot God their
Savior, which had done great Things in Egypt, wondrous Works in the Land of
Ham, and terrible Things by the Red Sea.

LET us not think it enough, my Brethren, that we have laid aside our wordly
Business, for a while, to appear in the Sanctuary of God, that we may speak and
sing his Praises. The Lord has done great things for us. The God of Jeshurun
has rode upon the Heavens in our help, and in his Excellency on the Sky. And
this wonderful Appearance of God for us, should excite our Love, warm our
Devotion, confirm our Faith, encourage our Hope, and inspire us with the
firmest Resolutions of all holy Obedience to the Commandments of God.

LET us not think, that God will be pleased with mere external Offerings of
Praise. Nay, he has showed thee, O Man, what is good. And what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to do Justice, and to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? Behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of Rams. To love the Lord our God with all our Heart, and with all
our Understanding, and with all our Soul, and with all our Strength, and to
love our Neighbor as ourselves, is more than whole Burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices. Let us, together with Offerings of Praise, order our Conversation
aright: So shall we glorify God, and he will still show us his Salvation.

AND let me here mind you of one Way wherein it is peculiarly fitting you should
express your Gratitude on this joyful Occasion; and that is, by showing Mercy
to the Poor. It Is observable, when the Jews prevailed against their Enemies,
and solemnized the Feast of Purim in Thanksgiving to God, they gave Gifts to
the Poor, as we read, Esther 9.22. And if, when we fast, and humble our selves
before God, it is proper to deal our Bread to the hungry, when we see the naked
to cover them, and satisfy the afflicted Soul; is it not reasonable also when
we are called to serve the Lord with gladness, and to come before his Presence
with singing, to be in the exercise of that Charity which shall refresh the
Bowels of the poor and needy? Can there be a more fit Occasion than a Day of
religious Gladness and Thanksgiving, to open our Hands in liberal
Distributions, causing the Widow's Heart to sing for Joy? Let us in this way,
do good, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

BUT what I would more especially recommend to you is, the exercise of all
Christian Compassion toward those of the Enemies whom it has pleased God to
put under our Power. Of old it was said, thou shall love thy Neighbor, and
hate thine Enemy; but our Lord Jesus Christ says, love your Enemies. This
Christian Law must not indeed (...) construed in prejudice of that Love which
we owe to our selves, our Families and Country, which may make it necessary to
take up Arms: But when by this Means our Enemies are fallen into our Hands, we
should treat them, not only with Humanity, but Christian Love; being ready to
all the Offices of Kindness and Compassion toward them. We should not insult
them, we should not upbraid them, we should not treat them with Harshness and
Severity; but endeavor to make their captive State as comfortable to them as
may consist with the public Good.

SOME of you, it may be, have Friends or Relatives among their Enemies. How
would you desire they should treat them? Would not you be glad, if they were
kind to them? Would you not think hardly of them, if they should shut up their
Bowels of Compassion, and behave toward them with Diskindness? Let us treat
those who are our Captives in the same humane christian Way, we should be glad
our Friends should be treated, or our selves, were we in our Enemies Power.
That is the Prescription of the Bible, Prove. 25.21. If thine Enemy be hungry,
give him Bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him Water to drink. And the
Reason follows in the next Verse, For thou shall heap Coals of Fire upon his
Head, and the Lord shall reward thee. -- But I have no need to use any
Arguments upon this Head. I believe there is no Place where Prisoners of War
are treated with more Kindness. They have no Reason to complain for want of all
reasonable Liberty, or that they are not sutably provided with all Things
necessary: Though the Case of some of them may be such as to call for Christian
Charity; and in this Case, I would hope, there are none of us but would
willingly open our Hands for their Relief; and in so doing we should honor
God, and behave like the Disciples of Jesus Christ: Nor should we in any wise
lose our Reward; it would be laid up for us in Heaven.

AND now as the Conclusion of all, May it please the good and gracious God to
over rule this glorious Conquest to an happy Issue, the Good of our Nation and
Land. May he give all needed Direction as to resettling the Place. And may all
proper Care be taken, that the pure Gospel of Christ be preached in this part
of the Dominion of Antichrist. May the Man of Sin, that Son of Perdition, be no
longer acknowledged as Christ's Vicegerent. May all Graven Images be pulled
down, all Superstition removed, and the Religion of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
it is contained in the BIBLE, be upheld and practiced there.

AND may the happy Period come on, when Nation shall no more life up Sword
against Nation, nor the Alarm of War be heard on Earth. This happy Time cannot
be expected till the Lord Jesus Christ has taken to himself his great Power and
Reign; till he is seated King upon God's holy Hill of Zion, and has generally
subdued the Lusts and Passions of Men: And when this is once the Case, that
will be fulfilled which is spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, The Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid; and the Calf, and
the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them.
And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together.
-- They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain. The Meaning is,
Love and Peace shall reign on Earth among Men. The good Lord hasten this
blessed Time, for his Mercies sake in Jesus Christ. Amen.


