A LETTER To the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, Vindicating certain Passages
he has excepted against, in a late Book entitled, Seasonable Thoughts on the
State of Religion in New England; and showing that he has neither sufficiently
defended himself, nor retracted his past Misconduct.

By Charles Chauncy, D.D.

Decipimur Specie recti --

HOR. BOSTON: Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1745.

A LETTER TO THE Rev. Mr. Whitefield, etc.
Reverend Sir,
WHEN I cast my Eyes upon the first Paragraph of your late Letter to me by Way
of the Press, I was pleased with the Hope of an ample Confession of several
Things in your past Conduct, which, I cannot but think, have been justly
offensive to good Men, as well as a great Obstacle to your Usefulness in the
World. And had you been particular and explicit in condemning and retracting
these Things, you would have given "me all the Satisfaction" I desire, and
taken the most effectual Method to "allay and remove the Jealousies and Fears,
which have been raised in the Minds, both of your Friends and Enemies"; and
more than all this, you would, I believe, have honored GOD, and done good
Service to the Interest of Religion.

You must have been sensible, Sir, upon the most cursory reading of my Book,
that I considered you as the true Source of several of the Disorders I complain
of as generally prevalent in the Land. A heavy Charge this! I am sure, it very
nearly touched your Character. And yet, how little have you said to remove away
the Grounds of it? I could wish, from the Bottom of my Heart, you had been more
thorough in vindicating, or censuring your self. It Is a thousand Pities, as you
so earnestly desire "the Prosperity of the Ministers and Churches of
New England", you did not more effectually qualify your self to be an
Instrument in promoting it, either by making it evident to them, and all the
World, that you have not been, in a faulty Sense, the Occasion of those unhappy
Alienations, Contentions and Confusions, which have been so hurtful to
Religion; or otherwise, by frankly confessing your Faults, and taking all due
Blame to your self. You might, in this Way, have calmed the Spirits of those
who are enraged against you; Nay, I have no Reason to think, but you would have
gained the Love and Esteem, even of your greatest Enemies. And, in this Case,
how much more comfortable would your Visit have been to your self, and how much
greater the Prospect of its being advantageous to others?

I freely own, you have discovered no "Inclination to railing" in the Remarks
you have made upon those Passages in my late Book, which you might think
injurious to your Character; for which Reason, I think my self obliged (in
Virtue of the Promise you refer to) to make you some suitable Acknowledgment.
And I shall endeavor to do it with Candor becoming the Gentleman and
Christian. I can truly say, I don't perceive the least working of Bitterness,
or Wrath, or Anger, in my Spirit; but, on the contrary, am in a Temper of Mind,
disposing me to all Christian good Offices toward you. And as this is my
present Frame, if I should have Reason to rebuke you, it shall be with Meekness
and Love, and that I might not suffer Sin upon you.

You begin with that Paragraph in my Book, where, speaking of Itinerant
preaching, I say, This had its Rise (at least in these Parts) from Mr.
Whitefield; though I could never see, I own, upon what Warrant, either from
Scripture or Reason, he went about preaching from one Province and Parish to
another, where the Gospel was already preached, and by Persons as well
qualified for the Work as he can pretend to be. -- I really expected, as the
Itinerancy (by your tacit Confession) had its Rise from you, that you would
have stood its Friend and Patron; at least, that you would have taken some
Pains to vindicate your own going about the World in the Capacity of an
Itinerant Preacher; and the rather, as you cannot be insensible, how highly
offensive this Part of your Conduct has been. You may remember, Sir, you have
declared to the World, (Page 1.) that if private Christians or Ministers have
given any Occasion of Offense, either by their Conduct, Conversation or
Writings, all possible Care ought to be taken to have (...) Offenses removed,
especially if they are under Apprehensions (as was your Case when you wrote
this Letter) of being called by a speedy Dissolution before the great Shepherd
and Bishop of Souls. How then shall I account for it, that you have taken so
little Care to remove away this great Article of Offense? I say so little Care,
for all you have said in Vindication of "your Coming where the Gospel is
already preached by Persons as well qualified for the Work as you can pretend
to be," is only this, (Page 3) Did I come unasked? Nay, did not some of those
very Persons, who were as well qualified for the Work as I can pretend to be,
send me Letters of Invitation? Yes assuredly they did; or otherwise, in all
Probability, I had never seen New England. Will you, Sir, upon a Review of this
Passage, say, that it contains Matter of solid Argument? I had declared, "I
could see no Warrant, either from Scripture or Reason, for your Itinerating
Practice." And what is your Answer? Why, I was asked to itinerate, I had
received Letters inviting me to it. Will you call this satisfactory Reasoning?
Don't you perceive, that the Thing in Question is taken for granted? I deny
not, that your being asked to come into New England was the Occasion of it; But
how does this warrant your Conduct here as an Itinerant Preacher? Ought you not
to have produced your Commission? Should you not have made it evident, from
Scripture or Reason, that you had a Call to this Kind of Preaching? The
Invitation you had to come here would then have justified you, in exercising
your Ministry among us; but not otherwise. This is so plain, that you must, I
think, be convinced.

You have not offered one Word more in Vindication of your Character as an
Itinerant Preacher, unless that, in Page 2, (which I shall have Occasion to
consider in another View afterward) may be thought to look this Way, where you
suggest, as though you had begun a Relation how you were led into your present
Way of acting, which, when God shall give you Strength and Leisure, you will
finish and print. But as the Contents of this Relation, though promised four
Years ago, are still secret, and no one can say but it may be four Years longer
before they will be made public, I cannot suppose you will call this a
Vindication of your self that the World ought, at present, to be satisfied
with. If they are satisfied, it must be by implicit Faith, and blind Obedience,
to a high Degree.

Forgive me now, Sir, if I profess myself surprised, that you have done no more
to answer this grand Objection against you. In the Book you are replying to, I
had placed the Itinerancy at the Head of the Disorders reigning in the Land;
and had spent many more Pages than are contained in your whole Letter, in
showing its Inconsistency with Scripture, and Reason, and good Order, as well
as the known Constitution of the Churches in New England, and other reformed
Churches, and in pointing out the Restraints that have been laid upon this
Practice, as an evil one, by Ecclesiastical Authority, almost from the
Beginning of Christianity: And yet, you have passed all over in total Silence.
Is this all the Care you could possibly take to remove this known Occasion of
Offense? Especially, at a Time, when you were "under Apprehensions of being
speedily called before the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls. May I not appeal
even to your self, whether I have not just the same Reason to say, "I can see no
Warrant for your Itinerating Practice," as before you wrote this Letter? Have
you answered one Objection against it? Have you proposed one Text in the whole
Bible to justify it? Have you offered any one Argument, upon the Strength of
which you will say I ought, as a Man or a Christian, to own I am convinced?

Upon all which suffer me, Sir, to beseech you in the Bowels of Christ Jesus to
review your supposed Call to the Work of an Itinerant Preacher. -- If one
Minister may go about preaching at large, where the Gospel is already preached
by settled and well-qualified Pastors, may not another do the same, and another
still, and so on, 'till their is no such Thing as Church Order in the Christian
World? -- And what is the Tendency of this Kind of Preaching? Han't there been
awful Effects of it in the Country? Has it not produced Envy, and Strife, and
Schism, and an undue Preference of one Minister to another to the great
Hindrance of the Gospel? Have you seen nothing of this, since your Coming among
us? Have none of the Works of the Flesh been manifest, Hatred, Variance,
Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Bitterness, Clamor, Evil speaking? Do you know of no
Alienations between Ministers and People on your Account? Have you heard of no
Parishes, where, on the one Hand, the Minister appears for you, and the People
against you; and, on the other Hand, the Minister is against you, and the
People for you? And is it possible, in such a State of Things, but that
Religion should suffer unspeakable Damage? I own, if you are sent of God, you
are not accountable for what may follow upon your Obedience to the heavenly
Call; but the Case is otherwise, if your Mission is not real, but imaginary. In
this Case, you are answerable, in a Sense, for all the mischievous Effects,
which are occasioned by your present Method of Acting. An awful Consideration
truly! And I pray GOD to impress it deeply on your Heart.

The Paragraph you are considering goes on, I charitably hope, his Design
herein was good; but might it not be leavened with some undesirable Mixture?
Might he not, at first, take up this Practice from a mistaken Thought of some
extraordinary Mission from God? Or, from the undue Influence of too high an
Opinion of his own Gifts and Graces? And when he had got into this Way, might
he not be encouraged to go on in it, from the popular Applauses every where so
liberally heaped on him? You own (Page 2) "all this might possibly be true
concerning you." But yet, I am blameworthy. And why? The Reason you give in the
following Words, Have you not prejudged me? Did I not, at the latter End of the
Account of God's Dealings with me, already published, promise, as soon as I had
Time and Freedom, to relate how I was led out into my present Way of Acting?
And should you not have waited for this, and then from the Account it self
inferred what might be the Motives that induced me to commence and continue an
Itinerant Preacher? I did wait, Sir, about three Years; and as you was not
pleased, within that Time, to tell the World how you were led into this Way of
Preaching, I thought I might venture to make some Guess as to the probable
Motives exciting to it: Nor am I convinced by any Thing you have said, that I
have either prejudged, or done you the least Wrong. You take Occasion indeed
from those Words, Might not his Design be leavened with some undesirable
Mixture, humbly to enquire (Page 3.) Whether we must leave off acting for God,
till we feel that our Actions are not leavened with some undesirable Mixture?
And then go on to renounce the "Doctrine of sinless Perfection as
unscriptural;" for which I am glad, because, if Mr. Tennent is to be relied on,
the Moravians, whom you call Brethren, and have spoke well of since you have
been in Town, are strenuous Asserters of this Doctrine, and entertain so high
an Opinion of their perfect Freedom from Sin, as not to be able to join with
you in what you say from the Apostle Paul and Bp. Beveridge. But what Need,
Sir, of so much Enlargement in confessing that you are a frail imperfect Man,
and can do nothing but with a Mixture of Sin? Is this what I aimed at by the
Phrase, undesirable Mixture? Did I not evidently intend something more gross,
though I spoke in that soft Language? And was not my Meaning sufficiently
explained by the Words that immediately followed? Might he not, at first, take
up this Practice from a mistaken Thought of some extraordinary Mission from
God? Or from the undue Influence of too high an Opinion of his own Gifts and
Graces? These are Suggestions, I think, carrying in them a stronger Idea than
that of common Imperfection and Frailty. But what is it you say to them?

The first Suggestion, viz. "that you took up Itinerant Preaching from a
mistaken Thought of some extraordinary Mission from God," you no where except
against as groundless; and consequently, I have no Reason, from any Thing you
have offered, to reflect upon my self as having injured you, in mentioning this
as one of the Motives to your taking up the Itinerating Practice. If you had
thought yourself misrepresented, in this Instance, I may reasonably suppose you
would have been particular in suggesting it to me; and the rather, because, a
Misrepresentation in a Matter of such high Importance would have been greatly
criminal in me. I believe, Sir, you would have gratified many, (I know you
would have pleased me) if you had opened your Mind here, and plainly told the
World your Sentiments about your Mission as an Itinerant Preacher. There are
those, without all Doubt, who imagine you are a Minister extraordinarily sent
forth from God; and there are a great many Passages in your Writings, which
might lead them into such an Apprehension of you. And as you have not
particularly blamed me for suggesting that this might be your own Apprehension
of your self, I shall not think I wrong you in supposing that it is; though if
it be your real Apprehension, that you are extraordinarily called of God to
this Way of Preaching, I am abundantly satisfied, in Virtue of a great Variety
of Arguments particularly illustrated in my Book, but no where replied to by
you, that you are under a gross Mistake. And it may be, you will, sooner or
later, see your Mistake, after the Example of Mr. Davenport, a Gentleman highly
celebrated in one of your Journals.

The other Suggestion, That you might be influenced to take up this Practice
from too high an Opinion of your own Gifts and Graces, and the popular
Applauses so liberally heaped on you, I did not publish from my own Fancy, much
less from a Spirit of Evil-Surmising; but in Consideration of numerous Passages
in your Writings, almost perpetually repeated, which so evidently savor of
ostentatious Boasting, that even your very good Friends have complained of
them. How often do you lead your Readers into Admiration at your spiritual
Enlargements, the Sweetness and Power of your inward Feelings, and the
extraordinary Communications you so often receive from above? And when you are
so particular in describing, upon every Occasion, the Troops that attended you,
the Alarm of Towns as you made your Entrance into them, the Flocking of People
after you, the vast Numbers coming to hear you, their Meltings under your
Preaching, their sore Weeping, their being drowned in Tears, their Hearts
leaping for Joy, their receiving you as an Angel of God; -- I say, when such
Passages as these are perpetually dropping from you, in almost every Page you
write, is it possible an unprejudiced Person should take no Notice of the
Self-Satisfaction you discover in the Hosanna's of the Multitude? This shows
itself in so many Instances, that others cannot help seeing it, if you don't
your self. And to what, separate from this, could it be owing, That you were so
fond of Preaching always yourself, to the Exclusion, not of your Brethren only,
but Fathers in Grace, and Gifts, and Learning, as well as Age? And that you
were so ostentatious and assuming as to alarm so many Towns, by proclaiming
your Intentions, in the public Prints, to preach such a Day in such a Parish,
the next Day in such an one, and so on, as you passed through the Country; and
all this, without the Knowledge either of Pastors or People in most Places?
These Queries you except against and say, What Foundation are they built upon?
Or, how can it be proved, that I was so fond of preaching always myself to the
Exclusion of my Fathers, etc? Are you really ignorant, Sir, how this may be
proved? Don't you know that two Sermons, preached on two Lord's Days, one by
Dr. Colman, the other by Dr. Sewall, were the only Sermons you heard preached
by others, in all New England; though the whole Time of your Continuance here,
you preached your self every Day in the Week, and mostly twice a Day? And
though so many Lectures were called, particularly in this Town, did you ever
excuse your self from Preaching, urging the Work upon your Fathers or Brethren?
Nay, did you ever, at such a Time, so much as coldly desire any one of the 14
associated Pastors to take the Pulpit, that you might be a Hearer? And has this
no Appearance of your being always fond to preach yourself? Especially, if it
be considered, that most of the Ministers were your Fathers in Age, not to say
in other Respects. I may appeal even to your self, whether it would not have
looked more modest and humble, in so young a Man, if you had sometimes, at
least, been a Hearer, and not always the Preacher? You say, it was "through
repeated Solicitations that you preached the Thursday-Lecture." You should
have added every Time it was preached while you were in Town. And I deny not
that you were solicited to preach this stated Lecture; but as your Preaching
was so frequent at other Times, would you not have made it more evident, that
you wan't fond of preaching always yourself, if you had withstood their
Entreaties, and let the Town know by your sitting patiently as a Hearer, that
you supposed some of the Ministers, at least, were capable of preaching as well
as you. Your always preaching the stated as well as occasional and
extraordinary Lectures, was a virtual Exclusion of your Fathers and Brethren
from the Pulpit* such an Exclusion of them as could not have taken Place, if
you had preferred others in Love, as the Scripture directs.

You go on, and say, Whatever I may think your Opinion of the Boston Ministers
was, at that Time, yet you always recommended them, and instead of encouraging
People to separate, constantly exhorted them (as you would do again) to attend
upon their Ministrations. I never charged you, Sir, with directly encouraging
People to separate from their Ministers; though, in a late Sermon, which you
have seen, I have charged you with publishing such Sentiments concerning
Ministers in general, and the Ministers of New England in particular, as are
naturally connected with the Separations brought forward in the Land, and the
true Source from which they originally sprang; and this Charge I am ready to
make good, whenever you shall think fit to call me to an Account for laying it
against you. In the mean Time, don't take it amiss, Sir, If I say, though you did
not, when here, carry the Matter so far as, in Terms, to "encourage People to
separate from the Boston Ministers," yet you had no very high Opinion of them
at that Time (however raised your Conceptions may have been since); and this
you evidently discovered by putting Mr. Tennent to the extraordinary Trouble of
so long a Journey in the Winter Season, to carry on the Work you begun here;
the Boston Ministers, though so considerable a Body, not being though it
sufficiently qualified for the Purpose. I shall repeat here what I said in my
late Book, Page 39. I know what Opinion Mr. Whitefield had of the Generality of
the Ministers in Town; for I have had personal Conversation with one, who
joined in the Prayers previous to Mr. Tennent's Journey to Boston.

The other Queries in this Paragraph, Why so ostentatious and assuming as to
alarm so many Towns, by proclaiming his Intentions, in the public Prints, to
preach such a Day in such a Parish, etc. I perceive are not grateful to you.
The Facts indeed you own; but say in Vindication of your self, "That this
proceeded from Ostentation, is what the great Searcher of Hearts can alone
determine." I left it entirely with the Searcher of Hearts to determine, how
far this proceeded from Ostentation; but that it looked ostentatious is what I
still really believe, and if others should do so too, they would be in no
Danger of invading a divine Prerogative. For Men's public Conduct may lawfully
be judged upon. God himself allows of it; nor will you venture to deny it. You
then excuse yourself by saying, It was judged expedient by your Friends to give
People public Notice of your Intention to preach to them, and that every
Advertisement was penned by the Direction of some one or more of your Brethren
and Fathers. I believe what you say is true; and though it may be some Excuse
for the Thing, it cannot alter its Nature. It Is possible, the Friends you speak
of might entertain too exalted an Opinion of you, and from hence be insensibly
led to advise to that, which* in Respect of any other Person, they themselves
would have cried out of, as ostentatious and vain. You don't directly affirm,
"That Application was made to you in every Place where you preached, by the
Minister or People, before you gave public Notice of your Intention to
preach;" and so I have no Occasion to say, that, in several Places, you had no
previous Invitation from the Minister, or People; which makes the Advice of
your Friends the more exceptionable, and your own Conduct in Pursuance of it
ostentatious and assuming.

The next Paragraph, you are pleased to bestow your Remarks upon is in the 37th
Page of my Book, where I inquire, And what became of his little Flock all this
while? -- And what is the mighty Difference (so far as a particular Flock is
concerned in its Pastor's Labor) between an Itinerant Preacher, absent from
his Charge seven Eights of his Time, and a Non-Resident Minister? Or between a
Pluralist, and one that acts as though all the Parishes in a Country were his
proper Cure? In Answer to Part of these Questions you insert a large Account
you had Occasion to write to a dignified Clergyman of the Church of England.
This, Sir, I have carefully perused, and perceive not but it is a Confirmation
of what I have advanced against you. For it is plain, from the current Strain of
this Account, that you were in Fact absent from your proper Cure seven Eights
of your Time; and that, while you were absent, you were going about the World
as a preaching and begging Itinerant. And the Question now is, wherein does the
Difference lie between you, and any Non-Resident Minister, or Pluralist, SO FAR
as your Flock is concerned in your pastoral Labors? And you may remember, Sir,
this was the Point of Light, in which I was here considering the Matter. I
never charged you with loitering and living at Ease, or with fleecing your
Flock and spending it upon your Lusts; but with neglecting the Souls committed
to your special Charge. And is not this apparent from what you have wrote to
the dignified Clergyman? It Is true, your having been abundant in laboring and
collecting in various Parts of the World, is an Argument that you have not been
idle; but, at the same Time, it as strongly argues, that you have not taken
Heed to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost made thee an Overseer. And I must
needs say, your Zeal to promote the Salvation of the People of your own Charge,
don't seem to equal that you discover in populous Places, where you may have
Crowds to attend you. I particularly remember, when here last, you seldom
prayed but you expressed a more than ordinary Love to your little Flock, and
longing after the Salvation of their Souls: And yet, when you went to Georgia,
how little Benefit had they of your Labors? I am sensible (and mention it here
to correct a Mistake in my Book, Page 48. which you have passed over without
Notice; I am sensible) your special Relation to the People of Savanna was now
dissolved; but considering the near Relation you had so lately, and for several
Years, stood in to them, and considering also the little Advantage they had of
your Ministry while this Relation subsisted, I cannot but wonder you allowed
them so small a Share of your Labors. For you was with them no more than two
Days, and preached no more than two Sermons to them. And yet, as soon as you
left Georgia, your Journals appear with pompous Accounts of your Preachings
twice every Day in the Week to large Auditories, besides frequent Expoundings
in the Evening. I cannot help saying I could scarce have believed these Things,
if I had not seen them with my own Eyes, under your own Hand. -- I shall only
add, if the Words of Job, which conclude this Account to the dignified
Clergyman, had been wrote by another, and not your own Pen, it might have
tended as much to your Honor, if there be a Pertinency in that Advice of the
inspired Solomon, (Prove. 27.2) Let another Man praise thee, and not thine own
Mouth; a Stranger, and not thine own Lips.

The Paragraph you are upon proceeds, And some are in the Opinion, it han't
been to Mr. Whitefield's Disadvantage, on temporal Accounts, that he has
traveled about the World in Quality of an Itinerant Preacher. He has certainly
made large Collections: And if, in the Doing of this, he had a Fellow-Feeling
with the Orphans, it is no more than might be expected. No one, I believe,
besides himself, can tell the Amount of the Presents he received in this Town,
as well as in other Places, for his own proper Use. These Words, I find, have
given you great Offense. You say, "This is one of the most Ungentleman-like, as
well as uncharitable Things I am pleased to mention concerning you." And
intimate as though I must then think you "a consummate Villain." But what if you
have affixed a Sense to my Words that never entered into my Heart? And this,
Sir, is the real Truth of the Matter. However suspicious some have been,
whether you have employed the Moneys you collected for the sole Use intended
when they were given, I have, for my self, been all along inclined to think
charitably; and did not design by the Phrase, a Fellow-feeling with the
Orphans, a Fellow-sharing with them in a knavish Manner, as you suggest: Nor do
I see, how my Words can fairly be construed to such a Sense. If you had been in
the Exercise of as much Charity in Reading as I was in Writing them, you might
have spared this severe Reflection. The Idea I aimed at conveying to the World
was this, and only this, that while you were collecting for the Orphans, the
People who gave of their Bounty to them might give to you also, which
Fellow-feeling with the Orphans, together with the Presents I had heard of your
receiving for your own proper Use, I then supposed, and do still, would justify
my saying, that your Traveling about as an Itinerant Preacher was not to your
Disadvantage, on temporal Accounts. I believe, upon Examination, you will find
my Words capable of this Sense, without the Help of any great Degree of
Candor; and it was the very Sense in which I intended them.

The next Passage you are pleased to reply to, is in P. 126, where speaking of
People's expressing their religious Joy, in the late Times, by hearty loud
Laughing, I say, Nor can I think from whence it should take its Rise, unless
from Mr. Whitefield and Tennent. The former of these Gentlemen was sometimes
observed to speak of the Affairs of Salvation with a Smile in his Countenance.
Upon which you ask, Can it justly be deemed a Fault, in any Preacher, when
talking of Affairs of this Nature, to express his inward Joy by a Smile in his
Countenance? Is there any Thing inconsistent in such a Conduct with the
greatest Reverence and most awful Sense of the Divine Presence? And after
pointing me to the Example of Abraham's Laughing, upon the Receipt of a Divine
Message, conclude with Querying, Can it justly be inferred that the People in
New England, could any Way learn to express their religious Joy by a loud and
hearty Laugh, from my Being sometimes observed, at Boston, to speak of the
Affairs of Salvation with a Smile in my Countenance.? This, you will own, is a
fair Representation of what you have offered upon this Article; and if you had
been as fair in representing what I had offered, your Remarks would have made a
far less plausible Appearance. You cannot but be sensible, Sir, that I mentioned
the Smile in your Countenance only in transitu, and that Mr. Tennent's broad
Laugh, when told of any in spiritual Distress, was what I mainly insisted on.
And I leave it with the World to judge, whether I have not herein assigned the
most probable Cause of People's expressing their religious Joy by hearty loud
Laughter. It never came into my Thoughts, that this uncouth Way of expressing
spiritual Joy was principally owing to you; but your speaking of the Affairs of
Salvation with a Smile in your Countenance, I then thought (and do so still)
might have a Tendency, considering the exalted Opinion many People had of you,
to put them upon doing the like; and by this Means they might the more easily
be led into an Imitation of Mr. Tennent, the Gentleman thought by you the most
proper of any one to carry on the Work you had begun in New England. And I see
no Reason from any Thing you have suggested to alter my Opinion, in the least,
upon this Head. I am still of the Mind, that either Smiling or broad Laughing
are incongruous Ways of indicating spiritual Joy, and inconsistent with the
present Exercise, at least, of that holy Fear and Caution with which we ought
always to talk of the Affairs of everlasting Salvation. And I am sorry, while
you were vindicating your self from being so much as the remote Occasion of
People's laughing under spiritual Joy, you should do it after such a Manner,
as, in express Terms, to encourage them in it. For this is the true Purport of
the Argument you have put into their Mouths from the Example of Abraham;
though, if you had examined into the Affair of his Laughing, you might easily
have perceived a wide Difference between the Occasion of it, and the Occasion
of that Laughing you brought this Instance to support. I don't wonder the good
old Man laughed. I believe there is no one, under like Circumstances, but would
find himself excited to the same Thing. Here was a proper Occasion for
Laughing; and Laughing was, in the present Case, a proper Way of expressing the
Joy of the old Man's Heart, the immediate Occasion whereof was not wholly a
spiritual Matter.

In Page 140th of my Book I had said, That Spirit of rash, censorious and
uncharitable Judging, which has been so prevalent in the Land, appeared first
in Mr. Whitefield Upon which you cry out. What! did no rash, censorious and
uncharitable Judging appear in New England before I came into it? I readily
answer no; there was no Appearance of that Spirit of Judging I complained of,
and was so large in describing, before you came among us; and if you had read
my Book, only in the most cursory Manner, you must have known I should have
made this Answer. Don't I declare in express Terms, Page 168, 169, 170. That
there never was a Time since the Settlement of New England, wherein there was
so much bitter and rash Judging? And this, not in a single Place only, but in
most Towns throughout the Provinces; and carried to such a Height too, that
many of the most valuable Ministers in the Country have been called all the bad
Names one can easily think of; nay, even those, who, for 20, 30, 40 Years, have
so caused their Light to shine before others, as that they might have seen
their good Works, and have learnt from their good Example to glorify our Father
in Heaven? And after such a Declaration as this, and so much Pains as I had
taken to illustrate the Truth of it, could you persuade yourself to think it a
sufficient Reply only to put the Question, "Was there no uncharitable Judging
before I came into New England"? Is this giving what I had offered a fair and
Christian Examination? Could it enter into your Heart, that you had said that
which would carry Conviction along with it? You go on, "Sorry should I be from
my inmost Soul, if I introduced it." And is this all the Acknowledgment we are
to expect from you? Are you sensible of nothing said, or done by you, that
might have a Tendency to propagate a Spirit of censorious and rash Judging? Do
you need to have this proved to you? You were told in my late Book, You seldom
preached but you had something or other to say against unconverted Ministers?
To which you reply, "Was there any Harm in this?" You knew, Sir, I though it there
was Harm in it, or I should not have herein publicly charged you with a Fault.
You add, "Are not unconverted Ministers the Bane of the Christian Church?" If
they appear to be unconverted by a Conduct visibly contradictory to the Gospel,
I own, they are a Plague to the Church of God, as well as the greatest Scandal
to Religion: Nor is it a Hurt, but Service to the Interest of Christ, to expose
their Character, and lessen their Influence to do Mischief: But the Case is
widely different, where, so far as appears to the World, they are the Men their
Profession obliges them to be. It Is now an Abuse of them, and Injury to the
Church of God, to insinuate Suspicions against them, as you certainly did
against the Ministers of this Land, by perpetually levelling some Part of your
public Discourses against unconverted Ministers. You knew you could not charge
them with any Thing that was visibly bad, either in Point of Faith or Practice;
and yet, in almost every Sermon, you made a most doleful Outcry against
unconverted Ministers: And what could the Tendency of this be, but to leaven
the Minds of People with evil Surmisings against their Ministers? And wan't
this the Effect in Fact? Even before you left New England, Ministers were
commonly spoken of as Pharisees and unconverted; and it was not long after,
before they were called all the bad Names that could render them odious. You go
on, Had not the Prophets in the old, and the Apostles in the New Testament,
frequently some Thing to say against them? I answer, you cannot produce a
single Passage, either from the Prophets of the old or the Apostles of the new
Testament, wherein they insinuate Suspicions against those Ministers as
unconverted, whose visible Conduct was such as it ought to be: So far from it,
that by the current Strain of the Writings of all the Prophets and Apostles,
yea of Christ Jesus himself, those Ministers ought to be well thought of, and
well spoken of, whose Profession and real Character, so far as is visible,
agree with each other; as is the Truth with Respect to the Body of the
Ministers of this Land; nor will you venture publicly to deny it.

I had said, as a further Illustration of your being the fa^^^y Occasion of the
Uncharitableness prevailing in the Land* That you often spoke of the Ministers,
by the Lump, as Pharisees, Enemies of Jesus Christ, and the worst Enemies he
had. Upon which you say, That you spoke of the Ministers of New England in this
Way, I utterly deny. It is to be remembered, Sir, you preached when here last,
as you do now, in the extemporaneous Way* and I shall not esteem it an unjust
Reflection on you, to say, you are not your self the most capable Person to
tell what you so deliver; especially, when carried out almost beyond your self,
as was sometimes the Case when you go^ upon the Head of unconverted Ministers:
For which Reason your denying that you spoke of the Ministers of New England,
by the Lump, as Pharisees and Enemies of Christ, on it satisfy me that you
really did not; and your Denial is the less satisfactory, because I was my self
several Times present, when you spoke, in these Terms, of unconverted
Ministers; and I seriously declare to you, and all the World, that I verily
thought you intended to point out the Minsters of this Land; and I have no
Doubt, but this was the Opinion of the Generality of your Hearers, many of
whom, at the Time, I know, said as much. And since the Publication of your
Letter, a Minister in the Country of an unblemished Character has wrote to me
in these Words, I just saw Mr. Whitefield's Answer to some Things in your Book.
I observed his denying that he ever spoke of the Ministers of this Country as
Pharisees, etc. I can give you my Testimony and Mr. C -- s's too: He expressly
spoke of these our Ministers as Pharisees and unconverted. If you have Occasion
therefore, you shall have our Testimony drawn up. And there is Reason to believe
you said thus, because it agrees with your private Conversation upon the same
Head. You have now a Letter by you, wherein a Gentleman of Character and
Reputation in the Country has told you, "that you said in his House, that you
did not believe one Minister in twenty in the Country was converted." -- But I
have no need to labor this Point. -- You will not deny, Sir, what you have
published to the World under your own Name; and you have, in Reality of Sense,
printed the very Thing you disown you have preached. You have told the People
of New England (N. E. Journal Page 70) that "you verily believe the Generality
of Preachers talk of an unknown unfelt Christ;" Nay, you have particularly
pointed out the Ministers of New England, as it were by Name, and expressed your
Fears, (Page 95) lest "the most of them did not experimentally know Christ?"
Nor is this all; but you have plainly hinted to them (Page 70) as if the
"Reason why their Congregations have been so dead, is because they have had
dead Men preaching to them." And as though enough had not yet been done to finish
their Usefulness, you directly taught the People (Page Ibid) to look upon "
unconverted Ministers as no more fitted to beget Children in the spiritual,
than dead Men are to beget them in the natural Sense;" yea, (Page Ibid) you put
the Devil and them upon a Par in Respect of Instrumentality in the Business of
Conversion. Besides all which, you have (Page 86) particularly mentioned and
recommended Mr. Tennent's Nottingham Sermon, though perhaps as uncharitable a
Piece as was ever printed; I am well assured you cannot produce out of any
Author, in any Language, within the same Compass of Pages, so many base
slanderous Names as he freely bestows upon the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation. A List of them you may see, if you please, in Page 249 of my Book.

And can you look upon your self, after all this, as having been no Ways the
faulty Occasion of that Uncharitableness toward Ministers, which has produced
such awful Effects in these Times? Could you "under the immediate Views of a
happy Eternity" wipe your self clean, and say, "I should be sorry from my
inmost Soul, IF I introduced this Uncharitableness"? Is this "to let Survivors
see, if you should die, that you was not altogether unwilling to own your
Faults?" I freely own, I am surprised; and had any one told me you would have
taken no more Blame to yourself, in an Affair that has done so much Disservice
to the Kingdom of Christ, and wherein you have been so evidently faulty, I
could not have believed it. It Is true, you have made a Sort of Confession. I
had charged you with expressing your Fear, lest "many, nay, most of the
Ministers in this Land, did not experimentally know Christ." Upon which you
say, I confess this was too unguarded. -- For whether in Fact it was or is true
or not, that most that preach in New England did not experimentally know
Christ, yet I ought to have taken more Time before I delivered my Judgment. I
thank you, Reverend Sir, for pointing out this Fault unto me. And is this all
the Satisfaction you intend to give for so injurious a Reflection upon so good
a Ministry as this Land is favored with, the best, you have owned in private
Conversation, of any upon the whole Earth. You "thank me for pointing out this
Fault unto you." But wherein do you own your Fault to lie? Not in publishing
that which you see Reason to declare was not Fact; not in publishing that which
you esteem, in any Degree, the Occasion of those Alienations and Schisms which
have taken Place in the Land; not in publishing that which you confess has been
detrimental to the Character and Usefulness of the Ministers of New England,
and for which you desire Pardon of GOD and them. These are not the Faults you
confess; but that you have been "too unguarded, and delivered your Judgment
before you had taken Time." But had you taken Time, don't you think it would
have been highly assuming in a young Man, and a Stranger too, publicly to
judge the spiritual State of the Ministry of a Country? Who made thee a Judge?
Who art thou that judge the Servants of another Master? The Lord Christ is
the one Master and Judge, and he only is fit to be so: The Judgment of Men's
States is devolved on him as his appropriate Work, and the Revelation of their
States he has reserved as the proper Business of the great and last Day. You
were therefore greatly faulty in pretending to judge the spiritual State of
your Brethren at all; and I see not, but herein, in a Sense, You were guilty of
taking from Christ Jesus some Part of that Glory which is due to him as the
constituted Judge as well as Savior of Men. And I hope, when you come to give
this Matter a Review, you will be more sensible of your Error, and full in
retracting it.

You further add, But that I had a Design, either in preaching or writing, to
alienate People's Minds from the standing Ministers, I utterly disavow. You
know, Sir, I never charged You with designing to introduce those Alienations
and Schisms, which have been so great a Hindrance to the Gospel in the late
Times; but I have charged You with being the faulty Occasion of these Evils.
And what have You said to clear yourself of this Charge? Nay, though You have
confessed your Rashness in publishing that against the Ministry of the Land,
which you ought not to have done; yet You do not seem sensible of any
Connection between the Fault and the Evil that has, in Fact, followed upon it:
Neither do You express the least Sorrow upon this Account, or take to your self
the least Blame. And will You call this Christian Satisfaction? It Is no small
Thing, Sir, to be the Occasion of leavening the Minds of a Country with evil
Surmisings against the standing Ministry. What good is it likely Ministers
should do, when People are jealous of them, and filled with Fear lest they are
carnal and unconverted? Their Usefulness is hereby, in a great Measure,
destroyed; and never has the Enemy of Souls a greater Advantage to lead People
Captive at his Will and Pleasure. An awful Though It this! It deserves your most
serious Consideration. And the more so, if when you had prejudiced People
against the standing Ministry as unconverted, you discovered it to be your
Opinion, that unconverted Ministers ought not to continue in the Ministry, and
endeavored to propagate this Opinion, and a Practice agreeable to it? if you
were in the Scheme, and aimed at People's forsaking unconverted Ministers, and
endeavored that there might be a Supply of converted Ministers. This, Sir, was
the Opinion of your very good Friend, the Rev. Mr. Edwards, concerning you, as
appears from his Letters to the Rev. Mr. Clap, Rector of Yale-College. And if
he formed this Opinion, not from any Thing you might say to him in private, but
from the Manner of your Preaching and Writing, can you wonder at it, that
others should be in the same Way of thinking, and hereupon expect better
Satisfaction than you have yet given? Indeed, Sir, if this Opinion of your
undoubted Friend, Mr Edwards, is well founded, you ought to be looked upon as
directly chargeable with all the Schisms and Separations in the Land. And I
could wish, you had either cleared yourself more fully from all Suspicions of
Blame upon this Head, or appeared more ingenuously free and open in your
Acknowledgments.

The next Thing that comes under your Notice, is the Affair of A.Bp. Tillotson.
And here you acknowledge, (Page 9, 10.) that You spoke of his Person in too
strong Terms, and too rashly condemned his State, when you ought only to have
censured his Doctrine. You likewise own, that Dr. Edwards, and You through him,
have been mistaken in some particular Quotations from the A.Bp's Discourses. --
And in fine, You profess your Sorrow that You have judged his State and Person,
and not spoken sufficiently in Commendation of his great Candor and
Moderation. And if you intended, by these Expressions, a full Acknowledgment to
the World, that you have been faulty in judging the A.Bp's State and Person,
and would be looked upon as professing Sorrow for the Sin therein discovered,
and as retracting what you have said to the A.Bp's Disadvantage upon this Head,
I can readily forgive the Offense, so far as I have concerned my self with it;
and this, though you "rejoice, yea, and will rejoice, in the Testimony you have
born against his Doctrines:" For the Ground of my Offense was not your Writing
against any Doctrine delivered by the A.Bp, which you supposed was false; (This
is every Man's Right, and he is not to be blamed for exercising his Right) But
what I faulted you for was, your not confining yourself to his Doctrine but
judging his Person and State. -- But this, you have now publicly condemned,
and so I have nothing further to say; only I could wish, you had seen, and
owned, and lamented the bad Influence your rashly Judging the A.Bp soon had
upon others. I cannot suppose Mr. Croswell, had it not been from the
Encouragement of your Example, would have ever publicly declared concerning
the A.Bp, as in the 151 Page of my Book, That when he wrote his printed
Sermons, God knew he had not a Spark of saving Grace, and if he was not
converted afterward he was now weltering under the scalding Drops of God's
Wrath in Hell, there to remain a Monument of his Vengeance throughout Eternity.
Was ever rash Judging carried to a greater Height! Neither would Mr. Seward
have spoken of the A.Bp in such Ungentleman-like uncharitable Language, if you
had meddled only with his Doctrines, and not with his State. And this leads me
to remove away the Offense you have taken at the Mention I made in my Book, of
what this honored Friend of yours uncharitably wrote concerning the Primate.

You say to me, What Reason was there for your mentioning what Mr. Seward wrote
concerning his Grace? I think your Design was to show the Spirit of rash
Judging, which was gone out into this Land, -- Was not this shooting a little
beside, or rather beyond your intended Mark? I answer, not in the least. My
professed Design was to show, not only the Spirit of rash Judging that was gone
forth into the Land, but to make it appear, that you were, in a faulty Sense,
the Occasion of it. And I did not shoot at all beyond my intended Mark, in
mentioning Mr. Seward; for though he was never in New England, as I know of, in
Person, yet his Journal has been dispersed into all Parts of the Land, and was
unhappily qualified to propagate Uncharitableness, as it went under the
Character of a Performance of one of Mr. Whitefield's nearest and most intimate
Friends. And in this View of the Matter, I am willing you should determine,
whether my mentioning what he wrote was shooting beyond my Mark. You ask, "Am I
answerable for all my dearest and most intimate Friends say or do? Or it is
reasonable that I should account for all they write when distant from me?" By
no Means; I never insinuated any such Thing: But this I have intimated, and
this I am ready to make good, that, if any of your dearest Friends have been
unwarily led into rash and uncharitable Conduct by your Example, and as
encouraged by the like Conduct in you, you are a Partaker in their Sin, and
answerable, in a Degree, ^o the great God, both for the Sin itself, and the
unhappy Fruits of it. A little Skill in casuistical Divinity will suffice to
determine this. You go on, and characterise Mr. Seward as "an Israelite indeed,
a Man rich in Faith and good Works, one whose Heart devised liberal Things,
etc." I have as good an Opinion of A.Bp Tillotson as you have of your Friend
Mr. Seward; nothing doubting but he was as good a Man: And if I should say, he
had a Heart that devised liberal Things to a much greater Degree, I don't think
I should exceed the Truth. For it is well known, he was under GOD the chief
Support of the French Protestants, driven out of their own Land, for the Sake
of Christ; and he expended so much in Pity to them, under their miserable
distressed Circumstances, that he left no Estate when he died, though his Income
was, at least, Twenty Thousand Pounds a Year, this Currency: Which I take this
Notice of to show, how notoriously your honored Friend abused the A.B in
comparing him to Judas, but with this Difference, "That Judas sold his Lord for
30 Pieces of Silver, the A.B. got a better Price, perhaps 30 Bags of Gold:" And
in adding thereupon, -- "But the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, and he
(the A.Bp) chose his good Things here, a temporal rather than an eternal
Crown." Is this fit Language to be used by a professed Disciple of him who has
said, Judge not, that ye be not judged? And how great a Want of true
Discernment, as well as Charity, has your Friend discovered? For Covetousness
was, of all Sins, the most unsuitable to charge the A.Bp with, as he was of the
direct opposite Temper. A noble Generosity of Spirit, together with a
compossionate Fellow-Feeling of other Men's Miseries, and a Readiness to
stretch forth his Hands to help them, were distinguishing Strokes in the A.Bp's
Character, and must appear to be so to all, who have read his Writings, and
know how to judge of the Spirit discovered in them.

You finish the Paragraph with these remarkable Words, He has entered into his
Rest now above four Years, -- And if you blame him for censuring the Arch-Bp,
because he was now dead, and express yourself surprised at it, would it not
have been as well if you had let Mr. Seward's Ashes slept also, and been
content, as more immediately pertinent to the Design of your Book, to have
mentioned the Faults and Rashness of me his unworthy Friend? With what Face,
Sir, can you condemn that in me which you allow in yourself? Don't you rejoice,
and declare you will rejoice, in the Testimony you have born against the A.Bp's
Doctrines? And have not I equal Right, as well as Reason, to rejoice in the
Testimony I have born against Mr. Seward's uncharitable Way of Writing? Can
that be a Fault in me, which is commendable in you? Had I judged Mr. Seward's
Person or State, it would have been proper for you, I own, to have pointed out
my Crime, as you had retracted the like Fault in your self toward the A.Bp;
but as I never concerned my self with any Thing but his Writings, why do you
throw it in my Teeth that I testify against them, when it is the very Thing you
still do your self, (and glory in it) in Respect of the A.Bp's Writings? Was it
too assuming in me to meddle with the Journal of William Seward Esquire? Surely you
could not imagine thus, as you had, in the same Page, testified against the
Doctrines of a Metropolitan and Primate of all England! Did my Fault lie in
this, that Mr. Seward had been dead now four Years? Neither could you
reasonably think me worthy of Blame on this Account; for the A.Bp had been dead
forty Years? And if you have not uncivilly disturbed his Ashes, in rejoicing in
your Testimony against his Doctrines, why must I be charged with not suffering
Mr. Seward 's Ashes to sleep in Quiet, when I have said nothing more in Respect
of him, than you have done, in this very Letter, in Respect of the A.Bp?

I shall only add, as you have condemned your self for judging the A.Bp's
State, you have virtually and practically justified me in condemning the like
Fault in your honored Friend Mr. Seward; and if, instead of censuring me for
exposing the Uncharitableness discovered in his Journal, you had thanked me for
the Pains I had taken to prevent it is bad Influence upon others, you would have
been more consistent with your self. And as it was by Means of what you wrote,
that your Friend was led into such an uncharitable Opinion of the A.Bp, and to
publish it to the World, if, in Excuse of him, you had placed some Part of the
Blame to your own Account, I am ready to think You would have both served him,
and honored your self.

I should not have been so large upon this, which I esteem the most injudicious
Part of your whole Letter, had I not heard it spoken of by some of your
Friends, as that which was unanswerable, and must bring me under Conviction, if
I was not blind. -- How great is the Power of Prejudice! What are not Men
capable of believing, while they have a wrong Biass on their Mind!

You proceed to vindicate another of your Friends; and in order to it inquire
of me, Was it not equally foreign to your Purpose, to mention any Thing about
Mr. Barber, who has been at the Orphan-House ever since I left America, and
consequently could have no Hand in the late religious Disorders of New England?
It Is true, Mr. Barber has been at Georgia ever since you left America; but
might he not sow the Seeds of Enthusiasm and Disorder before he went? And if
you will please to read over the Account I have largely given, in my Book, of
his Spirit and Conduct, you may have Reason to think, that he really did so. --
And was not Mr. Barber an intimate Companion of Mr. Davenport? Did he not
encourage and strengthen that Spirit in him which he has since publicly
lamented, as well as the great Mischief he was an unhappy Instrument in
promoting, while he acted under the Influence of it? And considering these
known Facts, will you say it was foreign to my Purpose to mention any Thing
about Mr. Barber? Did it not rather directly fall in with my professed
Intention? -- But your greatest Offense is, at the Construction I put upon
certain Words in a Letter of Mr. Barber's to you, saying, it appeared to me,
they contained an Act of downright gross Idolatry. You will please to remember,
Sir, I did not say Mr. Barber intended any such Thing by the Words he used:
Neither did I say that you took the Words in such a Sense, but intimated my
Belief of the contrary, that you did not. All I aimed at was, to point out the
genuine Construction of the Words themselves; and upon a careful Review of
them, I am not sensible of a Misconstruction, though I have made the best Use I
could of all the Help you have offered for my Conviction.

The Words of the Letter referred to are these, I shall omit writing any Thing,
and only hereby present my hearty Love, and let you know that I am waiting at
the Post of your Door for Admission: Though I am unworthy, my Lord is worthy,
in whose Name, I trust, I come? Those Words in the Letter, I am now waiting at
the Post of your Door for Admission, you say were "too humble an Expression;"
but if you had called it a profane one, you would not have spoken with too
much Severity; for it is an evident Allusion to those Words of Wisdom (by whom
is commonly understood the Lord Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of God), Blessed is
the Man that hears me, -- waiting at the Posts of my Doors, Prove. 8.34. And
shall the Words, which are spoken of the Wisdom of God, be applied to you, and
an Admission into your Presence, and you think of it as nothing more than too
humble an Expression? You ought rather to have shown your Displicency at such
an irreverent Use of the sacred Language. Mr. Barber goes on, though I am
unworthy, my Lord is worthy, in whose Name, I trust, I come. Is it not obvious,
at the first Glance, that the Idea Mr. Barber had formed of you, as exhibited
in these Words, was exalted beyond all due Measure? Don't he appear to look
upon himself, in compare with you, as a poor, low, despicable Creature, not
worthy to come into your Presence? And does he not use the same Form of Words
to encourage a Hope of Admission into your Presence, which is commonly used in
Prayer when we approach before the great GOD? Are not you, in these Words,
according to the literal and most obvious Meaning, the final Object, and the
great Savior the Medium of Access to you? All this, I seriously profess,
appears plain to me; and it was upon such a View of the Words that I charged
them with gross Idolatry in Reality of Construction, though not of Intention.

You say in Defense of Mr. Barber, If this be gross Idolatry, I have been
frequently guilty of it in my late Sickness, when I told my Friends, though I
was utterly unworthy of their Care, yet Jesus Christ, whose I am, and whom I
desire to serve, was worthy, and that he would take what was done unto me, as
done unto himself. I cannot but wonder you don't see the Difference between these
two Cases. You might properly recommend your self to the Charity and Care of
your Friends, through the Worthiness of Christ, and for his Sake, because he
has himself directed to this Method, and the Glory finally centers in him. And
the same may be said of the Beggar you introduce asking an Alms. But in the
other Case, the Reverse is the obvious Import of the Words. You are exalted so
high, that a Man equal to your self is not worthy to come into your Presence;
and it is through Christ that he comes. If Words can express it, you are the
Person into whose Presence Mr. Barber wanted to come, and Christ is the Medium
of Approach. He was so unworthy in his own Apprehension, that he could not
think of being admitted into the Presence of a frail imperfect Man, like
himself, without the Interposition of the Savior. This, it seems to me, is the
genuine unforced Sense of these Words; though I would be as far from imposing
my Sense of them upon you, as you are yours upon me; and do as heartily pray,
that "GOD would give you, and me, and all the Ministers of the Gospel, a right
Judgment in all Things."

You now come to consider what I had offered upon those Impulses and
Impressions, which have been the Occasion of so much Mischief in the Land: Nor
have you at all misrepresented me in saying, "That these I father upon you;"
for it was my Intention to point you out as the Source from whence they sprang.
And to tell you the Truth, you have greatly disappointed my Expectations in not
submitting to the Charge, at least, in Part; confessing your Error, and
discovering that you were now of another Spirit. When I read that Passage in
your Letter to the Bp of London, lately reprinted here at your Desire, wherein
you speak of your self, (Page 5) as not insensible, That you may have sometimes
mistaken Nature for Grace, Imagination for Revelation, the Fire of your own
Temper for the pure and sacred Flame which comes from GOD'S Altar; and
declare, That you are ready, if you find you have been blameable, to confess
it; I say, when I read this Passage in your Letter to (...) Lordship, I really
thought you were, in a Measure, sensible of your former too great Proneness to
take the Motions of your own Mind for something divinely extraordinary; and
plainly saw, that you had put those Constructions upon common Occurrences which
there was no Ground for, but in your own Imagination. But so far are you from
taking the least Blame to your self in these Respects, that you endeavor to
evade every Instance of Fancy and Imagination I had presented to your View; and
in some Instances, the Evasion is so evident, that I can scarce think you were
your self insensible of it.

The Instances I began with were, the Saying of your Mother, when you were an
Infant, that she expected more Comfort from you than any other of her Children,
and your being born in an Inn: Upon which, the Sum of what you offer is this,
That there is no Harm in making a religious Improvement of what we hear our
Parents say, or the Circumstances our Savior is pleased to put us in. And is
this, Sir, all the Idea conveyed to the World by the Publication of these
Facts? Is it not obvious, at first Sight, that you esteemed them particularly
observable? Why else did you think it proper to acquaint the World with them?
And what should lead you to suppose such common Things worthy of particular and
public Notice, unless a Turn of Mind disposing you to magnify that in your own
Imagination, which, in it self, is of trivial Importance?

I observed what you said when at Bristol, though in an unconverted State at
that Time, viz. That God gave you great Foretastes of his Love, and filled you
with such unspeakable Raptures, in St. John's Church, that you were carried out
almost beyond your self. To which you reply, Is there any Thing in this that
may justly be styled Chimerical or Enthusiastical? I answer yes, a great deal.
It was, in the whole, a vain Imagination. You were now, being in an unconverted
State (if there is a Propriety in the Phrase you often use) nothing better than
half a Beast and half a Devil; and to suppose, that God should give a Person of
such a Character great Foretastes of his Love, and fill his Soul with
unspeakable Raptures, is little short of Profaneness: Nor can I conceive, how
such a Thought could enter into your Heart, unless from the over-bearing
Influence of a heated Fancy. You ask me, As I have had to deal with Souls,
whether I have never found any Instances of Persons, that could tell of many
Strivings and Drawings and Illuminations of the blessed SPIRIT, that they could
reflect upon after their Conversion, which the great GOD visited them with
before they were effectually called? I answer yes; I have met with Abundance.
And, perhaps, there are very few but can tell of many Strivings, and Drawings,
and Illuminations of the divine SPIRIT, before their Conversion: But then I
would add, I never met with any (neither have you) unless under the Influence
of Delusion or Imagination, who could tell of great Foretastes of the Love of
God, and hereupon unspeakable Raptures carrying them almost beyond themselves:
And I should be at no loss in my own Mind to determine, that this was truly
their Case, if they should go on and tell me, as you have told the World, (Page
3. of your Life) "That they had early (even while unconverted) such Movings on
their Hearts, as were sufficient to satisfy them that God loved them with an
everlasting Love." No Movings on the Heart of a Man, while in an unregenerate
State, can satisfy him of God's eternal Love, upon the Foundation of Christ and
the Apostles; and if he is satisfied, it must be from the working of his Fancy,
and not upon the Foot of reasonable Evidence. -- If you had owned your Mistake
of Nature for Grace, of Imagination for Revelation, in these and such like
Instances, you would have discovered more of the Christian, than by attempting
to vindicate that which is incapable of a just Defense.

I had mentioned several more of your Impressions, particularly that strong and
unaccountable one, (as you term it) even while you were a Lad, That you should
preach and print quickly. Upon which you observe, Doubtless there are such
Things as some Impressions coming from God, as well as others from the Devil.
Very true: And there are likewise the Workings of a vain Imagination; and there
is great Danger, especially when Men are of an imaginary Turn of Mind, lest
they should mistake Imagination for Revelation. And have you been in no Danger
from this Quarter? Have you wrote nothing that gives the World just Grounds of
Suspicion of you upon this Head? There are few, even of your Friends of known
Judgment, but think you have, in many Instances, discovered something of an
enthusiastic Spirit. Your very good Friend, the Rev. Mr. Edwards, thought it
advisable to talk with you, when here last, about your Impulses, though you
did not like his Discourse. And would one prejudiced in your Favor have
thought you worthy of Blame in this Respect, if you had not said or wrote that,
which he could not but esteem of dangerous Tendency? You add, I would never
judge of them (my Impressions) but as they agree with the written Word, and are
explained by subsequent Providence. -- I would with Mary lay up such Things in
my Heart, and wait upon GOD to see, by the Dealings of his Providence and
Grace, whether they come from him or not. This is plausibly enough said to
satisfy some Sort of People; but how does it really prove, that the Impressions
I had taken Notice of were from GOD, and not the Fruit of your own Fancy? You
had a strong Impression, when a Lad, that you should preach and print quickly:
And is it evident, that GOD made this Impression on your Mind, because, when
you were grown to Years, you did in Fact both preach and print? Might not this
Impression be the mere Motion of your own Fancy, or some sudden Start of a vain
and fond Imagination? Will any subsequent Providence evince the contrary? Were
you not, when you had this Impression, at a Distance from Christ, and an utter
Stranger to a Work of Grace on your Heart? And what Reason is there to think
God should point it out to you, while in this miserable Condition, by an
Impulse from Heaven, that you should preach and print? Is it not far more
likely, your Thought of such a Thing should be the Effect of the Working of a
Mind vainly puffed up? Does not this much better suit with your Character and
State at that Time? There are few, I believe, but will entertain this Though It of
the Matter; and I see not but you must be of the same Mind, if not hindered by
your own Imagination.

You go on to another Instance brought in my Book to show, that you mistook the
Workings of your own Mind for Divine Influences. And here you have entirely
left out the main Thing objected against you, whether with Design or not, you
can best tell. You say, I blame you for what you said about being led by the
Spirit of God into the Knowledge of divine Things, and being guided, even in
the minutest Circumstances, when reading the holy Scriptures. And did I blame
you for nothing else? Was not the principal Ground of the Blame I reflected on
you contained in those Words, you have given your Reader not the least Notice
of, I have been directed, by watching and reading the Scriptures, even in the
minutest Circumstances as plainly as the Jews, who consulted the URIM and the
THUMMIM at the HIGH-PRIEST'S BREAST. I Am ready to think, when you wrote these
Words, you spoke the real Sense of your Mind; and in doing so, you could scarce
have given a more flagrant Proof of your being led by Imagination. You know GOD
was will not to answer the Jews by Urim and Thummim in an immediate Manner from
Heaven: And this was the appointed Way in which they were to consult him to
this End. And could you place your self in the same Situation, with the
High Priest of old, while consulting the Urim and Thummim, and declare you were
as plainly directed by God, and not give the World Reason to suspect your
mistaking Imagination for Revelation? I don't wonder you passed over this Part
of the Charge in Silence, unless you found yourself disposed to make some
suitable Acknowledgment for your Fault; and yet, by taking no Notice of it, all
you have said serves only to amuse your Readers, and hide the Truth from their
Sight. Do you think, Sir, I faulted you for "reading the Scriptures," or for
"making them your Rule," or for "depending on the Spirit to lead you into the
Knowledge of divine Things", or for "believing that the very Hairs of our Heads
are all numbered by God?" Why then do you particularize these Things, as though
herein lay the Blame I had cast upon you? What I blamed you for was, your
vainly imagining that you were extraordinarily directed, in the minutest
Matters, as plainly as the Jews were by consulting the Urim and Thummim. And
was not this a mere imaginary Direction? Have not you made it evident to the World
that it was so, by the many Errors, not of the minutest Size, both in Point of
Faith and Practice, which you have been obliged to confess and retract, or are
still chargeable with? I assure you, Sir, what you have said upon this Article
han't raised my Opinion of your Simplicity; for I can scarce bring my self to
think, but that you knew it was all Evasion.

The last Passage, upon this Head of Impressions, you take Notice of, is in the
179 Page of my Book, where I cite the following Words from the History of your
Life, One Day perceiving an uncommon Drought, and a noisome Clamminess in my
Mouth, -- it was suggested to me, that, when Jesus Christ cried out, I thirst,
his Sufferings were near over. -- Upon this, I threw my self upon the Bed,
crying out, I thirst, I thirst etc. This I called, as I think I might upon good
Grounds, a very sinful Account. It Is true, I did not directly say, "what Parts
of it were sinful": Nor did I esteem such a Particularity necessary; having no
Suspicion, that any of my Readers would be at any Loss to find out my Meaning.
I assure you, Sir, I did not call this Account sinful, because I supposed "You
told a Lie in saying it was suggested to you." Such a Though It never came into my
Mind, and I wonder how it should into yours. Neither did I call it sinful,
because I judged "You had put your self on a Level with Jesus Christ"; though, I
am ready to believe, if your imaginary Faculty had not pointed out to you some
observable Resemblance between the Case of your Savior and your own, you would
never have had the Suggestion you speak of, nor the World this wonderful
Account: And I am the rather inclined to be of this Opinion, as this is not the
only Instance, wherein your Fancy has formed a Kind of Resemblance between your
own, and the Circumstances of Christ Jesus. -- But to be free and plain; -- I
spoke of this Account as sinful, because it appeared to me very evidently to
exhibit a profane Imitation of the Son of God in his last Sufferings. You
know, Sir, it was when the blessed Jesus hung on the Cross, and was expiring a
Sacrifice for the perishing World, that he said, I thirst; and he so spoke,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which had foretold this peculiar
Circumstance of his dying Moments. And can you prevail with your self to
believe, it was a decent Thing in you, in Imitation of the Son of God, under
these amazing Circumstances, to cry out, I thirst, I thirst? And do you see no
Reason for blushing, when you think of that noisome Clamminess in your Mouth,
which you expressly mention as an Occasion of the Suggestion, putting you upon
making this Cry? Can you suffer yourself to suppose, that such a Suggestion
upon such an Occasion came from the Spirit of God? Is it not a thousand Times
more likely, it should arise from some sudden Turn of your own Fancy? For my
self, I have no Doubt but the Rise of this Suggestion is to be fetched from an
ungoverned Imagination. You are pleased indeed to say, "That it came from the
good and not the evil Spirit, is evident from the Effect." I never though it there
was the Hand of Satan in this Matter. A disturbed or overheated Fancy will
sufficiently account for it, without any Help from him. Neither do I think it
came from the good Spirit, or that the Effect produced will argue any such
Thing. For really, Sir, I have no very raised Opinion of the Effect, any more
than of the Suggestion that was the Cause of it. "Singing wherever one goes,"
is not, in my Opinion, so good a Proof of true spiritual Joy, as of a State of
Mind somewhat, at least, disordered. And to tell you the plain Truth, I don't
think, nor ever did, that you had scriptural Warrant to look upon your self as
a converted Man, in Virtue of any Thing, or every Thing, contained in this
Relation of your Christian Experience. I don't mean, by what I now say, to
judge your State. GOD forbid I should be guilty of any such Rashness! But I
would seriously advise you, not to take that for saving Conversion, which, I
verily believe, ought rather to be called the working of your own Imagination.
And though I would not presume to say, you have never been "enabled to look up to
Christ, and act Faith on him as dying for Sinners;" yet I don't think you were
so enabled at this Time: For which Reason, if, instead of "praising the Father
of Mercies" for his Grace now conferred on you, you had blamed your self for
your irreverent Use of the Language of the dying Jesus, and Misapplication of
his Circumstances to your own, you would, in my Opinion, have discovered more
of the Spirit of a humble Christian. And this, I believe, you will be bro't to,
if God ever shows you your Error in giving so much Heed to Impulses and
Impressions.

Thus I have reviewed the Instances adduced in my Book to show, that the
imaginary Turn of Mind discovered in your Writings, has been of great
Disservice in propagating the like fanciful Disposition to many People in
New England. And I am so far from being convinced of the contrary by what you
have offered, that I am abundantly confirmed in the Opinion, that you are to be
looked upon as the original blameable Occasion of those Impulses, Impressions
and Revelations, which have produced such mischievous Effects in these Days.
And I am heartily sorry, you appear so insensible of your Mistake, and
indisposed to recover your own Character, or the poor People, who, by your
Means, have been led into strong Delusion.

The last Thing you say I blame you for is, "your talking so freely about
unconverted Ministers." To which you reply, "that they are seldom made use of
to convert others, I verily believe." If by unconverted Ministers you mean,
those who appear to be so, by a Faith or Life VISIBLY contradictory to the
Gospel, I entirely agree with you: But if you intend by unconverted Ministers
those, whom GOD knows to be so, though from what outwardly appears they ought to
be well though it of, I have no Doubt but you are under a great Mistake. You add,
If I have said what may be construed to imply, that it is impossible that
unconverted Ministers should be instrumental in converting others, or that
their Administrations in the visible Church are invalid, as it was not my
Intention, I would revoke it. A mighty Retractation truly! But you must still
enlarge it, and say, that the Ministrations of evil Men, whether in preaching
the Word, or dispensing the Sacraments, may be attended with Faith in GOD to
bless his own Institutions for spiritual and saving advantage; yea, that, if
evil Men are the Administrators of God's Ordinances, they shall notwithstanding
be effectual because of Christ's Promise and Institution, if by Faith and
rightly they are received: I say, you must enlarge your Retractations, and come
to this, or otherwise stand condemned as a Man, who has contradicted, with his
Tongue and Pen, what he has solemnly subscribed, both with his Heart and Hand.

Upon the whole, Sir, I am free to own my Sentiments concerning you are such,
that if, instead of proclaiming "your Joy in the Prospect of a happy Eternity,"
you had professed a becoming Sense of your past Misconduct, humbling your Soul
before God herefor, and making all proper Christian Satisfaction, you would, in
my Opinion, have more effectually recommended your self to the good Esteem of
the World. -- I heartily pray God, as you have asked an Interest in my Prayers,
that he would show you the hurtful Tendency of that Itinerating Practice you
have taken up; that he would preserve you from the undue Influence of Impulses
and Impressions; that he would give you a clear and just Sight of the great
Wrong you have done the Ministry of this Land; that he would dispose and enable
you, as much as in you lies, to undo the Mischief you have done to these
Churches; and in fine, that he would, in the Way of a full Retractation of all
your public Offenses, qualify you to be an Instrument in doing much Service for
Christ and Souls that so your Reward may be great in Heaven. I am, Sir,

Your real Friend and humble Servant, CHARLES CHAUNCY.
Boston, Jan. 31. 1744, 5.

